
# Laserdisc

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

It has been suggested that DiscoVision be merged into this article or section.
(Discuss)  
Not to be confused with disk laser, a flat-configuration solid-state laser.

Laserdisc <IMG>  
<IMG>  
A LaserDisc (left), compared with a DVD.  
Media type Optical disc  
Encoding NTSC, PAL  
Capacity 60 minutes per side CLV  
30 minutes per side CAV  
Developed by Philips & MCA  
Usage Home video  
Data Storage  
Optical disc authoring

  * Optical disc
  * Optical disc drive
  * Optical disc authoring
  * Authoring software
  * Recording technologies
    * Recording modes
    * Packet writing

  
Optical media types  
  * Blu-ray Disc (BD): BD-R, BD-RE
  * DVD: DVD-R, DVD+R, DVD-R DL, DVD+R DL, DVD-RW, DVD+RW, DVD-RW DL, DVD+RW DL, DVD-RW2, DVD-RAM, DVD-D
  * Compact Disc (CD): Red Book, CD-ROM, CD-R, CD-RW, 5.1 Music Disc, SACD, PhotoCD, CD Video (CDV), Video CD (VCD), SVCD, CD+G, CD-Text, CD-ROM XA, CD-i
  * VCDHD
  * GD-ROM
  * MiniDisc (MD) (Hi-MD)
  * Laserdisc (LD)
  * Video Single Disc (VSD)
  * Ultra Density Optical (UDO)
  * Universal Media Disc (UMD)

  
Discontinued Optical Disc Formats

  * HD DVD: HD DVD-R, HD DVD-RW, HD DVD-RAM
  * High-Definition Versatile Disc (HDVD)
  * High definition Versatile Multilayer Disc (HD VMD)
  * Holographic Versatile Disc (HVD)

  
Standards  
  * Rainbow Books
  * File systems
    * ISO 9660
      * Joliet
      * Rock Ridge
      * El Torito
      * Apple ISO 9660 Extensions
    * Universal Disk Format (UDF)
      * Mount Rainier

  
Further reading  
  * History of optical storage media
  * High definition optical disc format war

  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Laserdisc certification mark

The Laserdisc (LD) is an obsolete home video disc format, and was the first
commercial optical disc storage medium. Initially marketed as Discovision in
1978, the technology was licensed and sold as Reflective Optical Videodisc,
Laser Videodisc, Laservision, Disco-Vision, DiscoVision, and MCA DiscoVision
until Pioneer Electronics purchased the majority stake in the format and
marketed LaserDisc in the mid to late 1980s.

While technologically superior to the then rival VHS and Betamax systems, the
laserdisc never obtained more than a niche market with videophiles in America.
In Japan, the format was better supported and thus more prevalent. In Europe,
it remained largely an obscure format. The technology and concepts provided
with the Laserdisc would become the forerunner to Compact Discs and DVDs.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Technical information
    * 2.1 Audio
    * 2.2 Hardware
    * 2.3 Combi-players
    * 2.4 High-end Japanese players
    * 2.5 PAL Laserdiscs
  * 3 Branding
    * 3.1 Pioneer
    * 3.2 MCA
    * 3.3 Pioneer PR7820
    * 3.4 Other significant players
  * 4 Laserdisc vs. VHS
    * 4.1 Special editions
    * 4.2 Disadvantages of Laserdiscs
    * 4.3 Laser rot
  * 5 Laserdisc vs. DVD
    * 5.1 Video
    * 5.2 Audio
    * 5.3 Disadvantages of Laserdiscs
    * 5.4 Advantages of Laserdiscs
  * 6 Comparison to other media
  * 7 Success of the format
  * 8 Laserdisc variations
    * 8.1 Computer control
    * 8.2 Video games
    * 8.3 MUSE LD
    * 8.4 Laserdisc sizes
    * 8.5 Picture discs
    * 8.6 LD-G
    * 8.7 LaserActive
    * 8.8 Squeeze LD
    * 8.9 Recordable formats
  * 9 In popular culture
  * 10 See also
  * 11 References
  * 12 Resources
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] History

Laserdisc technology, using a transparent disc[1], was invented by David Paul
Gregg in 1958 (and patented in 1961 and 1990)[2][3]. By 1969 Philips had
developed a videodisc in reflective mode, which has great advantages over the
transparent mode. MCA and Philips decided to join their efforts. They first
publicly demonstrated the videodisc in 1972. Laserdisc was first available on
the market, in Atlanta, on December 15, 1978, two years after the VHS VCR and
four years before the CD, which is based on Laserdisc technology. Philips
produced the players and MCA the discs. The Philips/MCA cooperation was not
successful, and discontinued after a few years. Several of the scientists
responsible for the early research (Richard Wilkinson, Ray Deakin and John
Winslow) founded Optical Disc Corporation (now ODC Nimbus).

In 1979, the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago opened their
"Newspaper" exhibit which used interactive Laserdiscs to allow visitors to
search for the front page of any Chicago Tribune newspaper. This was a very
early use of digitally interactive technology in Museums and could even be
among the first.[citation needed]

The first Laserdisc title marketed in North America was the MCA DiscoVision
release of Jaws in 1978. The last two titles released in North America were
Paramount's Sleepy Hollow and Bringing Out the Dead in 2000. A dozen or so
more titles continued to be released in Japan, until the end of 2001. The last
Hong Kong-released Laserdisc-format movie title was Tokyo Raiders. Production
on Laserdisc players did not stop until January 2009 when Pioneer stopped
making them. The format was released in 1981 and a total of 3.6 million
Laserdisc players were sold in Japan.[4]

It was estimated that in 1998, Laserdisc players were in approximately 2% of
US households (roughly two million).[5] By comparison, in 1999, players were
in 10% of Japanese households.[6] Laserdisc has been completely replaced by
DVD in the North American retail marketplace, as neither players nor software
are now produced there. Laserdisc has retained some popularity among American
collectors and, to a greater degree, in Japan, where the format was better
supported and more prevalent during its life. In Europe, the Laserdisc has
always remained an obscure format. The format was, however, chosen by the
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) for the BBC Domesday Project in the
mid-1980s, a school-based project to commemorate 900 years since the original
Domesday Book in England.

## [edit] Technical information

The standard home video laserdisc is 30 cm (11.81 inches) in diameter and made
up of two single-sided aluminum discs layered in plastic. Although read and
featuring properties similar to a compact disc or DVD, a Laserdisc is for the
most part an entirely analog system with video stored in the composite domain
with analog sound and/or some form of digital audio. The first laserdiscs
featured in 1978 were entirely analog but the format evolved to incorporate
simple digital stereo sound to multi-channel formats such as Dolby Digital and
DTS.

Since digital encoding and compression schemes were either unavailable or
impractical in 1978, three encoding formats based on the rotation speed were
used:

  * CAV (Constant Angular Velocity) or Standard Play discs supported several unique features such as freeze frame, variable slow motion and reverse. CAV discs were spun at a constant rotational speed during playback, with one video frame read per revolution and in this mode, 54,000 individual frames or 30 minutes of audio/video could be stored on a single side of a CAV disc. Another unique attribute to CAV was to reduce the visibility of crosstalk from adjacent tracks, since on CAV discs any crosstalk at a specific point in a frame is simply from the same point in the next or previous frame. CAV was used less frequently than CLV, reserved for special editions of feature films to highlight bonus material and special effects. One of the most intriguing advantages of this format was the ability to reference every frame of a film directly by numberâa feature of particular interest to film buffs, students and others intrigued by the study of errors in staging, continuity etc.

  * CLV (Constant Linear Velocity) or Extended Play discs do not have the "trick play" features of CAV, offering only simple playback on all but the high-end laserdisc players incorporating a digital frame store. These high-end laserdisc players could add features not normally available to CLV discs such as variable forward and reverse, and a VCR-like "pause". CLV encoded discs could store 60 minutes of audio/video per side, or 2 hours per disc. For films with a runâtime less than 120 minutes, this meant they could fit on a single disc, lowering the cost of the title and eliminating the distracting exercise of "getting up to change the disc"âat least for those who owned a dual-sided player. The vast majority of titles were only available in CLV. (A few titles were released partly CLV, partly CAV. For example, a 140-minute movie could fit on two CLV sides, and one CAV side, thus allowing for the CAV-only features during the climax of the film.)

  * CAA (Constant Angular Acceleration). In the early 1980s, due to problems with crosstalk distortion on CLV extended play Laserdiscs, Pioneer Video introduced CAA formatting for extended play discs. Constant Angular Acceleration is very similar to Constant Linear Velocity save for the fact that CAA varies the angular rotation of the disc in controlled steps instead of gradually slowing down in a steady linear pace as a CLV disc is read. With the exception of 3M/Imation, all Laserdisc manufacturers adopted the CAA encoding scheme, although the term was rarely (if ever) used on any consumer packaging.

As Pioneer introduced Digital Audio to Laserdisc in 1985, they further refined
the CAA format. CAA55 was introduced in 1985 with a total playback capacity of
55 minutes 5 seconds, and was necessary to resolve technical issues with the
inclusion of Digital Audio. Several titles released between 1985 and 1987 were
analog audio only due to the length of the title and the desire to keep the
film on 1 disc (e.g., "Back to the Future"). By 1987, Pioneer had overcome the
technical challenges and was able to once again encode in CAA60âallowing a
total of 60 minutes, 5 seconds. Pioneer further refined CAA, offering
CAA45âencoding 45 minutes of material, but filling the entire playback
surface of the side. Used on only a handful of titles, CAA65 offered 65
minutes 5 seconds of playback time. The final variant of CAA is CAA70, which
could accommodate 70 minutes of playback time. There are not any known uses of
this format on the consumer market.

All of these timing parameters are based on the NTSC standard of 30fps. The
PAL and SECAM standards of 25fps increases the playback capacity of all the
various formats by 20%.

### [edit] Audio

Audio could be stored in either analog or digital format and in a variety of
surround sound formats; NTSC discs could carry two analog audio tracks, plus
two uncompressed PCM digital audio tracks, which were CD encoded channels,
(EFM, CIRC, 16 bit and 44.1 kHz sample rate)[7]. PAL discs could carry one
pair of audio tracks, either analog or digital; in the UK the term LaserVision
is used to refer to discs with analog sound, while LaserDisc is used for those
with digital audio. The digital sound signal in both formats are EFM-encoded
as in CD[7]. Dolby Digital (also called AC-3) and DTS, which are now common on
DVD titles, first became available on Laserdisc, and Star Wars: Episode I
(1999) which was released on Laserdisc in Japan, is among the first home video
releases ever to include 6.1 channel Dolby Digital EX Surround.[8] Unlike
DVDs, which carry Dolby Digital audio in digital form, Laserdiscs store Dolby
Digital in a frequency modulated form within a track normally used for analog
audio. Extracting Dolby Digital from a Laserdisc required a player equipped
with a special "AC-3 RF" output and an external demodulator in addition to an
AC-3 decoder. The demodulator was necessary to convert the 2.88 MHz modulated
AC-3 information on the disc into a 384 kbit/s signal that the decoder could
handle. DTS audio, when available on a disc, replaced the digital audio
tracks; hearing DTS sound required only an optical digital audio connection to
a DTS decoder.

The two FM audio channels occupied the disc spectrum at 2.3 and 2.8 MHz on
NTSC formatted discs and each channel had a 100 kHz FM deviation. The FM audio
carrier frequencies were chosen to minimize their visibility in the video
image, so that even with a poorly mastered disc, audio carrier beats in the
video will be at least -35db down, and thus, invisible. Due to the frequencies
chosen, the 2.8MHz audio carrier (Right Channel) and the lower edge of the
chroma signal are very close together and if filters are not carefully set
during mastering, there can be interference between the two. In addition, high
audio levels combined with high chroma levels can cause mutual interference,
leading to beats becoming visible in highly saturated areas of the image. To
help deal with this, Pioneer decided to implement the CX Noise Reduction
System on the analog tracks. By reducing the dynamic range and peak levels of
the audio signals stored on the disc, filtering requirements were relaxed and
visible beats greatly reduced or eliminated. The CX system gives a total NR
effect of 20db, but in the interest of better compatibility for non-decoded
playback, Pioneer reduced this to only 14db of noise reduction (the RCA CED
system used the 'original' 20db CX system). This also relaxed calibration
tolerances in players and helped reduce audible pumping if the CX decoder
wasn't calibrated correctly.

At least where the digital audio tracks were concerned, the sound quality was
unsurpassed at the time, but the quality of the analog soundtracks varied
greatly depending on the disc and, sometimes, the player. Many early and
lower-end LD players had poor analog audio components, and many early discs
had poorly mastered analog audio tracks, making digital soundtracks in any
form most desirable to serious enthusiasts. Early DiscoVision and Laserdisc
titles lacked the digital audio option, but many of those movies received
digital sound in later re-issues by Universal, and the quality of analog audio
tracks generally got far better as time went on. Many discs that had
originally carried old analog stereo tracks received new Dolby Stereo and
Dolby Surround tracks instead, often in addition to digital tracks, helping
boost sound quality. Later analog discs also applied CX Noise Reduction, which
improved the signal-noise ratio of their audio.

Both AC-3 and DTS surround audio were clumsily implemented on Laserdiscs,
leading to some interesting player- and disc-dependent issues. A disc that
included AC-3 audio forfeited the right analog audio channel to the modulated
AC-3 stream. If the player did not have an AC-3 decoder available, the next
most attractive playback option would be the digital Dolby Surround or stereo
audio tracks. If either the player did not support digital audio tracks
(common in older players), or the disc did not include digital audio tracks at
all (uncommon for a disc which is mastered with an AC-3 track), the only
remaining option was to fall back to a monophonic presentation of the left
analog audio track. However, many older analog-only players not only failed to
decode AC-3 streams, but weren't even aware of their potential existence. Such
a player will happily play the analog audio tracks verbatim, resulting in
garbage output in the right channel.

On a DTS disc, digital PCM audio is not available, so if a DTS decoder was
also not available, the only option is to fall back to the analog Dolby
Surround or stereo audio tracks. In some cases, the analog audio tracks were
further made unavailable through replacement with supplementary audio such as
isolated scores or audio commentary. This effectively reduced playback of a
DTS disc on a non-DTS equipped system to mono audioâor in a handful of
cases, no film soundtrack at all.[9]

Only one 5.1 surround sound option existed on a given Laserdisc (either Dolby
Digital or DTS), so if surround sound is desired, the disc must be matched to
the capabilities of the playback equipment (LD Player and Receiver/Decoder) by
the purchaser. A fully capable Laserdisc playback rig includes a newer
Laserdisc player that is capable of playing digital tracks, has a digital
optical output for digital PCM and DTS audio, is aware of AC-3 audio tracks,
and has an AC-3 coaxial output; an external or internal AC-3 RF demodulator
and AC-3 decoder; and a DTS decoder. Many A/V receivers combine the AC-3
decoder and DTS decoder logic, but an integrated AC-3 demodulator is rare both
in Laserdisc players and in newer A/V receivers.[10]

### [edit] Hardware

The earliest players used Helium-neon laser tubes to read the media with red-
orange light, while later players used infrared semiconductor laser diodes.
Many Pioneer VP-1000, LD-1100, LD-660 and PR-8210s are still in good working
order. Pioneer used very high-quality Helium-Neon laser tubes in their players
and, unlike the Magnavox Magnavision players (VH-8000, VH-8005), 'out-gassing'
of the laser tube in a Pioneer player is a rare event. Optical hobbyists have
also been known to cannibalize the laser tube machines. From 1978 until 1984,
basically all LaserDisc players, either industrial or consumer, used Helium-
Neon laser tubes.

In March 1984, Pioneer introduced the first consumer player with a solid-state
laser, the LD-700. It was also the first LD player to load from the front and
not the top. One year earlier Hitachi introduced an expensive industrial
player with a laser diode, but the player was made only in limited quantities.
After Pioneer released the LD-700, laser tubes were no longer used in consumer
players, despite their advantages, though Philips continued to use laser tubes
in their industrial units for a short time after. Helium-Neon lasers had a
tighter, lower wavelength laser that created a smaller spot on the disc,
leading to better tracking. In addition, the laser tube generated less photon-
shot noise than the solid-state diode laser, resulting in a less-noisy picture
on-screen.

The picture produced by a solid-state based LD player could be instantly
recognized; it was slightly softer and large expanses of color, such as a blue
sky in the image, would have a tendency to have small streaks across it. Also,
the infrared diode laser did not cope as well with disc defects requiring
"fast" response, such as dirt trapped under the surface of the disc
(inclusions), an off-center hole or track errors caused during mastering.
Because of this, collectors with large MCA DiscoVision collections tended to
use their tube-based LaserDisc players for playback of these discs since
DiscoVision discs were riddled with just these sorts of defects. In addition
to being the first LD player to use a laser diode, the Pioneer LD-700 was also
the first player ever to have a 'tilt' mechanism for tracking. This could
measure any warp of the laser disc and physically tilt the laser to maintain
accurate tracking â which greatly reduced crosstalk on CLV Extended Play
discs â arguably, the tilt-servo was one of the greatest advances in the
format.

Most machines made were single-sided; players which required manually turning
the disk over to play the other side. A number of players were made that were
double-sided, in that the machine could automatically reverse the spin
direction and move the pickup head to the other side of the disk. While
Pioneer produced some industrial "jukeboxes" that held more than 50 discs,
only one consumer player, the LD-W1, could hold more than a single disc; the
W1 held two discs and could automatically change discs and sides by rotating
the entire mechanism, including both the laser and turntable. Electrically,
the LD-W1 was the internal circuitry of the Elite LD-S1 combined with the
disc/side changing mechanism.

Many Laserdisc players manufactured from the late 1980s through the time of
the format's end had both composite (yellow RCA type connectors) and S-Video
outputs on the rear panel. When using the S-Video connection, the player would
utilize its own internal comb filter, designed to help reduce picture noise by
separating the luminance (brightness) and color parts of the signal, while
using the composite outputs forced the player to rely on the comb filter of
the display device. Although using the S-Video connection yielded superior
results in the late 80s and early 1990s, most of today's mid and high level
television sets contain better comb filters than the vast majority of players
were equipped with. In these instances, where a player is being used with a
more modern display, using the composite output and allowing the display
device's internal comb filter to do the work may yield better
results.[citation needed]

### [edit] Combi-players

Most players made after the mid-1980s were capable of also playing audio CDs.
These players included a 12 cm (4.7 in) indentation in the loading tray, where
the CD would be placed for play. At least one Pioneer model also operated as a
CD-changer, with several 12 cm indentations around the circumference of the
main tray.

In 1996, the first model DVD/LD combi-player (and first Pioneer DVD player,
for that matter) was the Pioneer DVL-9 released in Japan. The Pioneer Elite
DVL-90, an updated version, followed by a similar, though supposedly lower-end
model, the DVL-700, were released in 1997. Successors to this model include
the Pioneer DVL-909, Pioneer DVL-919, and the Pioneer Elite DVL-91. Although
the DVD/LD combi players offered competent LD performance, they paled in
comparison to high end LD players such as the Pioneer Elite CLD-99 and the
Pioneer Hi-Vision/MUSE HLD-X9.

The Pioneer DVL-909 lacks support for DTS output. However, a modification to
the player can allow this player to support DTS streams on DTS discs,
essentially turning the DVL-909 into a Pioneer Elite DVL-91.

The last model DVD/LD player was the Japanese only DVL-H9, but the older
DVL-919 is still sold in the U.S. and appears on Pioneer's North American
website. However, it has not been actively marketed since the late 1990s. The
DVL-919 supports DTS output. The DVL-919's DVD section is unremarkable by
modern standards, and does not support progressive scan (480p) even though it
has component output. As noted above, the LD section, while competent, is
inferior to earlier high end LD players. A few Pioneer dealers offer North
American specification DVL-919s, and a unit purchased in April 2004 had a
manufacture date of December 2003. Manufacturing of the DVL-919 continued
until January 1, 2009 when Pioneer announced [11] that production would cease
after a final production run of 3000 DVL-919 and other model laser disc
players.

### [edit] High-end Japanese players

Certain Japanese players, which are considered to be of higher quality or of
greater capacity for quality playback than the North American units, are
occasionally imported by enthusiasts. These include the CLD-R7G, LD-S9, HLD-X9
and HLD-X0. All four are manufactured by Pioneer and three contain technology
that was never officially available in North American Laserdisc players.

The CLD-R7G, LD-S9 and HLD-X9 share a highly advanced comb filter, allowing
them to offer a considerable advantage in picture quality over most other LD
players when the S-Video connection is used. The comb filter present in these
players is unique and is purportedly the finest comb filter ever used in
consumer A/V gear: it is still currently in use in Mitsubishi's top-spec CRT
rear-projection television sets (the Diamond and now defunct Platinum series
sets) and Pioneer's Elite line of rear-projection televisions.

In addition to the advanced comb filter, the HLD-X9 contains a red-laser
pickup, which significantly reduces crosstalk and picture-noise levels
compared to players with the traditional infrared laser; it can also read
through all but the worst cases of laser rot and surface wear. The HLD-X9 is,
lastly, also a MUSE player, capable when properly equipped of playing back
high definition Laserdiscs, called Hi-Vision or MUSE discs in Japan.

The HLD-X0 is Pioneer's original MUSE player, and is the player of choice for
many enthusiasts despite the fact that it lacks the comb filter shared by the
R7G, S9 and X9. It was entirely hand built from hand picked electronics and
weighed a massive 36 kilograms. Many argue that the newer X9 was a more
capable MUSE player but that the X0 had superior performance with standard
NTSC discs. Nonetheless, the X9 remains the more popular of the two models, as
it includes the newer comb filter and is a dual-side player, meaning that
double sided discs don't need to be manually flipped over in order for both
sides to be played.

### [edit] PAL Laserdiscs

PAL laserdiscs had a longer playing time than NTSC discs, but had fewer audio
options. PAL discs only have 2 audio tracks, consisting of either 2 analog-
only tracks on older PAL LDs, or 2 digital-only tracks on newer discs. In
comparison, newer NTSC LDs have 4 tracks, 2 digital and 2 analog altogether,
with one of the analog tracks sometimes being used to carry a modulated AC-3
signal for 5.1 channel audio (for decoding and playback by newer LD players
with an "AC-3 RF" output). However, older NTSC LDs made before 1984 (such as
the original DiscoVision discs) only have 2 analog audio tracks.

## [edit] Branding

<IMG>

<IMG>

Laserdisc Cover for Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation

During its development, MCA, which co-owned the technology, referred to it as
the Optical Videodisc System, "Reflective Optical Videodisc" or "Laser Optical
Videodisc", depending on the document; changing the name once in 1969 to
Disco-Vision and then again in 1978 to DiscoVision (without the hyphen), which
became the official spelling. Technical documents and brochures produced by
MCA Disco-Vision during the early and mid-'70s also used the term "Disco-
Vision Records" to refer to the pressed discs. MCA owned the rights to the
largest catalog of films in the world during this time, and they manufactured
and distributed the DiscoVision releases of those films under the "MCA
DiscoVision" software and manufacturing label â consumer sale of those
titles beginning on December 15, 1978.

Philips' preferred name for the format was "VLP", after the Dutch words Video
Langspeel-Plaat, which in English-speaking countries stood for Video Long-
Play. The first consumer player, the Magnavox VH-8000 even had the VLP logo on
the player. For a while in the early and mid-'70s, Philips also discussed a
compatible audio-only format they called "ALP", but that was soon dropped as
the Compact Disc system became a non-compatible project in the Philips
corporation. Until early 1981, the format had no 'official' name; however, the
LaserVision Association, made up of MCA, Universal-Pioneer and
Philips/Magnavox, was formed to standardize the technical specifications of
the format (which had been causing problems for the consumer market) and
finally named the system officially as "LaserVision".

In Europe, the format was introduced in 1983 with the LaserVision name
although Philips used "VLP" in model designations, such as VLP-600. Philips
tried renaming the entire format in 1987 to "CD-Video", and while the name and
logo appeared on players and labels for years, the 'official' name of the
format remained LaserVision. In the early 1990s, the format's name was finally
changed to LaserDisc.

### [edit] Pioneer

Pioneer Electronics also entered the optical disc market in 1977 as a 50/50
joint-venture with MCA called Universal-Pioneer and manufacturing MCA designed
industrial players under the MCA DiscoVision name (the PR-7800 and PR-7820).
For the 1980 launch of the first Universal-Pioneer player, the VP-1000, the
name became Laser Disc (with a 'rainbow' type logo joining the two words) and
in 1981 the intercap was eliminated and "LaserDisc" became the final and
common nickname for the format, although the official name was LaserVision.
However, as Pioneer reminded numerous video magazines and stores in 1984,
LaserDisc was a trademarked word, standing only for LaserVision products
manufactured for sale by Pioneer Video or Pioneer Electronics. A 1984 Ray
Charles ad for the LD-700 player bore the term "Pioneer LaserDisc brand
videodisc player." From 1981 until the early '90s, all properly licensed discs
carried the LaserVision name and logo, even Pioneer Artists titles.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Laserdisc turtle, used on the non-program side of some single sided
Laserdiscs

On single sided Laserdiscs mastered by Pioneer, playing the wrong side will
cause a still screen to appear with a happy, upside down turtle that has a
Laserdisc for a stomach (nicknamed the "Laserdisc Turtle"). The words "Program
material is recorded on the other side of this disc" are below the turtle.
Other manufacturers used a regular text message without graphics.

### [edit] MCA

During the early years, MCA also manufactured discs for other companies
including Paramount, Disney and Warner Bros. Some of them added their own
names to the disc jacket to signify that the movie was not owned by MCA. After
Discovision Associates shut down in early 1982, Universal Studio's videodisc
software label, called MCA Videodisc until 1984, began reissuing many
DiscoVision titles. Sadly, quite a few, such as Battlestar Galactica and Jaws,
were time-compressed versions of their CAV or CLV DiscoVision originals. The
time-compressed CLV re-issue of Jaws no longer had the original soundtrack,
having had incidental background music replaced for the videodisc version due
to licensing cost (the music wouldn't be available until the THX LaserDisc box
set was released in 1995). One Universal/Columbia co-production issued by MCA
DiscoVision in both CAV and CLV versions, The Electric Horseman, is still not
available in any other home video format with its original score intact; even
the most recent DVD release has had substantial music replacements of both
instrumental score and Willie Nelson's songs.

### [edit] Pioneer PR7820

The Pioneer PR7820 was first mass-produced industrial laserdisc player â
sold originally as the MCA DiscoVision PR-7820. This unit was used in many GM
dealerships as a source of training videos and presentation of GM's new line
of cars and trucks in the late '70s and early '80s. After MCA DiscoVision shut
down, Pioneer continued to sell the player under the Pioneer name as the
Pioneer Model-III. Was a full Level-III player and could accept a data-dump
from discs themselves. Could also be controlled by an external computer as
well as gen-locked to external video sources.

The 7820 is the only player ever sold to either the industrial or consumer
market that was entirely designed and engineered by the technicians at MCA
Disco-Vision and contained all of their preferred design approaches, such as
playing the disc with the laser on top (instead of underneath) and moving the
disc radially to provide tracking instead of moving the laser radially. MCA
engineers designed the player at the DiscoVision labs in Torrance, CA and
Universal-Pioneer mass produced it in Japan. The 7820 was such a high quality
player that MCA themselves used it at their DiscoVision disc pressing plant in
Carson, CA for quality control checks of both master discs and finished sets.
Unfortunately, this caused problems because the 7820 could easily play discs
that the poorly designed and quite primitive consumer player, the Magnavox
VH-8000, simply couldn't cope with.

In 1980, Discovision Associates released a factory update (it could also be
retrofitted to existing 7820s) that reduced disc search times to less than 3
seconds, and added the ability to jump up to 99 tracks during vertical
blanking, giving essentially "instant" searches. An external computer
interface box was also made available at the same time which contained
additional memory that increased the total size of a disc-based computer
program the 7820 could store and execute to 256k.

The 7820 was the first LD player to use solid-state tangential tracking â
instead of a tangential tracking mirror, the 7820 used an electronic CCD delay
line to provide tangential tracking corrections, giving the player superb
color quality. It wasn't until 1985/6 that the tangential mirror began to be
replaced by electronic correction, first by Yamaha in their first consumer LD
player, and eventually, by Pioneer themselves.

MCA DiscoVision had no suggested retail price for the PR-7820; depending on
the number purchased, it varied from $3,500 to $2,200 per unit if more than
1000 were bought at once. Fully functional 7820s are not easily available on
eBay and are nearly impossible to find in fully functional condition. Because
they are made of steel, weight is a problem for shipping the units.

### [edit] Other significant players

  * Pioneer VP-1000 Pioneer's first consumer player released in America in 1980. Never sold elsewhere. Also known as VP-1000A, which had circuit changes to greatly improve disc compatibility and power supply reliability. Was a lower-cost version of the 7820 in most respects and MCA DiscoVision engineers had a major hand in its design, thus giving it the ability to play discs that the Magnavox Magnavision VH-8000 would refuse to play or play poorly.
  * Pioneer LD-1100 Pioneer's first player to have built-in CX Noise Reduction and 2nd Generation American player, introduced in late 1981 along with lower-cost LD-660.
  * Pioneer LD-1000 Pioneer's first Japanese-market LD player introduced in 1981 â a 'clone' of the LD-1100, but with a transparent window in lid. NOTE: This unit should NOT be confused with the Pioneer LD-V1000.
  * Pioneer LD-X1 (Japanese market only; it had more sophisticated video processing than the LD-S1)
  * Pioneer LD-S1
  * Pioneer LD-700
  * Pioneer CLD-1010 First player capable of playing 5-inch CD-Videos. Released in 1987.
  * Pioneer CLD-1050 PAL only
  * Pioneer LD-S2
  * Pioneer CLD-D703/CLD-D704/CLD-79
  * Pioneer CLD-97
  * Pioneer CLD-99
  * Pioneer HLD-X0
  * Pioneer HLD-X9
  * Pioneer DVL-9/DVL-700/DVL-909/DVL-90/DVL-91/DVL-919 (Capable of playing DVD)
  * Pioneer CLD-2950
  * Pioneer CLD-D925
  * Panasonic LX-1000U

## [edit] Laserdisc vs. VHS

LD had a number of advantages over VHS. It featured a far sharper picture with
a horizontal resolution of 425 TVL lines for NTSC[citation needed] and 440 TVL
lines for PAL discs, while VHS featured only 240 TVL lines with NTSC. It could
handle analog and digital audio where VHS was analog only, and the NTSC discs
could store multiple audio tracks. This allowed for extras like director's
commentary tracks and other features to be added on to a film, creating
"Special Edition" releases that would not have been possible with VHS. Disc
access was random and chapter based, like the DVD format, meaning that one
could jump to any point on a given disc very quickly. By comparison, VHS would
require tedious rewinding and fast-forwarding to get to specific points.
Laserdiscs were cheaper than videocassettes to manufacture, because they lack
the moving parts and plastic outer shell that are necessary for VHS tapes to
work, and the duplication process was much simpler. A VHS cassette has at
least 14 parts including the actual tape while laserdisc has one part with
five or six layers. A disc can be stamped out in a matter of seconds;
duplicating videotape required a complex bulk tape duplication mechanism and
was a timeconsuming process.

Moreover, because the discs are read optically instead of magnetically, no
physical contact needs to be made between the player and the disc, except for
the player's clamp that holds the disc at its center as it is spun and read.
As a result, playback does not wear the information-bearing part of the discs,
and properly manufactured LDs will theoretically last beyond one's lifetime
(however, see Laser rot, below). By contrast, a VHS tape holds all of its
picture and sound information on the tape in a magnetic coating which is in
contact with the spinning heads on the head drum, causing progressive wear
with each use. Also, the tape is thin and delicate, and it is easy for a
player mechanism (especially on a low quality or malfunctioning model) to
mishandle the tape and damage it by creasing it, frilling (stretching) its
edges, or even breaking it.

### [edit] Special editions

The format's support for multiple audio tracks allowed for vast supplemental
materials to be included on-disc and made it the first available format for
"Special Edition" releases; the 1984 Criterion Collection edition of Citizen
Kane is generally credited as being the first "Special Edition" release to
home video,[citation needed] and for setting the standard by which future SE
discs were measured. In addition, the format's instant seeking capability made
it possible for a new breed of Laserdisc-based video arcade games, beginning
with Dragon's Lair, to be born.

### [edit] Disadvantages of Laserdiscs

Despite the apparent advantages over competing technology at the time (namely
VHS), the format was not without its flaws. The discs were 12" in diameter,
heavy, cumbersome, easier than a VHS cassette to damage when handling, and
manufacturers did not market LD units with recording capabilities to
consumers. Also, because of their size, greater mechanical effort was required
to spin the discs at the proper speed, resulting in much more noise generated
than other media.

In addition, perfect still frames and random access to individual still frames
were limited only to the more expensive CAV discs, which only had a playing
time of approximately 30 minutes per side. In later years, Pioneer and other
manufacturers overcame this limitation by incorporating a digital memory
buffer, which "grabbed" a single frame from a CLV title.

Despite their large physical size, the space-consuming analog video signal of
a Laserdisc limited playback duration to 30 (CAV) or 60 minutes (CLV) per side
because of the hardware manufacturer's refusal to reduce line count for
increased playtime. After one side was finished playing, a disc would have to
be flipped over in order to continue watching the film, and many films
required two discs or more. Many players, especially units built after the
mid-1980s, could "flip" discs automatically by rotating the optical pickup to
the other side of the disc, but this was accompanied by a pause in the movie
during the side change. If the movie was longer than what could be stored on 2
sides of a single disc, manually swapping to a second disc would be necessary
at some point during the film. One exception to this rule is the Pioneer
LD-W1, which had two disc platters.

### [edit] Laser rot

Main article: Laser rot

To make matters worse, many early LDs were not manufactured properly;
sometimes a substandard adhesive was used to sandwich together the two sides
of the disc.[citation needed] The adhesive contained impurities that were able
to penetrate the lacquer seal layer and chemically attack the metalized
reflective aluminium layer, causing it to oxidize and lose its reflective
characteristics. This was a problem that was coined "laser rot" (or,
"LaserRot", after the original official pascal-case "LaserDisc" name of the
underlying product) among LD enthusiasts. Some forms of laser rot could appear
as black spots that looked like mold or burned plastic which would cause the
disc to skip and the movie to exhibit excessive speckling noise. But, for the
most part, rotted discs may actually appear perfectly fine to the naked eye.

Later optical standards have been known to suffer similar problems, including
a notorious batch of defective CDs manufactured by Philips-DuPont Optical in
Europe during the early 1990s.

Coincidentally, the Laserdisc movie that has the most reported laser rot is
the film Eraser (1996), as noted by the contributors of LaserDisc Database.
The discs for this title were replicated by Sony Digital Audio Disc
Corporation, U.S., in Terre Haute, Indiana.

## [edit] Laserdisc vs. DVD

### [edit] Video

Laserdisc is a composite video format: the luminance (black and white) and
chrominance (color) information are transmitted in one signal and it is the
responsibility of the receiver to separate them. While good comb filters can
do so adequately, these two signals cannot be completely separated. On DVDs,
data is stored in the form of blocks which make up each independent frame. The
signal produced is dependent on the equipment used to master the disc. Signals
range from composite and split, to YUV and RGB. Depending upon which format is
used, this can result in far higher fidelity, particularly at strong colour
borders or regions of high detail (especially if there is moderate movement in
the picture) and low-contrast details like skin tones, where comb filters
almost inevitably smudge some detail.

Compared to the entirely digital DVD, Laserdiscs use only analog video. As the
Laserdisc format is not digitally encoded and does not make use of compression
techniques, it is immune from video macroblocking (most visible as blockiness
during high motion sequences) or contrast banding (subtle visible lines in
gradient areas, such as skies or light casts from spotlights) that can be
caused by the MPEG-2 encoding process as video is prepared for DVD. However,
proprietary human-assisted encoders manually operated by specialist experts
can vastly reduce the incidence of artifacts.

### [edit] Audio

DVDs almost exclusively use compressed audio formats such as Dolby Digital and
DTS which offer multichannel sound. Most Laserdiscs were encoded with stereo
(often Dolby Surround) CD quality audio 16bit/44kHz tracks as well as analog
audio tracks.[12] Many later release Laserdiscs included Dolby Digital and DTS
audio tracks but at slightly lower bitrates than DVD.

### [edit] Disadvantages of Laserdiscs

Given the analog nature of Laserdiscs, without any forms of checksum or error
correction, slight dust and scratches cause various problems that could affect
video quality. Wearout and/or calibration drift on the playback hardware also
play a role in degrading video quality, audio quality, and tracking accuracy.
In contrast, the DVD format's digital nature and error correction ensures that
the signal from a damaged disc will remain identical to that from a perfect
disc right up until read errors become so bad as to prevent the disc from
producing any usable data.

Laserdisc players sometimes suffered a problem known as "crosstalk" on
extended play discs, usually with equipment requiring service of the laser
optical pickup assembly when this occurs. However, the problem with crosstalk
may also occur with poorly manufactured CLV Laserdiscs or with discs that are
excessively warped. The issue comes up when the optical pickup inside the
player accidentally picks up the encoded video information from a track
adjacent to where it was reading on the disc. The added information shows up
as distortion in the picture, looking reminiscent of and referred to as
"barber poles".

Some players were better at compensating for and/or avoiding crosstalk
entirely than others, provided that the cause of crosstalk was the disc and
not the player. There is no crosstalk distortion on CAV standard play
Laserdiscs as the rotational speed never varies, but, if the player
calibration is out of order or if the CAV disc is faulty, other problems
affecting tracking accuracy could occur, such as "laser lock", where the
player reads the same track and, thus, the same two fields for one frame over
and over again, causing the picture to freeze as if in pause.

On most television sets a given DVD player will produce a picture that is
visually indistinguishable from other units, and quality differences between
players only becomes easily apparent with higher-end equipment due to some
post-processing of the MPEG-2 stream. In contrast, Laserdisc playback quality
is highly dependent on hardware decoder quality (as with any analog format).
Major variances in picture quality could appear between different makes and
models of LD players, even when tested on a low to mid-range television. This
had long lasting ramifications, as the pricing for high end players has
remained comparably high (anywhere from US$200 to well over $1,000), while
older and less desirable players can be purchased in working condition for as
little as $25.

### [edit] Advantages of Laserdiscs

Laserdisc players were known to provide the operator with a great degree of
control over the playback process. Unlike many DVD players, the operator is
immediately tied to the transport mechanism: pause, fast-forward, and fast-
reverse commands are always accepted. There were no "User Prohibited Options"
where content protection code instructs the player to refuse commands to skip
a specific part (such as fast forwarding through an FBI warning). However,
some DVD players, particularly in the higher-end units, have the ability to
ignore the blocking code and play the video without restrictions. With CAV
laserdiscs the user can access each individual frame of a video; a feature not
common among DVD players.[citation needed] However, Some DVD players have
cache features which stores a certain amount of the video in RAM which allows
the player to index a DVD as quickly as an LD, even down to the frame in some
players.

While Dolby Digital and DTS offer multichannel sound, many Laserdisc
enthusiasts claim that the uncompressed PCM tracks can often outperform the
respective DVDs of a title in richness and depth (and, because of the ways in
which 5.1 tracks are often mastered, in dimension as well). One important
factor in newer DVD releases' small advancement over Laserdiscs is their
opting for 16bit/44kHz sound in lieu of the DVD standard's little-known
24bit/96kHz capabilities.

Another advantage of Laserdisc is that damaged spots can be skipped, while a
DVD will become unusable. Some newer DVD players feature a repair+skip
algorithm, which alleviates this problem by continuing to play the disc,
filling in unreadable areas of the picture with blank space or a frozen frame
of the last readable image and sound. The success of this feature depends upon
the amount of damage. Laserdisc players, when working in full analog, recover
from such errors faster than DVD players. Direct comparison is, however,
almost impossible due to the differences between the two media. A 1" scratch
on a DVD will probably cause more problems than a 1" scratch on an Laserdisc,
but a fingerprint taking up 1% of the area of a DVD would almost certainly
cause fewer problems than a similar mark covering 1% of the surface of an
Laserdisc.

Some Laserdisc proponents believe analog laserdisc is theoretically capable of
higher quality than the "lossy" quality of DVD. Early DVD demo discs often had
compression or encoding problems, lending additional support to such claims at
the time. However, "LD-perfection" is rarely achieved in practice. Only the
best LDs in the best playback systems exhibit such superior quality in
comparison to the newer DVDs. Proponents of Laserdisc argue that Laserdisc
maintains a "smoother", more "film-like" image while DVD still looks slightly
more artificial. This is similar to the CD versus LP sound quality debates
common in the audiophile community.

## [edit] Comparison to other media

This is a list of modern-day, digital-type measurements (and traditional,
analog horizontal resolutions in TV lines per picture height) for various
media. The list only includes popular formats, not rare formats, and all
values are approximate (rounded to the nearest 10), since the actual quality
can vary machine-to-machine or tape-to-tape. For PAL media, replace 480 with
576 and 240 with 288. For ease-of-comparison all values are for the NTSC
system, and listed in ascending order from lowest quality to highest quality.

  * 350Ã240 (250 lines): Video CD
  * 330Ã480 (250 lines): U-matic, Betamax, VHS, Video8
  * 400Ã480 (300 lines): Super Betamax, Betacam (professional)
  * 440Ã480 (330 lines): analog broadcast
  * 560Ã480 (420 lines): LaserDisc, S-VHS, Hi8
  * 670Ã480 (500 lines): ED Betamax
  * 720Ã480 (500 lines): DVD, MiniDV, Digital8, Digital Betacam (professional)
  * 720Ã480 (400 lines): Widescreen DVD (anamorphic)
  * 1280Ã720 (720 lines): D-VHS, HD DVD, Blu-ray, HDV (miniDV - 720p)
  * 1920Ã1080 (1080 lines): D-VHS, HD DVD, Blu-ray, HDV (miniDV - 1080i - 1440 horizontal pixels interpolated to 1920), HDCAM SR (professional)

## [edit] Success of the format

The format was not well-received outside of videophile circles in North
America due in large part to the high cost of the players and discs, which
were far more expensive than VHS decks and tapes, and due to marketplace
confusion with the technologically inferior SelectaVision, which also went by
the name Videodisc. However, the Laserdisc format was more popular in Japan
than in North America because prices were kept low to ensure adoption,
resulting in minimal price differences between VHS tapes and the higher
quality Laserdiscs. LD also quickly became the dominant format of choice
amongst Japanese collectors of anime, who sought the higher video and sound
quality of laserdisc and the availability of numerous titles not available on
VHS. Laserdiscs were also popular alternatives to videocasettes among movie
enthusiasts in the more affluent regions of South East Asia, such as
Singapore, due to their high integration with the Japanese export market and
the disc-based media's superior longetivity compared to videocassette,
especially in humid conditions.

The format also became quite popular in Hong Kong during the 1990s before the
introduction of VCDs and DVD; although people rarely bought the discs, high
rental activity helped the video rental business in the city grow larger than
it had ever been previously. Interestingly, NTSC laserdiscs were used in the
Hong Kong market, in contrast to the PAL standard used for broadcast. The
standard conversion was effected in the player.

Despite the mild popularity, manufacturers refused to market recordable
Laserdisc devices on the consumer market, even though the competing VCR
devices could record onto cassette, which hurt sales worldwide. The
inconvenient disc size, the high cost of both the players and the media and
the inability to record onto the discs combined to take a serious toll on
sales, and contributed to the format's mediocre adoption figures.

Although the Laserdisc format has been supplanted by DVD, many LDs are still
highly coveted by movie enthusiasts. This is largely because there are many
films that are still only available on LD and many other LD releases contain
supplemental material not available on subsequent DVD versions of those films.

LD players are also sometimes found in contemporary North American high school
and college physics classrooms, in order to play a disc of the Physics: Cinema
Classics series of mid-20th century EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica films reproducing
classic experiments in the field which are difficult or impossible to
replicate in the laboratories in educational settings.[13] These films have
now been released on DVD.[14]

## [edit] Laserdisc variations

### [edit] Computer control

Early in the eighties, Philips produced a Laserdisc player model adapted for a
computer interface, dubbed "professional". When hooked to a PC this
combination could be used to display images or information for educational or
archival purposes, for example thousands of scanned medieval manuscripts. This
strange device could be considered a very early equivalent of a CD-ROM. In one
case such a "Laserdisc-ROM" was still present, although rarely used. In 1986,
a SCSI equipped Laserdisc player attached to a BBC Master computer was used
for the BBC Domesday Project.

Apple's HyperCard scripting language provided Macintosh computer users with a
means to design databases of slides, animation, video and sounds from
Laserdiscs and then to create interfaces for users to play specific content
from the disc. User-created "stacks" were shared and were especially popular
in education where teacher-generated stacks were used to access discs ranging
from art collections to basic biological processes. Commercially available
stacks were also popular with the Voyager company being possibly the most
successful distributor.[15]

Commodore International's 1992 multimedia presentation system for the Amiga,
AmigaVision, included device drivers for controlling a number of Laserdisc
players through a serial port. Coupled with the Amiga's ability to use a
Genlock, this allowed for the Laserdisc video to be overlaid with computer
graphics and integrated into presentations and multimedia displays, years
before such practice was commonplace.

Pioneer also made computer-controlled units such as the LD-V2000. It had a
back-panel RS-232 serial connection through a 5-pin DIN connector, and no
front-panel controls except Open/Close. (The disc would be played
automatically upon insertion.)

Under contract from the U.S. Military, Matrox produced a combination computer
laserdisc player for instructional purposes. The computer was a 286, the
laserdisc player only capable of reading the analog audio tracks. Together
they weighed 43 pounds and sturdy handles were provided in case 2 people were
required to lift the unit. The computer controlled the player via a 25-pin
serial port at the back of the player and a ribbon cable connected to a
proprietary port on the motherboard. Many of these were sold as surplus by the
military during the 90s, often without the controller software. It is
nevertheless possible to control the unit by removing the ribbon cable and
connecting a serial cable directly from the computer's serial port to the port
on the laserdisc player.

### [edit] Video games

Main article: Laserdisc video game

A number of companies used the Laserdisc format as the basis for arcade video
games during the 1980s and early 1990s, most notably Dragon's Lair and Space
Ace. Hardware in the arcade cabinet jumped to various scenes on the Laserdisc
according to the player's actions. The ability of Laserdisc to use full-motion
video provided significantly more detailed and complex visuals (although at
the expense of interactivity due to the non-realtime nature of the format)
than the simplistic sprite-based graphics of other arcade games at the time.
Significant players in the Laserdisc video game market included American Laser
Games and Cinematronics.

### [edit] MUSE LD

In 1991, several manufacturers announced specifications for what would become
known as MUSE Laserdisc, representing a span of almost 15 years until the
feats of this HD analog optical disc system would finally be duplicated
digitally by HD DVD and Blu-ray. Encoded using NHK's MUSE "Hi-Vision" analogue
TV system, MUSE discs would operate like standard Laserdiscs but would contain
high-definition 1125-line (1035 visible lines) video with a 5:3 aspect ratio.
The MUSE players were also capable of playing standard NTSC format discs and
are superior in performance to non-MUSE players even with these NTSC discs.
The MUSE-capable players had several noteworthy advantages over standard
Laserdisc players, including a red laser with a much narrower wavelength than
the lasers found in standard players. The red laser was capable of reading
through disc defects such as scratches and even mild disc-rot that would cause
most other players to stop, stutter or drop-out. Crosstalk was not an issue
with MUSE discs, and the narrow wavelength of the laser allowed for the
virtual elimination of crosstalk with normal discs.

In order to view MUSE encoded discs, it was necessary to have a MUSE decoder
in addition to a compatible player. There are televisions with MUSE decoding
built-in and set top tuners with decoders that can provide the proper MUSE
input. Equipment prices were high, especially for early HDTVs which generally
eclipsed US$10,000, and even in Japan the market for MUSE was tiny. Players
and discs were never officially sold in North America, although several
distributors imported MUSE discs along with other import titles. Terminator 2:
Judgement Day, Lawrence of Arabia, A League of Their Own, Bugsy, Close
Encounters of the Third Kind, Bram Stoker's Dracula and Chaplin were among the
theatrical releases available on MUSE LDs. Several documentaries, including
one about Formula One at Japan's Suzuka Circuit were also released.

### [edit] Laserdisc sizes

The most common size of Laserdisc was 30 centimetres (12 in). These
approximated the size of LP vinyl records. These discs allowed for 30 minutes
per side (CAV) or 60 minutes per side (CLV). The vast majority of programming
for the Laserdisc format was produced on these discs.

20 cm (7.9 in) Laserdiscs were also published. These "EP"-sized LDs allowed
for 20 minutes per side (CLV). They are much rarer than the full-size LDs,
especially in North America. These discs were often used for music video
compilations (e.g., Bon Jovi's "Breakout", Bananarama's "Video Singles" or
T'Pau's "View From A Bridge"[citation needed]).

There were also 12 cm (4.7 in) "single"-style discs produced that were
playable on Laserdisc players. These were referred to as CD Video (CD-V)
discs, and Video Single Discs (VSD). A CD-V carried up to 5 minutes of analog
Laserdisc-type video content (usually a music video), as well as up to 20
minutes of digital audio CD tracks. The original 1989 release of David Bowie's
restrospective Sound and Vision CD box set prominently featured a CD-V video
of Ashes To Ashes, and standalone promo CD-Vs featured the video, plus 3 audio
tracks: John, I'm Only Dancing, Changes and The Supermen.

CD-Vs are not to be confused with Video CDs (which are all-digital and can
only be played on VCD players, DVD players, CD-i players, computers, and
later-model Laserdisc players (such as the DVL series from Pioneer that can
also play DVDs). CD-Vs can only be played back on Laserdisc players with CD-V
capability. VSDs were the same as CD-Vs, but without the audio CD tracks. CD-
Vs were somewhat popular for a brief time worldwide, but soon faded from view.
VSDs were popular only in Japan and other parts of Asia, and were never really
introduced to the rest of the world.

### [edit] Picture discs

Picture discs have artistic etching on one side of the disc to make the disc
more visually attractive than the standard shiny silver surface. This etching
might look like a movie character, logo, or other promotional material.
Sometimes that side of the LD would be made with colored plastic rather than
the clear material used for the data side. Picture disc LDs only had video
material on one side as the "picture" side could not contain any data. Picture
discs are rare in North America.

### [edit] LD-G

Pioneer Electronics, one of the format's largest supporters/investors, was
also deeply involved in the karaoke business in Japan, and used Laserdiscs as
the storage medium for music and additional content such as graphics. The
format was generally called LD-G. While several other karaoke labels
manufactured Laserdiscs, there was nothing like the breadth of competition in
that industry that exists now, as almost all manufacturers have transitioned
to CD+G discs (en route, possibly, to a new DVD-based format).

### [edit] LaserActive

Main article: Pioneer LaserActive

Pioneer also marketed a format similar to LD-G, called LD-ROM. It was used by
Pioneer's LaserActive interactive Laserdisc player/video game console
introduced in 1993, and contained analog video and audio, in combination with
digital data (where the digital audio tracks would be on regular Laserdiscs).
LD-ROM was used for several games that could be played on the LaserActive
player/console.

### [edit] Squeeze LD

With the release of 16:9 televisions in the mid 1990s, Pioneer and Toshiba
decided that it was time to take advantage of this aspect ratio. Squeeze LDs
are enhanced 16:9 ratio widescreen Laserdiscs. In the video transfer stage the
movie is stored in an anamorphic format. The widescreen movie image was
stretched to fill the entire video frame with less or none of the video
resolution wasted to create letterbox bars. The advantage was a 33% greater
vertical resolution compared to regular Laserdisc. This same procedure was
used for DVD. Unlike most DVD players, very few LD players had the ability to
unsqueeze the image for 4:3 sets. If the discs were played on a 4:3 television
the image would be distorted. Since very few people owned 16:9 displays, the
marketability of these special discs was very limited.

There were no titles available in the US except for promotional purposes. Upon
purchase of a Toshiba 16:9 television viewers had the option of selecting a
number of Warner Brothers 16:9 films. Titles include Unforgiven, Grumpy Old
Men, The Fugitive, and Free Willy. The Japanese lineup of titles was
different. A series of releases under the banner "SQUEEZE LD" from Pioneer of
mostly Carolco titles included Basic Instinct, Stargate, Terminator 2:
Judgment Day, Showgirls, Cutthroat Island, and Cliffhanger. Oddly enough
Terminator 2 was released twice in Squeeze LD, the second release being THX
certified and a notable improvement over the first.

### [edit] Recordable formats

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Pioneer LaserRecorder that could be connected to a computer or a video
source

<IMG>

<IMG>

A CRV Disc with a VHS tape for size comparison

Another type of video media, CRVdisc, or "Component Recordable Video Disc"
were available for a short time, mostly to professionals. Developed by Sony,
CRVdiscs resemble early PC CD-ROM caddies with a disc inside resembling a full
sized LD. CRVdiscs were blank, write-once, read-many media that could be
recorded once on each side. CRVdiscs were used largely for backup storage in
professional/commercial applications.[citation needed]

Another form of recordable Laserdisc that is completely playback-compatible
with the Laserdisc format (unlike CRVdisc with its caddy enclosure) is the
RLV, or Recordable LaserVision disc. It was developed and first marketed by
the Optical Disc Corporation (ODC, now ODC Nimbus) in 1984. RLV discs, like
CRVdisc, are also a WORM technology, and function exactly like a CD-R disc.
RLV discs look almost exactly like standard Laserdiscs, and can play in any
standard Laserdisc player after they've been recorded.

The only cosmetic difference between an RLV disc and a regular factory-pressed
Laserdiscs is their reflective purple-violet (or blue with some RLV discs)
color resulting from the dye embedded in the reflective layer of the disc to
make it recordable, as opposed to the silver mirror appearance of regular LDs.
The purplish color of RLVs is very similar to some DVD-R and DVD+R discs. RLVs
were popular for making short-run quantities of Laserdiscs for specialized
applications such as interactive kiosks and flight simulators.

In spite of nonrecordability being commonly regarded as the primary weakness
of the Laserdisc format, these recordable LD systems were never marketed
toward the general public, and are so poorly known as to create the
misconception that a home recording system for Laserdiscs is impossible.

## [edit] In popular culture

  * An early single-sided prototype DiscoVision Laserdisc made an appearance in the 1977 movie Airport '77, during a scene in which a flight stewardess inserts it into what looks like a Magnavox VH-8000 "Magnavision" player for an in-flight movie.
  * In Back to the Future, an MCA LaserDisc hangs on the wall amongst Doc Brown's clocks. In Back to the Future Part II, Laserdiscs are seen bundled up and left out as garbage when Doc and Marty leave Jennifer after their arrival in the year 2015, suggesting that they have become undesireable.
  * Laserdisc players were used for the videos on the Back to the Future ride. The Ride in Hollywood closed on September 1, 2007, while the Florida version closed on March 30, 2007.
  * A LaserDisc player appears briefly in the 1989 Bond film, Licence to Kill in Felix Leiter's study as well as in a number of other scenes. Philips was a major sponsor of the film.
  * During the late 1980s, Pioneer signed contracts with major music artists, such as Madonna, Janet Jackson, and others, to release their concerts on Laserdisc only through Pioneer. To this date, the contracts are still standing, and the concerts have not been re-released on DVD by Pioneer or others. An exception is the Genesis Laserdisc of "The Way We Walk" , which was released to DVD in October 2002, under the Pioneer label.[citation needed]

## [edit] See also

  * Videodisc
  * SelectaVision
  * VHD

## [edit] References

  1. ^ U.S. Patent 3,430,966 Transparent recording disc, 1969.
  2. ^ U.S. Patent 3,530,258 Video signal transducer, 1970.
  3. ^ U.S. Patent 4,893,297 Disc-shaped member, 1990.
  4. ^ "News of laser disk player production end". 2009-01-14. http://pioneer.jp/press/2009/0114-1.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-09.
  5. ^ "New and emerging video technologies: A status report". October 29, 1998. http://www.dlib.indiana.edu/~brancoli/videostatus.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-05.
  6. ^ "Bittersweet Times for Collectors of Laser Disk Movies". April 29, 1999. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9D0CE5DD123DF93AA15757C0A96F958260&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=print. Retrieved on 2007-10-05.
  7. ^ a b "Digital audio modulation in the PAL and NTSC video disc formats, J. Audio Eng. Soc. vol. 32, pp. 883, 1984". http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=11765. Retrieved on 2008-02-24.
  8. ^ "Laserdisc Forever Review of Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace". May 9,2000. http://www.mindspring.com/~laserdisc-forever/phantommenace.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-05.
  9. ^ "DTS Digital Surround LaserDisc". January 24, 2005. http://www.blam1.com/LaserDisc/dts.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  10. ^ "LaserDisc FAQ". PrecisionLaserdisc.com. http://www.precisionlaserdisc.com/newfaq.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  11. ^ http://pioneer.jp/press/2009/0114-1.html
  12. ^ "(2.7) How does DVD compare to laserdisc?". AllforMP3.com. http://www.allformp3.com/dvd-faqs/27.htm. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  13. ^ Kay Hansen Littler. "Physics: CINEMA CLASSICS". Department of Physics, University of North Texas. http://www.phys.unt.edu/~klittler/demo_room/MultiMedia/CINCLSS.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.
  14. ^ AAPT. "Physics: CINEMA CLASSICS". AAPT. http://www.aapt.org/Store/cinemaclassics.cfm. Retrieved on 2008-01-15.
  15. ^ Jeff Martin. "Voyager Company CD-ROMs: Production History and Preservation Challenges of Commercial Interactive Media" (PDF). Electronic Arts Intermix (EAI) Resource Guide. http://resourceguide.eai.org/preservation/computer/pdf-docs/voyager_casestudy.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-07-20.

## [edit] Resources

  * Jordan Isailovic, Videodisc and Optical Memory Systems Vol. 1, Boston: Prentice Hall, 1984. ISBN 978-0139420535
  * Lenk, John D. Complete Guide to Laser/VideoDisc Player Troubleshooting and Repair. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1985. ISBN 0-13-160813-4.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Laserdisc  
  * [1] \- source material
  * The LaserDisc Database â titles database, profiling, marketplace
  * The 'Total Rewind' VCR museum, covering Laserdisc and other vintage formats
  * The Laserdisc FAQ, (original source)
  * MCA DiscoVision History via the Wayback Machine
  * The UK Laserdisc Player Archive â includes North American players
  * BLAM Entertainment Group â includes Star Wars and Star Trek Laserdisc catalogs and lists of Dolby Digital and DTS equipped titles
  * RCA SelectaVision VideoDisc FAQ â also contains some DiscoVision history
  * History of the Laserdisc, Terms and a look at some specific players
  * eBay UK guide - Laserdisc Players and Laserdiscs - Formats and Features
  * Guide to and software for the Matrox 286/Laserdisc player
  * Laserdisc.TV

v â¢ d â¢ e

Video storage formats  
Videotape

Analog

Quadruplex (1956) Â· VERA (1958) Â· Type A (1965) Â· CV-2000 (1965) Â· Akai
(1967) Â· U-matic (1969) Â· EIAJ-1 (1969) Â· Cartrivision (1972) Â· Philips
VCR (1972) Â· V-Cord (1974) Â· VX (1974) Â· Betamax (1975) Â· IVC (1975) Â·
Type B (1976) Â· Type C (1976) Â· VHS (1976) Â· VK (1977) Â· SVR (1979) Â·
Video 2000 (1980) Â· CVC (1980) Â· VHS-C (1982) Â· M (1982) Â· Betacam (1982)
Â· Video8 (1985) Â· MII (1986) Â· S-VHS (1987) Â· Hi8 (1989) Â· S-VHS-C (1987)
Â· W-VHS (1994)  
Digital

D1 (1986) Â· D2 (1988) Â· D3 (1991) Â· DCT (1992) Â· D5 (1994) Â· Digital
Betacam (1993) Â· DV (1995) Â· Digital-S (D9) (1995) Â· DVCPRO (1995) Â·
Betacam SX (1996) Â· DVCAM (1996) Â· HDCAM (1997) Â· DVCPRO50 (1998) Â· D-VHS
(1998) Â· Digital8 (1999) Â· DVCPRO HD (2000) Â· D6 HDTV VTR (2000) Â· MicroMV
(2001) Â· HDV (2003) Â· HDCAM SR (2003)  
Videodisc

Analog

Phonovision (1927) Â· TeD (1975) Â· Laserdisc (1978) Â· CED (1981) Â· VHD
(1983) Â· Laserfilm (1984) Â· CD Video (1987)  
Digital

VCD (1993) Â· MovieCD (c.1995) Â· DVD/DVD-Video (1995) Â· MiniDVD (c.1995) Â·
CVD (1998) Â· SVCD (1998) Â· EVD (2003) Â· XDCAM (2003) Â· HVD (2004) Â· FVD
(2005) Â· UMD (2005) Â· VMD (2006) Â· HD DVD (2006) Â· Blu-ray Disc (2006) Â·
CBHD (2008)  
Solid state

DVCPRO P2 (2004) Â· AVC-Intra (2006) Â· XDCAM EX (2007)  
Digital tapeless

MOD (2005) Â· AVCHD (2006) Â· TOD (2007)  
Non-video TV recording

Kinescope (1947) Â· Electronicam kinescope (1950s) Â· Electronic Video
Recording (1967)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laserdisc"

Categories: Optical disc authoring | Laserdisc | Video storage | Digital media
| 1978 introductions | 2001 disestablishments | Film and video technology |
Discontinued media formats

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since October 2008 | All articles to
be merged | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since April 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since July
2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | Articles with
unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 22:25.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



