
# Cover version

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

In popular music, a cover version, or simply cover, is a new rendition
(performance or recording) of a previously recorded, commercially released
song.

In its current use, it can sometimes have a pejorative meaning â implying
that the original recording should be regarded as the definitive version,
usually in the sense of an "authentic" rendition, and all others are merely
lesser competitors, alternatives or tributes (no matter how popular). However,
Billboard â and other magazines recording the popularity of the musical
artists and hit tunes â originally measured the sales success of the
published tune, not just recordings of it, or later the airplay that it also
managed to achieve. In that context, the greater the number of cover versions,
the more successful the song.[1]

Typically, artists and record companies are not compensated when other
musicians perform covers, revivals or contemporary versions. Contemporary
versions are particularly popular among nascent musical acts as they are often
used to strategically position well-known music between less popular
"originals" by the artist(s).

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Copyright Law
  * 3 Origin of the term
    * 3.1 Multiple Version In Various Formats Or Locations
    * 3.2 Rival Outlets And Popularized Recordings
    * 3.3 Incentives To Make Duplicate Recorded Versions Of A Tune Or Song
  * 4 Modern cover versions
  * 5 Updating older songs
  * 6 Introduction of new artists
  * 7 Tributes, tribute albums and cover albums
  * 8 By genre
    * 8.1 Metal
    * 8.2 Hip-hop
    * 8.3 Swamp pop
    * 8.4 New Age
    * 8.5 Indie
    * 8.6 Punk
    * 8.7 Hardcore
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] History

The term 'cover version' originally described a rival version of a tune
recorded to compete with the recently released original version, e.g. Paul
Williams' 1949 hit tune "The Hucklebuck" or Hank Williams' 1952[2] song
"Jambalaya (On the Bayou)", both crossed over to the popular Hit Parade and
had numerous hit versions. Prior to the mid-20th century the notion of an
original version of a popular tune would, of course, have seemed slightly odd
â the production of musical entertainment being seen essentially as a live
event, even if one that was reproduced at home via a copy of the sheet music,
learned by heart, or captured on a shellac recording disc. Popular musicians
(and especially modern listeners) have now begun to use the word "cover" to
refer to any remake of a previously recorded tune.

In previous generations, some artists made very successful careers out of
presenting revivals or reworkings of once popular tunes, even out of doing
contemporary cover versions of current hits. Musicians now play what they call
"cover versions" (e.g. the reworking, updating or interpretation) of songs as
a tribute to the original performer or group. Using familiar material (e.g.
evergreen hits, standard tunes or classic recordings) is an important method
in learning various styles of music. Most albums, or long playing records, up
until the mid-1960s usually contained a large number of evergreens or
standards to present a fuller range of the artist's abilities and style.[3]
Artists might also perform interpretations ("covers") of a favorite artist's
hit tunes[4] for the simple pleasure of playing a familiar song or collection
of tunes.[5] A cover band plays such "cover versions" exclusively.

In the contemporary world, there are broadly three types of entertainers who
depend upon cover versions for their principal repertoire:

Tribute acts or bands are performers who make a living by recreating the music
of one particular artist. Bands such as Bjorn Again, Dread Zeppelin and the
Fab Faux are dedicated to playing the music of ABBA, Led Zeppelin and the
Beatles respectively. There are also "tribute acts" that salute the Who, the
Rolling Stones, Pink Floyd and many other classic rock acts. Most tribute
bands are content to perform copycat versions of the original repertoire. Some
tribute bands introduce a twist. Dread Zeppelin's reggae takes on the Zeppelin
catalog, and Beatallica creates heavy metal fusions of songs by the Beatles
and Metallica.

Cover acts or bands are entertainers who perform a broad variety of crowd-
pleasing material for audiences who enjoy the familiarity of hit songs. Such
bands draw from Top 40 hits of different decades to provide a pleasurable
nostalgic entertainment in bars, on cruise ships and at events such as
weddings, family celebrations and corporate functions.

Revivalist artists or bands are performers who are inspired by an entire genre
of music and who are dedicated to curating and recreating that genre and
introducing it to younger audiences who have not experienced that music first
hand. Unlike tribute bands and cover bands who rely primarily on audiences
seeking a nostalgic experience, revivalist bands usually seek new young
audiences for whom the music is fresh and has no nostalgic value. For example:
Sha Na Na started in 1969 as a celebration of the doo-wop music of the 1950s,
a genre of music that was not initially fashionable during the hippie counter-
culture era. The Blues Brothers started in 1978 as a living salute to the
blues, soul and R&B music of the 1950s and 1960s that was not in vogue by the
late 70s. The Blues Brothers' creed was that they were "on a mission from God"
as evangelists for blues and soul music. The Black Crowes formed in 1984,
initially dedicated to reviving 1970s style blues-rock. They subsequently
started writing their own material in the same vein.

## [edit] Copyright Law

Cover songs often fall under a mechanical license whereby the cover artist
pays a standard royalty to the original artist, and is safe under copyright
law even if they do not have any permission from the original artist.

## [edit] Origin of the term

### [edit] Multiple Version In Various Formats Or Locations

From early in the 20th century it was common practice among phonograph record
labels, if any company had a record that was a significant commercial success,
that other record companies would have singers or musicians "cover" the "hit"
tune by recording a version for their own label in hopes of cashing in on the
tune's success. For example, Ain't She Sweet, was first popularized in 1927 by
Eddie Cantor (on stage) and by Ben Bernie and Gene Austin (on record), was
repopularized through popular recordings by Mr. Goon Bones & Mr. Ford and
Pearl Bailey in 1949, and later still revived as 33 1/3 and 45 RPM records by
the Beatles in 1964.[6] Since there was little promotion or advertising
involved in the earlier days of record production, other than at the local
music hall or music store, when the average record buyer went out to purchase
a new record, they usually asked for the tune, not the artist. In addition,
distribution of records was highly localized in many cases. So, a quickly-
recorded version of a hit song from another area could reach an audience
before the version by the artist(s) who first introduced the tune in a
particular format - the "original", "introductory" or "popularizing" artist -
was widely available, and the highly competitive record companies were quick
to take advantage of these facts.

### [edit] Rival Outlets And Popularized Recordings

This began to change in the later 1930s, when the average age of the now
greatly increased record-buying public began to expand to include a younger
age group. During the Swing Era, when a bobby soxer went looking for a
recorded tune, say "In the Mood", typically she wanted the version popularized
by her favourite artist(s), e.g. the Glenn Miller version (on RCA Victor's
cheaper Bluebird label), not someone else's (sometimes presented on a more
expensive record company's label). This trend was marked closely by the
charting of record sales by the different artists, not just hit tunes, on the
music industry's Hit Parades. However, for sound commercial reasons, record
companies still continued to record different versions of tunes that sold
well. Most audiences until the mid-1950s still heard their favorite artists
playing live music on stage or via the radio. And since radio shows were for
the most part aimed at local audiences, it was still rare for an artist in one
area to reach a mass audience. Also radio stations tended to cater to broad
audience markets, so an artist in one vein might not get broadcast on other
stations geared to a set audience. So popular versions of Jazz, Country and
Western or Rhythm and Blues tunes, and vice versa, were frequent. Consider
Mack The Knife (Die Moritat vom Mackie Messer): this was originally from
Bertholt Brecht's 1928 Die Dreigroschenoper. It was popularised by a 1956
record Hit Parade instrumental tune, Moritat, for the Dick Hyman Trio, also
recorded by Richard Hayman & Jan August,[7] but a hit also for Louis Armstrong
1956/1959, Bobby Darin, 1959,[8] and Ella Fitzgerald, 1960,[9] as vocal
versions of Mack The Knife.

Europe's Radio Luxembourg, like many commercial stations, also sold "air
time"; so record companies and others bought air time to promote their own
artists or products, thus increasing the number of recorded versions of any
tune then available. Add to this the fact that many radio stations were
limited in their permitted "needle time" (the amount of recorded music they
were allowed to play), or were regulated on the amount of local talent they
had to promote in live broadcasts, as with most national stations like the BBC
in the UK.

### [edit] Incentives To Make Duplicate Recorded Versions Of A Tune Or Song

Even to this day, authors and publishers are paid royalty by broadcasters and
artists are not; there is still an incentive to record numerous versions of a
song, particularly in different genres. For example, King Records frequently
cut both rhythm and blues and country and western versions of novelty songs
like "Good Morning, Judge" and "Don't Roll those Bloodshot Eyes at Me". This
tradition was expanded when rhythm and blues songs began showing up on pop
music charts.

In the early days of rock and roll, many tunes originally recorded by R&B and
Country musicians were still being re-recorded in a more popular vein by other
artists with a more toned-down style or professional polish.[10] Given the
reluctance of radio stations to play formats outside their own target audience
group's taste, this was inevitable. By far the most popular style of music in
the mid-1950s / mid-1960s was still the professional light orchestral unit, so
that was the format sought by popular recording artists.[11] For many purists
these popular versions lacked both the raw, often amateurish, earthiness of
the original introducing artists. But mostly they did not have the added kudos
craved by many rebellious teenagers, the social stigma - or street credibility
- of rock and roll music; as most of these were performed by the type of black
artists not heard on the popular mass entertainment markets, some having also
been written by them. The bowdlerized popular cover versions were considered
by most audiences at the time to be more palatable for the mass audience of
both parents and children as a group audience. Therefore the artists targeting
the white-majority family audience were more acceptable to programmers at most
radio and TV stations. For this reason singer-songwriter Don McLean has called
the cover version a "racist tool."[12] Many parents in the 1950s - 60s,
whether intentionally racists or not, felt deeply threatened by the rapid pace
of social change. After all they had for the most part shared entertainments
with their parents in ways that their own children had become reluctant to do.
The jukebox and the personal record disc player were still relatively
expensive pieces of machinery - and the portable radio a great novelty,
allowing truculent teenagers to shut themselves off. Tunes by introducing or
"original" niche market artists which were then successful on the mass
audience Hit Parade charts are called crossovers as they "crossed over" from
the targeted Country, Jazz or Rhythm audience. Also, many songs originally
recorded by male artists were rerecorded by female artists, and vice versa.
Such a cover version is also sometimes called a cross cover version.
Incidentally, up to the mid-1930s male vocalists often sang the female lyrics
to popular songs, though this faded rapidly after it was deemed decadent in
Nazi Germany.

Reworking non-English language tunes and lyrics for the Anglo-Saxon markets
was once a popular part of the music business. For example, the 1954 worldwide
hit The Happy Wanderer was originally Der frÃ¶hliche Wanderer, to this must be
added Hymne a l`amour, Mutterlein, Volare, Seeman, "Quando, Quando, Quando",
L'amour est bleu, etc.

## [edit] Modern cover versions

Cover versions of many popular songs have been recorded, sometimes with a
radically different style, sometimes virtually indistinguishable from the
original. For example, Jose Feliciano's version of "Light My Fire" (recorded
after the original had disappeared from sales charts) was distinct from The
Doors' version, but Carl Carlton's 1974 cover (seven years after the fact) of
Robert Knight's 1967 hit single "Everlasting Love" sounded almost identical to
the original. Another one of the most recent songs to be covered is the 2007
song "Umbrella" by Rihanna. Artists such as Amanda Palmer, Manic Street
Preachers, OneRepublic, Lillasyster, Scott Simons, Marie Digby, Mandy Moore,
Tegan and Sara, Vanilla Sky, Biffy Clyro, My Chemical Romance, Linkin Park,
All Time Low, McFly, Plain White T's, Taylor Swift, and others have covered it
in different styles. One good example is the band Megadeth, which has made
metal covers of various tunes such as These Boots, I Ain't Superstitious,
Anarchy in the U.K., No More Mr. Nice Guy, and others.

Cover versions can also still cross language barriers. Falco's 1982 German-
language hit "Der Kommissar" was covered in English by After the Fire,
although the German title was retained. The English version, which was not a
direct translation of Falco's original but retained much of its spirit,
reached the Top 5 on the US charts. The Lion Sleeps Tonight evolved over
several decades and versions from a 1939 Zulu a cappella song. Many of singer
Laura Branigan's 1980s hits were English-language remakes of songs already
successful in Europe, for the American record market. Numerable English-
language covers exist of 99 Luftballons by German singer Nena, one having been
recorded by Nena herself following the success of her original German version.
"Popcorn", a song which was originally completely instrumental, has had lyrics
added in at least six different languages in various covers.

Although modern cover versions are often produced for artistic reasons, some
aspects of the disingenuous spirit of early cover versions remain. In the
album-buying heyday of the 1970s, albums of sound-alike covers were created,
commonly released to fill bargain bins in the music section of supermarkets
and even specialized music stores, where uninformed customers might easily
confuse them with original recordings. The packaging of such discs was often
intentionally confusing, combining the name of the original artist in large
letters with a tiny disclaimer like as originally sung by or as made popular
by. More recently, albums such as the Kidz Bop series of compact discs,
featuring versions of contemporary songs sung by children, have sold
successfully.

Organized crime, or unscrupulous labels, have been known to release original
recordings in other markets, without payment of royalties to the writers or
artists; these unauthorized releases could not be properly termed "cover"
recordings.[citation needed]

## [edit] Updating older songs

Cover versions (as the term is now used) are often contemporary versions of
familiar songs. For example "Singin' in the Rain" was originally introduced in
the film The Hollywood Revue of 1929. The famous Gene Kelly version was a
revision that brought it up to date for a 1950s Hollywood musical, and was
used in the 1952 film Singin' in the Rain. In 1978, it was covered by French
singer Sheila accompanied by the B. Devotion group, as a disco song, once more
updating it to suit the musical taste of the era. During the disco era there
was a brief trend of taking well known songs and recording them in the disco
style. More recently "Singin' In the Rain" has been covered and remixed by
British act Mint Royale for a television commercial for Volkswagen. Another
example of this, from a different angle, is the tune Blueberry Hill, many
mistakenly believe the Fats Domino 1956 release to be the original recording
and artist. In fact, it was originally introduced on film by Gene Autry and
popularised on the record Hit Parade of 1940 by Glenn Miller. The Fats Domino
Rock 'n' Roll version is the only one that might currently get widespread
airplay on most media - due, no doubt, to the still prevailing prejudice
against non-beat music artists or styles. Similarly, "Unchained Melody" was
originally performed by Todd Duncan, featured in the 1955 film Unchained
(based on the non-fiction story: Prisoners are People by Kenyon J. Scudder);
Al Hibbler having the biggest number of worldwide record sales for the vocal
version with Jimmy Young's cover version rival outdoing this in the UK,[13]
Les Baxter's Orchestra gaining the big instrumentalist sales, reaching the US
Hit Parade number one spot in May 1955,[14] but The Righteous Brothers' later
rendition (top five on the US Hit Parade of September 1965[15] stalling at
number 14 in the UK in August) is by far better known since the 1990 film
Ghost.

Director Baz Luhrmann has contemporised and stylised older songs for use in
his films. New or cover versions such as John Paul Young's "Love Is in the
Air" occur in Strictly Ballroom, Candi Staton's "Young Hearts Run Free" appear
in Romeo + Juliet, and adaptations of artists such as Nat King Cole, Nirvana,
Kiss, Elton John, Thelma Houston, Marilyn Monroe, Madonna, T. Rex, David
Bowie, Queen and The Police are used in Moulin Rouge! The covers are carefully
designed to fit into the structure of each film and suit the taste of the
intended audience.

## [edit] Introduction of new artists

New artists are often introduced to the record buying public with performances
of well known, "safe" songs as evidenced in Pop Idol and its international
counterparts. It is also a means by which the public can more easily
concentrate upon the new performer without the need to judge the quality of
the songwriting skills.

However, some new artists have chosen to radically rework a popular song to
exemplify their approach and philosophy to music. Prime examples include Joe
Cocker's soulful reworking of The Beatles' originally-jaunty "With a Little
Help from My Friends", the band Devo's radical reconstruction of the Rolling
Stones' "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction", or Marilyn Manson's version of "Sweet
Dreams (Are Made of This)". Many musicians have other goals, such as to create
publicity as in Sid Vicious' notorious rendition of "My Way", or to
personalize a song, such as Johnny Cash reworking Nine Inch Nails's "Hurt" to
a devastating acoustic version that reflected upon his ill state.

## [edit] Tributes, tribute albums and cover albums

Established artists often pay homage to artists or songs that inspired them
before they started their careers, or musicians who in some way helped them
enter Show Business, by recording their own versions of tunes associated with
that artist.[16] This can also be seen in artists performing unrecorded
renditions of tunes associated with their favourite influential musician(s) in
their own live performances for variety. For example U2 has performed ABBA's
"Dancing Queen" live, and Kylie Minogue has performed The Clash's "Should I
Stay or Should I Go" - songs that would be completely out of character for
them to record, but which allow them artistic freedom when performing live.
These performances are often released as part of authorised "live recordings"
and thus become legitimate cover versions.

Since the late twentieth century, unrelated contemporary artists have
contributed individual reworkings of tunes to tribute albums for well
established artists who are considered to be influential and inspiring. This
trend was spawned by Hal Willner's Amarcord Nino Rota in 1981. Typically, each
project has resulted in a collection of the particular artist's best
recognised or most highly regarded songs reworked by more current performers.
Among the artists to receive this form of recognition are AC/DC, Joy Division,
Guns N' Roses, New Order, Rush, Faith No More, Tom Waits, Oingo Boingo, The
Bee Gees, ABBA, Fleetwood Mac, Cher, Shania Twain, Linkin Park, Kate Bush, Bob
Dylan, Johnny Cash, Rammstein, The Carpenters, Dolly Parton, Nirvana, Nine
Inch Nails, Leonard Cohen, U2, Jimi Hendrix, Elton John, Duran Duran, Carole
King, Smashing Pumpkins, Led Zeppelin, Sick Of It All, Metallica, the Ramones,
Queen, The Misfits, Sublime, Velvet Revolver, Weezer, the Finn brothers, Bruce
Cockburn, Donovan, Harry Chapin, Gordon Lightfoot, and BjÃ¶rk. At least five
tribute albums to Gary Numan have been released.

The soundtracks to the films I Am Sam and Across the Universe are examples of
this: they consisted of Beatles songs redone by various contemporary artists.
Some more notable examples are Conception: The Interpretation of Stevie Wonder
Songs; Common Thread an album of contemporary country artists performing hit
singles by The Eagles; the Rhythm, Country and Blues album where a country
artist duets with a Rhythm and blues artist on a standard of either genre. Two
notable tribute albums to the Grateful Dead are Wake the Dead, with Celtic-
style covers, and Might As Well, by The Persuasions.

In some cases this proves to be popular enough to spawn a series of cover
albums being released for a band, either under a consistent branding such as
the two Black Sabbath Nativity in Black cover albums and the Industrial themed
"Blackest Album" cover albums of Metallica songs, or in the form of releases
from a number of different companies cashing in on the trend such as the many
Metallica cover albums released in the late 1990s and early 2000s.

Metallica itself is known for doing covers; their original album Kill Em All
included a couple of covers (Diamond Head's Am I Evil and Blitzkrieg's
Blitzkrieg), the original Garage Days Re-Revisited was a collection of covers
paying homage to a number of mostly obscure bands, which were later combined
with additional new covers on the 2 disc Garage Inc., which among other things
included covers of Black Sabbath, Bob Seger, Blue Ãyster Cult, Mercyful Fate,
and numerous MotÃ¶rhead tracks. In an interesting turn around there were even
a couple of releases of The Metallic-Era CDs collecting tracks from bands that
Metallica had covered, both the original versions of the covered songs, and
some additional songs by the same artist.

A different type of all-covers album occurs when one artist creates a release
of covers of songs originally by many other artists, as a way to recognize
their influences or simply as a change of pace or direction. An early example
of this was David Bowie's album "Pin Ups", featuring songs from groups with
which he had shared venues in the 1960s. Since these bands included The Who
and The Kinks many of the tracks would have been at least familiar to his
audience. Other more recent examples of this type of album include Renegades
by Rage Against the Machine featuring covers of songs originally performed by
diverse artists including Bruce Springsteen, Bob Dylan, the Rolling Stones,
Afrikaa Bambaataa, and Erik B and Rakim, as well as the EP Feedback by
Canadian rock band Rush. Tori Amos' album Strange Little Girls features covers
of songs originally performed by male artists sung from the perspective of
thirteen female characters she created. Awaken's double album Party In
Lyceum's Toilets has a whole CD dedicated to covers of various artists.
Manfred Mann did albums with more covers than original songs, following the
mould of Vanilla Fudge. More rarely, bands will do an entire album of cover
songs originally by a particular artist, such as The The's Hanky Panky, which
consists entirely of Hank Williams songs, or Booker T. and the MGs' album
McLemore Avenue which was a cover of The Beatles' Abbey Road, or Russ Pay's
tribute to Manchester legends Joy Division.

There are also bands who create entire albums out of covers, but unlike Tin
Pan Alley-style traditional pop singers, they often perform the songs in a
genre completely unlike the original songs. Examples include the Moog Cookbook
(alternative and classic rock songs done on Moog synthesizers), Richard Cheese
and Lounge Against the Machine (top 40, including punk, heavy metal, teen pop
and indie rock performed in a Vegas lounge lizard style), and Hayseed Dixie (a
play on the name AC/DC, they started covering AC/DC songs and progressed to
other classic rock, playing them as bluegrass songs, similar to The Gourds'
version of "Gin and Juice.") Also notable are Dread Zeppelin, who take Led
Zeppelin songs and cover them in a reggae fashion with the added twist of an
Elvis Presley impersonation on the lead vocal; Nine Inch Elvis, who take Elvis
Presley songs and rework them in an industrial fashion similar to Nine Inch
Nails; and Beatallica, who "mix up" songs from The Beatles and Metallica, into
metallica-sounding songs with humorous lyrics referring to both bands' works.

In that same category, the Blues Brothers have made only covers in their 3
most famous albums, Briefcase Full of Blues, Made in America and the motion
picture soundtrack The Blues Brothers. They covered blues, R&B, soul, country
and rock'n'roll songs, but with their own particular, fresh and raw style of
interpretation, a successful blend of the Memphis Stax sound provided by MGs
band members Steve Cropper and Donald Dunn, and the New York City sound from
the horn section (Alan Rubin and Lou Marini, for example). The outcome
sometimes gave a new life to songs. Some became even more popular after the
Blues Brothers had played them, than before. The best example is "Soul Man",
more remembered as a hit by the Blues Brothers rather than by the original
singers, Sam and Dave. The same can be said of She Caught the Katy (originally
created by Taj Mahal) and Jailhouse Rock (sung by Elvis Presley) or Sweet Home
Chicago (Robert Johnson), acknowledging the fact that covers can become even
more famous than original performances.

Recent years have seen well-established artists (especially those mostly
active in the 1980s) release cover albums, such as Poison (Poison'd!), Tesla
(Real to Reel), QueensrÃ¿che (Take Cover), and Def Leppard (Yeah!), revealing
a wide range of musical influences.

Some cover albums take the unusual tack of doing classical versions of rock
and metal songs. The unusual band Apocalyptica which comprises four classical
cellists started out performing classical arrangements of Metallica songs. In
a similar vein, there have also been many string quartet tributes to popular
rock and metal bands, most notably Tool, Black Sabbath, Breaking Benjamin, New
Order/Joy Division, the Cure, Muse, the Beatles, and even Slayer among others.

One more type of cover album is when a cover of the entire album is done,
rather than a collection of songs. A notable band to earn acclaim this way are
the Easy Star All-Stars, who covered The Dark Side of the Moon by Pink Floyd
in their album Dub Side of the Moon and OK Computer by Radiohead in their
album Radiodread. Both albums were radical departures from the original
albums, being redone in reggae/dub. Another album cover to radically remake
the original in a new genre is the 2001 Rebuild the wall, where Luther Wright
& the Wrongs covered the entire double-album The Wall by Pink Floyd as a
country/bluegrass piece.

British pop group No Way Sis, released a single in 1996 which heavily borrowed
from the Oasis hit Shakermaker. The song was often referred to as No Way Sis
plagiarizing Oasis, plagiarizing The New Seekers, plagiarizing The Beatles.

## [edit] By genre

### [edit] Metal

Many up and coming bands in the metal genre cover songs by their predecessors
to gain public interest, although more established bands have also recorded
covers. Metallica, Napalm Death, Entombed, Iced Earth, Between the Buried and
Me, Overkill, and Slayer have released entire albums of covers, for example.
In specific subgenres of metal, covers generally reflect the genre the band is
in. The Norwegian black metal band Mayhem have recorded several Venom covers,
while Mayhem themselves have been covered many times, their song Deathcrush
has been covered around 140 times, according to Encyclopedia Metallum.

Another approach taken by several metal bands, including Children of Bodom, is
to cover songs generally not listened to by metal fans, such as pop, punk, or
classic rock songs. Children of Bodom's cover of Britney Spears' "Oops I Did
It Again" was originally recorded as an in-joke amongst the band members but
ended up being released as a bonus track on one of their EPs, as well as
Andrew W.K.'s "She is Beautiful." Blind Guardian have covered several surf-
rock songs, such as "Mr. Sandman", "Barbara Ann" and "Long Tall Sally". Yngwie
J. Malmsteen covered ABBA's "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)"
renamed "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Love After Midnight)" the song features the
same lyrics, with minor edits, and the same music with a more powerful metal
feel.

### [edit] Hip-hop

In recent years, artists have begun covering hip hop songs, most frequently in
concert. A notable such cover recorded in a studio and released commercially
is bluegrass version of "Gin and Juice" by Snoop Doggy Dogg, as performed by
The Gourds. Ben Folds, Tori Amos, Nina Gordon, KT Tunstall, Jonathan Coulton,
Luka Bloom, Ben Kweller, Dynamite Hack, Keller Williams and Alanis Morissette
have also recorded covers of hip-hop songs.

Many of these tracks rely on the incongruity of a white artist performing
music normally thought of as "black" for comic effect or shock value, though
some (such as Luka Bloom's acoustic version of LL Cool J's "I Need Love" and
Tori Amos's harrowing remake of Eminem's "'97 Bonnie and Clyde") are played
entirely "straight." The 2000 compilation Take a Bite Outta Rhyme consists
entirely of covers of this type, performed by various artists to various
degrees of seriousness.

Run-D.M.C.'s 1986 cover of Aerosmith's "Walk This Way", which featured the
original band, is a notable example of a hip-hop group remaking a popular song
from another genre; most of what passes for "cover" versions in the new
millennium should indeed be termed "remakes" in this respect.

The band Mindless Self Indulgence recorded a cover of the song "Bring the
Pain" by Method Man in which they completely change the entire rhythm and
sound of the song. The only part of the original song retained in their cover
is the lyrics.

### [edit] Swamp pop

A type of cover version that existed from the early 1950s to the late 1970s in
Louisiana was known as swamp pop. Contemporary and classic rock, R&B, and
country songs were re-recorded with Cajun audiences in mind. Some lyrics were
translated to French, and some were recorded with traditional Cajun
instrumentation. Several swamp pop songs charted nationally, but it was mostly
a regional niche market.

### [edit] New Age

The Taliesin Orchestra specializes in remaking famous songs into orchestra-
style melodies. Their debut album, Orinoco Flow: The Music of Enya, was a
collection of songs originally created and sung by Enya.

### [edit] Indie

Independent artists sometimes create covers for songs done by other
independent artists. Petra Haden has done several song covers, most notably,
the song Yellow by Coldplay. Youth Group did a cover for Alphaville with the
song Forever Young. Singer-songwriter Chan Marshall (a.k.a. Cat Power) is
known for covering other musicians' songs in her own, unique style. Canadian
indie artist Feist covered Inside and Out (originally by The Bee Gees) for her
album, Let It Die.

### [edit] Punk

Hundreds of songs have been covered by punk/pop punk bands, including the
bands Rancid, The Sex Pistols, A New Found Glory (covering most famously the
Titanic theme "My Heart Will Go On" by Celine Dion and Everything I Do (I Do
It For You) by Bryan Adams), Yellowcard and hundreds of others. Me First and
the Gimme Gimmes is a punk band that only does cover songs. BYO Records has
also BYO Split Series with bands such as NOFX, Anti-Flag, Rancid, Alkaline
Trio, and the Bouncing Souls.

Since 2000 Fearless Records has released a series of cds in which various rock
bands perform covers of songs from other genres or time-periods. The
deviations from this theme are Punk Goes Acoustic and Punk Goes Acoustic 2 in
which the featured bands recorded acoustic versions of their own songs.

### [edit] Hardcore

Swedish band Eternal September cover pop songs adapting them to the aesthetic
of hardcore music. Also Evergreen Terrace made a cover album called Writer's
Block

## [edit] See also

  * Budget cover albums
  * Compulsory license
  * Ed Starink
  * Joe Cocker
  * List of artists who have covered the Beatles
  * List of Grateful Dead covers
  * Mashup
  * Parody music
  * Pop standards, Jazz standards, Blues standards
  * Remix
  * Reprise
  * Sampling
  * Tribute band

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://museum.woolworths.co.uk/1950s-embassyrecords.htm
  2. ^ http://www.cashboxmagazine.com/archives/50s_files/19521011.html
  3. ^ See, for example, "Please Please Me")
  4. ^ http://www.amazon.com/dp/B00000DHVP
  5. ^ See, for example, Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Cole Porter Songbook
  6. ^ http://www.everyhit.com/retros/index.php?page=rchart&y1=1964&m1=06&day1=2&y2=1964&m2=06&day2=2&sent=1
  7. ^ http://www.cashboxmagazine.com/archives/50s_files/19560303.html
  8. ^ http://www.everyhit.com/retros/index.php?page=rchart&y1=1959&m1=11&y2=1959&m2=11&sent=1&day1=1&day2=1
  9. ^ http://www.everyhit.com/retros/index.php?page=rchart&y1=1960&m1=04&day1=3&y2=1960&m2=04&day2=3&sent=1
  10. ^ See Dot Records
  11. ^ http://www.percyfaithpages.org/tos2.htm
  12. ^ http://www.don-mclean.com/forum2/view.asp?topic=5432&s=Definition+of+a+Cover+Version&l=True
  13. ^ http://www.everyhit.com/retros/index.php?page=rchart&y1=1955&m1=06&y2=1955&m2=06&sent=1&day1=3&day2=3
  14. ^ http://www.cashboxmagazine.com/archives/50s_files/19550521.html
  15. ^ http://www.cashboxmagazine.com/archives/60s_files/19650828.html
  16. ^ See, for example, I Remember Tommy

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or
guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate
external links. (August 2008)  
  * Second Hand Songs, a database of over 60,000 cover versions.
  * retroCRUSH's Top 100 Cover Songs, a countdown featuring video and audio links of the 100 greatest spanning many decades
  * "Cover This: What Makes for a Definitive version?", Crawdaddy! (March 12, 2008)
  * They Did it Their Way, the 50 greatest cover songs of all time, as selected by The Telegraph (November 23, 2004)
  * CoverTrek a database of cover versions, searchable by artist and track, as well as an implementation of the "Six Degrees of Separation" game using bands and cover versions.
  * The Covers Project, an online database of cover versions, searchable by artist. (Probably inactive)
  * The Originals, the origins of numerous popular songs (update in English of the Belgian reference book)
  * PopArchives.com.au, "Where Did They Get That Song?" - the sources of Australian pop records.
  * Using cover song versions legally, US Music Copyright Laws
  * Must you get permission to record someone else's song?, Straight Dope column

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cover_version"

Categories: Musical terminology | Album types | Songs

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2007 | Wikipedia external links cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 11:18.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



