
# Guerrilla gardening

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Guerrilla gardeners planting vegetables in downtown Calgary

Guerrilla gardening is political gardening, a form of nonviolent direct
action, primarily practiced by environmentalists. It is related to land
rights, land reform, and permaculture. Activists take over ("squat") an
abandoned piece of land which they do not own to grow crops or plants.
Guerrilla gardeners believe in re-considering land ownership in order to
reclaim land from perceived neglect or misuse and assign a new purpose to it.

Some guerrilla gardeners carry out their actions at night, in relative
secrecy, to sow and tend a new vegetable patch or flower garden. Others work
more openly, seeking to engage with members of the local community, as
illustrated in the examples that follow. It has grown into a form of proactive
activism or pro-activism.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Guerrilla Gardening in Australia
  * 2 Examples
    * 2.1 Pure Genius!!
    * 2.2 Have pÃ¥ en nat
    * 2.3 May Day 2000
    * 2.4 Leaf Street Community Garden
    * 2.5 Abahlali baseMjondolo
    * 2.6 GuerrillaGardening.org
    * 2.7 Richmond, Virginia, birdhouses and gardens
    * 2.8 LAGuerrillaGardening.org
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links
    * 5.1 Regional

  
## [edit] History

The earliest record of the term guerrilla gardening being used was by Liz
Christy and her Green Guerrilla group in 1973 in the Bowery Houston area of
New York. They transformed a derelict private lot into a garden.[1] The space
is still cared for by volunteers but now enjoys the protection of the city's
parks department. Guerrilla gardening of this formâthat is gardening on
someone else's land without permissionâhas been around for centuries; there
is even a reference to it in the Bible.[citation needed]. Two celebrated
guerrilla gardeners, active prior to the coining of the term, were Gerrard
Winstanley, of the Diggers in Surrey, England (1649), and John "Appleseed"
Chapman in Ohio, USA (1801). Some[who?] would consider the latter, John
Chapman, not to be a guerrilla gardener, as he was planting orchards on
untitled land.

Guerrilla gardening is happening all over the world. In Northern Utah, apple
trees commonly grow along the banks of canals. Asparagus grows along the
smaller ditch banks. Many of these plants were seeded 150 years ago by the
workers who dug the canals, by burying their lunch apple core in the freshly
dug soil or by surreptitiously spreading seeds along a new ditchbank[citation
needed]. Guerrilla gardening continues today, as individuals secretly plant
fruit trees, edible perennials, and flowers in parks, along bike trails, etc.
Some guerrilla gardeners do so for the purpose of providing food. For example,
the Tacamiche banana plantation workers in Honduras illegally grew vegetables
on the abandoned plantation land, rather than leave with the plantation's
closure in 1995.[citation needed]

The term guerrilla gardening is applied by some quite loosely to describe
different forms of radical gardening. This includes gardening as an entirely
political gesture rather, than one with genuine horticultural ambition, such
as the London May Day protest in 2000, when no long term garden was expected
to take root. Guerrilla gardening has also been used by a number of writers to
give a radical edge to their gardening books. One of these is a book titled
Guerrilla Gardening, which was published in 1983 by John F. Adams, aimed at
encouraging amateur gardeners to grow heirloom varieties that are not the
result of corporate hybridization. Another was a book by Barbara Pallenberg
called Guerrilla Gardening, which instructed how to make a garden on a small
budget.

The term bewildering has been used as a synonym for guerrilla gardening by
Australian gardener Bob Crombie.[2]

### [edit] Guerrilla Gardening in Australia

Guerrilla gardening is prominent in Melbourne where most of the inner northern
suburbs have community vegetable gardens; land adjoining rail lines has
undergone regeneration of the native vegetation, including nature strips.
There are a few minor disputes between guerrilla gardeners in Melbourne, with
most falling into one of two groups: those concerned most with native planting
and those concerned most with communal food growing. However, people with
differing opinions still work together without dispute.[3]

There is a small community group in Melbourne called "Permablitz" who gather
regularly to design and construct suburban vegetable gardens for free, in an
effort to educate residents in Melbourne on how to grow their own food and
better prepare them if/when food prices become too expensive.

Australian Network 10's show Guerrilla Gardeners features a team of gardeners
who make over areas of council owned propery without them knowing.

## [edit] Examples

<IMG>

This section may contain excessive, poor or irrelevant examples. You can
improve the article by adding more descriptive text and removing less
pertinent examples. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for
further suggestions. (August 2008)  
### [edit] Pure Genius!!

One high-profile example of guerrilla gardening took place in May 1996, when
about 500 activists affiliated with The Land is Ours, including the journalist
George Monbiot, occupied 13 acres (53,000 m2) of derelict land belonging to
the Guinness company on the banks of the River Thames in Wandsworth, South
London. Their action aimed to highlight what they described as "the appalling
misuse of urban land, the lack of provision of affordable housing and the
deterioration of the urban environment."[citation needed]

A community grew up on the site called "Pure Genius!!" (named after the
Guinness advertising slogan). They lived there for five and a half months
before being evicted.[4]

### [edit] Have pÃ¥ en nat

Later, on July 1, 1996, Have pÃ¥ en nat ("Garden in a night") was made by the
Danish Ãkologiske IgangsÃ¦ttere ("Organic starters").

An empty piece of land in the middle of the city at Guldbergsgade in
NÃ¸rrebro, Copenhagen, Denmark, was transformed into a garden in a single
night. About 1000 people took part in the project.[citation needed]

### [edit] May Day 2000

On May Day 2000, Reclaim the Streets organised a mass guerrilla gardening
action in Parliament Square, London. After a carnivalesque procession with a
samba band and a Critical Mass bike ride from Hyde Park, thousands of
guerrilla gardeners occupied the square and planted vegetables and flowers. A
maypole was erected, around which many of the gardeners danced. Banners hung
in the square reading "Resistance is Fertile" (a pun on futile), "Let London
Sprout", "Capitalism is Pants", and "The Earth is a Common Treasury for All",
the latter being a quote from the seventeenth-century Digger Gerrard
Winstanley. An Indymedia public access terminal was set up in the new
allotment, and the statue of Winston Churchill was given a green turf mohican.
The perpetrator (an ex-British soldier) was fined for his vandalism of the
Churchill statue.[5]

### [edit] Leaf Street Community Garden

Leaf Street is an acre of land in Hulme, Manchester, England, that was once an
urban street until turfed over by Manchester City Council. Local people,
facilitated by Manchester Permaculture Group, took direct action in turning
the site into a thriving community garden.[1]

### [edit] Abahlali baseMjondolo

The South African shack dwellers' movement Abahlali baseMjondolo has planted
gardens in a number of their affiliated settlements, such as the Kennedy Road
settlement.

### [edit] GuerrillaGardening.org

GuerrillaGardening.org[6] was created in October 2004 by Richard Reynolds as a
blog of his solo guerrilla gardening outside Perronet House, a neglected
council block in London's Elephant and Castle district. At the time, his
motivations were simply those of a frustrated gardener looking to beautify the
neighborhood, but his website attracted the interest of fellow guerrilla
gardeners in London and beyond, as well as the world's media. Reynolds's
guerrilla gardening has now reached many pockets of South London, and news of
his activity has inspired people around the world to get involved. He also
works alongside other troops, some local and some who travel to participate.
He has also guerrilla-gardened in Libya, Berlin and Montreal. Today,
GuerrillaGardening.org is still his blog but also includes tips, links and
thriving community[7] boards where guerrilla gardeners from around the world
are finding supportive locals. His book, On Guerrilla Gardening[8], which
describes and discusses activity in 30 different countries, was published by
Bloomsbury Publishing in the UK and USA in May 2008.

### [edit] Richmond, Virginia, birdhouses and gardens

Early on Saturday, April 26, a team of volunteers installed forty-nine small
birdhouses along the entire length of Hanover Avenue in the Fan District of
Richmond, Virginia. They were built from untreated lumber and were
specifically sized to provide a safe haven for some of Richmond's local
songbirds, including wrens, blue birds, and finches, from the unwelcome non-
native species such as the Starling and the European Barn Swallow.

The installation was inspired by a combination of several local developments.

Additionally, the guerrilla gardening movement has been catching on in
Richmond, Virginia. In 2006, Style Weekly reported an act of guerrilla
gardening in an alley off Hanover Avenue adjacent to the new birdhouses.[9]
Also, a group called Tricycle Gardens has begun the reclamation of blighted
urban spaces in some of Richmond's poorest neighborhoods.[10] Their efforts
are bringing locally grown food and a better understanding of the
interconnectedness humans have with nature to the city.

The volunteers who installed the birdhouses have asked members of the
community to tend the houses in the fall once the breeding season is complete.
The houses have been designed with a hinged right panel for easy cleaning.

### [edit] LAGuerrillaGardening.org

A covert group in Los Angeles headed up by an agent known only as Mr. Stamen
has a garden in Hollywood at Wilton and Sunset. The garden consists of many
drought-resistant plants and has been supported by community members. Photos
of their garden are here.

This group also has done some unique work with Manual Arts High School in
South Central Los Angeles. The Los Angeles troop was invited to be a part of a
special project hosted by UC Berkely teaching students about pollution and
sustainable living. Members of the troop hosted a seed bomb workshop with the
students and are working on building a garden close to school.

## [edit] See also

  * Common land
  * Communal garden
  * Community gardening
  * Community Supported Agriculture
  * The Diggers
  * Dumpster diving
  * Flash mob, Smart mob
  * Food security
  * Intercultural Garden
  * Seed ball
  * Seed Bomb
  * Situationism
  * Vermicomposting
  * Abahlali baseMjondolo
  * Ecotivity
  * Johnny Appleseed
  * The Man Who Planted Trees
  * Urban gardening
  * Urban horticulture
  * Guerrilla Gardeners \- commercial reality-TV show

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Lamborn, P., and Weinberg, B. (Eds.), (1999), Avant Gardening: Ecological Struggle in The City and The World. Autonomedia. ISBN 1-57027-092-9
  2. ^ On the verge of a revolution, Sydney Morning Herald, 20 February 2008
  3. ^ The Age, Article "Gardening guerilla's in our midst", 10/12/08.
  4. ^ 'Pure Genius' land squat, Wandsworth, London, 1996
  5. ^ London Mayday 2000 pages on Urban 75
  6. ^ GuerrillaGardening.org
  7. ^ http://guerrillagardening.org/community/index.php Community
  8. ^ On Guerrilla Gardening
  9. ^ Style Weekly Article: http://www.styleweekly.com/article.asp?idarticle=13219
  10. ^ Tricycle Gardens: http://www.tricyclegardens.org/blog/index.html

## [edit] External links

  * Gruenewelle.org\- Multilingual Guerrilla Gardening Site
  * GuerrillaGardening.org\- The global forum for guerrilla gardeners
  * Blind Guerrilla Gardener An inspirational short film about a blind guerrilla gardener in London
  * Police vs guerrilla gardeners The Guardian filmed guerrilla gardeners in London encounter the police.
  * Allotmenteering Reflections on Guerrilla Gardening and Allotmenteering
  * Moss Graffiti How to make moss graffiti
  * Domestic Seed Bomb production Richard Reynolds demonstrates the Californian method of seed bomb making.
  * Interview with the author of Urban Homestead\- Erik Knutzen discusses guerrilla gardening and other collective action.

### [edit] Regional

  * socalguerrillagardening.org 20+ years of Guerrilla Gardening in Southern California.
  * laguerrillagardening.org Guerrilla Gardening in Hollywood and Los Angeles, California
  * Posterchild Guerrilla Gardening by Posterchild in Toronto
  * Toronto Guerrilla Gardening \- Organized by the Toronto Public Space Committee
  * Gruenewelle.org\- Guerrilla gardening in Berlin, Germany
  * Green Guerillas Supporting community gardening in New York
  * London Guerrilla Gardening Guerrilla Gardening in across London, UK
  * RÃ©bellion jardiniÃ¨re green activists based in France

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guerrilla_gardening"

Categories: Community building | DIY culture | Environmentalism | Horticulture
and gardening | Urban agriculture

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2008 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 |
Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with too many
examples

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 10:45.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



