
# Traveller (role-playing game)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

It has been suggested that AI Virus (Traveller) be merged into this article or
section. (Discuss)  
Traveller Image:Traveller Books 0 8.jpg  
Designer Marc Miller  
Publisher Game Designers' Workshop  
Imperium Games (Marc Miller's Traveller)  
Steve Jackson Games (GURPS Traveller)  
QLI/RPGRealms Publishing (Traveller 20)  
Publication date 1977 (Classic Traveller)  
1987 (MegaTraveller)  
1993 (Traveller: The New Era)  
1996 (Marc Miller's Traveller)  
1998 (GURPS Traveller)  
2002 (Traveller 20)  
2006 (GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars)  
2007 (Traveller Hero)  
2008 (Traveller5)  
2008 (Mongoose Traveller)  
Genre(s) Science fiction space opera  
System Custom, GURPS, d20 System  
Traveller is a series of related science fiction role-playing games, the first
published in 1977 by Game Designers' Workshop and subsequent editions by
various companies remaining in print to this day. The current edition is
produced by Mongoose Publishing.

Originally Traveller was intended to be a system for playing generic space
opera themed science fiction adventures, in the same sense that Dungeons &
Dragons is a system for generic fantasy adventures. However, a suggested
setting called the Third Imperium was detailed with the publication of
following supplements and since then this setting has become strongly
identified with the game, such that to fans the name Traveller and the Third
Imperium are synonymous.

The Traveller rules help construct a far future society that draws inspiration
from the Dumarest saga series by E.C. Tubb, the Foundation stories of Isaac
Asimov, H. Beam Piper's Space Viking, Larry Niven's Known Space, Jerry
Pournelle's CoDominium, Poul Anderson's Polesotechnic League and several other
works of science fiction literature[citation needed]. Characters are expected
to travel between star systems, engage in battle on the ground and in space,
and involve themselves in interstellar economics. Traveller characters are
defined less by the need to increase native skill and ability and more by
achieving positional advancement in the form of wealth, gadgets, titles and
political power. While any version of the game system could be used in many
science fiction settings, most published supplements have dealt in some way
with the Third Imperium, also sometimes referred to as the Official Traveller
Universe, or "OTU".

## Contents

  * 1 Setting
    * 1.1 "Original Traveller" versus "In My Traveller Universe"
    * 1.2 Features of the original Traveller universe
      * 1.2.1 The Legacy of the Ancients
      * 1.2.2 Humans are common and dominant
      * 1.2.3 The Return of the Age of Sail
      * 1.2.4 The New Feudalism
      * 1.2.5 The cycle of history
      * 1.2.6 A conservative society
      * 1.2.7 It isn't utopian
    * 1.3 Intelligent species
      * 1.3.1 Major races
      * 1.3.2 Minor races
        * 1.3.2.1 Minor human races
        * 1.3.2.2 Other minor races
  * 2 Rules System and Gameplay
  * 3 Publishing History
    * 3.1 Overview
    * 3.2 Editions
      * 3.2.1 Traveller or Classic Traveller
      * 3.2.2 MegaTraveller
      * 3.2.3 Traveller: The New Era
      * 3.2.4 Marc Miller's Traveller
      * 3.2.5 GURPS Traveller
      * 3.2.6 Traveller 20
      * 3.2.7 GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars
      * 3.2.8 Traveller Hero
      * 3.2.9 Traveller5
      * 3.2.10 Mongoose Traveller
      * 3.2.11 Traveller: 2300
  * 4 Traveller in other media
  * 5 Copyright infringement lawsuit
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Setting

The Third Imperium is in the distant futureâover three thousand years
removed from our own time. Interstellar travel is facilitated, and limited, by
the use of a technology called the jump drive (known as a hyperdrive in other
science fiction settings). Jump drives are capable of propelling a starcraft
between one to six parsecs, depending on the individual drive's
specifications. Regardless of the distance of a jump, the duration required
for the trip is approximately one week. Communications are limited to the
speed of travel; there is no "sub-space" or other form of FTL information
transfer. This leads to a central principle of Traveller's original setting,
that the restraint on the speed of information leads to decentralization and
the vestment of significant power in the hands of local officials.

The primary galactic society in Traveller is the Third Imperium, a vast,
human-dominated feudalistic union of over eleven thousand worlds currently (as
described in GURPS Traveller) ruled by its 43rd emperor, Strephon Aella
Alkhalikoi. The Imperium is the most powerful interstellar polity, but it is
surrounded on all sides by potentially hostile neighbors. Local nobility
operate largely free from oversight, restricted by convention, feudal
obligations, and the fear of being caught.

As presented in the original Traveller game, the Third Imperium had a tendency
to seem monolithic and unchanging. Characters could work within its systems,
but were considered too insignificant to affect matters on a galactic scale.
However, the publication of MegaTraveller shook up the status-quo by
introducing the great Rebellion, begun when Archduke Dulinor assassinated
Emperor Strephon in a bid for the Imperial throne. The death of Strephon
touched off a terrible conflict involving imperial dynastic struggle, violent
secession of large regions of the Imperium and the advance of foreign powers
into the empire's territory. In other words, the sort of "interesting times"
that gave characters a better chance at being involved in dramatic, important
events.

The Rebellion was finally ended, at the conclusion of the MegaTraveller game
line, by the inadvertent release of Virus, an electronic superweapon that
invested any computerized hardware it infected with intelligence and a
malevolence toward biological lifeforms. Unfortunately, this also reduced
great numbers of worlds to a pre-technological state. The following game,
Traveller: The New Era, presented the period seventy years after Virus during
which the first attempts at reestablishing Interstellar commerce are made.

GURPS Traveller holds to an alternate timeline in which the assassination and
subsequent apocalypse never happened, while the established canon line has
recently enjoyed additional development with two sourcebooks published by
Avenger Enterprises/Comstar Games.

### [edit] "Original Traveller" versus "In My Traveller Universe"

Original Traveller was published at a time when roleplaying games did not
typically feature a well-defined fictional universe, but instead offered rules
appropriate to the conventions of a particular genre. Each roleplaying group
used and altered published rules to suit their setting and play style.
Traveller's "Third Imperium" setting became the default game universe, but
players deviate from this setting so frequently that "in my Traveller
universe" (IMTU) is a very common expression among the fandom[citation
needed]. Typical IMTU variables include the power and presence of the
Imperium, the role and existence of the various published aliens, the
prevalence of interstellar trade and piracy, and the range of technology.

### [edit] Features of the original Traveller universe

Several key features of the Traveller Universe distinguish it from other
settings. Most of them grew from assumptions inherent in the original rules
system (for instance, the chance for starting characters to have a Noble
Title) which in turn were derived from the literary sources described above.
From these features grew the detailed specific background of the Empires and
aliens of the Traveller Universe.

#### [edit] The Legacy of the Ancients

At some point hundreds of thousands of years ago our region of the galaxy was
dominated by a species, now known only as the Ancients, who wielded fantastic
technology. Though the details are unknown (at least to the player's
characters; the true history of the Ancients is available to the referee), it
is believed that the Ancients destroyed themselves in a 2,000-year period of
massive internecine warfare. Though long gone, the effects of the Ancients'
reign are still evident, from the seeding of humanity (and creatures
genetically engineered from Terran animals) across scores of worlds to the
incomprehensible ruins and artifacts which are occasionally discovered.

#### [edit] Humans are common and dominant

Due to the Ancient race that scattered humanity across the stars, there are
many worlds on which Human civilizations developed other than Earth. Two major
space-faring races, the Vilani and the Zhodani, arose from such transplants.
Solomani (humans of Earth) also eventually rose into interstellar dominance.
Humans are the most populous species in known space and thus rule or heavily
influence most worlds. The result of 300,000 years of individual evolution on
such widely divergent worlds (or, in some cases, deliberate genetic
engineering by the Ancients) has resulted in broad speciation within the human
genotype, however.

#### [edit] The Return of the Age of Sail

Due to the details of interstellar travel and communication, much of the
setting carries a feel very similar to the Age of Sail, wherein ships could
journey for years at a time without contact from higher authority and
individual settlements were isolated and thus individualistic. This isolation
causes entire wars to be fought, won, or lost on the frontiers before a
message gets to the Capital to let the Emperor know the war has begun. This
means that all kinds of agents, from merchants to generals, must show
initiative and be reasonably independent from their corporate or political
overlords.

#### [edit] The New Feudalism

Since local rulers cannot be directly controlled by central authority, the
Imperium is managed by a class of independent nobility, who even make use of
classic titles such as Baron, Duke and Archduke. This decentralization of
authority is one means of coping with the difficulties imposed by size and
limits of speed of transportation technology.

#### [edit] The cycle of history

By the time of the Third Imperium, Interstellar society has risen, fallen and
risen again (and in Traveller: the New Era, fallen again) in a cycle
comparable to the history of the Roman Empire, but more directly inspired by
the Foundation Trilogy of Isaac Asimov[citation needed]; In fact Asimov's term
for the study and manipulation of this cycle, Psychohistory, is used in the
setting. The continuing path of this cycle, and its eventual outcome, is a
recurring theme in the setting.

The most recent "rise" in the Traveller universe has been the move to the 1248
New Era setting, where the 4th Imperium, a polity far smaller than its
predecessors, has been created in 1248. This setting is published by Comstar
Games and Avenger Enterprises (http://www.comstar-games.com/traveller). Other
small polities have sprung up in this setting, including the Terran
Commonwealth, Solomani Imperium, New Ziru Sirka, the League of Spinward
States, The K'kree Dominate, Vargr Splinters, Zhodani Concord and many others.

#### [edit] A conservative society

As a whole, the society of the Third Imperium evolves very slowly and prefers
what is traditional and established to what is new and different. Even though
it exists three millennia in the future, most of the technology and social
institutions aren't much different from those of twentieth century Earth.
Psionics, though known, are feared by most and have been outlawed and brutally
repressed. Artificial Intelligence is extremely rare and is not trusted when
it exists. The writers of the setting have admitted that this implied
conservatism is a direct result of a desire to maintain Traveller's feel as a
classic Space Opera, which by modern standards is somewhat outdated. Others
argue that such a society demands predictability, as it is mightily taxed to
preserve order as it is considering its large size and resultant time to
central authority, and the long practice of setting careful policies and
vigorously adhering to set policy whenever possible has bred a culture
reluctant to change, at least at the higher levels where decisions are made.
In GURPS Traveller, special mention is made of the need to avoid the modern
concepts of Nanotechnology and Transhumanism, as they are anathema to the
setting. The recent printing of GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars, as well as
the out of print Digest Group title Vilani and Vargr, elaborated on the
history and social background of the Vilani and its strong conservatism.
Previous editions of Traveller have clearly stated that the Third Imperium has
both Solomani and Vilani cultural roots. The implication is that much of the
Third Imperium's social and technological conservatism stems from those roots.

#### [edit] It isn't utopian

As depicted in Traveller, the human race will not have evolved into a superior
state a few millennia hence. People continue to steal, cheat and fight wars.
If anything, the Third Imperium is fully aware of these baser human tendencies
and encourages them to be vented regularly in small outbursts before they have
a chance to reach Imperium-shattering proportions. Thus, planets are allowed
to fight out internal conflicts and capitalism is the major driving force of
civilization. There is no prohibition on contact or interference with other
races protecting them from advanced technology. Economics and other factors
that applied to exploration and colonization on Earth are the same factors
that shape the Traveller Universe. However, Governments may interdict planets
with native primitive intelligent species. These interdicted worlds are
commonly known as "Red Zones" based on the Imperial designation for such a
world. 'Red' (or the less restrictive 'Amber') zones are often to protect the
interest of the Imperium, not the native population.

### [edit] Intelligent species

#### [edit] Major races

A major race is defined as one that developed jump technology independently,
and thus got an early start on establishing itself in interstellar society. In
the setting it is generally agreed there are 6 major races, but how they are
defined varies a little. The standard list includes:

  * Aslan are a bipedal species of vaguely feline appearance, slightly larger than human. Aslan society is organized into competitive clans, has a strict code of honor and very strict gender roles. During the Rebellion period it was alleged that the Aslan are not technically a Major Race, in that they reverse-engineered their FTL technology from a salvaged Terran ship. Even accounting for such a distinction, however, Aslan-dominated space is certainly vast enough for them to qualify as major by any other measurement. (The word "aslan" is Turkish for "lion," and is a possible reference[1] to the works of C. S. Lewis.)

  * Droyne are a short-statured, winged bipedal race of reptilian appearance. Droyne by nature are a highly conservative and group-oriented race, with a caste-based system dependent upon a combination of ritual and biology. Though by far the oldest of the jump capable races, the Droyne were the last to be recognized as such because they do not control any interstellar regions, much less an empire. Instead they are scattered as independent communities on worlds throughout known space, their homeworld unknown even to them. Droyne completely control some worlds but generally share them with other races. A semi-intelligent sub-class, known as Chirpers, consist of Droyne colonies which have lost the ability to caste, and with it all knowledge of technological society or interstellar travel. It is conjectured that the Droyne were either a servant race of the Ancients, or are direct descendants of them. In the original (GDW) setting it was specifically stated that the Droyne were servitors of the Ancients, and that the Ancients were in fact a form of mutant Droyne.[2]

  * Hivers are a race based on sixfold symmetry. Of all the major races they are the most "alien" to humans in both appearance and thought patterns. Despite their name Hivers actually have a highly individualistic society. They avoid where possible direct violence and war, preferring instead to work behind the scenes via covert manipulation and psychohistory.

  * Humaniti is the spelling used for Humanity in the Third Imperium. When humans of Terra first reached out to travel to the stars most were very surprised to find that other humans were already there due to the machinations of the Ancients. Three sub-races of humans independently developed jump drive technology and are therefore sometimes classified as Major Races in their own right. The first two (Solomani and Vilani]]) make up the majority of the human population of known space (and are thus increasingly culturally and biologically indistinct from each other); the third (the Zhodani) remains much more separated, both culturally, astrographically, and biologically. 
    * The Solomani of Earth (called Terra in Traveller); It is generally acknowledged that Terra is the original homeworld of Humaniti and that all subsequent sub-races are derived from primitive stock taken from this world by the Ancients. After achieving FTL star travel, the Solomani conquered the stagnant First Imperium of the Vilani and subsequently founded the Second Imperium, or "Rule of Man."
    * The Vilani of Vland; They were the first race of Humaniti to invent the jump drive, and created the Ziru Sirka ("The Grand Empire [of Stars]"), or First Imperium. Traditional Vilani society is highly caste-based, prizes cooperation over individuality, and is extremely conservative. As the ecosystem of their homeworld is indigestible to humans in its raw state, Vilani cuisine (and much of its culture) is based on fermentation techniques.
    * The Zhodani of Zhdant (occasionally referred to as Zhodane); the Zhodani are known for their high level of psychic ability and its formal integration into their society, the Zhodani Consulate. Originally the Zhodani were presented as uncomplicated, vaguely oriental[citation needed] mind-controlling bad guys for the setting, but since then more depth has been added to their depiction, especially in the New Era setting. The more recent characterization of the Zhodani emphasizes the consistent honesty of Consulate citizenry (as befits a telepathically-based society), as well as their distrust of psionically-averse humans (whom the Zhodani regard as duplicitous, thieving crooks).

  * K'kree are a race of massive individuals having 2 arms and 4 legs, reminding humans somewhat of Centaurs. Their homeworld is Kirur, far to trailing of human-dominated space, from which they rule a large interstellar polity known as "The 2,000 Worlds." K'kree psychology is evolved from herding instincts, thus they are rarely found alone and fear enclosed places. So gregarious are the K'kree, in fact, that forcing a member into isolation can be regarded as a form of torture, and a willingly solitary K'kree should be regarded as a dangerously insane individual. Early in their pre-starfaring history, the K'kree were traumatized by a "close encounter" with an intelligent species of exceptionally cruel carnivore, and as a result they have evolved into a society of hierarchical, reactionary, militant and often aggressive herbivores with a disdain (often carried to genocidal extremes) for meat eating of any kind.

  * Vargr are a bi-pedal canine species, slightly smaller than humans. This species resembles the Terran conception of a wolf-man because that is essentially what they are; canine stock taken from Terra that were genetically manipulated by the Ancients to an intelligent bipedal form in an attempt to create suitable servants. (The name Vargr comes from the Old Norse for "wolves").

#### [edit] Minor races

Any species which was contacted before it could independently develop Jump
Drive is considered minor. Such species wield much less power than the Major
Races, and most are subject to the whims of the established interstellar
powers. Numerous minor races exist, some have been fully developed, some only
briefly mentioned in the Traveller background material. Listed here are only a
few of the minor races.

##### [edit] Minor human races

As well as the three human races that are considered Major, there are at least
22 additional ones that are classified as minor races. Most human races are
interbreedable and thus physically increasingly indistinguishable from each
other, though a few have unique physiologies due to development in a harsh
environment, a period that restricted the available gene pool or other
uncommon factors.

Notable minor human races include:

  * Answerin: Tough and stoic beyond all extremes. A core Answerin belief is that fear in any form is merely a curable disease. This, coupled with a unique racial ability to produce adrenalin at will, makes them excellent warriors, and thus widely prized as soldiers. As the animal life on their homeworld is indigestible to humans, the Answerin have evolved into strict vegetarians.
  * Darrians: A slightly built, technologically precocious people who unfortunately nearly destroyed themselves over a millennium previously when a stellar physics experiment gone wrong induced subnova flares in their home star and nearly destroyed their entire civilization. They have since recovered somewhat, and are rumored to be in possession of the "Star Trigger", a flare-inducing superweapon based on their earlier mistake which is used as a deterrent for their much-bigger neighbours of Third Imperium and Zhodani Consulate.
  * Geonee: A stocky, task-oriented race. The Geonee achieved FTL capabilities - and even a minor interstellar society of their own - prior to contact with the much more powerful Vilani. They are not held to be Major, however, due to the fact that their technology was based on recovered Ancient artifacts. The Geonee dispute this claim, and in fact further assert that they, in fact, are the Ancients, a view which is not shared by any non-Geonee.
  * Loeskalth: The fierce, aggressive Loeskalth were early beneficiaries of pre-First Imperium Vilani contact, and used their acquired technology to build a formidable interstellar empire of their own. They ultimately proved no match for the Vilani, however, and the race is considered long extinct. A contingent of ancient Loeskalth may have crossed the Great Rift (a region of extremely low stellar density lying to spinward of most Imperial space) to escape Vilani absorption, however, and as such may be the source of the "Sky Raiders" legend among a number of Spinward cultures.
  * Syleans: Another early conquest by the Vilani, the proud Syleans managed to maintain their culture and language throughout the First Imperium era. They flourished under the Solomani-dominated Second Imperium, and survived the Long Night better than most others. In fact, the Sylean Federation of the Long Night era eventually formed the core of the Third Imperium, with the Sylean homeworld as its capital.
  * Suerrat: Like the Geonee, the Suerrat had built up a small interstellar polity prior to contact with the Vilani. This was based solely on sublight generation ships, however, as the Suerrat had never achieved Jump Drive on their own.

##### [edit] Other minor races

Some of the minor races with a large amount of background material include:

  * Ael Yael: One of the few known intelligent species capable of flight, the Ael Yael are native to a world whose dying oceans make it a trove of easily accessible mineral wealth. The resulting exploitation of their planet (and with it their species) by amoral corporate interests has left them with a deep seated animosity for all forms of private industry. Ael Yael work well with government agencies, however, and are in particular renown as Imperial Scouts.
  * Bwaps (Newts): The Bawapakerwa-a-a-awapawab, as they call themselves, are a slightly built, fastidious, conservative, bureaucratically-inclined race of bipedal amphibians. These characteristics helped them to thrive during the First Imperium era. As such "Bwaps" are the most widespread of the Minor Races, and can be found throughout much of human space (although more so in the coreward regions). Nevertheless, most non-Bwaps find them tiresome to deal with.
  * Ithklur
  * Mahkahraik
  * Schalli
  * Vegans: A minor race, and the closest to Terra astrographically of any starfaring aliens. The Vegans are named after the bright star Vega, which is within a few light years of their home system. They are organized into philosophically based communities, and are the dominant local power in the Solomani Rim sector. They were oppressed during the Solomani Confederation's rule of the region of space, and now have been granted their own Autonomous Region by the Imperium, centered on their homeworld.
  * Virushi

## [edit] Rules System and Gameplay

The game system introduced a unique character generation system which helped
it to stand out from other Roleplaying games of the time. Whereas most
roleplaying games start characters as inexperienced youngsters who acquire
skills and abilities as the game progresses, Traveller characters got their
skills and experience before play began. To accomplish this, players took
their characters through a career development path (usually in the military)
where the character rolled for different assignments and gained extra skills,
rank and retirement benefits, but suffered the risk of possible injury and
death. Leaving a character in service for longer before the game would lead to
more skills and beginning cash but could also mean that basic attributes (such
as strength) would begin to degrade with old age.

The starship design systems and starship combat systems, both the original
version from Book 2 or the modified version from High Guard, are like games
unto themselves, with a complex balance of starship systems fitting within
certain hull weight classes, technology levels, and modifiers based upon
characters skills. It is complex enough that computer programs have been
created to more effectively model and predict starship combat, with one such
program named Eurisko winning Traveller TCS national championship in 1981 and
1982, the program's maker retiring it from the game only after the officials
threatened to abolish the competition.[3]

## [edit] Publishing History

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
### [edit] Overview

The original Traveller gamebooks were distinctive half-size black pamphlets
(the so-called "Little Black Books" or "LBBs") produced by Game Designers
Workshop (GDW). The main rules were detailed in three such booklets, sold as a
boxed set while the same format was used for early support material, such as
the Adventures, Supplements and further Books. Currently these LBB's are
available in collected reprints from Far Future Enterprises. Later supplements
and updated versions of the main game system introduced full sized booklets,
complete re-writes of the game system and significant changes to the Third
Imperium. The second edition of the game, titled Megatraveller, was published
in 1986 and attempted to collect and collate the various rules of the system
and offer new political twists in the Third Imperium, such as the
assassination of the emperor and the rebellion which followed. The last GDW
produced version of Traveller was the third, Traveller: The New Era, which
broke completely with the previous rules system and presented a setting in
which interstellar civilization had been completely destroyed by the
rebellion. GDW went out of business before this iteration was completed.

Subsequently, in 1997 Imperium Games published Marc Miller's Traveller, often
referred to as T4, which returned to the classic setting and game system,
though not without some major alterations. For instance the default setting
was "Milieu 0", set about 1200 years previous to the time period laid out in
the original Traveller. It was intended that other "Milieus" would be
described in following supplements, but T4 proved to be a failure both
critically and financially before this could happen. The game was left briefly
idle until the publication of GURPS Traveller. Once again the system was
replaced, this time with the GURPS system from Steve Jackson Games, but the
setting was returned to the present laid out in the original Traveller, albeit
as an alternate history in which the assassination and subsequent fall of the
Third Imperium never happened. To confuse matters further there is another
version of the game being published simultaneously with the GURPS edition,
Traveller 20 or T20, which uses the same setting but integrates into the
popular D20 roleplaying system and is set a century earlier than Classic
Traveller or GURPS Traveller.

### [edit] Editions

#### [edit] Traveller or Classic Traveller

(1977-1986) Published by GDW. The original game system was generic in setting,
requiring you to create your whole universe (or copy someone else's), but
later supplements described the Third Imperium at its height. This system and
its associated supplements are often referred to as Classic Traveller or "CT".

Most of the game's rulebooks and supplements were printed in the distinctive
"Little Black Book" format of 8 1/2" by 5 1/2" booklets. Rather than cover art
each rule book, supplement, and adventure had a black cover with the title
"Book x", "Supplement y" or "Adventure z" each in a distinct color, numbered
in the order in which they were produced. The core rules were available as
three booklets in a boxed set (cf the original Dungeons and Dragons format).

The character generation system forked with the introduction of the fourth
rulebook "Mercenary" which introduced a far more sophisticated system of
character generation, but only for military (Army and Marine) characters,
leaving the Navy, Merchant, Scouts and 'Others' to use the original rules
until expanded rulebooks for them were released. Merchants and Scouts remained
popular characters because of the possibility of getting a starship upon
retirement but the Navy became unpopular until the fifth rulebook "High Guard"
became available. High Guard also introduced rules for large starships and big
naval battles in the same way that Mercenary added rules to flesh out ground
battles. Book 6 expanded the Scout service in much the same way, as well as
adding rules for fully detailing star systems, while Book 7 gave more depth to
Merchants and included a new set of trading & commerce rules. Eight separate
boxed games were released as tie-in products: "Striker", a game of tabletop
miniature warfare, added very complex rules for vehicle design & combat,
"Mayday" concentrated on small ship vs ship space combat, "Snapshot" and
"Azhanti High Lightning" featured small-unit battles on board spacecraft,
while "Fifth Frontier War", "Invasion Earth" and "Dark Nebula" were wargames
based on selected interstellar conflicts from the Classic Traveller (though in
the case of the later this was not the case on its publication, but they were
used as the basis of parts of the 'imperial' background)future history.

At the beginning there was only some very basic background material to the
Traveller universe. It appeared that like most other RPG games of the time
that individual game masters would develop their own universe to adventure in.
As more adventures and supplements were developed the rich character of the
standard Traveller universe began to evolve. The starting point for this
appears to be the board game "Imperium" -

Most of the Classic Traveller books are available in compendium volumes from
Far Future Enterprises, which is the current copyright and trademark holder of
all forms of the Traveller game. Far Future Enterprises also sells a CD-ROM
containing scans of all the canonical Classic Traveller material in PDF
format, including the rules, counters and maps from the boxed games.

Traveller was inducted into the Origins Adventure Gaming Hall of Fame in 1997.

#### [edit] MegaTraveller

MegaTraveller (1987-1992) was published by GDW but designed by Digest Group
Publications which published the popular Traveller's Digest (later the
MegaTraveller Journal) Traveller support magazine. The game system used
revised versions of the Classic Traveller mechanics with ideas first developed
in the Traveller's Digest (and later also adapted to Traveller: 2300). The
system is often referred to as "MT".[4][5]

The game was set during the Rebellion era which shattered the Imperium.
Supplements and magazines produced during this era detailed the progression of
the Rebellion from the initial assassination of the Emperor in 1116 to the
collapse of large-scale interstellar trade in roughly 1124 (the beginning of
the supplement Hard Times).

Digest Group Publications also produced a number of top-quality MegaTraveller
supplements, including alien modules detailing the Aslan, Vargr, Vilani and
Solomani for MegaTraveller and the World Builder's Handbook, which expanded
greatly on the world-building system found in the main rulebooks.

#### [edit] Traveller: The New Era

Traveller: The New Era (1993-1995) was published by GDW. The game mechanics
were changed to GDW's standardized rules system which had originally appeared
in the second edition of Twilight: 2000. It introduced the Virus and described
the former area of the Third Imperium after interstellar society had
completely collapsed. The game is often referred to as "TNE". In 1994,
Traveller: The New Era won the Origins Award for Best Roleplaying Rules of
1993.

Where MegaTraveller left the Third Imperium in its death throes, The New Era
smashed it flat and turned it into fertilizer to begin the game anew. A common
complaint from players new to Traveller was the feeling they had to learn 3000
years of history to play; TNE removed that. Another perceived problem was that
players couldn't make much difference to a polity of trillions of beings. TNE
made the standard game world one of a few, in which players would be the
difference between their survival and destruction. And for those who had been
with the game from the start, a pocket of the original Third Imperium was
partially preserved, where high tech and frivolity were still rampant.

At the dawn of the New Era, a few survivors have weathered the storm of Virus,
and begin emerging and rebuilding, but the galaxy is a lot different. Most
worlds are governed by TEDs, Technologically Elevated Dictators, who have
found or kept hold of a cache of high-tech weapons and use them to control
their worlds. A few have made it back into space to prey upon weak neighbors.
And there are still the occasional Vampires, self-aware spacecraft which are
insane and will probably attack you, but the Virus is evolving, and not all
living machines are homicidal maniacs...

TNE used GDW's new "House System" RPG rules, which were also adapted to
Twilight 2000, Cadillacs & Dinosaurs, and Dark Conspiracies (but not 2300 AD),
allowing the authors to concentrate on a single set of RPG rules instead of
half a dozen, saving lots of work and allowing more to get published. It also
made an attempt to go back to a more realism-centered approach to science
fiction, doing away with such niceties as reactionless thrusters and partially
doing away with fantastic lasers and missiles. With the addition of Fire,
Fusion, and Steel, the Traveller Technical Architecture, it became possible to
design not just ships and vehicles, but also weapons themselves. FF&S became
very popular among "gearheads".

Unfortunately, going to reaction thrusters, even ones slightly more efficient
than is possible in reality, made a huge change in the way travel took place,
and TNE is the only edition to shun reactionless thrusters. Despite this, the
starship combat resolution system was fairly well detailed, and even garnered
two games for it: Brilliant Lances for small battles and Battle Rider for
large battles. Additionally, Striker made a comeback as Striker 2, a detailed,
multi-tech miniatures ground combat system.

Several supplements were published for TNE covering most if not all of what
the year 1201 was like, but before any of the meta-events could start to
advance the timeline, GDW fell on a string of bad luck and finally was forced
to close its doors, after publishing a new product an average of every 22
days, for 22 years (not counting magazines).

#### [edit] Marc Miller's Traveller

Marc Miller's Traveller (1996-1998) was published by Imperium Games after GDW
dissolved and the rights to Traveller reverted to Marc Miller, the creator of
the original game. It returned to a heavily modified version of the original
rules and was set in the early days of the Third Imperium (Milieu 0). It is
often referred to as "T4". The publication of this edition suffered from
notoriously poor writing and editing, which required the subsequent printing
of 25 pages worth of errata. This edition is currently available on Marc
Miller's website.

#### [edit] GURPS Traveller

GURPS Traveller (1998- ) was "Created on a handshake with Steve Jackson of
Steve Jackson Games." The game uses the GURPS (Third Edition) system and takes
place in an alternate timeline in which no Rebellion occurred and the Virus
was never released. The GURPS Traveller product line has been updated to the
4th Edition version in part by the release of GURPS Traveller: Interstellar
Wars. This has also included a change to the starship design rules first
published in GURPS Traveller. Steve Jackson Games produced numerous high-
quality supplements for the line, including details for all of the major
races, many of the minor races, interstellar trade, expanded world generation,
the military forces of the Third Imperium, and starships. The game is often
referred to as "GT".

#### [edit] Traveller 20

Traveller 20 (2002- ) was published by QLI/RPGRealms Publishing. The D20
system version is set at the time of the Solomani Rim War around year Imperial
year 990, about a century before the era depicted in the original game. The
preferred setting is the Gateway Domain region of the Imperium.

#### [edit] GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars

GURPS Traveller: Interstellar Wars is the second GURPS-driven version of
Traveller. It concentrates on the 22nd and 23rd centuries, much earlier than
the usual Traveller setting, at the time when Earth first started to send out
interstellar ships and had just encountered the Vilani Imperium. This setting
book uses the 4th Edition of the GURPS rules, and hence is referred to by some
as "G4T" or "GTIW." The Interstellar Wars book features extensive notes on
period Earth society, Vilani culture and values, and spaceship construction
and combat rules.

#### [edit] Traveller Hero

Traveller Hero is a port of the Traveller setting to the Hero System, produced
under license by Comstar Games.

#### [edit] Traveller5

Traveller5 or "T5" is the fifth edition of Traveller and is currently in
development and due for release in the second quarter of 2008 after missing
the planned release on the 30th anniversary of the original Traveller game.[6]
T5 is intended by designer Marc Miller to achieve advances in both playability
and realism. The planned system will have a Core Rules Set for the Referee,
supplemented by a Playersâ Manual, a Technical Reference (for ship, vehicle,
and equipment design, and system and world generation), and an Encyclopedia.

Support for the system centers on Sourcebooks (each on a specific topicâa
world, a milieu, an important thread in history) with an integrated adventure.
Sourcebooks will be rule-independent so they can be used with any edition of
Traveller[7]

It is planned that T5 will be produced in conjunction with Mongoose Traveller.

#### [edit] Mongoose Traveller

Mongoose Publishing has produced a major revision of the original Traveller
game, offering it both in a traditional format and as an open-source SRD
around which other games may be built. The core rule book was released in
April 2008, with a following a series of supplements starting with Spinward
Marches and 760 Patrons in July 2008. The two supplements highlight Mongoose
Publishing's dual treatment that separates the intellectual property of
Traveller and its Charted Space/Third Imperium setting from the rules set, the
result being that some supplements may lack traditional Traveller content that
long time fans will want, despite the books actually carrying the Traveller
name. Mongoose Publishing holds the license for ten years and has plans to
unify the Traveller setting, including the possible incorporation of the
Traveller 2300/2300AD RPG setting. [8].

#### [edit] Traveller: 2300

This GDW roleplaying game is a clear rules-descendent of CT and Striker, and
uses a task system later used in MT, but substitutes a d10 instead of 2d6. It
was intended to completely replace the Traveller line and introduced a new
rule system and setting. It was a hard science fiction alternative to the
looser space opera of Classic Traveller. Presented as a future extrapolation
of the speculative World War III of GDW's popular military role-playing game
Twilight: 2000, in which the various nations of Earth were only just beginning
to explore and colonize the 50 light year sphere of surrounding space. Some
buyers mistakenly thought the game was intended to depict the year 2300 in the
standard Traveller universe, the 2nd edition of the game was retitled to
2300AD and this second edition introduced some cyberpunk rules and adventures.
Recently a third version of the setting, 2320 AD was released as a supplement
to the Traveller T20 ruleset.

## [edit] Traveller in other media

GDW licensee Paragon produced two computer games based on the Traveller
universe: MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy (1990) for Amiga, Atari ST
and MS-DOS operating environments, and MegaTraveller 2: Quest for the Ancients
(1991) for Amiga and MS-DOS.

Several novels have been specifically set in the various Traveller universes:

  1. Death of Wisdom Book 1 of 3 by Paul Brunette.
  2. To Dream of Chaos Book 2 of 3 by Paul Brunette.
  3. Marc Miller's Traveller: Gateway to the Stars by Pierce Askegren. ISBN 0-671-01188-X
  4. The Force of Destiny by Dale Kemper
  5. Diaspora Phoenix by Martin J. Dougherty [1]
  6. Tales of the New Era 1: Yesterdayâs Hero by Martin J. Dougherty [2]
  7. The Road Less Travelled by Marc Miller

In addition, Jefferson Swycaffer has written several novels set in the
"Concordat" fictional universe he originally developed for his Traveller
campaign.

Heavy metal band The Lord Weird Slough Feg issued a "Traveller" based concept
album, appropriately titled "Traveller" in 2003.

Gaming magazine White Dwarf ran a comic strip called The Travellers by Mark
Harrison from 1983 to 1986. The strip blatantly spoofed Traveller and other
space opera settings[9].

## [edit] Copyright infringement lawsuit

In 1982 Game Designers Workshop sued software publisher Edu-Ware Services for
infringing upon Traveller's copyright.[10] Edu-Ware admitted to using
Traveller as the basis of its computer role-playing game Space, and in an out-
of-court settlement, removed the computer game from the market.[11]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Wiseman, Loren K. (1999) GURPS Traveller 2nd edition, Steve Jackson Games, ISBN 1-55634-408-2, p.21
  2. ^ Traveller Alien module 3 Droyne, GDW, 1985
  3. ^ Johnson, George (1984). "Eurisko, The Computer With A Mind Of Its Own". The APF Reporter (Washington, D.C.: The Alicia Patterson Foundation) 7 (4). http://www.aliciapatterson.org/APF0704/Johnson/Johnson.html.
  4. ^ Miller, Marc W. (1987). MegaTraveller Players' Manual. Game Designers' Workshop. ISBN 0-943580-38-2. OCLC 29757224.
  5. ^ "Playersâ Guide to MegaTraveller" (PDF). Far Future Enterprises. 2005. http://www.farfuture.net/MTGuide.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-03-17.
  6. ^ "Traveller5". 2007-03-17. http://www.traveller5.com/. Retrieved on 2007-03-17.
  7. ^ Traveller5 at the Internet Archive(2006-01-26). Retrieved on 2007-03-17.
  8. ^ Traveller
  9. ^ "RPGNet RPG Gaming Index: White Dwarf articles". 2008-02-12. http://index.rpg.net/display-article.phtml?articleid=4148. Retrieved on 2008-02-12.
  10. ^ Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society 13. 1982. http://members.aol.com/wergames/travjourn.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-25.
  11. ^ "Tea Leaves: David Mullich: The Interview". August 16 2005. http://www.tleaves.com/weblog/archives/000431.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-25.

  * Chadwick, Frank (1978). Traveller Book 4: Mercenary. Game Designers' Workshop.
  * Fugate, Joe D. Sr; Timothy B. Brown (1986). Traveller Book 8: Robots. Game Designers' Workshop. ISBN 0-943580-10-2.
  * Masters, Phil (February 1983). "Open Box: The Traveller Book". White Dwarf (Games Workshop) (Issue 38): 12. ISSN 0265-8712.
  * Miller, Marc William (1980). Traveller Book 5: High Guard. revised by Marc William Miller, Frank Chadwick and John Harshman. Game Designers' Workshop.
  * Miller, Marc W (1983). Traveller Book 6: Scouts. Game Designers' Workshop.
  * Miller, Marc W; John Harshman, Loren Wiseman, John Astell and Frank Chadwick (1984). Traveller Adventure 12: Secret of the Ancients. Game Designers' Workshop.
  * Miller, Marc W; J. Andrew Keith (1985). Traveller Book 7: Merchant Prince. Game Designers' Workshop.
  * Miller, Marc W (1988). Rebellion Sourcebook. Game Designers' Workshop. ISBN 0-943580-63-3.
  * Slack, Andy (February 1983). "An Introduction to Traveller Part III: Scenarios". White Dwarf (Games Workshop) (Issue 38): 10â11. ISSN 0265-8712.
  * Slack, Andy (March 1983). "An Introduction to Traveller Part IV: Scenarios". White Dwarf (Games Workshop) (Issue 39): 18â19. ISSN 0265-8712.
  * Slack, Andy (December 1983). "Open Box: Traveller Starter Edition". White Dwarf (Games Workshop) (Issue 48): 10. ISSN 0265-8712.
  * Smith, Lester (1996). Milieu 0. Imperium Games. ISBN 0-57828-336-1.
  * Wiseman, Loren K. (1981). Traveller Book 0: An Introduction To. Game Designers' Workshop.
  * Traveller Book 1: Characters and Combat. Game Designers' Workshop. 1977a.
  * Traveller Book 2: Starships. Game Designers' Workshop. 1977b.
  * Traveller Book 3: Worlds and Adventures. Game Designers' Workshop. 1977c.

## [edit] External links

  * BITS (British Isle Traveller Support) produces supplements & adventures including the 101 Series
  * GURPS Traveller by Steve Jackson Games
  * Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society official magazine of Traveller (all versions) for over 20 years
  * Marc Miller's Far Future Enterprises reprints Classic Traveller books, also developing new Traveller5 game
  * Citizens of the Imperium The largest, most active Traveller community and home to Traveller20.
  * Traveller Hero by Comstar Games under license from Hero Games and Far Future Enterprises.
  * Travellers Aid Society Forum Discussion forum for the 1248 setting as well as all other settings and rule systems.
  * Comstar Games/Avenger Enterprises publishes all new Traveller adventures and supplements, supporting the Classic Traveller rules, and soon the HERO system. Sourcebooks are systemless.
  * Traveller, an external wiki \- has Traveller Library Data and Source material.
  * Traveller5 fansite compiling info on the upcoming version.
  * Traveller Webring ring of fansites.
  * Traveller Bibliography
  * The Traveller Mailing List Email discussion group of long standing (c.1987) for all forms of Traveller, theoretical and technical discussions, adventure ideas, ship designs, conversation among Traveller players.
  * Stellar Reaches A fanzine for Classic and D20 Traveller, set in the Empty Quarter. A wide range of articles are available, with a sourcebook also planned.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Traveller_(role-playing_game)"

Categories: Traveller | Origins Award winners | Science fiction role-playing
games

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since October 2008 | All articles to
be merged | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since October 2008 | Articles to be expanded since July 2008 | All
articles to be expanded

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 20 March 2009, at 01:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



