
# Home Taping Is Killing Music

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The original logo.

"Home Taping Is Killing Music" was the slogan of a 1980s anti-copyright
infringement campaign by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), a British
music industry trade group. With the rise in cassette recorder popularity, the
BPI feared that people being able to record music from the radio onto
cassettes would cause a decline in record sales. The logo, consisting of a
skull and crossbones formed from the silhouette of a cassette, also included
the words And It's Illegal.

The campaign has in recent years had its revival, as the Norwegian branch of
IFPI launched a new campaign named Piracy Kills Music. The campaign has
exactly the same message, same name and even very similar logos. The campaign
won the Norwegian 2008 Gulltaggen award for "Best Internet Strategy" with much
controversy.

## Contents

  * 1 Parodies
  * 2 Other references
  * 3 See also
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] Parodies

<IMG>

<IMG>

Example of a parody on the original logo.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Another example of a parody on the original logo.

The slogan was often parodied, one example being the addendum and it's about
time too!, used by Dutch anarcho-punk band The Ex. Another example was the
early 1980s counter-slogan Home Taping is Skill in Music, referring to early
mixtapes, in some ways a precursor to sampling and remixes. In 1981 the Dead
Kennedys printed "Home taping Is killing big business profits. We left this
side blank so you can help" on one side of In God We Trust, Inc. EP. The
cassette & crossbones image was displayed briefly as a backdrop in the "Time
Out For Fun" video by the band Devo from their 1982 album, "Oh, No! It's
Devo". Venom's classic 1982 album Black Metal had some play with the logo; it
read Home Taping Is Killing Music; So Are Venom. The phrase Home-Taping Is
Making Music appears on the back cover of Peter Principle's self-produced 1988
album Tone Poems. The San Diego punk band Rocket from the Crypt sold T-shirts
with the tape and bones and the words "Home Taping Is Killing the Music
Industry: Killing Ain't Wrong." Sonic Youth has t-shirts with the cassette and
sonic youth written under it.[1] The cover of Billy Bragg's album Workers
Playtime featured a notice reading "Capitalism is killing music - pay no more
than Â£4.99 for this record".[2] Mitch Benn also comments "home taping isn't
killing music, music's dying of natural causes" in the song "steal this song"
from the album Radioface. Another variant is "home sex is killing
prostitution".

More recently, the pro-p2p file sharing group Downhill Battle has used the
slogan "Home Taping Is Killing the Music Industry, and It's Fun" on T-shirts,
and the BitTorrent website The Pirate Bay uses the logo of a pirate ship whose
sails bear the "tape and bones." Additionally the Pirate Party in the UK have
a version of the tape and bones with the logo "copyright is killing music -
and it's legal" and the Swedish PiratbyrÃ¥n is using the same tape and bones
as their logo.

Similar rhetoric has continued; in 1982 Jack Valenti famously compared the VCR
and its anticipated effect on the movie industry to the Boston Strangler, and
in 2005 Mitch Bainwol of the RIAA claimed that CD burning is hurting music
sales.

## [edit] Other references

  * "Home Taping's Killing Music" is also the title of a short song by Misty's Big Adventure, a band from Birmingham, which takes the implications of this slogan to their illogical conclusion.
  * In 2005, Zane Lowe, a DJ on Radio 1, toured around the United Kingdom with the Home Taping Tour. The promotional materials for this tour bore the skull-and-bones logo.
  * X-Press 2's music video Witchi Tai To includes anthropomorphic compact cassettes. Also, a man from the music video wears a red "Home Taping Is Killing Music" shirt.
  * The IT Crowd had a parody "Home Sewing is killing fashion" poster in Roy's kitchen.
  * German Hip Hop group Fettes Brot used the logo on the cover of their 2001 album "Demotape".

## [edit] See also

  * Piracy Is Theft
  * You Can Click, But You Can't Hide
  * Don't Copy That Floppy
  * You Wouldn't Steal a Car

## [edit] External links

  * BPI Anti-Piracy Unit
  * Home taping not killing musicâSydney Morning Herald
  * Guardian Unlimited Culture VultureâTrack Back
  * The Piracy Kills Music Campaign

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Home_Taping_Is_Killing_Music"

Categories: Political slogans | Music industry associations | Copyright
campaigns

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 April 2009, at 03:23 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



