
# Celtic polytheism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Series on  
Celtic mythology  
Coventina  
Celtic polytheism  
Celtic deities (list)  
Gaelic mythology  
Irish mythology  
Scottish mythology  
Hebridean mythology  
Tuatha DÃ© Danann  
Mythological Cycle  
Ulster Cycle  
Fenian Cycle  
  
Brythonic mythology  
British Iron Age religion  
British mythology  
Welsh mythology  
Breton mythology  
Mabinogion  
Book of Taliesin  
Trioedd Ynys Prydein  
  
Religious vocations  
Druids Â· Bards Â· Vates  
  
Festivals  
Samhain, Calan Gaeaf  
Imbolc, GÅµyl Fair  
Beltane, Calan Mai  
Lughnasadh, Calan Awst  

Index of related articles

This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Celtic polytheism, sometimes known as Celtic paganism, refers to the religious
beliefs and practises of the ancient Celtic peoples of western Europe prior to
Christianisation.

Celtic polytheism, as its name suggests, was polytheistic, believing in a
number of different deities, and was also animistic, believing in spirits
existing in natural objects such as trees and rocks. Religious beliefs and
practises of the Celts varied throughout the different Celtic lands, which
included Ireland, Britain, Celtiberia, Gaul, areas along the Danube river, and
Galatia; however there were commonalities shared by all.

Celtic religious practices bear the marks of Romanization following the Roman
Empire's conquest of certain Celtic lands such as Gaul (58â51 BC) and
Britain (43 AD), although the depth and significance of Romanization is a
subject of scholarly disagreement.

Celtic polytheism declined in the Roman Empire period, especially after the
outlawing of one form of it, Druidism, by the emperor Claudius in 54 AD. It
persisted somewhat longer in Britain and Ireland, where it gradually
disappeared during Christianization, over the 5th to 6th centuries.

## Contents

  * 1 Terminology
  * 2 Sources
    * 2.1 Literary sources
      * 2.1.1 Greek and Roman sources
      * 2.1.2 Irish and Welsh sources
    * 2.2 Archaeological sources
  * 3 Beliefs
    * 3.1 Deities
      * 3.1.1 Pan-Celtic deities
      * 3.1.2 Local deities
    * 3.2 Afterlife
  * 4 Practises
    * 4.1 Festivals
    * 4.2 Temples
    * 4.3 Sacrifice
    * 4.4 Ceremonies
  * 5 Religious vocations
    * 5.1 Druids
    * 5.2 Bards and filid
  * 6 History
    * 6.1 Origins
    * 6.2 Romanisation
    * 6.3 Christianisation
  * 7 Neopagan revival
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Terminology

Celtic polytheists probably did not have a name for their religion until faced
with other religions to compare it. Therefore, the only titles bestowed upon
Celtic religion are the ones which were used to describe the religion in a
competitive manner, such as the Latin word "paganism".

## [edit] Sources

<IMG>

<IMG>

Three Celtic goddesses, as depicted at Coventina's well.

We know comparatively little about Celtic polytheism because the evidence for
it is fragmentary, largely due to the fact that the pagan Celts themselves
wrote nothing down about their religion. [1][2] Therefore all we have to study
their religion from is the literature from the early Christian period,
commentaries from classical Greek and Roman scholars, and archaeological
evidence.[3]

### [edit] Literary sources

The Iron Age Celts wrote nothing down about their religion not because they
couldn't (many knew the Greek alphabet, and used it for other purposes[2] and
the Celts of the British Isles also made use of their native Ogham
script[citation needed]), but because it was forbidden. The Druids, or
priestly caste of the Celts, would only allow their knowledge to be passed
orally, possibly so as to protect its secrets from outsiders.[2]

#### [edit] Greek and Roman sources

Various Greek and Roman writers of the ancient world commented on the Celts
and their beliefs. The Roman general (and later dictator) Julius Caesar, when
leading the conquering armies of the Roman Republic against Celtic Gaul, made
various descriptions of the inhabitants, though some of his claims, such as
that the Druids practised human sacrifice by burning people in wicker men,
have come under scrutiny by modern scholars.

However, the key problem with the use of these sources is that they were often
biased against the Celts, whom the classical peoples viewed as
"barbarians".[1] In the case of the Romans who conquered several Celtic
realms, they would have likely been biased in favour of making the Celts look
uncivilised, thereby giving the "civilised" Romans more reason to conquer
them. [4]

#### [edit] Irish and Welsh sources

<IMG>

<IMG>

A scene from the TÃ¡in BÃ³ CÃºailnge, an Irish epic that told of a great war,
here depicting its hero, CÃºchulainn. Whilst this story was originally Celtic
pagan, it only survives to us in a Christianised written form.

The other literary sources come from the Celtic lands of Wales and Ireland, in
the Christian mediaeval period, long after the decline of Celtic paganism.
These sources are in the form of mythological stories, such as the Welsh
Mabinogion and the Irish vernacular sources such as the TÃ¡in BÃ³ CÃºailnge.
These were initially written in the Welsh and Irish language respectively.

They were written several centuries after Christianity became the dominant
religion in these regions, and were written down by Christian monks (at the
time, monks would have been some of the few people with the ability to write).
Instead of treating the characters as deities, they are allocated the roles of
being historical heroes, for instance, in the Irish sources the gods are
claimed to be an ancient tribe of humans known as the Tuatha DÃ© Danann.
Because they were written in a very Christian context, these sources must be
scrutinized with even more rigour than the classical sources in assessing
their validity as evidence for pagan Celtic religion.[1]

While it is possible to single out specific texts which â because of their
pagan content â can be strongly argued to encapsulate genuine echoes or
resonances of the pre-Christian past, opinion is divided as to whether these
texts contain substantive material derived from oral tradition as preserved by
bards or whether they were the creation of the mediaeval monastic
tradition.[1]

### [edit] Archaeological sources

The archaeological evidence does not contain the bias inherent in the literary
sources. Nonetheless, our interpretation of this evidence can sometimes be
coloured by the 21st century mindset.[1]

Various archaeological discoveries have aided our understanding of the pagan
religion of the Celts. One is the minted coins of Gaul, Raetia, Noricum, and
Britain, and another is the sculptures, monuments, and inscriptions associated
with the Celts of continental Europe and of Roman Britain. Most of the
monuments, and their accompanying inscriptions, belong to the Roman period and
reflect a considerable degree of syncretism between Celtic and Roman gods;
even where figures and motifs appear to derive from pre-Roman tradition, they
are difficult to interpret in the absence of a preserved literature on
mythology. A notable example of this is the horned deity that was called
Cernunnos; we have found several depictions and inscriptions of him, but know
very little about the myths that would have been associated with him or how he
was worshipped.

## [edit] Beliefs

### [edit] Deities

<IMG>

<IMG>

Image of a tricephalic god identified as Lugus, discovered in Paris, the old
Celtic city of Lutetia.

Celtic religion was polytheistic, believing in many deities, both gods and
goddesses. The most notable of these were pan-Celtic, being worshipped across
much of the Celtic world, albeit under various regional names and with
different associations. Despite the notability of these pan-Celtic deities,
they make up only a tiny percentage of Celtic gods; out of the roughly 300
Celtic deities that we know about, only around 60 can be found in more than
one region, and of those, only about 20â30 are pan-Celtic [5].

The Celts were also animists, believing in deities existing in most aspects of
nature, such as in trees and streams, who were often venerated at local
shrines.

According to classical era sources, the Celts worshipped the forces of nature
and did not envisage deities in anthropomorphic terms,[6] as other pagan
peoples such as the Greeks, Romans, and Egyptians did. This appeared to change
as the classical peoples grew in influence over the Celtic cultures, as the
Celts did begin to give their deities human forms, and they moved from a more
animistic-based faith to a more Romanized polytheistic view.

Several of these deities, including Lugus and Matrones, exhibited triplism,
being found in a set of three[7].

Insular Celts swore their oaths by their personal or tribal gods, and the
land, sea and sky; as in, "I swear by the gods by whom my people swear" and
"If I break my oath, may the land open to swallow me, the sea rise to drown
me, and the sky fall upon me."[8]

#### [edit] Pan-Celtic deities

Main article: Celtic pantheon

<IMG>

<IMG>

Image of a horned figure on the Gundestrup cauldron

Some deities of the Celts were deities of major natural occurrences, such as
the sun. The Celts did not worship the sun, but saw it as a symbol for that
aspect of divinity. These deities were generally worshipped across the Celtic
lands, however, they often went under different names. An example of this was
the god Lugus, who appeared in later Irish mythology as Lugh, and in later
Welsh mythology, where he appeared as Lleu Llaw Gyffes.

Another widespread pan-Celtic god was Taranis, a god of thunder, whose worship
has been detected as having occurred in Gaul, Britain and Hispania. Other
similar deities included Toutatis, a god of tribal protection in Gaul and
Britain, Belenos, a god of healing, and Cernunnos, a horned figure found in
Gaul.

There were also pan-Celtic goddesses. Examples of this include a mother
goddess (such as Danu from Ireland and DÃ´n from Wales), a goddess of water
(such as Sulis), and a goddess of horses (such as Epona in France, Macha in
Ireland, and Rhiannon in Wales).

When the Romans conquered the Celtic lands of Gaul, Hispania and Britain, they
equated the Celtic gods with their own deities. For instance, they claimed
that the Gaulish Celtic god Belenos was the same as their own god Apollo, and
that Lugus was the same as their own Mercury. These Roman descriptions
comparing Celtic and Roman deities are one of the few sources of literary
information that we have about the Celtic gods.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An oak tree, a species of tree that was venerated by the pagan Celts.

#### [edit] Local deities

Main article: Celtic nature worship

The Celts were animists, believing that all aspects of the natural world
contained spirits, and that these spirits could be communicated with.[9].

These animistic deities were often worshipped, so places such as rocks,
streams, mountains, and trees may all have had shrines or offerings devoted to
a deity residing there. A similar belief is found in modern Shinto in Japan,
through the belief of kami. These would have been local deities, known and
worshipped by inhabitants living near to the shrine itself, and not pan-Celtic
like some of the polytheistic gods.

Among the most popular sites for the veneration of animistic deities were
trees; the oak, ash, and thorn were considered to be the most sacred. The
early Celts considered some trees to be sacred. The importance of trees in
Celtic religion is shown by the fact that the very name of the Eburonian tribe
contains a reference to the yew tree, and that names like Mac Cuilinn (son of
holly) and Mac Ibar (son of yew) appear in Irish myths. In Ireland, wisdom was
symbolized by the salmon who feed on the hazelnuts from the trees that
surround the well of wisdom (Tobar Segais).

Hot springs and rivers were also popular sites for worship, and were commonly
associated with healing.

One of the most popular theories for a belief in fairies (such as knockers,
clurichaun, and pixies[10]) in Christianised Celtic areas is that they were a
recurring folk belief of these animistic deities, placed under a Christian
worldview, where they were seen no longer as nature deities but as malevolant
spirits. Sometimes these fairies were treated just the same as previous pagan
nature gods had been, with offerings being placed on trees and other shrines
to both placate them from committing negative actions and ensuring a good
harvest or hunt etc.

### [edit] Afterlife

There is no direct information that has survived on what the Celts believed
happened after death. However, from archaeological discoveries, Roman
accounts, and later mythology, possible ideas of a Celtic afterlife can be
established.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A reconstructed Celtic burial mound located near Hochdorf in Germany. Such
burials were reserved for the influential and wealthy in Celtic society.

Celtic burial practices, which included burying food, weapons, and ornaments
with the dead, suggest a belief in life after death.[11]

The druids, the Celtic learned class which included members of the clergy,
were said by Caesar to have believed in reincarnation and transmigration of
the soul along with astronomy and the nature and power of the gods.[12]

A common factor in later mythologies from Christianised Celtic nations was the
otherworld[13]. This was the realm of the fairy folk and other supernatural
beings, who would entice humans into their realm. Sometimes this otherworld
was claimed to exist underground, whilst at other times it was said to lie far
to the west. Several scholars have suggested that the otherworld was the pagan
Celtic afterlife[14], though there is no direct evidence to prove this.

## [edit] Practises

### [edit] Festivals

<IMG>

<IMG>

A jack-o'-lantern is made by celebrants of Halloween. Halloween is a
Christianised form of the Celtic festival of Samhain, and the jack o' lantern
originated amongst Celtic ideas of scaring away evil spirits that may appear
on this day.

Virtually everything that we know about the pagan Celtic religious festivals
come from insular sources from Ireland, however the Coligny calendar of Gaul
also provides evidence that the Gaulish Celts followed the same festivals[15].
The Celts of these lands practised four religious festivals a year. [2] These
festivals were equidistant from each other, and divided the year into four
quarters.

The first festival was Imbolc, celebrated on the eve of February 1st. It was
sacred to the fertility goddess Brigit, and as such was a spring festival. It
was later Christianised as the feast of St Brigid.[2] The French scholar
Joseph Vendryes compared it to the Roman lustrations[citation needed].

The second festival was Beltaine, held on the eve of May 1st. It was devoted
to the god Bel, and a common practise was the lighting of fires. It was later
Christianised as the feast of St John the Baptist,[2] and the festival of May
Day is generally thought to have been based upon it.

The third festival was Lughnasadh, which took place in August. It revolved
around the god Lugh, who, according to mythology, was giving a feast for his
foster mother Tailtu at that time. [2]

The fourth festival was Samhain, held on October 31st. It marked the end of
one pastoral year, and the beginning of another, and was similarly thought of
as the time when spirits of the Otherworld became visible to humans[2]. It was
Christianised as Halloween, which has kept its associations with spirits and
the supernatural right into the contemporary period.

### [edit] Temples

Classical sources claimed that the Celts had no temples (before the Gallo-
Roman period) and that their ceremonies took place in forest sanctuaries.
However, archaeologists have discovered a large number of temple sites
excavated throughout the Celtic world, primarily in Gaul. In the Gallo-Roman
period, more permanent stone temples were erected, and many of them have been
discovered by archaeologists in Britain as well as in Gaul. Indeed, a distinct
type of Celto-Roman temple called a fanum also was developed. This was
distinguished from a common Roman shrine by having an ambulatory on all four
sides of the central cella.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An 18th century illustration of a wicker man, a form of human sacrifice that
Caesar alleged the Druids, or Celtic pagan priesthood, performed, though no
archaeological evidence has been uncovered to support this.

### [edit] Sacrifice

Celtic religious practice was probably sacrificial in its interactions with
the gods. Roman writers stated that the Celts practiced human sacrifice in
Gaul: Cicero, Julius Caesar, Suetonius, and Lucan all refer to it, and Pliny
the Elder says that it occurred in Britain, too. It was forbidden under
Tiberius and Claudius. However there is also the possibility that these claims
may have been false, and used as a sort of propaganda to justify the Roman
conquest of these territories. There are only very few recorded archaeological
discoveries which preserve evidence of human sacrifice and thus most
contemporary historians tend to regard human sacrifice as rare within Celtic
cultures. There is some circumstantial evidence that human sacrifice was known
in Ireland and was later forbidden by St. Patrick, a claim which has also been
disputed.

There was also a warrior cult that centered on the severed heads of their
enemies. The Celts provided their dead with weapons and other accoutrements,
which indicates that they most likely believed in some form of an afterlife.

### [edit] Ceremonies

An example of a ceremony was the ritual of the oak and the mistletoe.

## [edit] Religious vocations

According to Poseidonius and later classical authors Gaulish religion and
culture were the concern of three professional classesâthe druids, the
bards, and the vates. This threefold hierarchy had its reflection among the
two main branches of Celts in Ireland and Wales, but is best represented in
early Irish tradition with its draoithe (druids), filidh (visionary poets),
and Faidh (seers). However these categories are not always fixed, and may be
named or divided differently in different primary sources.

### [edit] Druids

<IMG>

<IMG>

Two druids, from an 1845 publication, based on a bas-relief found at Autun,
France.

Main article: Druid

A Druid was a member of the learned class among the ancient Celts. They acted
as priests, teachers, and judges. The earliest known records of the Druids
come from the 3rd century BC. Some scholars have suggested that the Druids
were the Celtic counterparts of the Brahmans of India.

### [edit] Bards and filid

Main articles: Fili and Bard

In Ireland the filid were visionary poets, associated with lorekeeping,
versecraft, and the memorization of vast numbers of poems. They were also
magicians, as Irish magic is intrinsically connected to poetry, and the satire
of a gifted poet was a serious curse upon the one being satirized. To run
afoul of a poet was a dangerous thing indeed to a people who valued reputation
and honor more than life itself.

In Ireland a "bard" was considered a lesser grade of poet than a fili \- more
of a minstrel and rote reciter than an inspired artist with magical powers.
However, in Wales bardd was the word for their visionary poets, and used in
the same manner fili was in Ireland and Scotland.

The Celtic poets, of whatever grade, were composers of eulogy and satire, and
a chief duty was that of composing and reciting verses on heroes and their
deeds, and memorizing the genealogies of their patrons. It was essential to
their livelihood that they increase the fame of their patrons, via tales,
poems and songs. As early as the 1st century AD, the Latin author Lucan
referred to "bards" as the national poets or minstrels of Gaul and Britain. In
Gaul the institution gradually disappeared, whereas in Ireland and Wales it
survived. The Irish bard through chanting preserved a tradition of poetic
eulogy. In Wales, where the word bardd has always been used for poet, the
bardic order was codified into distinct grades in the 10th century. Despite a
decline of the order toward the end of the European Middle Ages, the Welsh
tradition has persisted and is celebrated in the annual eisteddfod, a national
assembly of poets and musicians.

## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Diachronic distribution of Celtic peoples:  
core Hallstatt territory, by the 6th century BC maximal Celtic expansion, by
the 3rd century BC Lusitanian area of Iberia where Celtic presence is
uncertain the "six Celtic nations" which retained significant numbers of
Celtic speakers into the Early Modern period areas where Celtic languages
remain widely spoken today

### [edit] Origins

The Celtic peoples originated in the Hallstatt culture of central Europe in
the 6th century BC. Over the next three centuries the Celts spread both
westward and eastward[16]. They took their religious beliefs with them,
however they also adopted local deities that they came across, and attributed
deities to local natural phenomenon near to where they settled.

### [edit] Romanisation

The Celtic peoples of Gaul and Hispania (though not those of further away
lands such as Ireland) began to be influenced by the Classical peoples of
Greece and Rome. This culminated in the 1st century BC when the Roman Republic
conquered Gaul and Hispania and soon annexed it into the Roman Empire. In the
1st century AD they then conquered Britain.

The Romans' religion influenced that of the Celts, most notable in introducing
the idea of deities having anthropomorphic, human forms.

According to Mircea Eliade, Celtic religion succeeded in retaining a number of
pre-Indo-European motifs despite successive accretions from Mediterranean,
Roman and Christian religion. Among these motifs were an emphasis on the
magico-religious importance of women, and customs connected with the
"mysteries" of femininity, destiny, death and the otherworld.[17]

### [edit] Christianisation

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Celtic cross, a pre-Christian symbol which was later amalgamated with the
Christian crucifix.

The conversion to Christianity inevitably had a profound effect on this socio-
religious system from the 5th century onward, though its character can only be
extrapolated from documents of considerably later date. By the early 7th
century the church had succeeded in relegating Irish druids to ignominious
irrelevancy, while the filidh, masters of traditional learning, operated in
easy harmony with their clerical counterparts, contriving at the same time to
retain a considerable part of their pre-Christian tradition, social status,
and privilege. But virtually all the vast corpus of early vernacular
literature that has survived was written down in monastic scriptoria, and it
is part of the task of modern scholarship to identify the relative roles of
traditional continuity and ecclesiastical innovation as reflected in the
written texts. Cormac's Glossary (c. 900) recounts that St. Patrick banished
those mantic rites of the filidh that involved offerings to "demons", and it
seems probable that the church took particular pains to stamp out animal
sacrifice and other rituals repugnant to Christian teaching. What survived of
ancient ritual practice tended to be related to filidhecht, the traditional
repertoire of the filidh, or to the central institution of sacral kingship. A
good example is the pervasive and persistent concept of the hierogamy (sacred
marriage) of the king with the goddess of sovereignty: the sexual union, or
banais rÃ­ghi ("wedding of kingship"), which constituted the core of the royal
inauguration seems to have been purged from the ritual at an early date
through ecclesiastical influence, but it remains at least implicit, and often
quite explicit, for many centuries in the literary tradition.

Nagy has noted the Gaelic oral tradition has been remarkably conservative. The
fact that we have tales in existence which were still being told in the 19th
century in almost exactly the same form as they exist in ancient manuscripts
leads to the strong probability that much of what the monks recorded was
considerably older. Though the Christian interpolations in some of these tales
are very obvious, many of them read like afterthoughts or footnotes to the
main body of the tales, which most likely preserve traditions far older than
the manuscripts themselves.

Mythology based on (though, not identical to) the pre-Christian religion is
still common place knowledge in Celtic-speaking cultures. Various rituals
involving acts of pilgrimage to sites such as hills and sacred wells which are
believed to have curative or otherwise beneficial properties are still
performed. Based on evidence from the European continent, various figures
which are still known in folklore in the Celtic countries up to today, or who
take part in post-Christian mythology, are known to have also been worshipped
in those areas that did not have records before Christianity.

## [edit] Neopagan revival

Main article: Celtic Neopaganism

Further information: Neodruidism and Celtic Reconstructionist Paganism

Various Neopagan groups claim association with Celtic polytheism. These groups
range from the Reconstructionists, who work to practice ancient Celtic
religion with as much accuracy as possible; to new age, eclectic groups who
take some of their inspiration from Celtic mythology and iconography but place
little significance on any sort of historical precedent, the most notable of
which is Neo-druidry.

## [edit] See also

  * Aeron
  * Animism
  * Celtic Christianity
  * Celtic mythology
  * Celtic languages
  * Germanic paganism
  * Gundestrup cauldron

  * Irish mythology
  * Horned helmet
  * Paganism
  * polytheism
  * Proto-Indo-European religion
  * Welsh mythology

  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d e Miranda J. Green. (2005) Exploring the world of the druids. London: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-28571-3. Page 24
  2. ^ a b c d e f g h Emrys Evans (1992) Mythology Little Brown & Company. ISBN 0-316-84763-1. Page 170
  3. ^ Emrys Evans (1992) Mythology Little Brown & Company. ISBN 0-316-84763-1. Page 170-171
  4. ^ Dr Ray Dunning (1999) The Encyclopedia of World Mythology Parragon. ISBN 0-752-58444-8.
  5. ^ [1]
  6. ^ Juliette Wood. âIntroduction.â In Squire, C. (2000). The mythology of the British Islands: an introduction to Celtic myth, legend, poetry and romance. London & Ware: UCL & Wordsworth Editions Ltd. ISBN 1-84022-500-9. Page 12-13
  7. ^ Emrys Evans - Little, Brown & Company, Page 171
  8. ^ Marie-Louise Sjoestedt, Gods and Heroes of the Celts, translated by Myles Dillon, Berkeley, CA, Turtle Island Foundation, 1982, p.17. ISBN 0-913666-52-1.
  9. ^ Miranda Green. (1992:196) Animals in Celtic life and myth. London: Routledge. ISBN 0415050308
  10. ^ West Country Faerie, Diana Mullis, (2005), Bossiney Books
  11. ^ Barry Cunliffe, The Ancient Celts. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1997, pp.208-210. ISBN 0-19-815010-5.
  12. ^ Julius Caesar, Commentarii de Bello Gallico 5:14
  13. ^ The Celts in The Encyclopedia of World Mythology, Dr Ray Dunning, page 91
  14. ^ The Celts in The Encyclopedia of World Mythology, Dr Ray Dunning, page 91
  15. ^ [2]
  16. ^ The Celts in The Encyclopedia of World Mythology by Dr Ray Dunning, page 77
  17. ^ Eliade, Mircea (1982) A History of Religious Ideas Vol. 2. University of Chicago Press. Â§ 171.

## [edit] Further reading

  * de Vries, Jan (1961) Keltische Religion, a comprehensive survey
  * Duval, Paul-Marie (1976) Les Dieux de la Gaule, new ed. updated and enlarged.
  * Green, Miranda (1986, revised 2004) Gods of the Celts,
  * Mac Cana, Proinsias (1970) Celtic Mythology, copious illustrations.
  * Nagy, Joseph Falaky (1985) The Wisdom of the Outlaw: The Boyhood Deeds of Finn in Gaelic Narrative Tradition, tales and analysis in Gaelic and English.
  * O'Rahilly, Thomas F. (1946, reissued 1971) Early Irish History and Mythology
  * Sjoestedt, Marie-Louise (1949, reissued 1982; originally published in French, 1940) Gods and Heroes of the Celts comparisons between deities of the various Celtic cultures vs Classical models.
  * Stercks, Claude (1986) ÃlÃ©ments de cosmogonie celtique, contains an interpretive essay on the goddess Epona and related deities.
  * VendryÃ¨s, Joseph; Tonnelat, Ernest; Unbegaun, B.-O. (1948) Les Religions des Celtes, des Germains et des anciens Slaves.

## [edit] External links

  * Celtnet
  * The Sacred Grove

* * *
v â¢ d â¢ e

Celts  
Ancient Celts  
Celtic studies

Peoples

Names Â· Gaels (Early Ireland Â· Gaelic Ireland) Â· Britons (British Iron Age
Â· Roman Britain) Â· Picts Â·  
Gauls (Gaul Â· Gallic Invasion of Greece Â· Galatia) Â· Celtiberians (Celtic
Gallaecia)  
Religion

Polytheism Â· Christianity  
Mythology

Irish Â· Scottish Â· Welsh Â· British Â· Breton  
Society

Calendar Â· Law Â· Gaelic clothing and fashion Â· Gaelic warfare Â· Celtic
warfare  
Art

Triple spiral Â· Knot Â· Cross Â· Maze Â· Pictish  
Celtic design featuring three intertwined dogs  
Modern Celts  
Celtic Revival

Modern Celtic nations Â· Pan-Celticism (Celtic Congress Â· Celtic League) Â·
Music Â· Neopaganism (Reconstructionist)  
Languages

Proto-Celtic Â· Insular Celtic (Brythonic Â· Goidelic) Â· Continental Celtic
(Celtiberian Â· Gaulish Â· Galatian Â· Lepontic Â· Noric)  
Festivals

Samhain/Calan Gaeaf Â· Imbolc/GÅµyl Fair Â· Beltane/Calan Mai Â·
Lughnasadh/Calan Awst  
Lists

Celts Â· Deities Â· English words of Celtic origin Â· Spanish words of Celtic
origin Â· Tribes  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Paganism (Historical Polytheism, Ethnic religion and Neopaganism)  
Main concepts

Animism Â· Pantheism Â· Polytheism Â· Shamanism  
Historical Polytheism

Prehistoric religion: Proto-Indo-European Â· Proto-Semitic Â· European: Baltic
Â· Celtic Â· Finnish Â· Germanic (Anglo-Saxon Â· Norse Â· West German) Â·
Greek (Orphism Â· Eleusinian Mysteries Â· Mithraic Mysteries ) Â· Roman Â·
Slavic Â· Near Eastern: Canaanite Â· Egyptian Â· Assyro-Babylonian Â· Asian:
Vedic  
Ethnic/Folk religions

African Â· African diasporic Â· Eurasian Shamanism Â· Native American Â·
Pacific  
Myth and ritual

Ancestor worship Â· Animal worship Â· Ethos Â· Folklore Â· Hero cult Â· Magic
and religion Â· Myth and ritual Â· Mythology Â· Orthopraxy Â· Religion and
mythology Â· Ritual Â· Sacrifice (Animal Â· Human) Â· Sorcery Â· Tradition Â·
Virtue Â· Witchcraft  
Christianization

Christianity and Paganism Â· Christianised sites Â· Christianized myths and
imagery Â· Christianised calendar Â· Christianised rituals Â· Constantinian
shift Â· Hellenistic religion Â· Iconoclasm Â· Neoplatonism Â· Religio licita
Â· Roman imperial cult Â· Virtuous pagan  
Neopagan movements

Baltic Â· Celtic Â· Finnish Â· Germanic (Ariosophy Â· ÃsatrÃº Â· Theodism) Â·
Greek Â· Judeo-Paganism Â· Kemetism Â· Neo-druidism Â· Religio Romana Â·
Slavic Â· Unitarian-Universalist Â· Wicca (British Traditional Wicca)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celtic_polytheism"

Categories: Celtic mythology | Polytheism | Pagan religions

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Boarisch
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Latina

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 22:45 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



