
# MC5

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2007)  
MC5  
Origin Detroit, Michigan, USA  
Genre(s) Hard rock, protopunk, garage rock, rock & roll, blues-rock  
Years active 1964â1972  
2003âpresent  
Label(s) Elektra, Rhino, Atlantic  
Associated acts Destroy All Monsters, Sonic's Rendezvous Band  
Members  
Wayne Kramer  
Dennis Thompson  
Michael Davis  
Handsome Dick Manitoba  
Former members  
Rob Tyner  
Fred "Sonic" Smith  
Patrick Burrows  
Steve Moorhouse  
Bob Gaspar  
Ray Craig  
The MC5 was an American rock band formed in Lincoln Park, Michigan in 1964 and
active until 1972. They played hard rock music that also included blues-rock,
psychedelic rock, rock & roll and garage rock. "Crystallizing the
counterculture movement at its most volatile and threatening",[1] their far
left political ties and anti-establishment lyrics and music would serve as a
prototype for later punk rock musicians. The band consisted of Wayne Kramer
and Fred "Sonic" Smith (guitars) Michael Davis (bass), Rob Tyner (vocals), and
Dennis Thompson (drums).

MC5 had a promising beginning which earned them a cover appearance on Rolling
Stone magazine in 1969[2] even before their debut album was recorded. They
developed a reputation for energetic live performances, one of which was
recorded as the critically acclaimed Kick Out The Jams. Their career was
ultimately short-lived, though within just a few years of their dissolution,
the MC5 were often cited as one of the most important American hard rock
groups of their era[3]: their three albums are regarded as classics. Their
song "Kick Out the Jams" is widely covered.

## Contents

  * 1 Band History
    * 1.1 Early years
    * 1.2 Success in Detroit
  * 2 Radical political affiliations
  * 3 Recordings
    * 3.1 Kick out the Jams
    * 3.2 Back in the USA
    * 3.3 High Time
  * 4 Record label controversy
  * 5 Late career and disbandment
    * 5.1 Post-break up
    * 5.2 Reunion
  * 6 Covers and Tributes
  * 7 Discography
  * 8 Filmography
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Band History

### [edit] Early years

The origins of the MC5 can be traced to the friendship between guitarists
Wayne Kramer and Fred Smith. Friends since their teen years, they were both
fans of R&B music, blues, Chuck Berry, Dick Dale, the Ventures, and what would
later be called garage rock: they adored any music with speed, energy and a
rebellious attitude. Each guitarist/singer formed and led a rock group
(Smith's Vibratones and Kramer's Bounty Hunters). As members of both groups
left for college or straight jobs, the most committed members eventually
united (under Kramer's leadership and the Headhunters name) with Michael
Fraser on vocals/bass and Grant Palmer on drums, and were popular and
successful enough in and around Detroit that the musicians were able to quit
their day jobs and make a living from the group.

Kramer felt they needed a manager, which led him to Rob Derminer, a few years
older than the others, and deeply involved in Detroit's hipster and left-wing
political scenes. Derminer originally auditioned as a bass guitarist, though
they quickly realized that his talents could be better used as a lead singer:
though not conventionally attractive and rather paunchy by traditional
frontman standards, he nonetheless had a commanding stage presence, and a
booming baritone voice that evidenced his abiding love of American soul and
gospel music. Derminer renamed himself Rob Tyner (after Coltrane's pianist
McCoy Tyner). Tyner also invented their new name, The MC5: it reflected their
Detroit roots (it was short for "Motor City Five'), was vaguely reminiscent of
a sports car name (like the GTO), and echoed the Dave Clark Five, at the peak
of their popularity in 1964â1965. In some ways the group was similar to
other garage bands of the period, composing soon-to-be historic workouts such
as "Black To Comm" during their mid-teens in the basement of the home of
Kramer's mother.

The music also reflected Smith and Kramer's increasing interest in free jazz
\-- the guitarists were inspired by the likes of Albert Ayler, Archie Shepp,
Sun Ra and late period John Coltrane, and tried to imitate the ecstatic sounds
of the squealing, high-pitched saxophonists they adored. The MC5 even later
opened for a few U.S. midwest shows for Sun Ra, whose influence is obvious in
"Starship". Kramer and Smith were also deeply inspired by Sonny Sharrock, one
of the few electric guitarists working in free jazz, and they eventually
developed a unique interlocking style that was like little heard before:
Kramer's solos often used a heavy, irregular vibrato, while Smith's rhythms
contained an uncommon explosive energy, including patterns that conveyed great
excitement, as evidenced in "Black To Comm" and many other songs.

### [edit] Success in Detroit

Playing almost nightly any place they could in and around Detroit, the MC5
quickly earned a reputation for their high-energy live performances and had a
sizeable local following, regularly selling out to audiences of 1000 or more.
Contemporary rock writer Robert Bixby stated that the sound of the MC5 was
like "a catastrophic force of nature the band was barely able to control,"
while Don McLeese notes that fans compared the aftermath of an MC5 performance
to the delirious exhaustion experienced after "a street rumble or an orgy."
(McLeese, 57)

Their debut single was released by Trans-Love Energies in early 1968,
comprising two original songs: "Borderline" and "Looking at You." The first
pressing sold out in a few weeks, and by the year's end, had gone through more
pressings totaling several thousand copies.

That summer, MC5 toured the U.S. east coast, which generated an enormous
response, with the group often overshadowing the more famous acts they opened
up for: McLeese writes notes that when opening for Big Brother and the Holding
Company audiences regularly demanded multiple encores of the MC5, and at a
memorable series of concerts, Cream â one of the leading hard rock groups of
the era â "left the stage vanquished" by the Detroit upstarts. (McLeese, 65)
This same east coast tour led to the rapturous aforementioned Rolling Stone
cover story that praised the MC5 with nearly evangelistic zeal, and also to an
association with the radical group Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers.

The MC5 became the leading band in a burgeoning hard rock scene, serving as
mentors to fellow South-Eastern Michigan bands The Stooges and Up, and major
record labels expressed an interest in the group. As related in the notes for
reissued editions of the Stooges' debut album, Danny Fields of Elektra Records
came to Detroit to see the MC5. At Kramer's recommendation, he went to see the
Stooges. Fields was so impressed that he ended up offering contracts to both
bands in September 1968. They were the first hard rock groups signed to the
fledgling Elektra.

## [edit] Radical political affiliations

According to Kramer, the MC5 of this period was politically influenced by the
Marxism/Maoism of the Black Panther Party and Fred Hampton.[4] Black Panther
Party founder Huey P. Newton prompted John Sinclair to found the White
Panthers, a militant leftist organization of white people working to assist
the Black Panthers. Shortly after, Sinclair was arrested for possession of
illegal narcotics.

Under the "guidance" of John Sinclair (who dubbed his enterprise "Trans-Love
Energies" and refused to be categorized as a traditional manager), the MC5
were soon involved in left-wing politics: Sinclair was active with the White
Panther Party and Fifth Estate. In their early career, the MC5 had a
politically provocative stage show: they would appear onstage toting unloaded
rifles, and at the climax of the performance, an unseen "sniper" would shoot
down Tyner. The band members were also all using the drugs LSD and marijuana,
though not all group members agreed with Sinclair's politics, as Thompson
would later reveal in a 2000 interview for an article published in Goldmine
magazine.[citation needed]

The band generated political controversy by performing before the outbreak of
violent protests at the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago. The
group's appearance at the convention is also notable for their lengthy
performance: in an interview featured in the documentary Get Up, Stand Up,
Kramer reported that while many musicians were scheduled to perform at a day-
long concert, only the MC5 initially appeared. The MC5 played for over eight
hours straight; of the other scheduled performers, Kramer stated in Get Up,
Stand Up that only Neil Young actually arrived, though due to the chaos at the
convention, Young didn't perform. Dennis Thompson asserted years later that
"Country Joe" McDonald (Country Joe and the Fish) was also present at the
scene (Thompson, 2000). Other performers at the convention included the
protest folk singer Phil Ochs.[5]

## [edit] Recordings

### [edit] Kick out the Jams

The MC5 earned national attention with their first album, Kick Out the Jams,
recorded live on October 30 and 31, 1968 at Detroit's Grande Ballroom. A live
debut was all but unheard of in 1968 (and is still rare today), but Elektra
executives Jac Holzman and Bruce Botnick recognized that the MC5 were at their
best when playing for a receptive audience. The first song, a version of the
R&B standard "Ramblin' Rose," featured a ragged falsetto lead vocal from
Kramer before Tyner joined the group onstage. Containing such songs as the
proto-punk classics "Kick Out the Jams" and "Rama Lama Fa Fa Fa", the spaced-
out "Starship" (co-credited to Sun Ra because the lyrics were partly cribbed
from one of Ra's poems), and an extended cover of John Lee Hooker's "Motor
City is Burning" wherein Tyner praises the role of Black Panther snipers
during the Detroit Insurrection of 1967. The album is generally regarded as
one of the best live rock and roll records: critic Mark Deming writes that the
gleefully lusty Kick "is one of the most powerfully energetic live albums ever
made ... this is an album that refuses to be played quietly.[6]

The album caused some controversy due to the title track's rallying cry of
"Kick out the jams, motherfuckers!" (according to Kramer, the band recorded
this as "Kick out the jams, brothers and sisters!" for the single released for
radio play; Tyner claimed this was done without group consensus (Thompson,
2000) ) and Sinclair's inflammatory liner notes. The edited version also
appeared in some LP copies, which also withdrew Sinclair's excitable comments.
The album was released in January, 1969; reviews were mixed, but the album was
successful, quickly selling over 100,000 copies, and appearing for several
weeks on the Billboard Hot 100.

### [edit] Back in the USA

Their second album, Back in the USA, produced by future Bruce Springsteen
mentor Jon Landau, virtually provided a prototype for punk rock with its
short, fast, hard-edged angry guitar rock. The band sounded radically
different from Kick, and McLeese writes that except for Tyner's vocals, they
were "barely recognizable as the same band." (McLeese, 96) The second album
also featured very different production from the first â the MC5 now sounded
compressed and somewhat limited in their sonic palate compared to their
earlier era â band members later said that Landau was overbearing and heavy-
handed in production, trying to shape the group to his own liking.

Reviews were again mixed, sales were mediocre (It peaked at 137 in March 1970)
and the MC5's tours were not as well-received as before. Exhaustion was partly
to blame, from the band's heavy touring schedule and increasingly heavy drug
use.

They had fallen out with Sinclair, as well, and were conspicuous by their
absence at the December, 1971 "Free John Sinclair" rally to protest his
incarceration on marijuana possession.

### [edit] High Time

Their third album, High Time would also prove influential on 1970s hard rock
bands.[citation needed] The album was poorly promoted, and sales were worse
than ever, but High Time was the best-reviewed of the band's original records
upon its initial release. The group had much more creative control, and were
very satisfied with the results. This release saw the band stretch out with
longer, more experimental pieces like Future/Now and the Sun Ra-influenced
Skunk (Sonically Speaking).

## [edit] Record label controversy

When Hudson's, a Detroit-based department store chain, refused to stock Kick
Out The Jams due to the obscenity, the MC5 responded with a full page
advertisement in the Fifth Estate saying "Fuck Hudson's!" and prominently
including the logo of MC5's label, Elektra Records, in the ad.

Hudson's pulled all Elektra records from their stores, and in the ensuing
controversy, Jac Holzman, the head of Elektra, dropped the band from their
contract, though there were later allegations of strong company support of the
controversial content of the LP. Uncommonly, Elektra's classical division
(Nonesuch) was operated on a nearly pro bono basis due to profits generated by
popular music releases, and the removal of Nonesuch records from Hudson's
represented a significant loss for the corporation.

The MC5 then signed with Atlantic Records, ironically now part of the same
company as Elektra.

## [edit] Late career and disbandment

Both Back in the USA and High Time lost money for Atlantic Records, which
dropped the band.

On February 13, 1972, Michael Davis left the band (he was using heroin and was
all but forced out by the others). The remaining members recorded three new
songs â "Gold," "Train Music," and "Inside Out" â in London shortly
afterwards for the soundtrack of a film called Gold. This would be the band's
final recording session.

The group limped along a while longer, eventually reduced to Kramer and Smith
touring and playing with local pick-up groups, playing R&B covers as much as
their original material.

The MC5 reunited for a farewell show on New Year's Eve, 1972-73 at the Grande
Ballroom. The venue that had only a few years before hosted over a thousand
eager fans now had a few dozen people, and, distraught, Kramer left the stage
after a few songs.

The band broke up shortly afterwards.

### [edit] Post-break up

Fred "Sonic" Smith formed a new group called Sonic's Rendezvous Band, married
singer Patti Smith, retired from music to raise a family, and died in 1994.
Sonic's Rendezvous Band released only the "City Slang" single during their
initial time as a group, though later recordings were released post-mortem,
and a reconstituted Rendezvous Band (including original member Scott Morgan,
of The Rationals and newly-added Deniz Tek of Radio Birdman) reunited in
tribute years afterward.

Wayne Kramer made scattered appearances on other people's records before being
incarcerated for drug offenses (in prison in Kentucky, Kramer was unexpectedly
reunited with MC5 bassist Michael Davis, also behind bars on a drug charge).
After his parole, Kramer worked straight jobs for several years and focused on
kicking drugs; in the early 1990s, he returned to the music industry, and has
released several well-received albums.

Tyner became a successful producer, manager and promoter in Detroit; he
released the warmly-reviewed Blood Brothers in 1990, and died in 1991. For
many years, Tyner had been performing using his own moniker, but had also used
the MC5 name for some live gigs for a brief period, though he was the only
active original member involved. During the mid-1980s, Tyner produced a single
for Detroit band Vertical Pillows, and occasionally made brief guest
appearances during some of their live shows, singing MC5 covers. A tribute
concert to Tyner in 1992 resulted in the first MC5 concert in twenty years.

### [edit] Reunion

2003 saw the three surviving members of MC5âKramer, bassist Michael Davis,
and drummer Dennis Thompsonâperforming as MC5 at the 100 Club in London with
Fred 'Sonic' Smith's place being taken by Nicke Andersson of The Hellacopters
(also known as Nicke Royale / Nick Royale), vocal chores being filled by David
Vanian of The Damned, Lemmy of MotÃ¶rhead, Ian Astbury of The Cult, and singer
Kate O'Brien, as well as seeing Charles Moore and Buzzy Jones reprise their
roles in the brass section from the High Time album. The first real public
reunion of the band after their recording years as a group was as a four-
piece, at a performance celebrating the life of the late Tyner, a concert
event at the State Theater in Detroit MI on February 22, 1992. The event was
heavily attended, and included The Rationals, Scot Richardson (SRC), The
Romantics, Dee Dee Ramone, The Cult, and other musicians. The band on this
evening was unbilled, but their appearance had been rumored--Kramer was the
only group member advertised--and the set lasted about thirty minutes. The
recording of this show remains unreleased.

In 2004, the band set out on an extensive world tour using the name DKT/MC5.
As with the 100 Club concert, a host of special guests joined them on tour
such as Mark Arm of Mudhoney, Nicke Royale of The Hellacopters, Evan Dando of
The Lemonheads, Marshall Crenshaw, Lisa Kekuala of the Bellrays, and others.
Since February 2005, Handsome Dick Manitoba has been singing lead for the
band.

In May 2006, bass player for DKT/MC5 Michael Davis injured his back in a
motorcycle accident.

August 2007 bass player for DKT/MC5 Michael Davis joins band The Lords Of
Altamont on bass.

Michael Davis also founded and leads the Michael H. Davis MUSIC IS REVOLUTION
FOUNDATION, dedicated to supporting music education programs in public
schools. www.musicisrevolution.org

## [edit] Covers and Tributes

The Damned covered "Looking at You" on their third album, 1979's "Machine Gun
Ettiquette." On their 2000 album Renegades, Rage Against the Machine performed
a cover of "Kick Out the Jams". Singer Zack de la Rocha had already left the
band, but their version still featured his vocals. Poison Idea's version of
the song appears on their Pajama Party covers album as well as the live album
Dutch Courage. The song was also covered by Jeff Buckley on the DVD Live in
Chicago, as well as on the 1994 debut album by The Presidents of the United
States of America, and by Blue Ãyster Cult on their 1978 live album Some
Enchanted Evening. A version of the song performed by Bad Brains with Henry
Rollins also appeared on the soundtrack to the film, Pump Up the Volume. More
recently, Monster Magnet contributed yet another version of "Kick Out the
Jams" to the Varsity Blues soundtrack (it had already appeared as a bonus
track on the Japanese edition of their 1998 album, Powertrip). Pearl Jam also
covers the song live in concert. Rocket from the Crypt recorded an infamous
cover of Gold. The song What Time Is Love? by the KLF started with the
beginning "kick out the jams", although "motherfuckers" was censored in the
UK. Interestingly, this led to an MC5 sample being heard in an attraction at a
major family theme park.

Spacemen 3 covered 'Starship' on their 1987 album "The Perfect Prescription,"
crediting it to both MC5 and Sun Ra.

The Australian band Radio Birdman recorded a Stooges' "TV Eye" cover which
also includes several lyrics and the characteristic guitar solo from "Looking
at You". The Michigan band The Gories did an authentic-sounding cover version
of "I Just Don't Know," and the song "Sister Ann" may also be found on their
House Rockin' LP. The Vertical Pillows, a 1980s Michigan band with strong MC5
influences, had their debut single ("Jump Back"/"R.U.N.") produced by Tyner,
who also did live guest sets with the VPs of MC5 songs. The band The Didjits
recorded "Call Me Animal" on their 1990 LP "Hornet Pinata".

The band Corrosion of Conformity released a version of "Future/Now" as a
b-side to their "Vote With A Bullet" single.

In 1999, on their album No.4, Stone Temple Pilots wrote a song entitled "MC5"
in honor of the band.

The Norwegian Band Motorpsycho covered "Black To Comm" on their live album
"Roadwork Vol.1" released in 1999.

Swedish rock band The Hellacopters has performed Kick out the Jams live on
several occasions,[7], released a cover version of "American Ruse" on the
split-EP "Respect The Rock USA" (together with Gluecifer) in 1999 and
guitarist Robert Dahlqvist named his sideproject Thunder Express after the MC5
song as a tribute.[8]

The band Young Heart Attack covered "Over and Over" as a 2003 single and on
their 2004 album Mouthful of Love.

In December 2003, Michael Davis entered a studio in Eagle Rock, Los Angeles,
to produce Swedish rock band Dollhouse's debut-album "The Rock and Soul
Circus" (Released 2004 on Dim Mak Records). Michael Davis himself appears on
backing vocals on the MC5 cover song "The Human Being Lawnmower".

"Kick Out The Jams" is included in the 2008 video game Guitar Hero World Tour.
The guitar tracks were rerecorded but the original vocal track from Rob Tyner
remains.

The Melvins did cover "Rocket Reducer #62" which was released on the 1994
promo single of "Lizzy". The song can also be found on the bootleg compilation
"Leech" from 1996. Additionally, the MC5's own recording of "High School"
appeared in the Ramones film Rock 'n' Roll High School.

In 2008, Wendy & Lisa released a single "Salt & Cherries [MC5]" (from the
forthcoming album White Flags of Winter Chimneys) which name checks the MC5.
"I put the music of the MC5 on / while I'm knocking at your door."

## [edit] Discography

Albums

  * Kick Out the Jams (1969)
  * Back in the USA (1970)
  * High Time (1971)

Compilations

  * Babes in Arms (1983)
  * Black to Comm (1994)
  * Power Trip (1994)
  * Looking At You (1995)
  * The American Ruse (1995)
  * Ice Pick Slim (1997)
  * 66 Breakout (1999)
  * The Big Bang!: Best of the MC5 (2000)
  * Thunder Express (1999) (Recorded in 1972)

Live

  * Teen Age Lust (recorded 1970, released 1996)
  * Phun City, UK (recorded 1970, released 1996)
  * Live At The Sturgis Armoury (recorded 1968, released 1998)
  * Are You Ready To Testify?: The Live Bootleg Anthology (2005)
  * Live At The Grande Ballroom 68 (2006)

Box Sets

  * Purity Accuracy (2004)

Singles

  * I Can Only Give You Everything (1966)
  * One of the Guys (1967)
  * Looking at You (1968)
  * Kick Out the Jams (1969)
  * Ramblin' Rose (1969)
  * Tonight (1969)
  * Shakin' Street (1970)
  * Over and Over / Sister Anne (1971) (Never officially released, only test pressings exist)

## [edit] Filmography

  * MC5: Kick Out the Jams 1999
  * MC5*: A True Testimonial 2002

## [edit] See also

  * 1960s counterculture
  * Fifth Estate
  * List of forerunners of punk music
  * Music and politics
  * Music of Detroit
  * New Left
  * John Sinclair
  * Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers
  * White Panther Party

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=11:hifyxqe5ldfe~T1
  2. ^ http://www.rollingstone.com/photos/gallery/5392211/1969_rolling_stone_covers/photo/1
  3. ^ http://www.rockonthenet.com/archive/2000/vh1hardrock.htm
  4. ^ [1]
  5. ^ Michael Schumacher, There But for Fortune: The Life of Phil Ochs, pp. 200â201.
  6. ^ "[2]
  7. ^ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aAX6XWfGoK8
  8. ^ http://www.cuttingedgerocks.com/Thunder.html

McLeese, Don, The MC5's Kick Out the Jams (33 1/3); Continuum International
Publishing Group, 2005; ISBN-10: 0826416608; ISBN-13: 978-0826416605 Thompson,
James H. MC5: Kickin' Out The Jams; Goldmine magazine, issue #512 (March 10,
2000 cover date), Krause Publications. Online version at
http://makemyday.free.fr/goldmine1 as part of MC5 Gateway.

## [edit] External links

  * The Official Website of John Sinclair
  * MC5 GATEWAY - Detailed site on the MC5
  * MC5 Lyrics "provided by MC5 members"
  * All-MC5 Webguide
  * Band Timeline
  * MC5 2005, a Head Heritage article by Dorian Cope

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MC5"

Categories: Hard rock musical groups | Pre-punk groups | Blues-rock groups |
Garage rock groups | Psychedelic rock | American rock music groups | Musical
groups from Michigan | Musical groups established in 1964 | Musical groups
disestablished in 1972 | 1960s music groups | 1970s music groups | Reachout
International Records recording artists | Atlantic Records artists

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2007 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 March 2009, at 10:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



