
# Desert Fathers

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Coptic icon of Saint Anthony the Great, the father of Eastern monasticism

The Desert Fathers were Hermits, Ascetics and Monks who lived mainly in the
Scetes desert of Egypt, beginning around the third century. Very few of the
Desert Fathers lived in other deserted regions of Egypt. The original desert
hermits were Christians fleeing the chaos and persecution of the Roman
Empire's Crisis of the Third Century. Christians were often scapegoated during
these times of unrest, and near the end of the century, the Diocletianic
Persecution was more severe and systematic. In Egypt, refugee communities
formed at the edges of population centers, far enough away to be safe from
Imperial scrutiny.

In 313, when Christianity was made legal in Egypt by Diocletian's successor
Constantine I, a trickle of individuals, many of them young men, continued to
live in these marginal areas. The solitude of these places attracted them
because the privations of the desert were a means of learning stoic self-
discipline. Such self-discipline was modelled after the examples of Jesus'
fasting in the desert and of his cousin John the Baptist (himself a desert
hermit). These individuals believed that desert life would teach them to
eschew the things of this world and allow them to follow God's call in a more
deliberate and individual way.

Thus, during the fourth century, the empty areas around Egyptian cities
continued to attract others from the world over, wishing to live in solitude.
As the lifestyle developed, these men and women developed a reputation for
holiness and wisdom. In its early form, each hermit followed more or less an
individual spiritual program, perhaps learning some basic practices from other
monks, but developing them into their own unique (and sometimes highly
idiosyncratic) practice. Later monks, notably Anthony the Great, Pachomius and
Shenouda the Archimandrite, developed a more regularized approach to desert
life, and introduced some aspects of community living (especially common
prayer and meals) that would eventually develop into cenobitic monasticism.
Many individuals who spent part of their lives in the Egyptian desert went on
to become important figures in the Church and society of the fourth and fifth
century, among them Athanasius of Alexandria, John Chrysostom, John Cassian,
and Augustine of Hippo. Through the work of these last two, the spirituality
of the desert fathers, emphasizing an ascent to God through periods of
purgation and illumination that led to unity with the Divine, deeply affected
the spirituality of the Western Church and the Eastern Church. For this
reason, the writings and spirituality of the desert fathers are still of
interest to many people today.

## [edit] Essential texts

The essential texts â from the time itself â are:

  * The Sayings of the Desert Fathers (Apophthegmata Patrum) translated by Benedicta Ward, with an introduction;
  * The Lives of the Desert Fathers [Historia Monachorum in Aegypte] translated by Norman Russell, with a highly informative introduction;
  * The Lausiac History by Palladius;
  * The Life of Saint Antony by St. Athanasius.
  * Philokalia collection of texts.

There are also The Conferences and The Institutes by Cassian, but those are
large, thick, detailed and rather scholarly volumes, though of the time.

Thomas Merton's little book The Wisdom of the Desert is a fine selection from
the Sayings of the Desert Fathers, with a serious and meaningful introduction,
as one would expect.

## [edit] See also

  * Christian monasticism before 451
  * Hesychasm
  * Coptic Monasticism

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desert_Fathers"

Categories: Church Fathers | Asceticism | Christian orders | Religious
occupations | Christian monks | Eastern Orthodoxy | Eastern Catholicism |
Hesychasm | Egyptian hermits | Christian monasticism

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 March 2009, at 00:50.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



