
# C86 (music)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

C86  
C86 cover  
Compilation album by Various  
Released 1986  
Recorded 1985/86  
Genre Indie pop, Post-punk, C86  
Label Rough Trade  
New Musical Express  
Compiler Neil Taylor, Adrian Thrills, Roy Carr  
Professional reviews  
  * Allmusic 4.5/5 stars<IMG><IMG><IMG><IMG> link

  
Various chronology  
Pogo A Go Go  
(1986) C86  
(1986) Holiday Romance  
(1986)  
C86 is a cassette compilation released by the British music magazine New
Musical Express (NME) in 1986, featuring new bands licensed from independent
labels of the time. As a phrase, C86 quickly evolved into shorthand for a
guitar-based musical genre characterised by "jangly" guitars and fey melodies,
although other musical styles were represented on the tape. Inspired by the
DIY ideals of punk, it evolved into one of the most derided UK music genres in
the last thirty years.[1] It became a term of abuse for its associations with
tweeness and underachievement, although some now argue that its release
represents a pivotal moment for independent music in the UK.[2]

The C86 name was a play on the labelling and length of blank compact cassettes
that were sold in the 80s - commonly C60, C90 and C120 - combined with 1986.

## Contents

  * 1 The C86 Cassette
    * 1.1 Legacy
      * 1.1.1 Follow-ups
    * 1.2 Track listing
      * 1.2.1 Side one
      * 1.2.2 Side two
  * 2 The C86 Genre
  * 3 See also
  * 4 Notes
  * 5 References
    * 5.1 Articles and books
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] The C86 Cassette

The tape was a belated follow-up to C81, a more diverse collection of new
bands, released by the NME in 1981 in conjunction with Rough Trade. C86 was
similarly designed to reflect the new music scene of the time. It was compiled
by NME writers Roy Carr, Neil Taylor and Adrian Thrills, who licenced tracks
from labels such as Creation, Pink, and Ron Johnson. Readers had to pay for
the tape via mail order although an LP was subsequently released on Rough
Trade in 1987. The UK music press, in this period, was extremely competitive,
with four weekly papers documenting new bands and trends. There was a tendency
to artificially create and "discover" new musical sub-genres in order to
heighten reader interest. NME journalists of the period now agree that C86 was
a typical example of this, but also a byproduct of NME's "hip hop wars";[3] a
schism on the paper (and amongst readers) between enthusiasts of the
contemporary progressive black music such as Public Enemy and Mantronix, and
the fans of guitar-based music, which was the superabundant genre represented
on C86.

It was the 23rd NME tape, although its catalogue number was NME022 (C81 had
been dubbed COPY001). The rest of the tapes were compilations promoting
labels' back catalogues and dedicated to R&B, Northern Soul, Jazz or Reggae.
C86 was followed up with a Billie Holiday compilation, "Holiday Romance".[4]

The C86 line-up featured early tracks from The Shrubs, A Witness, Stump, Big
Flame and The Mackenzies. Their loud quirkiness was completely at odds with
the Byrds-style guitars and fey melodies of what came to be known as C86
bands. NME promoted the tape it in conjunction with London's Institute of
Contemporary Arts, who staged a week of gigs in July 1986 which featured most
of the acts on the compilation.

### [edit] Legacy

Ex-NME staffer Andrew Collins summed up C86 by dubbing it "the most indie
thing to have ever existed".[5] Bob Stanley, a Melody Maker journalist in the
late 1980s and founder member of pop band Saint Etienne, similarly claimed in
a 2006 interview[6] that C86 represented the:

> "beginning of indie music...It's hard to remember how underground guitar
music and fanzines were in the mid 80s; DIY ethics and any residual punk
attitudes were in isolated pockets around the country and the C86 comp and
gigs brought them together in an explosion of new groups".

Martin Whitehead, who ran the Subway label in the late 80s, was of this
view[7] believing it to have had a political influence. "Before C86, women
could only be eye-candy in a band, I think C86 changed that - there were women
promoting gigs, writing fanzines and running labels".

Some writers however regret the influence the tape had over the music scene of
the time and subsequently. Everett True, a writer for NME in 1986 under the
name "The Legend!"[8] called it "unrepresentative of its times (as opposed to
the brilliant C81 comp) and even unrepresentative of the small narrow strata
of music it thought it was representing." Alastair Fitchett, editor of the
long-running music site Tangents goes further, despite being a fan of many of
the bands on the tape.[9]

> '"(The NME) laid the foundations for the desolate wastelands of what we came
to know by that vile term 'Indie'. What more reason do you need to hate it?"'

#### [edit] Follow-ups

In 1996 NME continued the tradition of compiling a new band album (this time a
CD) by releasing C96. This had little impact and has been almost
forgotten.[10]

The 20th anniversary of the tape, in 2006, saw several tributes. A download-
only compilation, C06, of contemporary bands inspired by those on the original
C86 cassette was put together by the indie-mp3 site in July 2006. A double-CD
compilation; CD86,[11] compiled by Bob Stanley, was released by Sanctuary
Records and the ICA hosted "C86 - Still Doing It For Fun",[12] an exhibition
and 2 nights of gigs celebrating the rise of British Independent music.

A documentary film marking the period; Hungry Beat; is in production directed
by Paul Kelly.[13]

### [edit] Track listing

The full tracklisting for the C86 compilation was:

#### [edit] Side one

  1. Primal Scream \- "Velocity Girl"
  2. The Mighty Lemon Drops \- "Happy Head"
  3. The Soup Dragons \- "Pleasantly Surprised"
  4. The Wolfhounds \- "Feeling So Strange Again"
  5. The Bodines \- "Therese"
  6. Mighty Mighty \- "Law"
  7. Stump \- "Buffalo"
  8. Bogshed \- "Run to the Temple"
  9. A Witness \- "Sharpened Sticks"
  10. The Pastels \- "Breaking Lines"
  11. Age of Chance \- "From Now On, This Will Be Your God"

#### [edit] Side two

  1. The Shop Assistants \- "It's Up to You"
  2. Close Lobsters \- "Firestation Towers"
  3. Miaow \- "Sport Most Royal"
  4. Half Man Half Biscuit \- "I Hate Nerys Hughes (From The Heart)"
  5. The Servants \- "Transparent"
  6. The Mackenzies \- "Big Jim (There's no pubs in Heaven)"
  7. Big Flame \- "New Way (Quick Wash And Brush Up With Liberation Theology)"
  8. Fuzzbox \- "Console Me"
  9. McCarthy \- "Celestial City"
  10. The Shrubs \- "Bullfighter's Bones"
  11. The Wedding Present \- "This Boy Can Wait"

## [edit] The C86 Genre

    For more information on C86 as a genre, see Indie pop
## [edit] See also

  * Indie pop
  * Post-punk
  * DIY punk ethic
  * Fanzine
  * Indie rock
  * Sarah Records
  * Northern Soul

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Cajun Dance Party, The Colourful Life, The Observer, 20 April 2008 http://music.guardian.co.uk/pop/reviews/story/0,,2273973,00.html
  2. ^ Stanley, Bob Sleevenotes to CD86
  3. ^ NME: Still Rocking at 50, BBC News, 24 February 2002 http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/music/1836411.stm
  4. ^ I Love Everything Forum http://ilx.p3r.net/thread.php?msgid=2077178
  5. ^ Andrew Collins, Wan Love, Indie RIP; Word Magazine, October 2006
  6. ^ Bob Stanley, Uncut Magazine, February 2006
  7. ^ Hann, Michael Fey City Rollers http://arts.guardian.co.uk/features/story/0,11710,1325674,00.html
  8. ^ Everett True, Plan B blog http://planbmag.com/blogs/staff/2005/07/22/friday-22-july/
  9. ^ Alastair Fitchett, C86, Tangents, http://www.tangents.co.uk/tangents/main/2002/nov/c86.html
  10. ^ Tim Footman, Tangents blog, 2002, http://www.tangents.co.uk/tangents/main/2002/dec/c96.html
  11. ^ Press Release, CD86 Myspace Profile, http://www.myspace.com/cd86sanctuaryrecords
  12. ^ ICA website, C86 - Still Doing It For Fun, October 2006, http://www.ica.org.uk/?lid=12257
  13. ^ Tangents blog; Hungry Beat, The Sun Is Shining, July 27 2006, http://unpopular.typepad.com/unpopular/2006/07/hungry_beat_the.html

## [edit] References

#### [edit] Articles and books

  * Bladh, Krister Everything went Pop!, C86 and more, A wave and its rise and wake (pdf) 2005
  * Cavanagh, David The Creation Records Story: My Magpie Eyes Are Hungry for the Prize (Virgin Books, 2000) ISBN 1-85227-775-0
  * "Fire Escape Talking","Anoraky in the UK,C86, the punk that refuses to die" ("Fire Escape Talking blog", July 7, 2006)
  * Fitchett, Alastair, C86 (Tangents Blog, July 25, 2005)
  * Hann, Michael Fey City Rollers (The Guardian, 13 October 2004)
  * Hasted, Nick "How an NME cassette launched indie music" ("The Independent", October 27, 2006)
  * Pearce, Kevin A Different Story; The Ballad of the June Brides(Tangents, March 2001)
  * Reynolds, Simon Rip It Up and Start Again: Post Punk 1978-1984 (Faber and Faber, 2005) ISBN 0-571-21569-6
  * Reynolds, Simon The C86 Indie Scene is back (Time Out, Oct 23 2006)
  * Stanley, Bob, Where were you in C86? (The Times October 20, 2006)
  * True, Everett C86 Q&A(Plan B Blog July 22, 2005)
  * Wire, Nicky The Birth of Uncool(The Guardian, October 25, 2006)

## [edit] External links

  * C86 Profile "Indie MP3-Keeping C86 alive" blog

v â¢ d â¢ e

Alternative rock  
Alternative metal \- Baggy \- Britpop \- Christian alternative rock \- College
rock \- Dream pop \- Dunedin Sound \- Geek rock \- Gothic rock \- Grebo \-
Grunge \- Indie pop \- Indie rock \- Industrial rock \- Jangle pop \- Lo-fi \-
Madchester \- Math rock \- Noise pop \- Noise rock \- Paisley Underground \-
Post-grunge \- Post-punk revival \- Post-rock \- Psychobilly \- Riot Grrrl \-
Sadcore \- Shoegazing \- Slowcore \- Space rock \- Wicca  
Other topics

Artists \- College radio \- History \- Independent music \- Lollapalooza  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C86_(music)"

Categories: Alternative rock | Magazine compilation albums | 1986 albums |
Rough Trade Records albums

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * Brezhoneg
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 March 2009, at 16:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



