
# Pygmalion effect

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article's tone or style may not be appropriate for Wikipedia. Specific
concerns may be found on the talk page. See Wikipedia's guide to writing
better articles for suggestions. (December 2007)  
The Pygmalion effect, or Rosenthal effect, refers to situations in which
students perform better than other students simply because they are expected
to do so. The effect is named after George Bernard Shaw's play Pygmalion, in
which a professor makes a bet that he can teach a poor flower girl to speak
and act like an upper-class lady, and is successful.

The Pygmalion effect requires a student to internalize the expectations of
their superiors. It is a form of self-fulfilling prophecy, and in this
respect, students with poor expectations internalize their negative label, and
those with positive labels succeed accordingly. Within sociology, the effect
is often cited with regards to education and social class.

## Contents

  * 1 Rosenthal-Jacobson study
  * 2 Student rating of teachers
  * 3 Applications to racism
  * 4 Quotations
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 Further reading

  
## [edit] Rosenthal-Jacobson study

Robert Rosenthal and Lenore Jacobson (1968/1992) report and discuss the
Pygmalion effect at length. [1] In their study, they showed that if teachers
were led to expect enhanced performance from some children, then the children
did indeed show that enhancement.

The purpose of the experiment was to support the hypothesis that reality can
be influenced by the expectations of others. This influence can be beneficial
as well as detrimental depending on which label an individual is assigned. The
observer-expectancy effect, which involves an experimenter's unconsciously
biased expectations, is tested in real life situations. Rosenthal posited that
biased expectancies can essentially affect reality and create self-fulfilling
prophecies as a result.

In this experiment, Rosenthal predicted that, when given the information that
certain students are brighter than others, elementary school teachers may
unconsciously behave in ways that facilitate and encourage the studentsâ
success. The prior research that motivated this study was done in 1911 by
psychologists regarding the case of Clever Hans, a horse that gained notoriety
because it was supposed to be able to read, spell, and solve math problems by
using its hoof to answer. Many skeptics suggested that questioners and
observers were unintentionally signaling Clever Hans. For instance, whenever
Clever Hans was asked a question the observers' demeanor usually elicited a
certain behavior from the subject that in turn confirmed their expectations.

## [edit] Student rating of teachers

Although not of central importance here, of huge importance in educational
research in general is the issue of teacher effects, on student progress, and
how students rate those teachers. Tim O'Shea has said that in all studies
where one of the variables was the teacher, the effect of different teachers
was always bigger than the effect of different treatments (usually the actual
subject to be studied). Basically, teachers have a huge effect, but it's
poorly understood.

Note too that all this casts doubt on the value of training teachers, apart
from giving them practice to learn for themselves; without knowledge of what
it is about teachers' behavior that has such large effects on learning,
training them usefully could be considered impossible (but see Teacher
education). In the absence of this knowledge, the only measure of a teacher's
worth is the comparative learning outcomes of their students. So while it is
quite possible that teachers learn either by unaided practice or by
unconscious imitation of other teachers (as an apprentice), there is almost no
evidence on whether that training makes a difference.

The Pygmalion effect is one big demonstration of the effect of teachers,
showing they can double the amount of pupil progress in a year.

Rosenthal & Jacobson (1992) also mention, briefly, research that showed that
10 seconds of video without sound of a teacher allows students to predict the
ratings they will get as a teacher. Similarly, hearing the sound without
vision AND without content (rhythm and tone of voice only) were enough too.
This was viewed as strong evidence that teachers differ in ways they cannot
easily or normally control, but which are very quickly perceptible, and which,
at least in students' minds, determine their value as a teacher. Marsh's
(1987) work shows that student ratings of teachers do relate to learning
outcomes.

Feldman & Prohaska (1979) performed an experiment to study the effect of
student expectations of teachers. One group was told their teacher was "quite
effective," and another group was told their teacher was "incompetent." The
effect of these positive and negative expectations were measured in terms of
student attitudes toward the teacher, scores on tests, and "nonverbal
behavior" of the students toward the teachers. The teacher was blind (see:
double-blind) to what the students thought about him/her. There were clear
differences in all three measures based on a positive or negative expectation.
Students with a negative expectation "rated the lesson as being more
difficult, less interesting, and less effective." Students with a positive
expectation scored 65.8% on the test, and those with a negative expectation
scored lower, at 52.2%. In terms of nonverbal behavior, subjects leaned
"forward more to good teachers than poor teachers." There was some evidence
that students with a positive expectation had better eye contact with the
teacher. Overall, the expectation of the teacher affects overall learning
outcomes.

## [edit] Applications to racism

The Pygmalion effect can also result from racial expectations. This effect is
seen during Jane Elliott's blue-eyed versus brown-eyed discrimination
exercise, where third graders were divided based on eye color. One group was
given preference and regarded as "superior" because of their eye color, with
the other group repeatedly being considered inferior in intelligence and
learning ability. On the second day of the experiment, the groups were
completely reversed, with those oppressed against one day being regarded as
superior the next.

Elliott gave spelling tests to both groups on each day of the experiment. The
students scored very low on the day they were racially "inferior" and very
high on the day they were considered racially "superior." [2]

## [edit] Quotations

James Rhem, executive editor for the online National Teaching and Learning
Forum, commented:

  * "When teachers expect students to do well and show intellectual growth, they do; when teachers do not have such expectations, performance and growth are not so encouraged and may in fact be discouraged in a variety of ways."
  * "How we believe the world is and what we honestly think it can become have powerful effects on how things turn out."

## [edit] See also

  * Hawthorne effect
  * Placebo effect

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Rosenthal, Robert & Jacobson, Lenore Pygmalion in the classroom (1992). Expanded edition. New York: Irvington
  2. ^ Peters, Williams (1971). A Class Divided, New York: Doubleday and Company

## [edit] Further reading

  * Jussim, L. and Harber, KD (2005) "Teacher Expectations and Self-Fulfilling Prophecies: Knows and Unknowns, Resolved and Unresolved Controversies." Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9(2), 131-155.
  * Pygmalion effect in banks, at school, and in the army

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pygmalion_effect"

Categories: Cognitive biases

Hidden categories: All articles needing style editing | Wikipedia articles
needing style editing from December 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Svenska
  * Simple English

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 March 2009, at 02:47.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



