
# Bad Brains

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)  
Bad Brains  
Bad Brains performing in Baltimore in 2007  

Bad Brains performing in Baltimore in 2007  
Background information  
Also known as Soul Brains  
Origin Washington, D.C., USA  
Genre(s) Punk Rock, Reggae  
Years active 1977â1984  
1986â1995  
1997âpresent  
Label(s) ROIR, Caroline, SST, Epic, Maverick, Megaforce  
Website BadBrains.com  
Members  
H.R.  
Dr. Know  
Darryl Jenifer  
Earl Hudson  
Former members  
Sid McCray  
Israel Joseph I  
Mackie Jayson  
Chuck Mosely  
Bad Brains are an American hardcore/reggae band formed in Washington, D.C. in
1977. They are widely regarded as being among the pioneers of the
genre,[1][2][3] though the band's members objected to the term "hardcore" to
describe their music.[4]

Originally formed as a jazz fusion ensemble under the name Mind Power, Bad
Brains developed a very fast and intense punk rock sound, which was both
musically complex, and was often played faster and more emphatically than the
music of many of their peers. They were also an adept reggae band, in a sort
of Jekyll-and-Hyde arrangement, while later recordings featured elements of
other genres. Bad Brains are also notable as religious followers of the
Rastafari movement.

Bad Brains broke up and reformed several times over the years, sometimes with
different singers and/or drummers. The band's classic and current lineup is
singer H.R., guitarist Dr. Know, bassist Darryl Jenifer, and drummer Earl
Hudson, H.R.'s younger brother.

Bad Brains were ranked #99 on VH1's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock.

Though the official name of the band is Bad Brains, they are often referred to
as The Bad Brains, sometimes even by the band members themselves. Beastie Boys
were huge Bad Brains fans, and they intentionally selected a name with the
initials B.B. because of this.[5]

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 From Fusion to Hardcore (1977â1985)
    * 1.2 Change of Style (1986â1992)
    * 1.3 Lineup Change and Reunions (1993â2000)
    * 1.4 New Millennium (2001-present)
    * 1.5 Soul Brains
  * 2 Controversy
    * 2.1 Homophobia
      * 2.1.1 1982 Flipside Interview
      * 2.1.2 Confrontation with Big Boys & MDC
      * 2.1.3 1982 Forced Exposure Interview
      * 2.1.4 "Don't Blow Bubbles"
  * 3 Members
    * 3.1 Current members
    * 3.2 Former members
    * 3.3 Timeline
  * 4 Discography
  * 5 Legacy and influence
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] History

### [edit] From Fusion to Hardcore (1977â1985)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bad Brains at 9:30 Club, Washington, D.C., 1983

The band was first founded as a jazz-fusion ensemble called Mind Power (1975),
with singer Sid McCray, in the mold of bands such as Chick Corea's Return to
Forever and John McLaughlin's Mahavishnu Orchestra. In 1977, McCray introduced
the rest of the band, who were already interested in bands such as Black
Sabbath, to punk rock, including the Dickies, the Dead Boys, and the Sex
Pistols. Mind Power became obsessed with punk rock and changed their name to
"Bad Brains", after the Ramones song "Bad Brain" but with the word "bad" in
the sense of "powerful". Despite their burgeoning punk sound, the early Bad
Brains also delved deep into reggae music.[6] McCray left in the early days of
the group's hardcore-punk era, and guitarist H.R. became the band's singer.[7]

<IMG>

"Pay to Cum"  
Play sound  
Sample of "Pay to Cum" by the Bad Brains from Pay to Cum single (1980)  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
<IMG>

"I Against I"  
Play sound  
Sample of "I Against I" by the Bad Brains from I Against I (1986)  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
The band developed an early reputation in Washington D.C., due in part to the
relative novelty of an entirely African-American band playing punk rock, but
also due to their high-energy performances and undeniable talent.[6]

The band's considerable musical technique, due in part to their jazz and
progressive rock roots, set them apart from other Washington punk groups, who
were typically earnest but often amateurish performers. Bad Brains' emphasis
on extreme speed, especially in their early records and performances, are
often regarded as establishing hardcore punk.

Their music still contained hints of their progressive rock past, with quick
time changes and H.R.'s fluctuating vocal dynamics. H.R. was a muscular and
unpredictable stage performer with a very wide vocal range, who often leapt
into the audience or onto amplifiers.

In 1979, Bad Brains found themselves the subject of an unofficial ban among
many Washington D.C. area clubs and performance venues (later addressed in
their song, "Banned in D.C."). The band subsequently relocated to New York
City.[6]

Their self-titled debut album was released on New York's ROIR Records on
"cassette only" in January 1982, followed in 1983 by Rock for Light, produced
by Ric Ocasek of The Cars. These two albums, containing hardcore thrash punk
and mellow reggae, were landmarks, influencing an entire generation of
musicians, including Beastie Boys, Red Hot Chili Peppers, 311, Living Colour
and more.

The band fought constantly with volatile singer H.R., who was very expressive.
H.R. seemed to reflect Bad Brains' music: one minute calm and espousing peace
and love, and the next minute an aggressive, sometimes violent man. In 1984,
Bad Brains broke up; it was the first of many splits. H.R. began a solo career
devoted to all genres of music, calling music "Transcendental" and saying
"acceptance of all music is what I feel will be the unification of all nations
under one" releasing many albums from 1984, 86', 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991,
1992, 1993, and 2000.[citation needed]

### [edit] Change of Style (1986â1992)

In 1986, Bad Brains reunited. SST Records released I Against I, seen by
some[who?] as their finest recording.[citation needed] As the title track
demonstrated, Bad Brains could still play extremely fast, but there was also a
new variety; there was much more melody and slower grooves. Dr. Know sounded a
bit like a punked-out Eddie Van Halen, there was an outright love song in
"She's Calling You," and H.R. famously provided vocals for "Sacred Love" over
the phone from the Lorton Reformatory while doing a bid for a cannabis charge.
Also critically praised was H.R.'s performance: "he digs deep into his bag of
voices and pulls them all out, one by one: the frightening nasal falsetto that
was his signature in the band's hardcore days, an almost bel canto baritone,
and a declamatory speed-rap chatter that spews lyrics with the mechanical
precision of a machine gun".[2] The title track's video was shown on MTV's
then-new 120 Minutes program, for which the band appeared in promotional
footage. Despite the success of I Against I, Bad Brains broke up again after
spending most of 1987 on the road.

The group signed with Caroline Records in the late 1980s to release Quickness
in 1989. The album continued where I Against I had left off, yet with a
heavier sound and featuring the return of reggae with "The Prophet's Eye".

Bad Brains were plagued by internal tensions nearly from their beginning.
Aside from the problems with H.R., who sometimes refused to perform at
scheduled concerts, he and his younger brother, drummer Earl Hudson, also
wanted to devote the band strictly to reggae, while Dr. Know and Darryl
Jenifer were increasingly interested in heavy metal music. H.R. was replaced
by Taj Singleton for the Quickness tour. H.R. had financial problems after an
unsuccessful European tour with the group Human Rights, and meanwhile touring
replacement singer Taj Singleton did not fit well with Bad Brains. H.R. and
Earl both returned to the band, and H.R. was given a week to spit out some
lyrics and get the vocal tracks down for Quickness. After the Quickness tour,
H.R. and Earl left once again and H.R. was replaced by former Faith No More
vocalist Chuck Mosely. Soon afterwards, Bad Brains broke up yet again.

In 1990, Bad Brains backed longtime friend, fan, and protege Henry Rollins on
a cover version of The MC5's "Kick out the Jams". The recording appears on the
soundtrack to the film Pump Up the Volume.

### [edit] Lineup Change and Reunions (1993â2000)

As bands influenced by Bad Brains (such as Living Colour and Fishbone) enjoyed
commercial success, Dr. Know was approached by Epic Records in 1993, offering
the band a major-label record deal. However, H.R. and Earl weren't interested,
as they were concentrating strictly on reggae. Dr. Know and Darryl Jenifer
replaced them with former Cro-Mags drummer Mackie Jayson (who had played as a
session musician on Quickness), and vocalist Israel Joseph I. Rise was
released in 1993 to some confusion as original vocalist H.R. had been billed
as "Joseph I" on the Rock for Light album back in 1983. Mixing jazz, punk,
reggae, pop, funk, and rock, Rise was by far the most diverse album the group
had released. In addition to a mix of reggae and hardcore, the album also
featured thrash and even heavy metal overtones as well. However, sales were
unimpressive, reviews were mixed, and Israel and Jayson were fired to make
room for the return of H.R. and Earl Hudson.

With the original band back together for the first time in five years, Bad
Brains signed to the Maverick Records label for the 1995 release God of Love.

At a show at The Bottleneck in Lawrence, Kansas in 1995, H.R., (according to
some accounts, while high on psychedelic mushrooms), bashed a microphone stand
against the skull of an audience member, notably, a skinhead, severely
injuring him. After this incident, the band called it quits yet again. Earlier
that year, while on tour with Beastie Boys, the band was arrested with drug
paraphernalia while crossing into Canada. Later in Montreal, Canada, H.R.
attacked Bad Brains' manager Anthony Countey, breaking his nose, and also
assaulted his brother Earl before their scheduled appearance with Beastie
Boys. This incident also caused them to miss the next show planned for Madison
Square Garden in New York City.

Two years later, the band worked together to remaster some very early studio
recordings which were then released as the EP The Omega Sessions by Victory
Records. In 1999, the original lineup toured under the name "Soul Brains"[6]
due to complications regarding their relationship with Madonna's Maverick
label and the "Bad Brains" moniker. A live album, A Bad Brains Reunion Live
from Maritime Hall was released in 2000 .

### [edit] New Millennium (2001-present)

In 2002, the band released I & I Survived, an album devoted entirely to dub
and reggae; many fans had been pushing for such an album for years.

In 2004, rap singer Lil' Jon, another longtime fan of the band, recruited Dr.
Know, Jenifer and Earl Hudson to back him on a version of his song "Real Nigga
Roll Call," which interpolated the music of I Against I 's "Re-Ignition." The
recording appears on the limited-edition release of Lil' Jon's album Crunk
Juice. The accompanying DVD features footage of the session.

H.R. Performed the song "Whos Got the Herb?" with the band 311 on June 22,
2004, in Long Beach, California.

In 2005, Darryl Jenifer told Billboard magazine that the band was in the
studio recording their first proper studio album in ten years, to be released
later in the year. Beastie Boy Adam Yauch also gave interviews indicating that
he was producing the sessions, for which basic tracks featuring the original
lineup had been recorded. H.R. was said to be on board for the new album,
slated to emphasize a return to their early hardcore sound.

In late 2005, it was announced that Bad Brains would headline a two-date show
at New York City's legendary CBGB's, which was scheduled for February 24 - 25,
2006. Tickets for both dates quickly sold out. After sets from a handful of
other hardcore punk acts, Bad Brains came to the stage, as billed in print,
"with John Joseph" of The Cro-Mags filling in for H.R. and former Bad Brains
drummer Mackie Jayson filling in for Earl Hudson. Meanwhile, H.R. and Dubb
Agents played gigs under the Global Rock Showcase event brand in California.

May 28, 2005, to Sept. 8, 2006, H.R. & Dubb Agents headlined a series of
Global Rock Showcase dates across the United States. Dates include Little
Steven Van Zandt's "Save CBGB Rally" concert in Washington Square Park, New
York City, August 31, 2005. H.R. has a long time association with Global Rock
Showcase organizers D.I.A. Records, and released an album through them titled
Out Of Bounds.

On hiatus from Global Rock Showcases, in the fall of 2006, H.R. reunited with
Bad Brains for two dates at CBGB's on October 9th & 10th, as part of the
continuing celebration of the venue's legacy and imminent closing. Due to
tickets selling out within mere minutes, unsurprising due to the band's
devoted following, a third show was added for Wednesday, October 11th. During
the course of the three day bill, H.R. announced that the new Bad Brains album
was "forthcoming." He also stated that the band's next set of tour dates would
be called The Re-Ignition Tour. However, the tour eventually was not billed as
such.

While H.R. & Dubb Agents geared up to tour Global Rock Showcases '07 dates, in
early January 2007, Bad Brains revealed the title of the new album. Build a
Nation was released on June 26th, 2007. The album debuted at #100 on the
Billboard 200, and also garnished overwhelmingly positive reception from fans
and critics alike. Scheduled between Global Rock Showcase dates, Bad Brains
played five dates including Sasquatch Fest, June 27, 2007, George, Washington,
and Virgin Fest, Aug. 5, 2007, Baltimore, Maryland. Bad Brains' California
dates were Sept. 22 to 28, 2007, followed by a European tour is set for
October, 2007. Upon return to the U.S. the band took stage in Chicago for the
multi-billed Riotfest rock concert. Bad Brains, as of 2006-07, appear to be a
more stable unit, and are enjoying successes that did not come to fruition
previously. The internet has also contributed to the band's resurgence as it
is now possible to view old and new concert footage via Youtube, or read
archived interviews.

On May 15, 2007, it was revealed that System of a Down bassist Shavo Odadjian
would be directing the first video from Build a Nation.[8]

The video for the song "Give Thanks and Praises" can be seen online on the
band's MySpace page as of August 2007. Director Shavo Odadjian makes an
appearance at the end of the concert video with frontman H.R.. The two are
seen charismatically walking stageside, passing and smoking a marijuana joint.

Before the release of the new album, Dr. Know stated he was eager for the band
to record more albums. As of 2007, Dr. Know, Darryl Jenifer, and H.R. all have
solo albums in the works. H.R. will continue to tour solo with DIA Records
Global Rock Showcase through the remainder of 2007, with his instrumental
section Dub Agents. The title of bassist Darryl Jenifer's upcoming solo effort
is Blackvova Universal Sound.

In January 2008, the band announced they are working on a box set of 7" vinyl
records.[9]

Bad Brains toured South America during April 2008 with former singer Isreal
Joseph I (who was in the Bad Brains from 1992-1994 and appeared on the album
Rise), temporarily filling in for H.R.

### [edit] Soul Brains

Soul Brains was the name used by the original Bad Brains from 1999 to 2001. It
is rumored that Bad Brains took this name because they had temporarily lost
legal rights to the original band name. Darryl Jenifer, though, stated several
years ago[citation needed] that the actual reason was a 'spiritual change' of
H.R., who found it inappropriate for some time to use the word 'bad' in the
band's name. The other band members, who (according to Jenifer) didn't care
too much about the name Bad Brains as long as they could play their music,
then decided to replace the word 'bad' with 'soul'.

## [edit] Controversy

### [edit] Homophobia

There have been many charges of homophobia directed at Bad Brains. The
homophobic stance seemed at odds with the prevailing spirit against prejudice,
racism, homophobia, etc., and with Bad Brains' own call for unity. This has
been attributed to the increasing influence of Rastafarian religious beliefs
in their lives[10], but there is controversy about whether or not Rastafari is
itself inherently homophobic. As bassist Darryl Jennifer pointed out in a 2007
interview, "In Rastafari and even in Christianity, they disagree with
homosexuality. Thatâs a known fact."[11]. In the same interview, he also
distanced himself from his earlier homophobic statements, saying:

> So the point being here, when we first were discovering Rastafari â like
any young men or any young women getting into anything â youâre
overzealous. Back in 1988, I might have been saying, âFire burnâ¦â Iâm
25 years old! Youâve got to understand that Iâm a young man growing,
getting into something. Now Iâm 46 years old and Iâve learned that
thatâs ignorant. Iâve learned through the years that weâre all Godâs
children, regardless of your race, creed, color, sexuality, any of that.[11]

It is unclear whether the rest of the band shares his change of heart.

#### [edit] 1982 Flipside Interview

In a 1982 interview with Flipside Fanzine, in issue #31, H.R. made a few
homophobic remarks near the start of the interview. He said San Francisco
(where they had just played some shows) had "...too many faggots" and said
that "...most of them (homosexuals) act so crazy even out in public, it
disturbs me, makes me want to go and shoot one of them.". Link To PDF of
article [12][13]

#### [edit] Confrontation with Big Boys & MDC

During a 1982 tour, Bad Brains played in Austin, TX with local band Big Boys,
whose singer Randy Turner was homosexual. They also incurred a debt to Turner,
with some sources indicating the debt was from loaning Bad Brains'
money[10][14], others indicating the debt was from Turner buying the band
marijuana.[15] When H.R. learned that Turner was homosexual, an argument
erupted, with a particularly heated exchange between H.R. and MDC singer Dave
Dictor, leading to Bad Brains leaving Austin without repaying their debt to
Turner and instead leaving a note that allegedly read "burn in hell, bloodclot
faggot"[10][15][16] and vandalizing Turner's house[15]. Big Boys seemed to
gloss over the incident; in an interview after the incident in Suburban Punk
#7 they refuse to discuss the issue and refer to Bad Brains as "...one of the
best live bands I've ever seen"[17]. MDC on the other hand referred to the
incident often in interviews and even wrote a song about it called "Pay To
Come Along."[15][16][18]

Nonetheless, in November 2008, the Bad Brains played at Fun, Fun, Fun Fest in
Austin, named after the Big Boys song "Fun Fun Fun".

#### [edit] 1982 Forced Exposure Interview

In a 1982 interview with Forced Exposure Fanzine, in issue #2, there was a
discussion with H.R. about changes in the band (becoming a reggae band and
abandoning Punk Rock, moving out from the city to "the land", becoming
"survivalists"). When asked about what led to the final decision to make these
changes, H.R. responded "I guess the final decision was made about a couple
months ago, halfway through the tour when we went out to California and we saw
all the faggots and we went to Texas and seen all the punk rock bands. Out
there the in thing was being gay and all the hardcore bands were gay. That was
the last straw, I couldn't take no more. I had to say somebody got to go out
there and show the youth the truth, man."[19]

#### [edit] "Don't Blow Bubbles"

On the 1989 Quickness album, a song titled "Don't Blow Bubbles" had lyrics
that were generally interpreted as being homophobic and suggesting that AIDS
was God's cure for homosexuality. When asked about the song, guitarist Dr.
Know said that "We wrote that song as kind of an angry warning to homosexuals.
We didn't really mean to insult them, but a lot of people we knew seemed to be
living with their eyes closed."[20]. In a 2007 interview where bassist Darryl
Jennifer called their previous homophobic views "ignorant" he was asked about
the song and the furor over the lyrics and replied "They donât understand
that weâve grown. Just like anyone, Iâm not ashamed to say, 'Maybe I could
have been...' Damn right, I was a homophobe! I shouldnât have to explain
that to the world because everyone will do that. Thatâs wisdom. You have to
grow to be wise."[11]

## [edit] Members

### [edit] Current members

  * H.R. â vocals (1978â1984, 1986-1989, 1990, 1994â1995, 1997-present), guitar (1977-1978)
  * Dr. Know â guitar (1977â1984, 1986â1995, 1997âpresent)
  * Darryl Jenifer â bass (1977â1984, 1986â1995, 1997âpresent)
  * Earl Hudson â drums (1977â1984, 1986-1991, 1994â1995, 1997-present)

### [edit] Former members

  * Sid McCray â vocals (1977â1978)
  * Chuck Mosely â vocals (1990â1991)
  * Israel Joseph I â vocals (1991â1994)
  * Mackie Jayson â drums (1991â1994)

### [edit] Timeline

Role Year  
1977â1979 1979â1984 1986â1990 1990â1991 1991â1994 1994â1995
1997âpresent  
Vocals Sid McCray H.R. Chuck Mosely Israel Joseph I H.R.  
Guitar Dr. Know  
Bass Darryl Jenifer  
Drums Earl Hudson Mackie Jayson Earl Hudson  
  * Note: Bad Brains were inactive during the period 1984-1986, and 1995-1997.

## [edit] Discography

    For a more comprehensive list, see Bad Brains discography.
  * 1982: Bad Brains
  * 1983: Rock for Light
  * 1986: I Against I
  * 1989: Quickness
  * 1993: Rise
  * 1995: God of Love
  * 2002: I & I Survived
  * 2007: Build a Nation

## [edit] Legacy and influence

  * Henry Rollins, who had been personally encouraged by H.R. to become a singer himself â even to the point where H.R. would drag the young Rollins onstage and make him sing a song with the rest of the band, long before Rollins formed State of Alert or joined Black Flag â considered Bad Brains among the most important rock bands. Adam Yauch of Beastie Boys (who started off as a hardcore punk band) also shares Rollins' sentiments, citing Bad Brains as his main influence. Dave Grohl stated that they were the "greatest live band ever". Rapper and hip-hop producer Lil Jon also considers the 'Brains among his favorite bands.

  * Moby covered their song "Sailin' On" for the Never Give In: A Tribute to Bad Brains (1999, Century Media) tribute album to the band. Living Colour, No Doubt, HIM, Some Days You Just Can't Get Rid Of A Bomb and John Frusciante of Red Hot Chili Peppers have also covered "Sailin' On".

  * Dr. Know plays in Mos Def's backing band, Black Jack Johnson. He also played additional guitar on the Coheed and Cambria song "Time Consumer" featured on the album The Second Stage Turbine Blade.

  * Billy Corgan credits Bad Brains' combination of thrash and reggae as a primary influence for The Smashing Pumpkins hybrid of soft and loud music after attending a live show by the band in 1986. Years later the Pumpkins had Bad Brains open for them for a show in Paris, which Corgan has cited as a highlight of his career.

  * Post-Hardcore band The Bled covered their song "House of Suffering" for the Tony Hawk's American Wasteland soundtrack.

  * Oakland-based groove metal band Machine Head also covered "House of Suffering" as a Japanese bonus track to their 1999 album The Burning Red.

  * On their album Soundsystem, 311 covered Bad Brains' song "Leaving Babylon".

  * On their album Master of Styles, The Urge covered Bad Brains' song "Gene Machine".

  * "Pay to Cum" was used in a scene in the 1985 Martin Scorsese film After Hours.

  * "Big Takeover" was covered by John Frusciante of Red Hot Chili Peppers on his first solo album, Niandra LaDes and Usually Just a T-Shirt, released in 1994.

  * "House of Suffering" was covered live by Sublime and is featured on their boxset Everything Under the Sun, released in 2006. Also featured on the boxset is a live performance of "Leaving Babylon".

  * "Pay to Cum" was covered by the ska band Skankin' Pickle on their cover album The Green Album.

  * Long-time friend and original Bad Brains singer Sid McCray still works with the band today, accompanying them on tour, setting up for shows, and in other capacities.

  * Dutch skateboard brand Built To Destroy made a signature model for skateboarder Nelson Mosikili of which the artwork is directly adapted from the artwork from the Destroy Babylon single.

  * The Beastie Boys' song "Pass The Mic" contains a guitar riff sample from the Bad Brains song "Big Takeover".

  * The Hive song "Ultrasonic Sound," which is featured on The Matrix soundtrack is built off of a sample of Bad Brains' Re-Ignition.

  * Brazilian metal band Sepultura covered the song "Gene Machine/Don't Bother Me" as a b-side for their 1998 single, Choke.

  * Pro skateboarder Bucky Lasek, a Baltimore native, listed Bad Brains as his No. 1 musical artist on his blog on his official web site, buckylasekskate.com.

  * Adam Jones (guitarist of Tool) listed Dr Know (Miller) among his top 10 influences/inspirations in music magazine "Guitar World" (vol.30, no.4, April 2009)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Biography of Bad Brains". Allmusic. http://allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=11:kifpxqw5ldse~T1. Retrieved on 29 December 2008.
  2. ^ Washngton Dcs 5 | Washington D.C. Metblogs
  3. ^ [1]
  4. ^ see the documentary film Punk attitude.
  5. ^ http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/08/02/AR2007080200702.html
  6. ^ a b c d Moskowitz, David V. (2006). Caribbean Popular Music. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. pp. 18â19. ISBN 0-313-33158-8.
  7. ^ http://books.google.com/books?id=CU1jKq0TlvQC&pg=PA34&lpg=PA34&dq=%22dance+of+days%22+sid+mcray+h.r.&source=web&ots=1is_KLzL5G&sig=FMmL1fWrSvFFn8S7cFsYP7FJTyg&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=1&ct=result#PPA33,M1
  8. ^ System Of A Down Bassist To Direct Bad Brains Video - Strangeglue - Music News, Views and Reviews
  9. ^ blog.myspace.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=blog.view&friendID=165875891&blogID=348107499
  10. ^ a b c KFTH - Bad Brains Page
  11. ^ a b c Darryl Jenifer Of Bad Brains: 'I Want To Be The Soldier Of My Music' | Interviews @ Ultimate-Guitar.Com
  12. ^ :30 Under DC > Bands > Bad Brains > Interview from Flipside 31
  13. ^ Flipside Issue 31
  14. ^ MDC (band)
  15. ^ a b c d :30 Under DC > Bands > Bad Brains
  16. ^ a b KFTH - MDC Interview from Flipside #36
  17. ^ KFTH - Big Boys interview from Suburban Punk #7
  18. ^ Andersen, Mark; Jenkins, Mark (2003), Dance of Days, Akashic Books, ISBN 1888451440
  19. ^ :30 Under DC > Bands > Bad Brains > Interview from Forced Exposure 2
  20. ^ Don't Blow Bubbles@Everything2.com

## [edit] External links

  * Official website
  * Bad Brains at Allmusic
  * Bad Brains at ROIR

v â¢ d â¢ e

Bad Brains  
H.R. Â· Dr. Know Â· Darryl Jenifer Â· Earl Hudson  
Sid McCray Â· Israel Joseph I Â· Mackie Jayson Â· Chuck Mosely  
Studio albums

Bad Brains (1982) Â· Rock for Light (1983) Â· I Against I (1986) Â· Quickness
(1989) Â· Rise (1993) Â· God of Love (1995) Â· I & I Survived (2002) Â· Build
a Nation (2007)  
EPs

Spirit Electricity (1991) Â· The Omega Sessions (1997)  
Live albums

Live (1988) Â· The Youth Are Getting Restless (1990) Â· A Bad Brains Reunion
Live from Maritime Hall (2001) Â· Live at CBGB's 1982 (2006)  
Compilations

Black Dots (1996) Â· Banned in D.C. (2003)  
DVDs

Live at CBGB's 1982 (2006)  
Singles

"Pay to Cum" Â· "Sailin' On" Â· "Attitude" Â· "Banned in D.C." Â· "F.V.K.
(Fearless Vampire Killers)" Â· "Big Take Over" Â· "I Luv I Jah" Â· "Joshua's
Song" Â· "Destroy Babylon" Â· "At the Movies" Â· "Riot Squad" Â· "How Low Can
a Punk Get?" Â· "I and I Survive" Â· "The Meek" Â· "I Against I" Â· "Re-
Ignition" Â· "Sacred Love" Â· "Soul Craft" Â· "With the Quickness" Â· "The
Prophet's Eye" Â· "Rise" Â· "God of Love" Â· "Give Thanks and Praises" Â· "Jah
Love"  
Related articles

Discography Â· Hardcore punk Â· Reggae Â· Beastie Boys Â· Black Flag Â· Minor
Threat Â· CBGB  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bad_Brains"

Categories: 1980s music groups | 1990s music groups | 2000s music groups |
African American musical groups | American alternative rock music groups |
American punk rock groups | American Rastafarians | Black rock musicians |
D.C. hardcore punk groups | Early punk groups | Musical groups established in
1977 | Musical quartets | Pan-Africanism | Reachout International Records
recording artists | Victory Records artists

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2007 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2007 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-
marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced
statements since February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since June
2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * KaszÃ«bsczi
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 20:33.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



