
# Nobilis

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Nobilis <IMG>  
The cover of the second edition of the Nobilis roleplaying game, depicting a
sculpture by Charles van der Stappen. This edition is known as the "Great
White Book" or the "Coffee table book".  
Designer R. Sean Borgstrom  
Publisher Pharos Press  
Hogshead Publishing  
Publication date 1999  
Genre(s) Fantasy  
System Custom (diceless resource-management, optional live action system)  
Nobilis is a contemporary fantasy role-playing game created by R. Sean
Borgstrom. The player characters are "Sovereign Powers" called the Nobilis;
each Noble is the personification of an abstract concept or class of things
such as Time, Death, cars, or communication. Unlike most role-playing games,
Nobilis does not use dice or other random elements to determine the outcome of
characters' actions, but instead uses a Karma-based system for task
resolution.

## Contents

  * 1 Setting
  * 2 System
  * 3 History
    * 3.1 First edition
    * 3.2 Second edition
    * 3.3 Third edition
    * 3.4 Supplements
    * 3.5 Translation
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Setting

Nobilis draws on many sources, including Christian and Norse mythologies, but
adds numerous unique details to its setting. Though the everyday world in the
game appears much like our own, it is actually only the Prosaic Earth, a lie
that the world told to itself in a desperate attempt to explain suffering, and
a rationalized delusion which conceals the true reality that would plunge most
mortals into madness: the Mythic Earth, an animistic world where everything
has its own sentient spirit. In the Mythic, the earth is really flat, and
hangs somewhere among the vast boughs of the "world-tree", Yggdrasil.
Countless worlds dot the branches of this world-tree, but at the top is
Heaven, which is inaccessible to all but the angels (only one human soul in a
billion is not turned away) and is the source of all beauty. Beneath the
earth, in the roots of Yggdrasil, is Hell, the source of all corruption.
Around Yggdrasil, except above heaven (where it is open to the stars), is a
mystical impenetrable curtain of blue flames known as the Weirding Wall.

Every class of objects and every concept is represented by a being of god-like
power known as an Imperator. Each Imperator may govern from one to several of
these Estates, and has effectively limitless control over them. The Imperators
are engaged in a deadly struggle with the Excrucians, terrible beings from
outside the Weirding Wall who wish to destroy reality; this struggle is known
as the Valde Bellum. This war keeps Imperators busy in the Spirit World, so in
order to maintain their affairs on Earth and in the other worlds they invest a
shard of their soul in a human (or occasionally another animal or object),
creating a Nobilis. Each Nobilis represents one of the Imperator's Estates;
the group of Nobilis this forms, known as a Familia Caelestis, is typically
loyal, both to each other and their Imperator.

The Imperator Lord Entropy oversees the actions of the Nobilis and enforces
the Code Fidelitatis, the five laws he has established for them, in his Locust
Court. The most notable and notorious of these, and the one most often broken,
is the Windflower Law which states that no Noble is allowed to love another
being. Ironically, Nobilis can turn other humans into Anchors, whose every
action they can control, but in order to do this they must first love or hate
the person.

To protect their physical forms from the ravages of the Valde Bellum,
Imperators take a part of reality and partition it off into a self-contained,
unique world which can take any form. This world, called a Chancel, both
houses their physical bodies and is a spiritual reflection of it. Much like in
the myth of the Fisher King, if the Imperator suffers, so does their Chancel.

Flowers have great significance to the Nobilis and their Imperators; earthly
flowers are reflections of their heavenly counterparts and each has a meaning.
For example, the gamemaster is known as the Hollyhock God because, in the
world of Nobilis, hollyhocks represent vanity and ambition. This is because,
according to the in-game story, the angels used flowers as a tool to control
and direct the brunt of their powers when they created Reality. Each Nobilis
and Imperator has a flower that represents them, and flowers are often used in
their magical rites.

## [edit] System

<IMG>

The cover to The Game of Powers, which provides live action role-playing rules
for the game. The cover depicts a sculpture by Maurice Bouval

Unlike most role-playing game systems, Nobilis does not use random elements in
determining success in characters' actions. Instead, Nobilis uses a resource
management system; players may spend Miracle Points to succeed at certain
actions, but otherwise they rarely fail at what they set out to do. Instead of
the action centering on whether or not the characters succeed, the emphasis is
instead on the consequences of those actions. Since combat between Nobilis
uses up Miracle Points very quickly and a Nobilis can easily defeat even great
numbers of humans, social roleplaying is encouraged over combat. Though the
characters may seem to have limitless power, in reality they must take into
consideration both the outcome of every act and what other Powers or
Imperators they may offend in the process.

Each character has 4 attributes: Aspect, which governs their ability to
perform superhuman physical and mental acts; Domain, which covers their power
over their estate; Realm, which determines how much power they have in their
Chancel; and Spirit, which describes how much magical power the Nobilis has.
Spirit creates the Auctoritas, a shield that protects them from the Miracles
of other Powers. A character's Spirit also determines how many Anchors they
may have. Each attribute has a number of Miracle Points associated with it.

The character creation system also makes Nobilis notable by giving players an
unusual amount of control over the setting. In addition to creating their own
characters â a process which already allows for considerable customization
â the players create their Imperator and Chancel. Players receive a number
of points to invest in their Chancel equal to the total amount they spent on
their characters' Realm; they may use these to buy special attributes for
their Chancel such as special technology or magical inhabitants. They do not
receive any points for their Imperator, so they must take a corresponding
drawback for every special attribute they wish their Imperator to have. Each
Nobilis also has an Affiliation, which is a moral code they follow in order to
regain Miracle Points, as well as character flaws called Limits and
Restrictions. Much like their Affiliation, these allow the character to regain
Miracle Points when they become an inconvenience.

## [edit] History

### [edit] First edition

The first edition was printed on demand by Pharos Press in 1999 with cover art
by Alphonse Mucha.

### [edit] Second edition

In 2002 Hogshead Publishing printed the second edition.[1] When Hogshead
Publishing shut down in 2003, the rights to the book returned to Borgstrom,
but arrangements were made with Guardians of Order to publish the second
edition.

The second edition is a coffee table-style book, designed by Headless Hollow,
with a ribbon bookmark; it is called the "Great White Book" by Nobilis fans.
Full-page black and white art was commissioned for this book, in particular
from Charles Vess and Michael William Kaluta; Borgstrom's flash fiction, set
in the game world, fills its large margins. This edition won the Origins Award
for Best Graphic Presentation Book Format Product 2002 and the 2003 Diana
Jones Award for Excellence in Gaming.[2] Guardians of Order ceased operations
in 2006, with an announcement that they would attempt to find other publishers
for their games.

### [edit] Third edition

On March 3, 2008 is was announced that Eos Press would be printing a third
edition of the core book, in a new layout and with additional material found
in A Game of Powers.[3]

### [edit] Supplements

A single sourcebook was published, The Game of Powers, which provides rules
for live action role-playing.[4] Attempts to publish a second sourcebook, to
be entitled A Society of Flowers, were unsuccessful until March 2008: part of
the supplement was finally made available as a free pdf download from Eos
Press [3] or for a small fee from drivethru.rpg, under the name Unlikely
Flowerings. This document was the first of an announced serie of "peculiar
books" that would make available the whole "work version" of Society of
Flowers. Then those peculiar books, completed and cleaned, would be released
later in 2008 in hardcopy version.[5] However, the second peculiar book and
Society of Flowers have been delayed following personal problems of the
author.[6]

### [edit] Translation

The second edition of Nobilis was translated into French in 2002 by the Swiss
company 2 dÃ©s sans faces, sociÃ©tÃ© coopÃ©rative (2 dice without faces,
cooperative society). Curiously, this translation was available for sale
before the original, English edition. The french edition, for reason of
available space, replaced the scenario from the English language book by an
original one, whose action is in a media-obsessed Chancel. A gamemaster
screen, titled Perfidie, has been released in late 2002, with a small booklet
including errata and the scenario from the English language book.

## [edit] See also

  * Amber Diceless Roleplaying Game
  * Incarnations of Immortality

## [edit] References

  1. ^ R. Sean Borgstrom Nobilis (2nd Edition) (Hogshead Publishing, 2002) ISBN 1-899749-30-6
  2. ^ The Diana Jones Award website (accessed: 2007-09-08).
  3. ^ a b Eos Press Nobilis website
  4. ^ R. Sean Borgstrom The Game of Powers (Guardians of Order, 2004) ISBN 1-899749-36-5
  5. ^ RPG.net Tabletop Roleplaying Open forum
  6. ^ Hitherby Dragons

## [edit] External links

  * The Nobilist, a mailing list for Nobilis players
  * Wind in the Flowers author R. Sean Borgstrom discusses the development of the second edition and The Game of Powers supplement
  * Official French Nobilis home page Hosted by the French editor, 2 dÃ©s sans faces, sociÃ©tÃ© coopÃ©rative (in French).
  * Nobilis Wiki, hosted by Wikia

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nobilis"

Categories: Fantasy role-playing games | Origins Award winners | Contemporary
role-playing games | Latin adjectives in current use

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 21:33 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



