
# Christian angelic hierarchy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2008)  
    For other angelic hierarchies, see Hierarchy of angels.
According to medieval Christian theologians, the Angels are organized into
several orders, or Angelic Choirs.[citation needed]

The most influential of these classifications was that put forward by Pseudo-
Dionysius the Areopagite in the 4th or 5th century, in his book "The Celestial
Hierarchy". However, during the Middle Ages, many schemes were proposed, some
drawing on and expanding on Pseudo-Dionysius, others suggesting completely
different classifications (some authors limited the number of Choirs to
seven). Several other hierarchies were proposed, some in nearly inverted
order. Scholars of the Middle Ages believed that angels and archangels were
lowest in the order and were the only angels directly involved in the affairs
of the world of men.

The authors of The Celestial Hierarchy and the Summa Theologica drew on
passages from the New Testament, specifically Ephesians 1:21 and Colossians
1:16 (considered by modern scholars to be very tentative and ambiguous sources
in relation to the construction of such a schema), in an attempt to reveal a
schema of three Hierarchies, Spheres or Triads of angels, with each Hierarchy
containing three Orders or Choirs.

From the comparative study of the Old Testament and New Testament passages,
including their etymology and semantics, the above mentioned theological works
(which contain variations), and esoteric Christian teachings, the descending
order of rank can be inferred as following:

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Assumption of the Virgin by Francesco Botticini at the National Gallery
London, shows three hierarchies and nine orders of angels, each with different
characteristics

  * First Sphere (Old Testament sources) 
    * Seraphim
    * Cherubim
    * Thrones (Gr. thronos) (New Testament sources)

  * Second Sphere (New Testament sources) 
    * Dominions (Gr. kuriotes)
    * Virtues (Gr. dunamis)
    * Powers (Gr. exousia)[1]

  * Third Sphere
    * Principalities (Gr. arche)[2]
    * Archangels
    * Angels

The Choirs in the second and third spheres, of the present hierarchical list,
appear to be also united in pairs. The existence of these pairs of Orders is
inferred through their etymological proximity and the apparent affinity in the
description of their work-activity (1 Peter 3:22):

  * Thrones and Dominions (Might, dunamis);
  * Principalities and Powers (Powers, exousia; Ephesians 6:12);
  * Archangels and Angels (Angels, aggelos).

Note, however, that several variations of the hierarchical order may be found
published through the last two millennia.

## Contents

  * 1 Hierarchies, Spheres or Triads of Choirs
    * 1.1 First Sphere
      * 1.1.1 Seraphim
      * 1.1.2 Cherubim
      * 1.1.3 Thrones
        * 1.1.3.1 In the Occult
        * 1.1.3.2 Ophanim
        * 1.1.3.3 In the Occult
    * 1.2 Second Sphere
      * 1.2.1 Dominions
        * 1.2.1.1 In the Occult
        * 1.2.1.2 Leaders
      * 1.2.2 Virtues
      * 1.2.3 Powers
        * 1.2.3.1 In the Occult
        * 1.2.3.2 Authorities
    * 1.3 Third Sphere
      * 1.3.1 Principalities
        * 1.3.1.1 In the Occult
        * 1.3.1.2 Rulers
      * 1.3.2 Archangels
      * 1.3.3 Angels
  * 2 Choirs scheme in the medieval theology
  * 3 References
  * 4 Bibliography
  * 5 See also

  
## [edit] Hierarchies, Spheres or Triads of Choirs

### [edit] First Sphere

Angels of first sphere work as heavenly guardians of God's throne.

#### [edit] Seraphim

Main article: Seraph

The Seraphim (singular "Seraph"), mentioned in Isaiah 6:1-7 [3], serve as the
caretakers of God's throne and continuously sing praises: "Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord of hosts. All the earth is filled with His Glory." It is said that
such a bright light emanates from them that nothing, not even other divine
beings, can look upon them. It is also said that there are four of them
surrounding God's throne, where they burn eternally from love and zeal for
God. The name Seraphim means "the burning ones."

The Seraphim have six wings; two covering their faces, two covering their
genitals ("feet"), and two with which they fly. (See also Revelation 4:8.)

#### [edit] Cherubim

Main article: Cherub

The Cherubim (singular "Cherub") are beyond the throne of God; they are the
guardians of light and of the stars. It is believed that, although they are
separated from Earth, the divine light that they filter down from Heaven still
touches the lives of living things.

They have four faces: one of each a man, an ox, a lion, and an eagle. The ox-
face is considered the "true face", as later on in Ezekiel the ox's face is
called a cherub's face (Chapter 10). They have four conjoined wings covered
with eyes, and they have ox's feet.

Cherubim are considered the elect beings for the purpose of protection.
Cherubim guard the way to the tree of life in the Garden of Eden (Genesis
3:24)[4] and the throne of God (Ezekiel 28:14-16). [5]

Their rank among angels is uncertain but they are always categorized in the
First Sphere. Some believe them to be an order or class of angels; others hold
them to be a class of heavenly beings higher than angels. Cherubim are said to
have perfect knowledge of God, surpassed only by the love of the Seraphim.

The Cherubim are mentioned in Genesis 3:24 [4]; Ezekiel 10:17â20 [6],
28:14-16[5]; and 1 Kings 6:23â28 [7].

#### [edit] Thrones

Main article: Thrones

The Thrones (Gr. thronos) or Elders, also known as the Erelim or Ophanim, are
a class of celestial beings mentioned by Paul of Tarsus in Colossians 1:16
(New Testament) and related to the throne of God the Father. They are living
symbols of God's justice and authority. They come the closest of all Angels to
spiritual perfection and emanate the light of God with mirror-like goodness.
They, despite their greatness, are intensely humble, an attribute that allows
them to dispense justice with perfect objectivity and without fear of pride or
ambition. Because they are living symbols of God's justice and authority, they
are called Thrones and have as one of their symbols the throne. These high
celestial beings are mentioned again in Revelation 11:16.

##### [edit] In the Occult

The Thrones (Gr. thronos) may possibly be equated with the Lords of Wisdom, a
Hierarchy of Elohim astrologically associated to Virgo, presented in The
Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception. They inhabit, in Rosicrucian cosmology, the
World of Divine Spirit, which is the home of The Father. According to this
source, the Lords of Wisdom (here equated with the Thrones; thronos) and the
higher Lords of the Flame (Thrones/Wheels: Ophanim) have worked together in a
far past toward the development of humankind.

##### [edit] Ophanim

Main article: Ophan

The Ophanim (Heb. owphan: Wheels, also known as Thrones, from the vision of
Daniel 7:9) are unusual looking compared to the other celestial beings; They
appear as a beryl-coloured wheel-within-a-wheel, their rims covered with
hundreds of eyes.

They are closely connected with the Cherubim: "When they moved, the others
moved; when they stopped, the others stopped; and when they rose from the
earth, the wheels rose along with them; for the spirit of the living creatures
[Cherubim] was in the wheels." (Ezekiel 10:17).

##### [edit] In the Occult

In Esoteric Christianity they are called Lords of Flame. De Coelesti
Hierarchia refers the Thrones (from the Old Testament; Ezekiel and Daniel
visions of the Thrones/Wheels) as the third Order of the first sphere,
corresponding to the description of the Ophanim; the other two superior orders
being the Cherubim and Seraphim. The Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception refers that
the "Lords of the Flame", the Hierarchy of Elohim astrologically assigned to
Leo, are the Thrones "because of the brilliant luminosity of their bodies and
their great spiritual powers.", corresponding also to the description of the
Ophanim; the other two superior hierarchies being also the Cherubim and
Seraphim.

According to the mentioned esoteric Christian teachings, the three previous
Hierarchies (Seraphim, Cherubim and Ophanim [Thrones/Wheels]) have already
reached liberation, thus no longer active in the work of evolution.

### [edit] Second Sphere

Angels of the Second Sphere work as heavenly governors.

#### [edit] Dominions

The Dominions (lat. dominatio, pl. dominationes), also known as the
Hashmallim, hold the task of regulating the duties of lower angels. It is only
with extreme rarity that the angelic lords make themselves physically known to
mortals. Instead, they quietly concern themselves with the details of
existence. They are also the angels who preside over nations.

The Dominions are believed to look like divinely beautiful humans with a pair
of feathered wings, much like the common representation of Angels, but they
are physically characterized from other groups as wielding orbs of light
fastened to the heads of their sceptres or on the pommel of their swords.

##### [edit] In the Occult

The Dominions may possibly be equated with the Lords of Individuality, a
Hierarchy of Elohim astrologically associated to Libra, presented in The
Rosicrucian Cosmo-Conception. They inhabit, in Rosicrucian cosmology, the
World of Life Spirit, which is the home of Christ.

##### [edit] Leaders

The Dominions are also translated from the Greek term "kuriotes" as Lordships,
related to the Lord Christ-Jesus, and also Leaders. They are presented as the
hierarchy of celestial beings Lordships in the De Coelesti Hierarchia.

#### [edit] Virtues

The Virtues or Strongholds lie beyond the Ophanim (Thrones/Wheels). Their
primary duty is to supervise the movements of the heavenly bodies in order to
ensure that the cosmos remains in order.

The term appears to be linked to the attribute "Might", from the Greek root
"dunamis" in Ephesians 1:21, which is also translated as "Virtue" (probably
due to the powerful nature of these high celestial beings; see quotation
below). They are presented as the celestial Choir "Virtues", in the Summa
Theologica, and the theological conception of these highest beings appears to
describe the same high Order, in touch with God, called the Thrones (Gr.
thronos).

From Dionysius the Areopagite:

> "The name of the holy Virtues signifies a certain powerful and unshakable
virility welling forth into all their Godlike energies; not being weak and
feeble for any reception of the divine Illuminations granted to it; mounting
upwards in fullness of power to an assimilation with God; never falling away
from the Divine Life through its own weakness, but ascending unwaveringly to
the superessential Virtue which is the Source of virtue: fashioning itself, as
far as it may, in virtue; perfectly turned towards the Source of virtue, and
flowing forth providentially to those below it, abundantly filling them with
virtue."

#### [edit] Powers

The Powers (lat. potestas (f), pl. potestates) are the bearers of conscience
and the keepers of history. They are academically driven and are concerned
with ideology, philosophy, theology, religion, and documents pertaining to
those studies. Powers are the brain trusts; a group of experts who serve as
advisers and policy planners. They are also the warrior angels created to be
completely loyal to God. Some believe that no Power has ever fallen from
grace, but another theory states that Satan was the Chief of the Powers before
he Fell (see also Ephesians 6:12). Their duty is to oversee the distribution
of power among humankind, hence their name.

##### [edit] In the Occult

The Powers may possibly be equated with the Lords of Mind, a Hierarchy of
Elohim astrologically associated to Sagittarius, presented in The Rosicrucian
Cosmo-Conception. They inhabit, in Rosicrucian cosmology, the World of Thought
in the Region of Concrete Thought (lower region; the Christian Second Heaven),
which is the location of the human mind. This region is also described as the
place where one of the three records of the Memory of Nature, covering the
essence of a whole life or events, is kept-stored.

    Paul used the term powers in Colossians 1:16 [1] and Ephesians 1:21 [2] but he may have used it to refer to the powers of nations, societies or individuals, instead of referring to angels.
##### [edit] Authorities

The Powers are also translated, from the Greek term "exousia", as Authorities
(see Greek root in Eph 3:10).

These celestial beings appear to collaborate, in power and authority (as
implied in their etymology source), with the Principalities (Rulers). Rulers
develop ideologies whereas Authorities write the documents and doctrines. Both
Authorities (Powers) and Rulers (Principalities) are involved in formulating
ideologies. However, Authorities are all-encompassing whereas Rulers are more
focused on specific lines of thought. Authorities specialize in putting those
ideas into print and in producing actual documents.

    Paul used the term rule and authority in Ephesians 1:21 [3], and rulers and authorities in Ephesians 3:10 [4]. He may have been referring to the rulers and authorities of humanity, instead of referring to angels.
### [edit] Third Sphere

Angels who function as heavenly messengers and soldiers.

#### [edit] Principalities

The Principalities (lat. principatus, pl. principatÅ«s) are shown wearing a
crown and carrying a sceptre. Their duty also is said to be to carry out the
orders given to them by the Dominions and bequeath blessings to the material
world. Their task is to oversee groups of people. As beings related to the
world of the germinal ideas, they are said to inspire living things to many
things such as art or science.

##### [edit] In the Occult

The Principalities may possibly be equated with the Lords of Form, a Hierarchy
of Elohim astrologically associated to Scorpio, presented in The Rosicrucian
Cosmo-Conception. They inhabit, in Rosicrucian cosmology, the World of Thought
in the Region of Abstract Thought (higher region; the Christian Third Heaven),
which is the home of Jehova, The Holy Spirit.

##### [edit] Rulers

The Principalities are also translated, from the Greek term "arche", as
Princedoms and also Rulers (see Greek root in Eph 3:10).

These celestial beings appear to collaborate, in power and authority (as
implied in their etymology source), with the Powers (Authorities). Rulers
develop ideologies whereas Authorities write the documents and doctrines. Both
Rulers (Principalities) and Authorities (Powers) are involved in formulating
ideologies. However, Rulers are more focused on specific lines of thought
whereas Authorities are all-encompassing.

    Paul used the term rule and authority in Ephesians 1:21 [5], and rulers and authorities in Ephesians 3:10 [6]. He may have been referring to the rulers and authorities of men or societies, instead of referring to angels.:
#### [edit] Archangels

Main article: Archangel

The word archangel comes from the Greek Î±ÏÏÎ¬Î³Î³ÎµÎ»Î¿Ï (archangÄlÇs),
meaning chief angel.[8] It derives from the Greek archÅ, meaning to be first
in political rank or power; and aggÄlÇs which means messenger. This suggests
that they are the highest ranking angels. The word is only used twice in the
New Testament: 1 Thessalonians 4:16 and Jude 1:9. Only Michael and Gabriel are
mentioned by name in the New Testament.

Michael is the only angel the Bible named expressly as "the" archangel. In
Daniel he is referred to as "one of the chief princes". The word "prince" here
is the ancient Hebrew word sar, which means: "a head person (of any rank or
class), a chief, a general etc."[8]

In most Christian traditions Gabriel is also considered an archangel, but
there is no direct literal support for this assumption.

The name of the archangel Raphael appears only in the Deuterocanonical Book of
Tobit (Tobias). Tobit is considered canonical by Roman Catholics (Both
Eastern, and Western Rites), Eastern Orthodox and some (but few)
Protestants.[9] Raphael said to Tobias that he was "one of the seven who stand
before the Lord", and it is generally believed that Michael and Gabriel are
two of the other seven.

A fourth Archangel is Uriel whose name literally means "Fire of God" or "Light
of God." Uriel's name is the only one not mentioned in the Lutheran Bible but
is only found in the apocrypha. He plays a most prominently role in the second
Book of Esdras (fourth Books of Esdras in the Latin Vulgate). In the book he
unveils seven prophecies to the prophet Ezra, after whom the book is named. He
also plays a role in the apocryphal Book of Enoch, which is considered
canonical only by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church.

Another possible interpretation of the seven archangels, is that the seven are
the seven spirits of God that stand before the throne described in the Book of
Enoch, and in the Book of Revelation.[10]

They (The Seven Archangels) are said to be the guardian angels of nations and
countries, and are concerned with the issues and events surrounding these,
including politics, military matters, commerce and trade: e.g. Archangel
Michael is traditionally seen as the protector of Israel and of the Ecclesia
(Gr. root ekklesia from the New Testament passages), theologically equated as
the Church, the forerunner of the spiritual New Israel.

#### [edit] Angels

Main article: Angel

The Angels, also known as the Malakh wat watim (messengers or angels), are the
lowest order of the angels, and the most recognized. They are the ones most
concerned with the affairs of living things. Within the category of angels,
there are many different kinds, with different functions. The angels are sent
as messengers to humankind.

## [edit] Choirs scheme in the medieval theology

During the Middle Ages, many schemes were proposed, some drawing on and
expanding on Pseudo-Dionysius, others suggesting completely different
classifications (some authors limited the number of Choirs to seven). Several
other hierarchies were proposed, some in nearly inverted order. Some of those
schemes are here presented:

  * Clement of Rome in Apostolic Constitutions (1st century): 
    * 1\. Seraphim, 2. Cherubim, 3. Aeons, 4. Hosts, 5. Powers, 6. Authorities, 7. Principalities, 8. Thrones, 9. Archangels, 10. Angels, 11. Dominions.

  * St. Ambrose in Apologia Prophet David, 5 (4th century): 
    * 1\. Seraphim, 2. Cherubim, 3. Dominations, 4. Thrones, 5. Principalities, 6. Potentates (or Powers), 7. Virtues, 8. Angels, 9. Archangels.

  * St. Jerome (4th century): 
    * 1\. Seraphim, 2. Cherubim, 3. Powers, 4. Dominions (Dominations), 5. Thrones, 6. Archangels, 7. Angels.

  * Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite in De Coelesti Hierarchia (ca. 5th century): 
    * First sphere: 1. Seraphim, 2. Cherubim, 3. Thrones;
    * Second sphere: 4. Authorities, 5. Lordships, 6. Powers;
    * Third sphere: 7. Principalities, 8. Archangels, 9. Angels.

  * St. Gregory the Great in Homilia (6th century) 
    * 1\. Seraphim, 2. Cherubim, 3. Thrones, 4. Dominations, 5. Principalities, 6. Powers, 7. Virtues, 8. Archangels, 9. Angels.

  * St. Isidore of Seville in Etymologiae (7th century): 
    * 1\. Seraphim, 2. Cherubim, 3. Powers, 4. Principalities, 5. Virtues, 6. Dominations, 7. Thrones, 8. Archangels, 9. Angels.

  * John of Damascus in De Fide Orthodoxa (8th century): 
    * 1\. Seraphim, 2. Cherubim, 3. Thrones, 4. Dominions, 5. Powers, 6. Authorities (Virtues), 7. Rulers (Principalities), 8. Archangels, 9. Angels.

  * St. Thomas Aquinas in Summa Theologica (1225-1274): 
    * 1\. Seraphim, Cherubim, and Thrones;
    * 2\. Dominations, Virtues, and Powers;
    * 3\. Principalities, Archangels, and Angels.

  * Dante Alighieri in The Divine Comedy (1308-1321) 
    * 1\. Seraphim, 2. Cherubim, 3. Thrones, 4. Dominations, 5. Virtues, 6. Powers, 7. Archangels, 8. Principalities, 9. Angels.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Catholic Online - Saints & Angels - The Nine Choirs of Angels
  2. ^ Angels
  3. ^ "Isaiah 6 - NET Bible". Bible.org. http://www.bible.org/netbible/isa6.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-13.
  4. ^ a b "Genesis 3 - NET Bible". Bible.org. http://www.bible.org/netbible/gen3.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-13.
  5. ^ a b "Ezekiel 10 - NET Bible". Bible.org. http://www.bible.org/netbible/eze28.htm. Retrieved on 2008-11-10.
  6. ^ "Ezekiel 10 - NET Bible". Bible.org. http://www.bible.org/netbible/eze10.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-13.
  7. ^ "1 Kings 6 - NET Bible". Bible.org. http://www.bible.org/netbible/1ki6.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-13.
  8. ^ a b Strong, J, Strong's Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible, Riverside Books and Bible House, Iowa Falls (Iowa), ISBN 0-917006-01-1.
  9. ^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raphael_(archangel)
  10. ^ Revelation 1:5.

## [edit] Bibliography

  1. Copeland, Mark. Ministering Spirits: Angels In The Old Testament. Executable Outlines. 2004.
  2. Copeland, Mark. Terms And Descriptions Of Angels. Executable Outlines. 2004.
  3. Fares, Aymen. Angelics and the Angelic Realm. Spiritual.com.au Pty. Ltd. 2000.
  4. Tatum, Johnny. The Hierarchy of Angels: Hierarchical Chart of Angels. Worldnet Grace Ministries.
  5. Tatum, Johnny. The Hierarchy of Angels: Distinguishing the Higher Ranked. Worldnet Grace Ministries.
  6. The Bible (Searchable online version)
  7. Pseudo-Dionysus the Areopagite. The Celestial Hierarchy.

## [edit] See also

  * Hierarchy of angels
  * Heavenly Host
  * Seven archangels
  * Hierarchy of Devils
  * Fallen angel

Christian angelic hierarchy

v â¢ d â¢ e  
First Sphere  
(liberated)

Seraphim â¢ Cherubim â¢ Thrones

<IMG>  
Second Sphere  
(active)

Dominions â¢ Virtues â¢ Powers  
Third Sphere  
(active)

Principalities â¢ Archangels â¢ Angels  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christian_angelic_hierarchy"

Categories: Classes of angel | Old Testament theology | New Testament theology

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2008 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Galego
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Suomi
  * PortuguÃªs
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 22:49.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



