
# Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta ("MEND") is a militant
indigenous people's movement dedicated to armed struggle against what they
regard as the exploitation and oppression of the people of the Niger Delta and
the degradation of the natural environment by foreign multinational
corporations involved in the extraction of oil in the Niger Delta and the
Federal Government of Nigeria. MEND has been linked to attacks on foreign-
owned petroleum companies in Nigeria as part of the Conflict in the Niger
Delta.

MEND's stated goals are to localize control of Nigeria's oil and to secure
reparations from the federal government for pollution caused by the oil
industry. In an interview with one of the group's leaders, who used the alias
Major-General Godswill Tamuno, the BBC reported that MEND was fighting for
"total control" of the Niger Delta's oil wealth, saying local people had not
gained from the riches under the ground and the region's creeks and swamps."
[1] The Economist has described the organization as one that "portrays itself
as political organisation that wants a greater share of Nigeriaâs oil
revenues to go to the impoverished region that sits atop the oil. In fact, it
is more of an umbrella organisation for several armed groups, which it
sometimes pays in cash or guns to launch attacks." [2]

In a January 2006 email MEND warned the oil industry, "It must be clear that
the Nigerian government cannot protect your workers or assets. Leave our land
while you can or die in it.... Our aim is to totally destroy the capacity of
the Nigerian government to export oil."[3] Additionally MEND has called upon
President Olusegun Obasanjo to free two jailed ethnic Ijaw leaders â Mujahid
Dokubo-Asari, who is jailed and charged with treason, and Diepreye
Alamieyeseigha, a former governor of Bayelsa State charged with corruption.
Obasanjo's successor, President Umaru Musa Yar'Adua authorised the release of
Dokubo-Asari and Alamieyeseigha in 2007. [4]

## Contents

  * 1 Origins and Context
  * 2 Constituency and Organization
  * 3 Tactics
  * 4 Timeline of Activities
    * 4.1 2006
    * 4.2 2007
    * 4.3 2008
    * 4.4 2009
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Origins and Context

For the roughly fifty years since Nigeria declared independence from British
colonial rule, oil has been produced in Nigeria. Throughout this period,
corporate politics has intersected with successive dictatorships. Under these
dictatorships the Nigerian government has signed laws that appropriated oil
resources and placed these under the control of multinational oil companies,
such as Chevron Corporation and most notoriously, Royal Dutch Shell.

From the point of view of MEND, and its supporters, the people of the Niger
Delta have suffered an unprecedented degradation of their environment due to
unchecked pollution produced by the oil industry. As a result of this policy
of dispossessing people from their lands in favor of foreign oil interests,
within a single generation, many now have no ability to fish or farm. People
living in the Niger Delta have found themselves in a situation where their
government and the international oil companies own all the oil under their
feet, the revenues of which are rarely seen by the people who are suffering
from the consequences of it.

Kenneth Roth, Executive Director of Human Rights Watch, has said of the
situation, "The oil companies can't pretend they don't know what's happening
all around them. The Nigerian government obviously has the primary
responsibility to stop human rights abuse. But the oil companies are directly
benefiting from these crude attempts to suppress dissent, and that means they
have a duty to try and stop it."[1] Eghare W.O. Ojhogar, chief of the Ugborodo
community, said: "It is like paradise and hell. They have everything. We have
nothing... If we protest, they send soldiers."

Over the last twenty years various political movements and activists have
emerged in opposition to the perceived injustices perpetrated upon the people
of the Niger Delta by the government and the oil companies. These were usually
nonviolent; Ken Saro-Wiwa was the most famous activist. Saro-Wiwa was an Ogoni
poet-turned-activist who was executed by the Nigerian government in 1995 on
what many believe to be deliberately false charges with the aim of silencing
his vocal opposition to the oil interests in Nigeria. In Saro-Wiwa's footsteps
came others who, having seen the government's reaction to nonviolent activism,
advocated violence as resistance to what they regarded as the enslavement of
their people. Militants in the delta enjoy widespread support among the
region's approximately 20 million people, most of whom live in poverty despite
the enormous wealth generated in the oil-rich region.[2]

## [edit] Constituency and Organization

MEND is closely connected with Asari's Niger Delta People's Volunteer Force, a
rebel group with similar aims. MEND reportedly seeks "a union of all relevant
militant groups in the Niger Delta."[3] However, the identity of MEND is
somewhat obscure since its leaders like to remain faceless[4] and its cause
has been taken up by completely unrelated groups inspired by the original
MEND, one of which is claiming responsibility for some of the violence that
has occurred. However, the original members of MEND (recognized as MEND by the
United States government and Chevron security), have claimed that impostors
are causing some of the violence that is now occurring.[5]

MEND's evolving approach to conducting warfare has been described as "open
source" [6], so called because it is analogous to the decentralized communal
development process now prevalent in the software industry, making it
extremely quick to innovate and move new technologies and tactics rapidly from
cell to cell without the direction of a vulnerable leadership hierarchy.[7]
Former United States Air Force "counter-terrorism" officer, technology
analyst, and software entrepreneur, John Robb, in a Wired Magazine interview
about the emergence of "open source guerrillas", alleged that MEND "doesnât
even field its own guerillas. They hire their experts and fighters mostly from
criminal gangs and tribal warrior cults to do their operations." [8]

## [edit] Tactics

MEND's attacks involve substantially more sophisticated tactics than those of
previous militant groups in the Niger Delta. MEND's recent tactics have
included:

  * Swarm-based maneuvers: guerrillas are using speed boats in the Niger Delta's swamps to quickly attack targets in succession. Multiple, highly maneuverable units have kept the government and Shell's defensive systems off-balance defending their sprawling networks.

  * Radically improved firepower and combat training: allowing guerrillas to overpower a combination of Shell's Western-trained private military guards and elite Nigerian units in several engagements. (One of Shell's private military operators was captured as a hostage.)

  * Effective use of system disruption: targets have been systematically and accurately selected to completely shut down production and delay and/or halt repairs, and the guerrillas are making effective use of Shell's hostages to coerce both the government and the multinational.[9]

The militants have bombed two pipelines, triggering an international increase
in the cost of oil. Recently MEND kidnapped four foreign oil workers, who are
from Bulgaria, Britain, Honduras and the United States. Violence and
destruction by MEND in 2007 caused Chevron Corporation to shut down some oil
production after one Nigerian sailor was killed and six other foreign oil
workers were kidnapped by members of MEND. MEND reportedly attacked the
company's Oloibiri floating production, storage, and offloading vessel off
southern Bayelsa state on May 1, 2007. [10] In September 2008, MEND released a
statement proclaiming that their militants had launched an "oil war"
throughout the Niger Delta against both pipelines and oil production
facilities, and the Nigerian soldiers that protect them. In the statement MEND
claimed to have killed 22 Nigerian soldiers in one attack against a Chevron-
owned oil platform. The Nigerian government confirmed that their troops were
attacked in numerous locations, but said that all assaults were repelled with
the infliction of heavy casualties on the militants. [5]

## [edit] Timeline of Activities

See also: Foreign hostages in Nigeria

### [edit] 2006

Nine officials for the Italian petrol company Eni SpA were killed when armed
members of MEND attacked Eni SpA's security forces in Port Harcourt. MEND
militants briefly occupied and robbed a bank near the Eni SpA base, leaving at
about 3:30 p.m, about an hour after they showed up.

A company official stated, "Eni has temporarily evacuated staff and
contractors from the area of the base affected by the incident and the
situation is currently under control."

MEND issued a statement regarding the oil workers: "Be assured therefore that
the hostages in return, will remain our guests... [the hostages] are in good
health and have adapted fairly well to the conditions under which the people
of the Niger Delta have been kept."

On May 10, 2006, an executive with the United States-based oil company, Baker
Hughes, was shot and killed in the south-eastern city of Port Harcourt. At the
time of the shooting, it was not immediately known if MEND had any involvement
or not. Witnesses say the attacker appeared to be specifically targeting the
US executive. [11]

On June 2, 2006 a Norwegian rig offshore Nigeria was attacked and 16 crew
members were kidnapped. According to the news agency Reuters, MEND has not
taken responsibility for this attack. [12] (Norwegian)

On August 20, 2006, 10 MEND members were killed by the Nigerian military. The
members were working on releasing a Royal Dutch Shell hostage. In an email to
REUTERS, MEND stated, "Our response to Sunday's killings will come at our
time, but for certain it will not go unpunished."[13]

On October 2, 2006, 10 Nigerian soldiers were killed off the shore of the
Niger Delta in their patrol boat by a MEND mortar shell. Earlier that day a
Nigerian/Royal Dutch Shell convoy was attacked in the Port Harcourt region
resulting in some people being wounded.

On October 3, 2006, a militant group abducted four Scots, a Malaysian, an
Indonesian and a Romanian from a bar in Akwa Ibom state.[14]

On October 4, 2006, Nigerian soldiers attacked a militant camp, in the ensuing
battle 9 Nigerian soldiers were killed.[15]

On November 22, 2006, Nigerian soldiers attempted a rescue of kidnapped oil
workers which resulted in one soldier being killed.

### [edit] 2007

On May 1, 2007, MEND seized six expatriate workers from an offshore oil
facility owned by Chevron. The group of six consisted of four Italians, an
American and a Croat. On the same day, MEND published photos of the captives
seated on white plastic chairs in a wooden shelter around the remains of a
campfire.

On May 3, 2007, MEND seized eight foreign hostages from another offshore
vessel. The hostages were released less than 24 hours later, stating they had
intended to destroy the vessel and did not want more hostages.

On May 8, 2007, three major oil pipelines (one in Brass and two in the Akasa
area) were attacked, shutting down oil production and cutting power to a
facility run by Italian oil company Agip, part of the ENI energy group. An
e-mail statement from a MEND spokesperson said, "Fighters of the Movement for
the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND) attacked and destroyed three major
pipelines in Bayelsa state... We will continue indefinitely with attacks on
all pipelines, platforms and support vessels." [16]

On September 23, 2007, a MEND spokesperson named Jomo Gbomo announced, through
a communiquÃ© to the Philadelphia Independent Media Center, that media reports
of his arrest and detention were false; and then further informed, through the
letter, that MEND had officially declared war, effective 12 midnight,
September 23, 2007, and that they would be commencing "attacks on
installations and abduction of expatriates."[17]

On November 13, 2007, MEND militants attacked Cameroonian soldiers on the
disputed Bakassi peninsula, killing more than 20 soldiers, three days after
this incident; a southern Cameroonian rebel group claimed responsibility to
the attack on the soldiers.[18]

### [edit] 2008

On May 3, 2008, MEND militants attacked Shell-operated pipelines in Nigeria,
forcing the company to halt 170,000 barrels a day of exports of Bonny Light
crude.[6]

On June 20, 2008, MEND naval forces attacked the Shell-operated Bonga oil
platform, shutting down 10% of Nigeria's oil production in one fell swoop. The
oil platform, Shell's flagship project in the area capable of extracting a
massive 200,000 barrels of oil a day, was widely assumed to be outside the
reach of the militants due to its location 120km off-shore. This attack has
demonstrated a level of prowess and sophistication never before seen by the
rebels and it is now known that all of Nigeria's oil platforms are within
range of MEND attack. [7]

On September 14, 2008, MEND inaugurated Operation Hurricane Barbarossa with an
ongoing string of militant attacks to bring down the oil industry in Rivers
State.[8]

On September 27, a week after declaring an oil war and sustaining heavy losses
at the hands of the Nigerian armed forces, the group declared a ceasefire
until "further notice."[9]

### [edit] 2009

MEND called off its ceasefire on January 30, 2009.[10]

Equatorial Guinea blamed MEND for an attack on the presidential palace in
Malabo on February 17, which resulted in the death of at least one attacker.
MEND denied involvement.[11][12]

## [edit] See also

  * Niger Delta conflicts
  * Niger Delta People's Volunteer Force
  * Movement for the Actualization of the Sovereign State of Biafra
  * Ijaw Youths
  * Petroleum in Nigeria
  * Ken Saro-Wiwa
  * Controversies surrounding Royal Dutch Shell
  * Isaac Adaka Boro

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/4732210.stm
  2. ^ http://www.economist.com/world/mideast-africa/displaystory.cfm?story_id=12267373
  3. ^ http://www.corpwatch.org/article.php?id=13121
  4. ^ http://www.crisisgroup.org/library/documents/africa/west_africa/135_nigeria___ending_unrest_in_the_niger_delta.pdf
  5. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7615498.stm
  6. ^ http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=aNXVIrK.7.Y4&refer=home
  7. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7463288.stm
  8. ^ http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/nigeria/2962894/Nigerian-militants-launch-Hurricane-Barbarossa-against-oil-plants.html
  9. ^ http://english.aljazeera.net/news/africa/2008/09/200892110225491930.html
  10. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/7861257.stm
  11. ^ http://www.ngrguardiannews.com/africa/article01/indexn2_html?pdate=200209&ptitle=Equatorial%20Guinea%20arrests%2015%20over%20attack%20on%20capital
  12. ^ http://allafrica.com/stories/200902200905.html

## [edit] External links

  * Curse of the Black Gold: 50 years of oil in the Niger Delta - The full book by Ed Kashi and Michael Watts online
  * News on the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta from the Nigerian Press
  * Website for Curse of the Black Gold
  * Curse of the Black Gold Blog
  * "Free from Nigerian Military Custody, âSweet Crudeâ Director Sandy Cioffi on Oil Politics in the Niger Delta" on Democracy Now May 09, 2008
  * "Rebels in the Pipeline" by Mariana van Zeller on Current TV Nov. 2007
  * HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH CRITICIZES NIGERIAN CIVILIAN REGIME FOR CONTINUING HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS IN NIGER DELTA
  * CFR: MEND: The Niger Deltaâs Umbrella Militant Group
  * Article on MEND and the Delta, providing context, interviews and some idea of future issues \- TIME Europe, 14 May 2006
  * News story of the group
  * "Nine Killed in Oil Company Attack" (Reuters) accessed January 24, 2006
  * "American oil executive killed in Nigeria" (CNN) May 10, 2006
  * "As Hundreds Die in an Oil Pipeline Explosion in Lagos, A Look At the Fight Over Nigeria's Natural Resources" (Democracy Now) December 26, 2006
  * Stories of Torture committed by Nigerian Police - Niger Delta Torture
  * Sweet Crude, a documentary currently in production, will tell the story of Nigeriaâs Niger Delta.
  * "Nigeria's shadowy oil rebels" (BBC) 20 April 2006
  * "The poverty of oil wealth in Nigeriaâs delta", by Dulue Mbachu in Utorogu, Nigeria for ISN Security Watch (03/02/06)
  * NIGERIA: Shell may pull out of Niger Delta after 17 die in boat raid (The Independent, UK) January 17, 2006
  * The Niger Delta Question: Incubating the Future Suicide Bombers of Nigeria, by Hosiah Emmanuel
  * "NIGERIAN EVOLUTION", (Global Guerrillas) January 16, 2006
  * Blood Oil by Sebastian Junger in Vanity Fair, February 2007 (accessed 28 January 2007)
  * Nigerian Oil -- "Curse of the Black Gold: Hope and Betrayal in the Niger Delta" \-- article from National Geographic Magazine (February 2007)
  * "Chronology of Nigerian militants' Attacks", Masterweb News Desk (February 21, 2007)
  * The shadowy militants in Nigeria's Delta \-- from the BBC (May 2007)
  * Inside the Brave New War, Part 1, Wired May 16, 2007, interview with former Air Force counter-terrorism officer, technology analyst, and software entrepreneur about his book by the same name.
  * Emerging Requirements for US Counterinsurgency, An Examination of the Insurgency in the Niger River Delta

Coordinates: 5Â°21â²N 5Â°21â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿5.35Â°N 5.35Â°Eï»¿ / 5.35; 5.35

Retrieved from
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Movement_for_the_Emancipation_of_the_Niger_Delta"

Categories: Rebel groups in Nigeria | History of the petroleum industry |
National liberation movements | Rebellions in Africa | Niger River Delta |
Energy in Nigeria

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 13:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



