
# Social phobia

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Social phobias  
Classification and external resources  
ICD-10 F40.1, F93.2  
ICD-9 300.23  
MeSH D010698  
Social anxiety disorder (DSM-IV 300.23), also known as social anxiety[1] or
social phobia[2] is a diagnosis within psychiatry and other mental health
professions referring to excessive social anxiety (anxiety in social
situations) [2] causing abnormally considerable distress and impaired ability
to function in at least some areas of daily life. The diagnosis can be of a
specific disorder (when only some particular situations are feared) or a
generalized disorder. Generalized social anxiety disorder typically involves a
persistent, intense, and chronic fear of being judged by others and of
potentially being embarrassed or humiliated by one's own actions. These fears
can be triggered by perceived or actual scrutiny by others. While the fear of
social interaction may be recognized by the person as excessive or
unreasonable, considerable difficulty can be encountered overcoming it.
Approximately 13.3 percent of the general population may meet criteria for
social anxiety disorder at some point in their lifetime, according to the
highest survey estimate, with the male to female ratio being 1:1.5.[3]

Physical symptoms often accompanying social anxiety disorder include excessive
blushing, sweating (hyperhidrosis), trembling, palpitations, nausea, and
stammering. Panic attacks may also occur under intense fear and discomfort. An
early diagnosis may help in minimizing the symptoms and the development of
additional problems such as depression. Some sufferers may use alcohol or
other drugs to reduce fears and inhibitions at social events. It is very
common for sufferers of social phobia to self-medicate in this fashion,
especially if they are undiagnosed and/or untreated. This can lead to
alcoholism or other kinds of substance abuse.

A person with the disorder may be treated with psychotherapy, medication, or
both. Research has shown cognitive behavior therapy, whether individually or
in a group, to be effective in treating social phobia. The cognitive and
behavioral components seek to change thought patterns and physical reactions
to anxiety-inducing situations. Prescribed medications include two classes of
antidepressants: selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). A herb called kava has
also attracted attention as a possible treatment,[4] although safety concerns
exist,[5][6] especially given the unregulated nature of herbs in the United
States. Attention given to social anxiety disorder has significantly increased
in the United States since 1999 with the approval and marketing of drugs for
its treatment.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Diagnostic Criteria
  * 3 Symptoms
    * 3.1 Cognitive aspects
    * 3.2 Behavioral aspects
    * 3.3 Physiological aspects
  * 4 Prevalence
  * 5 Comorbidity
  * 6 Causes and perspectives
    * 6.1 Genetic and family factors
    * 6.2 Social experiences
    * 6.3 Social/cultural influences
    * 6.4 Evolutionary context
    * 6.5 Neurochemical and neurocognitive influences
    * 6.6 Substance induced
    * 6.7 Psychological factors
  * 7 Treatment
    * 7.1 Pharmacological treatments
      * 7.1.1 SSRIs
      * 7.1.2 Other drugs
    * 7.2 Psychotherapy
  * 8 Criticisms
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 Further reading
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] History

Literary descriptions of shyness can be traced back to the days of Hippocrates
around 400 B.C. Hippocrates described someone who 'through bashfulness,
suspicion, and timorousness, will not be seen abroad; loves darkness as life
and cannot endure the light or to sit in lightsome places; his hat still in
his eyes, he will neither see, nor be seen by his good will. He dare not come
in company for fear he should be misused, disgraced, overshoot himself in
gesture or speeches, or be sick; he thinks every man observes him'.

Charles Darwin wrote about the physiology and social context of blushing and
shyness. The first mention of a psychiatric term, social phobia ("phobie des
situations sociales"), was made in the early 1900s. Psychologists used the
term "social neurosis" to describe extremely shy patients in the 1930s. After
extensive work by Joseph Wolpe on systematic desensitization, research in
phobias and their treatment grew. The idea that social phobia was a separate
entity from other phobias came from the British psychiatrist, Isaac Marks in
the 1960s. This was accepted by the American Psychiatric Association and was
first officially included in the third edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. The definition of the phobia was
revised in 1989 to allow comorbidity with avoidant personality disorder, and
introduced generalized social phobia. [7] Social phobia had been largely
ignored prior to 1985.

After a call to action by psychiatrist Michael Liebowitz and clinical
psychologist Richard Heimberg, there was an increase in research and attention
on the disorder. The DSM-IV gave social phobia the alternative name Social
Anxiety Disorder. Research in to the psychology and sociology of everyday
social anxiety continued. Cognitive Behavioural models and therapies were
developed for social anxiety disorder. In the 1990s, paroxetine became the
first prescription drug in the U.S. approved to treat social anxiety disorder,
with others following.

A contemporary example of social anxiety disorder in literature can be found
in New York City-based author Tao Lin's story-collection Bed in which a
20-something woman suffering from loneliness lies in her room listening to
tapes her father bought her designed to cure, or help cure, social anxiety
disorder.

Social phobia in many cases can be an extremely debilitating disorder,
especially because one who struggles with it often suffers alone.

## [edit] Diagnostic Criteria

According to the DSM-IV-TR[8], to be diagnosed with Social Phobia all these
criteria (A-H) must be met:

A. A marked and persistent fear of one or more social performance situations
in which the person is exposed to unfamiliar people or to possible scrutiny by
others. The individual fears that he or she will act in a way (or show anxiety
symptoms) that will be humiliating or embarrassing. Note: In children, there
must be evidence of the capacity for age-appropriate social relationships with
familiar people and the anxiety must occur in peer settings, not just in
interactions with adults.

B. Exposure to the social or performance situation almost invariably provokes
an immediate anxiety response. This response may take the form of a
situationally bound or situationally people predisposed Panic Attack. Note: In
children, the anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing, or
shrinking from social situations with unfamiliar people.

C. The person recognizes that their fear is excessive or unreasonable. Note:
In children, this feature may be absent.

D. The social or performance situation is avoided, although it is sometimes
endured with dread (intense anxiety or distress).

E. The avoidance, anxious anticipation of, or distress in, the feared social
or performance situation interferes significantly with the person's normal
routine, occupational (academic) functioning, social life, or if the person is
markedly distressed about having the phobia.

F. In individuals under age 18 years, the duration is at least 6 months.

G. The fear or avoidance is not due to the direct physiological effects of a
substance or a general medical condition and is not better accounted for by
another mental disorder (e.g., Panic Disorder, Separation Anxiety Disorder,
Body Dysmorphic Disorder, a Pervasive Developmental Disorder, or Schizoid
Personality Disorder).

H. If a general medical condition or another mental disorder is present, the
fear in Criterion A or the avoidance in Criteria D, is unrelated to it (e.g.,
the fear is not of Stuttering, trembling in Parkinson's disease, or exhibiting
abnormal eating behavior in Anorexia Nervosa).

Specify if:  
Generalized: if the fears include most social situations (also consider the
additional diagnosis of Avoidant Personality Disorder).

## [edit] Symptoms

### [edit] Cognitive aspects

In cognitive models of Social Anxiety Disorder, social phobics experience
dread over how they will be presented to others. They may be overly self-
conscious, pay high self-attention after the activity, or have high
performance standards for themselves. According to the social psychology
theory of self-presentation, a sufferer attempts to create a well-mannered
impression on others but believes he or she is unable to do so. Many times,
prior to the potentially anxiety-provoking social situation, sufferers may
deliberately go over what could go wrong and how to deal with each unexpected
case. After the event, they may have the perception they performed
unsatisfactorily. Consequently, they will review anything that may have
possibly been abnormal or embarrassing. These thoughts do not just terminate
soon after the encounter, but may extend for weeks or longer.[9] Those with
social phobia tend to interpret neutral or ambiguous conversations with a
negative outlook and many studies suggest that socially anxious individuals
remember more negative memories than those less distressed.[7] An example of
an instance may be that of an employee presenting to his co-workers. During
the presentation, the person may stutter a word upon which he or she may worry
that other people significantly noticed and think that he or she is a terrible
presenter. This cognitive thought propels further anxiety which may lead to
further stuttering, sweating and a possible panic attack.

### [edit] Behavioral aspects

Social anxiety disorder is a persistent fear of one or more situations in
which the person is exposed to possible scrutiny by others and fears that he
or she may do something or act in a way that will be humiliating or
embarrassing. It exceeds normal "shyness" as it leads to excessive social
avoidance and substantial social or occupational impairment. Feared activities
may include almost any type of social interaction, especially small groups,
dating, parties, talking to strangers, restaurants, etc. Physical symptoms
include "mind going blank", fast heartbeat, blushing, stomach ache. Cognitive
distortions are a hallmark, and learned about in CBT (cognitive-behavioral
therapy). Thoughts are often self-defeating and inaccurate.

The groundless fear of making telephone calls is typical, both answering and
picking up, due to conversing's social nature.[citation needed] It may appear
early in childhood.

According to psychologist B.F. Skinner, phobias are controlled by escape and
avoidance behaviors. For instance, a student may leave the room when talking
in front of the class (escape) and refrain from doing verbal presentations
because of the previously encountered anxiety attack (avoid). Minor avoidance
behaviors are exposed when a person avoids eye contact and crosses arms to
avoid recognizable shaking.[7] A fight-or-flight response is then triggered in
such events. Preventing these automatic responses is at the core of treatment
for social anxiety.

### [edit] Physiological aspects

Physiological effects, similar to those in other anxiety disorders, are
present in social phobics. Faced with an uncomfortable situation, children
with social anxiety may display tantrums, weeping, clinging to parents, and
shutting themselves out.[10] In adults, it may be tears as well as
experiencing excessive sweating, nausea, shaking, and palpitations as a result
of the fight-or-flight response. The walk disturbance (?) may appear,
especially when passing a group of people. Blushing is commonly exhibited by
individuals suffering from social phobia.[7] These visible symptoms further
reinforce the anxiety in the presence of others. A 2006 study found that the
area of the brain called the amygdala, part of the limbic system, is
hyperactive when patients are shown threatening faces or confronted with
frightening situations. They found that patients with more severe social
phobia showed a correlation with the increased response in the amygdala.[11]

## [edit] Prevalence

Country Prevalence  
United States 2-7%[1]  
England 0.4%

(children)[2]  
Scotland 1.8%

(children)[3]  
Wales 0.6%

(children)[4]  
Australia 1-2.7%[5]  
Brazil 4.7-7.9%[12]  
When prevalence estimates were based on the examination of psychiatric clinic
samples, social anxiety disorder was thought to be a relatively rare disorder.
The opposite was instead true; social anxiety was common but many were afraid
to seek psychiatric help, leading to an understatement of the problem.[7]
Prevalence rates vary widely because of its vague diagnostic criteria and its
overlapping symptoms with other disorders. There has been some debate on how
the studies are conducted and whether the illness truly impairs the
respondents as laid out in the official criteria. Psychologist Dr. Ray Crozier
argues, "it is difficult to ascertain whether the person being interviewed
adheres to the DSM-III-R criteria or whether they are merely exhibiting poor
social skills or shyness."[13]

The National Comorbidity Survey of over 8,000 American correspondents in 1994
revealed a 12-month and lifetime prevalence rates of 7.9 percent and 13.3
percent making it the third most prevalent psychiatric disorder after
depression and alcohol dependence and the most apparent of the anxiety
disorders.[14] According to U.S. epidemiological data from the National
Institute of Mental Health, social phobia affects 5.3 million adult Americans
in any given year. Cross-cultural studies have reached prevalence rates with
the conservative rates at 5 percent of the population.[15][16] However, other
estimates vary within 2 percent and 7 percent of the U.S. adult
population.[17][18]

Onset of social phobia typically occurs between 11 and 19 years of age. Onset
after age 25 is rare. Social anxiety disorder occurs in females nearly twice
as often as males, although men are more likely to seek help.[19] The
prevalence of social phobia appears to be increasing among white, married, and
well-educated individuals. As a group, those with generalized social phobia
are less likely to graduate from high school and are more likely to rely on
government financial assistance or have poverty-level salaries.[20] Surveys
carried out in 2002 show the youth of England, Scotland, and Wales have a
prevalence rate of 0.4 percent, 1.8 percent, and 0.6 percent,
respectively.[21] The prevalence of self-reported social anxiety for Nova
Scotians older than 14 years was 4.2 percent in June 2004 with women (4.6
percent) reporting more than men (3.8 percent).[22] In Australia, social
phobia is the 8th and 5th leading disease or illness for males and females
between 15â24 years of age as of 2003.[23] Because of the difficulty in
separating social phobia from poor social skills or shyness, some studies have
a large range of prevalence.[24] The table also shows higher prevalence in
Brazil.

## [edit] Comorbidity

There is a high degree of comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders. Social
phobia often occurs alongside low self-esteem and clinical depression, due to
lack of personal relationships and long periods of isolation from avoiding
social situations. To try to reduce their anxiety and alleviate depression,
people with social phobia may use alcohol or other drugs, which can lead to
substance abuse. It is estimated that one-fifth of patients with social
anxiety disorder also suffer from alcohol dependence.[25] The most common
complementary psychiatric condition is unipolar depression. In a sample of
14,263 people, of the 2.4 percent of persons diagnosed with social phobia,
16.6 percent also met the criteria for clinical depression.[26] Besides
depression, the most common disorders diagnosed in patients with social phobia
are panic disorder (33 percent), generalized anxiety disorder (19 percent),
post-traumatic stress disorder (36 percent), substance abuse disorder (18
percent), and attempted suicide (23 percent).[27] In one study of social
anxiety disorder among patients who developed comorbid alcoholism, panic
disorder, or depression, social anxiety disorder preceded the onset of
alcoholism, panic disorder and depression in 75 percent, 61 percent, and 90
percent of patients, respectively. Avoidant personality disorder is also
highly correlated with social phobia.[28] Because of its close relationship
and overlapping symptoms with other illnesses, treating social phobics may
help understand underlying connection in other psychiatric disorders.

There is research indicating that social anxiety disorder is often correlated
with bipolar disorder[29]. Some researchers believe they share an underlying
cyclothymic-anxious-sensitive disposition.[30] In addition, studies show that
more socially phobic patients treated with anti-depressant medication develop
hypomania than non-phobic controls[6][31]. This can be seen as the medication
creating a new problem, and also has this adverse effect in a proportion of
those without social phobia.

## [edit] Causes and perspectives

Research into the causes of social anxiety and social phobia is wide-ranging,
encompassing multiple perspectives from neuroscience to sociology. Scientists
have yet to pinpoint the exact causes. Studies suggest that genetics can play
a part in combination with environmental factors.

### [edit] Genetic and family factors

It has been shown that there is a two to threefold greater risk of having
social phobia if a first-degree relative also has the disorder. This could be
due to genetics and/or due to children acquiring social fears and avoidance
through processes of observational learning or parental psychosocial
education. Studies of identical twins brought up (via adoption) in different
families have indicated that, if one twin developed social anxiety disorder,
then the other was between 30 percent and 50 percent more likely than average
to also develop the disorder.[32] To some extent this 'heritability' may not
be specific - for example, studies have found that if a parent has any kind of
anxiety disorder or clinical depression, then a child is somewhat more likely
to develop an anxiety disorder or social phobia.[33] Studies suggest that
parents of those with social anxiety disorder tend to be more socially
isolated themselves (Bruch and Heimberg, 1994; Caster et al, 1999), and
shyness in adoptive parents is significantly correlated with shyness in
adopted children (Daniels and Plomin, 1985);

Adolescents who were rated as having an insecure (anxious-ambivalent)
attachment with their mother as infants were twice as likely to develop
anxiety disorders by late adolescence,[34] including social phobia.

A related line of research has investigated 'behavioural inhibition' in
infants â early signs of an inhibited and introspective or fearful nature.
Studies have shown that around 10-15 percent of individuals show this early
temperament, which appears to be partly due to genetics. Some continue to show
this trait in to adolescence and adulthood, and appear to be more likely to
develop social anxiety disorder.[35]

### [edit] Social experiences

A previous negative social experience can be a trigger to social
phobia.[36][37] perhaps particularly for individuals high in 'interpersonal
sensitivity'. For around half of those diagnosed with social anxiety disorder,
a specific traumatic or humiliating social event appears to be associated with
the onset or worsening of the disorder;[38] this kind of event appears to be
particularly related to specific (performance) social phobia, for example
regarding public speaking (Stemberg et al., 1995). As well as direct
experiences, observing or hearing about the socially negative experiences of
others (e.g. a faux pas committed by someone), or verbal warnings of social
problems and dangers, may also make the development of a social anxiety
disorder more likely.[39] Social anxiety disorder may be caused by the longer-
term effects of not fitting in, or being bullied, rejected or ignored (Beidel
and Turner, 1998). Shy adolescents or avoidant adults have emphasised
unpleasant experiences with peers[40] or childhood bullying or harassment
(Gilmartin, 1987). In one study, popularity was found to be negatively
correlated with social anxiety, and children who were neglected by their peers
reported higher social anxiety and fear of negative evaluation than other
categories of children.[41] Socially phobic children appear less likely to
receive positive reactions from peers[42] and anxious or inhibited children
may isolate themselves.[43]

### [edit] Social/cultural influences

Cultural factors that have been related to social anxiety disorder include a
society's attitude towards shyness and avoidance, affecting ability to form
relationships or access employment or education. One study found that the
effects of parenting are different depending on the culture - American
children appear more likely to develop social anxiety disorder if their
parents emphasize the importance of other's opinions and use shame as a
disciplinary strategy (Leung et al., 1994), but this association was not found
for Chinese/Chinese-American children. In China, research has indicated that
shy-inhibited children are more accepted than their peers and more likely to
be considered for leadership and considered competent, in contrast to the
findings in Western countries.[44] Purely demographic variables may also play
a role - for example there are possibly lower rates of social anxiety disorder
in Mediterranean countries and higher rates in Scandinavian countries, and it
has been hypothesized that hot weather and high-density may reduce avoidance
and increase interpersonal contact.

Problems in developing social skills, or 'social effectiveness', may be a
cause of some social anxiety disorder, through either inability or lack of
confidence to interact socially and gain positive reactions and acceptance
from others. The studies have been mixed, however, with some studies not
finding significant problems in social skills[45] while others have.[46] What
does seem clear is that the socially anxious perceive their own social skills
to be low. It may be that the increasing need for sophisticated social skills
in forming relationships or careers, and an emphasis on assertiveness and
competitiveness, is making social anxiety problems more common, at least among
the 'middle classes'.[47] An interpersonal or media emphasis on 'normal' or
'attractive' personal characteristics has also been argued to fuel
perfectionism and feelings of inferiority or insecurity regarding negative
evaluation from others. The need for social acceptance or social standing has
been elaborated in other lines of research relating to social anxiety[48]

### [edit] Evolutionary context

A long-accepted evolutionary explanation of anxiety is that it reflects an in-
built 'fight or flight' system, which errs on the side of safety. One line of
research suggests that specific dispositions to monitor and react to social
threats may have evolved, reflecting the vital and complex importance of
social living and social rank in human ancestral environments. Charles Darwin
originally wrote about the evolutionary basis of shyness and blushing, and
modern evolutionary psychology and psychiatry also addresses social phobia in
this context.[49] It has been hypothesized that in modern day society these
evolved tendencies can become more inappropriately activated and result in
some of the cognitive 'distortions' or 'irrationalities' identified in
cognitive-behavioral models and therapies[50]

### [edit] Neurochemical and neurocognitive influences

Some scientists hypothesize that social phobia is related to an imbalance of
the brain chemical serotonin. A recent study report increased Serotonin and
Dopamine transporter binding in psychotropic medication-naive patients with
Generalized Social Anxiety Disorder.[51] Sociability is also closely tied to
dopamine neurotransmission. Low D2 receptor binding is found in people with
social anxiety.[52] The efficacy of medications which affect serotonin and
dopamine levels also indicates the role of these pathways. There is also
increasing focus on other candidate transmitters, e.g. Norepinephrine, which
may be over-active in social anxiety disorder, and the inhibitory transmitter
GABA.

Individuals with social anxiety disorder have been found to have a
hypersensitive amygdala, for example in relation to social threat cues (e.g.
someone might be evaluating you negatively), angry or hostile faces, and while
just waiting to give a speech.[53] Recent research has also indicated that
another area of the brain, the 'Anterior cingulate cortex', which was already
known to be involved in the experience of physical pain, also appears to be
involved in the experience of 'social pain', for example perceiving group
exclusion.[54]

### [edit] Substance induced

Whilst alcohol initially helps social phobia with excessive use alcohol misuse
can worsen social phobia symptoms and can cause panic disorder to develop or
worsen, during alcohol intoxication and especially during the alcohol
withdrawal syndrome. This effect is not unique to alcohol but can also occur
with long term use of drugs which have a similar mechanism of action to
alcohol such as the benzodiazepines which are sometimes prescribed as
tranquillisers.[55] Benzodiazepines possess anti-anxiety properties and can be
useful for the short-term treatment of severe anxiety. Like the
anticonvulsants, they tend to be mild, well tolerated, and extremely safe.
Benzodiazepines are usually administered orally for the treatment of anxiety;
however, occasionally lorazepam or diazepam may be given intravenously for the
treatment of panic attacks.[56]

The World Council of Anxiety does not recommend benzodiazepines for the long
term treatment of anxiety due to a range of problems associated with long term
use of benzodiazepines including tolerance, psychomotor impairment, cognitive
and memory impairments, physical dependence and a benzodiazepine withdrawal
syndrome upon discontinuation of benzodiazepines.[57] Despite increasing focus
on the use of antidepressants and other agents for the treatment of anxiety,
benzodiazepines have remained a mainstay of anxiolytic pharmacotherapy due to
their robust efficacy, rapid onset of therapeutic effect, and generally
favorable side effect profile.[58] Treatment patterns for psychotropic drugs
appear to have remained stable over the past decade, with benzodiazepines
being the most commonly used medication for panic disorder.[59]

Approximately half of patients attending mental health services for conditions
including anxiety disorders such as panic disorder or social phobia are the
result of alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence. Sometimes anxiety pre-existed
alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence but the alcohol or benzodiazepine
dependence act to keep the anxiety disorders going and often progressively
making them worse. Many people who are addicted to alcohol or prescribed
benzodiazepines when it is explained to them they have a choice between
ongoing ill mental health or quitting and recovering from their symptoms
decide on quitting alcohol and or their benzodiazepines. It was noted that
every individual has an individual sensitivity level to alcohol or sedative
hypnotic drugs and what one person can tolerate without ill health another
will suffer very ill health and that even moderate drinking can cause rebound
anxiety syndromes and sleep disorders. A person who is suffering the toxic
effects of alcohol or benzodiazepines will not benefit from other therapies or
medications as they do not address the root cause of the symptoms which is a
"poisoned brain". Recovery from benzodiazepines tends to take a lot longer
than recovery from alcohol but people can regain their previous good health.
Symptoms may temporarily worsen however, during alcohol withdrawal or
benzodiazepine withdrawal.[60]

### [edit] Psychological factors

Research has indicated the role of 'core' or 'unconditional' negative beliefs
(e.g. I am inept) and 'conditional' beliefs nearer to the surface (e.g. If I
show myself, I will be rejected). They are thought to develop based on
personality and adverse experiences and to be activated when the person feels
under threat.[61] One line of work has focused more specifically on the key
role of self-presentational concerns.[62][63] The resulting anxiety states are
seen as interfering with social performance and the ability to concentrate on
interaction, which in turn creates more social problems, which strengthens the
negative schema. Also highlighted has been a high focus on and worry about
anxiety symptoms themselves and how they might appear to others.[64] A similar
model[65] emphasizes the development of a distorted mental representation of
their self and over-estimates of the likelihood and consequences of negative
evaluation, and of the performance standards that others have. Such cognitive-
behavioral models consider the role of negatively-biased memories of the past
and the processes of rumination after an event, and fearful anticipation
before it. Studies have also highlighted the role of subtle avoidance and
defensive factors, and shown how attempts to avoid feared negative evaluations
or use 'safety behaviors' (Clark & Wells, 1995) can make social interaction
more difficult and the anxiety worse in the long run. This work has been
influential in the development of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for social
anxiety disorder, which has been shown to have efficacy.

## [edit] Treatment

Arguably the most important clinical point to emerge from studies of social
anxiety disorder is the benefit of early diagnosis and treatment. Social
anxiety disorder remains under-recognized in primary care practice, with
patients often presenting for treatment only after the onset of complications
such as clinical depression or substance abuse disorders.

Research has provided evidence for the efficacy of two forms of treatment
available for social phobia: certain medications and a specific form of short-
term psychotherapy called Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), the central
component being gradual exposure therapy.

### [edit] Pharmacological treatments

#### [edit] SSRIs

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), a class of antidepressants,
are considered by many to be the first choice medication for generalised
social phobia. These drugs elevate the level of the neurotransmitter
serotonin, among other effects. The first drug formally approved by the Food
and Drug Administration was paroxetine, sold as Paxil in the U.S. or Seroxat
in the UK. Compared to older forms of medication, there is less risk of
tolerability and drug dependency.[66] However, their efficacy and increased
suicide risk has been subject to controversy.

In a 1995 double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, the SSRI paroxetine was
shown to result in clinically meaningful improvement in 55 percent of patients
with generalized social anxiety disorder, compared with 23.9 percent of those
taking placebo.[67] An October 2004 study yielded similar results. Patients
were treated with either fluoxetine, psychotherapy, fluoxetine and
psychotherapy, placebo and psychotherapy, and a placebo. The first four sets
saw improvement in 50.8 to 54.2 percent of the patients. Of those assigned to
receive only a placebo, 31.7 percent achieved a rating of 1 or 2 on the
Clinical Global Impression-Improvement scale. Those who sought both therapy
and medication did not see a boost in improvement.[68]

General side-effects are common during the first weeks while the body adjusts
to the drug. Symptoms may include headaches, nausea, insomnia and changes in
sexual behavior. Treatment safety during pregnancy has not been
established.[69] In late 2004 much media attention was given to a proposed
link between SSRI use and juvenile suicide. For this reason, the use of SSRIs
in pediatric cases of depression is now recognized by the Food and Drug
Administration as warranting a cautionary statement to the parents of children
who may be prescribed SSRIs by a family doctor.[70] Recent studies have shown
no increase in rates of suicide.[71] These tests, however, represent those
diagnosed with depression, not necessarily with social anxiety disorder.
However, it should be noted that due to the nature of the conditions, those
taking SSRIs for social phobias are far less likely to have suicidal ideation
than those with depression.

#### [edit] Other drugs

Although SSRIs are often the first choice for treatment, other prescription
and illegal drugs are commonly used, sometimes only if SSRIs fail to produce
any clinically significant improvement.

In 1985, before the introduction of SSRIs, anti-depressants such as monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) were frequently used in the treatment of social
anxiety. Their efficacy appears to be comparable or sometimes superior to
SSRIs or Benzodiazepines. However, because of the dietary restrictions
required, high toxicity in overdose, and incompatibilities with other drugs,
its usefulness as a treatment for social phobics is now limited. Some argue
for their continued use, however, or that a special diet does not need to be
strictly adhered to.[72] A newer type of this medication, Reversible
inhibitors of monoamine oxidase subtype A (RIMAs) inhibit the MAO enzyme only
temporarily, improving the adverse-effect profile but possibly reducing their
efficacy.

Benzodiazepines are a short-acting and more potent alternative to SSRIs. These
drugs are often used for short-term relief of severe, disabling anxiety.
Alprazolam and clonazepam are usual benzodiazepines for social fear. Although
benzodiazepines are still sometimes prescribed for long-term everyday use in
some countries, there is much concern over the development of drug tolerance,
dependency and recreational abuse. Benzodiazepines augment the action of GABA,
the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain; effects usually begin to
appear within minutes or hours.

Some people with a form of social phobia called performance phobia have been
helped by beta-blockers, which are more commonly used to control high blood
pressure. Taken in low doses, they control the physical manifestation of
anxiety and can be taken before a public performance.

A novel treatment approach has recently been developed as a result of
translational research. It has been shown that a combination of acute dosing
of d-cycloserine (DCS) with exposure therapy facilitates the effects of
exposure therapy of social phobia (Hofmann, Meuret, Smits, et al., 2006). DCS
is an old antibiotic medication used for treating tuberculosis and does not
have any anxiolytic properties per se. However, it acts as an agonist at the
glutamatergic N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor site, which is important
for learning and memory (Hofmann, Pollack, & Otto, 2006). It has been shown
that administering a small dose acutely 1 hour before exposure therapy can
facilitate extinction learning that occurs during therapy.

### [edit] Psychotherapy

Research has shown that cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) can be highly
effective for several anxiety disorders, particularly panic disorder and
social phobia.[73] CBT, as its name suggests, has two main components,
cognitive and behavioral. In cases of social anxiety, the cognitive component
can help the patient question how they can be so sure that others are
continually watching and harshly judging him or her. The behavioral component
seeks to change people's reactions to anxiety-provoking situations. As such it
serves as a logical extension of cognitive therapy, whereby people are shown
proof in the real world that their dysfunctional thought processes are
unrealistic. A key element of this component is gradual exposure, in which the
patient is confronted by the things they fear in a structured, sensitive
manner. Gradual exposure is an inherently unpleasant technique; ideally it
involves exposure to a feared social situation that is anxiety provoking but
bearable, for as long as possible, two to three times a day. Often, a
hierarchy of feared steps is constructed and the patient is exposed each step
sequentially. The aim is to learn from acting differently and observing
reactions. This is intended to be done with support and guidance, and when the
therapist and patient feel they are ready. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
social phobia also includes anxiety management training, which may include
techniques such as deep breathing and muscle relaxation exercises, which may
be practiced 'in-situ'. CBT can also be conducted partly in group sessions,
facilitating the sharing of experiences, a sense of acceptance by others and
undertaking behavioral challenges in a trusted environment (Heimberg).

Some studies have suggested social skills training can help with social
anxiety[74]. However, it is not clear whether specific social skills
techniques and training are required, rather than just support with general
social functioning and exposure to social situations.[75].

Additionally, a recent study has suggested that interpersonal therapy, a form
of psychotherapy primarily used to treat depression, may also be effective in
the treatment of social phobia.[76].

## [edit] Criticisms

Some argue that inherent problems with society such as a competitive culture,
power imbalances, lack of care and poor social education in families cause
social anxiety; they feel the diagnostic boundaries have been stretched too
far and that clinical and media work is promoting the idea that any problems
with shyness or social worries are a pathological medical condition requiring
medical treatment. Some see this as being driven by pharmaceutical companies,
either by direct advertising to the public or their financial influence on
psychiatry.[77] This view can be associated with anti-psychiatry. Proponents
of this view argue that drug companies try to increase profits by inventing
new diseases or labels.

## [edit] See also

  * Agoraphobia
  * Anxiety
  * Anxiety Disorders Association of America
  * Asperger syndrome
  * Avoidant personality disorder
  * Fear
  * Generalized anxiety disorder
  * Hikikomori
  * Hypervigilance
  * Hypoglycemia
  * Introversion and extroversion
  * Liebowitz social anxiety scale (LSAS)

  * Love-shyness
  * Major depressive disorder
  * Mean world syndrome
  * Mindfulness
  * Paranoid personality disorder
  * Schizoid personality disorder
  * Schizotypal personality disorder
  * Selective mutism
  * Social anxiety
  * Social control
  * Social rejection
  * Taijin kyofusho
  * Timidness

  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ Thomas A. Richards, Ph.D., Director, Social Anxiety Institute, Why We Prefer the Term Social Anxiety to Social Phobia 2003.
  2. ^ a b Webmd. Mental Health: Social Anxiety Disorder
  3. ^ p. 29-30. Social Phobia: Diagnosis, Assessment, and Treatment. Richard G. Heimberg. Guilford Press
  4. ^ Pittler MH, Ernst E (2003). "Kava extract for treating anxiety". Cochrane database of systematic reviews (Online) (1): CD003383. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003383. PMID 12535473.
  5. ^ Lim ST, Dragull K, Tang CS, Bittenbender HC, Efird JT, Nerurkar PV (May 2007). "Effects of kava alkaloid, pipermethystine, and kavalactones on oxidative stress and cytochrome P450 in F-344 rats". Toxicol. Sci. 97 (1): 214â21. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfm035. PMID 17329236.
  6. ^ Sorrentino L, Capasso A, Schmidt M (September 2006). "Safety of ethanolic kava extract: Results of a study of chronic toxicity in rats". Phytomedicine 13 (8): 542â9. doi:10.1016/j.phymed.2006.01.006. PMID 16904878.
  7. ^ a b c d e Furmark, Thomas. Social Phobia - From Epidemiology to Brain Function. Retrieved February 21, 2006.
  8. ^ American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-IV-TR (4th ed., text revision). Washington, DC: Author.
  9. ^ Shyness & Social Anxiety Treatment Australia Social Phobia
  10. ^ eNotes. Social phobia - Causes. Retrieved February 22, 2006.
  11. ^ Studying Brain Activity Could Aid Diagnosis Of Social Phobia. Monash University. January 19, 2006.
  12. ^ Rocha FL, Vorcaro CM, Uchoa E, Lima-Costa MF (September 2005). "Comparing the prevalence rates of social phobia in a community according to ICD-10 and DSM-III-R". Rev Bras Psiquiatr 27 (3): 222â4. doi:/S1516-44462005000400011. PMID 16224610.
  13. ^ Crozier, page 4.
  14. ^ Social Anxiety Disorder: A Common, Underrecognized Mental Disorder. American Family Physician. Nov 15, 1999.
  15. ^ Crozier, page 3.
  16. ^ Stein MB, Gorman JM (May 2001). "Unmasking social anxiety disorder" (PDF). J Psychiatry Neurosci 26 (3): 185â9. PMID 11394188. PMC: 1408304. http://www.cma.ca/multimedia/staticContent/HTML/N0/l2/jpn/vol-26/issue-3/pdf/pg185.pdf.
  17. ^ Surgeon General Adults and Mental Health 1999..
  18. ^ Retrieved February 22, 2006.
  19. ^ Retrieved February 22, 2006.
  20. ^ Nordenberg, Tamar. FDA Consumer. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Social Phobia's Traumas and Treatments. November-December 1999. Retrieved February 23, 2006.
  21. ^ National Statistics. The mental health of young people looked after by local authorities in Scotland. 2002-2003. Retrieved February 23, 2006.
  22. ^ Nova Scotia Department of Health. Social Anxiety in Nova Scotia. June 2004. Retrieved February 23, 2006.
  23. ^ Senate Select Committee on Mental Health. Mental Health. 2003. Retrieved February 23, 2006.
  24. ^ Thomas Furmark (1999-09-01). "Social phobia in the general population: prevalence and sociodemographic profile (Sweden)". http://www.springerlink.com/content/9pkp3ephnqe6l486/. Retrieved on 2007-03-28.
  25. ^ Alcohol Research and Health. Sarah W. Book, Carrie L. Randall. Social anxiety disorder and alcohol use. Retrieved February 24, 2006.
  26. ^ Crozier, page 358-9.
  27. ^ eNotes. Social phobia Retrieved February 23, 2006.
  28. ^ Crozier, page 361.
  29. ^ Pini S, Maser JD, Dell'Osso L, et al (2006). "Social anxiety disorder comorbidity in patients with bipolar disorder: a clinical replication". J Anxiety Disord 20 (8): 1148â57. doi:10.1016/j.janxdis.2006.03.006. PMID 16630705.
  30. ^ Perugi G, Akiskal HS (December 2002). "The soft bipolar spectrum redefined: focus on the cyclothymic, anxious-sensitive, impulse-dyscontrol, and binge-eating connection in bipolar II and related conditions". Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. 25 (4): 713â37. PMID 12462857.
  31. ^ ValenÃ§a AM, Nardi AE, Nascimento I, et al (May 2005). "Do social anxiety disorder patients belong to a bipolar spectrum subgroup?". J Affect Disord 86 (1): 11â8. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2004.12.007. PMID 15820266.
  32. ^ Kendler K, Karkowski L, Prescott C (1999). "Fears and phobias: reliability and heritability". Psychol Med 29 (3): 539â53. doi:10.1017/S0033291799008429. PMID 10405076.
  33. ^ Merikangas, S. Avenevoli, L. Dierker and C. Grillon (1999) Vulnerability factors among children at risk for anxiety disorders. Biol Psychiatry 46 1523-1535
  34. ^ Warren S, Huston L, Egeland B, Sroufe L (1997) Child and adolescent anxiety disorders and early attachment. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 36:637-644.
  35. ^ Schwartz C, Snidman N, Kagan J (1999) Adolescent social anxiety as an outcome of inhibited temperament in childhood. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 38:1008-1015
  36. ^ National Center for Health and Wellness.Causes of Social Anxiety Disorder. Retrieved February 24, 2006.
  37. ^ Athealth.com.Social phobia. 1999. Retrieved February 24, 2006.
  38. ^ Mineka S, Zinbarg R (1995) Conditioning and ethological models of social phobia. In: Heimberg R, Liebowitz M, Hope D, Schneier F, editors. Social Phobia: Diagnosis, Assessment, and Treatment. New York: The Guilford Press, 134-162
  39. ^ Beidel, D.C., & Turner, S.M. (1998). Shy children, phobic adults: The nature and treatment of social phobia. American Psychological Association Books.
  40. ^ Ishiyama F (1984) Shyness: Anxious social sensitivity and self-isolating tendency. Adolescence 19:903-911
  41. ^ La Greca A, Dandes S, Wick P, Shaw K, Stone W (1988):Development of the social anxiety scale for children: Reliability and concurrent validity. J Clin Child Psychol 17:84-91
  42. ^ Spence SH, Donovan C, Brechman-Toussaint M (May 1999). "Social skills, social outcomes, and cognitive features of childhood social phobia". J Abnorm Psychol 108 (2): 211â21. PMID 10369031. http://content.apa.org/journals/abn/108/2/211.
  43. ^ Rubin KH, Mills RS (December 1988). "The many faces of social isolation in childhood". J Consult Clin Psychol 56 (6): 916â24. PMID 3204203. http://content.apa.org/journals/ccp/56/6/916.
  44. ^ Xinyin, C. Rubin, KH, Boshu, L. (1995). Social and school adjustment of shy and aggressive children in China. Development and Psychopathology, 7, 337-349
  45. ^ Rapee RM, Lim L (November 1992). "Discrepancy between self- and observer ratings of performance in social phobics". J Abnorm Psychol 101 (4): 728â31. PMID 1430614. http://content.apa.org/journals/abn/101/4/728.
  46. ^ Stopa L, Clark D (1993). "Cognitive processes in social phobia". Behav Res Ther 31 (3): 255â67. doi:10.1016/0005-7967(93)90024-O. PMID 8476400.
  47. ^ Heimberg RG, Stein MB, Hiripi E, Kessler RC (February 2000). "Trends in the prevalence of social phobia in the United States: a synthetic cohort analysis of changes over four decades". Eur. Psychiatry 15 (1): 29â37. PMID 10713800. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0924-9338(00)00213-3.
  48. ^ Baumeister R, Leary M (1995). "The need to belong: desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation". Psychol Bull 117 (3): 497â529. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.117.3.497. PMID 7777651.
  49. ^ Gilbert P (December 2001). "Evolution and social anxiety. The role of attraction, social competition, and social hierarchies". Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. 24 (4): 723â51. PMID 11723630.
  50. ^ Gilbert P (December 1998). "The evolved basis and adaptive functions of cognitive distortions". Br J Med Psychol 71 ( Pt 4): 447â63. PMID 9875955.
  51. ^ van der Wee et al. (May 2008). "Increased Serotonin and Dopamine Transporter Binding in Psychotropic MedicationâNaÃ¯ve Patients with Generalized Social Anxiety Disorder Shown by 123I-Ã-(4-Iodophenyl)-Tropane SPECT". The Journal of Nuclear Medicine 49 (5): 757â63. doi:10.2967/jnumed.107.045518. PMID 18413401.
  52. ^ Murray B. Stein, MD; Jack M. Gorman, MD. Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience Volume 26. Unmasking social anxiety disorder 2001\. Retrieved March 1, 2006.
  53. ^ Davidson RJ, Marshall JR, Tomarken AJ, Henriques JB (January 2000). "While a phobic waits: regional brain electrical and autonomic activity in social phobics during anticipation of public speaking". Biol. Psychiatry 47 (2): 85â95. PMID 10664824. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0006-3223(99)00222-X.
  54. ^ Eisenberger NI, Lieberman MD, Williams KD (October 2003). "Does rejection hurt? An FMRI study of social exclusion". Science (journal) 302 (5643): 290â2. doi:10.1126/science.1089134. PMID 14551436.
  55. ^ Terra MB, Figueira I, Barros HM (August 2004). "Impact of alcohol intoxication and withdrawal syndrome on social phobia and panic disorder in alcoholic inpatients". Rev Hosp Clin Fac Med Sao Paulo 59 (4): 187â92. doi:/S0041-87812004000400006. PMID 15361983. http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0041-87812004000400006&lng=en&nrm=iso&tlng=en.
  56. ^ BNF; British Medical Journal (2008). "Anxiolytics". written at UK. British National Formulary. http://www.bnf.org/bnf/bnf/56/3169.htm. Retrieved on 17 december 2008.
  57. ^ Allgulander C, Bandelow B, Hollander E, et al (August 2003). "WCA recommendations for the long-term treatment of generalized anxiety disorder". CNS Spectr 8 (8 Suppl 1): 53â61. PMID 14767398.
  58. ^ Stevens JC, Pollack MH (2005). "Benzodiazepines in clinical practice: consideration of their long-term use and alternative agents". J Clin Psychiatry 66 Suppl 2: 21â7. PMID 15762816. http://article.psychiatrist.com/?ContentType=START&ID=10001225.
  59. ^ Bruce SE, Vasile RG, Goisman RM, Salzman C, Spencer M, Machan JT, Keller MB (August 2003). "Are benzodiazepines still the medication of choice for patients with panic disorder with or without agoraphobia?". Am J Psychiatry 160 (8): 1432â8. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.160.8.1432. PMID 12900305.
  60. ^ Cohen SI (February 1995). "Alcohol and benzodiazepines generate anxiety, panic and phobias" (PDF). J R Soc Med 88 (2): 73â7. PMID 7769598. PMC: 1295099. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/picrender.fcgi?artid=1295099&blobtype=pdf.
  61. ^ Beck AT, Emery G, Greenberg RL (1985) Anxiety Disorders and Phobias: A Cognitive Perspective. New York: Basic Books.
  62. ^ Leary, M.R., & Kowalski, R.M. (1995) Social Anxiety. London: Guildford Press
  63. ^ Leary, M.R., Kowalski, R.M, Campbell, C.D. (1988). Self-presentational concerns and social anxiety: the role of generalized impression expectancies. Journal of Research in Personality, 22, 308-321.
  64. ^ Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In. R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Liebowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social phobia: Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment (pg 41-68). Guilford Press: New York.
  65. ^ Rapee RM, Heimberg RG (August 1997). "A cognitive-behavioral model of anxiety in social phobia". Behav Res Ther 35 (8): 741â56. PMID 9256517. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0005-7967(97)00022-3.
  66. ^ SSRIs in Depression and Anxiety. John Wiley and Sons. pp. 109â111. ISBN 0-4708-4136-2.
  67. ^ Stein MB, Liebowitz MR, Lydiard RB, Pitts CD, Bushnell W, Gergel I (August 1998). "Paroxetine treatment of generalized social phobia (social anxiety disorder): a randomized controlled trial". JAMA 280 (8): 708â13. PMID 9728642. http://jama.ama-assn.org/cgi/content/full/280/8/708.
  68. ^ Davidson JR, Foa EB, Huppert JD, et al (October 2004). "Fluoxetine, comprehensive cognitive behavioral therapy, and placebo in generalized social phobia". Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 61 (10): 1005â13. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.61.10.1005. PMID 15466674.
  69. ^ Social Phobia at eMedicine
  70. ^ Federal Drug and Administration. Class Suicidality Labeling Language for Antidepressants. 2004. Retrieved February 24, 2006.
  71. ^ Group Health Cooperative. Study refutes link between suicide risk, antidepressants January 1, 2006. Retrieved February 24, 2006.
  72. ^ Crozier, page. 475-477.
  73. ^ Jonathan R. T. Davidson, MD; Edna B. Foa, PhD; et al. Fluoxetine, Comprehensive Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, and Placebo in Generalized Social Phobia 1998\. Retrieved March 1, 2006.
  74. ^ Mersch et al., 1991
  75. ^ Stravynski & Amado, 2001
  76. ^ Lipsitz et al, 1999
  77. ^ Koerner, Brendan I. (July/August 2002). "Disorders Made to Order". Mother Jones. http://www.motherjones.com/news/feature/2002/07/disorders.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-14.

## [edit] Further reading

  * American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Anxiety disorders. In Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev., pp. 450â456). Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association.
  * Belzer, K. D., McKee, M. B., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2005). Social Anxiety Disorder: Current Perspectives on Diagnosis and Treatment. Primary Psychiatry, 12(11), 40â53.
  * Berent, Jonathan, with Amy Lemley (1993). Beyond Shyness: How to Conquer Social Anxieties. New York: Simon & Shuster. ISBN 0-671-74137-3.
  * Bruch, M. A. (1989). Familial and developmental antecedents of social phobia: Issues and findings. Clinical Psychology Review, 9, 37-47.
  * Burns, D. D. (1999). Feeling good: The new mood therapy (Rev. ed.). New York: Avon. ISBN 0-380-81033-6.
  * Crozier, W. R., & Alden, L. E. (2001). International Handbook of Social Anxiety: Concepts, Research, and Interventions Relating to the Self and Shyness. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN 0-471-49129-2.
  * Hales, R. E., & Yudofsky, S. C. (Eds.). (2003). Social phobia. In Textbook of Clinical Psychiatry (4th ed., pp. 572â580). Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Publishing.
  * Hofmann SG, Meuret AE, Smits JA, et al (March 2006). "Augmentation of exposure therapy with D-cycloserine for social anxiety disorder". Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 63 (3): 298â304. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.3.298. PMID 16520435. .
  * Hofmann SG, Pollack MH, Otto MW (2006). "Augmentation treatment of psychotherapy for anxiety disorders with D-cycloserine". CNS Drug Rev 12 (3-4): 208â17. doi:10.1111/j.1527-3458.2006.00208.x. PMID 17227287.
  * Okano K (1994). "Shame and social phobia: a transcultural viewpoint". Bull Menninger Clin 58 (3): 323â38. PMID 7920372.
  * Samson, A. (2002). Psychiatric conceptions of "social phobia": A comparative perspective. Swiss Journal of Sociology, 28(3), 505â527.
  * Stein MB, Kean YM (October 2000). "Disability and quality of life in social phobia: epidemiologic findings". Am J Psychiatry 157 (10): 1606â13. PMID 11007714. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=11007714. .
  * Van Ameringen MA, Lane RM, Walker JR, et al (February 2001). "Sertraline treatment of generalized social phobia: a 20-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled study". Am J Psychiatry 158 (2): 275â81. PMID 11156811. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=11156811.
  * Wagstaff AJ, Cheer SM, Matheson AJ, Ormrod D, Goa KL (2002). "Paroxetine: an update of its use in psychiatric disorders in adults". Drugs 62 (4): 655â703. PMID 11893234.
  * Garcia-Lopez LJ, Olivares J, Beidel D, Albano AM, Turner S, Rosa AI (2006). "Efficacy of three treatment protocols for adolescents with social anxiety disorder: a 5-year follow-up assessment". J Anxiety Disord 20 (2): 175â91. doi:10.1016/j.janxdis.2005.01.003. PMID 16464703.

## [edit] External links

Listen to this article (info/dl)  

Play sound

Spoken Wikipedia

This audio file was created from a revision dated 2006-06-27, and does not
reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles

This is a spoken version of the article. Click here to listen.

  * Social Anxiety at the Open Directory Project
  * Anxiety Disorders Association of America \- Help for people with anxiety disorders, including social anxiety disorder

v â¢ d â¢ e

WHO ICD-10 mental and behavioral disorders (F Â· 290â319)  
Neurological/symptomatic

Dementia (Alzheimer's disease, multi-infarct dementia, Pick's disease,
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, AIDS
dementia complex, Frontotemporal dementia, Elopement, Sundowning, Wandering)
Â· Delirium Â· Post-concussion syndrome Â· Organic brain syndrome  
Psychoactive substance

alcohol (acute alcohol intoxication, drunkenness, alcohol dependence,
alcoholic hallucinosis, Alcohol withdrawal, delirium tremens, Korsakoff's
syndrome, alcohol abuse) Â· opioids (opioid overdose, opioid dependency) Â·
sedative/hypnotic (benzodiazepine overdose, benzodiazepine dependence,
benzodiazepine withdrawal) Â· cocaine (cocaine dependence) Â· general
(Intoxication/Drug overdose, Drug abuse, Physical dependence, Rebound effect,
Withdrawal)  
Schizophrenia, schizotypal  
and delusional

Psychosis (Schizoaffective disorder, Schizophreniform disorder, Brief reactive
psychosis) Â· Schizophrenia (Disorganized schizophrenia, Delusional disorder,
Folie Ã deux) Â· Personality disorder (Schizotypal personality disorder)  
Mood (affective)

Mania Â· Bipolar disorder (Bipolar I, Bipolar II, Cyclothymia) Â· Depression
(Major depressive disorder, Dysthymia)  
Neurotic, stress-related  
and somatoform

Anxiety disorder/  
adjustment disorder

phobic anxiety disorders: Agoraphobia Â· Social anxiety/Social phobia
(Anthropophobia) Â· Specific phobia (Claustrophobia)  
Panic disorder/Panic attack Â· Generalized anxiety disorder Â· OCD Â· stress
(Acute stress reaction, PTSD)  
Somatoform disorder

Somatization disorder Â· Body dysmorphic disorder Â· Hypochondriasis Â·
Nosophobia Â· Da Costa's syndrome Â· Psychalgia Â· Conversion disorder (Ganser
syndrome) Â· Neurasthenia  
Dissociative disorder

Dissociative identity disorder Â· Psychogenic amnesia  
Physiological/physical  
behavioral

Eating disorder

Anorexia nervosa Â· Bulimia nervosa  
Sleep disorder

Dyssomnia (Hypersomnia, Insomnia) Â· Parasomnia (REM behavior disorder, Night
terror) Â· Nightmare  
Sexual dysfunction

Erectile dysfunction Â· Premature ejaculation Â· Vaginismus Â· Dyspareunia Â·
Hypersexuality Â· Female sexual arousal disorder  
Postnatal

Postpartum depression Â· Postnatal psychosis  
Adult personality  
and behavior

Personality disorder Â· Impulse control disorder (Kleptomania,
Trichotillomania, Pyromania) Â· Factitious disorder (Munchausen syndrome) Â·
Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Â· Paraphilia (Voyeurism, Fetishism)  
Mental disorders  
diagnosed in childhood

Mental retardation

X-Linked mental retardation  
Psychological development  
(developmental disorder)

Specific

speech and language (expressive language disorder, aphasia, expressive
aphasia, receptive aphasia, Landau-Kleffner syndrome, lisp) Â· Scholastic
skills (dyslexia, dysgraphia, Gerstmann syndrome) Â· Motor function
(developmental dyspraxia)  
Pervasive

Autism Â· Rett syndrome Â· Asperger syndrome  
Behavioral and emotional

ADHD Â· Conduct disorder (ODD) Â· emotional disorder (Separation anxiety
disorder) Â· social functioning (Selective mutism, RAD, DAD) Â· Tic disorder
(Tourette syndrome) Â· Speech (Stuttering, Cluttering) Â· Stereotypic movement
disorder  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_phobia"

Categories: Spoken articles | Anxiety disorders | Phobias

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 16:12.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



