
# Public administration

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search  
This article is part of the  
Politics series  
Politics  
  * List of political topics
  * Politics by country
  * Politics by subdivision
  * Political economy
  * Political history
  * Political history of the world
  * Political philosophy
  * Political science
  * Political systems
    * Parliamentary  

    * Presidential  

    * Semi-presidential

  * International relations (theory)
  * Political scientists
  * Comparative politics
  * Public administration
    * Bureaucracy (street-level)
    * Adhocracy

  * Public Policy
  * Separation of powers
    * Legislature  

    * Executive  

    * Judiciary

  * Sovereignty
  * Theories of political behavior

  
Subseries  
  * Elections
Electoral systems  
Voting

  * Federalism
  * Forms of government
  * Ideology
  * Political campaigning
  * Political parties

  
Politics portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Public administration can be broadly described as the development,
implementation and study of branches of government policy. The pursuit of the
public good by enhancing civil society, ensuring a well-run, fair, and
effective public service are some of the goals of the field. Though public
administration has historically referred to as government management, since
the 1990s the term is sometimes expanded to encompass non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) that also operate with a similar, primary dedication to
providing services to the public.

Public administration is carried out by public servants who work in public
departments and agencies, at all levels of government, and perform a wide
range of tasks. Public administrators collect and analyze data (statistics),
monitor budgets,, draft legislation, develop policy, and execute legally
mandated government activities. Public administrators serve in many roles:
ranging from "front-line" positions serving the public (e.g., parole officers
and border guards); administrators (e.g., auditors); analysts (e.g., policy
analysts); and managers and executives of government branches and agencies.

Public administration is also an academic field. In comparison with related
fields such as political science, public administration is a relatively new,
multidisciplinary field which only emerged in the 19th century. It draws on
theories and concepts from economics, political science, sociology,
administrative law, management, and a range of related fields. The goals of
the field of public administration are related to the democratic values of
improving equality, justice, security, efficiency, effectiveness of public
services; business administration is primarily concerned with profit.

## Contents

  * 1 In academia
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Antiquity to the early 19th century
    * 2.2 Mid-1800s - 1930s
    * 2.3 1940s
      * 2.3.1 Post-World War II - 1970s
    * 2.4 1980s
    * 2.5 1990s
      * 2.5.1 New public management (NPM)
  * 3 Organizational theory
    * 3.1 Management and government academic work
    * 3.2 Early management theory
    * 3.3 Early political administration theory
    * 3.4 Emergence as a distinct field
    * 3.5 A consolidated discipline
    * 3.6 Public management
    * 3.7 Humanist era
    * 3.8 Rethinking power and management
    * 3.9 Organizational power
    * 3.10 New public management
    * 3.11 Feminist interpretations
    * 3.12 New public service
  * 4 Decision-making models and public administration
    * 4.1 Rational choice
    * 4.2 Herbert Simon's satisficing
    * 4.3 Incrementalism
    * 4.4 Game theory
    * 4.5 William Niskanen's budget-maximizing
    * 4.6 Patrick Dunleavy's bureau shaping
  * 5 Public Administration dichotomies
    * 5.1 Wilson's Politics-Administration Dichotomy
    * 5.2 Fact-Value Dichotomy
    * 5.3 Leonard White
    * 5.4 Paul Appleby
    * 5.5 Luther Gulick
  * 6 Ethics: (Denhardt 127-128)
    * 6.1 Notable scholars
  * 7 References
  * 8 See also
    * 8.1 Societies for public administration
    * 8.2 International public administration
  * 9 External links
  * 10 Suggested reading

  
## [edit] In academia

See also: Master of Public Administration and Doctor of Public Administration

A public administrator can expect to serve in a variety of capacities. In the
United States, the academic field draws heavily on political science and law.
In Europe, notably England and Germany, the divergence of the field from other
disciplines can be traced back to the 1720s continental university curriculum.
Formally, official academic distinctions were made in the 1910s and 1890s,
respectively. Returning again to the United States, the Federalist Papers
referred to the importance of good administration at various times. Further,
scholars such as John A. Rohr writes of a long history behind the
constitutional legitimacy of government bureaucracy.

One minor tradition that the more specific term "public management" refers to
ordinary, routine or typical management concerns, in the context of achieving
public good. Others argue that public management as a new, economically driven
perspective on the operation of government. We will see that this latter view
is often called "new public management" by its advocates. New public
management represents a reform attempt, aimed at reemphasizing the
professional nature of the field. This will replace the academic, moral or
disciplinary emphasis. Some theorists advocate a bright line differentiation
of the professional field from related academic disciplines like political
science and sociology; it remains interdisciplinary in nature.

As a field, public administration can be compared to business administration,
and the master of public administration (MPA) viewed as similar to a master of
business administration (MBA) for those wishing to pursue governmental or non-
profit careers. An MPA often emphasizes substantially different ethical and
sociological criteria that are traditionally secondary to that of profit for
business administrators. The MPA is related to similar government studies
including public affairs, public policy, and political science. Differences
often include program emphases on policy analysis techniques or other topical
focuses such as the study of international affairs as opposed to focuses on
constitutional issues such as separation of powers, administrative law,
problems of governance and power, and participatory democracy.

The Doctor of Public Administration (DPA) is a terminal applied-research
doctoral degree in the field of public administration, focusing on practice.
The DPA requires a dissertation and significant coursework beyond the masters
level. Upon successful completion of the doctoral requirements, the title of
"Doctor" is awarded and the post-nominals of D.P.A. are often added.

Public administration theory is the domain in which discussions of the meaning
and purpose of government, bureaucracy, budgets, governance, and public
affairs takes place. In recent years, public administration theory has
periodically connoted a heavy orientation toward critical theory and
postmodern philosophical notions of government, governance, and power.
However, many public administration scholars support a classic definition of
the term emphasizing constitutionality, service, bureaucratic forms of
organization, and hierarchical government.

## [edit] History

### [edit] Antiquity to the early 19th century

Classic scholars including Plato, Aristotle and Machiavelli are the basis of
subsequent generations of public administration. Until the birth of a national
state, the governors principally emphasized moral and political human nature,
as well as the on the organization of the governing bodies. Operations were
perceived to secondary to establishing guiding theory. In Machiavelli's The
Prince, European princes or governors were offered advice for properly
administering their governments. This work represents one of the first Western
expressions of the methodology of government. As the centuries moved past,
scholars and governors persisted in their various endeavors explaining how one
governs.

Though progress varied across the globe, 16th century Western Europe primarily
ascribed to the "national-state" model of government and its corresponding
administrative structures. Predominantly imperial Asia, tribal Africa, and the
tribal/colonial Americas were each feeling the extent of Europe's aggressive,
dominant diplomatic strategies whose emphasis was war, profit, and
proselytizing. In any event, nation-states required a professional force and
structure for carrying out the primary purposes of government: ensuring
stability with through law, security with a military, and some measure of
equity through taxation. Consequently, the need for expert civil servants
whose ability to read and write formed the basis for developing expertise in
such necessary activities as legal records, military prowess, and tax
administration, and record keeping. As the European imperialist age progressed
and the militarily dominant region extended its hold over other continents and
people, the need for increasingly conventional administrative expertise grew.

Eighteenth century noble, King Frederick William I of Prussia, created
professorates in Cameralism in an effort to service this need. The
universities of Frankfurt an der Oder and University of Hallewere Prussian
institutions emphasizing economic and social disciplines, with the goal of
societal reform. Johann Heinrich Gottlob Justi was the most well-known
professor of Cameralism. Thus, from a Western European perspective, classic,
medieval, and enlightened scholars formed the foundation of the discipline
that has come to be called public administration.

### [edit] Mid-1800s - 1930s

Lorenz von Stein, an 1855 German professor from Vienna, is considered the
founder of the science of public administration in many parts of the world. In
the time of Von Stein, public administration was considered a form of
administrative law, but Von Stein believed this concept too restrictive.

Von Stein taught:

  * Public administration relies on many prestablished disciplines such as sociology, political science, administrative law and public finance. Further, public administration is an integrating science.
  * Public administrators need be concerned with both theory and practice. Practical considerations are at the forefront of the field, but theory is the basis of best practices.
  * Public administration is a science because knowledge is generated and evaluated according to the scientific method.

In the United States, Woodrow Wilson is considered the father of public
administration. He first formally recognized public administration in an 1887
article entitled "The Study of Administration." The future president wrote
that "it is the object of administrative study to discover, first, what
government can properly and successfully do, and, secondly, how it can do
these proper things with the utmost possible efficiency and at the least
possible cost either of money or of energy."[1] Wilson was more influential to
the science of public administration than Von Stein, primarily due to an
article Wilson wrote in 1887 in which he advocated four concepts:

  * Separation of politics and administration
  * Comparative analysis of political and private organizations
  * Improving efficiency with business-like practices and attitudes toward daily operations
  * Improving the effectiveness of public service through management and by training civil servants, merit-based assessment

The separation of politics and administration has been the subject of lasting
debate. The different perspectives regarding this dichotomy contribute to
differentiating characteristics of the suggested generations of public
administration.

### [edit] 1940s

The separation of politics and administration advocated by Wilson continues to
play a significant role in public administration today. However, the dominance
of this dichotomy was challenged by second generation scholars, beginning in
the 1940s. Luther Gulick's fact-value dichotomy was a key contender for
Wilson's allegedly impractical politics-administration dichotomy. In place of
Wilson's first generation split, Gulick advocated a "seamless web of
discretion and interaction" (Fry 1989, 80).[2]

Luther Gulick and Lyndall Urwick are two such second generation scholars.
Gulick, Urwick, and the new generation of administrators stood on the
shoulders of contemporary behavioral, administrative, and organizational
"giants" including Henri Fayol, Fredrick W. Taylor, Paul Appleby, Frank
Goodnow, and Willam Willoughby. With the help of these specialists and their
empirical work on human nature, group behavior, and business organizations,
second generation public administration scholars had a necessary advantage
over the pre-generation and first generation scholars. That is, the new
generation of organizational theories no longer relied upon logical
assumptions and generalizations about human nature like classical and
enlightened theorists.

Gulick is considered a watershed theorist, a truly unique administrative
scholar credited with generating a comprehensive, generic theory of
organization. During his seven decade career Gulick differentiated his
theories from those of his predecessors by emphasizing the scientific method,
efficiency, professionalism, structural reform, and executive control. Gulick
summarized the duties of administrators with an acronym; POSDCORB, which
stands for planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting,
and budgeting. Finally, Fayol offered a systematic, 14-point, treatment of
private management. Second generation theorists drew upon private management
practices for administrative sciences. A single, generic management theory
bleeding the borders between the private and the public sector, was thought to
be possible. With the general theory, the administrative theory could be
focused on governmental organizations.

#### [edit] Post-World War II - 1970s

The mid-1940s theorists challenged Wilson and Gulick. The politics-
administration dichotomy remained the center of criticism in the third
generation. In addition to this area of criticism, government itself came
under fire as ineffective, inefficient, and largely a wasted effort. The
sometimes deceptive, and expensive American intervention in Vietnam along with
domestic scandals including Watergate are two examples of self-destructive
government behavior during the third generation. There was a call by citizens
for efficient administration to replace ineffective, wasteful bureaucracy.
Public administration would have to distance itself from politics to answer
this call and remain effective.

Elected officials supported such reform. The Hoover Commission, chaired by
University of Chicago professor Louis Brownlow, to examine reorganization of
government. Dr. Brownlow subsequently he founded the public administration
service on the university, 1313 E. 60th Street. The organization PAS provided
consulting services to governments at all levels of government until the
1970s.

### [edit] 1980s

In the late 1980s, yet another generation of public administration theorists
began to displace the last. What was called New Public Management was proposed
by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler [3] . The new model advocated the use of
private sector innovation, resources, and organizational ideas to improve the
public sector. During the Clinton Administration (1992-2000), Vice President
Al Gore adopted and reformed federal agencies accordingly. New public
management there by became prevalent throughout the US bureaucracy.

Some critics argue that new public management concept of Americans as
"customers" rather than "citizens" is an unacceptable abuse. That is,
customers are a means to an end, profit, rather than part of the policy making
process. Furthermore, citizens are more like the proprietors of government
than customers of a business. In new public management, people are economic
units not democratic participants. Nevertheless, the model is still widely
accepted at all levels of government.

### [edit] 1990s

In the late 1990s, Janet and Robert Denhardt proposed a new public service
model [4]. This model's chief contribution is a focus on Americans as
"citizens" rather than "customers". Accordingly, the citizen is expected to
participate in government and take an active role throughout the policy
process. No longer are the proprietors considered an end to a mean. Whilse
this remains feasible at the federal level, where the concept of citizenship
is commonly wedded, the emergence of 'transnational administration' with the
growing number of international organizations and 'transnational executive
networks' complicates the prospects for citizen engagement.[5]

One example of this is openforum.com.au, an Australian non-for-profit
eDemocracy project which invites politicians, senior public servants,
academics, business people and other key stakeholders to engage in high-level
policy debate.

#### [edit] New public management (NPM)

The critics of NPM claim that a successor to NPM is digital era governance,
focusing on themes of reintegrating government responsibilities, needs-based
holism (executing duties in cursive ways), and digitalization (exploiting the
transformational capabilities of modern IT and digital storage).

## [edit] Organizational theory

The thematic evolution of organizational theory is yet another way one might
capture the development of the field. Modern public sector organizational
theory can be thought of as the product of two fields of study: management and
government. Each of these disciplines stand upon a foundation built by the
theories of Karl Marx, Max Weber, Sigmund Freud, Abraham Maslow, and Robert
Golembiewsky.

Foundational scholars do not precede the entire discipline and have emerged by
contributing to transformations of the field. The discipline has undergone at
least two major transformations: from classic, rational managers and political
scientists to a humanistic model of management and increasingly distinct
public administration scholars. Indeed, some argue that the third and possibly
fourth thematic developments are currently under way. That is, new public
management that was popular with the Clinton Administration (1992-2000) may
soon yield to new public service. While a thematic discussion of the field
involves much of the same chronological narrative, a thematic discussion
permits meaningful insights that might otherwise be overlooked. We will begin
with foundations of organizational theory before discussing modern trends.

### [edit] Management and government academic work

In much the same way âpre-generationâ scholars provide a foundation for
future governors and administrators, many seemingly unrelated scholars are
important to the developing organizational theory. Though their respective
connections with and relevance to organizational theory vary, Marx, Weber,
Freud, Maslow, and Golembiewsky (Denhardt 104-108)[6] form the foundation for
much of what has become public sector organizational theory.

  * Karl Marx-âThe history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.â (The Communist Manifesto 1848, 10)
  * Max Weber-Government merely monopolizes the legitimate use of force in a given area. Weberâs most famous work was The Protestant Work Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1930).
  * Sigmund Freud-Subconscious needs and desires are manifest in everyday human activities; The Interpretation of Dreams (1900).
  * Abraham Maslow theorized that there is a hierarchy of human needs, each level of which must be fulfilled before one can effectively ascend to the next level. Toward a Psychology of Being (1968).
  *     * The five categories of needs are, in hierarchical order: physiological needs, safety, love and belonging, self esteem, and self actualization needs.
  * Robert Golembiewsky- Golembiewsky wrote two books of particular relevance to public administration: Men Management and Morality (1967 in Denhardt 2001, 104) and Renewing Organizations (1972 in Denhardt 2001, 106). In the first, he argues for what has come to be known as moral management, a âmoral sensitivityâ¦associated with satisfactory output and employee satisfactionâ (Denhardt 104). In the second, Golembiewsky takes a âlaboratory approach to organizational changeâ (Denhardt 106). The author identifies five metavalues that guide this approach to organizational change
  *     1. âacceptance of inquiry based on mutual accessibility and open communication
    2. expanded consciousness and recognition of choice, especially the willingness to experiment with new behaviors and choose those that seem most effective
    3. a collaborative concept of authority, emphasizing cooperation and responsibility for others
    4. authenticity in interpersonal relationshipsâ (Denhardt 106-107).

Golembiewskyâs moral management and meta values are highly compatible with
subsequently discussed Theory Y management, Type-Z Organizations, and a
humanist approach to workplace organization.

Given its interdisciplinary nature, one might visualize public sector
organization theory as a helix of management and government scholars.
Management theory began as a strictly rational, positivist dogma through a
humanist revolution, and includes a modern reinterpretations and explorations.
Similarly, government scholars in the United States first delineated a border
between politics and administration that has been re-evaluated and re-
interpreted throughout the history of the discipline. Today, public sector
management incorporates developments in private management theory with a
renegotiation of the policy analystâs role in the political process.

### [edit] Early management theory

Due in part to the historic context in which the field of public
administration emerged, early management and government scholars attempted to
be comprehensive rationalists. This required that they also ascribe to a
positivist reality. That is, scholars seek a factual basis for drawing
conclusions based upon observations and logical deduction. Positivists believe
these methods yield factual, solid, unwavering truths, similar to the
laboratory sciences. The early theorists sometimes lost sight of the
unpredictable nature of social science.

Early management theorists were almost exclusively private sector scholars.
The concept of an employee as a manipulable tool was another feature of early
theorists. By creating the proper conditions, management could better shape
employees to fit the needs of the organization; the company was primary in
early management theory. Though somewhat naive from a modern perspective,
early management scholars set a precedent for systematic, unbiased decision-
making. Fredrick W. Taylor and Henri Fayol were two of the many seminal
management theorists of particular importance to public sector management.
Fredrick W. Taylor is probably most remembered for "scientific management."
This is commonly described as the method by which the "one best way" to
complete a task is discovered. In a 1915 address, Taylor outlined the mutual
advantages of labor saving technology and processes, implicitly touting the
significance of his model. Taylor argued that objective empirical observation
would eventually yield an optimally efficient process by which a labor task
could be completed. (Taylor in Shafritz and Ott 2001, 61)[7]

Much like Taylor, Henri Fayol was originally a private sector theorist. In
General and Industrial Management (1916), Fayol outlined what he called the
âGeneral Principles of Management.â The author acknowledges, from a
positivist perspective, the flexibility of management studies. However, his
fourteen principles use in much the same matter-of-fact tone as Taylorâs.
Fayolâs 14 principles included the division of work, authority and
responsibility, discipline, unity of command, unity of direction,
subordination of individual interest to the general interest, re-numeration of
personnel, centralization, scalar chain, order, equity, stability of tenure of
personnel, initiative, and espirit de corps.

His elaboration upon each principle can be summarized as an argument for a
logically structured organization with an efficient (non-duplicative)
management chain. The author highlighted tension between individual and
organizational interests, a theme that would be taken up again by subsequent
humanists. Finally, his principles advocated a management style and structure
intended to foster a healthy, spirited workforce, with a sense of loyalty to
the company. Taylor and Fayol represent early, private sector, management
scholars whose work would be succeeded by humanist managers from both the
public and private sectors.

### [edit] Early political administration theory

Government or political science scholars dominated what would become the
public side of organizational theory. Woodrow Wilson, PhD. and 28th president,
is remembered as one such political scientist who first distinguished public
administrators from politicians. In an 1887 article, âThe Study of
Administrationâ Wilson called a professional workforce of public sector
employees. He further argued for efficiency and responsibility to the public
as key criteria by which this workforce would operate. His work marks the
beginning of an era, at least in the United States, during which public
administration has been thought of as a distinct field of study and practice.
Since Wilson, public administration has been a discipline separate from
politics, worthy of academic study and independent discussion. The idea that
business-like administrators should separate themselves from politics in daily
operations remains Wilsonâs chief, most enduring contribution.

Subsequent interpretations and the eventual development of rival dichotomies
are perhaps a tribute to the importance of Wilsonâs first distinction. The
politics administration survived the mid-twentieth century in the works of
Leonard White, Frank Goodnow, and W.F. Willoughby, but these scholars did not
leave the original dichotomy as they had found it. Leonard White authored The
Study of Public Administration (1948), a standard in the field for years
(Denhardt 2000, 44). In it, the author argued that âthe study of public
administrationâ¦needs to be related to the broad generalizations of political
theory concerned with such matters as justice, liberty, obedience, and the
role of the state in human affairs â (cited in Denhardt 2000, 44). The
desire to restore a degree of reliability, merit, and workability to
modernizing democracy was a major impetus for the continued division of
politics and administration.

In a related work, Frank Goodnow, Policy and Administration (1900), takes a
local government perspective to comment on the separation of powers in
government. He argues that the strict interpretation of the separation of
powers in the constitution has been violated many times for good reason
(Denhardt 2000, 46). âTherefore, it is appropriate to rethink the formal
theory of separation of powers so that our theory might more closely match our
practiceâ (46). The unique perspective offers valuable insight into other
trade-offs, including that between legislative versus administrative
centralization at the state level (Denhardt 47).

W.F. Willoughby, âThe Government of Modern States (1936), also contributed
to the dialogue. Early in his career, Wolloughby argued for a somewhat strict
separation of government powers. The executive branch was to enforce laws as
they were created by the legislature and interpreted by the courts (Denhardt
47). However, he later recognized difficulties in this hard-line position.
Consequently, Willoughby suggested there are five classes of governmental
powers: legislative, judicial, executive, electorate, and administrative.
These classes existed in addition to the three traditional branches of
government. The theories of White, Goodnow, and Willougby represent nuanced
elaborations of a dichotomy much like that of Wilson. However, this dichotomy
would be more directly challenged with suggested alternatives by the next
generation of public administration scholars.

### [edit] Emergence as a distinct field

Luther Gulick and Paul Appleby were among those who argued for dichotomies
that were wholly different from Wilson's. Gulick has been called a strong
personification of public administration in the United States (Fry 1989, 73).
Gulick ascribes to many of Wilsonâs themes, including a âscience of
administration,â increased efficiency, structural reform of the bureaucracy,
and augmented executive authority. The chief executive coordinates the
otherwise disaggregate activities of a large, complex organization such as a
government. However, Gulick challenged Wilsonâs strict dichotomy by
suggesting every action of a public administrator represents a âseamless web
of discretion and interaction.â âThe administratorâs role is to
understand and coordinate public policy and interpret policy directives to the
operating services, but with unquestioned loyalty to the decision of elected
officialsâ (Fry 1989, 81).

Paul Appleby argued against the increasingly dominant theory that
administrators were somehow neutral policy actors. He argued that
âadministrators are significant policy actors who influence the policy-
making process in several different waysâ (Denhadt 49). Administrators are
charged with the execution of public programs, the analysis of data for
decision recommendations, and interpreting the law as it is carried out on a
regular basis. Consequently, administrators influence and even produce policy
on a daily basis. Despite their break with Wilson on the issue of completely
separating administration from politics, these divergent scholars agreed that
a professional workforce remain educated, skilled, and exist in meritous
competition for public sector employment. Thus, Gulick and Appleby are major
theorists whose theories truly break with Wilson's original public
administration theories.

### [edit] A consolidated discipline

In addition to Gulick and Appleby, Herbert Simon, Chester Barnard, and Charles
Lindblom are among the first of those recognized as early American public
administrators. These men ushered in an era during which the field gained
recognition as independent and unique, despite its multidisciplinary nature.
In Simonâs Administrative Behavior (1948), the argument is made that
decision-making is the essence of management. The premises with which
decisions are made are therefore integral to management. Simon also
contributed a fact-value dichotomy, a theoretical separation to discern
management, decisions based upon fact versus those made based on values. Since
one cannot make completely responsible decisions with public resources based
solely on personal values, one must attempt to upon objectively determined
facts.

Simon developed other relevant theories as well. Similar to Lindblomâs
subsequently discussed critique of comprehensive rationality, Simon also
taught that a strictly economic man, one who maximizes returns or values by
making decisions based upon complete information in unlimited time, is
unrealistic. Instead, most public administrators use a sufficient amount of
information to make a satisfactory decision:, they âsatisfice.â

Charles Lindblom also expressed disaffection with the comprehensive rational
model in a 1959 article, âThe Science of Muddling Through.â He argued for
âsuccessive limited comparison" (81). [8]â Though the result of this
process was not as rational or ultimately as reliable as decisions truly
rational methods, incremental decision-making is undoubtedly preferable to
making a decision âoff-the-cuffâ or those that consume extensive
resources. Incrementalism's value lies in the realistic expectation that
practitioners will be able to use it.

Chester Barnard was also one of the watershed scholars. That is, his theories
would bridge what would become a gap between managers like F.W. Taylor and
Henri Fayol with subsequent humanists: Mary Follett, Elton Mayo, and Chris
Argyris. Barnard published âThe Economy of Incentivesâ (1938), in an
attempt to explain individual participation in an organization. Barnard
explained organizations as systems of exchange. Low-level employees must have
more incentive to remain with the organization for which they exchange their
labor and loyalty. The organization (and higher level employees) must derive
sufficient benefit from its employees to keep them. The net pull of the
organization is determined by material rewards, environmental conditions, and
other intangibles like recognition.

Scholars including Gulick, Appleby, Simon, Lindblom, and Barnard are among the
early, independent public administrators. We will see, however, that many of
their ideas and justifications for a positive, pro-active government are
indebted, in fact, to the contributions of numerous female philanthropists
(Acker 1992; [9] Stivers 2002[10]).

### [edit] Public management

Several theorists bridged the gap between strictly private and public sector
management. Luther Gulick negotiated a generic theory of organization. Max
Weber exploring sociologist, explored the ideal bureaucracy in The Protestant
Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism(Denhardt 2000, 27). He claimed that
bureaucracies are organizations that manage resources for citizens (Weber in
Shafritz and Ott, 2001, 73). The "physical" characteristics the organization
and the position of public officials were essential to its structure. Weber
held that graduated authority and equitable, formalized procedures guard
against the subjective abuse of power by bureaucrats.

Weber admired bureaucracy for its trustworthiness. The bureaucracy was
constituted by a group of professional, ethical public officials. These
servants dedicate themselves to the public in return for security of job
tenure among the many advantages of public employment. By rationalizing the
organization of individuals and recognizing the professional nature of the
field, Weber implicitly supports Wilson's politics-administration dichotomy.

### [edit] Humanist era

Humanists embrace a dynamic concept of an employee and management techniques.
This requires a theoretical shift away from the idea that an employee is a cog
in the industrial machine. Rather, employees are unique individuals with
goals, needs, desires, etc. Mary Parker Follett, Elton Mayo, Chris Agyris are
among the most prominent humanists. Mary Parker Follett claims that conflict
is neither good nor bad, it is simply inevitable (Fry 1989, 98).[11] Elton
teaches that humans are social beings whose individualism is defined in part
by participation in the group.

Chris Agyris, a writer commonly associated with business management authored
Personality and Organization in 1957. He argues that âformal organizational
structures and traditional management practices tend to be at odds with
certain basic trends toward individual growth and developmentâ[12]. Argyris
continues,Executives must therefore fuse basic human tendencies for growth and
development with demands of the organizationâs task.

### [edit] Rethinking power and management

The humanist era ushered in other possible interpretations of such topics as
power and management. One of the most significant was Douglas McGregorâs
âTheory X and Theory Y.â McGregor's work provided a basis for a management
framework, a structure upon whose rungs the classic and new-aged management
might be hung (Denhardt 99-100). First, commonly held by early management
theorists, Theory X begins with the assumption that humans possess an inherent
aversion to work. Employees must therefore be coerced and controlled if
management expects to see results. Further, lazy humans prefer direction
bordering micromanagement whenever possible (Denhardt 99).

Theory Y is much more compatible with the humanist tradition. This begins with
the assumption that work is as natural for humans as rest or play. Further,
employees will direct and control themselves as they complete objectives.
Humans learn naturally and seek responsibility (Denhardt 100). Consequently,
managers need only to steer employees in a cooperative manner toward goals
that serve the organization. There is room for many to create and share power.

The Z-Organization can be thought of as a complimentary third element to
McGregor's dichotomy. Z-organizations are a Japanese organizational model.[13]
Similar to Theory-Y management, Z organizations place a large degree of
responsibility upon the employees. Further, relatively low-level employees are
entrusted with the freedom to be creative, âwander around the
organizationâ and become truly unique, company-specific employees. However,
employees achieve only after âagreeing on a central set of objectives and
ways of doing businessâ (Oichi 435).

In Z Organizations, decision-making (Simonâs ostensible basis of management)
is democratic and participatory. Despite the many advantages of this
organizational model, there are several draw-backs. These include the
depredation of a large professional distance--de-personalization is impossible
in Z-organizations. A high level of self-discipline is also necessary.
Z-organizations tend to be homogeneous. In Japan where this organizational
form is popular, management is dominated by males and foreigners are a rarity.

### [edit] Organizational power

An organization has an array of options for delegating power to its lower
level employees. Bown and Lawlwer (2006)identify a spectrum of empowerment
possible for service workers in private sector employment.[14] Low-level
workers can either be thought of as belonging to a production line and given
little individual decision-making freedom (power). These workers can be
thought of as individual actors, given discretion to interpret a situation as
it arises, and make reasonably independent decisions themselves. Most
organizations allow their employees to operate somewhere between these
extremes depending on several criteria the organization has as a whole.

Henry Mintzburg contributes to the power discussion with his article, âThe
Power Game and its Players.[15]" He writes that organizations consist of many
individuals, each drawing a source of power from their position within the
organization, knowledge skills and abilities, and relative role in that
organization. Each also works to increase or maximize his or her power.

Moss Kanter published âPower Failure in Management Circuitsâ to address
symptoms of unhealthy organizational power struggles. The reader learns that
many symptoms of dysfunctional organizations can, in fact, be traced to power
problems. The three sources of power: position/authority, knowledge/expertise,
and technical/vocational ability combined with the way individuals within an
organization use this power are often the root of dysfunctional symptoms. By
addressing power issues and the ways in which individuals use power with and
over one another, participants within an organization can better work together
and increase power with one another.

### [edit] New public management

New public administration theories have emerged over the latter half of the
twentieth century. New frameworks increasingly acknowledge that government is
seen by citizens through administrators, front line, service deliverers. These
are the employees that execute decisions by elected officials. One such
theory, new public management, gained popularity in the early nineties
(Denhardt 144-153). Programs were implemented and reformed accordingly the
Clinton Administration (1992-2000). Vice President Al Gore's efforts and
leadership during the National Performance Review spearheaded the effort. Gore
and the NPR operated with government effectiveness, efficiency, and reduced
cost their main criteria. A private sector mentality pervaded. David Osborne
and Ted Gebler (1992) Reinventing Government , describe ten new features of
government emphasized in new public management.

  1. "Catalytic Government: Steering Rather Than Rowing
  2. Community-Owned Government: Empowering Rather than Serving
  3. Competitive Government: Injecting Competition into Service
  4. Mission-Driven Government: Transforming Rule-Driven Organizations
  5. Results-Oriented Government: Funding Outcomes, Not Inputs
  6. Customer-Driven Government: Meeting the Needs of the Customer, Not the Bureaucracy
  7. Enterprising Government: Earning Rather Than Spending
  8. Anticipatory Government: Prevention Rather than Cure
  9. Decentralized Government: From Hierarchy to Participation and Teamwork
  10. Market-Oriented Government: Leveraging Change Through the Market" (Osborn and Gaebler 1992 cited in Denhardt 145-146).

There has been a rigorous critique and emphasis upon implicit problems with
new public management. First, a reliance upon competition and market forces
assumes that individual self interest will effectively bring about an
equitable social and economic reality for citizens. Henry Mintzbergâs
protests,âI am not a mere customer of my government, thank you.â (cited by
Dendhardt 2001, 77). âI expect something more than armâs length trading
and something less than the encouragement to consume.â (Denhardt 152 citing
Mintzberg 1992, 77). âDo we really want our governmentsâ¦hawking
products?â While greater government efficiency, an individual emphasis, and
lower cost operations of new public management may be initially attractive,
Mintzberg and Denhardt highlight many incompatibilities of such values with
justice, equity, security, and other important government values.

Further, encouraging an entrepreneurial spirit in administrators carries the
benefits of innovation and productivity. These benefits are balanced by
necessary costs. An entrepreneurial attitude tends to be accompanied by a
willingness to bend the rules, reduced level of accountability, and a
motivation to take risk with public resources are potentially costly (Denhardt
152-153). Despite what might appear to be a destructive criticism of a new
model for public service delivery, Denhardt advocates new public service, one
that carefully navigates the intricate differences between public and private
organizations.

### [edit] Feminist interpretations

The simple phrase, "feminist interpretation" carries relevant concepts, often
stimulating an emotional response. However, if one can move past prejudice or
negativity popularly attributed to the word, one might find important
challenges to the implicit assumptions upon which many modern institutions and
disciplines are built. Specifically, feminists uncover and challenge the
assumption that a heritage of male-dominated public administration has yielded
anything other than a "masculine interpretation" of the field. The simple
adjective, feminist, asks the public administrator to evaluate his or her
premises in a search for masculine interpretations, buried beneath a century
of academic dialogue and practice (Stivers, 2002).

Many of the responsibilities public employees currently carry are rooted in
nineteenth and twentieth century female philanthropists. Women volunteered
their time to contribute to the communal welfare, innovating the rationale and
justifications subsequently borrowed by paid male advocates of positive
government. Government employees that advocated a public responsibility to
assist the poor and underprivileged with material aid and necessary services.
Due in part to women's role as pioneers, such activities were (and in
actuality still are) perceived to be feminine. Further, the written language
describing these efforts was actively "cleaned" of feminine attributes. Once
predominantly male, professional administrators began advocating and defending
public medical assistance for such groups as the elderly and low income,
services including retirement aid and youth activity, and arguments had to be
âre-couchâ in explicitly masculine terms.

This and other traditional features are used to make the argument that males
have a persistent advantage in professional organizations. Subtle, gendered
processes perpetuate the advantage, vehemently denied by men and women
alike.(Acker 1992). These may be overt, sexual jokes or discrimination in
promotion, or covert, organizational processes and decisions apparently
independent of gender considerations on their face.

Processes fall into four categories:

  1. Production of gender divisions-hierarchies are gendered
  2. Creating "symbols, images, and forms of consciousness that explicate, justify, and, more rarely, oppose gender divisionsâ (Shafritz and Ott, 393).
  3. Interactions between individuals that âenact dominance and subordination and create alliances and exclusions.â
  4. âInternal mental work of individuals as they consciously construct their understandings of the organizationâs gendered structureâ

Comparable Worth is another, related topic [16]. Difficult, unpopular
questions, like whether women are paid less because they ware women, are
explored by contributing scholars. Women might be victims of discrimination
because of societal expectations of their biological and psychological state
of mind. That is, women bear children and are most often the primary care-
taker of children. If a young, newly-wed women is pitted against a similarly
qualified, young, newly-wed male for a promotion or position, do expectations
of gender roles influence management decisions? Further, to what degree do
women possess sufficient power of self-determination?

While feminists are often attacked as radical an unfounded in their claims,
the group provides valuable food for thought. That is, questioning premises
and assumptions that have led administrators to truths is important for
judging the value of these truths.

### [edit] New public service

Among the many new trends in government administration, the âgovernment
scholarâ is being rapidly replaced by the âpolicy analyst.â The change
in specialty reflects a shift in focus toward policy outputs and outcomes.
Government rhetoric would be expected to yield to measurable impacts of public
action. Government professionals are shifting from a focus upon government
actors to observation and quantification at all steps of the policy process.
For example, domestic social programming and support like senior center
activities, welfare, Medicare, and youth groups have measurable inputs and
outputs that can be quantified and examined. Effectiveness and efficiency can
be estimated with dollars, opinion surveys, confidence indexes, and the like,
to quantify the output, impact, and value of such programming.

New concepts of administrative roles challenge both the politics-
administration and fact-value dichotomies. In the former case,administrators
serving as policy analysts inevitably influence the information they generate,
thereby impacting policy. In the case of the former, a newly constructed
bureaucracy, representative of the populace it serves, personal values of
administrators my reflect the values of the citizenry. In such a case, the
necessity of a distinction between fact and value is compromised. A degree of
subjectivity, interjection of personal values into factual decision-making may
be preferred by the population. In place of alternate theoretical dichotomies,
policy analysts and workplace diversity essentially compromise the value of
the dichotomy mentality.

In the new public service, citizens are expected to develop a sense of
community in addition to personal interests, pushing the threshold past simple
self-interest of the new public management. Further, public employees draw
heavily upon the variety of humanist management theories that have developed
in the private and public sectors. John Gardner writes that healthy
communities consisting of good community members âdeal with each other
humanely, respect individual differences and value the integrity of each
personâ (cited by Denhardt 2000, 183). Similarly, Robert Bellah, The Good
Society , argues that the relationships, the space between these communities
and the government, ought to then be relevant.

Smaller, intermediary institutions like churches, families, work groups, and
civic associations, are also participants in the negotiation of the newly
recognized space for public activity. Such commitment carries tangible
benefits. Robert Putnam empirically demonstrates that communities whose
citizens are civically engaged live in communities of reduced poverty, crime,
better health and improved educational systems. Organization thereby
represents a form of âsocial capital.â Capital being the aspects of social
life, like the aforementioned networks, that âfacilitate the coordination
and cooperation for mutual benefitâ (Denhardt 185 citing Putnam 1995, 67).

In Orange County, Florida The âCitizens First!â exemplifies a campaign in
favor of new public service. The group advocates for citizens to demonstrate a
concern for the wider community of which they are a part. Further, the group
teaches that governments must be prepared to listen to citizen groups as they
reach out, becoming active. Further, the group recognizes that a citizen is
much more than a customer. âultimately government must be more concerned and
more responsive to the needs and interests of citizensâ than a business is
of its customers (Denhard 187).

The changing nature of leadership, a proactive leadership, is particularly
important to new public service (Denhardt 2001). That is, a âcatalytic
leadershipâ (Luke 1998) âinvolves elevating the issue to the public and
policy agendas, engaging a diverse set of people on an issue, stimulating
multiple strategies and options for action, and sustaining actionâ (Denhardt
188). New public service administrators have a much more active role to play
and cannot differ to citizen apathy to justify ineffectiveness. Where the new
public management emphasizes self-interest, new public service asks that
citizens become active and develop a sense, an appreciation of the public
interest. Further, public employees are expected to engage with the citizens
they serve. This is no longer a job; the new public service is a way of life.

Jane Vinzant, StreetâLevel Leadership (1998) and Terry Cooper, An Ethic of
Citizenship for Public Administration (1991) each highlight an important
implications of the new public service. Vinzantâs study of administrators
physically on the street, including police officers and case workers, brings
the reality of increased administrator discretion in daily operations to life.
Cooper discusses a relationship between leaders, public employees and citizens
(Denhardt 188). The new public service, with a focus on community-mindedness,
makes this analysis possible and facilitates a new understanding of public
administrators as âcitizen-administrators.â Public servants who, by
definition, engage citizens as peers. These ideas, combined with modern
management practices in the Pursuit of Significance (Denhardt 1993) exemplify
best administrative and management practices (Dehardt 2001, 189).

Denhardtâs proposed new public service represents a necessary reconciliation
of the new public management and the American-democratic principles. Further,
his description of new public service is the culmination of the converging
generic management theory and public administration. In Wilson and Taylorâs
era, politics and the administration of mandated government activities was
very much the same thing. Management was restricted to Theory-X
interpretations and assumptions. American âpublic administrationâ was thus
a nepotistic, spoiled system in which managers governed from high.

After Wilsonâs initial distinction between a professional workforce and
elected officials, nuanced variations maintained his theoretical trajectory.
Taylor and Fayol, Theory-X managers, initially dominated the management
circuit until humanists like Mayo, Follett, and Argyris hung new concepts of
organization and management on McGregorâs Theory-X/Theory-Y framework.
During this time, truly independent administrators including Gulick, Simon,
Barnard, and Lindblom forged a significant new field.

A fact-value dichotomy challenged Wilsonâs politics-administration dichotomy
for dominance, management science was defocused on a revolutionary new unit of
analysis: decision premises. Organizations, viewed as systems of exchange, had
to recognize employees, even low-level line workers, as partners brokering for
adequate compensation and fulfillment. Even the comprehensive rational model,
the most scientific of all possible decision-making methods, was challenged as
highly impractical. If managers instead make âsuccessive limited
comparisons,â they can make informed decisions in a timely, affordable
manner.

This dynamic evolution, indeed a changing system of intellectual exchange,
continues today as the popular new public management dominates the field.
Public administration should arguably be a field dedicated to service of its
owners, not mere customers. Indeed, citizens ought to take an active role in
their government as an owner would in a business. A government that is
administered by a meritocracy, professionals with powerful analytic and
literary abilities. Managers might soon find themselves operating with an
ethical commitment to values, serve the public, an empowerment attitude with a
concept of shared power, pragmatic incrementalism, and a dedication to the
public. âUnlike the new public management, which is built on economic
concepts such as the maximization of self-interest, the new public service is
built on the idea of the public interest, the idea of public administrators
serving citizens and indeed becoming fully engaged with those they serve.
(Denhardt 2001, 190).

## [edit] Decision-making models and public administration

Given the array of duties public administrators find themselves performing,
the professional administrator might refer to a theoretical framework from
which he or she might work. Indeed, many public and private administrative
scholars have devised and modified decision-making models.

### [edit] Rational choice

### [edit] Herbert Simon's satisficing

### [edit] Incrementalism

### [edit] Game theory

### [edit] William Niskanen's budget-maximizing

An relatively recent rational choice variation, proposed by William Niskanen
in a 1971 article 'budget-maximizing' model, argued that rational bureaucrats
will universally seek to increase their budgets, thereby contributing to state
growth, measured by expenditure. Niskanen served on President Reagan's Council
of Economic Advisors; his model underpinned what has been touted as curtailed
public spending and increased privatization. However, budgeted expenditures
and the growing deficit during the Reagan administration is evidence of a
different reality. A range of pluralist authors have critiqued Niskanen's
universalist approach. These scholars have argued that officials tend also to
be motivated by considerations of the public interest.

### [edit] Patrick Dunleavy's bureau shaping

The bureau-shaping model, a modification of Niskanen, holds that rational
bureaucrats only maximize the part of their budget that they spend on their
own agency's operations or give to contractors and interest groups. Groups
that are able to organize a "flowback" of benefits to senior officials would,
according to this theory, receive increased budgetary attention. For instance,
rational officials will get no benefit from paying out larger welfare checks
to millions of low-income citizens because this does not serve a bureaucrats'
goals. Accordingly, one might should instead expect a jurisdiction to seek
budget increases for defense and security purposes in place of domestic social
programming. If we refer back to Reagan once again, Dunleavy's bureau shaping
model accounts for the alleged decrease in the "size" of government while
spending did not, in fact, decrease. Domestic entitlement programming was
financially de-emphasized for military research and personnel.

## [edit] Public Administration dichotomies

### [edit] Wilson's Politics-Administration Dichotomy

### [edit] Fact-Value Dichotomy

### [edit] Leonard White

### [edit] Paul Appleby

### [edit] Luther Gulick

## [edit] Ethics: (Denhardt 127-128)

Denhardt identifies two approaches to ethics in public sector work: a more
rigorous, philosophical studies in ethics that can be applied to the field.

  * Alternately, administrators might simply assume âan ethical obligation to support âregime values.â Essentially, public employees should refer to the constitution and Supreme Court decisions for specifics on equity and justice.
  * John Rohr, Ethics for Bureaucrats (1978)
  * Terry Cooper The Responsible Administrator (1990)
  * John Burke-Bureaucratic Responsibility (1986).
  * Kathryn G. Denhardt-The Ethics of Public Service (1988)

### [edit] Notable scholars

Notable scholars of public administration have come from a range of fields. In
the period before public administration existed as its own independent
discipline, scholars contributing to the field came from economics, sociology,
management, political science, law, and, other related fields. More recently,
scholars from public administration and public policy have contributed
important studies and theories.

For a longer list of academics and theorists, see the List of notable public
administration scholars article.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Wilson, Woodrow, "The Study of Administration," Political Science Quarterly 2 (June 1887)
  2. ^ Fry, Brian R. 1989. Mastering Public Administration; from Max Weber to Dwight Waldo. Chatham, New Jersey: Chatham House Publishers, Inc.
  3. ^ Public Administration Review, Vol. 56, No. 3 (May â Jun., 1996), pp. 247â255
  4. ^ Denhardt , Robert B. and Janet Vinzant Denhardt (2000). "The New Public Service: Serving Rather than Steering." Public Administration Review 60(6)
  5. ^ Diane Stone, (2008) 'Global Public Policy, Transnational Policy Communities and their Networks,' Journal of Policy Sciences.
  6. ^ Denhard, Robert B. 2000. Theories of Public Organizations. Orlando Florida: Harcourt Brace & Co.
  7. ^ Shafritz, Jay M. and J. Steven Ott. 2001. The Classics of Organization Theory. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
  8. ^ Lindblom, Charles 1959. âThe Science of Muddling Through.â Public Administration Review. Spring 19.
  9. ^ Acker, Joan. 1992. "Gendering Organizational Theory." in The Classics of Organization Theory. Jay M. Shafritz and J. Steven Ott eds. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 391-399
  10. ^ Stivers, Camilla.1992 From the Ground(s) Up: Women Reformers and the Rise of the Administrative Stateâin Gender Images in Public Administration. Camilla Stivers ed. Sage.
  11. ^ Fry, Brian R. 1989. Mastering Public Administration; from Max Weber to Dwight Waldo. Chatham, New Jersey: Chatham House Publishers, Inc.
  12. ^ cited in Denhardt 2001, 100-101
  13. ^ William Ouichi. 1981. âThe Z Organization." in Classics of Organization Theory. Shafritz and Ott eds. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
  14. ^ Bowen, David and Edward Lawler. 2006. âThe Empowerment of service Workers; What, Why, How and When.â in Managing Innovation and Change David Mayle. Sage.
  15. ^ Mintzburg, Henry. 2001. "The Power Game and its Players." in The Classics of Organization Theory. Jay M. Shafritz and J. Steven Ott Eds. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 353-360.
  16. ^ Acker, Joan. 1989. Doing Comparable Worth: Gender, Class and Pay Equity . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

## [edit] See also

  * Accountability
  * Administration (government)
  * Administrative law
  * British civil service
  * Budgeting
  * Budget theory
  * Bureaucracy
  * Civil society
    * Community Development
    * Governance
    * Nonprofit organizations
    * Non-governmental organization
    * Separation of church and state
    * Social innovation
  * Doctor of Public Administration
  * Docket
  * Municipal government
  * Politics
  * Professional administration
  * Public management â focusing on the efficiency and effectiveness of a government
  * Public administration theory
  * Public policy
  * Public policy schools
  * Record
  * Theories of administration
    * Max Weber
    * Dwight Waldo

### [edit] Societies for public administration

  * American Society for Public Administration
  * Chinese Public Administration Society
  * Dutch Association for Public Administration
  * Royal Institute for Public Administration

### [edit] International public administration

There are several organizations that are active. The oldest is the
International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration (IASIA).
Based in Brussels, Belgium, IASIA is an association of organizations and
individuals whose activities and interests focus on public administration and
management. The activities of its members include education and training of
administrators and managers. It is the only worldwide scholarly association in
the field of public management. Visit their Web site at
www.iiasiisa.be/schools/aeacc.htm.

Also the International Committee of the US-based National Association of
School of Public Affairs and Administration (NASPAA) has developed a number of
relationships around the world. They include sub regional and National forums
like CLAD, INPAE and NISPAcee, APSA, ASPA. For general information about these
regional networks, visit www.GlobalMPA.net.

The Center for Latin American Administration for Development (CLAD), based in
Caracas, Venezuela, this regional network of schools of public administration
set up by the governments in Latin America is the oldest in the region.
Information about CLAD is accessible at www.clad.org.ve.

The Institute is a founding member and played a central role in organizing the
Inter-American Network of Public Administration Education (INPAE). Created in
2000, this regional network of schools is unique in that it is the only
organization to be composed of institutions from North and Latin America and
the Caribbean working in public administration and policy analysis. It has
more than 49 members from top research schools in various countries throughout
the hemisphere, www.ebape.fgv.br/inpae.

NISPAcee is a network of experts, scholars and practitioners who work in the
field of public administration in Central and Eastern Europe, including the
Russian Federation and the Caucasus and Central Asia. Their English Web site
is located at www.nispa.sk/_portal/homepage.php.

The US public administration and political science associations like NASPA,
APSA and ASPA. These organizations have helped to create the fundamental
establishment of modern public administration. For more information visit the
Web sites of American Political Science Association, www.apsanet.org, and the
American Society of Public Administration www.aspanet.org.

## [edit] External links

Australia

  * Australia's Open Forum

Austria

  * KDZ â Centre for Public Administration Research

Brazil

  * The Brazilian National School of Public Administration
  * The Brazilian School of Public and Business Administration

Canada

  * The Institute of Public Administration of Canada
  * Commonwealth Association for Public Administration and Management

People's Republic of China

  * Hong Kong Public Administration Association

Europe

  * National Institute of Public Administration â Europe/Portugal
  * EAPAA European Association for Public Administration Accreditation
  * EGPA European Group of Public Administration
  * NISPAcee Network of Institutes and Schools of Public Administration in Central and Eastern Europe
  * EUPAN European Public Administration Network
  * EPSA European Public Service Award

Finland

  * University of Helsinki, Faculty of Social Sciences (In English-Suomeksi-PÃ¥ svenska)

Greece

  * National Centre for Public Administration and Local Government (In Greek)

Philippines

  * University of the Philippine's National College of Public Administration and Governance

Russia

  * Ð¿Ð¾Ð²ÑÑÐµÐ½Ð¸Ðµ ÑÑÑÐµÐºÑÐ¸Ð²Ð½Ð¾ÑÑÐ¸ ÑÐ°Ð±Ð¾ÑÑ ÑÑÐºÐ¾Ð²Ð¾Ð´Ð¸ÑÐµÐ»ÐµÐ¹ Ð³Ð¾ÑÑÐ´Ð°ÑÑÑÐ²ÐµÐ½Ð½ÑÑ Ð¸ Ð¼ÑÐ½Ð¸ÑÐ¸Ð¿Ð°Ð»ÑÐ½ÑÑ Ð¾ÑÐ³Ð°Ð½Ð¾Ð² (ÐÐ¾ ÑÑÑÑÐºÐ¸)

Holland/The Netherlands

  * Dutch Association for Public Administration (In Dutch)
  * Public Administration starting page (In Dutch)
  * Page about the Dutch association of Public Administration (In English)

India

  * Indian Institute of Public Administration

Philippines

  * University of the Philippines â National College of Public Administration and Governance

Poland

  * National School of Public Administration, Warsaw, Poland

Turkey

  * Ankara University Faculty of Political Science â Public Administration (In Turkish)
  * Ä°stanbul University Faculty of Political Science â Public Administration (In Turkish)

United Kingdom

  * Royal Institute of Public Administration
  * How to be a civil servant under the British or Westminster system

United States

  * Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management
  * American Society for Public Administration
  * National Academy of Public Administration
  * National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration

## [edit] Suggested reading

  * Smith, Kevin B. and Licari, Michael J. Public Administration â Power and Politics in the Fourth Branch of Government, ISBN 1-933220-04-X

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_administration"

Categories: Public administration

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Asturianu
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Furlan
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 21:22.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



