
# Learned helplessness

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)  
Learned helplessness as a technical term in animal psychology and related
human psychology means a condition of a human being or an animal in which it
has learned to behave helplessly, even when the opportunity is restored for it
to help itself by avoiding an unpleasant or harmful circumstance to which it
has been subjected. Learned helplessness theory is the view that clinical
depression and related mental illnesses result from a perceived absence of
control over the outcome of a situation (Seligman, 1975).

## Contents

  * 1 Foundation of research and theory
    * 1.1 Seligman and Maier
    * 1.2 Later experiments
  * 2 The attributional reformulation
  * 3 Differences between humans and animals
  * 4 Health implications
    * 4.1 Physical health
    * 4.2 Psychological health
    * 4.3 Social impact
  * 5 Extensions
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Foundation of research and theory

### [edit] Seligman and Maier

The American psychologist Martin Seligman's foundational experiments and
theory of learned helplessness began at University of Pennsylvania in 1967, as
an extension of his interest in depression. Quite by accident, Seligman and
colleagues discovered that the conditioning of dogs led to outcomes that
opposed the predictions of B.F. Skinner's behaviorism, then a leading
psychological theory (Seligman & Maier, 1967; Overmier & Seligman, 1967).

In part one of Seligman and Steve Maier's experiment, three groups of dogs
were placed in harnesses. Group One dogs were simply put in the harnesses for
a period of time and later released. Groups Two and Three consisted of "yoked
pairs." A dog in Group 2 would be intentionally subjected to pain by being
given electric shocks, which the dog could end by pressing a lever. A Group 3
dog was wired in parallel with a Group 2 dog, receiving shocks of identical
intensity and duration, but his lever didn't stop the electric shocks. To a
dog in Group 3, it seemed that the shock ended at random, because it was his
paired dog in Group 2 that was causing it to stop. For Group 3 dogs, the shock
was apparently "inescapable." Group 1 and Group 2 dogs quickly recovered from
the experience, but Group 3 dogs learned to be helpless, and exhibited
symptoms similar to chronic clinical depression.

In part two of the Seligman and Maier experiment, these three groups of dogs
were tested in a shuttle-box apparatus, in which the dogs could escape
electric shocks by jumping over a low partition. For the most part, the Group
3 dogs, who had previously "learned" that nothing they did had any effect on
the shocks, simply lay down passively and whined. Even though they could have
easily escaped the shocks, the dogs didn't try.

In a second experiment later that year, Overmier and Seligman ruled out the
possibility that the Group 3 dogs learned some behavior in part one of the
experiment, while they were struggling in the harnesses against the
"inescapable shocks," that somehow interfered with what would have been their
normal, successful behavior of escaping from the shocks in part two. The Group
3 dogs were immobilized with a paralyzing drug (Curare), and underwent a
procedure similar to that in part one of the Seligman and Maier experiment. A
similar part two in the shuttle-box was also undertaken in this experiment,
and the Group 3 dogs exhibited the same "helpless" response.

However, not all of the dogs in Seligman's experiments became helpless. Of the
roughly 150 dogs in experiments in the latter half of the 1960s, about one-
third did not become helpless, but instead managed to find a way out of the
unpleasant situation despite their past experience with it. The corresponding
characteristic in humans has been found to correlate highly with optimism;
however, not a naÃ¯ve Polyannaish optimism, but an explanatory style that
views the situation as other than personal, pervasive, or permanent. This
distinction between people who adapt and those who break down under long-term
psychological pressure was also studied in the 1950s in the context of
brainwashing.

### [edit] Later experiments

Other experiments were performed with different animals with similar results.
In all cases, the strongest predictor of a depressive response was lack of
control over the negative stimulus. One such later experiment, presented by
Finkelstein and Ramey (1977), consisted of two groups of human babies. One
group was placed into a crib with a sensory pillow, designed so that the
movement of the babyâs head could control the rotation of a mobile. The
other group had no control over the movement of the mobile and could only
enjoy looking at it. Later, both groups of babies were tested in cribs that
allowed the babies to control the mobile. Although all the babies now had the
power to control the mobile, only the group that had already learned about the
sensory pillow bothered to use it (Finkelstein & Ramey, 1977).

A similar experiment was done with people who performed mental tasks in the
presence of distracting noise. If the person could use a switch to turn off
the noise, his performance improved, even though he rarely bothered to turn
off the noise. Simply being aware of this option was enough to substantially
counteract its distracting effect (Hiroto and Seligman, 1975).

## [edit] The attributional reformulation

Later research discovered that the original theory of learned helplessness
failed to account for people's varying reactions to situations that can cause
learned helplessness (Peterson & Park, 1998). Learned helplessness sometimes
remains specific to one situation (Cole & Coyne, 1977), but at other times
generalizes across situations (Hiroto & Seligman, 1975).

An individual's attributional style or explanatory style was the key to
understanding why people responded differently to adverse events (Peterson &
Seligman, 1984). Although a group of people may experience the same or similar
negative events, how each person privately interprets or explains the event
will affect the likelihood of acquiring learned helplessness and subsequent
depression (Abraham, Seligman & Teasdale, 1978).

People with pessimistic explanatory styleâwhich sees negative events as
permanent ("it will never change"), personal ("it's my fault"), and pervasive
("I can't do anything correctly")âare most likely to suffer from learned
helplessness and depression (Peterson, Maier, & Seligman 1993). Cognitive
behavioral therapy, heavily endorsed by Seligman, can help people to learn
more realistic explanatory styles, and can help ease depression.

Bernard Weiner's attribution theory (1979, 1985, 1986) concerns the way that
people attribute a cause or explanation to an unpleasant event. Attribution
theory includes the dimensions of globality/specificity,
stability/instability, and internality/externality (Weiner, 1986). A global
attribution occurs when the individual believes that the cause of negative
events is consistent across different contexts. A specific attribution occurs
when the individual believes that the cause of a negative event is unique to a
particular situation. A stable attribution occurs when the individual believes
the cause to be consistent across time. Unstable attribution occurs when the
individual thinks that the cause is specific to one point in time. An external
attribution assigns causality to situational or external factors, while an
internal attribution assigns causality to factors within the person (Abraham
et al., 1978).

## [edit] Differences between humans and animals

There are several aspects of human helplessness that have no counterpart among
other animals. One of the most intriguing aspects is "vicarious learning (or
modelling)": that people can learn to be helpless through observing another
person encountering uncontrollable events (Bandura, 1986). However, studies
with animals have shown that many species can learn through observation[1].
Thus, this "difference" may not exist between humans and nonhumans.

Apart from the shared depression symptoms between human and other animals such
as passivity, introjected hostility, weight loss, appetite loss, social and
sexual deficits, some of the diagnostic symptoms of learned
helplessnessâincluding depressed mood, feelings of worthlessness, and
suicidal ideationâcan be found and observed in human beings but not
necessarily in animals (Peterson, Maier & Seligman, 1993).

## [edit] Health implications

Whatever their origins, people who suffer uncontrollable events reliably see
disruption of emotions, aggressions, physiology, and problem-solving tasks
(Roth, 1980; Wortman, & Brehm, 1975). These helpless experiences can associate
with passivity, uncontrollability and poor cognition in people, ultimately
threatening their physical and mental well-being.

### [edit] Physical health

Learned helplessness can effectively contribute to poor health when people
neglect diet, exercise and medical treatment, falsely believing they have no
power to change. The more people perceive events as uncontrollable and
unpredictable, the more stress they experience, and the less hope they feel
with about making changes in their life (Henry, 2005).

Young adults and middle-aged parents with a pessimistic explanatory style are
likely to suffer from depression (Chan & Sanna, 2007). People with a
pessimistic explanatory style tend to be poor at problem-solving and cognitive
restructuring, and also tend to demonstrate poor job satisfaction and
interpersonal relationships in the workplace (Welbourne, Eggerth, Hartley,
Andrew & Sanchez, 2007; Henry, 2005). Those with a pessimistic explanatory
style also tend to have weakened immune systems, and not only have increased
vulnerability to minor ailments (e.g. cold, fever) and major illness (e.g.
heart attack, cancers), but also have a less effective recovery from health
problems (Bennett & Elliott, 2005).

### [edit] Psychological health

Learned helplessness can also be a motivational problem. Individuals who have
failed at tasks in the past conclude erroneously that they are incapable of
improving their performance (Stipek, 1988). This might set children behind in
academic subjects and dampen their social skills.

Children with learned helplessness typically fail academic subjects, and are
less intrinsically motivated than others. They may use learned helplessness as
an excuse or a shield to provide self-justification for school failure.
Additionally, describing someone as having learned to be helpless can serve as
a reason to avoid blaming him or her for the inconveniences experienced. In
turn, the student will give up trying to gain respect or advancement through
academic performance (Ramirez, Maldonado, & Martos, 1992).

### [edit] Social impact

Child abuse by neglect can be a manifestation of learned helplessness: when
parents believe they are incapable of stopping an infant's crying, they may
simply give up trying to do anything for the child (Donovan, Leavitt, & Walsh,
1990).

Another example of learned helplessness in social settings involves loneliness
and shyness. Those who are extremely shy, passive, anxious and depressed may
learn helplessness to offer stable explanations for unpleasant social
experiences. However, Gotlib and Beatty (1985) found that people who cite
helplessness in social settings may be viewed poorly by others, resulting in a
situation that reinforces the problematic thinking. A third example is aging,
with the elderly learning to be helpless and concluding that they have no
control over losing their friends and family members, losing their jobs and
incomes, getting old, weak and so on (Rodin, 1986).

Social problems resulting from learned helplessness seem unavoidable; however,
the effect goes away with the passage of time (Young, & Allin, 1986).
Nonetheless, learned helplessness can be minimized by "immunization" and
potentially reversed by therapy. People can be immunized against the
perception that events are uncontrollable by increasing their awareness of
previous positive experiences (Altmaier, & Happ, 1985). Therapy can instruct
people in the fact of contingency (Thornton, & Powell, 1974) and bolster
people's self esteem (Orbach & Hadas, 1982).

## [edit] Extensions

The American sociologist Harrison White has suggested in his book Identity and
Control that the notion of learned helplessness can be extended beyond
psychology into the realm of social action. When a culture or political
identity fails to achieve desired goals, perceptions of collective ability
suffer.

## [edit] See also

  * Explanatory style
  * Fundamental attribution error
  * Locus of control
  * Somebody Else's Problem
  * Learned optimism

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Animal Intelligence

  * Abrahamson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans: Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 49â74.
  * Altmaier, E. M., and Happ, D. A. (1985). Coping skills trainingâs immunization effects against learned helplessness. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 3, 181â189.
  * Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. ISBN 013815614X
  * Bennett, K.K., & Elliott, M. (2005). Pessimistic explanatory style and Cardiac Health: What is the relation and the mechanism that links them? Basic and applied social psychology, 27, 239â248.
  * Chang, E.C., & Sanna, J. L. (2007). Affectivity and psychological adjustment across tow adult generations: Does pessimistic explanatory style still matter? Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 1149â1159.
  * Cole, C. S., & Coyne, J. C. (1977). Situational specificity of laboratory-induced learned helplessness in humans. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86, 615â623.
  * Donovan, W. L., Leavitt, L. A., and Walsh, R. O. (1990). Maternal self-efficacy: Illusory control and its effect on susceptibility to learned helplessness. Child Development, 61, 1638â1647.
  * Finkelstein, N., & Ramey, C. Learning to control the environment. Child Development, 1977, 48, 806â819.
  * Gotlib, I. H., and Beatty, M. E. (1985). Negative responses to depression: The role of attributional style. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 9, 91â103.
  * Henry, P.C. (2005). Life stress, explanatory style, hopelessness, and occupational stress. International Journal of Stress Management, 12, 241â256.
  * Hiroto, D. S., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Generality of learned helplessness in man. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 311â327.
  * Orbach, E., and Hadas, Z. (1982). The elimination of learned helplessness deficits as a function of induced self-esteem. Journal of Research in Personality, 16, 511â523.
  * Overmier, J. B. and Seligman, M.E.P. (1967). Effects of inescapable shock upon subsequent escape and avoidance responding. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 63, 28â33.
  * Peterson, C., & Park, C. (1998) Learned helplessness and explanatory style. In D. F. Barone, M. Hersen, and V. B. VanHasselt (Eds.), Advanced Personality. New York: Plenum Press, 287â308.
  * Peterson, C., Maier, S.F., Seligman, M.E.P. (1995). Learned Helplessness: A Theory for the Age of Personal Control. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-504467-3
  * Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1984). Causal explanations as a risk factor for depression: Theory and evidence. Psychological Review, 91, 347â374.
  * Ramirez, E., Maldonado, A., & Martos, R. (1992). Attribution modulate immunization against learned helplessness in humans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 139â146.
  * Roth, S. (1980). A revised model of learned helplessness in humans . Journal of Personality, 48, 103â133.
  * Rodin, J. (1986). Aging and health: Effects of the sense of control. Science, 233, 1271â1276.
  * Seligman, M.E.P. (1975). Helplessness: On Depression, Development, and Death. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman. ISBN 0-7167-2328-X
  * Seligman, M.E.P. (1990). Learned Optimism. New York: Knopf. (Reissue edition, 1998, Free Press, ISBN 0-671-01911-2).
  * Seligman, M.E.P. and Maier, S.F. (1967). Failure to escape traumatic shock. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74, 1â9.
  * Seligman, M.E.P. (2004). Can Happiness be Taught?. Daedalus journal, Spring 2004.
  * Stipek, D. E. P. (1988). Motivation to learning. Allyn & Bacon: Boston.
  * Thornton, J. W., and Powell, G. D. (1974). Immunization to and alleviation of learned helplessness in man. American Journal of Psychology, 87, 351â367.
  * Weiner, B. (1979). A theory of motivation for some classroom experiences. Journal of Educational Psychology, 71, 3â25.
  * Weiner, B. (1985). âSpontaneousâ causal thinking. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 74â84.
  * Weiner, B. (1986). An attributional theory of motivation and emotion. New York: Springer-Verlag.
  * Welbourne, J.L., Eggerth, D., Hartley, T.A., Andrew, M.E., & Sanchez, F. (2007). Coping strategies in the workplace: Relationships with attributional style and job satisfaction. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 70, 312â325.
  * Wortman, C. B., and Brehm, J. W. (1975). Response to uncontrollable outcomes: An integration of reactance theory and the learned helplessness model. In Advances in experimental social psychology, L. Berkowitz, (ed.). Vol. 8. New York: Academic Press.
  * Young, L. D., and Allin, J. M. (1986). Persistence of learned helplessness in humans. Journal of General Psychology, 113, 81â88.

## [edit] External links

Listen to this article (info/dl)  

Play sound

Spoken Wikipedia

This audio file was created from a revision dated 2006-12-17, and does not
reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles

This is a spoken version of the article. Click here to listen.

  * An introductory article on "Learned Helplessness" at noogenesis.com
  * An in-depth discussion of "Learned Helplessness" with helpful charts and graphs at University of Plymouth's "Study and Learning Materials On-line"
  * Learned Helplessness - A Basic Guide

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learned_helplessness"

Categories: Spoken articles | Behavioral concepts | Psychological attitude |
Psychology experiments

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 07:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



