
# Third Way (centrism)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Not to be confused with Third Position.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bill Clinton and Tony Blair, adherents of the "Third Way".

The Third Way is a term that has been used to describe a variety of political
philosophies of governance that embrace a mix of market and interventionist
philosophies. Third Way approaches are commonly viewed as representing a
centrist compromise between capitalism and socialism, or between market
liberalism and democratic socialism. However, proponents of third way
philosophies often claim that the third way represents a synthesis of these
competing viewpoints, distinct from and superior to both of its sources,
rather than simply a compromise or mixture.[1] This claim is embodied in the
alternative description of the Third Way as the Radical center.

Past invocations of a political 'third way', in this sense, have included the
Fabian Socialism, Distributism, Keynesian economics, Franklin D. Roosevelt's
New Deal, and Harold Macmillan's 1950s One Nation Conservatism.[2] A "Third
Way" approach has been adopted by social liberals and some social democrats in
many Western liberal democracies.[3]

Third Way policies were enacted in the 1980s in Australia by the Hawke/Keating
Labor governments.[4] The most recent prominent examples are the Obama[5] and
Clinton Administrations in the United States as well as presidential candidate
Hillary Clinton,[6] the Labour Party (New Labour) governments of the United
Kingdom under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, the Liberal Party government of
Canada under Jean ChrÃ©tien and Paul Martin, the Australian Labor Party under
Kevin Rudd, the Polder Model in The Netherlands and the Democratic Party -
demokraci.pl in Poland.

The Third Way rejects both socialism and laissez-faire approaches to economic
governance, but chiefly stresses technological development, education, and
competitive mechanisms to pursue economic progress and governmental
objectives.[7] One of its central aims is to protect the modern welfare state
through reforms that maintain its economic integrity.[8]

The third way has been criticized by some conservatives and libertarians who
advocate laissez-faire capitalism.[9] It has also been heavily criticized by
many social democrats and democratic socialists in particular as a betrayal of
left-wing values. The third way policies differ considerably between Europe
and America, in America the third way refers to significantly more right-wing
and laissez-faire policies than in Europe.

## Contents

  * 1 Origins
  * 2 Modern usage
  * 3 Examples
    * 3.1 Australia
    * 3.2 Canada
    * 3.3 United Kingdom
    * 3.4 United States
    * 3.5 Other
  * 4 Criticism
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 External links
    * 7.1 Criticism

  
## [edit] Origins

Social democracy  
Precursors

Age of Enlightenment  
Utopian socialism  
Trade unionism  
Revolutions of 1848  
Orthodox Marxism  
Development

Revisionism / Reformism  
Third way  
Policies

Representative democracy  
Labor rights Â· Civil liberties  
Welfare state Â· Mixed economy  
Secularism Â· Fair trade  
Environmental protection  
  
Organizations

Social democratic parties  
Socialist International  
Party of European Socialists  

International Trade Union Confederation  
People

Eduard Bernstein Â· Karl Kautsky Â· Hjalmar Branting Â· Friedrich Ebert Â·
Jean JaurÃ¨s Â· Ignacy DaszyÅski Â· Ramsay MacDonald Â· LÃ©on Blum Â· Clement
Attlee Â· Tommy Douglas Â· Tony Blair Â· Gerhard SchrÃ¶der  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
The term "Third Way" has been used to explain a variety of political policies
and ideology in the last few centuries. These ideas were implemented by both
progressives and fascists in the early 20th century.[10] The Third Way
philosophy was extended in the 1950s by German ordoliberal economists such as
Wilhelm RÃ¶pke, resulting in the development of the concept of the social
market economy. Most significantly, Harold Macmillan, British Prime Minister
from 1957 to 1963, based his philosophy of government on what he entitled in a
book, The Middle Way (1938).

## [edit] Modern usage

<IMG>

<IMG>

Anthony Giddens, pictured, is a key proponent of Third Way theory

The term was later used by politicians in the 1990s who wished to incorporate
Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan's projects of economic deregulation,
privatization, and globalization into the mainstream centre-left political
parties (following the crisis of socialism after the fall of the Berlin Wall).

In the last decade the Third Way can be defined as:

> "something different and distinct from liberal capitalism with its
unswerving belief in the merits of the free market and democratic socialism
with its demand management and obsession with the state. The Third Way is in
favour of growth, entrepreneurship, enterprise and wealth creation but it is
also in favour of greater social justice and it sees the state playing a major
role in bringing this about. So in the words of... Anthony Giddens of the LSE
the Third Way rejects top down socialism as it rejects traditional neo
liberalism."

> â Report from the BBC, 1999[11]

A leading defender of the spread of Third Way influence in modern democracies
has been British sociologist Anthony Giddens. Giddens regularly expounds on
Third Way philosophy through contributions to progressive policy think tank
Policy Network.

## [edit] Examples

### [edit] Australia

Under the centre-left Australian Labor Party from 1983 to 1996, the Bob Hawke
and Paul Keating governments pursued many economic policies associated with
economic rationalism, such as floating the Australian Dollar in 1983,
reductions in trade tariffs, taxation reforms, changing from centralised wage-
fixing to enterprise bargaining, the privatisation of Qantas and Commonwealth
Bank, and deregulating the banking system. Keating also proposed a Goods and
Services Tax (GST) in 1985, however due to its unpopularity amongst Labor as
well as the electorate, was scrapped. The party also desisted from other
reforms, such as wholesale labour market deregulation (e.g., WorkChoices), the
eventual GST, the privatisation of Telstra and welfare reform including "work
for the dole", which John Howard and the Liberal Party of Australia were to
initiate after winning office in 1996.

Various ideological beliefs were factionalised under reforms to the ALP under
Gough Whitlam, resulting in what is now known as the Socialist Left who tend
to favour a more interventionist economic policy and more socially progressive
ideals, and Labor Right, the now dominant faction that tends to be more
economically liberal and focus to a lesser extent on social issues. The
Whitlam government was first to use the term economic rationalism.[12] The
Gough Whitlam Labor government from 1972 to 1975 changed from a democratic
socialism platform to social democracy, their precursor to the party's "Third
Way" policies. Under the Whitlam government, tariffs across the board were cut
by 25 percent after 23 years of Labor being in opposition.[13]

Labor Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's first speech to parliament in 1998 stated:

> Competitive markets are massive and generally efficient generators of
economic wealth. They must therefore have a central place in the management of
the economy. But markets sometimes fail, requiring direct government
intervention through instruments such as industry policy. There are also areas
where the public good dictates that there should be no market at all. We are
not afraid of a vision in the Labor Party, but nor are we afraid of doing the
hard policy yards necessary to turn that vision into reality. Parties of the
Centre Left around the world are wrestling with a similar challengeâthe
creation of a competitive economy while advancing the overriding imperative of
a just society. Some call this the `third way'. The nomenclature is
unimportant. What is important is that it is a repudiation of Thatcherism and
its Australian derivatives represented opposite. It is in fact a new
formulation of the nation's economic and social imperatives.[14]

Rudd is critical of free market economists such as Friedrich Hayek,[15]
although Rudd describes himself as "basically a conservative when it comes to
questions of public financial management", pointing to his slashing of public
service jobs as a Queensland governmental advisor.[16]

### [edit] Canada

In Canada following the election of Jean ChrÃ©tien and the Liberal Party of
Canada in 1993 the new government became focused on debt and deficit
reduction, leading to a fiscally conservative agenda cutting billions of
dollars from provincial transfer payments and other areas of government
funding. The Liberals managed to eliminate a C$42 billion deficit and pay down
36 billion dollars in debt. However, these steep funding cuts led to cuts to
some social programs such as Katimavik, reduced resources for the Canadian
military, and charges by the provinces and municipalities of federal
downloading, typified by a significant increase in wait times for medical
services (a provincial responsibility).

Unlike previous Liberal governments in the late 20th century, the ChrÃ©tien
government pursued corporate tax cuts and the expansion of "free trade",
leading to the negotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
in 1994. As of 2007 the Liberal Party of Canada still advocates a social
liberal agenda based on balanced budgets, support for globalization and fiscal
"moderation".

Canada's largest leftwing party, the New Democratic Party (NDP) has also
experimented with the so called "Third Way" at various times. During the
government of Roy Romanow in the province of Saskatchewan from 1991â2003 the
Saskatchewan New Democratic Party broke with its socialist past and followed a
very conservative agenda with the goal of reducing the province's debt. This
was characterized by a program of hospital closures, program cuts and
privatization. Romanow would later claim to be a "disciple" of the "Third Way"
ideology of Tony Blair (even though he had been in power for five and a half
years before Blair's first election win). Romanow would also quip that he was
a supporter of Blair's Third Way concept before it even existed.

The Province of Ontario's only NDP premier Bob Rae also followed a very
fiscally conservative agenda during his government (1990-1995). Ontario was
experiencing its worst recession since the Great Depression when Bob Rae was
elected into office. After 1991 the government introduced budget cutbacks,
reopened collective bargaining agreements with the public sector unions (the
"Social Contract") and put a cap on enrollment into medical schools.[17] The
Social Contract which imposed a wage freeze on public sector workers and
forced them to take ten days off per year without pay (Rae Days) led to a
split between the Ontario New Democratic Party and their historic allies, the
labour unions (the Ontario Public Service Employees Union and the Canadian
Auto Workers).[18]

Bob Rae also failed to deliver on one of his key campaign promises of
introducing public auto insurance drawing intense criticism from the leftwing
of his own party. In 1995 the NDP went down to an historic defeat at the hands
of the province's Progressive Conservatives led by Mike Harris. In spite of
the improving electoral fortunes of the federal NDP in the province of
Ontario, the Ontario NDP has yet to make any significant gains. In 2002 Bob
Rae wrote a piece to one of Canada's most rightwing newspapers, the National
Post entitled "Parting Company with the NDP" where he criticized the party for
rejecting the "third way" of Tony Blair and opposing globalization. The
Ontario NDP has also thoroughly washed its hands of Bob Rae and recommitted
itself to social democracy, with leader Howard Hampton citing the policies of
the Swedish Social Democrats as reflecting his own beliefs. In 2006 Bob Rae
joined the Liberal Party of Canada and ran for the party's leadership, coming
in third. He has since been elected as a Liberal, representing Toronto Centre,
in the March 2008 by-election.

After declining fortunes in the early 1990s the federal NDP also followed a
more centrist agenda under leader Alexa McDonough leading NDP members and
supporters including Canadian Auto Workers president Buzz Hargrove to call for
her resignation. After two modest election results the NDP chose Jack Layton
as its leader in 2003.[19] Layton vowed never to move the NDP into the "mushy
middle". As of the 2008 election the NDP won 37 seats and 18.1% of the popular
vote (their highest number of votes since 1988). This has been largely at the
expense of the Liberals.

### [edit] United Kingdom

Former Prime Minister Tony Blair is cited as a Third Way politician.[20][21]
According to a former Tony Blair staff member, UK Labour and Blair learnt
from, and owes a debt to the Australian Bob Hawke government in the 1980s on
how to govern as a 'third way' party when they took power in the 1990s.[22]
Blair is a particular follower of the ideas of Anthony Giddens[23], as is
current UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown.

Harold Macmillan's book The Middle Way, first published in 1938, is also
written from broadly this centrist position.

Third Way policies introduced by Blair's government include the creation of
Train to Gain in 2006, which offers publicly funded, flexible and specific
training and education to businesses and their employees, in order to boost
the success of the businesses that use it, improve the wages and career
prospects of the individual employees who use it and boost the overall
economy. This can be seen as simultaneously creating social justice and
pursuing economic growth. Another Third Way policy introduced by New Labour
includes Sure Start, which provides childcare, early education, health and
family support, with an emphasis on outreach and community development,
allowing mothers to go back to work and pursue their career, and providing
education for young children. The New Labour government has created Academy
Schools which are state-funded schools that are sponsored by a private
company, faith group or charity, and have more autonomy and independence than
traditional state schools and the freedom to influence the curriculum to an
extent. In 1998, the New Labour government created the New Deal, which was
created to reduce unemployment by providing training, subsidised employment
and voluntary work to the unemployed. The New Labour government has also
increased funding for apprenticeships, created adult apprenticeships for
anyone over 25, and created incentives for employers to take on apprentices by
providing wage subsidies for small businesses. In 2009, John Denham announced
plans to create state-funded internships to help poorer university graduates
get on the first rung of the career ladder.[24] The New Labour government
recently created National Skills Academies, which are employer led education
centres for adults, school and college leavers, graduates, employers, existing
employees, new entrants to the workforce and people who are changing career.
[25] They deliver skills required by key sectors and sub-sectors of the
economy through working with employers. [26] Many commentators argue that the
New Labour government has adopted many neoliberal and free market
policies.[27] The New Labour government has created tax credits for businesses
that deal in research and development.[28] Corporation tax was cut form 30% to
28% for big business in 2008.[29] The New Labour government has made many
efforts to create lifelong access to learning and training.[30]

Other third way policies introduced by the New Labour government include the
devolution of power to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, as well as other
localist policies, such as giving local authorities more power. Public
services such as the NHS and education, have been given more autonomy and
independence. Foundation hospitals are an example of devolved hospitals within
the NHS. Patients can ask their GP to refer them to a specialist at any
Foundation Hospital in the UK.[31] Third way policies have been seen as part
of an ambitious attempt to reframe social citizenship in order to create a
centre-left political grouping which can command majorities in the UK's
'first-past-the-post' electoral system.[32]

### [edit] United States

In the United States, Third Way adherents emphasize fiscal conservatism, some
replacement of welfare with workfare, and a stronger preference for market
solutions to traditional problems (as in pollution markets), while rejecting
pure laissez-faire economics and other libertarian positions. The Third Way
style of governing was firmly adopted and partly redefined during the
Administration of President Bill Clinton.[33]

After Tony Blair came to power in the UK, Clinton, Blair and other leading
Third Way adherents organized conferences to promote the Third Way in 1997 at
Chequers in England.[34][35] The Democratic Leadership Council are adherents
of Third Way politics.[36]

In 2004, several veteran U.S. Democrats founded a new Washington, DC
organization entitled Third Way, which bills itself as a "strategy center for
progressives."[37] U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is also considered
to be third way politician. President Barack Obama is considered by some to be
a Third Way politician as well.[38]

### [edit] Other

Other leaders who have adopted elements of the Third Way style of governance
include Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil, Marianne Jelved of Denmark,
FranÃ§ois Bayrou of France, Gerhard SchrÃ¶der of Germany,[35] Ferenc
GyurcsÃ¡ny of Hungary, Wim Kok of the Netherlands and Mir Zafarullah Khan
Jamali of Pakistan, whose book's preface was written by Anthony Giddens.

## [edit] Criticism

Advocates of laissez-faire capitalism are staunch opponents of a mixed
economy, even in the weaker form of the "third way." In 1990, after the fall
of his country's communist government, Czechoslovakia's finance minister,
VÃ¡clav Klaus, declared, "We want a market economy without any adjectives. Any
compromises with that will only fuzzy up the problems we have. To pursue a so-
called Third Way is foolish. We had our experience with this in the 1960s when
we looked for a socialism with a human face. It did not work, and we must be
explicit that we are not aiming for a more efficient version of a system that
has failed. The market is indivisible; it cannot be an instrument in the hands
of central planners."[39]

Third way is sometimes described as an idea of former social-democrats which
replaces socialism with capitalism and a minimum of socialism, and a strategy
to bring the social-democratic parties back to power where they have lost
elections. For example, Slavoj Zizek argues that the notion of the Third Way
emerged as the only alternative to the victorious global capitalism and its
notion of liberal democracy when the Second Way crumbled.[40] Critics argue
that third way politicians are in favour of ideas and policies that ultimately
serve the interests of corporate power and the wealthy at the expense of the
working class and the poor. Some also classify the Third Way as neosocialism
or "neoliberalism with a social touch".[41][42] In many western nations where
social democratic or "socialist" parties have adopted centrist or third way
policies or have been seen by some as doing so, many new leftwing parties have
been able to attract voters who still adhere to the values of traditional
left. These include The Left Party of Germany (formerly the Party of
Democratic Socialism), the Left Party of Sweden, the Socialist Party of
Ireland and Sinn Fein, The Respect Party of the United Kingdom, the Scottish
Socialist Party, the Citizen and Republican Movement and the Communist Party
of France, the Green Party in the United States and the United Left of Spain
to name a few.

Charles Clarke, a former UK home secretary and the first senior "Blairite" to
attack UK Prime Minister Brown openly and in print, stated "We should discard
the techniques of 'triangulation' and 'dividing lines' with the Conservatives,
which lead to the not entirely unjustified charge that we simply follow
proposals from the Conservatives or the right-wing media, to minimise
differences and remove lines of attack against us."[43]

## [edit] See also

  * Argument to moderation
  * Centrism
  * Centrist Party (United States)
  * Clintonian triangulation
  * Communitarian
  * Corporatism
  * Democratic Leadership Council
  * Distributism
  * History of Socialism
  * New Labour
  * Peronism
  * Radical middle
  * Social Liberalism
  * Social Democracy

    This entry is related to, but not included in the Political ideologies series or one of its sub-series. Other related articles can be found at the Politics Portal.
## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ "Dale, R. (4 April, 2000). Thinking Ahead / Commentary : What a 'Third Way' Is Really About. The International Herland.". http://www.iht.com/articles/2000/04/04/think.2.t.php. Retrieved on 2007-07-07.
  2. ^ The Third Way, University of Texas Accessed 2007
  3. ^ "Democratic Leadership Council. (1 June, 1998). About the Third Way.". http://www.ndol.org/ndol_ci.cfm?kaid=128&subid=187&contentid=895. Retrieved on 2007-07-11.
  4. ^ Progressives Rising Down Under?
  5. ^ Obama Wants to Move the Center Left: Wall Street Journal 23/2/2009
  6. ^ FrontPage Magazine
  7. ^ "Democratic Leadership Council, About the Third Way". http://www.ndol.org/ndol_ci.cfm?kaid=128&subid=187&contentid=895. Retrieved on 2007-07-07.
  8. ^ Pierson, P. (2002). Coping with permanent austerity: welfare state restructuring in affluent democracies. Revue Francaise de Sociologie, 43(2), 369-406.
  9. ^ "Bashan, P. (5 November, 2002). Is the Third Way at a Dead End? Cato Institute.". http://72.14.253.104/search?q=cache:NMYDW2TI_1MJ:www.cato.org/pub_display.php%3Fpub_id%3D4173+%22third+way%22+%22center+left%22&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=11&gl=us. Retrieved on 2007-07-07.
  10. ^ University of Texas, Third Way
  11. ^ What is the Third Way? BBC, 1999
  12. ^ John Quiggin - Journal Articles 1997 - Economic rationalism
  13. ^ The Whitlam Institute: The Whitlam Collection: Tariff Reduction
  14. ^ Rudd, Kevin (11 November 1998). "First Speech to Parliament". Parliament of Australia. http://www.aph.gov.au/house/members/firstspeech.asp?id=83T. Retrieved on 2006-12-09.
  15. ^ Rudd, Kevin (16 November 2006). "What's Wrong with the Right" (PDF). http://www.kevinrudd.com/_dbase_upl/061116%20CIS.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-12-09. ; Hartcher, Peter (14 October 2006). "Howard's warriors sweep all before them". Sydney Morning Herald. http://www.smh.com.au/news/opinion/howards-warriors-sweep-all-before-them/2006/10/13/1160246325222.html?page=fullpage. Retrieved on 2006-12-04.
  16. ^ "New Labor Leader Outlines Plan". The 7.30 Report. 4 December 2006. http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2006/s1804034.htm?page=fullpage. Retrieved on 2006-12-05. ; "Labor elects new leader". The 7.30 Report. 4 December 2006. http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2006/s1804032.htm?page=fullpage. Retrieved on 2006-12-05.
  17. ^ Schools social contact, Canada.
  18. ^ Labour History in Canada
  19. ^ NDP Leadershup, CBC News
  20. ^ www.third-way.info is coming soon!
  21. ^ Leader: Blair's new third way | Politics | The Observer
  22. ^ How the British came, saw and helped Rudd - National - theage.com.au
  23. ^ BBC News | UK Politics | All aboard the Third Way
  24. ^ [1]
  25. ^ [2]
  26. ^ [3]
  27. ^ [4][5]
  28. ^ [6]
  29. ^ [7]
  30. ^ [8]
  31. ^ [9]
  32. ^ Taylor-Gooby, P. (2009) Reframing Social Citizenship, Oxford University Press, Oxford
  33. ^ The Survivor:Bill Clinton in the White House, John F Harris, Random House, 2005
  34. ^ The Clinton Wars, Sidney Blumenthal, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003
  35. ^ a b BBC News | EUROPE | 'Third Way' gets world hearing
  36. ^ DLC: About The Third Way
  37. ^ Third Way:
  38. ^ Obama Wants to Move the Center Left: Wall Street Journal 23/2/2009
  39. ^ No Third Way Out: Creating A Capitalist Czechoslovakia Reason, June 1990. Accessed April 22, 2007.
  40. ^ Slavoj Zizek, Attempts to Escape the Logic of Capitalism
  41. ^ Neosocialism versus Neoliberalism?
  42. ^ National Review: Reinventing socialism: the triumph of neosocialism is the defining characteristic of politics today
  43. ^ http://www.theage.com.au/text/articles/2008/05/07/1210131068738.html

## [edit] External links

  * The Third Way by Anthony Giddens (ISBN 0-7456-2267-4), followed by The Third Way And Its Critics (ISBN 0-7456-2450-2)
  * NEXUS Third Way Debate Summary
  * Why Tony is not a guitar-wielding fascist [sic] dictator; The Guardian, July 1, 2003âabout Mussolini and Blair.
  * Third Way a strategy center for U.S. progressives
  * Sourcewatch.org entry on the Third Way Foundation
  * The Third Way - an Answer to Blair by Patrick Harrington
  * Official website of Policy Network
  * thirdwaycenter \-- "Third Way" blog & Third Way Wikizine \-- selections from the blog, related content
  * Social Democrats USA

### [edit] Criticism

  * No Third Way
  * Is the Third Way at a Dead End?
  * The So-Called Third Way
  * Europe's "New" Third Way
  * 21st century democracy and the Third Way
  * Blatcherism's brief flirtation with 'Third Way'

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_Way_(centrism)"

Categories: Political philosophy | Social democracy

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 18:02.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



