
# Transmodernism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is an orphan, as few or no other articles link to it. Please
introduce links to this page from other articles related to it. (February
2009)  
<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2007)  
Transmodernism is a development in thought following the periodization of
postmodernity. It sees postmodernity, or hypermodernity as the conclusion or
culmination of modernism, and critiques modernism and postmodernism on
material, social, and spiritual viewpoints.

Transmodernity consists of a set of criticisms aimed at theories it perceives
as advocating relativism, pessimism, nihilism, and counter-Enlightenment, by
embracing with a limited capacity foundationalism, absolutism, optimism, and
universalism.

It draws elements from both modernism and postmodernism, and can therefore be
seen as an amended and more tolerant form of modernization. Transmodernity is
a loose term describing a development of thought that seeks a synthesis of the
best of 'pre-modern,' 'modern,' and 'postmodern' reality.

Transmodernism appears to be in part influenced by the esoteric movements that
sprang from the Renaissance. It is also influenced by the Transcendental
movement and admires the American philosophy of mid-nineteenth century writers
like Emerson and the Transcendentalists. Transmodernism often continues today
in the rise of new religions and spiritualism. Its tendencies are also felt in
humanitic and transpersonal psychology. It is thought to be 'leading edge and
often subject to change'.

Transmodernism reacts against both modernism and postmodernism by opposing the
wholesale secularization of society. It criticizes the rejection of all
traditional worldviews and their truths as unproven, false, or of no
importance. It encompasses social movements confluent with traditional systems
of philosophy, religion, and morality. These movements often find themselves
at odds with modernism and postmodernism, yet the Transmodernism sees
tradition as self-propelled and adaptable at its own independent pace. There
is room for both modernity and tradition.

## [edit] Features

The emerging Transmodern or Integral Culture is summarized by Paul H. Ray as
follows:

[1] Ecological sustainability, beyond environmentalism: If you can name an
aspect of ecology and sustainability, they are emphatically for it, and are
leading the way. Cultural Creatives demonstrate awareness of a large range of
issues, including wanting to rebuild neighborhoods and communities, ecological
sustainability and limits to growth, seeing nature as sacred, wanting to stop
corporate polluters, being anti-big-business, wanting voluntary simplicity,
being willing to pay to clean up the environment and to stop global warming.

[2] Globalism: Two of the top values for Cultural Creatives are xenophilism
(love of travel to foreign places, of foreigners and the exotic) and
ecological sustainability, which strongly includes concern for the planetary
ecology and stewardship, and population problems.

[3] Feminism, women's issues, relationships, family: The fact that Cultural
Creatives are 60 percent women is a major key to understanding this
subculture. Much of the focus on women's issues in politics comes from them-
including concerns about violence and abuse of women and children, desire to
rebuild neighborhoods and community, desire to improve caring relationships,
and concerns about family (though they are no more family-oriented than most
North Americans, it is near the top in their list of values).

[4] Altruism, self-actualization, alternative health care, spirituality and
spiritual psychology: This is a complex of highly interrelated beliefs and
values centered on the inner life. In reality, this is a new sense of the
sacred that incorporates personal growth psychology and the spiritual and
service to others as all one orientation. It also includes a stronger trend
toward holistic health and alternative health care as part of this complex.

[5] Well-developed social conscience and social optimism: Contrary to some
social critics, an emphasis on the personal does not exclude the political or
social conscience, though individuals may focus on them in sequence. Cultural
Creatives are engaged in the world just as much as in personal and spiritual
issues. Rebuilding and healing society is related to healing ourselves,
physically and spiritually. With that goes a guarded social optimism.

## [edit] See also

  * Transmodernity
  * Ziauddin Sardar
  * Remodernism
  * Alex Katz
  * Postmodernism
  * Modernism

## [edit] External links

  * "Islam and the West in a Transmodern World" by Ziauddin Sardar
  * "The Rise of Integral Culture" by Paul H. Ray
  * "Transmodernism, Marxism, and Social Change: Some Implications for Teacher Education" by Mike Cole

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmodernism"

Categories: Postmodern theory

Hidden categories: Orphaned articles from February 2009 | All orphaned
articles | Articles lacking sources from June 2007 | All articles lacking
sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * Suomi
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 February 2009, at 20:17 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



