
# Educational psychology

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Educational psychology is the study of how humans learn in educational
settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of
teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations. Although the
terms "educational psychology" and "school psychology" are often used
interchangeably, In the US researchers and theorists are likely to be
identified as educational psychologists, whereas practitioners in schools or
school-related settings are identified as school psychologists. In the UK,
however, this distinction is not made and the generic term for practitioners
is "Educational Psychologist." Educational psychology is concerned with how
students learn and develop, often focusing on subgroups such as gifted
children and those subject to specific disabilities.

Psychology

Greek letter 'psi'

Portal â¢ History  
Areas  
Research  
Abnormal  
Biological  
Cognitive  
Developmental  
Experimental  
Evolutionary  
Mathematical  
Neuropsychology  
Personality  
Positive  
Psychophysics  
Social  
Transpersonal  
Applied  
Clinical  
Educational  
Forensic  
Health  
Industrial  
Organizational  
School  
Sport  
Lists  
Publications  
Topics  
Therapies

v â¢ d â¢ e  
Educational psychology can in part be understood through its relationship with
other disciplines. It is informed primarily by psychology, bearing a
relationship to that discipline analogous to the relationship between medicine
and biology and also between Engineering and Physics. Educational psychology
in turn informs a wide range of specialities within educational studies,
including instructional design, educational technology, curriculum
development, organizational learning, special education and classroom
management. Educational psychology both draws from and contributes to
cognitive science and the learning sciences. In universities, departments of
educational psychology are usually housed within faculties of education,
possibly accounting for the lack of representation of educational psychology
content in introductory psychology textbooks.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Social, moral and cognitive development
  * 2 Individual differences and disabilities
  * 3 Learning and cognition
    * 3.1 Behavioral perspective
    * 3.2 Cognitive perspective
    * 3.3 Social cognitive perspective
    * 3.4 Constructivist perspective
  * 4 Motivation
  * 5 Research methodology
    * 5.1 Quantitative methods
    * 5.2 Qualitative methods
  * 6 Applications in instructional design and technology
  * 7 Applications in teaching
  * 8 History
    * 8.1 Influential educational psychologists and theorists
  * 9 Careers in educational psychology
    * 9.1 Education and training
    * 9.2 Employment outlook
  * 10 Research journals
  * 11 See also
  * 12 External links
    * 12.1 Careers in the United Kingdom
    * 12.2 Careers in the United States
    * 12.3 Textbooks
  * 13 References

  
## [edit] Social, moral and cognitive development

<IMG>

<IMG>

An abacus provides concrete experiences for learning abstract concepts.

  
To understand the characteristics of learners in childhood, adolescence,
adulthood, and old age, educational psychology develops and applies theories
of human development. Often cast as stages through which people pass as they
mature, developmental theories describe changes in mental abilities
(cognition), social roles,moral reasoning, and beliefs about the nature of
knowledge.

For example, educational psychologists have researched the instructional
applicability of Jean Piaget's theory of development, according to which
children mature through four stages of cognitive capability. Piaget
hypothesized that children are not capable of abstract logical thought until
they are older than about 11 years, and therefore younger children need to be
taught using concrete objects and examples. Researchers have found that
transitions, such as from concrete to abstract logical thought, do not occur
at the same time in all domains. A child may be able to think abstractly about
mathematics, but remain limited to concrete thought when reasoning about human
relationships. Perhaps Piaget's most enduring contribution is his insight that
people actively construct their understanding through a self-regulatory
process.[2]

Piaget proposed a developmental theory of moral reasoning in which children
progress from a naive understanding of morality based on behavior and outcomes
to a more advanced understanding based on intentions. Piaget's views of moral
development were elaborated by Kohlberg into a stage theory of moral
development. There is evidence that the moral reasoning described in stage
theories is not sufficient to account for moral behavior. For example, other
factors such as modeling (as described by the social cognitive theory of
morality) are required to explain bullying.

Rudolf Steiner's model of child development interrelates physical, emotional,
cognitive, and moral development[3] in developmental stages similar to those
later described by Piaget.[4]

Developmental theories are sometimes presented not as shifts between
qualitatively different stages, but as gradual increments on separate
dimensions. Development of epistemological beliefs (beliefs about knowledge)
have been described in terms of gradual changes in people's belief in:
certainty and permanence of knowledge, fixedness of ability, and credibility
of authorities such as teachers and experts. People develop more sophisticated
beliefs about knowledge as they gain in education and maturity.[5]

## [edit] Individual differences and disabilities

<IMG>

<IMG>

An example of an item from a cognitive abilities test.

Each person has an individual profile of characteristics, abilities and
challenges that result from learning and development. These manifest as
individual differences in intelligence, creativity, cognitive style,
motivation, and the capacity to process information, communicate, and relate
to others. The most prevalent disabilities found among school age children are
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), learning disability,
dyslexia, and speech disorder. Less common disabilities include mental
retardation, hearing impairment, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and blindness.

Although theories of intelligence have been discussed by philosophers since
Plato, intelligence testing is an invention of educational psychology, and is
coincident with the development of that discipline. Continuing debates about
the nature of intelligence revolve on whether intelligence can be
characterized by a single, scalar factor (Spearman's general intelligence),
multiple factors (as in Sternberg's triarchic theory of intelligence and
Gardner's theory of multiple intelligences), or whether it can be measured at
all. In practice, standardized instruments such as the Stanford-Binet IQ test
and the WISC are widely used in economically developed countries to identify
children in need of individualized educational treatment. Children classified
as gifted are often provided with accelerated or enriched programs. Children
with identified deficits may be provided with enhanced education in specific
skills such as phonological awareness.

## [edit] Learning and cognition

Two fundamental assumptions that underlie formal education systems are that
students (a) retain knowledge and skills they acquire in school, and (b) can
apply them in situations outside the classroom. But are these assumptions
accurate? Research has found that, even when students report not using the
knowledge acquired in school, a considerable portion is retained for many
years and long term retention is strongly dependent on the initial level of
mastery.[6] One study found that university students who took a child
development course and attained high grades showed, when tested 10 years
later, average retention scores of about 30%, whereas those who obtained
moderate or lower grades showed average retention scores of about 20%.[7]
There is much less consensus on the crucial question of how much knowledge
acquired in school transfers to tasks encountered outside formal educational
settings, and how such transfer occurs.[8] Some psychologists claim that
research evidence for this type of far transfer is scarce,[9][10] while others
claim there is abundant evidence of far transfer in specific domains.[11]
Several perspectives have been established within which the theories of
learning used in educational psychology are formed and contested. These
include behaviorism, cognitivism, social cognitive theory, and constructivism.
This section summarizes how educational psychology has researched and applied
theories within each of these perspectives.

### [edit] Behavioral perspective

Applied behavior analysis, a set of techniques based on the behavioral
principles of operant conditioning, is effective in a range of educational
settings.[12] For example, teachers can improve student behavior by
systematically rewarding students who follow classroom rules with praise,
stars, or tokens exchangeable for sundry items.[13][14] Despite the
demonstrated efficacy of awards in changing behavior, their use in education
has been criticized by proponents of self-determination theory, who claim that
praise and other rewards undermine intrinsic motivation. There is evidence
that tangible rewards decrease intrinsic motivation in specific situations,
such as when the student already has a high level of intrinsic motivation to
perform the goal behavior.[15] But the results showing detrimental effects are
counterbalanced by evidence that, in other situations, such as when rewards
are given for attaining a gradually increasing standard of performance,
rewards enhance intrinsic motivation.[16][17] Many effective therapies have
been based on the principles of Applied Behavior Analysis, including Pivotal
Response Therapy which is used to treat Autism Spectrum Disorders.

### [edit] Cognitive perspective

Among current educational psychologists, the cognitive perspective is more
widely held than the behavioral perspective perhaps because it admits causally
related mental constructs such as traits, beliefs, memories, motivations and
emotions. Cognitive theories claim that memory structures determine how
information is perceived, processed, stored, retrieved and forgotten. Among
the memory structures theorized by cognitive psychologists are separate but
linked visual and verbal systems described by Allan Paivio's dual coding
theory. Educational psychologists have used dual coding theory and cognitive
load theory to explain how people learn from multimedia presentations.[18]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Three experiments reported by Krug, Davis and Glover[19] demonstrated the
advantage of delaying a 2nd reading of a text passage by one week
(distributed) compared with no delay between readings (massed).

The spaced learning effect, a cognitive phenomenon strongly supported by
psychological research, has broad applicability within education.[20] For
example, students have been found to perform better on a test of knowledge
about a text passage when a second reading of the passage is delayed rather
than immediate (see figure).[19] Educational psychology research has confirmed
the applicability to education of other findings from cognitive psychology,
such as the benefits of using mnemonics for immediate and delayed retention of
information.[21]

Problem solving, regarded by many cognitive psychologists as fundamental to
learning, is an important research topic in educational psychology. A student
is thought to interpret a problem by assigning it to a schema retrieved from
long term memory. When the problem is assigned to the wrong schema, the
student's attention is subsequently directed away from features of the problem
that are inconsistent with the assigned schema.[22] The critical step of
finding a mapping between the problem and a pre-existing schema is often cited
as supporting the centrality of analogical thinking to problem solving.

### [edit] Social cognitive perspective

Main article: Social cognitive theory

Social cognitive theory is a highly influential fusion of behavioral,
cognitive and social elements that was initially developed by educational
psychologist Albert Bandura. In its earlier, neo-behavioral incarnation called
social learning theory, Bandura emphasized the process of observational
learning in which a learner's behavior changes as a result of observing
others' behavior and its consequences. The theory identified several factors
that determine whether observing a model will affect behavioral or cognitive
change. These factors include the learner's developmental status, the
perceived prestige and competence of the model, the consequences received by
the model, the relevance of the model's behaviors and consequences to the
learner's goals, and the learner's self-efficacy. The concept of self-
efficacy, which played an important role in later developments of the theory,
refers to the learner's belief in his or her ability to perform the modeled
behavior.

An experiment by Schunk and Hanson,[23] that studied grade 2 students who had
previously experienced difficulty in learning subtraction, illustrates the
type of research stimulated by social learning theory. One group of students
observed a subtraction demonstration by a teacher and then participated in an
instructional program on subtraction. A second group observed other grade 2
students performing the same subtraction procedures and then participated in
the same instructional program. The students who observed peer models scored
higher on a subtraction post-test and also reported greater confidence in
their subtraction ability. The results were interpreted as supporting the
hypothesis that perceived similarity of the model to the learner increases
self-efficacy, leading to more effective learning of modeled behavior. It is
supposed that peer modeling is particularly effective for students who have
low self-efficacy.

Over the last decade, much research activity in educational psychology has
focused on developing theories of self-regulated learning (SRL) and
metacognition. These theories work from the central premise that effective
learners are active agents who construct knowledge by setting goals, analysing
tasks, planning strategies and monitoring their understanding. Research has
indicated that learners who are better at goal setting and self-monitoring
tend to have greater intrinsic task interest and self-efficacy;[24] and that
teaching learning strategies can increase academic achievement.[25]

### [edit] Constructivist perspective

Main article: Constructivism (learning theory)

Constructivism is a category of learning theories in which emphasis is placed
on the agency and prior knowledge of the learner, and often on the social and
cultural determinants of the learning process. Educational psychologists
distinguish individual (or psychological) constructivism, identified with
Piaget's learning theory, from social constructivism. A dominant influence on
the latter type is Lev Vygotsky's work on sociocultural learning, describing
how interactions with adults, more capable peers, and cognitive tools are
internalized to form mental constructs. Elaborating on Vygotsky's theory,
Jerome Bruner and other educational psychologists developed the important
concept of instructional scaffolding, in which the social or information
environment offers supports for learning that are gradually withdrawn as they
become internalized.

Vygotsky's version of constructivist theory has led to the view that behavior,
skills, attitudes and beliefs are inherently situated, that is, bound to a
specific sociocultural setting. According to this view, the learner is
enculturated through social interactions within a community of practice. The
social constructivist view of learning has spawned approaches to teaching and
learning such as cognitive apprenticeship, in which the tacit components of a
complex skill are made explicit through conversational interactions occurring
between expert and novice in the setting in which the skill is embedded.[26]

## [edit] Motivation

Motivation is an internal state that activates, guides and sustains behavior.
Educational psychology research on motivation is concerned with the volition
or will that students bring to a task, their level of interest and intrinsic
motivation, the personally held goals that guide their behavior, and their
belief about the causes of their success or failure.

A form of attribution theory developed by Bernard Weiner[27] describes how
students' beliefs about the causes of academic success or failure affect their
emotions and motivations. For example, when students attribute failure to lack
of ability, and ability is perceived as uncontrollable, they experience the
emotions of shame and embarrassment and consequently decrease effort and show
poorer performance. In contrast, when students attribute failure to lack of
effort, and effort is perceived as controllable, they experience the emotion
of guilt and consequently increase effort and show improved performance.

Motivational theories also explain how learners' goals affect the way that
they engage with academic tasks.[28] Those who have mastery goals strive to
increase their ability and knowledge. Those who have performance approach
goals strive for high grades and seek opportunities to demonstrate their
abilities. Those who have performance avoidance goals are driven by fear of
failure and avoid situations where their abilities are exposed. Research has
found that mastery goals are associated with many positive outcomes such as
persistence in the face of failure, preference for challenging tasks,
creativity and intrinsic motivation. Performance avoidance goals are
associated with negative outcomes such as poor concentration while studying,
disorganized studying, less self-regulation, shallow information processing
and test anxiety. Performance approach goals are associated with positive
outcomes, and some negative outcomes such as an unwillingness to seek help and
shallow information processing.

## [edit] Research methodology

The research methods used in educational psychology tend to be drawn from
psychology and other social sciences. There is also a history of significant
methodological innovation by educational psychologists, and psychologists
investigating educational problems. Research methods address problems in both
research design and data analysis. Research design informs the planning of
experiments and observational studies to ensure that their results have
internal, external and ecological validity. Data analysis encompasses methods
for processing both quantitive (numerical) and qualitative (non-numerical)
research data. Although, historically, the use of quantitative methods was
often considered an essential mark of scholarship, modern educational
psychology research uses both quantitative and qualitative methods.

### [edit] Quantitative methods

<IMG>

<IMG>

Test scores and other educational variables often approximate a normal
distribution.

Perhaps first among the important methodological innovations of educational
psychology was the development and application of factor analysis by Charles
Spearman. Factor analysis is mentioned here as one example of the many
multivariate statistical methods used by educational psychologists. Factor
analysis is used to summarize relationships among a large set of variables or
test questions, develop theories about mental constructs such as self-efficacy
or anxiety, and assess the reliability and validity of test scores.[29] Over
one hundred years after its introduction by Spearman, factor analysis has
become a research staple figuring prominently in educational psychology
journals.

Because educational assessment is fundamental to most quantitative research in
the field, educational psychologists have made significant contributions to
the field of psychometrics. For example, alpha, the widely used measure of
test reliability was developed by educational psychologist Lee Cronbach. The
reliability of assessments are routinely reported in quantitative educational
research. Although, originally, educational measurement methods were built on
classical test theory, item response theory and Rasch models are now used
extensively in educational measurement worldwide. These models afford
advantages over classical test theory, including the capacity to produce
standard errors of measurement for each score or pattern of scores on
assessments and the capacity to handle missing responses.

Meta-analysis, the combination of individual research results to produce a
quantitative literature review, is another methodological innovation with a
close association to educational psychology. In a meta-analysis, effect sizes
that represent, for example, the differences between treatment groups in a set
of similar experiments, are averaged to obtain a single aggregate value
representing the best estimate of the effect of treatment.[30] Several decades
after Pearson's work with early versions of meta-analysis, Glass[31] published
the first application of modern meta-analytic techniques and triggered their
broad application across the social and biomedical sciences. Today, meta-
analysis is among the most common types of literature review found in
educational psychology research.

Other quantitative research issues associated with educational psychology
include the use of nested research designs (e.g., a student nested within a
classroom, which is nested within a school, which is nested within a district,
etc.) and the use of longitudinal statistical models to measure change.

### [edit] Qualitative methods

Qualitative methods are used in educational studies whose purpose is to
describe events, processes and situations of theoretical significance. The
qualitative methods used in educational psychology often derive from
anthropology, sociology or sociolinguistics. For example, the anthropological
method of ethnography has been used to describe teaching and learning in
classrooms. In studies of this type, the researcher may gather detailed field
notes as a participant observer or passive observer. Later, the notes and
other data may be categorized and interpreted by methods such as grounded
theory. Triangulation, the practice of cross-checking findings with multiple
data sources, is highly valued in qualitative research.

Case studies are forms of qualitative research focusing on a single person,
organization, event, or other entity. In one case study,[32] researchers
conducted a 150-minute, semi-structured interview with a 20-year old woman who
had a history of suicidal thinking between the ages of 14 to 18. They analyzed
an audio-recording of the interview to understand the roles of cognitive
development, identity formation and social attachment in ending her suicidal
thinking.

Qualitative analysis is most often applied to verbal data from sources such as
conversations, interviews, focus groups, and personal journals. Qualitative
methods are thus, typically, approaches to gathering, processing and reporting
verbal data. One of the most commonly used methods for qualitative research in
educational psychology is protocol analysis.[33] In this method the research
participant is asked to think aloud while performing a task, such as solving a
math problem. In protocol analysis the verbal data is thought to indicate
which information the subject is attending to, but is explicitly not
interpreted as an explanation or justification for behavior. In contrast, the
method of verbal analysis[34] does admit learners' explanations as a way to
reveal their mental model or misconceptions (e.g., of the laws of motion). The
most fundamental operations in both protocol and verbal analysis are
segmenting (isolating) and categorizing sections of verbal data. Conversation
analysis and discourse analysis, sociolinguistic methods that focus more
specifically on the structure of conversational interchange (e.g., between a
teacher and student), have been used to assess the process of conceptual
change in science learning.[35] Qualitative methods are also used to analyse
information in a variety of media, such as students' drawings and concept
maps, video-recorded interactions, and computer log records.

## [edit] Applications in instructional design and technology

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives: categories in the cognitive
domain[36]

Instructional design, the systematic design of materials, activities and
interactive environments for learning, is broadly informed by educational
psychology theories and research. For example, in defining learning goals or
objectives, instructional designers often use a taxonomy of educational
objectives created by Benjamin Bloom and colleagues.[36] Bloom also researched
mastery learning, an instructional strategy in which learners only advance to
a new learning objective after they have mastered its prerequisite objectives.
Bloom[37] discovered that a combination of mastery learning with one-to-one
tutoring is highly effective, producing learning outcomes far exceeding those
normally achieved in classroom instruction. GagnÃ©, another psychologist, had
earlier developed an influential method of task analysis in which a terminal
learning goal is expanded into a hierarchy of learning objectives[38]
connected by prerequisite relations.

  * Intelligent tutoring system
  * Educational technology
  * John R. Anderson
  * Cognitive tutor
  * Cooperative learning
  * Collaborative learning
  * problem-based learning
  * Computer supported collaborative learning
  * William Winn
  * constructive alignment

## [edit] Applications in teaching

<IMG>

<IMG>

A class size experiment in the United States found that attending small
classes for 3 or more years in the early grades increased high school
graduation of students from low income families.[39]

Research on classroom management and pedagogy is conducted to guide teaching
practice and form a foundation for teacher education programs. The goals of
classroom management are to create an environment conducive to learning and to
develop students' self-management skills. More specifically, classroom
management strives to create positive teacher-student and peer relationships,
manage student groups to sustain on-task behavior, and use counselling and
other psychological methods to aid students who present persistent
psychosocial problems.[40]

Introductory educational psychology is a commonly required area of study in
most North American teacher education programs. When taught in that context,
its content varies, but it typically emphasizes learning theories (especially
cognitively oriented ones), issues about motivation, assessment of students'
learning, and classroom management. A developing Wikibook about educational
psychology gives more detail about the educational psychology topics that are
typically presented in preservice teacher education.

  * Special education
  * Lesson plan
  * More about applications to classroom teaching

## [edit] History

Educational psychology cannot claim priority in the systematic analysis of
educational processes. Philosophers of education such as Democritus,
Quintilian, Vives and Comenius, had examined, classified and judged the
methods of education centuries before the beginnings of psychology in the late
1800s. Instead, aspirations of the new discipline rested on the application of
the scientific methods of observation and experimentation to educational
problems. Even in the earliest years of the discipline, educational
psychologists recognized the limitations of this new approach. In his famous
series of lectures Talks to Teachers on Psychology, published in 1899 and now
regarded as the first educational psychology textbook, the pioneering American
psychologist William James commented that:

â Psychology is a science, and teaching is an art; and sciences never
generate arts directly out of themselves. An intermediate inventive mind must
make that application, by using its originality.[41] â  
According to Berliner[42] educational psychology theorists' attitude to the
world of educational practice has shifted from initial interest to disdain,
and eventually to respect.

  * Charles Hubbard Judd

In 1912, Thorndike, who developed the theory of instrumental conditioning,
presaged later work on programmed instruction, mastery learning and computer-
based learning:

â If, by a miracle of mechanical ingenuity, a book could be so arranged that
only to him who had done what was directed on page one would page two become
visible, and so on, much that now requires personal instruction could be
managed by print.[43] â  
### [edit] Influential educational psychologists and theorists

Main article: List of educational psychologists

The following persons were selected and featured in a recent biographical
history of educational psychology[44] as having made significant contributions
to the field:

  * Albert Bandura 1925-
  * Alfred Binet 1857-1911
  * Benjamin Bloom 1913-1999
  * Ann Brown 1943-1999
  * Jerome Bruner 1915-
  * Lee Cronbach 1916-2001
  * John Dewey 1859-1952
  * Nathaniel Gage 1917-
  * Robert GagnÃ© 1916-2002
  * William James 1842-1910
  * Maria Montessori 1870-1952
  * Jean Piaget 1896-1980
  * Herbert Simon 1916â2001
  * Burrhus Frederic Skinner 1904-1990
  * Charles Spearman 1863-1945
  * Lewis Terman 1877-1956
  * Edward L. Thorndike 1874-1949
  * Lev Semenovich Vygotsky 1896-1934

## [edit] Careers in educational psychology

### [edit] Education and training

<IMG>

The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide
view of the subject. Please improve this article or discuss the issue on the
talk page.  
A person may be considered an educational psychologist after completing a
graduate degree in educational psychology or a closely related field.
Universities establish educational psychology graduate programs in either
psychology departments or, more commonly, faculties of education.

Educational psychologists work in a variety of settings. Some work in
university settings where they carry out research on the cognitive and social
processes of human development, learning and education. Educational
psychologists may also work as consultants in designing and creating
educational materials, classroom programs and online courses.

Educational psychologists who work in k-12 school settings (called school
psychologists in the United States) are trained at the masters and doctoral
levels. In addition to conducting assessments, school psychologists provide
services such as academic and behavioral intervention, counseling, teacher
consultation, and crisis intervention.

In the UK, status as a Chartered Educational Psychologist is gained by
completing:

  * an undergraduate degree in psychology permitting registration with the British Psychological Society
  * two or three years experience working with children, young people and their families.
  * a three-year professional doctorate in educational psychology.

The previous requirement to train and work for two years as a teacher has now
been abandoned.

### [edit] Employment outlook

Employment for psychologists in the United States is expected to grow faster
than most occupations through the year 2014, with anticipated growth of
18-26%. One in four psychologist are employed in educational settings. In the
United States, the median salary for psychologists in primary and secondary
schools is $58,360 as of May 2004.[45]

In recent decades the participation of women as professional researchers in
North American educational psychology has risen dramatically.[46] The
percentage of female authors of peer-reviewed journal articles doubled from
1976 (24%) to 1995 (51%), and has since remained constant. Female membership
on educational psychology journal editorial boards increased from 17% in 1976
to 47% in 2004. Over the same period, the proportion of chief editor positions
held by women increased from 22% to 70%.

## [edit] Research journals

Journal Impact*  
Educational Psychologist 3.72  
Journal of the Learning Sciences 2.28  
Learning and Individual Differences 2.17  
Review of Educational Research 1.96  
Journal of Educational Psychology 1.69  
Learning and Instruction 1.62  
Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics 1.35  
Educational Psychology Review 1.23  
American Educational Research Journal 1.10  
British Journal of Educational Psychology 0.92  
Cognition and Instruction 0.80  
Contemporary Educational Psychology 0.75  
Journal of Experimental Education 0.73  
Instructional Science 0.66  
Journal of Educational Measurement 0.47  
Educational Technology Res and Dev 0.20  
International Journal of Learning 0.19  
European Journal of Psychology of Education 0.18  
Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology 0.08  
* Citations per article from 2005 ISI JCR  
Although not exhaustive, the table to the right lists peer-reviewed journals
in educational psychology and related fields. The impact factor is the average
number of citations per article in each journal.

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikiversity has learning materials about Educational psychology  
  * Articles related to educational psychology
  * American Educational Research Association
  * American Psychological Association
  * Association for Psychological Science
  * British Psychological Society
  * Educational psychologists
  * Contemporary Educational Psychology
  * Educational research
  * Evolutionary educational psychology
  * Important publications in educational psychology
  * International Society of the Learning Sciences
  * Learning sciences
  * List of education topics
  * Philosophy of education
  * School psychologist

<IMG> Education portal  
## [edit] External links

  * Educational Psychology Resources by Athabasca University
  * Division 15 of the American Psychological Association
  * Educational Psychology Interactive
  * Psychology of Education Section of the British Psychological Society
  * School Psychology on the Web
  * Explorations in Learning & Instruction: The Theory Into Practice Database
  * Classics in the History of Psychology
  * The Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing
  * Educational psychology at The Psychology Wiki
  * EPNET - Educational Psychology forum

  

### [edit] Careers in the United Kingdom

  * United Kingdom description of educational psychologist
  * Educational Psychologist description from the British Psychological Society

### [edit] Careers in the United States

  * Careers in Educational Psychology

### [edit] Textbooks

There are many introductory educational psychology textbooks, mostly intended
for future k-12 teachers.

  * Psychology Applied To Teaching by Jack Snowman and Robert Biehler
  * Educational Psychology by John Santrock
  * Educational Psychology by Robert Slavin
  * Educational Psychology: Developing Learners by Jeanne Ormrod
  * Educational Psychology by Anita Woolfolk
  * Educational Psychology: Effective Teaching, Effective Learning by Elliot, Kratochwill, Cook & Travers

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Lucas, J. L., Blazek, M. A., & Raley, A. B. (2005). The lack of representation of educational psychology and school psychology in introductory psychology textbooks. Educational Psychology, 25, 347-351.
  2. ^ Woolfolk, A. E.,Winne,P. H. & Perry, N. E. (2006). Educational Psychology (3rd Canadian ed.). Toronto, Canada: Pearson.
  3. ^ Woods, Ashley and Woods, Steiner Schools in England, University of West of England, Bristol: Research Report RR645, section 1.5, "Findings from the survey and case studies"
  4. ^ Carrie Y. Nordlund, "Art Experiences in Waldorf Education", Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Missouri-Columbia, May 2006
  5. ^ Cano, F. (2005). Epistemological beliefs and approaches to learning: Their change through secondary school and their influence on academic performance. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 203-221.
  6. ^ Semb, G. B., & Ellis, J. A. (1994). Knowledge taught in schools: What is remembered? Review of Educational Research, 64, 253-286.
  7. ^ Ellis, J. A., Semb, G. B., & Cole, B. (1998). Very long-term memory for information taught in school. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 23, 419-433.
  8. ^ Perkins, D. N., & Salomon, G. (1992). Transfer of learning. International Encyclopedia of Education (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press.
  9. ^ Perkins, D. N., & Grotzer, T. A. (1997). Teaching intelligence. American Psychologist, 52, 1125-1133.
  10. ^ Detterman, D. K. (1993). The case for the prosecution: Transfer as an epiphenomenon. In D. K. Detterman & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), Transfer on trial: Intelligence, cognition, and instruction (pp. 1-24). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
  11. ^ Halpern, D. F. (1998). Teaching critical thinking for transfer across domains. American Psychologist, 53, 449-455.
  12. ^ Alberto, P., & Troutman, A. (2003). Applied behavior analysis for teachers (6th ed.). Columbus, OH, USA: Prentice-Hall-Merrill.
  13. ^ McGoey, K. E., & DuPaul, G. J. (2000). Token reinforcement and response cost procedures: Reducing the disruptive behavior of preschool children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. School Psychology Quarterly, 15, 330-343.
  14. ^ Theodore, L. A., Bray, M. A., Kehle, T. J., & Jenson, W. R. (2001). Randomization of group contingencies and reinforcers to reduce classroom disruptive behavior. Journal of School Psychology, 39, 267-277.
  15. ^ Lepper, M. R., Greene, D. & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children's intrinsic interest with extrinsic reward: A test of the âoverjustificationâ hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 129-137.
  16. ^ Cameron, J., Pierce, W. D., Banko, K. M., & Gear, A. (2005). Achievement-based rewards and intrinsic motivation: A test of cognitive mediators. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 641-655.
  17. ^ Pierce, W. D. & Cameron, J. (2002). A summary of the effects of reward contingencies on interest and performance. The Behavior Analyst Today, 3, 222-226.
  18. ^ Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
  19. ^ a b Krug, D., Davis, T. B., Glover, J. A. (1990). Massed versus distributed repeated reading: A case of forgetting helping recall? Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 366-371.
  20. ^ Dempster, F. N. (1989). Spacing effects and their implications for theory and practice. Educational Psychology Review, 1, 309-330.
  21. ^ Carney, R. N., & Levin, J. R. (2000). Fading mnemonic memories: Here's looking anew, again! Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25, 499-508.
  22. ^ Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., Tuovinen, J., & Sweller, J. (2001). When problem solving is superior to studying worked examples. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 579-588.
  23. ^ Schunk, D. H., & Hanson, A. R. (1985). Peer models: Influence on children's self-efficacy and achievement behavior. Journal of Educational Psychology, 77, 313-322.
  24. ^ Zimmerman, B. J. (1998). Developing self-fulfilling cycles of academic regulation: An analysis of exemplary instructional models. In D. H. Schunk & B. J. Zimmerman (Eds.) Self-regulated learning: From teaching to self-reflective practice (pp. 1-19). New York: Guilford.
  25. ^ Hattie, J., Biggs, J., & Purdie, N. (1996). Effects of learning skills interventions on student learning: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 66, 99-136.
  26. ^ Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick, (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser. Hillsdale, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 453-494.
  27. ^ Weiner, B. (2000). Interpersonal and intrapersonal theories of motivation from an attributional perspective. Educational Psychology Review, 12, 1-14.
  28. ^ Elliot, A. J. (1999). Approach and avoidance motivation and achievement goals. Educational Psychologist, 34, 169â189.
  29. ^ Thompson, B. (2004). Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis: Understanding concepts and applications. Washington, DC, USA: American Psychological Association.
  30. ^ Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. London: Sage.
  31. ^ Glass, G. V. (1976). Primary, secondary, and meta-analysis of research. Educational Researcher, 5, 3-8.
  32. ^ Everall, R. D., Bostik, K. E. & Paulson, B. L. (2005). I'm sick of being me: Developmental themes in a suicidal adolescent. Adolescence, 40, 693-708.
  33. ^ Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data (Rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
  34. ^ Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical guide. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6, 271-315.
  35. ^ Pea, R. D. (1993). Learning scientific concepts through material and social activities: Conversational analysis meets conceptual change. Educational Psychologist, 28, 265-277.
  36. ^ a b Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. New York, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman.
  37. ^ Bloom, B. S. (1984). The two sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13(6),4â16.
  38. ^ Gronlund, N. E. (2000). How to write and use instructional objectives (6th ed.). Columbus, OH, USA: Merrill.
  39. ^ Finn, J. D., Gerber, S. B., Boyd-Zaharias, J. (2005). Small classes in the early grades, academic achievement, and graduating from high school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 214-233.
  40. ^ Emmer, E. T., & Stough, L. M. (2001). Classroom management: A critical part of educational psychology with implications for teacher education. Educational Psychologist, 36, 103-112.
  41. ^ James, W. (1983). Talks to teachers on psychology and to students on some of life's ideals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (Original work published 1899)
  42. ^ Berliner, D. C. (1993). The 100-year journey of educational psychology: From interest to disdain to respect for practice. In T. K. Fagan & G. R. VandenBos (Eds). Exploring applied psychology: Origins and critical analysis. Washington DC: American Psychology Association.
  43. ^ Thorndike, E. L. (1912). Education: A first book. New York: MacMillan.
  44. ^ Zimmerman, B. J., & Schunk, D. H. (Eds.)(2003). Educational psychology: A century of contributions. Mahwah, NJ, US: Erlbaum.
  45. ^ Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. Occupational Outlook Handbook. 2006-07 Edition. Psychologists. retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos056.htm on June 30, 2006.
  46. ^ Evans, J., Hsieh, P. P., & Robinson, D. H. (2005). Women's Involvement in educational psychology journals from 1976 to 2004. Educational Psychology Review, 17, 263-271.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Psychology  
History Â· Portal Â· Psychologist  
Research

Affective Â· Biological Â· Clinical Â· Cognitive Â· Cognitive neuroscience Â·
Comparative Â· Developmental Â· Emotion Â· Evolutionary Â· Experimental Â·
Mathematical Â· Neuropsychology Â· Personality Â· Physiological Â· Positive Â·
Psycholinguistics Â· Psychopathology Â· Psychophysics Â· Psychophysiology Â·
Qualitative research Â· Quantitative research Â· Social Â· Theoretical

Psi  
Applied

Assessment Â· Clinical Â· Counseling Â· Educational Â· Forensic Â· Health Â·
Industrial/organizational Â· Legal Â· Media Â· Military Â· Occupational health
Â· Psychometrics Â· Relationship counseling Â· School Â· Sport Â· Systems  
Orientations

Analytical Â· Behaviorism Â· Cognitive behavioral therapy Â· Cognitivism Â·
Descriptive Â· Ecological Systems Theory Â· Existential therapy Â· Family
therapy Â· Feminist therapy Â· Gestalt psychology Â· Humanistic Â· Narrative
therapy Â· Psychoanalysis Â· Psychodynamic psychotherapy Â· Rational emotive
behavior therapy Â· Transpersonal  
Eminent  
psychologists

Gordon Allport Â· Albert Bandura Â· Raymond Cattell Â· Kenneth and Mamie Clark
Â· Erik Erikson Â· Hans Eysenck Â· Leon Festinger Â· Sigmund Freud Â· Donald
O. Hebb Â· Clark L. Hull Â· William James Â· Carl Jung Â· Jerome Kagan Â· Kurt
Lewin Â· Abraham Maslow Â· David McClelland Â· George A. Miller Â· Neal E.
Miller Â· Walter Mischel Â· Ivan Pavlov Â· Jean Piaget Â· Carl Rogers Â·
Stanley Schachter Â· B. F. Skinner Â· Edward Thorndike Â· John B. Watson  
Lists

Counseling topics Â· Important publications in psychology Â· Psychological
research methods Â· Psychological schools Â· Psychologists Â· Psychology
disciplines Â· Psychology organizations Â· Psychology topics Â·
Psychotherapies Â· Timeline of psychology  
Wiktionary definition Â· Wikisource Â· Wikimedia Commons Â· Wikiquote Â·
Wikinews Â· Wikibooks  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Educational_psychology"

Categories: Educational psychology | Applied psychology | Human behavior |
Social sciences | Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder

Hidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Ãslenska
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * à·à·à¶à·à¶½
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 March 2009, at 10:43.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



