
# Mind control

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Mind control is a broad range of psychological tactics able to subvert an
individual's control of his own thinking, behavior, emotions, or decisions.
There are a number of controversial issues regarding mind control and the
methods by which control might be attained (either direct or more subtle) are
the focus of study among psychologists, neuroscientists, and sociologists. The
question of mind control has been discussed in relation to religion, politics,
prisoners of war, totalitarianism, black operations, neural cell manipulation,
cults, terrorism, torture, parental alienation, and even battered person
syndrome. Mind control as a legal defense tactic (see also temporary insanity)
was rejected by the court in the case of Patty Hearst, and in several court
cases involving New Religious Movements. Also, questions of mind control are
regarding ethical questions linked to the subject of free will. Mind control
theories are based on the premise that an outside source can strongly
influence or even control an individual's thinking, behavior or consciousness.
Such theories have ethical and legal implications. Perhaps the most frequently
thought of example of mind control is hypnosis, a widely accepted practice
often used for entertainment and psychological assessment.

## Contents

  * 1 Theoretical models and methods
    * 1.1 Lifton thought reform model
    * 1.2 William Sargant's theories on mind control
    * 1.3 Margaret Singer's conditions for mind control
    * 1.4 Steven Hassan's BITE model
    * 1.5 Mind Control and the Battered Person Syndrome
    * 1.6 Social psychology tactics
    * 1.7 Social psychological conditioning by Stahelski
    * 1.8 Subliminal advertising
  * 2 Cults and mind control controversies
    * 2.1 Scholarly points of view
    * 2.2 Mind control, exit counseling, and deprogramming
    * 2.3 Mind control and recruitment rates
    * 2.4 Mind control and faith
    * 2.5 Counter-cult movement and mind control
  * 3 Legal issues
  * 4 See also
    * 4.1 Methods
    * 4.2 Researchers
    * 4.3 Miscellaneous
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Theoretical models and methods

### [edit] Lifton thought reform model

Main article: Thought Reform (book)

In his 1961 book Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism: A Study of
"Brainwashing" in China, psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton, M.D., describes eight
coercive methods which, he says, are able to change the minds of individuals
without their knowledge and were used with this purpose on prisoners of war in
Korea and China. These include:[1]

  * Milieu Control. This involves the control of information and communication both within the environment and, ultimately, within the individual, resulting in a significant degree of isolation from society at large.
  * Mystical Manipulation. There is manipulation of experiences that appear spontaneous but in fact were planned and orchestrated by the group or its leaders in order to demonstrate divine authority or spiritual advancement or some special gift or talent that will then allow the leader to reinterpret events, scripture, and experiences as he or she wishes.
  * Demand for Purity. The world is viewed as black and white and the members are constantly exhorted to conform to the ideology of the group and strive for perfection. The induction of guilt and/or shame is a powerful control device used here.
  * Confession. Sins, as defined by the group, are to be confessed either to a personal monitor or publicly to the group. There is no confidentiality; members' "sins," "attitudes," and "faults" are discussed and exploited by the leaders.
  * Sacred Science. The group's doctrine or ideology is considered to be the ultimate Truth, beyond all questioning or dispute. Truth is not to be found outside the group. The leader, as the spokesperson for God or for all humanity, is likewise above criticism.
  * Loading the Language. The group interprets or uses words and phrases in new ways so that often the outside world does not understand. This jargon consists of thought-terminating clichÃ©s, which serve to alter members' thought processes to conform to the group's way of thinking.
  * Doctrine over person. Member's personal experiences are subordinated to the sacred science and any contrary experiences must be denied or reinterpreted to fit the ideology of the group.
  * Dispensing of existence. The group has the prerogative to decide who has the right to exist and who does not. This is usually not literal but means that those in the outside world are not saved, unenlightened, unconscious and they must be converted to the group's ideology. If they do not join the group or are critical of the group, then they must be rejected by the members. Thus, the outside world loses all credibility. In conjunction, should any member leave the group, he or she must be rejected also.

In his 1999 book Destroying the world to save it: Aum Shinrikyo, Apocalyptic
Violence and the New Global Terrorism, he concluded that thought reform was
possible without violence or physical coercion.

Robert W. Ford, a British radio operator who worked in Tibet in the 50's,
spent 5 years in Chinese jails. He published a book entitled "Captured in
Tibet", describing and analyzing thought reform to which he was harshly
subjected.[2]

### [edit] William Sargant's theories on mind control

William Sargant connected Pavlovâs findings to the ways people learned and
internalized belief systems. Conditioned behavior patterns could be changed by
stimulated stresses beyond a dogâs capacity for response, in essence causing
a breakdown. This could also be caused by intense signals, longer than normal
waiting periods, rotating positive and negative signals and changing a dogâs
physical condition, as through illness. Depending on the dogâs initial
personality, this could possibly cause a new belief system to be held
tenaciously. Sargant also connected Pavlovâs findings to the mechanisms of
brain-washing in religion and politics.[3]

> "Though men are not dogs, they should humbly try to remember how much they
resemble dogs in their brain functions, and not boast themselves as demigods.
They are gifted with religious and social apprehensions, and they are gifted
with the power of reason; but all these faculties are physiologically entailed
to the brain. Therefore the brain should not be abused by having forced upon
it any religious or political mystique that stunts the reason, or any form of
crude rationalism that stunts the religious sense." (p. 274)[3]

### [edit] Margaret Singer's conditions for mind control

Psychologist Margaret Singer describes in her book Cults in our Midst six
conditions which she says would create an atmosphere in which thought reform
is possible. Singer states that these conditions involve no need for physical
coercion or violence.[4]

  * Keep the person unaware of what is going on and how attempts to psychologically condition him or her are directed in a step-by-step manner. 
    * Potential new members are led, step by step, through a behavioral-change program without being aware of the final agenda or full content of the group. The goal may be to make them deployable agents for the leadership, to get them to buy more courses, or get them to make a deeper commitment, depending on the leader's aim and desires.
  * Control the person's social and/or physical environment; especially control the person's time. 
    * Through various methods, newer members are kept busy and led to think about the group and its content during as much of their waking time as possible.
  * Systematically create a sense of powerlessness in the person. 
    * This is accomplished by getting members away from their normal social support group for a period of time and into an environment where the majority of people are already group members.
    * The members serve as models of the attitudes and behaviors of the group and speak an in-group language.
    * Strip members of their main occupation (quit jobs, drop out of school) or source of income or have them turn over their income (or the majority of) to the group.
    * Once the target is stripped of their usual support network, their confidence in their own perception erodes.
    * As the target's sense of powerlessness increases, their good judgment and understanding of the world are diminished. (ordinary view of reality is destabilized)
    * As the group attacks the target's previous worldview, it causes the target distress and inner confusion; yet they are not allowed to speak about this confusion or object to it - leadership suppresses questions and counters resistance.
    * This process is sped up if the targeted individual or individuals are kept tired - the cult will take deliberate actions to keep the target constantly busy.
  * Manipulate a system of rewards, punishments and experiences in such a way as to inhibit behavior that reflects the person's former social identity. 
    * Manipulation of experiences can be accomplished through various methods of trance induction, including leaders using such techniques as paced speaking patterns, guided imagery, chanting, long prayer sessions or lectures, and lengthy meditation sessions.
    * the target's old beliefs and patterns of behavior are defined as irrelevant or evil. Leadership wants these old patterns eliminated, so the member must suppress them.
    * Members get positive feedback for conforming to the group's beliefs and behaviors and negative feedback for old beliefs and behavior.
  * The group manipulates a system of rewards, punishments, and experiences in order to promote learning the group's ideology or belief system and group-approved behaviors. 
    * Good behavior, demonstrating an understanding and acceptance of the group's beliefs, and compliance are rewarded while questioning, expressing doubts or criticizing are met with disapproval, redress and possible rejection. If one expresses a question, he or she is made to feel that there is something inherently disordered about them to be questioning.
    * The only feedback members get is from the group; they become totally dependent upon the rewards given by those who control the environment.
    * Members must learn varying amounts of new information about the beliefs of the group and the behaviors expected by the group.
    * The more complicated and filled with contradictions the new system is and the more difficult it is to learn, the more effective the conversion process will be.
    * Esteem and affection from peers is very important to new recruits. Approval comes from having the new member's behaviors and thought patterns conform to the models (members). Members' relationship with peers is threatened whenever they fail to learn or display new behaviors. Over time, the easy solution to the insecurity generated by the difficulties of learning the new system is to inhibit any display of doubts -- new recruits simply acquiesce, affirm and act as if they do understand and accept the new ideology.
  * Put forth a closed system of logic and an authoritarian structure that permits no feedback and refuses to be modified except by leadership approval or executive order. 
    * The group has a top-down, pyramid structure. The leaders must have verbal ways of never losing.
    * Members are not allowed to question, criticize or complain -- if they do, the leaders allege that the member is defective - not the organization or the beliefs.
    * The targeted individual is treated as if he or she is always intellectually incorrect or injust, while conversely the system, its leaders and its beliefs are always automatically, and by default, considered as absolutely just.
    * Conversion or remolding of the individual member happens in a closed system. As members learn to modify their behavior in order to be accepted in this closed system, they change -- begin to speak the language -- which serves to further isolate them from their prior beliefs and behaviors.

A report on brainwashing and mind control presented by an American
Psychological Association (APA) task force known as the APA Taskforce on
Deceptive and Indirect Techniques of Persuasion and Control (DIMPAC), chaired
by Singer, was rejected in 1987 by the APA's Board of Social and Ethical
Responsibility for Psychology (BSERP) as lacking "the scientific rigor and
evenhanded critical approach necessary for APA imprimatur." and cautioned the
task force members to "not distribute or publicize the report without
indicating that the report was unacceptable to the Board."[5]

In 2001, Alberto Amitrani and Raffaella Di Marzio, from the Roman seat of the
Group for Research and Information about Sects (GRIS) published an article in
which they assert that the rejection of the report should not be construed as
a rejection of the theories of thought reform and mind control as applied to
New Religious Movements, and that the rejection by one division of the APA
does not represent the whole association. They quote a personal e-mail from
Benjamin Zablocki, professor of sociology, from 1997 in which Zablocki told
the authors "many people have been misled about the true position of the APA
and the ASA with regard to brainwashing", and that the APA urged scholars to
do more research on the matter. They also write that they have reason to
believe that the APA still considers "psychological coercion" to be a
phenomenon worth investigating, and not a notion rejected by the scientific
community. They also write "Otherwise, why would people such as Margaret
Singer, Michael Langone, and others considered to be 'anti-cultists'
contribute to APA Conventions and be respected in other prestigious
professional bodies as well?"[6]

Writing in 1999, research and forensic psychologist Dick Anthony noted that
the removal of Singer's brainwashing concept from the most recent edition of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM IV) "would seem
to indicate that the American Psychiatric Association, like the American
Psychological Association, the American Sociological Association and the
Society for the Scientific Study of Religion, has repudiated Singer's cultic
brainwashing theory because of its unscientific character." Anthony also noted
that Singer's testimony had also been repeatedly excluded from American legal
trials.[7]

Benjamin Zablocki points out the limitations of Dick Anthony's
characterisation of Singer's cultic brainwashing theory as 'unscientific', in
passing in a paper titled 'Methodological Fallacies In Anthonyâs Critique Of
Exit Cost Analysis' [2]. In this paper, Zablocki attempts to rebutt Anthony's
criticisms of his theoretical work on brainwashing in a chapter of the book
'Misunderstanding Cults' (University of Toronto Press 2001). Zablocki writes:

> There is one error that Anthony makes so persistently that it runs through
fully one third of all his 98 propositions. This is the error of assuming that
my theory asserts that the influence mechanism I am describing involves the
destruction of the targetâs free-will. [...] It is true that various
anticult writers, drawn mostly from the ranks of mental health professionals
rather than social sciences, have alleged that cults take away the free will
of their members, not realizingâ or not caringâ that the overthrow of free
will is an unfalsifiable (and therefore unscientific) phenomenon. It is also
true that Anthony has been successful in the past in exposing the non-
scientific nature of these cultic-loss-of-free-will arguments. He senses
correctly that if he could only map an isomorphism between my theory and
theirs, his work would be mostly done and he could tar me with the same brush
he has used successfully in the past on these hapless clinicians (of which
Margaret Singer is the most notorious example). [...] Anthony does not seem to
grasp that one can discuss socially imposed constraints without declaring the
overthrow of free will.

### [edit] Steven Hassan's BITE model

In his book Releasing the Bonds: Empowering People to Think for Themselves,
mental health counselor and exit counselor Steven Hassan describes his mind-
control model, "BITE". "BITE" stands for "Behavior, Information, Thoughts, and
Emotions." The model has a basis in the works of Singer and Lifton, and in the
cognitive dissonance theory of Leon Festinger.[8]

In the book, Hassan describes the components of the BITE model:[8]

  * Behavior Control 
    * Regulation of individualâs physical reality
    * Major time commitment required for indoctrination sessions and group rituals
    * Need to ask permission for major decisions
    * Need to report thoughts, feelings, and activities to superiors
    * Rewards and punishments (behavior modification techniques positive and negative)
    * Individualism discouraged; "group think" prevails
    * Rigid rules and regulations
    * Need for obedience and dependency
  * Information Control 
    * Use of deception
    * Access to non cult sources of information minimized or discouraged
    * Compartmentalization of information; Outsider vs. Insider doctrines
    * Spying on other members is encouraged
    * Extensive use of cult generated information and propaganda
    * Unethical use of confession
  * Thought Control 
    * Need to internalize the groupâs doctrine as "Truth"
    * Use of "loaded" language (for example, âthought terminating clichÃ©s"). Words are the tools we use to think with. These "special" words constrict rather than expand understanding, and can even stop thoughts altogether. They function to reduce complexities of experience into trite, platitudinous "buzz words."
    * Only "good" and "proper" thoughts are encouraged.
    * Use of hypnotic techniques to induce altered mental states
    * Manipulation of memories and implantation of false memories
    * Use of thought stopping techniques, which shut down "reality testing" by stopping "negative" thoughts and allowing only "good" thoughts
    * Rejection of rational analysis, critical thinking, constructive criticism. No critical questions about leader, doctrine, or policy seen as legitimate.
    * No alternative belief systems viewed as legitimate, good, or useful
  * Emotional Control 
    * Manipulate and narrow the range of a personâs feelings
    * Make the person feel that if there are ever any problems, it is always their fault, never the leaderâs or the groupâs
    * Excessive use of guilt
    * Excessive use of fear
    * Extremes of emotional highs and lows
    * Ritual and often public confession of "sins"
    * Phobia indoctrination: inculcating irrational fears about ever leaving the group or even questioning the leaderâs authority. The person under mind control cannot visualize a positive, fulfilled future without being in the group.

Hassan writes that cults recruit and retain members through a three-step
process which he refers to as "unfreezing," "changing," and "refreezing". This
involves the use of an extensive array of various techniques, including
systematic deception, behavior modification, withholding of information, and
emotionally intense persuasion techniques (such as the induction of phobias),
which he collectively terms mind control. He describes these steps as
follows:[9]

  * Unfreezing: the process of breaking a person down
  * Changing: the indoctrination process
  * Refreezing: the process of reinforcing the new identity

In Releasing the Bonds he also writes "I suspect that most cult groups use
informal hypnotic techniques to induce trance states. They tend to use what
are called "naturalistic" hypnotic techniques. Practicing meditation to shut
down thinking, chanting a phrase repetitively for hours, or reciting
affirmations are all powerful ways to promote spiritual growth. But they can
also be used unethically, as methods for mind control indoctrination."[8]

Hassan, after taking part in a number of deprogrammings in the late 1970s,
states that he is no longer involved in this practice.[10] and which
eventually became completely illegal except in the case of minors.[citation
needed]

In Releasing the Bonds, Hassan describes an approach that he calls the
"Strategic Interaction Approach" (SIA) in order to help cult members leave
their groups, and in order to help them recover from the psychological damage
that they have incurred. The approach is non-coercive and the person being
treated is free to discontinue it at any time. He writes: "The goal of the SIA
is to help the loved one recover his full faculties; to restore the creative,
interdependent adult who fully understands what has happened to him; who has
digested and integrated the experience and is better and stronger from the
experience."[11]

In 1998 the Enquete Commission issued its report on "So-called Sects and
Psychogroups" in Germany. Reviewing Hassan's BITE model, the report said
that:[12]

> Thus, the milieu control identified by Hassan, consisting of behavioural
control, mental control, emotional control and information control cannot, in
every case and as a matter of principle, be characterised as "manipulative".
Control of these areas of action is an inevitable component of social
interactions in a group or community. The social control that is always
associated with intense commitment to a group must therefore be clearly
distinguished from the exertion of intentional, methodical influence for the
express purpose of manipulation.

### [edit] Mind Control and the Battered Person Syndrome

A very different explanation of the control some groups have over their
members is by associating it with Battered person syndrome and Stockholm
syndrome. This has been done by psychologists Teresa Ramirez Boulette, Ph.D.
and Susan M. Andersen, Ph.D.

### [edit] Social psychology tactics

A contemporary view of mind control sees it as an intensified and persistent
use of well researched social psychology principles like compliance,
conformity, persuasion, dissonance, reactance, framing or emotional
manipulation.

One of the most notable proponents of such theories is social psychologist
Philip Zimbardo, former president of the American Psychological Association:

    I conceive of mind control as a phenomena [sic] encompassing all the ways in which personal, social and institutional forces are exerted to induce compliance, conformity, belief, attitude, and value change in others. [13]
    "Mind control is the process by which individual or collective freedom of choice and action is compromised by agents or agencies that modify or distort perception, motivation, affect, cognition and/or behavioral outcomes. It is neither magical nor mystical, but a process that involves a set of basic social psychological principles."
In Influence, Science and Practice, social psychologist Robert Cialdini argues
that mind control is possible through the covert exploitation of the
unconscious rules that underlie and facilitate healthy human social
interactions. He states that common social rules can be used to prey upon the
unwary, and he titles them as follows:

  * "Reciprocation: The Old Give and Take...and Take"
  * "Commitment and Consistency: Hobgoblins of the Mind"
  * "Social Proof: Truths Are Us"
  * "Liking: The Friendly Thief"
  * "Authority: Directed Deference"
  * "Scarcity: The Rule of the Few"

Using these six broad categories, he offers specific examples of both mild and
extreme mind control (both one on one and in groups), notes the conditions
under which each social rule is most easily exploited for false ends, and
offers suggestions on how to resist such methods.

### [edit] Social psychological conditioning by Stahelski

Writing in the Journal of Homeland Security, a publication of the ANSER
Institute for Homeland Security, Anthony Stahelski identifies five phases of
social psychological conditioning which he calls cult-like conditioning
techniques employed by terrorist groups: [Stahelski, 2004]:

  1. Depluralization: stripping away all other group member identities
  2. Self-deindividuation: stripping away each memberâs personal identity
  3. Other-deindividuation: stripping away the personal identities of enemies
  4. Dehumanization: identifying enemies as subhuman or nonhuman
  5. Demonization: identifying enemies as evil

### [edit] Subliminal advertising

Main article: Subliminal message

Subliminal advertising was proposed around 1960 as a means for organized mass
control of human behavior. The allegations has since then fallen out of the
common debate, because there are few reports that subliminal advertising has
any real effect in the way advertisers may wish.

## [edit] Cults and mind control controversies

Some of the mind control models discussed above have been related to religious
and non-religious cults (for debates regarding what is a cult, see the
article). There is debate among scholars, members of new religious movements,
and cult critics whether or not mind control is applied either in general or
by any particular group.

### [edit] Scholarly points of view

While the majority of scholars in the study of religion reject theories of
mind control (e.g., Massimo Introvigne and J. Gordon Melton), it is often
accepted in psychology and psychiatry[citation needed] (e.g., Margaret Singer,
Michael Langone, and Philip Zimbardo) and in sociology the opinions are
divided (e.g., David G. Bromley and Anson Shupe contra, Stephen A. Kent and
Benjamin Zablocki pro). Most scholars have either a decided contra or a
decided pro opinion; there are few who advocate a moderate point of
view.[citation needed]

James T. (Jim) Richardson, professor of Sociology and Judicial Studies at the
University of Nevada, writes in his "Brainwashing" Claims and Minority
Religions Outside the United States: Cultural Diffusion of a Questionable
Concept in the Legal Arena that, while heavy on theory, the mind control model
is light on evidence:

    "The CCM movement has collected some information to support its belief that religious groups successfully employ mind-control techniques. But the data is unreliable. The information typically represents a very small sample size. It is not practical to obtain information before, during and after an individual has been in a new religious movement (NRM). Often, their data is disproportionately obtained from former members of a religious organization who have been convinced during CCM counseling that they have been victims of mind-control." [14]
James Richardson, also states that if the NRMs had access to powerful
brainwashing techniques, one would expect that NRMs would have high growth
rates, while in fact most have not had notable success in recruitment. Most
adherents participate for only a short time, and the success in retaining
members has been limited. In addition, Thomas Robbins, Eileen Barker, Newton
Maloney, Massimo Introvigne, John Hall, Lorne Dawson, Anson Shupe, David G.
Bromley, Gordon Melton, Marc Galanter, Saul Levine and other scholars
researching NRMs have argued and established to the satisfaction of courts and
relevant professional associations and scientific communities that there
exists no scientific theory, generally accepted and based upon
methodologically sound research, that supports the brainwashing theories as
advanced by the anti-cult movement. [15]

Sociologist Benjamin Zablocki sees strong indicators of mind control in some
NRMs and suggests that the concept should be researched without bias:

    "I am not personally opposed to the existence of NRMs and still less to the free exercise of religious conscience. I would fight actively against any governmental attempt to limit freedom of religious expression. Nor do I believe it is within the competence of secular scholars such as myself to evaluate or judge the cultural worth of spiritual beliefs or spiritual actions. However, I am convinced, based on more than three decades of studying NRMs through participant-observation and through interviews with both members and ex-members, that these movements have unleashed social and psychological forces of truly awesome power. These forces have wreaked havoc in many livesâin both adults and in children. It is these social and psychological influence processes that the social scientist has both the right and the duty to try to understand, regardless of whether such understanding will ultimately prove helpful or harmful to the cause of religious liberty." (Zablocki, 1997)
Sociologists David Bromley and Anson Shupe consider the idea that "cults" are
brainwashing American youth to be "implausible"..[14] Sociology professor
Stephen A. Kent published several articles where he discusses practices of
NRMs as regards to brainwashing [16][17]

In 1984 the American Psychological Association (APA) requested Margaret
Singer, the main proponent of mind control theories, to set up a working group
called the APA taskforce on Deceptive and Indirect Techniques of Persuasion
and Control (DIMPAC).

In 1987 the DIMPAC committee submitted its final report to the Board of Social
and Ethical Responsibility for Psychology of the APA. On May 11, 1987 the
Board rejected the report. In the rejection memo [18] it is stated: "Finally,
after much consideration, BSERP does not believe that we have sufficient
information available to guide us in taking a position on this issue.".

There are two interpretations of this rejection: one side (e.g. Amitrani and
di Marzio 2000 and Zablocki 2001) see it as no position on the issue of
brainwashing, the other (e.g. Introvigne 1997) sees it as rejecting all
brainwashing theories.

Philip Zimbardo, who teaches a course on the "The psychology of mind control"
at Stanford University, wrote that "Several participants [in a presentation
called 'Cults of Hatred'] challenged our profession to form a task force on
extreme forms of influence, asserting that the underlying issues inform
discourses on terrorist recruiting, on destructive cults versus new religious
movements, on social-political-'therapy' cults and on human malleability or
resiliency when confronted by authority power."[19]

Recently, there are indications that some members of both sides are willing to
start a dialog as, for example, in the 2001 book "Misunderstanding Cults:
Searching for Objectivity in a Controversial Field". Additionally, professor
of Sociology Eileen Barker was invited to speak at the 2002 yearly conference
of the International Cultic Studies Association. And J. Gordon Melton and
Douglas Cowan were invited to speak at a conference sponsored by the
Evangelical Ministries to New Religions.

### [edit] Mind control, exit counseling, and deprogramming

Opponents of some new religious movements have accused them of being cults
that coerce recruits to join (and members to remain) by using strong influence
over members that is instilled and maintained by manipulation (see also Anti-
cult movement, Opposition to cults and new religious movements and Christian
countercult movement). Such opponents frequently advocate exit counseling as
necessary to free the cult member from mind control. The practice of coercive
deprogramming has practically ceased. (Kent & Szimhart, 2002)

Opponents of deprogramming generally regard it as an even worse violation of
personal autonomy than any loss of free will attributable to the recruiting
tactics of new religious movements. These people complain that targets of
deprogramming are being deceived, denied due process, and forced to endure
more intense manipulation than that encountered during their previous group
membership.

Steven Hassan, who began his career as a deprogrammer, criticizes
deprogramming in his book Releasing the Bonds: Empowering People to Think for
Themselves. He writes that "Deprogramming has many drawbacks. I have met
dozens of people who were successfully deprogrammed but, to this day,
experience psychological trauma as a result of the method. These people were
glad to be released from the grip of cult programming but were not happy about
the method used to help them."[20]

### [edit] Mind control and recruitment rates

Eileen Barker states that out of one thousand people persuaded by the
Unification Church to attend one of their overnight programs in 1979, 90% had
no further involvement. Only 8% joined for more than one week and less than 4%
remained members by 1981, two years later.[14]

Tyler Hendricks, former president of the Unification Church, estimates that
approximately 100,000 people "moved into" the Unification Church as full-time
members from the 1970s to the 1990s. Membership in the church was 8,600 in
2004 (counting only those who joined as adults and excluding the children of
members). This is an attrition rate of 93%.

Billy Graham, one of the most prominent evangelists of the last century had
only an average of 1% of the attendants of his evangelizations heed the altar
call at all. Follow-up work after evangelizations shows that only 10% of the
people responding to an altar call actually do join a church. Therefore
successful Christian evangelizations resulted in a longterm success rate of
0.1%, as compared to the 4% of Barker's observation. And these 0.1% do not
become full-time missionaries as in the Unification Church. (Langone, 1993).

### [edit] Mind control and faith

The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) published a statement in 1977
related to brainwashing and mind control. In this statement the ACLU opposed
certain methods "depriving people of the free exercise of religion". The ACLU
also rejected (under certain conditions) the idea that claims of the use of
'brainwashing' or of 'mind control' should overcome the free exercise of
religion. [21]

Leon Festinger based his theory of the cognitive dissonance, a component of
Hassan's Mind Control model, on his observation that the faith of most members
of a UFO cult was unshattered by failed prophecy. .[22]

Barrett who is affiliated with CESNUR and Eileen Barker, whom some anti-cult
activists consider cult apologists, wrote that logical arguments are
irrelevant when trying to persuade some members to leave a movement due to the
certainty that they have about their faith, which he sees as not confined to
cults, but also occurring in some forms of mainstream religion. He also wrote
that some members do not leave the movement even though they realize that
things are wrong. See also Leaving a cult.

### [edit] Counter-cult movement and mind control

In the Christian counter-cult movement there are several commentators who
reject mind control as a factor in cult membership, and membership in both
Christian and non-Christian cults as a spiritual or theological issue.

In an article by the evangelical Christian writers Bob and Gretchen
Passantino, first appearing in Cornerstone magazine, titled Overcoming The
Bondage Of Victimization: A Critical Evaluation of Cult Mind Control Theories
they challenge the validity of mind control theories and the alleged
"victimization" by mind-control, and assert in their conclusion:

    [...] the Bogey Man of cult mind control is nothing but a ghost story, good for inducing an adrenaline high and maintaining a crusade, but irrelevant to reality. The reality is that people who have very real spiritual, emotional, and social needs are looking for fulfillment and significance for their lives. Ill-equipped to test the false gospels of this world, they make poor decisions about their religious affiliations. Poor decisions, yes, but decisions for which they are personally responsible nonetheless. As Christians who believe in an absolute standard of truth and religious reality, we cannot ignore the spiritual threat of the cults. We must promote critical thinking, responsible education, biblical apologetics, and Christian evangelism. We must recognize that those who join the cults, while morally responsible, are also spiritually ignorant.[23]
In a rebuttal to the Passantino's article, a protagonist of the counter-cult
movement, Paul R. Martin, Ph.D. et al. in his Overcoming the Bondage of
Revictimization: A Rational/Empirical Defense of Thought Reform, (first
appeared in Cultic Studies Journal 15/2 1998), writes:

    "The Passantinos are well known and respected evangelical writers. Consequently, their critique, which is rife with errors and misinterpretations, disturbs us very much and calls for a detailed rebuttal. [...]For us, theological considerations inform our understanding of the sociological and psychological destruction caused by cults, although others hold similar positions without considering theological issues. Cults distort one's perceptions both of natural reality (sociological and psychological) and spiritual reality. In the Christian tradition, the former is supposed to reveal the latter; therefore, those interested in spiritual issues must address both sides in order to minister adequately to former cult members.[24]
## [edit] Legal issues

Some persons have claimed a "brainwashing defense" for crimes committed while
purportedly under mind control. In the cases of Patty Hearst, Steven Fishman
and Lee Boyd Malvo the court rejected such defenses.

Also in the court cases against members of Aum Shinrikyo regarding the 1995
sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway system the mind control defense was not a
mitigating factor.

Starting from the Fishman case (1990) (where a defendant accused of commercial
fraud raised as a defense that he was not fully responsible since he was under
the mind control of Scientology) American courts consistently rejected
testimonies about mind control and manipulation, stating that these were not
part of accepted mainline science according to the Frye Standard (Anthony &
Robbins 1992: 5-29). Margaret Singer and her associate Richard Ofshe filed
suits against the American Psychological Association) (APA) and the American
Sociological Association (ASA) (who had supported APA's 1987 statement) but
they lost in 1993 and 1994.[25]

The Frye standard has since been replaced by the Daubert standard and there
have been to court cases where testimonies about mind control have been
examined according to the Daubert standard.

Some Civil suits where mind control was an issue, were, though, more
effective:

In the case of Wollersheim v. Church of Scientology of California the court
states church practices had been conducted in a coercive environment and so
were not protected by religious freedom guarantees. Wollersheim was finally
awarded $8 million in damages. (California appellate court, 2nd district, 7th
division, Wollersheim v. Church of Scientology of California, Civ. No. B023193
Cal. Super. (1986)

"During trial, Wollersheim's experts testified Scientology's "auditing" and
"disconnect" practices constituted "brainwashing" and "thought reform" akin to
what the Chinese and North Koreans practiced on American prisoners of war. A
religious practice which takes place in the context of this level of coercion
has less religious value than one the recipient engages in voluntarily. Even
more significantly, it poses a greater threat to society to have coerced
religious practices inflicted on its citizens." "Using its position as
religious leader, the 'church' and its agents coerced Wollersheim into
continuing auditing even though his sanity was repeatedly threatened by this
practice... Thus there is adequate proof the religious practice in this
instance caused real harm to the individual and the appellant's outrageous
conduct caused that harm... 'Church' practices conducted in a coercive
environment are not qualified to be voluntary religious practices entitled to
first amendment religious freedom guarantees"[26]

In 1993 the European Court of Human Rights upheld the right of a Greek
Jehovah's Witness Minos Kokkinakis, who had been sentenced to prison and a
fine for proselytizing, to spread his faith, though the court sought to define
what it regarded as acceptable ways of sharing one's faith. However, in a
dissenting judgment, two judges argued that Kokkinakis and his wife had
applied "unacceptable psychological techniques" akin to brainwashing.
KOKKINAKIS v. GREECE (14307/88) [1993] ECHR 20 (25 May 1993)[27]

  

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Mind
control  
### [edit] Methods

  * Brain implant
  * Brainwashing
  * Cognotechnology
  * Conditioning
  * Culture of fear
  * Hypnosis
  * Hypnotherapy, Hypnotherapist
  * Love bombing
  * Memory inhibition
  * Milieu control
  * MKULTRA
  * Neuro-Linguistic Programming
  * Propaganda, and Propaganda model
  * Simulated reality
  * Subliminal messages
  * Thought reform

### [edit] Researchers

  * JosÃ© Manuel Rodriguez Delgado
  * George Estabrooks
  * Joseph Goebbels
  * William Sargant

### [edit] Miscellaneous

  * Candy Jones
  * James Carne
  * Christian Conventions
  * Manchurian Candidate
  * Robert Hendy-Freegard
  * L. Ron Hubbard

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism: A Study of "Brainwashing" in China, Robert J. Lifton, 1956
  2. ^ Robert W. Ford, Captured in Tibet, Publisher: Oxford Univ Press, September 1990, ISBN 019581570X ; Wind Between the Worlds: Captured in Tibet , Publisher: SLG Books, ISBN 0961706694
  3. ^ a b Sargant, W. (1997). Battle for the Mind; A physiology of conversion and brain-washing (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Malor Books. p. 300\. ISBN 1-883536-06-5. http://www.amazon.com/Battle-Mind-Physiology-Conversion-Brainwashing/dp/1883536065.
  4. ^ Cults in Our Midst: The Continuing Fight Against Their Hidden Menace, Margaret Thaler Singer, Jossey-Bass, publisher, April 2003, ISBN 0-78796-741-6]
  5. ^ May 11, 1987, APA MEMORANDUM available online
  6. ^ "Mind Control" in New Religious Movements and the American Psychological Association, Amitrani Marzio and Raffaella Di Marzio, Cults and Society, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2001
  7. ^ Anthony, Dick, Pseudoscience and Minority Religions: An Evaluation of the Brainwashing Theories of Jean-Marie Abgrall, Social Justice Research, Springer Netherlands (1999), Volume 12, Number 4
  8. ^ a b c Releasing the Bonds: Empowering People to Think for Themselves, Steven Hassan, Ch. 2, Aitan Publishing Company, 2000
  9. ^ Releasing the Bonds: Empowering People to Think for Themselves, Steven Hassan, Ch. 4, Steven Hassan, Aitan Publishing Company, 2000
  10. ^ Refuting the Disinformation Attacks Put Forth by Destructive Cults and their Agents
  11. ^ Releasing the Bonds: Empowering People to Think for Themselves, Steven Hassan, Ch. 3, Aitan Publishing Company, 2000
  12. ^ Final Report of the Enquete Commission on "So-called Sects and Psychogroups" New Religious and Ideological Communities and Psychogroups in the Federal Republic of Germany
  13. ^ Phil Zimbardo
  14. ^ a b c Brainwashing by Religious Cults
  15. ^ CESNUR - Brainwashing and Mind Control Controversies
  16. ^ Brainwashing and Re-Indoctrination Programs in the Children of God/The Family
  17. ^ Dr. Stephen A. Kent (1997-11-07) (PDF). Brainwashing in Scientology's Rehabilitation Force (RPF). http://www.hamburg.de/servlet/contentblob/109286/brainwashing-pdf/data.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-16.
  18. ^ CESNUR - APA Memo of 1987 with Enclosures
  19. ^ Mind Control: Psychological Reality or Mindless Rhetoric? Philip Zimbardo, Monitor on Psychology, Volume 33, No. 10, November 2002
  20. ^ Releasing the Bonds: Empowering People to Think for Themselves, Steven Hassan, Ch. 3, Aitan Press, 2000  
Deprogramming has many drawbacks. I have met dozens of people who were
successfully deprogrammed but, to this day, experience psychological trauma as
a result of the method. These people were glad to be released from the grip of
cult programming but were not happy about the method used to help them...A
deprogramming triggers the deepest fears of cult members. They have been taken
against their will. Family and friends are not to be trusted. The trauma of
being thrown into a van by unknown people, driven away, and imprisoned creates
mistrust, anger, and resentment.

  21. ^ American Civil Liberties Union Records, 1947-1995: Finding Aid
  22. ^ cognitive dissonance
  23. ^ [1][dead link]
  24. ^ Martin, Paul: "Overcoming the Bondage of Revictimization: A Rational/Empirical Defense of Thought Reform"
  25. ^ Case No. 730012-8, Margaret Singer, et al., Plaintiff v. American Psychological Association, et. Al., Defendants  
"This case, which involves claims of defamation, frauds, aiding and abetting
and conspiracy, clearly constitutes a dispute over the application of the
First Amendment to a public debate over matters both academic and
professional. The disputant may fairly be described as the opposing camps in a
longstanding debate over certain theories in the field of psychology. The
speech of which the plaintiff's complain, which occurred in the context of
prior litigation and allegedly involved the "fraudulent" addition of the names
of certain defendants to documents filed in said prior litigation, would
clearly have been protected as comment on a public issue whether or not the
statements were made in the contest of legal briefs. The court need not
consider whether the privilege of Civil Code 47 (b) extends to an alleged
interloper in a legal proceeding. Plaintiffs have not presented sufficient
evidence to establish any reasonable probability of success on any cause of
action. In particular Plaintiffs cannot establish deceit with reference to
representations made to other parties in the underlying lawsuit. Thus
Defendants' Special Motions to Strike each of the causes at action asserted
against them, pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure 425.16 is granted."

  26. ^ Newsletter May 2002 - Scientology pays Lawrence Wollersheim at www.factnet.org
  27. ^ KOKKINAKIS v. GREECE - 14307/88 (1993) ECHR 20 (25 May 1993) at www.worldlii.org

## [edit] Further reading

  * Bowart W.H. (1978). "Operation Mind Control". Fontana. http://www.scribd.com/doc/6205006/Operation-Mind-Control-Walter-Bowart.
  * Langone MD (1993). Recovery from cults help for victims of psychological and spiritual abuse. New York: Norton. ISBN 0-393-31321-2.
  * Lifton RJ (1989). Thought reform and the psychology of totalism: a study of "brainwashing" in China. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-4253-2.
  * Singer M et al. (1986-11-01). "Report of the APA Task Force on Deceptive and Indirect Techniques of Persuasion and Control (DIMPAC report)". American Psychological Association. http://www.rickross.com/reference/apologist/apologist23.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-10.
  * Streatfeild D (2008). Brainwash: The Secret History of Mind Control. New York: Picador. ISBN 0-312-42792-1.
  * Zablocki, B (1997). "The Blacklisting of a Concept. The Strange History of the Brainwashing Conjecture in the Sociology of Religion". Nova Religio 1 (1): 96â121. doi:10.1525/nr.1997.1.1.96.
  * Zablocki, B (1998). "Exit Cost Analysis: A New Approach to the Scientific Study of Brainwashing" (PDF). Nova Religio 2 (1): 216â249. doi:10.1525/nr.1998.1.2.216. http://caliber.ucpress.net/doi/pdf/10.1525/nr.1998.1.2.216. Retrieved on 2008-10-10.
  * Zimbardo P (2002-11-01). "Mind Control: Psychological Reality or Mindless Rhetoric?". Monitor on Psychology. http://www.csj.org/infoserv_articles/zimbardo_philip_mindcontrol.htm.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up mind control in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * Mind Control: America's Secret War Video - The History Channel (2000)
  * Mind control at the Open Directory Project

v â¢ d â¢ e

Cults  
Definitions

Christian cult Â· Cult apologist Â· Cults and governments Â· Cult of
personality Â· Cult suicide Â· Destructive cult Â· Doomsday cult Â· Political
cult  
Lists

Authors opposing cults Â· In literature and popular culture Â· Government
documents Â· Researchers  
Organizations

CAIC Â· CAN Â· CESNUR Â· CIC Â· COMA Â· FACTnet Â· FREECOG Â· ICSA Â·
MIVILUDES Â· Reachout Trust Â· Wellspring Retreat and Resource Center  
Opposition

Anti-cult movement Â· Christian countercult movement Â· Opposition to cults
and new religious movements Â· Project Megiddo  
Theories

Atrocity story Â· Brainwashing Â· Coercive persuasion Â· Cult checklist Â·
Deprogramming Â· Exit counseling Â· Love bombing Â· Mind control Â· Post-cult
trauma Â· Sociological classifications Â· APA Task Force (DIMPAC)  
Wiktionary definition Â· Wikisource Â· Wikimedia Commons Â· Wikiquote Â·
Wikinews Â· Wikibooks  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Silva Method  
Founder

JosÃ© Silva  
Background

Alpha wave Â· Electrical impedance Â· Extra-sensory perception Â· Human
Potential Movement Â· Hypnosis Â· Large Group Awareness Training Â· Lucid
dreaming Â· Mind control Â· Pseudoscience Â· Remote viewing Â· Theta rhythm  
Notable students

Werner Erhard Â· Alexander Everett  
Researchers

Joseph Banks Rhine  
Books

The Silva Mind Control Method  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mind_control"

Categories: Conspiracy theories | Mind control | Popular psychology | Public
opinion

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since March 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since January 2007 | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 19:20 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



