
# Hysterical realism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Hysterical realism, also called recherchÃ© postmodernism or maximalism, is a
literary genre typified by a strong contrast between elaborately absurd prose,
plotting, or characterization and careful detailed investigations of real
specific social phenomena.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Authors described as hysterical realists
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] History

The term was coined by the critic James Wood in an essay on Zadie Smith's
White Teeth, titled "Human, All Too Inhuman: The Smallness of the 'Big'
Novel", which appeared in the July 24, 2000 issue of The New Republic and was
later reprinted in Wood's 2004 book, The Irresponsible Self: On Laughter and
the Novel.[1] Wood uses the term to denote the contemporary conception of the
"big, ambitious novel" that pursues "vitality at all costs" and consequently
"knows a thousand things but does not know a single human being."

He decried the genre as an attempt to "turn fiction into social theory," and
an attempt to tell us "how the world works rather than how somebody felt about
something." Wood points to Don DeLillo and Thomas Pynchon as the forefathers
of the genre, which continues in writers like David Foster Wallace and Salman
Rushdie. In response, Zadie Smith described hysterical realism as a "painfully
accurate term for the sort of overblown, manic prose to be found in novels
like my own White Teeth and a few others he was sweet enough to mention."[2]
Smith qualified the term, though, explaining that "any collective term for a
supposed literary movement is always too large a net, catching significant
dolphins among so much cannable tuna."

Wood's line of argument echoes many common criticisms of postmodernist art as
a whole. In particular Wood's attacks on DeLillo and Pynchon clearly echo the
similar criticisms that Gore Vidal and other critics lodged against them a
generation earlier. The "hysterical" prose style is often mated to
"realistic", almost journalistic, effects, such as Pynchon's depiction of 18th
century land surveys in Mason & Dixon, Don DeLillo's treatment of Lee Harvey
Oswald in Libra, or Robert Clark Young's treatment of the arcana of U.S. Navy
life in One of the Guys.

This extravagant treatment of everyday events can be found in the work of
earlier authors, such as Mikhail Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita, Harry
Stephen Keeler's meganovels such as The Box from Japan, Mervyn Peake's
Gormenghast novels, and Herman Melville's The Confidence-Man and Moby-Dick.
Even earlier precursors include Tristram Shandy by Laurence Sterne, often
cited as the first postmodernist novel,[3] and The Anatomy of Melancholy by
Robert Burton. A less "hysterical" version of such a juxtaposition of essay
and narrative passages can be found in the work of Milan Kundera.

## [edit] Authors described as hysterical realists

  * Don DeLillo
  * Dave Eggers
  * Jonathan Safran Foer
  * Jonathan Franzen
  * Thomas Pynchon
  * Salman Rushdie
  * George Saunders
  * Zadie Smith
  * Laurence Sterne
  * David Foster Wallace

## [edit] See also

  * Literary theory
  * Magical realism
  * Literary realism
  * Genre studies
  * Postmodernism
  * Neosurrealism
  * Realism (arts)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ James Wood, "Human, All Too Inhuman," The New Republic Online (August 30, 2001), online at Powell's Books and archived.
  2. ^ Smith, Zadie (2001-10-13). "This is how it feels to me". The Guardian. http://books.guardian.co.uk/departments/generalfiction/story/0,6000,568381,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-21. and archived.
  3. ^ Margaret Markwick, Trollope and Women (London: Hambledon Press, 1997), 3. ISBN 185285152X.

## [edit] External links

  * US novelists must now abandon social and theoretical glitter, says James Wood, The Guardian
  * Salon.com article in response to Wood's criticism.
  * Believer Mag article that discusses Wood's coined term.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hysterical_realism"

Categories: Fiction by genre | Postmodern art | Literary fiction | Literary
movements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 December 2008, at 17:30 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



