
# Transformational grammar

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help clarify the
article; suggestions may be found on the talk page. (February 2009)  
In linguistics, a transformational grammar, or transformational-generative
grammar (TGG), is a generative grammar, especially of a natural language, that
has been developed in a Chomskyan tradition. Additionally, transformational
grammar is the Chomskyan tradition that gives rise to specific
transformational grammars. Much current research in transformational grammar
is inspired by Chomsky's Minimalist Program.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Deep structure and surface structure
  * 2 Development of basic concepts
  * 3 Innate linguistic knowledge
  * 4 Grammatical theories
  * 5 "I-Language" and "E-Language"
  * 6 Grammaticality
  * 7 Minimalism
  * 8 Mathematical representation
  * 9 Transformations
  * 10 References
  * 11 See also
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Deep structure and surface structure

Linguistics  
Language  
Theoretical linguistics  
Generative linguistics  
Phonology  
Morphology  
Syntax  
Lexis  
Semantics  
Lexical semantics  
Statistical semantics  
Structural semantics  
Prototype semantics  
Pragmatics  
Systemic functional linguistics  
Descriptive linguistics  
Phonetics  
Historical linguistics  
Comparative linguistics  
Etymology  
Sociolinguistics  
Corpus linguistics  
Applied linguistics  
Language acquisition  
Language assessment  
Language development  
Language education  
Psycholinguistics  
Neurolinguistics  
Linguistic anthropology  
Cognitive linguistics  
Computational linguistics  
Stylistics  
Prescription  
History of linguistics  
List of linguists  
Unsolved problems  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
In 1957, Noam Chomsky published Syntactic Structures, in which he developed
the idea that each sentence in a language has two levels of representation â
a deep structure and a surface structure.[2] [3] The deep structure
represented the core semantic relations of a sentence, and was mapped on to
the surface structure (which followed the phonological form of the sentence
very closely) via transformations. In his 1995 book, Issues of Modernism in
the works of Abd-al-QÄhir al-JurjÄnÄ«, Egyptian linguist scholar Muttaleb
suggests that Chomskian notions of deep and surface structure were clearly
defined, fifteen centuries earlier, by the Persian linguist Abd al-Qahir al-
Jurjani [4]. Chomsky believed that there would be considerable similarities
between languages' deep structures, and that these structures would reveal
properties, common to all languages, which were concealed by their surface
structures. However, this was perhaps not the central motivation for
introducing deep structure. Transformations had been proposed prior to the
development of deep structure as a means of increasing the mathematical and
descriptive power of Context-free grammars. Similarly, deep structure was
devised largely for technical reasons relating to early semantic theory.
Chomsky emphasizes the importance of modern formal mathematical devices in the
development of grammatical theory:

    But the fundamental reason for [the] inadequacy of traditional grammars is a more technical one. Although it was well understood that linguistic processes are in some sense "creative", the technical devices for expressing a system of recursive processes were simply not available until much more recently. In fact, a real understanding of how a language can (in Humboldt's words) "make infinite use of finite means" has developed only within the last thirty years, in the course of studies in the foundations of mathematics.
    (Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, p. 8 [2])
## [edit] Development of basic concepts

Though transformations continue to be important in Chomsky's current theories,
he has now abandoned the original notion of Deep Structure and Surface
Structure. Initially, two additional levels of representation were introduced
(LF â Logical Form, and PF â Phonetic Form), and then in the 1990s Chomsky
sketched out a new program of research known as Minimalism, in which Deep
Structure and Surface Structure no longer featured and PF and LF remained as
the only levels of representation.

To complicate the understanding of the development of Noam Chomsky's theories,
the precise meanings of Deep Structure and Surface Structure have changed over
time â by the 1970s, the two were normally referred to simply as D-Structure
and S-Structure by Chomskyan linguists. In particular, the idea that the
meaning of a sentence was determined by its Deep Structure (taken to its
logical conclusions by the generative semanticists during the same period) was
dropped for good by Chomskyan linguists when LF took over this role
(previously, Chomsky and Ray Jackendoff had begun to argue that meaning was
determined by both Deep and Surface Structure).[5][6]

## [edit] Innate linguistic knowledge

Terms such as "transformation" can give the impression that theories of
transformational generative grammar are intended as a model for the processes
through which the human mind constructs and understands sentences. Chomsky is
clear that this is not in fact the case: a generative grammar models only the
knowledge that underlies the human ability to speak and understand. One of the
most important of Chomsky's ideas is that most of this knowledge is innate,
with the result that a baby can have a large body of prior knowledge about the
structure of language in general, and need only actually learn the
idiosyncratic features of the language(s) it is exposed to. Chomsky was not
the first person to suggest that all languages had certain fundamental things
in common (he quotes philosophers writing several centuries ago who had the
same basic idea), but he helped to make the innateness theory respectable
after a period dominated by more behaviorist attitudes towards language.
Perhaps more significantly, he made concrete and technically sophisticated
proposals about the structure of language, and made important proposals
regarding how the success of grammatical theories should be evaluated.

Chomsky goes so far as to suggest that a baby need not learn any actual rules
specific to a particular language at all. Rather, all languages are presumed
to follow the same set of rules, but the effects of these rules and the
interactions between them can vary greatly depending on the values of certain
universal linguistic parameters. This is a very strong assumption, and is one
of the most subtle ways in which Chomsky's current theory of language differs
from most others.

## [edit] Grammatical theories

In the 1960s, Chomsky introduced two central ideas relevant to the
construction and evaluation of grammatical theories. The first was the
distinction between competence and performance. Chomsky noted the obvious fact
that people, when speaking in the real world, often make linguistic errors
(e.g. starting a sentence and then abandoning it midway through). He argued
that these errors in linguistic performance were irrelevant to the study of
linguistic competence (the knowledge that allows people to construct and
understand grammatical sentences). Consequently, the linguist can study an
idealised version of language, greatly simplifying linguistic analysis (see
the "Grammaticalness" section below). The second idea related directly to the
evaluation of theories of grammar. Chomsky made a distinction between grammars
which achieved descriptive adequacy and those which went further and achieved
explanatory adequacy. A descriptively adequate grammar for a particular
language defines the (infinite) set of grammatical sentences in that language;
that is, it describes the language in its entirety. A grammar which achieves
explanatory adequacy has the additional property that it gives an insight into
the underlying linguistic structures in the human mind; that is, it does not
merely describe the grammar of a language, but makes predictions about how
linguistic knowledge is mentally represented. For Chomsky, the nature of such
mental representations is largely innate, so if a grammatical theory has
explanatory adequacy it must be able to explain the various grammatical
nuances of the languages of the world as relatively minor variations in the
universal pattern of human language. Chomsky argued that, even though
linguists were still a long way from constructing descriptively adequate
grammars, progress in terms of descriptive adequacy would only come if
linguists held explanatory adequacy as their goal. In other words, real
insight into the structure of individual languages could only be gained
through the comparative study of a wide range of languages, on the assumption
that they are all cut from the same cloth.

## [edit] "I-Language" and "E-Language"

In 1986, Chomsky proposed a distinction between I-Language and E-Language,
similar but not identical to the competence/performance distinction.[7]
(I-language) refers to Internal language and is contrasted with External
Language (or E-language). I-Language is taken to be the object of study in
linguistic theory; it is the mentally represented linguistic knowledge that a
native speaker of a language has, and is therefore a mental object â from
this perspective, most of theoretical linguistics is a branch of psychology.
E-Language encompasses all other notions of what a language is, for example
that it is a body of knowledge or behavioural habits shared by a community.
Thus, E-Language is not itself a coherent concept[8], and Chomsky argues that
such notions of language are not useful in the study of innate linguistic
knowledge, i.e. competence, even though they may seem sensible and intuitive,
and useful in other areas of study. Competence, he argues, can only be studied
if languages are treated as mental objects.

## [edit] Grammaticality

Further information: Grammaticality

Chomsky argued that the notions "grammatical" and "ungrammatical" could be
defined in a meaningful and useful way. In contrast an extreme behaviorist
linguist would argue that language can only be studied through recordings or
transcriptions of actual speech, the role of the linguist being to look for
patterns in such observed speech, but not to hypothesize about why such
patterns might occur, nor to label particular utterances as either
"grammatical" or "ungrammatical". Although few linguists in the 1950s actually
took such an extreme position, Chomsky was at an opposite extreme, defining
grammaticality in an unusually (for the time) mentalistic way.[9] He argued
that the intuition of a native speaker is enough to define the grammaticalness
of a sentence; that is, if a particular string of English words elicits a
double take, or feeling of wrongness in a native English speaker, it can be
said that the string of words is ungrammatical (when various extraneous
factors affecting intuitions are controlled for). This (according to Chomsky)
is entirely distinct from the question of whether a sentence is meaningful, or
can be understood. It is possible for a sentence to be both grammatical and
meaningless, as in Chomsky's famous example "colorless green ideas sleep
furiously". But such sentences manifest a linguistic problem distinct from
that posed by meaningful but ungrammatical (non)-sentences such as "man the
bit sandwich the", the meaning of which is fairly clear, but which no native
speaker would accept as being well formed.

The use of such intuitive judgments permitted generative syntacticians to base
their research on a methodology in which studying language through a corpus of
observed speech became downplayed, since the grammatical properties of
constructed sentences were considered to be appropriate data on which to build
a grammatical model. Without this change in philosophy, the construction of
generative grammars, when conceived of as a some kind of representation of
mental grammars, would have been almost impossible at the time, since
gathering the necessary data to assess a speakers mental grammar would have
been prohibitively difficult.[citation needed]

## [edit] Minimalism

Main article: Linguistic minimalism

In the mid-1990s to mid-2000s, much research in transformational grammar was
inspired by Chomsky's Minimalist Program.[10] The "Minimalist Program" aims at
the further development of ideas involving economy of derivation and economy
of representation, which had started to become significant in the early 1990s,
but were still rather peripheral aspects of Transformational-generative
grammar theory.

  * Economy of derivation is a principle stating that movements (i.e. transformations) only occur in order to match interpretable features with uninterpretable features. An example of an interpretable feature is the plural inflection on regular English nouns, e.g. dogs. The word dogs can only be used to refer to several dogs, not a single dog, and so this inflection contributes to meaning, making it interpretable. English verbs are inflected according to the grammatical number of their subject (e.g. "Dogs bite" vs "A dog bites"), but in most sentences this inflection just duplicates the information about number that the subject noun already has, and it is therefore uninterpretable.
  * Economy of representation is the principle that grammatical structures must exist for a purpose, i.e. the structure of a sentence should be no larger or more complex than required to satisfy constraints on grammaticality.

Both notions, as described here, are somewhat vague, and indeed the precise
formulation of these principles is controversial.[11][12] An additional aspect
of minimalist thought is the idea that the derivation of syntactic structures
should be uniform; that is, rules should not be stipulated as applying at
arbitrary points in a derivation, but instead apply throughout derivations.
Minimalist approaches to phrase structure have resulted in "Bare Phrase
Structure", an attempt to eliminate X-bar theory. In 1998, Chomsky suggested
that derivations proceed in "phases". The distinction of Deep Structure vs.
Surface Structure is not present in Minimalist theories of syntax, and the
most recent phase-based theories also eliminate LF and PF as unitary levels of
representation.

## [edit] Mathematical representation

Returning to the more general mathematical notion of a grammar, an important
feature of all transformational grammars is that they are more powerful than
context free grammars.[13] This idea was formalized by Chomsky in the Chomsky
hierarchy. Chomsky argued that it is impossible to describe the structure of
natural languages using context free grammars.[14] His general position
regarding the non-context-freeness of natural language has held up since then,
although his specific examples regarding the inadequacy of CFGs in terms of
their weak generative capacity were later disproven. [15] [16]

## [edit] Transformations

The usual usage of the term 'transformation' in linguistics refers to a rule
that takes an input typically called the Deep Structure (in the Standard
Theory) or D-structure (in the extended standard theory or government and
binding theory) and changes it in some restricted way to result in a Surface
Structure (or S-structure). In TGG, Deep structures were generated by a set of
phrase structure rules.

For example a typical transformation in TG is the operation of subject-
auxiliary inversion (SAI). This rule takes as its input a declarative sentence
with an auxiliary: "John has eaten all the heirloom tomatoes." and transforms
it into "Has John eaten all the heirloom tomatoes?". In their original
formulation (Chomsky 1957), these rules were stated as rules that held over
strings of either terminals or constituent symbols or both.

    X NP AUX Y \\Rightarrow X AUX NP Y
(where NP = Noun Phrase and AUX = Auxiliary)

In the 1970s, by the time of the Extended Standard Theory, following the work
of Joseph Emonds on structure preservation, transformations came to be viewed
as holding over trees. By the end of government and binding theory in the late
1980s, transformations are no longer structure changing operations at all,
instead they add information to already existing trees by copying
constituents.

The earliest conceptions of transformations were that they were construction-
specific devices. For example, there was a transformation that turned active
sentences into passive ones. A different transformation raised embedded
subjects into main clause subject position in sentences such as "John seems to
have gone"; and yet a third reordered arguments in the dative alternation.
With the shift from rules to principles and constraints that was found in the
1970s, these construction specific transformations morphed into general rules
(all the examples just mentioned being instances of NP movement), which
eventually changed into the single general rule of move alpha or Move.

Transformations actually come of two types: (i) the post-Deep structure kind
mentioned above, which are string or structure changing, and (ii) Generalized
Transformations (GTs). Generalized transformations were originally proposed in
the earliest forms of generative grammar (e.g. Chomsky 1957). They take small
structures which are either atomic or generated by other rules, and combine
them. For example, the generalized transformation of embedding would take the
kernel "Dave said X" and the kernel "Dan likes smoking" and combine them into
"Dave said Dan likes smoking". GTs are thus structure building rather than
structure changing. In the Extended Standard Theory and government and binding
theory, GTs were abandoned in favor of recursive phrase structure rules.
However, they are still present in tree-adjoining grammar as the Substitution
and Adjunction operations and they have recently re-emerged in mainstream
generative grammar in Minimalism as the operations Merge and Move.

In generative phonology, another form of transformation is the phonological
rule, which describes a mapping between an underlying representation (the
phoneme) and the surface form that is articulated during natural speech.[17]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Chomsky, Noam (1995). The Minimalist Program. MIT Press.
  2. ^ a b Chomsky, Noam (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. MIT Press.
  3. ^ The Port-Royal Grammar of 1660 identified similar principles; Chomsky, Noam (1972). Language and Mind. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
  4. ^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd_al-Qahir_al-Jurjani
  5. ^ Jackendoff, Ray (1974). Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar. MIT Press.
  6. ^ May, Robert C. (1977). The Grammar of Quantification. MIT Phd Dissertation. (Supervised by Noam Chomsky, this dissertation introduced the idea of "logical form".)
  7. ^ Chomsky, Noam (1986). Knowledge of Language. New York:Praeger.
  8. ^ Chomsky, Noam (2001). "Derivation by Phase". In other words, in algebraic terms, the I-Language is the actual function, whereas the E-Language is the extension of this function. In Michael Kenstowicz (ed.) Ken Hale: A Life in Language. MIT Press. Pages 1-52. (See p. 49 fn. 2 for comment on E-Language.)
  9. ^ Newmeyer, Frederick J. (1986). Linguistic Theory in America (Second Edition). Academic Press.
  10. ^ Chomsky, Noam (1995). The Minimalist Program. MIT Press.
  11. ^ Lappin, Shalom; Robert Levine and David Johnson (2000). "Topic ... Comment". Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 18: 665â671. doi:10.1023/A:1006474128258.
  12. ^ Lappin, Shalom; Robert Levine and David Johnson (2001). "The Revolution Maximally Confused". Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 19: 901â919. doi:10.1023/A:1013397516214.
  13. ^ Peters, Stanley; R. Ritchie (1973). "On the generative power of transformational grammars". Information Sciences 6: 49â83. doi:10.1016/0020-0255(73)90027-3.
  14. ^ Chomsky, Noam (1956). "Three models for the description of language". IRE Transactions on Information Theory 2: 113â124. doi:10.1109/TIT.1956.1056813. http://www.chomsky.info/articles/195609--.pdf.
  15. ^ Shieber, Stuart (1985). "Evidence against the context-freeness of natural language". Linguistics and Philosophy 8: 333â343. doi:10.1007/BF00630917. http://www.eecs.harvard.edu/~shieber/Biblio/Papers/shieber85.pdf.
  16. ^ Pullum, Geoffrey K.; Gerald Gazdar (1982). "Natural languages and context-free languages". Linguistics and Philosophy 4: 471â504. doi:10.1007/BF00360802.
  17. ^ Goldsmith, John A (1995). "Phonological Theory". in John A. Goldsmith. The Handbook of Phonological Theory. Blackwell Handbooks in Linguistics. Blackwell Publishers. p. 2.

## [edit] See also

  * Antisymmetry
  * Generalised phrase structure grammar
  * Generative semantics
  * Head-driven phrase structure grammar
  * Heavy NP shift
  * Lexical functional grammar
  * Parasitic gap
  * Phrase structure rules
  * Syntax

## [edit] External links

  * What is I-language? \- Chapter 1 of I-language: An Introduction to Linguistics as Cognitive Science.
  * The Syntax of Natural Language â an online textbook on transformational grammar.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transformational_grammar"

Categories: Generative linguistics | Grammar frameworks | Noam Chomsky |
Syntactic transformation

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009
| All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * PortuguÃªs
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 18 March 2009, at 09:52 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



