
# Cognitivism (psychology)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Cognitivism (disambiguation).

<IMG>

This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(January 2008)  
<IMG>

This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject.
WikiProject Psychology or the Psychology Portal may be able to help recruit
one. (June 2008)  
Psychology

Greek letter 'psi'

Portal â¢ History  
Areas  
Research  
Abnormal  
Biological  
Cognitive  
Developmental  
Experimental  
Evolutionary  
Mathematical  
Neuropsychology  
Personality  
Positive  
Psychophysics  
Social  
Transpersonal  
Applied  
Clinical  
Educational  
Forensic  
Health  
Industrial  
Organizational  
School  
Sport  
Lists  
Publications  
Topics  
Therapies

v â¢ d â¢ e  
In psychology, cognitivism is a theoretical approach in understanding the mind
using quantitative, positivist and scientific methods, that describes mental
functions as information processing models.[citation needed]

## Contents

  * 1 Theoretical approach
  * 2 Criticisms of psychological cognitivism
  * 3 See also
  * 4 Further reading

  
## [edit] Theoretical approach

Cognitivism has two major components, one methodological, the other
theoretical. Methodologically, cognitivism adopts a positivist approach and
the belief that psychology can be (in principle) fully explained by the use of
experiment, measurement and the scientific method.[citation needed] This is
also largely a reductionist goal, with the belief that individual components
of mental function (the 'cognitive architecture') can be identified and
meaningfully understood.[citation needed] The second is the belief that
cognition consists of discrete, internal mental states (representations or
symbols) whose manipulation can be described in terms of rules or
algorithms.[citation needed]

Cognitivism became the dominant force in psychology in the late-20th century,
replacing behaviorism as the most popular paradigm for understanding mental
function. Cognitive psychology is not a wholesale refutation of behaviorism,
but rather an expansion that accepts that mental states exist. This was due to
the increasing criticism towards the end of the 1950s of behaviorist models.
One of the most notable criticisms was Chomsky's argument that language could
not be acquired purely through conditioning, and must be at least partly
explained by the existence of internal mental states.

The main issues that interest cognitive psychologists are the inner mechanisms
of human thought and the processes of knowing. Cognitive psychologists have
attempted to throw light on the alleged mental structures that stand in a
causal relationship to our physical actions.

## [edit] Criticisms of psychological cognitivism

Cognitivism has been criticised in a number of ways.

Phenomenologists and hermeneutic philosophers have criticised the positivist
approach of cognitivism for reducing individual meaning to what they perceive
as measurements stripped of all significance. They argue that by representing
experiences and mental functions as measurements, cognitivism is ignoring the
context (cf contextualism) and, therefore, the meaning of these measurements.
They believe that it is this personal meaning of experience gained from the
phenomenon as it is experienced by a person (what Heidegger called being in
the world) which is the fundamental aspect of our psychology that needs to be
understood: therefore they argue that a context-free psychology is a
contradiction in terms. They also argue in favour of holism: that positivist
methods cannot be meaningfully used on something which is inherently
irreducible to component parts. Hubert Dreyfus has been the most notable
critic of cognitivism from this point of view. Humanistic psychology draws
heavily on this philosophy, and practitioners have been among the most
critical of cognitivism.

In the 1990s, various new theories emerged and challenged cognitivism and the
idea that thought was best described as computation. Some of these new
approaches, often influenced by phenomenological and post-modernist
philosophy, include situated cognition, distributed cognition, dynamicism,
embodied cognition. Some thinkers working in the field of artificial life (for
example Rodney Brooks) have also produced non-cognitivist models of cognition.

The idea that mental functions can be described as information processing
models has been criticised by philosopher John Searle and mathematician Roger
Penrose who both argue that computation has some inherent shortcomings which
cannot capture the fundamentals of mental processes.

  * Penrose uses GÃ¶del's incompleteness theorem (which states that there are mathematical truths which can never be proven in a sufficiently strong mathematical system; any sufficiently strong system of axioms will also be incomplete) and Turing's halting problem (which states that there are some things which are inherently non-computable) as evidence for his position.
  * Searle has developed two arguments, the first (well known through his Chinese Room thought experiment) is the 'syntax is not semantics' argumentâthat a program is just syntax, understanding requires semantics, therefore programs (hence cognitivism) cannot explain understanding. It should be noted that such an argument presupposes the controversial notion of a private language. The second, which Searle now prefers but is less well known, is his 'syntax is not physics' argumentânothing in the world is intrinsically a computer program except as applied, described or interpreted by an observer, so either everything can be described as a computer and trivially a brain can but then this does not explain any specific mental processes, or there is nothing intrinsic in a brain that makes it a computer (program). Detractors of this argument might point out that the same thing could be said about any concept-object relation, and that the brain-computer analogy can be a perfectly useful model if there is a strong isomorphism between the two. Both points, Searle claims, refute cognitivism.

Another argument against cognitivism is the problems of Ryle's Regress or the
homunculus fallacy. Cognitivists have offered a number of arguments to refute
these attacks.

## [edit] See also

  * Cognition
  * Cognitive psychology
  * Cognitive science
  * Computationalism
  * Consciousness
  * Critical psychology
  * Educational psychology
  * Enactivism
  * Phenomenology
  * Symbol grounding
  * Important publications in cognitivism

## [edit] Further reading

  * Costall, A. and Still, A. (eds) (1987) Cognitive Psychology in Question. Brighton: Harvester Press Ltd. ISBN 0-7108-1057-1
  * Searle, J. R. Is the brain a digital computer APA Presidential Address
  * Wallace, B ., Ross, A., Davies, J.B., and Anderson T., (eds) (2007) The Mind, the Body and the World: Psychology after Cognitivism. London: Imprint Academic. ISBN 978-1845400736

v â¢ d â¢ e

Psychology  
History Â· Portal Â· Psychologist  
Research

Affective Â· Biological Â· Clinical Â· Cognitive Â· Cognitive neuroscience Â·
Comparative Â· Developmental Â· Emotion Â· Evolutionary Â· Experimental Â·
Mathematical Â· Neuropsychology Â· Personality Â· Physiological Â· Positive Â·
Psycholinguistics Â· Psychopathology Â· Psychophysics Â· Psychophysiology Â·
Qualitative research Â· Quantitative research Â· Social Â· Theoretical

Psi  
Applied

Assessment Â· Clinical Â· Counseling Â· Educational Â· Forensic Â· Health Â·
Industrial/organizational Â· Legal Â· Media Â· Military Â· Occupational health
Â· Psychometrics Â· Relationship counseling Â· School Â· Sport Â· Systems  
Orientations

Analytical Â· Behaviorism Â· Cognitive behavioral therapy Â· Cognitivism Â·
Descriptive Â· Ecological Systems Theory Â· Existential therapy Â· Family
therapy Â· Feminist therapy Â· Gestalt psychology Â· Humanistic Â· Narrative
therapy Â· Psychoanalysis Â· Psychodynamic psychotherapy Â· Rational emotive
behavior therapy Â· Transpersonal  
Eminent  
psychologists

Gordon Allport Â· Albert Bandura Â· Raymond Cattell Â· Kenneth and Mamie Clark
Â· Erik Erikson Â· Hans Eysenck Â· Leon Festinger Â· Sigmund Freud Â· Donald
O. Hebb Â· Clark L. Hull Â· William James Â· Carl Jung Â· Jerome Kagan Â· Kurt
Lewin Â· Abraham Maslow Â· David McClelland Â· George A. Miller Â· Neal E.
Miller Â· Walter Mischel Â· Ivan Pavlov Â· Jean Piaget Â· Carl Rogers Â·
Stanley Schachter Â· B. F. Skinner Â· Edward Thorndike Â· John B. Watson  
Lists

Counseling topics Â· Important publications in psychology Â· Psychological
research methods Â· Psychological schools Â· Psychologists Â· Psychology
disciplines Â· Psychology organizations Â· Psychology topics Â·
Psychotherapies Â· Timeline of psychology  
Wiktionary definition Â· Wikisource Â· Wikimedia Commons Â· Wikiquote Â·
Wikinews Â· Wikibooks  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitivism_(psychology)"

Categories: Psychological theories | Cognitive psychology

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Psychology articles needing expert
attention | Articles needing expert attention since June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 17 November 2008, at 19:42.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



