
# Modal realism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Modal realism is the view, notably propounded by David Lewis, that all
possible worlds are as real as the actual world. It is based on the following
tenets: possible worlds exist; possible worlds are not different in kind from
the actual world; possible worlds are irreducible entities; the term actual in
actual world is indexical.

## Contents

  * 1 The term possible world
  * 2 Main tenets of modal realism
  * 3 Details and alternatives
  * 4 Criticisms
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 Bibliography

  
## [edit] The term possible world

The term goes back to Leibniz's theory of possible worlds, used to analyse
necessity, possibility, and similar modal notions. In short: the actual world
is regarded as merely one among an infinite set of logically possible worlds,
some "nearer" to the actual world and some more remote. A proposition is
necessary if it is true in all possible worlds, and possible if it is true in
at least one.

## [edit] Main tenets of modal realism

At the heart of David Lewis's modal realism are six central doctrines about
possible worlds:

  1. Possible worlds exist â they are just as real as our world;
  2. Possible worlds are the same sort of things as our world â they differ in content, not in kind;
  3. Possible worlds cannot be reduced to something more basic â they are irreducible entities in their own right.
  4. Actuality is indexical. When we distinguish our world from other possible worlds by claiming that it alone is actual, we mean only that it is our world.
  5. Possible worlds are unified by the spatiotemporal interrelations of their parts; every world is spatiotemporally isolated from every other world.
  6. Possible worlds are causally isolated from each other.

## [edit] Details and alternatives

In philosophy possible worlds are usually regarded as real but abstract
possibilities, or sometimes as a mere metaphor, abbreviation, or faÃ§on de
parler for sets of counterfactual propositions.

Lewis himself not only claimed to take modal realism seriously (although he
did regret his choice of the expression modal realism), he also insisted that
his claims should be taken literally:

> By what right do we call possible worlds and their inhabitants disreputable
entities, unfit for philosophical services unless they can beg redemption from
philosophy of language? I know of no accusation against possibles that cannot
be made with equal justice against sets. Yet few philosophical consciences
scruple at set theory. Sets and possibles alike make for a crowded ontology.
Sets and possibles alike raise questions we have no way to answer. [...] I
propose to be equally undisturbed by these equally mysterious mysteries.[1]

> How many [possible worlds] are there? In what respects do they vary, and
what is common to them all? Do they obey a nontrivial law of identity of
indiscernibles? Here I am at a disadvantage compared to someone who pretends
as a figure of speech to believe in possible worlds, but really does not. If
worlds were creatures of my imagination, I could imagine them to be any way I
liked, and I could tell you all you wished to hear simply by carrying on my
imaginative creation. But as I believe that there really are other worlds, I
am entitled to confess that there is much about them that I do not know, and
that I do not know how to find out.[2]

## [edit] Criticisms

While it may appear to be a simply extravagant account of modality, modal
realism has proven to be historically quite resilient, and has so far resisted
all attempts at definitive refutation. Lewis's own extended presentation of
the theory (On the Plurality of Worlds, 1986) raises and then counters several
lines of argument against it. That work is still the best introduction not
only to the theory, but to its reception among philosophers. The many
objections that continue to be published are typically variations on one or
other of the lines that Lewis has already canvassed.

Here are some of the major categories of objection:

  * Catastrophically counterintuitive

The theory does not accord with our deepest intuitions about reality. This is
sometimes called "the incredulous stare", since it lacks argumentative
content, and is merely an expression of the affront that the theory represents
to "common sense" philosophical and pre-philosophical orthodoxy. Lewis is
concerned to support the deliverances of common sense in general: "Common
sense is a settled body of theory â unsystematic folk theory â which at
any rate we do believe; and I presume that we are reasonable to believe it.
(Most of it.)" (1986, p. 134). But most of it is not all of it (otherwise
there would be no place for philosophy at all), and Lewis finds that
reasonable argument and the weight of such considerations as theoretical
efficiency compel us to accept modal realism. The alternatives, he argues at
length, can themselves be shown to yield conclusions offensive to our modal
intuitions.

  * An inflated ontology

Some object that modal realism postulates vastly too many entities, compared
with other theories. It is therefore, they argue, vulnerable to Occam's razor,
according to which we should prefer, all things being equal, those theories
that postulate the smallest number of entities. Lewis's reply is that all
things are not equal, and in particular competing accounts of possible worlds
themselves postulate more classes of entities, since there must be not only
one real "concrete" world (the actual world), but many worlds of a different
class altogether ("abstract" in some way or other).

  * Too many worlds

This is perhaps a variant of the previous category, but it relies on appeals
to mathematical propriety rather than Occamist principles. Some argue that
Lewis's principles of "worldmaking" (means by which we might establish the
existence of further worlds by recombination of parts of worlds we already
think exist) are too permissive. So permissive are they, in fact, that the
total number of worlds must exceed what is mathematically coherent. Lewis
allows that there are difficulties and subtleties to address on this front
(1986, pp. 89-90). Daniel Nolan ("Recombination unbound", Philosophical
Studies, 1996, vol. 84, pp. 239-262) mounts a sustained argument against
certain forms of the objection; but variations on it continue to appear.

  * Island universes

On the version of his theory that Lewis strongly favours, each world is
distinct from every other world by being spatially and temporally isolated
from it. Some have objected that a world in which spatio-temporally isolated
universes ("island universes") coexist is therefore not possible, by Lewis's
theory (see for example Bigelow, John, and Pargetter, Robert, "Beyond the
blank stare", Theoria, 1987, Vol. 53, pp. 97-114). Lewis's awareness of this
difficulty discomfits him; but he can reply that other means of distinguishing
worlds may be available, or alternatively that sometimes there will inevitably
be further surprising and counterintuitive consequences â beyond what we had
thought we would be committed to at the start of our investigation. But this
fact in itself is hardly surprising.

A continuing theme in Lewis's replies to the critics of modal realism is the
use of tu quoque argument: your account would fail in just the same way that
you claim mine would. A major heuristic virtue of Lewis's theory is that it is
sufficiently definite for objections to gain some foothold; but these
objections, once clearly articulated, can then be turned equally against other
theories of the ontology and epistemology of possible worlds.

  * Mathematical versus physical reality

Another criticism levelled against modal realism, specifically applied to the
mathematical expression of it, Max Tegmark's Ultimate ensemble, is that it
equates mathematical reality with physical reality:

> Physical existence is something that we have some experience of. We probably
can't define it but, like many things we have difficulty defining, we know it
when we see it. Mathematical existence is a far weaker thing, but much easier
to define. Mathematical existence just means logical self-consistency: this is
all that is needed for a mathematical statement to be "true". (Barrow, 2002,
pp. 279â80)

However, as Damon Woolsey points out [1], the rather intuitive notion of
physical existence being defined by its comprising "real stuff" is the true
metaphysical extravagance. The existence of "real stuff" constituting the
building blocks of matter would be indetectable, because the question of
whether any actual "physical stuff" exists or not could have no effect on the
interactions of matter we observe, and thus there is no reason to suppose the
existence of the "real stuff" that constitutes matter. Occam's Razor actually
prefers modal realism over other explanations because it posits the existence
of one less unobservable category of existence: namely, physical substance.

## [edit] See also

  * Linguistic modality
  * Modal logic
  * Multiverse
  * Counterpart theory
  * Ultimate ensemble
  * impossible world

## [edit] References

  1. ^ David Lewis, Convention, 1968, p. 208
  2. ^ David Lewis, Counterfactuals, 1973, pp. 87â88

## [edit] Bibliography

  * David Lewis, Counterfactuals, (1973 [revised printing 1986]; Blackwell & Harvard U.P.)
  * David Lewis, Convention: A Philosophical Study, (1969; Harvard University Press)
  * David Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds (1986; Blackwell)
  * David Armstrong, A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility (1989; Cambridge University Press)
  * Colin McGinn, "Modal Reality" (Reduction, Time, and Reality, R.Healey [ed.]; Cambridge University Press)
  * John D. Barrow, The Constants of Nature (2002; published by Vintage in 2003)
  * Damon Woolsey, A Fundamental Theory of Genuine Modal Realism (2005, unpublished, accessed from [2] on the 22nd of April, 2008)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modal_realism"

Categories: Realism | Analytic philosophy

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 March 2009, at 05:09 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



