
# 1000 Blank White Cards

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

1000 Blank White Cards is a party game played with cards in which the deck is
created as part of the game. Though it has been played by adults in organized
groups in several cities and college campuses, 1000 Blank White Cards is
described as well-suited for children in Hoyle's Rules of Games.[1] Since the
bulk of the rules are contained on the cards (rather than existing as all-
encompassing rules or in a rule book), 1000 Blank White Cards can be
considered a sort of nomic. It can be played by any number of players and
provides the opportunity for card creation and in fact actual gameplay outside
the scope of a single sitting. Creating new cards during the game, dealing
with previous cards' effects, is allowed, and creativity is encouraged as the
most important part.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Game
    * 1.1 Deck creation
    * 1.2 Play
    * 1.3 Epilogue
  * 2 Structure of a card
  * 3 Suggested rules
  * 4 History
  * 5 References
  * 6 See also
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Game

The game consists of whatever the players define it as by creating and playing
cards. There are no initial rules, and while there may be conventions among
certain groups of players, it is in the spirit of the game to spite and
explode these conventions, as well as to adhere to them religiously.

For many typical players, though, the game may be split into three logical
parts: the deck creation, the play itself, and the epilogue.

### [edit] Deck creation

A deck of cards consists of any number of cards with any or no content, but
originally and nominally of 1000 blank white cards. Some time may be taken to
create cards before gameplay commences, although card creation may be more
dynamic if no advance preparation is made, and it is suggested that the game
be simply sprung upon a group of players, who may or may not have any idea
what they are being caught up in. If the game has been played before, all past
cards can be used in gameplay unless the game specifies otherwise, but perhaps
not until the game has allowed them into play.

A typical group's conventions for deck creation follow:

> Though cards are created at all times throughout the game (except the
epilogue), it is necessary to start with at least some cards pre-made.
Depending on the desired duration of the game a deck of 80 to 150 cards is
usual, and of these approximately half will be created before the start of
play. If a group doesn't already possess a partial deck they may choose to
start with fewer cards and to create most of the deck during play.

> Whether or not the group possesses a deck already (from previous games),
they will usually want to add a few more cards, so the first phase of the game
involves each player creating six or seven new cards to add to the deck. See
structure of a card below.

> When the deck is ready, all of the cards (including blanks) are shuffled
together and each player is dealt five cards. The remainder of the deck is
placed in the centre of the table.

### [edit] Play

The rules of game are determined as the game is played. There exists no fixed
order of play or limit to the length or scope of the game. Such parameters may
be set within the game but are of course subject to alteration.

One sample convention suggests the following:

> Play proceeds clockwise beginning with the player on the dealer's left. On
each player's turn, he draws a card from the central deck and then plays a
card from his hand. Cards can be played to any player (including the person
playing the card), or to the table (so that it affects everyone). Cards with
lasting effects, such as awarding points or changing the game's rules, are
kept on the table to remind players of those effects. Cards with no lasting
effects, or cards that have been nullified, are placed in a discard pile.

> Blank cards can be made into playable cards at any time simply by drawing on
them (see structure of a card).

> Play continues until there are no cards left in the central deck and no one
can play (if they have no cards that can be played in the current situation).
The "winner" is the player with the highest score of total points at the end
of the game, though in most games the points don't actually matter.

### [edit] Epilogue

Since the cards created in any game may be used as the beginning of a deck for
a future game, many players like to reduce the deck to a collection of their
favourites. The epilogue is simply an opportunity for the players to
collectively decide which cards to keep and which to discard (or set aside as
not-for-play).

Many players believe that having their own cards favoured during the epilogue
is the true 'victory' of 1000 Blank White Cards, although the game's creator
has never discarded or destroyed a card unless that action was specified
within the scope of the game. Retaining and replaying those cards which seem
at the moment less than perfect can help reduce a certain stagnation and
tendency to over-think that can otherwise overtake the game's momentum.

One group of players in Boston (not the long-dispersed Harvard cadre) have
introduced the idea of the "Suck Box":

> We don't like to destroy cards, even if they suck, so we have a notecard box
called The Suck Box. If a player feels a card is boring and useless to
gameplay, They will nominate it for admission to The Suck Box. All players
present then vote (sometimes lobbying for their cases), and the card either
goes into The Suck Box or gets to remain in the primary deck. Ironically, when
The Suck Box was introduced, one player created a card for the express purpose
of adding it to The Suck Box. However, the rest of us felt that it was too
amusing a card and had to remain in the deck. â Bob: 1KBWC in Boston

## [edit] Structure of a card

At its simplest, a card is just that: a physical card, which may or may not
have undergone any modifications. Its role in the game is both as itself and
as whatever information it carries, which can be changed, erased or amended.
The cards used vary widely in size, from the original 1Â½" x 3Â½" Vis-Ed brand
flash cards, to half or full index cards, to simply sheets of A7 sized paper.
Cards may be created with any marking medium and need not conform to any
conventions of size or content unless specified within the scope of the game.
Cards have been made of a wide range of substances, and modifying the shape or
composition of a card is entirely acceptable: the original Viz-Ed box still
contains a card to which a tablet of zinc has been affixed with adhesive tape;
the card reads "Eat This!... In a few minutes, the ZINC will be entering your
system." Many cards have been created which demanded their own modification,
destruction or duplication, and many have been created which display nothing
but a picture or text bearing no explicit significance whatsoever. Some have
been eaten, burned and cut and folded into other shapes.

The game does tend to fall into structural conventions, of which the following
is a good example:

> A card consists (usually) of a title, a picture and a description of its
effect. The title should uniquely identify the card. The picture can be as
simple as a stick figure, or as complex as the player likes. The description,
or rule, is the part that affects the game. It can award or deny points, cause
a player to miss a turn, change the direction of play, or do anything the
player can think of. The rules written on cards in play make up the majority
of the game's total ruleset.

In practice, these conventions can generate rather monotonous decks of one
panel cartoons bearing point values, rules or both. As conceived, the game is
far broader, as it is not inherently limited in length or scope, is radically
self-modifying, and can contain references to, or actual instances of, other
games or activities. The game can also encode algorithms (trivially
functioning as a Turing machine), store real-world data, and hold or refer to
non-card objects.

## [edit] Suggested rules

There are many rule suggestions, but these seem to be the two most popular
house rules:

  1. Everyone draws up to 5 cards at the end of his/her turn.
  2. Cards must target a specific player, unless it says otherwise on the card. This keeps cards that weren't meant to be played on everyone from being put down in the middle. It also makes the game much easier to understand.

Other rule suggestions exist that attempt to establish a level of fairness
amongst the cards.[2] They are listed as follows:

  1. A card cannot say one player "wins" or another player "loses"
  2. A card cannot give players extra turns
  3. Cards cannot skip more than one turn
  4. Cards can only take one card from a player's hand
  5. Cards can't affect who can create cards or how players create cards
  6. Cards can't take cards from the deck (if you need to draw another card, you have to pass on a turn).
  7. Cards can only do one thing (cards can't gain points, skip a turn, and make a player discard his favorite card all at once)

It is also suggested that players set a limit to the number of points that a
single card can give or take away (1000 seems to be a good limit)

## [edit] History

The game was originally created by Nathan McQuillen Phoenix(b. 1974) of
Madison, Wisconsin.[citation needed] He was inspired by seeing a product at a
local coffeehouse: a box of 1000 blank white flash cards. He introduced "The
game of 1000 blank white cards" a few days later into a mixed group including
students, improv theater members and club kids. Initial play sessions were
frequent and high energy, but a fire consumed the regular venue shortly after
the game's introduction; the game physically survived but with the loss of
their regular meeting place the majority of the original players fell out of
contact with one another, and soon most had moved on to other cities.

The game started to spread as a meme through various social networks, mostly
collegiate, in the late 1990s. A former Madison resident brought the game to
Harvard University and started an active playgroup which changed the size of
the cards to the more standard half-index (2Â½" x 3Â½") and created the first
web content representing the game. Their graduation served to further spread
the game to the west coast and onto the web. Subsequently, an article in GAMES
Magazine and inclusion in the 2001 revision of Hoyle's Rules of Games[1]
established the game as an independent part of gaming culture.

The game's inventor and its original players have frequently expressed
amusement at the spread of a game they regarded mostly as a brilliant but
highly idiosyncratic bit of conceptual humor which provided them with an
excuse to draw goofy cartoons.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c Hoyle's Rules of Games, Third Revised and Updated Edition, in material revised by Philip D. Morehead. Penguin Putnam Inc., New York, USA, 2001. ISBN 0-451-20484-0. pp. 236-7.
  2. ^ Multi's Alternate Version a website created by a game 1000 Blank White Cards enthusiast

## [edit] See also

  * Dvorak
  * Fluxx
  * Nomic
  * Discordianism

## [edit] External links

  * 1000 Blank White Cards at BoardGameGeek
  * Bob: 1KBWC in Boston \- A large database of cards with a succinct and excellent summary of gameplay.
  * It's a card game. You make the cards. \- A site with many cards, links, and a good introduction to the game.
  * The Discordian Intelligence Agency Edition \- A comprehensive introduction and example cards.
  * 1000 Blank White Cards Gallery \- A gallery of cards, and simple explanation of game rules.
  * The original 1000 Blank White Cards web page by the creator as archived by the Internet Archive. The original page is no longer online.
  * 1000 Blank White Cards revised rules \- A fool-proof set of rules for fair play, plus sample cards.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1000_Blank_White_Cards"

Categories: Party games | Dedicated deck card games

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 March 2009, at 03:08 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



