
# Motivation

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Sister project Look up motivation in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
<IMG>

It has been suggested that Recognition Programs be merged into this article or
section. (Discuss)  
Motivation is the set of reasons that determines one to engage in a particular
behavior. The term is generally used for human motivation but, theoretically,
it can be used to describe the causes for animal behavior as well. This
article refers to human motivation. According to various theories, motivation
may be rooted in the basic need to minimize physical pain and maximize
pleasure, or it may include specific needs such as eating and resting, or a
desired object, hobby, goal, state of being, ideal, or it may be attributed to
less-apparent reasons such as altruism, morality, or avoiding mortality.

## Contents

  * 1 Motivational concepts
    * 1.1 The Incentive Theory of Motivation
    * 1.2 Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
      * 1.2.1 Intrinsic motivation
      * 1.2.2 Extrinsic motivation
    * 1.3 Self-control
  * 2 Motivational Theories
    * 2.1 Drive Reduction Theories
      * 2.1.1 Cognitive dissonance theory
    * 2.2 Affective-Arousal Theories
      * 2.2.1 Need Achievement Theory
      * 2.2.2 Interests Theory
    * 2.3 Need Theories
      * 2.3.1 Need Hierarchy Theory
      * 2.3.2 Herzbergâs two-factor theory
      * 2.3.3 Alderferâs ERG theory
      * 2.3.4 Self-determination theory
    * 2.4 Broad Theories
    * 2.5 Cognitive theories
      * 2.5.1 Goal-setting theory
    * 2.6 Models of Behavior Change
    * 2.7 Unconscious motivation
    * 2.8 Intrinsic motivation and the 16 basic desires theory
  * 3 Controlling motivation
    * 3.1 Early programming
    * 3.2 Organization
    * 3.3 Drugs
  * 4 Applications
    * 4.1 Education
    * 4.2 Business
    * 4.3 Online communities
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
    * 6.1 Further readings
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Motivational concepts

### [edit] The Incentive Theory of Motivation

A reward, tangible or intangible, is presented after the occurrence of an
action (i.e. behavior) with the intent to cause the behavior to occur again.
This is done by associating positive meaning to the behavior. Studies show
that if the person receives the reward immediately, the effect would be
greater, and decreases as duration lengthens. Repetitive action-reward
combination can cause the action to become habit. Motivation comes from two
things: you, and other people. There is extrinsic motivation, which comes from
others, and intrinsic motivation, which comes from within you.

Applying proper motivational techniques can be much harder than it seems.
Steven Kerr notes that when creating a reward system, it can be easy to reward
A, while hoping for B, and in the process, reap harmful effects that can
jeopardize your goals.[1]

Rewards can also be organized as extrinsic or intrinsic. Extrinsic rewards are
external to the person; for example, praise or money. Intrinsic rewards are
internal to the person; for example, satisfaction or a feeling of
accomplishment.

Some authors distinguish between two forms of intrinsic motivation: one based
on enjoyment, the other on obligation. In this context, obligation refers to
motivation based on what an individual thinks ought to be done. For instance,
a feeling of responsibility for a mission may lead to helping others beyond
what is easily observable, rewarded, or fun.

A reinforcer is different from reward, in that reinforcement is intended to
create a measured increase in the rate of a desirable behavior following the
addition of something to the environment.

### [edit] Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation

#### [edit] Intrinsic motivation

Intrinsic motivation occurs when people engage in an activity, such as a
hobby, without obvious external incentives. This form of motivation has been
studied by social and educational psychologists since the early 1970s.
Research has found that it is usually associated with high educational
achievement and enjoyment by students. Intrinsic motivation has been explained
by Fritz Heider's attribution theory, Bandura's work on self-efficacy [2], and
Ryan and Deci's cognitive evaluation theory. Students are likely to be
intrinsically motivated if they:

  * attribute their educational results to internal factors that they can control (e.g. the amount of effort they put in),
  * believe they can be effective agents in reaching desired goals (i.e. the results are not determined by luck),
  * are interested in mastering a topic, rather than just rote-learning to achieve good grades.

In knowledge-sharing communities and organizations, people often cite
altruistic reasons for their participation, including contributing to a common
good, a moral obligation to the group, mentorship or 'giving back'. In work
environments, money may provide a more powerful extrinsic factor than the
intrinsic motivation provided by an enjoyable workplace.

In terms of sports, intrinsic motivation is the motivation that comes from
inside the performer. That is, the athlete competes for the love of the sport.

    see also bellow the theory of 16 basic desires.
#### [edit] Extrinsic motivation

Extrinsic motivation comes from outside of the performer. Money is the most
obvious example, but coercion and threat of punishment are also common
extrinsic motivations.

In sports, the crowd may cheer the performer on, and this motivates him or her
to do well. Trophies are also extrinsic incentives. Competition is often
extrinsic because it encourages the performer to win and beat others, not to
enjoy the intrinsic rewards of the activity.

Social psychological research has indicated that extrinsic rewards can lead to
overjustification and a subsequent reduction in intrinsic motivation.

Extrinsic incentives sometimes can weaken the motivation as well. In one
classic study done by green & lepper, children who were lavishly rewarded for
drawing with felt-tip pens later showed little interest in playing with the
pens again.

### [edit] Self-control

See also: Self motivation

The self-control of motivation is increasingly understood as a subset of
emotional intelligence; a person may be highly intelligent according to a more
conservative definition (as measured by many intelligence tests), yet
unmotivated to dedicate this intelligence to certain tasks. Yale School of
Management professor Victor Vroom's "expectancy theory" provides an account of
when people will decide whether to exert self control to pursue a particular
goal.

Drives and desires can be described as a deficiency or need that activates
behaviour that is aimed at a goal or an incentive. These are thought to
originate within the individual and may not require external stimuli to
encourage the behaviour. Basic drives could be sparked by deficiencies such as
hunger, which motivates a person to seek food; whereas more subtle drives
might be the desire for praise and approval, which motivates a person to
behave in a manner pleasing to others.

By contrast, the role of extrinsic rewards and stimuli can be seen in the
example of training animals by giving them treats when they perform a trick
correctly. The treat motivates the animals to perform the trick consistently,
even later when the treat is removed from the process.

## [edit] Motivational Theories

### [edit] Drive Reduction Theories

Main article: Drive theory

There are a number of drive theories. The Drive Reduction Theory grows out of
the concept that we have certain biological needs, such as hunger. As time
passes the strength of the drive increases as it is not satisfied. Then as we
satisfy that drive by fulfilling its desire, such as eating, the drive's
strength is reduced. It is based on the theories of Freud and the idea of
feedback control systems, such as a thermostat.

There are several problems, however, that leave the validity of the Drive
Reduction Theory open for debate. The first problem is that it does not
explain how Secondary Reinforcers reduce drive. For example, money does not
satisfy any biological or psychological need but reduces drive on a regular
basis through a pay check second-order conditioning. Secondly, if the drive
reduction theory held true we would not be able to explain how a hungry human
being can prepare a meal without eating the food before they finished cooking
it.

However, when comparing this to a real life situation such as preparing food,
one does get hungrier as the food is being made (drive increases), and after
the food has been consumed the drive decreases. The only reason the food does
not get eaten before is the human element of restraint and has nothing to do
with drive theory. Also, the food will either be nicer after it is cooked, or
it won't be edible at all before it is cooked.

#### [edit] Cognitive dissonance theory

Main article: Cognitive dissonance

Suggested by Leon Festinger, this occurs when an individual experiences some
degree of discomfort resulting from an incompatibility between two cognitions.
For example, a consumer may seek to reassure himself regarding a purchase,
feeling, in retrospect, that another decision may have been preferable.

Another example of cognitive dissonance is when a belief and a behavior are in
conflict. A person may wish to be healthy, believes smoking is bad for one's
health, and yet continues to smoke.

### [edit] Affective-Arousal Theories

#### [edit] Need Achievement Theory

Main article: David McClelland

David McClellandâs achievement motivation theory envisions that a person has
a need for three things, but differs in degrees to which the various needs
influence their behavior: Need for achievement, Need for power, and Need for
affiliation.

#### [edit] Interests Theory

Main article: Holland Codes

Holland Codes are used in the assessment of interests as in Vocational
Preference Inventory (VPI; Holland, 1985). One way to look at interests is
that if a person has a strong interest in one of the six Holland areas, then
obtaining outcomes in that area will be strongly reinforcing relative to
obtaining outcomes in areas of weak interest.

### [edit] Need Theories

#### [edit] Need Hierarchy Theory

Main article: Hierarchy of needs

Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of human needs theory is the one of the most widely
discussed theories of motivation.

The theory can be summarized as follows:

  * Human beings have wants and desires which influence their behavior. Only unsatisfied needs influence behavior, satisfied needs do not.
  * Since needs are many, they are arranged in order of importance, from the basic to the complex.
  * The person advances to the next level of needs only after the lower level need is at least minimally satisfied.
  * The further the progress up the hierarchy, the more individuality, humanness and psychological health a person will show.

The needs, listed from basic (lowest, earliest) to most complex (highest,
latest) are as follows:

  * Physiological
  * Safety
  * Belongingness
  * Esteem
  * Self actualization

#### [edit] Herzbergâs two-factor theory

Main article: Frederick Herzberg

Frederick Herzberg's two-factor theory, aka intrinsic/extrinsic motivation,
concludes that certain factors in the workplace result in job satisfaction,
but if absent, lead to dissatisfaction.

The factors that motivate people can change over their lifetime, but "respect
for me as a person" is one of the top motivating factors at any stage of life.

He distinguished between:

  * Motivators; (e.g. challenging work, recognition, responsibility) which give positive satisfaction, and
  * Hygiene factors; (e.g. status, job security, salary and fringe benefits) that do not motivate if present, but, if absent, result in demotivation.

The name Hygiene factors is used because, like hygiene, the presence will not
make you healthier, but absence can cause health deterioration.

The theory is sometimes called the "Motivator-Hygiene Theory."

#### [edit] Alderferâs ERG theory

Main article: Clayton Alderfer

Clayton Alderfer, expanding on Maslow's hierarchy of needs, created the ERG
theory (existence, relatedness and growth). Physiological and safety, the
lower order needs, are placed in the existence category, while love and self
esteem needs are placed in the relatedness category. The growth category
contains our self-actualization and self-esteem needs.

#### [edit] Self-determination theory

Self-determination theory, developed by Edward Deci and Richard Ryan, focuses
on the importance of intrinsic motivation in driving human behavior. Like
Maslow's hierarchical theory and others that built on it, SDT posits a natural
tendency toward growth and development. Unlike these other theories, however,
SDT does not include any sort of "autopilot" for achievement, but instead
requires active encouragement from the environment. The primary factors that
encourage motivation and development are autonomy, competence feedback, and
relatedness.[3]

### [edit] Broad Theories

The latest approach in Achievement Motivation is an integrative perspective as
lined out in the "Onion-Ring-Model of Achievement Motivation" by Heinz
Schuler, George C. Thornton III, Andreas Frintrup and Rose Mueller-Hanson. It
is based on the premise that performance motivation results from way broad
components of personality are directed towards performance. As a result, it
includes a range of dimensions that are relevant to success at work but which
are not conventionally regarded as being part of performance motivation.
Especially it integrates formerly separated approaches as Need for Achievement
with e.g. social motives like Dominance. The Achievement Motivation Inventory
AMI (Schuler, Thornton, Frintrup & Mueller-Hanson, 2003) is based on this
theory and assesses three factors (17 separated scales) relevant to vocational
and professional success.

### [edit] Cognitive theories

#### [edit] Goal-setting theory

Goal-setting theory is based on the notion that individuals sometimes have a
drive to reach a clearly defined end state. Often, this end state is a reward
in itself. A goal's efficiency is affected by three features: proximity,
difficulty and specificity. An ideal goal should present a situation where the
time between the initiation of behavior and the end state is close. This
explains why some children are more motivated to learn how to ride a bike than
mastering algebra. A goal should be moderate, not too hard or too easy to
complete. In both cases, most people are not optimally motivated, as many want
a challenge (which assumes some kind of insecurity of success). At the same
time people want to feel that there is a substantial probability that they
will succeed. Specificity concerns the description of the goal in their class.
The goal should be objectively defined and intelligible for the individual. A
classic example of a poorly specified goal is to get the highest possible
grade. Most children have no idea how much effort they need to reach that
goal. [4]

Douglas Vermeeren, has done extensive research into why many people fail to
get to their goals. The failure is directly attributed to motivating factors.
Vermeeren states that unless an individual can clearly identify their
motivating factor or their significant and meaningful reasons why they wish to
attain the goal, they will never have the power to attain it.

### [edit] Models of Behavior Change

Social-cognitive models of behavior change include the constructs of
motivation and volition. Motivation is seen as a process that leads to the
forming of behavioral intentions. Volition is seen as a process that leads
from intention to actual behavior. In other words, motivation and volition
refer to goal setting and goal pursuit, respectively. Both processes require
self-regulatory efforts. Several self-regulatory constructs are needed to
operate in orchestration to attain goals. An example of such a motivational
and volitional construct is perceived self-efficacy. Self-efficacy is supposed
to facilitate the forming of behavioral intentions, the development of action
plans, and the initiation of action. It can support the translation of
intentions into action.

    See also:
  * Health Action Process Approach
  * I-Change Model

### [edit] Unconscious motivation

Some psychologists believe that a significant portion of human behavior is
energized and directed by unconscious motives. According to Maslow,
"Psychoanalysis has often demonstrated that the relationship between a
conscious desire and the ultimate unconscious aim that underlies it need not
be at all direct [5]." In other words, stated motives do not always match
those inferred by skilled observers. For example, it is possible that a person
can be accident-prone because he has an unconscious desire to hurt himself and
not because he is careless or ignorant of the safety rules. Similarly, some
overweight people are not hungry at all for food but for attention and love.
Eating is merely a defensive reaction to lack of attention. Some workers
damage more equipment than others do because they harbor unconscious feelings
of aggression toward authority figures.

Psychotherapists point out that some behavior is so automatic that the reasons
for it are not available in the individual's conscious mind. Compulsive
cigarette smoking is an example. Sometimes maintaining self-esteem is so
important and the motive for an activity is so threatening that it is simply
not recognized and, in fact, may be disguised or repressed. Rationalization,
or "explaining away", is one such disguise, or defense mechanism, as it is
called. Another is projecting or attributing one's own faults to others. "I
feel I am to blame", becomes "It is her fault; she is selfish". Repression of
powerful but socially unacceptable motives may result in outward behavior that
is the opposite of the repressed tendencies. An example of this would be the
employee who hates his boss but overworks himself on the job to show that he
holds him in high regard.

Unconscious motives add to the hazards of interpreting human behavior and, to
the extent that they are present, complicate the life of the administrator. On
the other hand, knowledge that unconscious motives exist can lead to a more
careful assessment of behavioral problems. Although few contemporary
psychologists deny the existence of unconscious factors, many do believe that
these are activated only in times of anxiety and stress, and that in the
ordinary course of events, human behavior â from the subject's point of view
â is rationally purposeful.

### [edit] Intrinsic motivation and the 16 basic desires theory

Starting from a studies involving more than 6,000 people, Professor Steven
Reiss has proposed a theory that find 16 basic desires that guide nearly all
people behavior. [6] [7]

The desires are:

  * Acceptance, the need for approval
  * Curiosity, the need to think
  * Eating, the need for food
  * Family, the need to raise children
  * Honor, the need to be loyal to the traditional values of one's clan/ethnic group
  * Idealism, the need for social justice
  * Independence, the need for individuality
  * Order, the need for organized, stable, predictable environments

  

  * Physical Activity, the need for exercise
  * Power, the need for influence of will
  * Romance, the need for sex
  * Saving, the need to collect
  * Social Contact, the need for friends (peer relationships)
  * Status, the need for social standing/importance
  * Tranquility, the need to be safe
  * Vengeance, the need to strike back

  
In this model, people differ in these basic desires. These basic desires
represent intrinsic desires that directly motivate people behaviour, and not
aimed at indirectly satisfying other desires. People may also be motivated by
non-basic desired, but in this case this does not relate to deep motivation,
or only as a means to achieve other basic desires.

## [edit] Controlling motivation

The control of motivation is only understood to a limited extent. There are
many different approaches of motivation training, but many of these are
considered pseudoscientific by critics. To understand how to control
motivation it is first necessary to understand why many people lack
motivation.

### [edit] Early programming

Modern imaging has provided solid empirical support for the psychological
theory that emotional programming is largely defined in childhood. Harold
Chugani, Medical Director of the PET Clinic at the Children's Hospital of
Michigan and professor of pediatrics, neurology and radiology at Wayne State
University School of Medicine, has found that children's brains are much more
capable of consuming new information (linked to emotions) than those of
adults. Brain activity in cortical regions is about twice as high in children
as in adults from the third to the ninth year of life. After that period, it
declines constantly to the low levels of adulthood. Brain volume, on the other
hand, is already at about 95% of adult levels in the ninth year of life.

### [edit] Organization

Besides the very direct approaches to motivation, beginning in early life,
there are solutions which are more abstract but perhaps nevertheless more
practical for self-motivation. Virtually every motivation guidebook includes
at least one chapter about the proper organization of one's tasks and goals.
It is usually suggested that it is critical to maintain a list of tasks, with
a distinction between those which are completed and those which are not,
thereby moving some of the required motivation for their completion from the
tasks themselves into a "meta-task", namely the processing of the tasks in the
task list, which can become a routine. The viewing of the list of completed
tasks may also be considered motivating, as it can create a satisfying sense
of accomplishment.

Most electronic to-do lists have this basic functionality, although the
distinction between completed and non-completed tasks is not always clear
(completed tasks are sometimes simply deleted, instead of kept in a separate
list).

Other forms of information organization may also be motivational, such as the
use of mind maps to organize one's ideas, and thereby "train" the neural
network that is the human brain to focus on the given task. Simpler forms of
idea notation such as simple bullet-point style lists may also be sufficient,
or even more useful to less visually oriented persons.

### [edit] Drugs

Some authors, especially in the transhumanist movement, have suggested the use
of "smart drugs", also known as nootropics, as "motivation-enhancers". The
effects of many of these drugs on the brain are emphatically not well
understood, and their legal status often makes open experimentation difficult.

Converging neurobiological evidence also supports the idea that addictive
drugs such as cocaine, nicotine, alcohol, and heroin act on brain systems
underlying motivation for natural rewards, such as the mesolimbic dopamine
system. Normally, these brain systems serve to guide us toward fitness-
enhancing rewards (food, water, sex, etc.), but they can be co-opted by
repeated abuse of drugs, causing addicts to excessively pursue drug rewards.
Therefore, drugs can hijack brain systems underlying other motivations,
causing the almost singular pursuit of drugs characteristic of addiction.

## [edit] Applications

### [edit] Education

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2007)  
Motivation is of particular interest to Educational psychologists because of
the crucial role it plays in student learning. However, the specific kind of
motivation that is studied in the specialized setting of education differs
qualitatively from the more general forms of motivation studied by
psychologists in other fields.

Motivation in education can have several effects on how students learn and how
they behave towards subject matter[8]. It can:

  1. Direct behavior toward particular goals
  2. Lead to increased effort and energy
  3. Increase initiation of, and persistence in, activities
  4. Enhance cognitive processing
  5. Determine what consequences are reinforcing
  6. Lead to improved performance.

Because students are not always internally motivated, they sometimes need
situated motivation, which is found in environmental conditions that the
teacher creates.

There are two kinds of motivation:

  * Intrinsic motivation occurs when people are internally motivated to do something because it either brings them pleasure, they think it is important, or they feel that what they are learning is significant.
  * Extrinsic motivation comes into play when a student is compelled to do something or act a certain way because of factors external to him or her (like money or good grades).

Note also that there is already questioning and expansion about this dichotomy
on motivation, e.g., Self-Determination Theory.

Motivation has been found to be a pivotal area in treating Autism Spectrum
Disorders, as in Pivotal Response Therapy.

Motivation is also an important element in the concept of Andragogy (what
motivates the adult learner).

### [edit] Business

At lower levels of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, such as Physiological needs,
money is a motivator, however it tends to have a motivating effect on staff
that lasts only for a short period (in accordance with Herzberg's two-factor
model of motivation). At higher levels of the hierarchy, praise, respect,
recognition, empowerment and a sense of belonging are far more powerful
motivators than money, as both Abraham Maslow's theory of motivation and
Douglas McGregor's Theory X and theory Y (pertaining to the theory of
leadership) demonstrate.

Maslow has money at the lowest level of the hierarchy and shows other needs
are better motivators to staff. McGregor places money in his Theory X category
and feels it is a poor motivator. Praise and recognition are placed in the
Theory Y category and are considered stronger motivators than money.

  * Motivated employees always look for better ways to do a job.
  * Motivated employees are more quality oriented.
  * Motivated workers are more productive.

The average workplace is about midway between the extremes of high threat and
high opportunity. Motivation by threat is a dead-end strategy, and naturally
staff are more attracted to the opportunity side of the motivation curve than
the threat side. Motivation is a powerful tool in the work environment that
can lead to employees working at their most efficient levels of production.
[9]

Nonetheless, Steinmertz also discusses three common character types of
subordinates: ascendant, indifferent, and ambivalent whom all react and
interact uniquely, and must be treated, managed, and motivated accordingly. An
effective leader must understand how to manage all characters, and more
importantly the manager must utilize avenues that allow room for employees to
work, grow, and find answers independently.[10]

The assumptions of Maslow and Herzberg were challenged by a classic study[11]
at Vauxhall Motors' UK manufacturing plant. This introduced the concept of
orientation to work and distinguished three main orientations: instrumental
(where work is a means to an end), bureaucratic (where work is a source of
status, security and immediate reward) and solidaristic (which prioritises
group loyalty).

Other theories which expanded and extended those of Maslow and Herzberg
included Kurt Lewin's Force Field Theory, Edwin Locke's Goal Theory and Victor
Vroom's Expectancy theory. These tend to stress cultural differences and the
fact that individuals tend to be motivated by different factors at different
times.[12]

According to the system of scientific management developed by Frederick
Winslow Taylor, a worker's motivation is solely determined by pay, and
therefore management need not consider psychological or social aspects of
work. In essence, scientific management bases human motivation wholly on
extrinsic rewards and discards the idea of intrinsic rewards.

In contrast, David McClelland believed that workers could not be motivated by
the mere need for money â in fact, extrinsic motivation (e.g., money) could
extinguish intrinsic motivation such as achievement motivation, though money
could be used as an indicator of success for various motives, e.g., keeping
score. In keeping with this view, his consulting firm, McBer & Company, had as
its first motto "To make everyone productive, happy, and free." For
McClelland, satisfaction lay in aligning a person's life with their
fundamental motivations.

Elton Mayo found out that the social contacts a worker has at the workplace
are very important and that boredom and repetitiveness of tasks lead to
reduced motivation. Mayo believed that workers could be motivated by
acknowledging their social needs and making them feel important. As a result,
employees were given freedom to make decisions on the job and greater
attention was paid to informal work groups. Mayo named the model the Hawthorne
effect. His model has been judged as placing undue reliance on social contacts
at work situations for motivating employees.[13]

### [edit] Online communities

Motivation to participate and contribute represents one of the most important
element in the success of online communities (and virtual communities).

See more at: online participation

## [edit] See also

Find more about Motivation on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions
from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Academy of Management
  * Addiction
  * Amotivational syndrome
  * Aptitude
  * Behavior
  * Equity theory
  * Human behavior
  * Humanistic psychology
  * Human Potential Movement
  * I-Change Model
  * Organizational behavior
  * Personality psychology
  * Preference
  * Successories

  

  * Social cycle theory
  * Victor Vroom
  * Operant conditioning
  * Flow
  * Motivation crowding theory
  * Organismic theory
  * Humanism
  * Andragogy
  * Health Action Process Approach
  * Self-efficacy
  * Volition

  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ Kerr, Steven (1995) On the folly of rewarding A, while hoping for B. http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~wstarbuc/mob/kerrab.html
  2. ^ Bandura, A. (1997), Self-efficacy: The exercise of control, New York: Freeman, pp. 604, ISBN 9780716726265, http://books.google.com/books?id=mXoYHAAACAAJ
  3. ^ Deci, Edward L.; & Ryan, Richard M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. New York: Plenum. ISBN 0-30-642022-8.
  4. ^ Locke and Latham (2002)
  5. ^ Maslow, Motivation and Personality, p. 66.
  6. ^ Reiss, Steven (2000), Who am I: The 16 basic desires that motivate our actions and define our personalities, New York: Tarcher/Putnam, pp. 288, ISBN 1-58542-045-X, http://books.google.fr/books?id=EbOjA5oAsEUC
  7. ^ Reiss, Steven (2004), "Multifaceted nature of intrinsic motivation: The theory of 16 basic desires", Review of General Psychology 8 (3): 179-193, doi:10.1037/1089-2680.8.3.179, http://nisonger.osu.edu/papers/Multifaceted%20nature%20of%20intrinsic%20motivation.pdf
  8. ^ Ormrod, 2003
  9. ^ Steinmetz, L. (1983) Nice Guys Finish Last: Management Myths and Reality. Boulder, Colorado: Horizon Publications Inc.
  10. ^ Steinmetz, L.L. (1983) Nice Guys Finish Last: Management Myths and Reality. Boulder, Colorado: Horizon Publications Inc. (p.43-44)
  11. ^ Goldthorpe, J.H., Lockwood, D., Bechhofer, F. and Platt, J. (1968) The Affluent Worker: Attitudes and Behaviour Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
  12. ^ Weightman, J. (2008) The Employee Motivation Audit: Cambridge Strategy Publications
  13. ^ Human Resources Management, HT Graham and R Bennett M+E Handbooks(1993) ISBN 0-7121-0844-0

### [edit] Further readings

  * Baumeister, R. F.; Vohs, K. D. (2004), Handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory, and applications, New York: Guilford Press, pp. 574, ISBN 1572309911, http://books.google.fr/books?id=7CeE67IrVDUC&dq
  * Carver, C. S.; Scheier, M. F. (2001), On the self-regulation of behavior, New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 460, ISBN 0521000998, http://books.google.fr/books?id=U9xi8wlfWccC&printsec
  * Cervone, D.; Shadel, W. G.; Smith, Ronald E.; Fiori, Marina (2006), "Self-Regulation: Reminders and Suggestions from Personality Science", Applied Psychology: An International Review 55 (3): 333-385, doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2006.00261.x, http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/118628287/abstract
  * Fishbein, M.; Ajzen, I. (1975), Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to theory and research, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
  * Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999), "Implementation intentions: Strong effects of simple plans", American Psychologist 54: 493-503, http://www.ub.uni-konstanz.de/kops/volltexte/2008/5559/

## [edit] External links

  * Factors of intrinsic motivation: Brief introduction to intrinsic movitation and factors that influence intrinsic motivation.
  * There is no intrinsic motivation: An article arguing that no intrinsic motivation exists.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motivation"

Categories: Human behavior | Experimental psychology | Cognition | Motivation

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since February 2009 | All articles to
be merged | Articles needing additional references from November 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 08:53.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



