
# Leadership

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Leader" redirects here. For other uses, see Leader (disambiguation).

Leadership is one of the most salient aspects of the organizational context.
However, defining leadership has been challenging. The following sections
discuss several important aspects of leadership including a description of
what leadership is and a description of several popular theories and styles of
leadership. This page also dives into topics such as the role of emotions and
vision, as well leadership effectiveness and performance. Finally, this page
discusses leadership in different contexts, how it may differ from related
concepts (i.e., management), and some critiques that have been raised about
leadership

## Contents

  * 1 Theories of leadership
    * 1.1 Trait theory
      * 1.1.1 Criticism to trait theory
    * 1.2 Behavioral and style theories
    * 1.3 Situational and contingency theories
    * 1.4 Functional theory
    * 1.5 Transactional and transformational theories
    * 1.6 Leadership and emotions
  * 2 Leadership performance
  * 3 Contexts of leadership
    * 3.1 Leadership in organizations
    * 3.2 Leadership versus management
    * 3.3 Leadership by a group
    * 3.4 Leadership among primates
  * 4 Historical views on leadership
  * 5 Titles emphasizing authority
  * 6 Criticism of the concept of leadership
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Theories of leadership

Leadership has been described as the âprocess of social influence in which
one person is able to enlist the aid and support of others in the
accomplishment of a common taskâ [1]. A definition more inclusive of
followers comes from Alan Keith of Genentech who said "Leadership is
ultimately about creating a way for people to contribute to making something
extraordinary happen." [2] Students of leadership have produced theories
involving traits [3], situational interaction, function, behavior, power,
vision and values [4], charisma, and intelligence among others.

### [edit] Trait theory

See also: Trait theory and Great man theory

<IMG>

<IMG>

Thomas Carlyle was a precursor of the trait theory

Trait theory tries to describe the types of behavior and personality
tendencies associated with effective leadership. This is probably the first
academic theory of leadership. Thomas Carlyle (1841) can be considered one of
the pioneers of the trait theory, using such approach to identify the talents,
skills and physical characteristics of men who arose to power. [5] Ronald
Heifetz (1994) traces the trait theory approach back to the nineteenth-century
tradition of associating the history of society to the history of great
men.[6]

Proponents of the trait approach usually list leadership qualities, assuming
certain traits or characteristics will tend to lead to effective leadership.
Shelley Kirkpatrick and Edwin A. Locke (1991) exemplify the trait theory. They
argue that "key leader traits include: drive (a broad term which includes
achievement, motivation, ambition, energy, tenacity, and initiative),
leadership motivation (the desire to lead but not to seek power as an end in
itself), honesty, integrity, self-confidence (which is associated with
emotional stability), cognitive ability, and knowledge of the business.
According to their research, "there is less clear evidence for traits such as
charisma, creativity and flexibility".[3]

##### [edit] Criticism to trait theory

Although trait theory has an intuitive appeal, difficulties may arise in
proving its tenets, and opponents frequently challenge this approach. The
"strongest" versions of trait theory see these "leadership characteristics" as
innate, and accordingly labels some people as "born leaders" due to their
psychological makeup. On this reading of the theory, leadership development
involves identifying and measuring leadership qualities, screening potential
leaders from non-leaders, then training those with potential.[citation needed]

### [edit] Behavioral and style theories

Main article: Managerial grid model

In response to the criticism of the trait approach, theorists began to
research leadership as a set of behaviors, evaluating the behavior of
'successful' leaders, determining a behavior taxonomy and identifying broad
leadership styles.[7] David McClelland, for example, saw leadership skills,
not so much as a set of traits, but as a pattern of motives. He claimed that
successful leaders will tend to have a high need for power, a low need for
affiliation, and a high level of what he called activity inhibition (one might
call it self-control).[citation needed]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A graphical representation of the managerial grid model

Kurt Lewin, Ronald Lipitt, and Ralph White developed in 1939 the seminal work
on the influence of leadership styles and performance. The researchers
evaluated the performance of groups of eleven-year-old boys under different
types of work climate. In each, the leader exercised his influence regarding
the type of group decision making, praise and criticism (feedback), and the
management of the group tasks (project management) according to three styles:
(1) authoritarian, (2) democratic and (3) laissez-faire.[8] Authoritarian
climates were characterized by leaders who make decisions alone, demand strict
compliance to his orders, and dictate each step taken; future steps were
uncertain to a large degree. The leader is not necessarily hostile but is
aloof from participation in work and commonly offers personal praise and
criticism for the work done. Democratic climates were characterized by
collective decision processes, assisted by the leader. Before accomplishing
tasks, perspectives are gained from group discussion and technical advice from
a leader. Members are given choices and collectively decide the division of
labor. Praise and criticism in such an environment are objective, fact minded
and given by a group member without necessarily having participated
extensively in the actual work. Laissez faire climates gave freedom to the
group for policy determination without any participation from the leader. The
leader remains uninvolved in work decisions unless asked, does not participate
in the division of labor, and very infrequently gives praise. [8] The results
seemed to confirm that the democratic climate was preferred.[9]

The managerial grid model is also based on a behavioral theory. The model was
developed by Robert Blake and Jane Mouton in 1964 and suggests five different
leadership styles, based on the leaders' concern for people and their concern
for goal achievement.[10]

### [edit] Situational and contingency theories

Main articles: Fiedler contingency model, Vroom-Yetton decision model, Path-
goal theory, and Hersey-Blanchard situational theory

Situational theory also appeared as a reaction to the trait theory of
leadership. Social scientists argued that history was more than the result of
intervention of great men as Carlyle suggested. Herbert Spencer (1884) said
that the times produce the person and not the other way around.[11] This
theory assumes that different situations call for different characteristics;
according to this group of theories, no single optimal psychographic profile
of a leader exists. According to the theory, "what an individual actually does
when acting as a leader is in large part dependent upon characteristics of the
situation in which he functions."[12]

Some theorists started to synthesize the trait and situational approaches.
Building upon the research of Lewin et al., academics began to normatize the
descriptive models of leadership climates, defining three leadership styles
and identifying in which situations each style works better. The authoritarian
leadership style, for example, is approved in periods of crisis but fails to
win the "hearts and minds" of their followers in the day-to-day management;
the democratic leadership style is more adequate in situations that require
consensus building; finally, the laissez faire leadership style is appreciated
by the degree of freedom it provides, but as the leader does not "take
charge", he can be perceived as a failure in protracted or thorny
organizational problems.[13] This theorists defined the style of leadership as
contingent to the situation, which is sometimes classified as contingency
theory. Four contingency leadership theories appear more prominently in the
recent years: Fiedler contingency model, Vroom-Yetton decision model, the
path-goal theory, and the Hersey-Blanchard situational theory.

The Fiedler contingency model bases the leaderâs effectiveness on what Fred
Fiedler called situational contingency. This results from the interaction of
leadership style and situational favorableness (later called "situational
control"). The theory defined two types of leader: those who tend to
accomplish the task by developing good-relationships with the group
(relationship-oriented), and those who have as their prime concern carrying
out the task itself (task-oriented).[14] According to Fiedler, there is no
ideal leader. Both task-oriented and relationship-oriented leaders can be
effective if their leadership orientation fits the situation. When there is a
good leader-member relation, a highly structured task, and high leader
position power, the situation is considered a "favorable situation". Fiedler
found that task-oriented leaders are more effective in extremely favourable or
unfavourable situations, whereas relationship-oriented leaders perform best in
situations with intermediate favourability.

Victor Vroom, in collaboration with Phillip Yetton (1973)[15] and later with
Arthur Jago (1988),[16] developed a taxonomy for describing leadership
situations, taxonomy that was used in a normative decision model where
leadership styles where connected to situational variables, defining which
approach was more suitable to which situation.[17] This approach was novel
because it supported the idea that the same manager could rely on different
group decision making approaches depending on the attributes of each
situation. This model was later referred as situational contingency
theory.[18]

The path-goal theory of leadership was developed by Robert House (1971) and
was based on the expectancy theory of Victor Vroom.[19] According to House,
the essence of the theory is "the meta proposition that leaders, to be
effective, engage in behaviors that complement subordinates' environments and
abilities in a manner that compensates for deficiencies and is instrumental to
subordinate satisfaction and individual and work unit performance.[20] The
theory identifies four leader behaviors, achievement-oriented, directive,
participative, and supportive, that are contingent to the environment factors
and follower characteristics. In contrast to the Fiedler contingency model,
the path-goal model states that the four leadership behaviors are fluid, and
that leaders can adopt any of the four depending on what the situation
demands. The path-goal model can be classified both as a contingency theory,
as it depends on the circumstances, but also as a transactional leadership
theory, as the theory emphasizes the reciprocity behavior between the leader
and the followers.

The situational leadership model proposed by Hersey and Blanchard suggest four
leadership-styles and four levels of follower-development. For effectiveness,
the model posits that the leadership-style must match the appropriate level of
followership-development. In this model, leadership behavior becomes a
function not only of the characteristics of the leader, but of the
characteristics of followers as well.[21]

### [edit] Functional theory

Main article: Functional leadership model

Functional leadership theory (Hackman & Walton, 1986; McGrath, 1962) is a
particularly useful theory for addressing specific leader behaviors expected
to contribute to organizational or unit effectiveness. This theory argues that
the leaderâs main job is to see that whatever is necessary to group needs is
taken care of; thus, a leader can be said to have done their job well when
they have contributed to group effectiveness and cohesion (Fleishman et al.,
1991; Hackman & Wageman, 2005; Hackman & Walton, 1986). While functional
leadership theory has most often been applied to team leadership (Zaccaro,
Rittman, & Marks, 2001), it has also been effectively applied to broader
organizational leadership as well (Zaccaro, 2001). In summarizing literature
on functional leadership (see Kozlowski et al. (1996), Zaccaro et al. (2001),
Hackman and Walton (1986), Hackman & Wageman (2005), Morgeson (2005)), Klein,
Zeigert, Knight, and Xiao (2006) observed five broad functions a leader
provides when promoting unit effectiveness. These functions include: (1)
environmental monitoring, (2) organizing subordinate activities, (3) teaching
and coaching subordinates, (4) motivating others, and (5) intervening actively
in the groupâs work.

A variety of leadership behaviors are expected to facilitate these functions.
In initial work identifying leader behavior, Fleishman (Fleishman, 1953)
observed that subordinates perceived their supervisorsâ behavior in terms of
two broad categories referred to as consideration and initiating structure.
Consideration includes behavior involved in fostering effective relationships.
Examples of such behavior would include showing concern for a subordinate or
acting in a supportive manner towards others. Initiating structure involves
the actions of the leader focused specifically on task accomplishment. This
could include role clarification, setting performance standards, and holding
subordinates accountable to those standards.

### [edit] Transactional and transformational theories

Main articles: Transactional leadership and Transformational leadership

The transactional leader (Burns, 1978)[22] is given power to perform certain
tasks and reward or punish for the teamâs performance. It gives the
opportunity to the manager to lead the group and the group agrees to follow
his lead to accomplish a predetermined goal in exchange for something else.
Power is given to the leader to evaluate, correct and train subordinates when
productivity is not up to the desired level and reward effectiveness when
expected outcome is reached.

The transformational leader (Burns, 2008)[22] motivates its team to be
effective and efficient. Communication is the base for goal achievement
focusing the group on the final desired outcome or goal attainment. This
leader is highly visible and uses chain of command to get the job done.
Transformational leaders focus on the big picture, needing to be surrounded by
people who take care of the details. The leader is always looking for ideas
that move the organization to reach the companyâs vision.

### [edit] Leadership and emotions

Leadership can be perceived as a particularly emotion-laden process, with
emotions entwined with the social influence process[23]. In an organization,
the leadersâ mood has some effects on his group. These effects can be
described in 3 levels[24]:

  1. The mood of individual group members. Group members with leaders in a positive mood experience more positive mood than do group members with leaders in a negative mood.The leaders transmit their moods to other group members through the mechanism of mood contagion[24].Mood contagion may be one of the psychological mechanisms by which charismatic leaders influence followers[25].
  2. The affective tone of the group. Group affective tone represents the consistent or homogeneous affective reactions within a group. Group affective tone is an aggregate of the moods of the individual members of the group and refers to mood at the group level of analysis. Groups with leaders in a positive mood have a more positive affective tone than do groups with leaders in a negative mood [24].
  3. Group processes like coordination, effort expenditure, and task strategy.Public expressions of mood impact how group members think and act. When people experience and express mood, they send signals to others. Leaders signal their goals, intentions, and attitudes through their expressions of moods. For example, expressions of positive moods by leaders signal that leaders deem progress toward goals to be good.The group members respond to those signals cognitively and behaviorally in ways that are reflected in the group processes [24].

In research about client service it was found that expressions of positive
mood by the leader improve the performance of the group, although in other
sectors there were another findings[26].

Beyond the leaderâs mood, his behavior is a source for employee positive and
negative emotions at work. The leader creates situations and events that lead
to emotional response. Certain leader behaviors displayed during interactions
with their employees are the sources of these affective events. Leaders shape
workplace affective events. Examples â feedback giving, allocating tasks,
resource distribution. Since employee behavior and productivity are directly
affected by their emotional states, it is imperative to consider employee
emotional responses to organizational leaders[27]. Emotional intelligence, the
ability to understand and manage moods and emotions in the self and others,
contributes to effective leadership in organizations[26]. Leadership is about
being responsible.

## [edit] Leadership performance

Main article: Leadership Performance

In the past, some researchers have argued that the actual influence of leaders
on organizational outcomes is overrated and romanticized as a result of biased
attributions about leaders (Meindl & Ehrlich, 1987). Despite these assertions
however, it is largely recognized and accepted by practitioners and
researchers that leadership is important, and research supports the notion
that leaders do contribute to key organizational outcomes (Day & Lord, 1988;
Kaiser, Hogan, & Craig, 2008). In order to facilitate successful performance
it is important to understand and accurately measure leadership performance.

Job performance generally refers to behavior that is expected to contribute to
organizational success (Campbell, 1990). Campbell identified a number of
specific types of performance dimensions; leadership was one of the dimensions
that he identified. There is no consistent, overall definition of leadership
performance (Yukl, 2006). Many distinct conceptualizations are often lumped
together under the umbrella of leadership performance, including outcomes such
as leader effectiveness, leader advancement, and leader emergence (Kaiser et
al., 2008). For instance, leadership performance may be used to refer to the
career success of the individual leader, performance of the group or
organization, or even leader emergence. Each of these measures can be
considered conceptually distinct. While these aspects may be related, they are
different outcomes and their inclusion should depend on the applied/research
focus.

## [edit] Contexts of leadership

### [edit] Leadership in organizations

An organization that is established as an instrument or means for achieving
defined objectives has been referred to as a formal organization. Its design
specifies how goals are subdivided and reflected in subdivisions of the
organization. Divisions, departments, sections, positions, jobs, and tasks
make up this work structure. Thus, the formal organization is expected to
behave impersonally in regard to relationships with clients or with its
members. According to Weber's definition, entry and subsequent advancement is
by merit or seniority. Each employee receives a salary and enjoys a degree of
tenure that safeguards him from the arbitrary influence of superiors or of
powerful clients. The higher his position in the hierarchy, the greater his
presumed expertise in adjudicating problems that may arise in the course of
the work carried out at lower levels of the organization. It is this
bureaucratic structure that forms the basis for the appointment of heads or
chiefs of administrative subdivisions in the organization and endows them with
the authority attached to their position. [28]

In contrast to the appointed head or chief of an administrative unit, a leader
emerges within the context of the informal organization that underlies the
formal structure. The informal organization expresses the personal objectives
and goals of the individual membership. Their objectives and goals may or may
not coincide with those of the formal organization. The informal organization
represents an extension of the social structures that generally characterize
human life â the spontaneous emergence of groups and organizations as ends
in themselves.

In prehistoric times, man was preoccupied with his personal security,
maintenance, protection, and survival. Now man spends a major portion of his
waking hours working for organizations. His need to identify with a community
that provides security, protection, maintenance, and a feeling of belonging
continues unchanged from prehistoric times. This need is met by the informal
organization and its emergent, or unofficial, leaders.[29]

Leaders emerge from within the structure of the informal organization. Their
personal qualities, the demands of the situation, or a combination of these
and other factors attract followers who accept their leadership within one or
several overlay structures. Instead of the authority of position held by an
appointed head or chief, the emergent leader wields influence or power.
Influence is the ability of a person to gain co-operation from others by means
of persuasion or control over rewards. Power is a stronger form of influence
because it reflects a person's ability to enforce action through the control
of a means of punishment.[29]

A leader is anyone who influences a group toward obtaining a particular
result. It is not dependant on title or formal authority. (elevos, paraphrased
from Leaders, Bennis, and Leadership Presence, Halpern & Lubar). Leaders are
recognized by their capacity for caring for others, clear communication, and a
commitment to persist. [30]An individual who is appointed to a managerial
position has the right to command and enforce obedience by virtue of the
authority of his position. However, he must possess adequate personal
attributes to match his authority, because authority is only potentially
available to him. In the absence of sufficient personal competence, a manager
may be confronted by an emergent leader who can challenge his role in the
organization and reduce it to that of a figurehead. However, only authority of
position has the backing of formal sanctions. It follows that whoever wields
personal influence and power can legitimize this only by gaining a formal
position in the hierarchy, with commensurate authority.[29] Leadership can be
defined as one's ability to get others to willingly follow. Every organization
needs leaders at every level.[31]

### [edit] Leadership versus management

Over the years the terms management and leadership have been so closely
related that individuals in general think of them as synonymous. However, this
is not the case even considering that good managers have leadership skills and
vice-versa. With this concept in mind, leadership can be viewed as:

  * centralized or decentralized
  * broad or focused
  * decision-oriented or morale-centred
  * intrinsic or derived from some authority

Any of the bipolar labels traditionally ascribed to management style could
also apply to leadership style. Hersey and Blanchard use this approach: they
claim that management merely consists of leadership applied to business
situations; or in other words: management forms a sub-set of the broader
process of leadership. They put it this way: "Leadership occurs any time one
attempts to influence the behavior of an individual or group, regardless of
the reason.Management is a kind of leadership in which the achievement of
organizational goals is paramount." "And according to Warren Bennis and Dan
Goldsmith, A good manager does things right. A leader does the right
things."[32]

However, a clear distinction between management and leadership may
nevertheless prove useful. This would allow for a reciprocal relationship
between leadership and management, implying that an effective manager should
possess leadership skills, and an effective leader should demonstrate
management skills. One clear distinction could provide the following
definition:

  * Management involves power by position.
  * Leadership involves power by influence.

Abraham Zaleznik (1977),for example, delineated differences between leadership
and management. He saw leaders as inspiring visionaries, concerned about
substance; while managers he views as planners who have concerns with
process.Warren Bennis (1989) further explicated a dichotomy between managers
and leaders. He drew twelve distinctions between the two groups:

  * Managers administer, leaders innovate
  * Managers ask how and when, leaders ask what and why
  * Managers focus on systems, leaders focus on people
  * Managers do things right, leaders do the right things
  * Managers maintain, leaders develop
  * Managers rely on control, leaders inspire trust
  * Managers have a short-term perspective, leaders have a longer-term perspective
  * Managers accept the status-quo, leaders challenge the status-quo
  * Managers have an eye on the bottom line, leaders have an eye on the horizon
  * Managers imitate, leaders originate
  * Managers emulate the classic good soldier, leaders are their own person
  * Managers copy, leaders show originality

Paul Birch (1999) also sees a distinction between leadership and management.
He observed that, as a broad generalization, managers concerned themselves
with tasks while leaders concerned themselves with people. Birch does not
suggest that leaders do not focus on "the task." Indeed, the things that
characterise a great leader include the fact that they achieve. Effective
leaders create and sustain competitive advantage through the attainment of
cost leadership, revenue leadership, time leadership, and market value
leadership. Managers typically follow and realize a leader's vision. The
difference lies in the leader realising that the achievement of the task comes
about through the goodwill and support of others (influence), while the
manager may not.

This goodwill and support originates in the leader seeing people as people,
not as another resource for deployment in support of "the task". The manager
often has the role of organizing resources to get something done. People form
one of these resources, and many of the worst managers treat people as just
another interchangeable item. A leader has the role of causing others to
follow a path he/she has laid out or a vision he/she has articulated in order
to achieve a task. Often, people see the task as subordinate to the vision.
For instance, an organization might have the overall task of generating
profit, but a good leader may see profit as a by-product that flows from
whatever aspect of their vision differentiates their company from the
competition.

Leadership does not only manifest itself as purely a business phenomenon. Many
people can think of an inspiring leader they have encountered who has nothing
whatever to do with business: a politician, an officer in the armed forces, a
Scout or Guide leader, a teacher, etc. Similarly, management does not occur
only as a purely business phenomenon. Again, we can think of examples of
people that we have met who fill the management niche in non-business
organisationsNon-business organizations should find it easier to articulate a
non-money-driven inspiring vision that will support true leadership. However,
often this does not occur.

Differences in the mix of leadership and management can define various
management styles. Some management styles tend to de-emphasize leadership.
Included in this group one could include participatory management, democratic
management, and collaborative management styles. Other management styles, such
as authoritarian management, micro-management, and top-down management, depend
more on a leader to provide direction. Note, however, that just because an
organisation has no single leader giving it direction, does not mean it
necessarily has weak leadership. In many cases group leadership (multiple
leaders) can prove effective. Having a single leader (as in dictatorship)
allows for quick and decisive decision-making when needed as well as when not
needed. Group decision-making sometimes earns the derisive label "committee-
itis" because of the longer times required to make decisions, but group
leadership can bring more expertise, experience, and perspectives through a
democratic process.

Patricia Pitcher (1994) has challenged the bifurcation into leaders and
managers. She used a factor analysis (in marketing)factor analysis technique
on data collected over 8 years, and concluded that three types of leaders
exist, each with very different psychological profiles:'Artists' imaginative,
inspiring, visionary, entrepreneurial, intuitive, daring, and emotional
Craftsmen: well-balanced, steady, reasonable, sensible, predictable, and
trustworthy Technocrats: cerebral, detail-oriented, fastidious,
uncompromising, and hard-headed She speculates that no one profile offers a
preferred leadership style. She claims that if we want to build, we should
find an "artist leader" if we want to solidify our position, we should find a
"craftsman leader" and if we have an ugly job that needs to get done like
downsizing.we should find a "technocratic leader".Pitcher also observed that a
balanced leader exhibiting all three sets of traits occurs extremely rarely:
she found none in her study.

Bruce Lynn postulates a differentiation between 'Leadership' and
âManagementâ based on perspectives to risk. Specifically,"A Leader
optimises upside opportunity; a Manager minimises downside risk." He argues
that successful executives need to apply both disciplines in a balance
appropriate to the enterprise and its context. Leadership without Management
yields steps forward, but as many if not more steps backwards. Management
without Leadership avoids any step backwards, but doesnât move forward.

### [edit] Leadership by a group

In contrast to individual leadership, some organizations have adopted group
leadership. In this situation, more than one person provides direction to the
group as a whole. Some organizations have taken this approach in hopes of
increasing creativity, reducing costs, or downsizing. Others may see the
traditional leadership of a boss as costing too much in team performance. In
some situations, the maintenance of the boss becomes too expensive - either by
draining the resources of the group as a whole, or by impeding the creativity
within the team, even unintentionally.[citation needed]

A common example of group leadership involves cross-functional teams. A team
of people with diverse skills and from all parts of an organization assembles
to lead a project. A team structure can involve sharing power equally on all
issues, but more commonly uses rotating leadership. The team member(s) best
able to handle any given phase of the project become(s) the temporary
leader(s). According to Ogbonnia (2007), "effective leadership is the ability
to successfully integrate and maximize available resources within the internal
and external environment for the attainment of organizational or societal
goals". Ogbonnia defines an effective leader "as an individual with the
capacity to consistently succeed in a given condition and be recognized as
meeting the expectations of an organization or society." Additionally, as each
team member has the opportunity to experience the elevated level of
empowerment, it energizes staff and feeds the cycle of success. [33]

  
Leaders who demonstrate persistence, tenacity, determination and synergistic
communication skills will bring out the same qualities in their groups. Good
leaders use their own inner mentors to energize their team and organizations
and lead a team to achieve success.[34]

### [edit] Leadership among primates

Richard Wrangham and Dale Peterson, in Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of
Human Violence present evidence that only humans and chimpanzees, among all
the animals living on earth, share a similar tendency for a cluster of
behaviors: violence, territoriality, and competition for uniting behind the
one chief male of the land. [1] This position is contentious. Many animals
beyond apes are territorial, compete, exhibit violence, and have a social
structure controlled by a dominant male (lions, wolves, etc.), suggesting
Wrangham and Peterson's evidence is not empirical. However, we must examine
other species as well, including elephants (which are undoubtedly matriarchal
and follow an alpha female), meerkats (who are likewise matriarchal), and many
others.

It would be beneficial, to examine that most accounts of leadership over the
past few millennia (since the creation of Christian religions) are through the
perspective of a patriarchal society, founded on Christian literature. If one
looks before these times, it is noticed that Pagan and Earth-based tribes in
fact had female leaders. It is important also to note that the peculiarities
of one tribe cannot necessarily be ascribed to another, as even our modern-day
customs differ. The current day patrilineal custom is only a recent invention
in human history and our original method of familial practices were
matrilineal (Dr. Christopher Shelley and Bianca Rus, UBC). The fundamental
assumption that has been built into 90% of the world's countries is that
patriarchy is the 'natural' biological predisposition of homo sapiens.
Unfortunately, this belief has led to the widespread oppression of women in
all of those countries, but in varying degrees. (Whole Earth Review, Winter,
1995 by Thomas Laird, Michael Victor). The Iroquoian First Nations tribes are
an example of a matrilineal tribe, along with Mayan tribes, and also the
society of Meghalaya, India. (Laird and Victor, 1995).

By comparison, bonobos, the second-closest species-relatives of man, do not
unite behind the chief male of the land. The bonobos show deference to an
alpha or top-ranking female that, with the support of her coalition of other
females, can prove as strong as the strongest male in the land. Thus, if
leadership amounts to getting the greatest number of followers, then among the
bonobos, a female almost always exerts the strongest and most effective
leadership. However, not all scientists agree on the allegedly "peaceful"
nature of the bonobo or its reputation as a "hippie chimp".[2]

## [edit] Historical views on leadership

Sanskrit literature identifies ten types of leaders. Defining characteristics
of the ten types of leaders are explained with examples from history and
mythology.[35]

Aristocratic thinkers have postulated that leadership depends on one's blue
blood or genes: monarchy takes an extreme view of the same idea, and may prop
up its assertions against the claims of mere aristocrats by invoking divine
sanction: see the divine right of kings. Contrariwise, more democratically-
inclined theorists have pointed to examples of meritocratic leaders, such as
the Napoleonic marshals profiting from careers open to talent.

In the autocratic/paternalistic strain of thought, traditionalists recall the
role of leadership of the Roman pater familias. Feminist thinking, on the
other hand, may damn such models as patriarchal and posit against them
emotionally-attuned, responsive, and consensual empathetic guidance and
matriarchies.

Comparable to the Roman tradition, the views of Confucianism on "right living"
relate very much to the ideal of the (male) scholar-leader and his benevolent
rule, buttressed by a tradition of filial piety.

Within the context of Islam, views on the nature, scope and inheritance of
leadership have played a major role in shaping sects and their history. See
caliphate.

In the 19th century, the elaboration of anarchist thought called the whole
concept of leadership into question. (Note that the Oxford English Dictionary
traces the word "leadership" in English only as far back as the 19th century.)
One response to this denial of Ã©litism came with Leninism, which demanded an
Ã©lite group of disciplined cadres to act as the vanguard of a socialist
revolution, bringing into existence the dictatorship of the proletariat.

Other historical views of leadership have addressed the seeming contrasts
between secular and religious leadership. The doctrines of Caesaro-papism have
recurred and had their detractors over several centuries. Christian thinking
on leadership has often emphasized stewardship of divinely-provided resources
- human and material - and their deployment in accordance with a Divine plan.
Compare servant leadership.

For a more general take on leadership in politics, compare the concept of the
statesman.

## [edit] Titles emphasizing authority

At certain stages in their development, the hierarchies of social ranks
implied different degrees or ranks of leadership in society. Thus a knight led
fewer men in general than did a duke; a baronet might in theory control less
land than an earl. See peerage for a systematization of this hierarchy, and
order of precedence for links to various systems.

In the course of the 18th and 20th centuries, several political operators took
non-traditional paths to become dominant in their societies. They or their
systems often expressed a belief in strong individual leadership, but existing
titles and labels ("King", "Emperor", "President" and so on) often seemed
inappropriate, insufficient or downright inaccurate in some circumstances. The
formal or informal titles or descriptions they or their flunkies employe
express and foster a general veneration for leadership of the inspired and
autocratic variety. The definite article when used as part of the title (in
languages which use definite articles) emphasizes the existence of a sole
"true" leader.

## [edit] Criticism of the concept of leadership

Noam Chomsky has criticized the concept of leadership as involving people
subordinating their needs to that of someone else. While the conventional view
of leadership is rather satisfying to people who "want to be told what to do",
one should question why they are being subjected to acts that may not be
rational or even desirable. Rationality is the key element missing when
"leaders" say "believe me" and "have faith". It is fairly easy to have people
simplistically follow their "leader", if no attention is paid to
rationality.[citation needed]. This view of Chomsky is related to his
Weltanschaung and has no solid psychological basis from the consensus of the
establishment. A further challenge to the concept of leadership is that it
creates a sense of 'following' in teams and organisations. The concept of
employeeship however, is a recent approach to developing responsibility at the
work place by focusing on the skills and attitudes that each person has in
common rather than separating out leadership as an entity.

## [edit] See also

Types of leadership and other theories

  * Agentic Leadership
  * Coaching
  * Communal Leadership
  * Max Weber's Charismatic authority
  * Antonio Gramsci's theory of Cultural hegemony
  * Ethical leadership
  * Islamic leadership
  * Ideal leadership
  * Leader-Member Exchange Theory (LMX)

  

  * Leadership Character Model
  * Leadership development
  * Servant leadership
  * Toxic Leadership
  * Youth leadership
  * Collaborative leadership
  * Outstanding leadership theory

Contexts of leadership

  * Chieftain
  * Hero
  * Minister
  * Priest
  * Scout leader

Related articles

  * Crowd psychology
  * Nicomachean Ethics
  * Professional development
  * Three theological virtues
  * Leadership school

  
## [edit] References

Notes

  1. ^ Chemers, M. M. (2002). Cognitive, social, and emotional intelligence of transformational leadership: Efficacy and Effectiveness. In R. E. Riggio, S. E. Murphy, F. J. Pirozzolo (Eds.), Multiple Intelligences and Leadership.}
  2. ^ Kouzes, J., and Posner, B. (2007). The Leadership Challenge. CA: Jossey Bass.
  3. ^ a b Locke et. al 1991
  4. ^ (Richards & Engle, 1986, p.206)
  5. ^ Carlyle (1841)
  6. ^ Heifetz (1994), pp. 16
  7. ^ Spillane (2004)
  8. ^ a b Lewin et. al (1939)
  9. ^ Miner (2005) pp. 39-40
  10. ^ Blake et. al (1964)
  11. ^ Spencer (1884), apud Heifetz (1994), pp. 16
  12. ^ Hemphill (1949)
  13. ^ Wormer et. al (2007), pp: 198
  14. ^ Fiedler (1967)
  15. ^ Vroom, Yetton (1973)
  16. ^ Vroom, Jago (1988)
  17. ^ Sternberg, Vroom (2002)
  18. ^ Lorsch (1974)
  19. ^ House (1971)
  20. ^ House (1996)
  21. ^ Hersey et. al (2008)
  22. ^ a b Burns, J. M. (1978). Leadership. New York: Harper and Row Publishers Inc..
  23. ^ George J.M. 2000. Emotions and leadership: The role of emotional intelligence, Human Relations 53 (2000), pp. 1027â1055â
  24. ^ a b c d Sy, T. & Cote, S & Saavedra R. 2005. The contagious leader: Impact of the leaderâs mood on the mood of group members, group affective tone, and group processes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(2): pp. 295-305. http://www.rotman.utoronto.ca/~scote/SyetalJAP.pdfâ
  25. ^ Bono J.E. & Ilies R. 2006 Charisma, positive emotions and mood contagion. The Leadership Quarterly 17(4): pp. 317-334
  26. ^ a b George J.M. 2006. Leader Positive Mood and Group Performance: The Case of Customer Service. Journal of Applied Social Psychology :25(9) pp. 778 - 794â
  27. ^ Dasborough M.T. 2006.Cognitive asymmetry in employee emotional reactions to leadership behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly 17(2):pp. 163-178
  28. ^ Cecil A Gibb (1970). Leadership (Handbook of Social Psychology). Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. pp. 884â89. ISBN 0140805176 9780140805178\. OCLC 174777513.
  29. ^ a b c Henry P. Knowles; Borje O. Saxberg (1971). Personality and Leadership Behavior. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. pp. 884â89. ISBN 0140805176 9780140805178\. OCLC 118832.
  30. ^ Hoyle, John R. Leadership and Futuring: Making Visions Happen. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, Inc., 1995.
  31. ^ The Top 10 Leadership Qualities - HR World
  32. ^ Bennis, Warren and Dan Goldsmith. Learning to Lead. Massachusetts: Persus Book, 1997.
  33. ^ Ingrid Bens (2006). Facilitating to Lead. Jossey-Bass.
  34. ^ Dr. Bart Barthelemy (1997). The Sky Is Not The Limit - Breakthrough Leadership. St. Lucie Press.
  35. ^ KSEEB. Sanskrit Text Book -9th Grade. Governament of Karnataka, India.

Books

  * Blake, R.; Mouton, J. (1964). The Managerial Grid: The Key to Leadership Excellence. Houston: Gulf Publishing Co..
  * Carlyle, Thomas (1841). On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic History. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
  * Fiedler, Fred E. (1967). A theory of leadership effectiveness. McGraw-Hill: Harper and Row Publishers Inc..
  * Heifetz, Ronald (1994). Leadership without Easy Answers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-51858-6.
  * Hemphill, John K. (1949). Situational Factors in Leadership. Columbus: Ohio State University Bureau of Educational Research.
  * Hersey, Paul; Blanchard, Ken; Johnson, D. (2008). Management of Organizational Behavior: Leading Human Resources (9th ed. ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
  * Miner, J. B. (2005). Organizational Behavior: Behavior 1: Essential Theories of Motivation and Leadership. Armonk: M.E. Sharpe.
  * Spencer, Herbert (1841). The Study of Sociology. New York: D. A. Appleton.
  * Vroom, Victor H.; Yetton, Phillip W. (1973). Leadership and Decision-Making. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
  * Vroom, Victor H.; Jago, Arthur G. (1988). The New Leadership: Managing Participation in Organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
  * Van Wormer, Katherine S.; Besthorn, Fred H.; Keefe, Thomas (2007). Human Behavior and the Social Environment: Macro Level: Groups, Communities, and Organizations. US: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195187547.

Journal articles

  * House, Robert J. (1971). "A path-goal theory of leader effectiveness". Administrative Science Quarterly Vol.16: 321-339.
  * House, Robert J. (1996). "Path-goal theory of leadership: Lessons, legacy, and a reformulated theory". Leadership Quarterly Vol.7 (3): 323-352.
  * Lewin, Kurt; Lippitt, Ronald; White, Ralph (1939). "Patterns of aggressive behavior in experimentally created social climates". Journal of Social Psychology: 271â301.
  * "Leadership: Do traits matter?". Academy of Management Executive Vol. 5, No. 2. 1991.
  * Lorsch, Jay W. (Spring 1974). "Review of Leadership and Decision Making". Sloan Management Review.
  * Spillane, James P.; et. al (2004). "Towards a theory of leadership practice". Journal of Curriculum Studies Vol. 36, No. 1: 3-34.
  * Vroom, Victor; Sternberg, Robert J. (2002). "Theoretical Letters: The person versus the situation in leadership". The Leadership Quarterly Vol. 13: 301-323.

## [edit] External links

  * Leadership at the Open Directory Project

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leadership"

Categories: Emergency laws | Strategic management | Management | Business
theory | Organizational studies and human resource management | Political
philosophy | Political science terms | Positions of authority | Positive
psychology | Social psychology | Sociology | Leadership

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Limburgs
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 04:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



