
# Color theory

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the American electronica/synthpop musician, see Color Theory.

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2008)  
In the visual arts, color theory is a body of practical guidance to color
mixing and the visual impact of specific color combinations. Although color
theory principles first appear in the writings of Leone Battista Alberti
(c.1435) and the notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci (c.1490), a tradition of
"colory theory" begins in the 18th century, initially within a partisan
controversy around Isaac Newton's theory of color (Opticks, 1704) and the
nature of so-called primary colors. From there it developed as an independent
artistic tradition with only superficial reference to colorimetry and vision
science.[citation needed]

## Contents

  * 1 Color abstractions
  * 2 Historical background
  * 3 Traditional color theory
    * 3.1 Complementary colors
    * 3.2 Warm vs. cool colors
    * 3.3 Achromatic colors
    * 3.4 Tints and shades
    * 3.5 Split primary colors
    * 3.6 Color harmony and color meaning
  * 4 Current status
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Color abstractions

<IMG>

<IMG>

Additive color mixing

<IMG>

<IMG>

Subtractive color mixing

The foundations of pre-20th-century color theory were built around âpureâ
or ideal colors, characterized by sensory experiences rather than attributes
of the physical world. This has led to a number of inaccuracies in traditional
color theory principles that are not always remedied in modern
formulations.[citation needed]

The most important problem has been a confusion between the behavior of light
mixtures, called additive color, and the behavior of paint or ink or dye or
pigment mixtures, called subtractive color. This problem arises because the
absorption of light by material substances follows different rules from the
perception of light by the eye.

A second problem has been the failure to describe the very important effects
of strong luminance (lightness) contrasts in the appearance of surface colors
(such as paints or inks) as opposed to light colors; "colors" such as grays,
browns or ochres cannot appear in light mixtures. Thus, a strong lightness
contrast between a mid valued yellow paint and a surrounding bright white
makes the yellow appear to be green or brown, while a strong brightness
contrast between a rainbow and the surrounding sky makes the yellow in a
rainbow appear to be a fainter yellow or white.

A third problem has been the tendency to describe color effects holistically
or categorically, for example as a contrast between "yellow" and "blue"
conceived as generic colors, when most color effects are due to contrasts on
three relative attributes that define all colors:

  1. lightness (light vs. dark, or white vs. black),
  2. saturation (intense vs. dull), and
  3. hue (e.g., red, yellow, green, blue or purple).

Thus, the visual impact of "yellow" vs. "blue" hues in visual design depends
on the relative lightness and intensity of the hues.

These confusions are partly historical, and arose in scientific uncertainty
about color perception that was not resolved until the late 19th century, when
the artistic notions were already entrenched. However they also arise from the
attempt to describe the highly contextual and flexible behavior of color
perception in terms of abstract color sensations that can be generated
equivalently by any visual media.

Many historical âcolor theoristsâ have assumed that three âpureâ
primary colors can mix all possible colors, and that any failure of specific
paints or inks to match this ideal performance is due to the impurity or
imperfection of the colorants. In reality, only imaginary âprimary colorsâ
used in colorimetry can "mix" or quantify all visible (perceptually possible)
colors; but to do this the colors are defined as lying outside the range of
visible colors: they cannot be seen. Any three real âprimaryâ colors of
light, paint or ink can mix only a limited range of colors, called a gamut,
which is always smaller (contains fewer colors) than the full range of colors
humans can perceive.

## [edit] Historical background

Color theory was originally formulated in terms of three "primary" or
"primitive" colors -- red, yellow and blue (RYB) -- because these colors were
believed capable of mixing all other colors. This color mixing behavior had
long been known to printers, dyers and painters, but these trades preferred
pure pigments to primary color mixtures, because the mixtures were too dull
(unsaturated).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Goethe's color wheel from his 1810 Theory of Colours

The RYB primary colors became the foundation of 18th century theories of color
vision, as the fundamental sensory qualities that are blended in the
perception of all physical colors and equally in the physical mixture of
pigments or dyes. These theories were enhanced by 18th-century investigations
of a variety of purely psychological color effects, in particular the contrast
between "complementary" or opposing hues that are produced by color
afterimages and in the contrasting shadows in colored light. These ideas and
many personal color observations were summarized in two founding documents in
color theory: the Theory of Colours (1810) by the German poet and government
minister Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, and The Law of Simultaneous Color
Contrast (1839) by the French industrial chemist Michel EugÃ¨ne Chevreul.

Subsequently, German and English scientists established in the late 19th
century that color perception is best described in terms of a different set of
primary colors -- red, green and blue violet (RGB) -- modeled through the
additive mixture of three monochromatic lights. Subsequent research anchored
these primary colors in the differing responses to light by three types of
color receptors or cones in the retina (trichromacy). On this basis the
quantitative description of color mixture or colorimetry developed in the
early 20th century, along with a series of increasingly sophisticated models
of color space and color perception, such as the opponent process theory.

Across the same period, industrial chemistry radically expanded the color
range of lightfast synthetic pigments, allowing for substantially improved
saturation in color mixtures of dyes, paints and inks. It also created the
dyes and chemical processes necessary for color photography. As a result
three-color printing became aesthetically and economically feasible in mass
printed media, and the artists' color theory was adapted to primary colors
most effective in inks or photographic dyes: cyan, magenta, and yellow (CMY).
(In printing, dark colors are supplemented by a black ink, known as the CMYK
system; in both printing and photography, white is provided by the color of
the paper.) These CMY primary colors were reconciled with the RGB primaries,
and subtractive color mixing with additive color mixing, by defining the CMY
primaries as substances that absorbed only one of the retinal primary colors:
cyan absorbs only red (-R+G+B), magenta only green (+R-G+B), and yellow only
blue violet (+R+G-B). It is important to add that the CMYK, or process, color
printing is meant as an economical way of producing a wide range of colors for
printing, but is deficient in reproducing certain colors, notably orange and
slightly deficient in reproducing purples. A wider range of color can be
obtained with the addition of other colors to the printing process, such as in
Pantone's Hexachrome printing ink system (six colors), among others.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Munsell's color system

For much of the 19th century artistic color theory either lagged behind
scientific understanding or was augmented by science books written for the lay
public, in particular Modern Chromatics (1879) by the American physicist Ogden
Rood, and early color atlases developed by Albert Munsell (Munsell Book of
Color, 1915, see Munsell color system) and Wilhelm Ostwald (Color Atlas,
1919). Major advances were made in the early 20th century by artists teaching
or associated with the German Bauhaus, in particular Wassily Kandinsky,
Johannes Itten, Faber Birren and Josef Albers, whose writings mix speculation
with an empirical or demonstration-based study of color design principles.

Contemporary color theory must address the expanded range of media created by
digital media and print management systems, which substantially expand the
range of imaging systems and viewing contexts in which color can be used.
These applications are areas of intensive research, much of it proprietary;
artistic color theory has little to say about these complex new
opportunities.[citation needed]

## [edit] Traditional color theory

### [edit] Complementary colors

Main article: Complementary color

When it comes to the mixing of color of paint, Newtonâs color wheel is often
used to describe complementary colors, which are colors which cancel each
other's hue to produce an achromatic (white, gray or black) mixture. Newton
offered as a conjecture that colors exactly opposite one another on the hue
circle cancel out each other's hue, but it was demonstrated in the 19th
century that this is a basic fact of color vision.

A key assumption in Newton's hue circle was that the "fiery" or maximum
saturated hues are located on the outer circumference of the circle, while
achromatic white is at the center. Then the saturation of the mixture of two
spectral hues was predicted by the straight line between them; the mixture of
three colors was predicted by the "center of gravity" or centroid of three
triangle points, and so on.

According to traditional color theory, which is derived from paint mixtures,
yellow mixed with purple, scarlet mixed with blue, or magenta mixed with green
produces an equivalent gray and are the painter's complementary colors. These
contrasts form the basis of Chevreul's law of color contrast: colors that
appear together will be altered as if mixed with the complementary color of
the other color. Thus, a piece of yellow fabric placed on a blue background
will appear tinted orange, because orange is the complementary color to blue.

Unfortunately, the artists' primary colors are not the same as complementary
colors defined by light mixtures, called visual complementary colors. Here the
complement of purple is green, and the complement of yellow is blue. This
discrepancy becomes important when color theory is applied across media.
Digital color management uses a hue circle defined around the additive RGB
primary colors, as these are the hues of the phosphors or diodes that create
the pixels of a computer display, and the colors in a computer monitor are
additive mixtures of light, not subtractive mixtures of paints.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Theory of three primary colors

### [edit] Warm vs. cool colors

Main article: Color temperature

The distinction between warm and cool colors has been important since at least
the late 18th century but is generally not remarked in modern color science or
colorimetry.[citation needed] The contrast, as traced by etymologies in the
Oxford English Dictionary, seems related to the observed contrast in landscape
light, between the "warm" colors associated with daylight or sunset and the
"cool" colors associated with a gray or overcast day. Warm colors are often
said to be hues from red through yellow, browns and tans included; cool colors
are often said to be the hues from blue green through blue violet, most grays
included. There is historical disagreement about the colors that anchor the
polarity, but 19th century sources put the peak contrast between red orange
and greenish blue. This concept is related to the color temperature of
"visible light", an important consideration in photography, television and
desktop publishing. The determination of whether a color appears warm or cool
is relative. Any color can be made to appear warm or cool by its context with
other colors.

Color theory has ascribed perceptual and psychological effects to this
contrast. Warm colors are said to advance or appear more active in a painting,
while cool colors tend to recede; used in interior design or fashion, warm
colors are said to arouse or stimulate the viewer, while cool colors calm and
relax. Most of these effects, to the extent they are real, can be attributed
to the higher saturation and lighter value of warm pigments in contrast to
cool pigments. Thus, brown is a dark, unsaturated warm color that few people
think of as visually active or psychologically arousing.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The hottest radiating bodies (e.g. stars) have a cool color while the less hot
bodies radiate with a warm color. (Image in mired scale.)

It is interesting to compare the traditional association of color with
temperature with that of a theoretical radiating black body, where the
association of color with temperature is reversed. For instance, the hottest
stars radiate blue light and the coolest radiate red.

### [edit] Achromatic colors

Any color that lacks strong chromatic content is said to be unsaturated,
achromatic, or near neutral. Pure achromatic colors include black, white and
all grays; near neutrals include browns, tans, pastels and darker colors. Near
neutrals can be of any hue or lightness.

Neutrals are obtained by mixing pure colors with either white or black, or by
mixing two complementary colors. In color theory, neutral colors are colors
easily modified by adjacent more saturated colors and they appear to take on
the hue complementary to the saturated color. Next to a bright red couch, a
gray wall will appear distinctly greenish.

Black and white have long been known to combine well with almost any other
colors; black increases the apparent saturation or brightness of colors paired
with it, and white shows off all hues to equal effect.[citation needed]

### [edit] Tints and shades

Main article: Tints and shades

When mixing colored light (additive color models), the achromatic mixture of
spectrally balanced red, green and blue (RGB) is always white, not gray or
black. When we mix colorants, such as the pigments in paint mixtures, a color
is produced which is always darker and lower in chroma, or saturation, than
the parent colors. This moves the mixed color toward a neutral colorâa gray
or near-black. Lights are made brighter or dimmer by adjusting their
brightness, or energy level; in painting, lightness is adjusted through
mixture with white, black or a color's complement.

It is common among some painters to darken a paint color by adding black
paintâproducing colors called shadesâor lighten a color by adding
whiteâproducing colors called tints. However it is not always the best way
for representational painting, as an unfortunate result is for colors to also
shift in hue. For instance, darkening a color by adding black can cause colors
such as yellows, reds and oranges, to shift toward the greenish or bluish part
of the spectrum. Lightening a color by adding white can cause a shift towards
blue when mixed with reds and oranges. Another practice when darkening a color
is to use its opposite, or complementary, color (e.g. purplish-red added to
yellowish-green) in order to neutralize it without a shift in hue, and darken
it if the additive color is darker than the parent color. When lightening a
color this hue shift can be corrected with the addition of a small amount of
an adjacent color to bring the hue of the mixture back in line with the parent
color (e.g. adding a small amount of orange to a mixture of red and white will
correct the tendency of this mixture to shift slightly towards the blue end of
the spectrum).

### [edit] Split primary colors

In painting and other visual arts, two-dimensional color wheels or three-
dimensional color solids are used as tools to teach beginners the essential
relationships between colors. The organization of colors in a particular color
model depends on the purpose of that model: some models show relationships
based on Human color perception, whereas others are based on the color mixing
properties of a particular medium such as a computer display or set of paints.

This system is still popular among contemporary painters,[citation needed] as
it is basically a simplified version of Newton's geometrical rule that colors
closer together on the hue circle will produce more vibrant mixtures. However,
with the range of contemporary paints available, many artists simply add more
paints to their palette as desired for a variety of practical reasons. For
example, they may add a scarlet, purple and/or green paint to expand the
mixable gamut; and they include one or more dark colors (especially "earth"
colors such as yellow ochre or burnt sienna) simply because they are
convenient to have premixed.[citation needed] Printers commonly augment a CYMK
palette with spot (trademark specific) ink colors.

### [edit] Color harmony and color meaning

Main article: Color symbolism and psychology

Color theory has long had the goal of predicting or specifying the color
combinations that would work well together or appear harmonious. The color
wheel has been adopted as a tool for defining these basic relationships. Some
theorists and artists believe juxtapositions of complementary colors are said
to produce a strong contrast or tension, because they annihilate each other
when mixed; others believe the juxtapositions of complementary colors produce
harmonious color interactions. Colors next to each other on the color wheel
are called analogous colors. They tend to produce a single-hued or a dominant
color experience. Harmony has been sought in combinations other than these
two. A split complementary color scheme employs a range of analogous hues,
"split" from a basic key color, with the complementary color as contrast. A
triadic color scheme adopts any three colors approximately equidistant around
the hue circle. Printers or photographers sometimes employ a duotone color
scheme, generated as value gradations in black and a single colored ink or
color filter; painters sometimes refer to the same effect as a monochromatic
color scheme.

The color wheel harmonies have had limited practical application, simply
because the impact of the color combinations is quite different, depending on
the colors involved: the contrast between the complementary colors purple and
green is much less strident than the contrast between red and turquoise. They
can suggest useful color combinations in fashion or interior design, but much
also depends on the tastes, lifestyle and cultural norms of the consumer. When
the schemes have proven effective, this is often because of fundamental
contrast is between warm and cool hues (in this instance meaning hues on the
opposite sides of the color wheel), contrast of value with darks and lights,
contrast of saturated and unsaturated colors, or contrast of extension, when
one color is extended over a large area contrasting another color extended
over a very small area.

In the 20th century color theory attempted to link colors to particular
emotional or subjective associations: red is an arousing, sensual, feminine
color; blue is a contemplative, serene, masculine color, and so on. This
project has failed for several reasons, the most important being that cultural
color associations play the dominant role in abstract color associations, and
the impact of color in design is always affected by the context.[1]

## [edit] Current status

Color theory has not developed an explicit explanation of how specific media
affect color appearance: colors have always been defined in the abstract, and
whether the colors were inks or paints, oils or watercolors, transparencies or
reflecting prints, computer displays or movie theaters, was not considered
especially relevant.[citation needed] Josef Albers investigated the effects of
relative contrast and color saturation on the illusion of transparency, but
this is an exception to the rule.[2]

A second omission[citation needed] has been in the effects of context on color
appearance, for example the increase in tonal contrast and saturation that is
produced by an increase in scene illumination (Stevens effect and Hunt
effect), or the effect on image tonal contrast induced by the lightness of the
image surround (Bartleson-Breneman effect). These effects appear, for example,
when art galleries spotlight a painting hung on a dimly lit wall, making the
colors in the painting appear more vibrant; or when a photographic print
appears to have greater contrast when displayed on a white rather than black
background.

Recently color scientists have made great strides in modeling and controlling
the effects of material attributes of paints determining the best way to map
one device gamut onto another (represent the appearance of a photographic
image on a color computer monitor), and the complex effects of
contextâespecially surround colors and luminance contrastsâon color
perception. This understanding is currently embodied in the disciplines of
color imaging, color reproduction, paint formulation, and so on; very little
of it has made its way into contemporary color theory.[citation needed]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Bellantoni, Patti (2005). If it's Purple, Someone's Gonna Die. Elsevier, Focal Press. ISBN 0-240-80688-3.
  2. ^ Albers, Josef (2006). Interaction of Color. Revised and Expanded Edition. Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-11595-4.

## [edit] External links

  * Color Theory Tutorial by Worqx
  * Handprint.com : Color \- a comprehensive site about color perception, color psychology, color theory, and color mixing
  * Color Theory in Landscape Design
  * The Dimensions of Colour \- color theory for artists using digital/ traditional mediums
  * Color Thesaurus World's Largest Database of Color Names

v â¢ d â¢ e

Eye \- Appearance phenomena  
Appearance phenomena of the eye

Eyeshine â¢ Leukocoria â¢ Red-eye effect â¢ Red reflex  
Appearance phenomena by the eye

Color appearance (Abney effect â¢ Bezold-BrÃ¼cke shift â¢ Chromatic
adaptation â¢ Purkinje effect)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_theory"

Categories: Color space | Color

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2008 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since May 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 |
Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007 | Articles with unsourced
statements since January 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
September 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 17:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



