
# Resampling (statistics)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Resampling.

In statistics, resampling is any of a variety of methods for doing one of the
following:

  1. Estimating the precision of sample statistics (medians, variances, percentiles) by using subsets of available data (jackknifing) or drawing randomly with replacement from a set of data points (bootstrapping)
  2. Exchanging labels on data points when performing significance tests (permutation tests, also called exact tests, randomization tests, or re-randomization tests)
  3. Validating models by using random subsets (bootstrapping, cross validation)

Common resampling techniques include bootstrapping, jackknifing and
permutation tests.

## Contents

  * 1 Bootstrap
  * 2 Jackknife
  * 3 Cross-validation
  * 4 Permutation tests
    * 4.1 Relation to parametric tests
    * 4.2 Examples
    * 4.3 Advantages
    * 4.4 Limitations
    * 4.5 Monte Carlo testing
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Bibliography
    * 6.1 Introductory statistics
    * 6.2 Resampling methods
      * 6.2.1 Bootstrapping
      * 6.2.2 Permutation test
    * 6.3 References
  * 7 External links
    * 7.1 Software

  
## [edit] Bootstrap

Main article: Bootstrap (statistics)

Bootstrapping is a statistical method for estimating the sampling distribution
of an estimator by sampling with replacement from the original sample, most
often with the purpose of deriving robust estimates of standard errors and
confidence intervals of a population parameter like a mean, median,
proportion, odds ratio, correlation coefficient or regression coefficient. It
may also be used for constructing hypothesis tests. It is often used as a
robust alternative to inference based on parametric assumptions when those
assumptions are in doubt, or where parametric inference is impossible or
requires very complicated formulas for the calculation of standard errors.

## [edit] Jackknife

Jackknifing, which is similar to bootstrapping, is used in statistical
inferencing to estimate the bias and standard error in a statistic, when a
random sample of observations is used to calculate it. The basic idea behind
the jackknife estimator lies in systematically recomputing the statistic
estimate leaving out one observation at a time from the sample set. From this
new set of "observations" for the statistic an estimate for the bias can be
calculated and an estimate for the variance of the statistic.

Both methods estimate the variability of a statistic from the variability of
that statistic between subsamples, rather than from parametric assumptions.
The jackknife is a less general technique than the bootstrap, and explores the
sample variation differently. However the jackknife is easier to apply to
complex sampling schemes, such as multi-stage sampling with varying sampling
weights, than the bootstrap.

The jackknife and bootstrap may in many situations yield similar results. But
when used to estimate the standard error of a statistic, bootstrap gives
slightly different results when repeated on the same data, whereas the
jackknife gives exactly the same result each time (assuming the subsets to be
removed are the same).

## [edit] Cross-validation

Main article: Cross-validation (statistics)

Cross-validation is a statistical method for validating a predictive model.
Subsets of the data are held out, to be used as validating sets; a model is
fit to the remaining data (a training set) and used to predict for the
validation set. Averaging the quality of the predictions across the validation
sets yields an overall measure of prediction accuracy.

One form of cross-validation leaves out a single observation at a time; this
is similar to the jackknife. Another, K-fold cross-validation, splits the data
into K subsets; each is held out in turn as the validation set.

This avoids "self-influence". For comparison, in regression analysis methods
such as linear regression, each y value draws the regression line toward
itself, making the predictions appear more accurate than they really are, on
average. Cross-validation applied to linear regression predicts the y value
for each observation without using that observation.

This is often used for deciding how many predictor variables to use in
regression. Without cross-validation, adding predictors always reduces the
residual sum of squares (or possibly leaves it unchanged). In contrast, the
cross-validated mean-square error will tend to decrease if valuable predictors
are added, but increase if worthless predictors are added.[citation needed]

## [edit] Permutation tests

Main article: Exact test

A permutation test (also called a randomization test, re-randomization test,
or an exact test) is a type of statistical significance test in which a
reference distribution is obtained by calculating all possible values of the
test statistic under rearrangements of the labels on the observed data points.
In other words, the method by which treatments are allocated to subjects in an
experimental design is mirrored in the analysis of that design. If the labels
are exchangeable under the null hypothesis, then the resulting tests yield
exact significance levels; see also exchangeability. Confidence intervals can
then be derived from the tests. The theory has evolved from the works of R.A.
Fisher and E.J.G. Pitman in the 1930s.

To illustrate the basic idea of a permutation test, suppose we have two groups
A and B whose sample means are \\bar{x}_{A} and \\bar{x}_{B}, and that we want
to test, at 5% significance level, whether they come from the same
distribution. Let nA and nB be the sample size corresponding to each group.
The permutation test is designed to determine whether the observed difference
between the sample means is large enough to reject the null hypothesis H0 that
the two groups have identical probability distribution.

The test proceeds as follows. First, the difference in means between the two
samples is calculated: this is the observed value of the test statistic,
T(obs). Then the observations of groups A and B are pooled.

Next, the difference in sample means is calculated and recorded for every
possible way of dividing these pooled values into two groups of size nA and nB
(i.e., for every permutation of the group labels A and B). The set of these
calculated differences is the exact distribution of possible differences under
the null hypothesis that group label does not matter.

The one-sided p-value of the test is calculated as the proportion of sampled
permutations where the difference in means was greater than or equal to
T(obs). The two-sided p-value of the test is calculated as the proportion of
sampled permutations where the absolute difference was greater than or equal
to ABS(T(obs)).

If the only purpose of the test is reject or not reject the null hypothesis,
we can as an alternative sort the recorded differences, and then observe if
T(obs) is contained within the middle 95% of them. If it does not, we reject
the hypothesis of identical probability curves at the 5% significant level.

### [edit] Relation to parametric tests

Permutation tests are a subset of non-parametric statistics. The basic premise
is to use only the assumption that it is possible that all of the treatment
groups are equivalent, and that every member of them is the same before
sampling began (i.e. the slot that they fill is not differentiable from other
slots before the slots are filled). From this, one can calculate a statistic
and then see to what extent this statistic is special by seeing how likely it
would be if the treatment assignments had been jumbled.

In contrast to permutation tests, the reference distributions for many popular
"classical" statistical tests, such as the t-test, f-test, z-test and chi-
squared test, are obtained from theoretical probability distributions.
Fisher's exact test is a commonly used test for evaluating the association
between two dichotomous variables, that is a permutation test. When sample
sizes are large, the Pearson's chi-square test will give accurate results, but
for small samples the chi-square reference distribution can't be assumed to
give a correct description of the probability distribution of the test
statistic, and in this situation the use of Fisherâs exact test becomes more
appropriate. A rule of thumb is that the expected count in each cell of the
table should be greater than 5 before Pearson's chi-squared test is used.

Permutation tests exist in many situations where parametric tests do not. For
example, when deriving an optimal test when losses are proportional to the
size of an error rather than its square. All simple and many relatively
complex parametric tests have a corresponding permutation test version that is
defined by using the same test statistic as the parametric test, but obtains
the p-value from the sample-specific permutation distribution of that
statistic, rather than from the theoretical distribution derived from the
parametric assumption. For example, it is possible in this manner to construct
a permutation t-test, a permutation chi-squared test of association, a
permutation version of Aly's test for comparing variances and so on.

The major down-side to permutation tests are that

  * They can be computationally intensive, and may require "custom" code for difficult-to-calculate statistics. This must be rewritten for every case.
  * They are primarily used to provide a p-value. The inversion of the test to get confidence regions/intervals requires even more computation.

### [edit] Examples

### [edit] Advantages

Permutation tests exist for any test statistic, regardless of whether or not
its distribution is known. Thus one is always free to choose the statistic
which best discriminates between hypothesis and alternative and which
minimizes losses.

Permutation tests can be used for analyzing unbalanced designs
(http://tbf.coe.wayne.edu/jmasm/vol1_no2.pdf) and for combining dependent
tests on mixtures of categorical, ordinal, and metric data (Pesarin, 2001).

Before the 1980s, the burden of creating the reference distribution was
overwhelming except for data sets with small sample sizes. But since the
1980s, the confluence of cheap fast computers and the development of new
sophisticated path algorithms applicable in special situations, made the
application of permutation test methods practical for a wide range of
problems, and initiated the addition of exact-test options in the main
statistical software packages and the appearance of specialized software for
performing a wide range of uni- and multi-variable exact tests and computing
test-based "exact" confidence intervals.

### [edit] Limitations

An important assumption behind a permutation test is that the observations are
exchangeable under the null hypothesis. An important consequence of this
assumption is that tests of difference in location (like a permutation t-test)
require equal variance. In this respect, the permutation t-test shares the
same weakness as the classical Studentâs t-test. A third alternative in this
situation is to use a bootstrap-based test. Good (2000) explains the
difference between permutation tests and bootstrap tests the following way:
"Permutations test hypotheses concerning distributions; bootstraps tests
hypotheses concerning parameters. As a result, the bootstrap entails less-
stringent assumptions." Of course, bootstrap tests are not exact.

### [edit] Monte Carlo testing

An asymptotically equivalent permutation test can be created when there are
too many possible orderings of the data to conveniently allow complete
enumeration. This is done by generating the reference distribution by Monte
Carlo sampling, which takes a small (relative to the total number of
permutations) random sample of the possible replicates. The realization that
this could be applied to any permutation test on any dataset was an important
breakthrough in the area of applied statistics. The earliest known reference
to this approach is Dwass (1957)[1]. This type of permutation test is known
under various names: approximate permutation test, Monte Carlo permutation
tests or random permutation tests.[2]

The necessary size of the Monte Carlo sample depends on the need for accuracy
of the test. If one merely wants to know if the p-value is significant,
sometimes few as 400 rearrangements is sufficient to generate a reliable
answer. However, for most scientific applications the required size is much
higher. For observed p=0.05, the accuracy from 10,000 random permutations is
0.0056 and for 50,000 it is 0.0025. For observed p=0.01, the corresponding
accuracy is 0.0077 and 0.0035. Accuracy is defined from the binomial 99%
confidence interval: p +/- accuracy

## [edit] See also

  * Particle filter
  * Random permutation
  * Nonparametric statistics

## [edit] Bibliography

### [edit] Introductory statistics

  * Good, P. (2005) Introduction to Statistics Through Resampling Methods and R/S-PLUS. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-71575-1

  * Good, P. (2005) Introduction to Statistics Through Resampling Methods and Microsoft Office Excel. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-73191-9

  * Hesterberg, T. C., D. S. Moore, S. Monaghan, A. Clipson, and R. Epstein (2005): Bootstrap Methods and Permutation Tests, software.

### [edit] Resampling methods

  * Good, P. (2006) Resampling Methods. 3rd Ed. Birkhauser.

#### [edit] Bootstrapping

  * Bradley Efron (1979). "Bootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknife", The Annals of Statistics, 7, 1-26.
  * Bradley Efron (1981). "Nonparametric estimates of standard error: The jackknife, the bootstrap and other methods", Biometrika, 68, 589-599.
  * Bradley Efron (1982). The jackknife, the bootstrap, and other resampling plans, In Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics CBMS-NSF Monographs, 38.
  * P. Diaconis, Bradley Efron (1983), "Computer-intensive methods in statistics," Scientific American, May, 116-130.
  * Bradley Efron, Robert J. Tibshirani, (1993). An introduction to the bootstrap, New York: Chapman & Hall, software.
  * Davison, A. C. and Hinkley, D. V. (1997): Bootstrap Methods and their Applications, software.
  * Mooney, C Z & Duval, R D (1993). Bootstrapping. A Nonparametric Approach to Statistical Inference. Sage University Paper series on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences, 07-095. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
  * Simon, J. L. (1997): Resampling: The New Statistics.

#### [edit] Permutation test

Original references:

  * R. A. Fisher, The Design of Experiment, New York: Hafner, 1935.
  * Pitman, E. J. G., "Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any population", Royal Statistical Society Supplement, 1937; 4: 119-130 and 225-32 (parts I and II).
  * Pitman, E. J. G., "Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any population. Part III. The analysis of variance test", Biometrika, 1938; 29: 322-335.

Modern references:

  * E. S. Edgington, Randomization tests, 3rd ed. New York: Marcel-Dekker, 1995.
  * Phillip I. Good, Permutation, Parametric and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses, 3rd ed., Springer, 2005. ISBN 0-387-98898-X
  * Good, P. (2002) Extensions of the concept of exchangeability and their applications, J. Modern Appl. Statist. Methods, 1:243-247.
  * Lunneborg, Cliff. Data Analysis by Resampling, Duxbury Press, 1999. ISBN 0-534-22110-6.
  * Pesarin, F. 2001. Multivariate Permutation Tests, Wiley.
  * Welch, W. J., Construction of permutation tests, Journal of American Statistical Association, 85:693-698, 1990.

Computational methods:

  * Mehta, C. R. and Patel, N. R. (1983). 2A network algorithm for performing Fisherâs exact test in r x c contingency tables", J. Amer. Statist. Assoc, 78(382):427â434.
  * Metha, C. R., Patel, N. R. and Senchaudhuri, P. (1988). "Importance sampling for estimating exact probabilities in permutational inference", J. Am. Statist. Assoc., 83(404):999â1005.

### [edit] References

  1. ^ Meyer Dwass, "Modified Randomization Tests for Nonparametric Hypotheses", The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 28:181-187, 1957.
  2. ^ Thomas E. Nichols, Andrew P. Holmes (2001). "Nonparametric Permutation Tests For Functional Neuroimaging: A Primer with Examples". Human Brain Mapping 15: 1â25. doi:10.1002/hbm.1058. http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/doc/papers/NicholsHolmes.pdf.

## [edit] External links

[Current research on permutation tests]

  * Bootstrap Sampling tutorial
  * Hesterberg, T. C., D. S. Moore, S. Monaghan, A. Clipson, and R. Epstein (2005): Bootstrap Methods and Permutation Tests, software.
  * Moore, D. S., G. McCabe, W. Duckworth, and S. Sclove (2003): Bootstrap Methods and Permutation Tests
  * Simon, J. L. (1997): Resampling: The New Statistics.
  * Yu, Chong Ho (2003): Resampling methods: concepts, applications, and justification. Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 8(19). (statistical bootstrapping)
  * Resampling: A Marriage of Computers and Statistics (ERIC Digests)

### [edit] Software

  * Statistics101: Resampling, Bootstrap, Monte Carlo Simulation program

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resampling_(statistics)"

Categories: Monte Carlo methods | Statistical tests | Statistical inference |
Resampling (statistics) | Non-parametric statistics

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 May 2009, at 02:42 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



