
# Space

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

For the space beyond Earth's atmosphere, see Outer space. For all other uses,
see Space (disambiguation).

Space is the boundless, three-dimensional extent in which objects and events
occur and have relative position and direction.[1] Physical space is often
conceived in three linear dimensions, although modern physicists usually
consider it, with time, to be part of the boundless four-dimensional continuum
known as spacetime. In mathematics spaces with different numbers of dimensions
and with different underlying structures can be examined. The concept of space
is considered to be of fundamental importance to an understanding of the
universe although disagreement continues between philosophers over whether it
is itself an entity, a relationship between entities, or part of a conceptual
framework.

  
Many of the philosophical questions arose in the 17th century, during the
early development of classical mechanics. In Isaac Newton's view, space was
absolute - in the sense that it existed permanently and independently of
whether there were any matter in the space.[2] Other natural philosophers,
notably Gottfried Leibniz, thought instead that space was a collection of
relations between objects, given by their distance and direction from one
another. In the 18th century, Immanuel Kant described space and time as
elements of a systematic framework which humans use to structure their
experience.

In the 19th and 20th centuries mathematicians began to examine non-Euclidean
geometries, in which space can be said to be curved, rather than flat.
According to Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity, space around
gravitational fields deviates from Euclidean space.[3] Experimental tests of
general relativity have confirmed that non-Euclidean space provides a better
model for explaining the existing laws of mechanics and optics.

## Contents

  * 1 Philosophy of space
    * 1.1 Leibniz and Newton
    * 1.2 Kant
    * 1.3 Non-Euclidean geometry
    * 1.4 Gauss and PoincarÃ©
    * 1.5 Einstein
  * 2 Mathematics
  * 3 Physics
    * 3.1 Classical mechanics
    * 3.2 Astronomy
    * 3.3 Relativity
    * 3.4 Cosmology
  * 4 Spatial measurement
  * 5 Geography
  * 6 In psychology
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References

  
## Philosophy of space

In the early 11th century Islamic philosopher and physicist, Ibn al-Haytham
(also known as Alhacen or Alhazen), discussed space perception and its
epistemological implications in his Book of Optics (1021). His experimental
proof of the intromission model of vision led to changes in the way the visual
perception of space was understood, contrary to the previous emission theory
of vision supported by Euclid and Ptolemy. In "tying the visual perception of
space to prior bodily experience, Alhacen unequivocally rejected the
intuitiveness of spatial perception and, therefore, the autonomy of vision.
Without tangible notions of distance and size for correlation, sight can tell
us next to nothing about such things."[4]

### Leibniz and Newton

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gottfried Leibniz

In the seventeenth century, the philosophy of space and time emerged as a
central issue in epistemology and metaphysics. At its heart, Gottfried
Leibniz, the German philosopher-mathematician, and Isaac Newton, the English
physicist-mathematician, set out two opposing theories of what space is.
Rather than being an entity which independently exists over and above other
matter, Leibniz held that space is no more than the collection of spatial
relations between objects in the world: "space is that which results from
places taken together".[5] Unoccupied regions are those which could have
objects in them and thus spatial relations with other places. For Leibniz,
then, space was an idealised abstraction from the relations between individual
entities or their possible locations and therefore could not be continuous but
must be discrete.[6] Space could be thought of in a similar way to the
relations between family members. Although people in the family are related to
one another, the relations do not exist independently of the people.[7]
Leibniz argued that space could not exist independently of objects in the
world because that would imply that there would be a difference between two
universes exactly alike except for the location of the material world in each
universe. But since there would be no observational way of telling these
universes apart then, according to the identity of indiscernibles, there would
be no real difference between them. According to the principle of sufficient
reason, any theory of space which implied that there could be these two
possible universes, must therefore be wrong.[8]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Isaac Newton

Newton took space to be more than relations between material objects and based
his position on observation and experimentation. For a relationist there can
be no real difference between inertial motion, in which the object travels
with constant velocity, and non-inertial motion, in which the velocity changes
with time, since all spatial measurements are relative to other objects and
their motions. But Newton argued that since non-inertial motion generates
forces, it must be absolute.[9] He used the example of water in a spinning
bucket to demonstrate his argument. Water in a bucket is hung from a rope and
set to spin, starts with a flat surface. After a while, as the bucket
continues to spin, the surface of the water becomes concave. If the bucket's
spinning is stopped then the surface of the water remains concave as it
continues to spin. The concave surface is therefore apparently not the result
of relative motion between the bucket and the water[10]. Instead, Newton
argued, it must be a result of non-inertial motion relative to space itself.
For several centuries the bucket argument was decisive in showing that space
must exist independently of matter.

### Kant

<IMG>

<IMG>

Immanuel Kant

In the eighteenth century the German philosopher Immanuel Kant developed a
theory of knowledge in which knowledge about space can be both a priori and
synthetic.[11] According to Kant, knowledge about space is synthetic, in that
statements about space are not simply true by virtue of the meaning of the
words in the statement. In his work, Kant rejected the view that space must be
either a substance or relation. Instead he came to the conclusion that space
and time are not discovered by humans to be objective features of the world,
but are part of an unavoidable systematic framework for organizing our
experiences.[12]

### Non-Euclidean geometry

<IMG>

<IMG>

Spherical geometry is similar to elliptical geometry. On the surface of a
sphere there are no parallel lines.

Euclid's Elements contained five postulates which form the basis for Euclidean
geometry. One of these, the parallel postulate has been the subject of debate
among mathematicians for many centuries. It states that on any plane on which
there is a straight line L1 and a point P not on L1, there is only one
straight line L2 on the plane which passes through the point P and is parallel
to the straight line L1. Until the 19th century, few doubted the truth of the
postulate; instead debate centered over whether it was necessary as an axiom,
or whether it was a theory which could be derived from the other axioms.[13]
Around 1830 though, the Hungarian JÃ¡nos Bolyai and the Russian Nikolai
Ivanovich Lobachevsky separately published treatises on a type of geometry
which does not include the parallel postulate, called hyperbolic geometry. In
this geometry, there are an infinite number of parallel lines which pass
through the point P. Consequently the sum of angles in a triangle is less than
180o and the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter is greater than
pi. In the 1850s, Bernhard Riemann developed an equivalent theory of
elliptical geometry, in which there are no parallel lines which pass through
P. In this geometry, triangles have more than 180o and circles have a ratio of
circumference to diameter which is less than pi.

Type of geometry Number of parallels Sum of angles in a triangle Ratio of
circumference to diameter of circle Measure of curvature  
Hyperbolic Infinite < 180o > Ï < 0  
Euclidean 1 180o Ï 0  
Elliptical 0 > 180o < Ï > 0  
### Gauss and PoincarÃ©

<IMG>

<IMG>

Carl Friedrich Gauss

Although there was a prevailing Kantian consensus at the time, once non-
Euclidean geometries had been formalised, some began to wonder whether or not
physical space is curved. Carl Friedrich Gauss, the German mathematician, was
the first to consider an empirical investigation of the geometrical structure
of space. He thought of making a test of the sum of the angles of an enormous
stellar triangle and there are reports he actually carried out a test, on a
small scale, by triangulating mountain tops in Germany.[14]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Henri PoincarÃ©

Henri PoincarÃ©, a French mathematician and physicist of the late 19th century
introduced an important insight which attempted to demonstrate the futility of
any attempt to discover by experiment which geometry applies to space.[15] He
considered the predicament which would face scientists if they were confined
to the surface of an imaginary large sphere with particular properties, known
as a sphere-world. In this world, the temperature is taken to vary in such a
way that all objects expand and contract in similar proportions in different
places on the sphere. With a suitable falloff in temperature, if the
scientists try to use measuring rods to determine the sum of the angles in a
triangle, they can be deceived into thinking that they inhabit a plane, rather
than a spherical surface.[16] In fact, the scientists cannot in principle
determine whether they inhabit a plane or sphere and, PoincarÃ© argued, the
same is true for the debate over whether real space is Euclidean or not. For
him, it was a matter of convention which geometry was used to describe
space.[17] Since Euclidean geometry is simpler than non-Euclidean geometry, he
assumed the former would always be used to describe the 'true' geometry of the
world.[18]

### Einstein

<IMG>

<IMG>

Albert Einstein

In 1905, Albert Einstein published a paper on a special theory of relativity,
in which he proposed that space and time be combined into a single construct
known as spacetime. In this theory, the speed of light in a vacuum is the same
for all observers - which has the result that two events that appear
simultaneous to one particular observer will not be simultaneous to another
observer if the observers are moving with respect to one another. Moreover, an
observer will measure a moving clock to tick more slowly than one which is
stationary with respect to them; and objects are measured to be shortened in
the direction that they are moving with respect to the observer.

Over the following ten years Einstein worked on a general theory of
relativity, which is a theory of how gravity interacts with spacetime. Instead
of viewing gravity as a force field acting in spacetime, Einstein suggested
that it modifies the geometric structure of spacetime itself.[19] According to
the general theory, time goes more slowly at places with lower gravitational
potentials and rays of light bend in the presence of a gravitational field.
Scientists have studied the behaviour of binary pulsars, confirming the
predictions of Einstein's theories and Non-Euclidean geometry is usually used
to describe spacetime.

## Mathematics

In modern mathematics, spaces are frequently described as different types of
manifolds which are spaces that locally approximate to Euclidean space and
where the properties are defined largely on local connectedness of points that
lie on the manifold.

## Physics

### Classical mechanics

Classical mechanics  
\\vec{F} = \\frac{\\mathrm{d}}{\\mathrm{d}t}\(m \\vec{v}\)  
Newton's Second Law  
History of ... Fundamental concepts  
Space Â· Time Â· Mass Â· Force  
Energy Â· Momentum  
  
Formulations  
Newtonian mechanics  
Lagrangian mechanics  
Hamiltonian mechanics  
  
Branches  
Statics  
Dynamics  
Kinematics  
Applied mechanics  
Celestial mechanics  
Continuum mechanics  
Statistical mechanics  
Scientists  
Newton Â· Euler Â· d'Alembert Â· Clairaut  
Lagrange Â· Laplace Â· Hamilton Â· Poisson  
  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Space is one of the few fundamental quantities in physics, meaning that it
cannot be defined via other quantities because nothing more fundamental is
known at the present. On the other hand, it can be related to other
fundamental quantities. Thus, similar to other fundamental quantities (like
time and mass), space can be explored via measurement and experiment.

### Astronomy

Main article: Astronomy

Astronomy is the science involved with the observation, explanation and
measuring of objects in outer space.

### Relativity

Main article: Theory of relativity

Before Einstein's work on relativistic physics, time and space were viewed as
independent dimensions. Einstein's discoveries have shown that due to
relativity of motion our space and time can be mathematically combined into
one object â spacetime. It turns out that distances in space or in time
separately are not invariant with respect to Lorentz coordinate
transformations, but distances in Minkowski space-time along space-time
intervals are â which justifies the name.

In addition, time and space dimensions should not be viewed as exactly
equivalent in Minkowski space-time. One can freely move in space but not in
time. Thus, time and space coordinates are treated differently both in special
relativity (where time is sometimes considered an imaginary coordinate) and in
general relativity (where different signs are assigned to time and space
components of spacetime metric).

Furthermore, from Einstein's general theory of relativity, it has been shown
that space-time is geometrically distorted- curved -near to gravitationally
significant masses.[20]

Experiments are ongoing to attempt to directly measure gravitational waves.
This is essentially solutions to the equations of general relativity which
describe moving ripples of spacetime. Indirect evidence for this has been
found in the motions of the Hulse-Taylor binary system.

### Cosmology

Main article: Shape of the universe

Relativity theory lead to the cosmological question of what shape the universe
is, and where space came from. It appears that space was created in the Big
Bang and has been expanding ever since. The overall shape of space is not
known, but space is known to be expanding very rapidly which is evident due to
the Hubble expansion.

## Spatial measurement

Main article: Measurement

The measurement of physical space has long been important. Although earlier
societies had developed measuring systems, the International System of Units,
(SI), is now the most common system of units used in the measuring of space,
and is almost universally used within science.

Currently, the standard space interval, called a standard meter or simply
meter, is defined as the distance traveled by light in a vacuum during a time
interval of exactly 1/299,792,458 of a second. This definition coupled with
present definition of the second is based on the special theory of relativity,
that our space-time is a Minkowski space.[citation needed]

## Geography

Geography is the branch of science concerned with identifying and describing
the Earth, utilizing spatial awareness to try and understand why things exist
in specific locations. Cartography is the mapping of spaces to allow better
navigation, for visualization purposes and to act as a locational device.
Geostatistics apply statistical concepts to collected spatial data in order to
create an estimate for unobserved phenomena.

Geographical space is often considered as land, and can have a relation to
ownership usage (in which space is seen as property or territory). While some
cultures assert the rights of the individual in terms of ownership, other
cultures will identify with a communal approach to land ownership, while still
other cultures such as Australian Aboriginals, rather than asserting ownership
rights to land, invert the relationship and consider that they are in fact
owned by the land. Spatial planning is a method of regulating the use of space
at land-level, with decisions made at regional, national and international
levels. Space can also impact on human and cultural behavior, being an
important factor in architecture, where it will impact on the design of
buildings and structures, and on farming.

Ownership of space is not restricted to land. Ownership of airspace and of
waters is decided internationally. Other forms of ownership have been recently
asserted to other spaces â for example to the radio bands of the
electromagnetic spectrum or to cyberspace.

Public space is a term used to define areas of land as collectively owned by
the community, and managed in their name by delegated bodies; such spaces are
open to all. While private property is the land culturally owned by an
individual or company, for their own use and pleasure.

Abstract space is a term used in geography to refer to a hypothetical space
characterized by complete homogeneity. When modeling activity or behavior, it
is a conceptual tool used to limit extraneous variables such as terrain.

## In psychology

The way in which space is perceived is an area which psychologists first began
to study in the middle of the 19th century, and it is now thought by those
concerned with such studies to be a distinct branch within psychology.
Psychologists analyzing the perception of space are concerned with how
recognition of an object's physical appearance or its interactions are
perceived.

Other, more specialized topics studied include amodal perception and object
permanence. The perception of surroundings is important due to its necessary
relevance to survival, especially with regards to hunting and self
preservation as well as simply one's idea of personal space.

Several space-related phobias have been identified, including agoraphobia (the
fear of open spaces), astrophobia (the fear of celestial space) and
claustrophobia (the fear of enclosed spaces).

## See also

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Space  
Sister project Look up space in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * Aether theories
  * Cosmology
  * Curvature of space
  * Personal space
  * Shape of the universe
  * Space exploration
  * Spatial analysis

## References

  1. ^ Britannica Online Encyclopedia: Space
  2. ^ French and Ebison, Classical Mechanics, p. 1
  3. ^ Carnap, R. An introduction to the Philosophy of Science
  4. ^ Smith, A. Mark (2005), "The Alhacenian Account Of Spatial Perception And Its Epistemological Implications", Arabic Sciences and Philosophy (Cambridge University Press) 15: 219â40, doi:10.1017/S0957423905000184
  5. ^ Leibniz, Fifth letter to Samuel Clarke
  6. ^ Vailati, E, Leibniz & Clarke: A Study of Their Correspondence p. 115
  7. ^ Sklar, L, Philosophy of Physics, p. 20
  8. ^ Sklar, L, Philosophy of Physics, p. 21
  9. ^ Sklar, L, Philosophy of Physics, p. 22
  10. ^ Newton's bucket
  11. ^ Carnap, R, An introduction to the philosophy of science, p. 177-178
  12. ^ Lucas, John Randolph. Space, Time and Causality. pp. p.149.
  13. ^ Carnap, R, An introduction to the philosophy of science, p. 126
  14. ^ Carnap, R, An introduction to the philosophy of science, p. 134-136
  15. ^ Jammer, M, Concepts of Space, p. 165
  16. ^ A medium with a variable index of refraction could also be used to bend the path of light and again deceive the scientists if they attempt to use light to map out their geometry
  17. ^ Carnap, R, An introduction to the philosophy of science, p. 148
  18. ^ Sklar, L, Philosophy of Physics, p. 57
  19. ^ Sklar, L, Philsosophy of Physics, p. 43
  20. ^ chapters 8 and 9- John A. Wheeler "A Journey Into Gravity and Spacetime" Scientific American Library isbn = 0-7167-6034-7

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space"

Categories: Spacetime | Topology | Environments | Nothing

Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism |
Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Latina
  * O'zbek
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 17 March 2009, at 19:40.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



