
# Game semantics

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Game semantics (German: dialogische Logik) is an approach to formal semantics
that grounds the concepts of truth or validity on game-theoretic concepts,
such as the existence of a winning strategy for a player. In the late 1950s
Paul Lorenzen was the first to introduce a game semantics for logic, and it
was further developed by Kuno Lorenz. At almost the same time as Lorenzen,
Jaakko Hintikka developed a model-theoretical approach known in the literature
as GTS. Since then, a number of different game semantics have been studied in
logic. Shahid Rahman (Lille) and collaborators developed dialogic into a
general framework for the study of logical and philosophical issues related to
logical pluralism. At around 1995 this triggered a kind of Renaissance with
lasting consequences. Actually this new philosophical impulse experienced a
parallel renewal in the fields of theoretical computer sciences, computational
linguistics, artificial intelligence and the formal semantics of programming
languages triggered by the work of Johan van Benthem and collaborators in
Amsterdam who looked thoroughly at the interface between logic and games. New
results in linear logic by J-Y. Girard in the interfaces between mathematical
game theory and logic on one hand and argumentation theory and logic on the
other hand resulted in the work of many others, including S. Abramsky, J. van
Benthem, A. Blass, D. Gabbay, M. Hyland, W. Hodges, R. Jagadessan, G.
Japaridze, E. Krabbe, L. Ong, H. Prakken, G. Sandu D. Walton, and J. Woods who
placed game semantics in the center of new concept of logic in which logic is
understood as a dynamic instrument of inference.

## Contents

  * 1 Classical logic
  * 2 Intuitionistic logic, denotational semantics, linear logic, logical pluralism
  * 3 Quantifiers
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
    * 5.1 Articles
    * 5.2 Books
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Classical logic

The simplest application of game semantics is to propositional logic. Each
formula of this language is interpreted as a game between two players, known
as the "Verifier" and the "Falsifier". The Verifier is given "ownership" of
all the disjunctions in the formula, and the Falsifier is likewise given
ownership of all the conjunctions. Each move of the game consists of allowing
the owner of the dominant connective to pick one of its branches; play will
then continue in that subformula, with whichever player controls its dominant
connective making the next move. Play ends when a primitive proposition has
been so chosen by the two players; at this point the Verifier is deemed the
winner if the resulting proposition is true, and the Falsifier is deemed the
winner if it is false. The original formula will be considered true precisely
when the Verifier has a winning strategy, while it will be false whenever the
Falsifier has the winning strategy.

If the formula contains negations or implications, other, more complicated,
techniques may be used. For example, a negation should be true if the thing
negated is false, so it must have the effect of interchanging the roles of the
two players.

More generally, game semantics may be applied to predicate logic; the new
rules allow a dominant quantifier to be removed by its "owner" (the Verifier
for existential quantifiers and the Falsifier for universal quantifiers) and
its bound variable replaced at all occurrences by an object of the owner's
choosing, drawn from the domain of quantification. Note that a single
counterexample falsifies a universally quantified statement, and a single
example suffices to verify an existentially quantified one.

Actually the formulation described above is due to Jaakko Hintikka's GTS-
interpretation. The original version of classical (and intuitionistic) logic
of Paul Lorenzen and Kuno Lorenz were not defined in relation to models but
with the help of winning strategies over formal dialogues (P. Lorenzen, K.
Lorenz 1978, S. Rahman and L. Keiff 2005). Shahid Rahman and Tero Tulenheimo
developed an algorithm to transform GTS-winning strategies for classical logic
into the dialogical winning strategies and vice-versa.

All of these games are of perfect information; the two players always know the
truth values of each primitive, and are aware of all preceding moves in the
game.

## [edit] Intuitionistic logic, denotational semantics, linear logic, logical
pluralism

The primary motivation for Lorenzen and Kuno Lorenz was to find a game-
theoretic (their term was "dialogical" Dialogische Logik) semantics for
intuitionistic logic. Andreas Blass[1] was the first to point out connections
between game semantics and linear logic. This line was further developed by
Samson Abramsky, Radhakrishnan Jagadeesan, Pasquale Malacaria and
independently Martin Hyland and Luke Ong, who placed special emphasis on
compositionality, i.e. the definition of strategies inductively on the syntax.
Using game semantics, the authors mentioned above have solved the long-
standing problem of defining a fully abstract model for the programming
language PCF. Consequently, game semantics has led to fully abstract semantic
models for a variety of programming languages and, to new semantic-directed
methods of software verification by software model checking.

Shahid Rahman and Helge RÃ¼ckert extended the dialogical approach to the study
of several non-classical logics such as modal logic, relevance logic, free
logic and connexive logic. Recently, Rahman and collaborators developed the
dialogical approach into a general framework aimed at the discussion of
logical pluralism.[1]

## [edit] Quantifiers

Foundational considerations of game semantics have been more emphasised by
Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu, especially for Independence-friendly logic
(IF logic, more recently Information-friendly logic), a logic with branching
quantifiers. It was thought that the principle of compositionality fails for
these logics, so that a Tarskian truth definition could not provide a suitable
semantics. To get around this problem, the quantifiers were given a game-
theoretic meaning. Specifically, the approach is the same as in classical
propositional logic, except that the players do not always have perfect
information about previous moves by the other player. Wilfrid Hodges has
proposed a compositional semantics and proved it equivalent to game semantics
for IF-logics. Foundational considerations have motivated the works of others,
such as Japaridze's computability logic.

## [edit] See also

  * Independence-friendly logic
  * Intuitionistic logic
  * Computability logic
  * Interactive computation
  * Ludics

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Andreas R. Blass

#### [edit] Articles

  * S.Abramsky and R.Jagadeesan, Games and full completeness for multiplicative linear logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic 59 (1994): 543-574.
  * A.Blass, A game semantics for linear logic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 56 (1992): 151-166.
  * G.Japaridze, Introduction to computability logic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 123 (2003): 1-99.
  * Krabbe, E. C. W., 2001. "Dialogue Foundations: Dialogue Logic Revisited," Supplement to the Proceedings of The Aristotelian Society 75: 33-49.
  * S. Rahman and L. Keiff, On how to be a dialogician. In Daniel Vanderken (ed.), Logic Thought and Action, Springer (2005), 359-408. ISBN 1-4020-2616-1.
  * S. Rahman and T. Tulenheimo, From Games to Dialogues and Back: Towards a General Frame for Validity. Dans Ondrej Majer, Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen and Tero Tulenheimo (ed.) , Games: Unifying logic, Language and Philosophy,. LEUS: Springer, Part III, 2008.

http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-dialogical/#Bib

#### [edit] Books

T. Aho and A-V. Pietarinen (eds.) Truth and Games. Essays in honour of Gabriel
Sandu. Societas Philosophica Fennica (2006).ISBN 951-9264-57-4.

  * J. van Benthem Logic in Games. Elsevier (2006).
  * J. van Benthem, G. Heinzmann, M. Rebuschi and H. Visser (eds.) The Age of Alternative Logics. Springer (2006).ISBN 1-40-20-5011-4.
  * L. Keiff Le Pluralisme Dialogique. Thesis UniversitÃ© de Lille3(2007).
  * K. Lorenz, P. Lorenzen: Dialogische Logik, Darmstadt 1978
  * P. Lorenzen: Lehrbuch der konstruktiven Wissenschaftstheorie, Stuttgart 2000 ISBN 3-476-01784-2
  * R. Inhetveen: Logik. Eine dialog-orientierte EinfÃ¼hrung., Leipzig 2003 ISBN 3-937219-02-1
  * S. Rahman, Ãber Dialogue protologische Kategorien und andere Seltenheiten. Frankfurt 1993 ISBN 3-631-46583-1
  * S. Rahman and H. RÃ¼ckert (editors), New Perspectives in Dialogical Logic. Synthese 127 (2001) ISSN 0039-7857.

## [edit] External links

  * GALOP: Workshop on Games for Logic and Programming Languages
  * Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Logic and Games
  * Game Semantics or Linear Logic?

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_semantics"

Categories: Logic | Logic in computer science | Mathematical logic |
Philosophical logic | Quantification | Semantics

Hidden categories: Articles containing German language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 11:33 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



