
# Aleph number

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Aleph One" redirects here. For other uses, see Aleph One (disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Aleph 0, the smallest infinite cardinal number

In the branch of mathematics known as set theory, the aleph numbers are a
sequence of numbers used to represent the cardinality (or size) of infinite
sets. They are named after the symbol used to denote them, the Hebrew letter
aleph (\\aleph).

The cardinality of the natural numbers is \\aleph_0 (aleph-null, also aleph-
nought or aleph-zero), the next larger cardinality is aleph-one \\aleph_1,
then \\aleph_2 and so on. Continuing in this manner, it is possible to define
a cardinal number \\aleph_\\alpha for every ordinal number Î±, as described
below.

The concept goes back to Georg Cantor, who defined the notion of cardinality
and realized that infinite sets can have different cardinalities.

The aleph numbers differ from the infinity (â) commonly found in algebra and
calculus. Alephs measure the sizes of sets; infinity, on the other hand, is
commonly defined as an extreme limit of the real number line (applied to a
function or sequence that "diverges to infinity" or "increases without
bound"), or an extreme point of the extended real number line.

## Contents

  * 1 Aleph-null
  * 2 Aleph-one
  * 3 The continuum hypothesis
  * 4 Aleph-Ï
  * 5 Aleph-Î± for general Î±
  * 6 Fixed points of aleph
  * 7 Aleph number in popular culture
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Aleph-null

Aleph-null (\\aleph_0) is by definition the cardinality of the set of all
natural numbers, and (assuming, as usual, the axiom of choice) is the smallest
of all infinite cardinalities. A set has cardinality \\aleph_0 if and only if
it is countably infinite, which is the case if and only if it can be put into
a direct bijection, or "one-to-one correspondence", with the natural numbers.
Such sets include the set of all prime numbers, the set of all integers, the
set of all rational numbers, the set of algebraic numbers, and the set of all
finite subsets of any countably infinite set.

## [edit] Aleph-one

\\aleph_1 is the cardinality of the set of all countable ordinal numbers,
called Ï1 or Î©. Note that this Ï1 is itself an ordinal number larger than
all countable ones, so it is an uncountable set. Therefore \\aleph_1 is
distinct from \\aleph_0. The definition of \\aleph_1 implies (in ZF, Zermelo-
Fraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice) that no cardinal number is
between \\aleph_0 and \\aleph_1. If the axiom of choice (AC) is used, it can
be further proved that the class of cardinal numbers is totally ordered, and
thus \\aleph_1 is the second-smallest infinite cardinal number. Using AC we
can show one of the most useful properties of the set Î©: any countable subset
of Î© has an upper bound in Î©. (This follows from the fact that a countable
union of countable sets is countable, one of the most common applications of
AC.) This fact is analogous to the situation in \\aleph_0: any finite set of
natural numbers has a maximum which is also a natural number; that is, finite
unions of finite sets are finite.

Î© is actually a useful concept, if somewhat exotic-sounding. An example
application is "closing" with respect to countable operations; e.g., trying to
explicitly describe the Ï-algebra generated by an arbitrary collection of
subsets. This is harder than most explicit descriptions of "generation" in
algebra (vector spaces, groups, etc.) because in those cases we only have to
close with respect to finite operations â sums, products, and the like. The
process involves defining, for each countable ordinal, via transfinite
induction, a set by "throwing in" all possible countable unions and
complements, and taking the union of all that over all of Î©.

## [edit] The continuum hypothesis

See also: Beth number

The cardinality of the set of real numbers (cardinality of the continuum) is
2^{\\aleph_0}. It is not clear where this number fits in the aleph number
hierarchy. It follows from ZFC (ZermeloâFraenkel set theory with the axiom
of choice) that the celebrated continuum hypothesis, CH, is equivalent to the
identity

    2^{\\aleph_0}=\\aleph_1.
CH is independent of ZFC: it can be neither proven nor disproven within the
context of that axiom system. That it is consistent with ZFC was demonstrated
by Kurt GÃ¶del in 1940; that it is independent of ZFC was demonstrated by Paul
Cohen in 1963.

## [edit] Aleph-Ï

Conventionally the smallest infinite ordinal is denoted Ï, and the cardinal
number \\aleph_\\omega is the smallest upper bound of

    \\left\\{\\,\\aleph_n : n\\in\\left\\{\\,0,1,2,\\dots\\,\\right\\}\\,\\right\\}.
Aleph-Ï is the first uncountable cardinal number that can be demonstrated
within Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory not to be equal to the cardinality of the
set of all real numbers; for any positive integer n we can consistently assume
that 2^{\\aleph_0} = \\aleph_n, and moreover it is possible to assume
2^{\\aleph_0} is as large as we like. We are only forced to avoid setting it
to certain special cardinals with cofinality \\aleph_0, meaning there is an
unbounded function from \\aleph_0 to it.

## [edit] Aleph-Î± for general Î±

To define \\aleph_\\alpha for arbitrary ordinal number Î±, we must define the
successor cardinal operation, which assigns to any cardinal number Ï the next
bigger well-ordered cardinal Ï + . (If the axiom of choice holds, this is the
next bigger cardinal.)

We can then define the aleph numbers as follows

    \\aleph_{0} = \\omega
    \\aleph_{\\alpha+1} = \\aleph_{\\alpha}^+
and for Î», an infinite limit ordinal,

    \\aleph_{\\lambda} = \\bigcup_{\\beta < \\lambda} \\aleph_\\beta.
The Î±-th infinite initial ordinal is written ÏÎ±. Its cardinality is written
\\aleph_\\alpha. See initial ordinal.

## [edit] Fixed points of aleph

For any ordinal Î± we have

    \\alpha\\leq\\aleph_\\alpha.
In many cases \\aleph_{\\alpha} is strictly greater than Î±. For example, for
any successor ordinal Î± this holds. There are, however, some limit ordinals
which are fixed points of the aleph function, because of the fixed-point lemma
for normal functions. The first such is the limit of the sequence

    \\aleph_0, \\aleph_{\\aleph_0}, \\aleph_{\\aleph_{\\aleph_0}},\\ldots
Any weakly inaccessible cardinal is a fixed point of the aleph function as
well.

## [edit] Aleph number in popular culture

  * The science fiction novel White Light by Rudy Rucker uses an imaginary universe to elucidate the set theory concept of aleph numbers.

  * The science fiction novel The Infinitive of Go by John Brunner concerns a teleportation device based on transfinite mathematics which gives access to a multiverse of parallel realities whose cardinality is "at least aleph-four".

  * Scarlett Thomas's book PopCo, features both a discussion of aleph-null and several events of importance that involve the concept.

  * Aleph One is the name of the open-source project for Bungie Studios' Marathon series of computer games. The last game of the series is entitled Marathon Infinity, so Aleph was chosen as the name because it was "going beyond Infinity".

  * Kenneth Kunen, a noted set theorist, has the license plate ALEPH 0.

  * In the episode Raging Bender of the television show Futurama, the movie theater the characters visit is named the \\aleph_{0}plex.

  * The author of the popular Phrack article "Smashing the stack for fun and profit" wrote under the name of Aleph One.

## [edit] External links

  * Eric W. Weisstein, Aleph-0 at MathWorld.
  * aleph numbers at PlanetMath.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleph_number"

Categories: Cardinal numbers | Infinity

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * Äesky
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 18 March 2009, at 02:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



