
# Reductio ad absurdum

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Reductio ad absurdum (Latin for "reduction to the absurd"), also known as an
apagogical argument, reductio ad impossibile, or proof by contradiction, is a
type of logical argument where one assumes a claim for the sake of argument
and derives an absurd or ridiculous outcome, and then concludes that the
original claim must have been wrong as it led to an absurd result.

It makes use of the law of non-contradiction â a statement cannot be both
true and false. In some cases it may also make use of the law of excluded
middle â a statement must be either true or false. The phrase is traceable
back to the Greek á¼¡ Îµá¼°Ï á¼ÏÎ¿ÏÎ¿Î½ á¼ÏÎ±Î³ÏÎ³Î® (hÄ eis Ã¡topon
apagÅgá¸), meaning "reduction to the absurd", often used by Aristotle.

In mathematics and formal logic, this refers specifically to an argument where
a contradiction is derived from some assumption (thus showing that the
assumption must be false). However, Reductio ad absurdum is also often used to
describe any argument where a conclusion is derived in the belief that
everyone (or at least those being argued against) will accept that it is false
or absurd. This is a comparatively weak form of reductio, as the decision to
reject the premise requires that the conclusion is accepted as being absurd.
Although a formal contradiction is by definition absurd (unacceptable), a weak
reductio ad absurdum argument can be rejected simply by accepting the
purportedly absurd conclusion. Such arguments also risk degenerating into
strawman arguments, an informal fallacy caused when an argument or theory is
twisted by the opposing side to appear ridiculous.

## Contents

  * 1 Explanation
  * 2 Examples
    * 2.1 Cubing-the-cube puzzle
    * 2.2 In mathematics
    * 2.3 In mathematical logic
    * 2.4 Humour
  * 3 Notation
  * 4 Quotations
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading

  
## [edit] Explanation

In formal logic, reductio ad absurdum is used when a formal contradiction can
be derived from a premise, allowing one to conclude that the premise is false.
If a contradiction is derived from a set of premises, this shows that at least
one of the premises is false; if there are several, other means must be used
to determine which ones. Mathematical proofs are sometimes constructed using
reductio ad absurdum, by first assuming the opposite of the theorem the
presenter wishes to prove, then reasoning logically from that assumption until
presented with a contradiction. Upon reaching the contradiction, the
assumption is disproved and therefore its opposite, due to the law of excluded
middle, must be true.

There is a fairly common misconception that reductio ad absurdum simply
denotes "a silly argument" and is itself a formal fallacy. However, this is
not correct; a properly constructed reductio constitutes a correct argument.
When reductio ad absurdum is in error, it is because of a fallacy in the
reasoning used to arrive at the contradiction, not the act of reduction
itself.

## [edit] Examples

A classic reductio proof from Greek mathematics is the proof that the square
root of 2 is irrational. If it were rational, it could be expressed as a
fraction a/b in lowest terms, where a and b are integers, at least one of
which is odd. But if a/b = â2, then a2 = 2b2. That implies a2 is even.
Because the square of an odd number is odd, that in turn implies that a is
even. This means that b must be odd because a/b is in lowest terms.

On the other hand, if a is even, then a2 is a multiple of 4. If a2 is a
multiple of 4 and a2 = 2b2, then 2b2 is a multiple of 4, and therefore b2 is
even, and so is b.

So b is odd and even, a contradiction. Therefore the initial assumptionâthat
â2 can be expressed as a fractionâmust be false.

### [edit] Cubing-the-cube puzzle

A more recent use of a reductio argument is the proof that a cube cannot be
cut into a finite number of smaller cubes with no two the same size. Consider
the smallest cube on the bottom face; on each of its four sides, either a
neighbouring cube or the border of the main cube is rising above it. This
means that any larger cube will not fit on top of it (the "footprint" of such
a cube is too large). Since different cubes aren't permitted to have the same
sizes, only smaller cubes can be placed directly on top of it. But then the
smallest of these would likewise be surrounded by larger cubes, so could only
have smaller cubes directly on top of it... and so on, in an infinite regress,
requiring an infinite number of cubes, which violates our conditions. (This
gives rise to a proof by induction that the cubing-the-cube puzzle is also
unsolvable in dimensions higher than three.)

### [edit] In mathematics

Say we wish to disprove proposition p. The procedure is to show that assuming
p leads to a logical contradiction. Thus, according to the law of non-
contradiction, p must be false.

Say instead we wish to prove proposition p. We can proceed by assuming "not p"
(i.e. that p is false), and show that it leads to a logical contradiction.
Thus, according to the law of non-contradiction, "not p" must be false, and
so, according to the law of the excluded middle, p is true.

In symbols:

To disprove p: one uses the tautology (p â (R â§ Â¬R)) â Â¬p, where R is
any proposition and the â§ symbol is taken to mean "and". Assuming p, one
proves R and Â¬R, and concludes from this that p â (R â§ Â¬R). This and the
tautology together imply Â¬p.

To prove p: one uses the tautology (Â¬p â (R â§ Â¬R)) â p where R is any
proposition. Assuming Â¬p, one proves R and Â¬R, and concludes from this that
Â¬p â (R â§ Â¬R). This and the tautology together imply p.

For a simple example of the first kind, consider the proposition, Â¬p: "there
is no smallest rational number greater than 0". In a reductio ad absurdum
argument, we would start by assuming the opposite, p: that there is a smallest
rational number, say, r0.

Now let x = \\frac{r_0}{2}. Then x is a rational number, and it's greater than
0; and x is smaller than r0. (In the above symbolic argument, "x is the
smallest rational number" would be R and "r0 (which is different from x) is
the smallest rational number" would be Â¬R.) But that contradicts our initial
assumption, p, that r0 was the smallest rational number. So we can conclude
that the original proposition, Â¬p, must be true â "there is no smallest
rational number greater than 0".

[Note: the choice of which statement is R and which is Â¬R is arbitrary.]

It is common to use this first type of argument with propositions such as the
one above, concerning the non-existence of some mathematical object. One
assumes that such an object exists, and then proves that this would lead to a
contradiction; thus, such an object does not exist. For other examples, see
proof that the square root of 2 is not rational and Cantor's diagonal
argument.

On the other hand, it is also common to use arguments of the second type
concerning the existence of some mathematical object. One assumes that the
object doesn't exist, and then proves that this would lead to a contradiction;
thus, such an object must exist. Although it is quite freely used in
mathematical proofs, not every school of mathematical thought accepts this
kind of argument as universally valid. See further Nonconstructive proof.

### [edit] In mathematical logic

In mathematical logic, the reductio ad absurdum is represented as:

    if 
    S \\cup \\{ p \\} \\vdash F
    then 
    S  \\vdash \\neg p.
or

    if 
    S \\cup \\{ \\neg p \\} \\vdash F
    then 
    S  \\vdash p.
In the above, p is the proposition we wish to prove or disprove; and S is a
set of statements which are given as true â these could be, for example, the
axioms of the theory we are working in, or earlier theorems we can build upon.
We consider p, or the negation of p, in addition to S; if this leads to a
logical contradiction F, then we can conclude that the statements in S lead to
the negation of p, or p itself, respectively.

Note that the set-theoretic union, in some contexts closely related to logical
disjunction (or), is used here for sets of statements in such a way that it is
more related to logical conjunction (and).

### [edit] Humour

The often humorous outcome of extending the simplification of a flawed
statement to ridiculous proportions with the aim of criticising the result is
frequently utilised in forms of humour. In fiction, seemingly simple and
innocuous actions that are extended beyond reasonable circumstance to chaotic
outcomes, typically by use of stereotype and literal interpretation, can also
be categorised as reductio ad absurdum[1]. See farce.

Example:

    Prove: All positive integers are interesting.
    Proof: Assume there exists an uninteresting positive integer. Then there must be a smallest uninteresting positive integer. However, being the smallest uninteresting positive integer is in itself interesting. Thus you have a contradiction and all positive integers are interesting.
## [edit] Notation

Proofs by reductio ad absurdum often end "Contradiction!" or "What a
contradiction!" Isaac Barrow and Baermann used the notation Q.E.A., for "quod
est absurdum" ("which is absurd"), along the lines of Q.E.D., but this
notation is rarely used today[2]. A graphical symbol sometimes used for
contradictions is a downwards zigzag arrow "lightning" symbol (U+21AF: â¯),
for example in Davey and Priestley[3]. Others sometimes used include a pair of
opposing arrows (as \\rightarrow\\!\\leftarrow or \\Rightarrow\\!\\Leftarrow),
struck-out arrows (\\nleftrightarrow), a stylized form of hash (such as
U+2A33: â¨³), or the "reference mark" (U+203B: â»).[4][5] The "up tack"
symbol (U+22A5: â¥) used by philosophers and logicians (see contradiction)
also appears, but is often avoided due to its usage for orthogonality.

## [edit] Quotations

In the words of G. H. Hardy (A Mathematician's Apology), "Reductio ad
absurdum, which Euclid loved so much, is one of a mathematician's finest
weapons. It is a far finer gambit than any chess gambit: a chess player may
offer the sacrifice of a pawn or even a piece, but a mathematician offers the
game."

In the first paragraph of the Quentin Section (Part 2: June Second, 1910) of
William Faulkner's The Sound and the Fury, Quentin's father, Mr. Compson,
gives his son a watch that has been in the family for many generations. His
father explains, "It [the watch] was Grandfather's and when Father gave it to
me he said I give you the mausoleum of all hope and desire; it's rather
excruciating-ly apt that you will use it to gain the reducto absurdum of all
human experience which can fit your individual needs no better that it fitted
his or his father's". This example represents a corruption of the Latin phrase
Reductio ad absurdum.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ N.A. Walker, What's So Funny: Humor in American Culture, Rowman & Littlefield, 1998.
  2. ^ Hartshorne on QED and related
  3. ^ B. Davey and H.A. Prisetley, Introduction to lattices and order, Cambridge University Press, 2002.
  4. ^ The Comprehensive LaTeX Symbol List, pg. 20. http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/info/symbols/comprehensive/symbols-a4.pdf
  5. ^ Gary Hardegree, Introduction to Modal Logic, Chapter 2, pg. II-2. http://people.umass.edu/gmhwww/511/pdf/c02.pdf

## [edit] Further reading

  * J. Franklin and A. Daoud, Proof in Mathematics: An Introduction, Quakers Hill Press, 1996, ch. 6

v â¢ d â¢ e

Fallacies of relevance  
General

Absurdity â¢ Accident â¢ Ad nauseam â¢ Argument from ignorance â¢ Argument
from silence â¢ Argumentum ad populum â¢ Base rate â¢ Compound question â¢
Loaded question â¢ Argument to moderation â¢ Moralistic â¢ Naturalistic â¢
Proof by assertion â¢ Irrelevant conclusion â¢ Special pleading â¢ Straw
man â¢ Style over substance â¢ Two wrongs make a right  
Appeals to emotion

Fear â¢ Flattery â¢ Nature â¢ Novelty â¢ Pity â¢ Ridicule â¢ Repugnance
â¢ Spite  
Genetic fallacies

Ad hominem (Ad hominem tu quoque) â¢ Appeal to authority â¢ Appeal to motive
â¢ Appeal to tradition â¢ Appeal to wealth â¢ Appeal to poverty â¢
Association â¢ Bulverism â¢ Chronological snobbery â¢ Ipse-dixitism â¢
Poisoning the well â¢ Appeal to etymology â¢ Reductio ad Hitlerum â¢
Appeals to intellectual and mental stability or capability  
Appeals to consequences

Appeal to force â¢ Wishful thinking  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reductio_ad_absurdum"

Categories: Rules of inference | Proofs | Mathematical terminology | Latin
logical phrases | Latin philosophical phrases

Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * Bosanski
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 08:09.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



