
# Scale invariance

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

In physics and mathematics, scale invariance is a feature of objects or laws
that do not change if length scales (or energy scales) are multiplied by a
common factor. The technical term for this transformation is a dilatation
(also known as dilation), and the dilatations can also form part of a larger
conformal symmetry.

  * In mathematics, scale invariance usually refers to an invariance of individual functions or curves. A closely related concept is self-similarity, where a function or curve is invariant under a discrete subset of the dilatations. It is also possible for the probability distributions of random processes to display this kind of scale invariance or self-similarity.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Koch curve is scale-invariant.

  * In classical field theory, scale invariance most commonly applies to the invariance of a whole theory under dilatations. Such theories typically describe classical physical processes with no characteristic length scale.

  * In quantum field theory, scale invariance has an interpretation in terms of particle physics. In a scale-invariant theory, the strength of particle interactions does not depend on the energy of the particles involved.

  * In statistical mechanics, scale invariance is a feature of phase transitions. The key observation is that near a phase transition or critical point, fluctuations occur at all length scales, and thus one should look for an explicitly scale-invariant theory to describe the phenomena. Such theories are scale-invariant statistical field theories, and are formally very similar to scale-invariant quantum field theories.

  * Universality is the observation that widely different microscopic systems can display the same behaviour at a phase transition. Thus phase transitions in many different systems may be described by the same underlying scale-invariant theory.

  * In general, dimensionless quantities are scale invariant. The analogous concept in statistics are standardized moments, which are scale invariant statistics of a variable, while the unstandardized moments are not.

## Contents

  * 1 Scale-invariant curves and self-similarity
    * 1.1 Projective geometry
    * 1.2 Fractals
  * 2 Scale invariance in stochastic processes
    * 2.1 Cosmology
  * 3 Scale invariance in classical field theory
    * 3.1 Scale invariance of field configurations
    * 3.2 Classical electromagnetism
    * 3.3 Massless scalar field theory
      * 3.3.1 Ï4 theory
  * 4 Scale invariance in quantum field theory
    * 4.1 Quantum electrodynamics
    * 4.2 Massless scalar field theory
    * 4.3 Conformal field theory
    * 4.4 Scale and conformal anomalies
  * 5 Phase transitions
    * 5.1 The Ising model
      * 5.1.1 CFT description
    * 5.2 Schramm-Loewner evolution
  * 6 Universality
  * 7 Other examples of scale invariance
    * 7.1 Newtonian fluid mechanics with no applied forces
    * 7.2 Computer vision
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References

  
## [edit] Scale-invariant curves and self-similarity

In mathematics, one can consider the scaling properties of a function or curve
f(x) under rescalings of the variable x. That is, one is interested in the
shape of f(Î»x) for some scale factor Î», which can be taken to be a length or
size rescaling. The requirement for f(x) to be invariant under all rescalings
is usually taken to be

    f(x) = Î» â Îf(Î»x)
for some choice of exponent Î, and for all dilations Î».

Examples of scale-invariant functions are the monomials f(x) = xn, for which
one has Î = n, in that clearly

    f(Î»x) = (Î»x)n = Î»nf(x).
An example of a scale-invariant curve is the logarithmic spiral, a kind of
curve that often appears in nature. In polar coordinates (r, Î¸) the spiral
can be written as

    \\theta = \\frac{1}{b} \\ln\(r/a\).
Allowing for rotations of the curve, it is invariant under all rescalings Î»;
that is Î¸(Î»r) is identical to a rotated version of Î¸(r).

### [edit] Projective geometry

The idea of scale invariance of a monomial generalizes in higher dimensions to
the idea of a homogeneous polynomial, and more generally to a homogeneous
function. Homogeneous functions are the natural denizens of projective space,
and homogeneous polynomials are studied as projective varieties in projective
geometry. Projective geometry is a particularly rich field of mathematics; in
its most abstract forms, the geometry of schemes, it has connections to
various topics in string theory.

### [edit] Fractals

It is sometimes said that fractals are scale-invariant, although more
precisely, one should say that they are self-similar. A fractal is equal to
itself typically for only a discrete set of values Î», and even then a
translation and rotation must be applied to match up to the fractal to itself.
Thus, for example the Koch curve scales with Î = 1, but the scaling holds
only for values of Î» = 1 / 3n for integer n. In addition, the Koch curve
scales not only at the origin, but, in a certain sense, "everywhere":
miniature copies of itself can be found all along the curve.

Some fractals may have multiple scaling factors at play at once; such scaling
is studied with multi-fractal analysis.

## [edit] Scale invariance in stochastic processes

If P(f) is the average, expected power at frequency f, then noise scales as

    P(f) = Î» â ÎP(Î»f)
with Î = 0 for white noise, Î = â 1 for pink noise, and Î = â 2 for
Brownian noise (and more generally, Brownian motion).

More precisely, scaling in stochastic systems concerns itself with the
likelihood of choosing a particular configuration out of the set of all
possible random configurations. This likelihood is given by the probability
distribution. Examples of scale-invariant distributions are the Pareto
distribution and the Zipfian distribution.

### [edit] Cosmology

In physical cosmology, the power spectrum of the spatial distribution of the
cosmic microwave background is near to being a scale-invariant function. This
means that the amplitude, P(k), of primordial fluctuations as a function of
wave number, k, is approximately constant. This pattern is consistent with the
proposal of cosmic inflation.

## [edit] Scale invariance in classical field theory

Classical field theory is generically described by a field, or set of fields,
\\varphi, that depend on coordinates, x. Valid field configurations are then
determined by solving differential equations for \\varphi\(x\), and these
equations are known as field equations.

For a theory to be scale-invariant, its field equations should be invariant
under a rescaling of the coordinates, combined with some specified rescaling
of the fields:

    x\\rightarrow\\lambda x,
    \\varphi\\rightarrow\\lambda^{-\\Delta}\\varphi.
The parameter Î is known as the scaling dimension of the field, and its value
depends on the theory under consideration. Scale invariance will typically
hold provided that no fixed length scale appears in the theory. Conversely,
the presence of a fixed length scale indicates that a theory is not scale-
invariant.

A consequence of scale invariance is that given a solution of a scale-
invariant field equation, we can automatically find other solutions by
rescaling both the coordinates and the fields appropriately. In technical
terms, given a solution, \\varphi\(x\), one always has other solutions of the
form \\lambda^{-\\Delta}\\varphi\(\\lambda x\).

### [edit] Scale invariance of field configurations

For a particular field configuration, \\varphi\(x\), to be scale-invariant, we
require that

    \\varphi\(x\)=\\lambda^{-\\Delta}\\varphi\(\\lambda x\)
where Î is again the scaling dimension of the field.

We note that this condition is rather restrictive. In general, solutions even
of scale-invariant field equations will not be scale-invariant, and in such
cases the symmetry is said to be spontaneously broken.

### [edit] Classical electromagnetism

An example of a scale-invariant classical field theory is electromagnetism
with no charges or currents. The fields are the electric and magnetic fields,
\\mathbf{E}\(\\mathbf{x},t\) and \\mathbf{B}\(\\mathbf{x},t\), while their
field equations are Maxwell's equations. With no charges or currents, these
field equations take the form of wave equations

    \\nabla^2 \\mathbf{E} = \\frac{1}{c^2} \\frac{\\partial^2 \\mathbf{E}}{\\partial t^2}
    \\nabla^2\\mathbf{B} = \\frac{1}{c^2} \\frac{\\partial^2 \\mathbf{B}}{\\partial t^2}
where c is the speed of light.

These field equations are invariant under the transformation

    x\\rightarrow\\lambda x,
    t\\rightarrow\\lambda t.
Moreover, given solutions of Maxwell's equations, \\mathbf{E}\(\\mathbf{x},t\)
and \\mathbf{B}\(\\mathbf{x},t\), we have that
\\mathbf{E}\(\\lambda\\mathbf{x},\\lambda t\) and
\\mathbf{B}\(\\lambda\\mathbf{x},\\lambda t\) are also solutions.

### [edit] Massless scalar field theory

Another example of a scale-invariant classical field theory is the massless
scalar field (note that the name scalar is unrelated to scale invariance). The
scalar field, \\varphi\(\\mathbf{x},t\) is a function of a set of spatial
variables, \\mathbf{x}, and a time variable, t. We first consider the linear
theory. Much like the electromagnetic field equations above, the equation of
motion for this theory is also a wave equation

    \\frac{1}{c^2} \\frac{\\partial^2 \\varphi}{\\partial t^2}-\\nabla^2 \\varphi = 0,
and is invariant under the transformation

    x\\rightarrow\\lambda x,
    t\\rightarrow\\lambda t.
The name massless refers to the absence of a term \\propto m^2\\varphi^2 in
the field equation. Such a term is often referred to as a `mass' term, and
would break the invariance under the above transformation. In relativistic
field theories, a mass-scale, m is physically equivalent to a fixed length
scale via

    L=\\frac{\\hbar}{mc},
and so it should not be surprising that massive scalar field theory is not
scale-invariant.

#### [edit] Ï4 theory

The field equations in the examples above are all linear in the fields, which
has meant that the scaling dimension, Î, has not been so important. However,
one usually requires that the scalar field action is dimensionless, and this
fixes the scaling dimension of \\varphi. In particular,

    \\Delta=\\frac{D-2}{2},
where D is the combined number of spatial and time dimensions.

Given this scaling dimension for \\varphi, there are certain nonlinear
modifications of massless scalar field theory which are also scale-invariant.
One example is massless Ï4 theory for D = 4. The field equation is

    \\frac{1}{c^2} \\frac{\\partial^2 \\varphi}{\\partial t^2}-\\nabla^2 \\varphi+g\\varphi^3=0.
(Note that the name \\varphi^4 derives from the form of the Lagrangian, which
contains the fourth power of \\varphi.)

When D=4 (e.g. three spatial dimensions and one time dimension), the scalar
field scaling dimension is Î = 1. The field equation is then invariant under
the transformation

    x\\rightarrow\\lambda x,
    t\\rightarrow\\lambda t,
    \\varphi\\rightarrow\\lambda^{-1}\\varphi.
The key point is that the parameter g must be dimensionless, otherwise one
introduces a fixed length scale into the theory. For Ï4 theory this is only
the case in D = 4.

## [edit] Scale invariance in quantum field theory

The scale-dependence of a quantum field theory (QFT) is characterised by the
way its coupling parameters depend on the energy-scale of a given physical
process. This energy dependence is described by the renormalization group, and
is encoded in the beta-functions of the theory.

For a QFT to be scale-invariant, its coupling parameters must be independent
of the energy-scale, and this is indicated by the vanishing of the beta-
functions of the theory. Such theories are also known as fixed points of the
corresponding renormalization group flow.

### [edit] Quantum electrodynamics

A simple example of a scale-invariant QFT is the quantized electromagnetic
field without charged particles. This theory actually has no coupling
parameters (since photons are massless and non-interacting) and is therefore
scale-invariant, much like the classical theory.

However, in nature the electromagnetic field is coupled to charged particles,
such as electrons. The QFT describing the interactions of photons and charged
particles is quantum electrodynamics (QED), and this theory is not scale-
invariant. We can see this from the QED beta-function. This tells us that the
electric charge (which is the coupling parameter in the theory) increases with
increasing energy. Therefore, while the quantized electromagnetic field
without charged particles is scale-invariant, QED is not scale-invariant.

### [edit] Massless scalar field theory

Free, massless quantized scalar field theory has no coupling parameters.
Therefore, like the classical version, it is scale-invariant. In the language
of the renormalization group, this theory is known as the Gaussian fixed
point.

However, even though the classical massless Ï4 theory is scale-invariant in D
= 4, the quantized version is not scale-invariant. We can see this from the
beta-function for the coupling parameter, g.

Even though the quantized massless Ï4 is not scale-invariant, there do exist
scale-invariant quantized scalar field theories other than the Gaussian fixed
point. One example is the Wilson-Fisher fixed point.

### [edit] Conformal field theory

Scale-invariant QFTs are almost always invariant under the full conformal
symmetry, and the study of such QFTs is conformal field theory (CFT).
Operators in a CFT have a well-defined scaling dimension, analogous to the
scaling dimension, Î, of a classical field discussed above. However, the
scaling dimensions of operators in a CFT typically differ from the those of
the fields in the corresponding classical theory. The additional contributions
appearing in the CFT are known as anomalous scaling dimensions.

### [edit] Scale and conformal anomalies

The Ï4 theory example above demonstrates that the coupling parameters of a
quantum field theory can be scale-dependent even if the corresponding
classical field theory is scale-invariant (or conformally invariant). If this
is the case, the classical scale (or conformal) invariance is said to be
anomalous.

## [edit] Phase transitions

In statistical mechanics, as a system undergoes a phase transition, its
fluctuations are described by a scale-invariant statistical field theory. For
a system in equilibrium (i.e. time-independent) in D spatial dimensions, the
corresponding statistical field theory is formally similar to a D-dimensional
CFT. The scaling dimensions in such problems are usually referred to as
critical exponents, and one can in principle compute these exponents in the
appropriate CFT.

### [edit] The Ising model

An example that links together many of the ideas in this article is the phase
transition of the Ising model, a crude model of ferromagnetic substances. This
is a statistical mechanics model which also has a description in terms of
conformal field theory. The system consists of an array of lattice sites,
which form a D-dimensional periodic lattice. Associated with each lattice site
is a magnetic moment, or spin, and this spin can take either the value +1 or
-1. (These states are also called up and down, respectively.)

The key point is that the Ising model has a spin-spin interaction, making it
energetically favourable for two adjacent spins to be aligned. On the other
hand, thermal fluctuations typically introduce a randomness into the alignment
of spins. At some critical temperature, Tc, spontaneous magnetization is said
to occur. This means that below Tc the spin-spin interaction will begin to
dominate, and there is some net alignment of spins in one of the two
directions.

An example of the kind of physical quantities one would like to calculate at
this critical temperature is the correlation between spins separated by a
distance r. This has the generic behaviour:

    G\(r\)\\propto\\frac{1}{r^{D-2+\\eta}},
for some particular value of Î·, which is an example of a critical exponent.

#### [edit] CFT description

The fluctuations at temperature Tc are scale-invariant, and so the Ising model
at this phase transition is expected to be described by a scale-invariant
statistical field theory. In fact, this theory is the Wilson-Fisher fixed
point, a particular scale-invariant scalar field theory. In this context, G(r)
is understood as a correlation function of scalar fields:

    \\langle\\phi\(0\)\\phi\(r\)\\rangle\\propto\\frac{1}{r^{D-2+\\eta}}.
Now we can fit together a number of the ideas we've seen already. From the
above we can see that the critical exponent, Î·, for this phase transition, is
also an anomalous dimension. This is because the classical dimension of the
scalar field

    \\Delta=\\frac{D-2}{2}
is modified to become

    \\Delta=\\frac{D-2+\\eta}{2},
where D is the number of dimensions of the Ising model lattice. So this
anomalous dimension in the conformal field theory is the same as a particular
critical exponent of the Ising model phase transition.

We note that for dimension D = 4 â Îµ, Î· can be calculated approximately,
using the epsilon expansion, and one finds that

    \\eta=\\frac{\\epsilon^2}{54}+O\(\\epsilon^3\).
In the physically interesting case of three spatial dimensions we have Îµ = 1,
and so this expansion is not strictly reliable. However, a semi-quantitative
prediction is that Î· is numerically small in three dimensions. On the other
hand, in the two-dimensional case the Ising model is exactly soluble. In
particular, it is equivalent to one of the minimal models, a family of well-
understood CFTs, and it is possible to compute Î· (and the other critical
exponents) exactly:

    \\eta_{D=2}=\\frac{1}{4}.
### [edit] Schramm-Loewner evolution

The anomalous dimensions in certain two-dimensional CFTs can be related to the
typical fractal dimensions of random walks, where the random walks are defined
via Schramm-Loewner evolution (SLE). As we have seen above, CFTs describe the
physics of phase transitions, and so one can relate the critical exponents of
certain phase transitions to these fractal dimensions. Examples include the 2d
critical Ising model and the more general 2d critical Potts model. Relating
other 2d CFTs to SLE is an active area of research.

## [edit] Universality

A phenomenon known as universality is seen in a large variety of physical
systems. It expresses the idea that different microscopic physics can give
rise to the same scaling behaviour at a phase transition. A canonical example
of universality involves the following two systems:

  * The Ising model phase transition, described above.
  * The liquid-vapour transition in classical fluids.

Even though the microscopic physics of these two systems is completely
different, their critical exponents turn out to be the same. Moreover, one can
calculate these exponents using the same statistical field theory. The key
observation is that at a phase transition or critical point, fluctuations
occur at all length scales, and thus one should look for a scale-invariant
statistical field theory to describe the phenomena. In a sense, universality
is the observation that there are relatively few such scale-invariant
theories.

The set of different microscopic theories described by the same scale-
invariant theory is known as a universality class. Other examples of systems
which belong to a universality class are:

  * Avalanches in piles of sand. The likelihood of an avalanche is in power-law proportion to the size of the avalanche, and avalanches are seen to occur at all size scales.
  * The frequency of network outages on the Internet, as a function of size and duration.
  * The frequency of citations of journal articles, considered in the network of all citations amongst all papers, as a function of the number of citations in a given paper.
  * The formation and propagation of cracks and tears in materials ranging from steel to rock to paper. The variations of the direction of the tear, or the roughness of a fractured surface, are in power-law proportion to the size scale.
  * The electrical breakdown of dielectrics, which resemble cracks and tears.
  * The percolation of fluids through disordered media, such as petroleum through fractured rock beds, or water through filter paper, such as in chromatography. Power-law scaling connects the rate of flow to the distribution of fractures.
  * The diffusion of molecules in solution, and the phenomenon of diffusion-limited aggregation.
  * The distribution of rocks of different sizes in an aggregate mixture that is being shaken (with gravity acting on the rocks).

The key observation is that, for all of these different systems, the behaviour
resembles a phase transition, and that the language of statistical mechanics
and scale-invariant statistical field theory may be applied to describe them.

## [edit] Other examples of scale invariance

### [edit] Newtonian fluid mechanics with no applied forces

Under certain circumstances, fluid mechanics is a scale-invariant classical
field theory. The fields are the velocity of the fluid flow,
\\mathbf{u}\(\\mathbf{x},t\), the fluid density, \\rho\(\\mathbf{x},t\), and
the fluid pressure, P\(\\mathbf{x},t\). These fields must satisfy both the
NavierâStokes equation and the continuity equation. For a Newtonian fluid
these take the respective forms

    \\rho\\frac{\\partial \\mathbf{u}}{\\partial t}+\\rho\\mathbf{u}\\cdot\\nabla \\mathbf{u} = -\\nabla P+\\mu \\left\(\\nabla^2 \\mathbf{u}+\\frac{1}{3}\\nabla\\left\(\\nabla\\cdot\\mathbf{u}\\right\)\\right\)
    \\frac{\\partial \\rho}{\\partial t}+\\nabla\\cdot \\left\(\\rho\\mathbf{u}\\right\)=0
where Î¼ is the dynamic viscosity.

In order to deduce the scale invariance of these equations we specify an
equation of state, relating the fluid pressure to the fluid density. The
equation of state depends on the type of fluid and the conditions to which it
is subjected. For example, we consider the isothermal ideal gas, which
satisfies

    P=c_s^2\\rho,
where cs is the speed of sound in the fluid. Given this equation of state,
NavierâStokes and the continuity equation are invariant under the
transformations

    x\\rightarrow\\lambda x,
    t\\rightarrow\\lambda t,
    \\rho\\rightarrow\\lambda \\rho,
    \\mathbf{u}\\rightarrow\\mathbf{u}.
Given the solutions \\mathbf{u}\(\\mathbf{x},t\) and \\rho\(\\mathbf{x},t\),
we automatically have that \\mathbf{u}\(\\lambda\\mathbf{x},\\lambda t\) and
\\lambda\\rho\(\\lambda\\mathbf{x},\\lambda t\) are also solutions.

### [edit] Computer vision

In computer vision, scale invariance refers to a local image description that
remains invariant when the scale of the image is changed. A general framework
for obtaining scale invariance in practice is by detecting local maxima over
scales of normalized derivative responses -- see the article on scale-space
for a brief introduction to the general theory and references. Examples of
scale invariant blob detectors and ridge detectors are given in the articles
on blob detection and ridge detection. An example of the application of scale
invariance to object recognition is given in the article on the scale-
invariant feature transform.

## [edit] See also

  * Scale space, in computer vision and image processing
  * Scale relativity, physics

## [edit] References

  * Zinn-Justin, Jean ; Quantum Field Theory and Critical Phenomena, Oxford University Press (2002). Extensive discussion of scale invariance in quantum and statistical field theories, applications to critical phenomena and the epsilon expansion and related topics.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scale_invariance"

Categories: Symmetry | Scaling symmetries | Conformal field theory | Critical
phenomena

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 March 2009, at 11:33 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



