
# Gene

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Gene (disambiguation).

For a non-technical introduction to the topic, see Introduction to genetics.

<IMG>

<IMG>

This stylistic diagram shows a gene in relation to the double helix structure
of DNA and to a chromosome pair (right). Introns are regions often found in
eukaryote genes that are removed in the splicing process (after the DNA is
transcribed into RNA): Only the exons encode the protein. This diagram labels
a region of only 40 or so bases as a gene. In reality, most genes are hundreds
of times larger.  
A gene is the basic unit of heredity in a living organism. All living things
depend on genes. Genes hold the information to build and maintain their cells
and pass genetic traits to offspring. In general terms, a gene is a segment of
nucleic acid that, taken as a whole, specifies a trait. The colloquial usage
of the term gene often refers to the scientific concept of an allele.

The notion of a gene has evolved with the science of genetics, which began
when Gregor Mendel noticed that biological variations are inherited from
parent organisms as specific, discrete traits. The biological entity
responsible for defining traits was termed a gene, but the biological basis
for inheritance remained unknown until DNA was identified as the genetic
material in the 1940s. All organisms have many genes corresponding to many
different biological traits, some of which are immediately visible, such as
eye color or number of limbs, and some of which are not, such as blood type or
increased risk for specific diseases, or the thousands of basic biochemical
processes that comprise life.

In cells, a gene is a portion of DNA that contains both "coding" sequences
that determine what the gene does, and "non-coding" sequences that determine
when the gene is active (expressed). When a gene is active, the coding and
non-coding sequences are copied in a process called transcription, producing
an RNA copy of the gene's information. This piece of RNA can then direct the
synthesis of proteins via the genetic code. In other cases, the RNA is used
directly, for example as part of the ribosome. The molecules resulting from
gene expression, whether RNA or protein, are known as gene products, and are
responsible for the development and functioning of all living things.

In more technical terms, a gene is a locatable region of genomic sequence,
corresponding to a unit of inheritance, and is associated with regulatory
regions, transcribed regions and/or other functional sequence regions.[1][2]
The physical development and phenotype of organisms can be thought of as a
product of genes interacting with each other and with the environment.[3] A
concise definition of a gene, taking into account complex patterns of
regulation and transcription, genic conservation and non-coding RNA genes, has
been proposed by Gerstein et al:[4] "A gene is a union of genomic sequences
encoding a coherent set of potentially overlapping functional products".

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Mendelian inheritance and classical genetics
  * 3 Physical definitions
    * 3.1 RNA genes and genomes
    * 3.2 Functional structure of a gene
    * 3.3 Chromosomes
  * 4 Gene expression
    * 4.1 Genetic code
    * 4.2 Transcription
    * 4.3 Translation
  * 5 DNA replication and inheritance
    * 5.1 Molecular inheritance
    * 5.2 Mutation
  * 6 Genome
    * 6.1 Chromosomal organization
    * 6.2 Number of genes
    * 6.3 Genetic and genomic nomenclature
  * 7 Evolutionary concept of a gene
  * 8 Gene targeting and implications
  * 9 Changing concept
  * 10 See also
  * 11 References
  * 12 Further reading
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] History

Main article: History of genetics

The existence of genes was first suggested by Gregor Mendel (1822â1884),
who, in the 1860s, studied inheritance in peaplants and hypothesized a factor
that conveys traits from parent to offspring. He spent over 10 years of his
life on one experiment. Although he did not use the term gene, he explained
his results in terms of inherited characteristics. Mendel was also the first
to hypothesize independent assortment, the distinction between dominant and
recessive traits, the distinction between a heterozygote and homozygote, and
the difference between what would later be described as genotype (the genetic
material of an organism) and phenotype (the visible traits of that organism).
Mendel's concept was given a name by Hugo de Vries in 1889, who, at that time
probably unaware of Mendel's work, in his book Intracellular Pangenesis coined
the term "pangen" for "the smallest particle [representing] one hereditary
characteristic".[5] Wilhelm Johannsen abbreviated this term to "gene" ("gen"
in Danish and German) two decades later.

In the early 1900s, Mendel's work received renewed attention from scientists.
In 1910, Thomas Hunt Morgan showed that genes reside on specific chromosomes.
He later showed that genes occupy specific locations on the chromosome. With
this knowledge, Morgan and his students began the first chromosomal map of the
fruit fly Drosophila. In 1928, Frederick Griffith showed that genes could be
transferred. In what is now known as Griffith's experiment, injections into a
mouse of a deadly strain of bacteria that had been heat-killed transferred
genetic information to a safe strain of the same bacteria, killing the mouse.

In 1941,George Wells Beadle and Edward Lawrie Tatum showed that mutations in
genes caused errors in specific steps in metabolic pathways. This showed that
specific genes code for specific proteins, leading to the "one gene, one
enzyme" hypothesis.[6] Oswald Avery, Colin Munro MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty
showed in 1944 that DNA holds the gene's information.[7] In 1953, James D.
Watson and Francis Crick demonstrated the molecular structure of DNA.
Together, these discoveries established the central dogma of molecular
biology, which states that proteins are translated from RNA which is
transcribed from DNA. This dogma has since been shown to have exceptions, such
as reverse transcription in retroviruses.

In 1972, Walter Fiers and his team at the Laboratory of Molecular Biology of
the University of Ghent (Ghent, Belgium) were the first to determine the
sequence of a gene: the gene for Bacteriophage MS2 coat protein.[8] Richard J.
Roberts and Phillip Sharp discovered in 1977 that genes can be split into
segments. This leads to the idea that one gene can make several proteins.
Recently (as of 2003â2006), biological results let the notion of gene appear
more slippery. In particular, genes do not seem to sit side by side on DNA
like discrete beads. Instead, regions of the DNA producing distinct proteins
may overlap, so that the idea emerges that "genes are one long continuum".[1]

## [edit] Mendelian inheritance and classical genetics

Main articles: Mendelian inheritance and Classical genetics

Darwin used the term Gemmule to describe a microscopic unit of inheritance,
and what would later become known as Chromosomes had been observed separating
out during cell division by Wilhelm Hofmeister as early as 1848. The idea that
chromosomes are the carriers of inheritance was expressed in 1883 by Wilhelm
Roux. The modern conception of the gene originated with work by Gregor Mendel,
a 19th-century Augustinian monk who systematically studied heredity in pea
plants. Mendel's work was the first to illustrate particulate inheritance, or
the theory that inherited traits are passed from one generation to the next in
discrete units that interact in well-defined ways. Danish botanist Wilhelm
Johannsen coined the word "gene" in 1909 to describe these fundamental
physical and functional units of heredity,[9] while the related word genetics
was first used by William Bateson in 1905.[6] The word was derived from Hugo
de Vries' 1889 term pangen for the same concept,[5] itself a derivative of the
word pangenesis coined by Darwin (1868).[10] The word pangenesis is made from
the Greek words pan (a prefix meaning "whole", "encompassing") and genesis
("birth") or genos ("origin").

<IMG>

<IMG>

Crossing between two pea plants heterozygous for purple (B, dominant) and
white (b, recessive) blossoms

According to the theory of Mendelian inheritance, variations in
phenotypeâthe observable physical and behavioral characteristics of an
organismâare due to variations in genotype, or the organism's particular set
of genes, each of which specifies a particular trait. Different forms of a
gene, which may give rise to different phenotypes, are known as alleles.
Organisms such as the pea plants Mendel worked on, along with many plants and
animals, have two alleles for each trait, one inherited from each parent.
Alleles may be dominant or recessive; dominant alleles give rise to their
corresponding phenotypes when paired with any other allele for the same trait,
whereas recessive alleles give rise to their corresponding phenotype only when
paired with another copy of the same allele. For example, if the allele
specifying tall stems in pea plants is dominant over the allele specifying
short stems, then pea plants that inherit one tall allele from one parent and
one short allele from the other parent will also have tall stems. Mendel's
work found that alleles assort independently in the production of gametes, or
germ cells, ensuring variation in the next generation.

Prior to Mendel's work, the dominant theory of heredity was one of blending
inheritance, which proposes that the traits of the parents blend or mix in a
smooth, continuous gradient in the offspring. Although Mendel's work was
largely unrecognized after its first publication in 1866, it was rediscovered
in 1900 by three European scientists, Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns, and Erich
von Tschermak, who had reached similar conclusions from their own research.
However, these scientists were not yet aware of the identity of the 'discrete
units' on which genetic material resides.

A series of subsequent discoveries led to the realization decades later that
chromosomes within cells are the carriers of genetic material, and that they
are made of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), a polymeric molecule found in all
cells on which the 'discrete units' of Mendelian inheritance are encoded. The
modern study of genetics at the level of DNA is known as molecular genetics
and the synthesis of molecular genetics with traditional Darwinian evolution
is known as the modern evolutionary synthesis.

## [edit] Physical definitions

<IMG>

<IMG>

The chemical structure of a four-base fragment of a DNA double helix.

The vast majority of living organisms encode their genes in long strands of
DNA. DNA consists of a chain made from four types of nucleotide subunits:
adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine. Each nucleotide subunit consists of
three components: a phosphate group, a deoxyribose sugar ring, and a
nucleobase. Thus, nucleotides in DNA or RNA are typically called 'bases'; as a
consequence, they are commonly referred to simply by their purine or
pyrimidine original base components adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine.
Adenine and guanine are purines, and cytosine and thymine are pyrimidines. The
most common form of DNA in a cell is in a double helix structure, in which two
individual DNA strands twist around each other in a right-handed spiral. In
this structure, the base pairing rules specify that guanine pairs with
cytosine and adenine pairs with thymine (each pair contains one purine and one
pyrimidine). The base pairing between guanine and cytosine forms three
hydrogen bonds, whereas the base pairing between adenine and thymine forms two
hydrogen bonds. The two strands in a double helix must therefore be
complementary, that is, their bases must align such that the adenines of one
strand are paired with the thymines of the other strand, and so on.

Due to the chemical composition of the pentose residues of the bases, DNA
strands have directionality. One end of a DNA polymer contains an exposed
hydroxyl group on the deoxyribose; this is known as the 3' end of the
molecule. The other end contains an exposed phosphate group; this is the 5'
end. The directionality of DNA is vitally important to many cellular
processes, since double helices are necessarily directional (a strand running
5'-3' pairs with a complementary strand running 3'-5'), and processes such as
DNA replication occur in only one direction. All nucleic acid synthesis in a
cell occurs in the 5'-3' direction, because new monomers are added via a
dehydration reaction that uses the exposed 3' hydroxyl as a nucleophile.

The expression of genes encoded in DNA begins by transcribing the gene into
RNA, a second type of nucleic acid that is very similar to DNA, but whose
monomers contain the sugar ribose rather than deoxyribose. RNA also contains
the base uracil in place of thymine. RNA molecules are less stable than DNA
and are typically single-stranded. Genes that encode proteins are composed of
a series of three-nucleotide sequences called codons, which serve as the words
in the genetic language. The genetic code specifies the correspondence during
protein translation between codons and amino acids. The genetic code is nearly
the same for all known organisms.

### [edit] RNA genes and genomes

In some cases, RNA is an intermediate product in the process of manufacturing
proteins from genes. However, for other gene sequences, the RNA molecules are
the actual functional products. For example, RNAs known as ribozymes are
capable of enzymatic function, and miRNAs have a regulatory role. The DNA
sequences from which such RNAs are transcribed are known as RNA genes.

Some viruses store their entire genomes in the form of RNA, and contain no DNA
at all. Because they use RNA to store genes, their cellular hosts may
synthesize their proteins as soon as they are infected and without the delay
in waiting for transcription. On the other hand, RNA retroviruses, such as
HIV, require the reverse transcription of their genome from RNA into DNA
before their proteins can be synthesized. In 2006, French researchers came
across a puzzling example of RNA-mediated inheritance in mouse. Mice with a
loss-of-function mutation in the gene Kit have white tails. Offspring of these
mutants can have white tails despite having only normal Kit genes. The
research team traced this effect back to mutated Kit RNA.[11] While RNA is
common as genetic storage material in viruses, in mammals in particular RNA
inheritance has been observed very rarely.

### [edit] Functional structure of a gene

<IMG>

<IMG>

Diagram of the "typical" eukaryotic protein-coding gene. Promoters and
enhancers determine what portions of the DNA will be transcribed into the
precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA). The pre-mRNA is then spliced into messenger RNA
(mRNA) which is later translated into protein.

All genes have regulatory regions in addition to regions that explicitly code
for a protein or RNA product. A regulatory region shared by almost all genes
is known as the promoter, which provides a position that is recognized by the
transcription machinery when a gene is about to be transcribed and expressed.
A gene can have more than one promoter, resulting in RNAs that differ in how
far they extend in the 5' end.[12] Although promoter regions have a consensus
sequence that is the most common sequence at this position, some genes have
"strong" promoters that bind the transcription machinery well, and others have
"weak" promoters that bind poorly. These weak promoters usually permit a lower
rate of transcription than the strong promoters, because the transcription
machinery binds to them and initiates transcription less frequently. Other
possible regulatory regions include enhancers, which can compensate for a weak
promoter. Most regulatory regions are "upstream"âthat is, before or toward
the 5' end of the transcription initiation site. Eukaryotic promoter regions
are much more complex and difficult to identify than prokaryotic promoters.

Many prokaryotic genes are organized into operons, or groups of genes whose
products have related functions and which are transcribed as a unit. By
contrast, eukaryotic genes are transcribed only one at a time, but may include
long stretches of DNA called introns which are transcribed but never
translated into protein (they are spliced out before translation). Splicing
can also occur in prokaryotic genes, but is less common than in
eukaryotes.[13]

### [edit] Chromosomes

The total complement of genes in an organism or cell is known as its genome,
which may be stored on one or more chromosomes; the region of the chromosome
at which a particular gene is located is called its locus. A chromosome
consists of a single, very long DNA helix on which thousands of genes are
encoded. Prokaryotes \- bacteria and archaea \- typically store their genomes
on a single large, circular chromosome, sometimes supplemented by additional
small circles of DNA called plasmids, which usually encode only a few genes
and are easily transferable between individuals. For example, the genes for
antibiotic resistance are usually encoded on bacterial plasmids and can be
passed between individual cells, even those of different species, via
horizontal gene transfer. Although some simple eukaryotes also possess
plasmids with small numbers of genes, the majority of eukaryotic genes are
stored on multiple linear chromosomes, which are packed within the nucleus in
complex with storage proteins called histones. The manner in which DNA is
stored on the histone, as well as chemical modifications of the histone
itself, are regulatory mechanisms governing whether a particular region of DNA
is accessible for gene expression. The ends of eukaryotic chromosomes are
capped by long stretches of repetitive sequences called telomeres, which do
not code for any gene product but are present to prevent degradation of coding
and regulatory regions during DNA replication. The length of the telomeres
tends to decrease each time the genome is replicated in preparation for cell
division; the loss of telomeres has been proposed as an explanation for
cellular senescence, or the loss of the ability to divide, and by extension
for the aging process in organisms.[14]

Whereas the chromosomes of prokaryotes are relatively gene-dense, those of
eukaryotes often contain so-called "junk DNA", or regions of DNA that serve no
obvious function. Simple single-celled eukaryotes have relatively small
amounts of such DNA, whereas the genomes of complex multicellular organisms,
including humans, contain an absolute majority of DNA without an identified
function.[15] However it now appears that, although protein-coding DNA makes
up barely 2% of the human genome, about 80% of the bases in the genome may be
being expressed, so the term "junk DNA" may be a misnomer.[2]

## [edit] Gene expression

Main article: Gene expression

In all organisms, there are two major steps separating a protein-coding gene
from its protein: First, the DNA on which the gene resides must be transcribed
from DNA to messenger RNA (mRNA); and, second, it must be translated from mRNA
to protein. RNA-coding genes must still go through the first step, but are not
translated into protein. The process of producing a biologically functional
molecule of either RNA or protein is called gene expression, and the resulting
molecule itself is called a gene product.

### [edit] Genetic code

Main article: Genetic code

<IMG>

<IMG>

Schematic diagram of a single-stranded RNA molecule illustrating the position
of three-base codons.

The genetic code is the set of rules by which a gene is translated into a
functional protein. Each gene consists of a specific sequence of nucleotides
encoded in a DNA (or sometimes RNA) strand; a correspondence between
nucleotides, the basic building blocks of genetic material, and amino acids,
the basic building blocks of proteins, must be established for genes to be
successfully translated into functional proteins. Sets of three nucleotides,
known as codons, each correspond to a specific amino acid or to a signal;
three codons are known as "stop codons" and, instead of specifying a new amino
acid, alert the translation machinery that the end of the gene has been
reached. There are 64 possible codons (four possible nucleotides at each of
three positions, hence 43 possible codons) and only 20 standard amino acids;
hence the code is redundant and multiple codons can specify the same amino
acid. The correspondence between codons and amino acids is nearly universal
among all known living organisms.

### [edit] Transcription

The process of genetic transcription produces a single-stranded RNA molecule
known as messenger RNA, whose nucleotide sequence is complementary to the DNA
from which it was transcribed. The DNA strand whose sequence matches that of
the RNA is known as the coding strand and the strand from which the RNA was
synthesized is the template strand. Transcription is performed by an enzyme
called an RNA polymerase, which reads the template strand in the 3' to 5'
direction and synthesizes the RNA from 5' to 3'. To initiate transcription,
the polymerase first recognizes and binds a promoter region of the gene. Thus
a major mechanism of gene regulation is the blocking or sequestering of the
promoter region, either by tight binding by repressor molecules that
physically block the polymerase, or by organizing the DNA so that the promoter
region is not accessible.

In prokaryotes, transcription occurs in the cytoplasm; for very long
transcripts, translation may begin at the 5' end of the RNA while the 3' end
is still being transcribed. In eukaryotes, transcription necessarily occurs in
the nucleus, where the cell's DNA is sequestered; the RNA molecule produced by
the polymerase is known as the primary transcript and must undergo post-
transcriptional modifications before being exported to the cytoplasm for
translation. The splicing of introns present within the transcribed region is
a modification unique to eukaryotes; alternative splicing mechanisms can
result in mature transcripts from the same gene having different sequences and
thus coding for different proteins. This is a major form of regulation in
eukaryotic cells.

### [edit] Translation

Translation is the process by which a mature mRNA molecule is used as a
template for synthesizing a new protein. Translation is carried out by
ribosomes, large complexes of RNA and protein responsible for carrying out the
chemical reactions to add new amino acids to a growing polypeptide chain by
the formation of peptide bonds. The genetic code is read three nucleotides at
a time, in units called codons, via interactions with specialized RNA
molecules called transfer RNA (tRNA). Each tRNA has three unpaired bases known
as the anticodon that are complementary to the codon it reads; the tRNA is
also covalently attached to the amino acid specified by the complementary
codon. When the tRNA binds to its complementary codon in an mRNA strand, the
ribosome ligates its amino acid cargo to the new polypeptide chain, which is
synthesized from amino terminus to carboxyl terminus. During and after its
synthesis, the new protein must fold to its active three-dimensional structure
before it can carry out its cellular function.

## [edit] DNA replication and inheritance

The growth, development, and reproduction of organisms relies on cell
division, or the process by which a single cell divides into two usually
identical daughter cells. This requires first making a duplicate copy of every
gene in the genome in a process called DNA replication. The copies are made by
specialized enzymes known as DNA polymerases, which "read" one strand of the
double-helical DNA, known as the template strand, and synthesize a new
complementary strand. Because the DNA double helix is held together by base
pairing, the sequence of one strand completely specifies the sequence of its
complement; hence only one strand needs to be read by the enzyme to produce a
faithful copy. The process of DNA replication is semiconservative; that is,
the copy of the genome inherited by each daughter cell contains one original
and one newly synthesized strand of DNA.[16]

After DNA replication is complete, the cell must physically separate the two
copies of the genome and divide into two distinct membrane-bound cells. In
prokaryotes \- bacteria and archaea \- this usually occurs via a relatively
simple process called binary fission, in which each circular genome attaches
to the cell membrane and is separated into the daughter cells as the membrane
invaginates to split the cytoplasm into two membrane-bound portions. Binary
fission is extremely fast compared to the rates of cell division in
eukaryotes. Eukaryotic cell division is a more complex process known as the
cell cycle; DNA replication occurs during a phase of this cycle known as S
phase, whereas the process of segregating chromosomes and splitting the
cytoplasm occurs during M phase. In many single-celled eukaryotes such as
yeast, reproduction by budding is common, which results in asymmetrical
portions of cytoplasm in the two daughter cells.

### [edit] Molecular inheritance

The duplication and transmission of genetic material from one generation of
cells to the next is the basis for molecular inheritance, and the link between
the classical and molecular pictures of genes. Organisms inherit the
characteristics of their parents because the cells of the offspring contain
copies of the genes in their parents' cells. In asexually reproducing
organisms, the offspring will be a genetic copy or clone of the parent
organism. In sexually reproducing organisms, a specialized form of cell
division called meiosis produces cells called gametes or germ cells that are
haploid, or contain only one copy of each gene. The gametes produced by
females are called eggs or ova, and those produced by males are called sperm.
Two gametes fuse to form a fertilized egg, a single cell that once again has a
diploid number of genesâeach with one copy from the mother and one copy from
the father.

During the process of meiotic cell division, an event called genetic
recombination or crossing-over can sometimes occur, in which a length of DNA
on one chromatid is swapped with a length of DNA on the corresponding sister
chromatid. This has no effect if the alleles on the chromatids are the same,
but results in reassortment of otherwise linked alleles if they are different.
The Mendelian principle of independent assortment asserts that each of a
parent's two genes for each trait will sort independently into gametes; which
allele an organism inherits for one trait is unrelated to which allele it
inherits for another trait. This is in fact only true for genes that do not
reside on the same chromosome, or are located very far from one another on the
same chromosome. The closer two genes lie on the same chromosome, the more
closely they will be associated in gametes and the more often they will appear
together; genes that are very close are essentially never separated because it
is extremely unlikely that a crossover point will occur between them. This is
known as genetic linkage.

### [edit] Mutation

Main article: Mutation

DNA replication is for the most part extremely accurate, with an error rate
per site of around 10-6 to 10-10 in eukaryotes.[16] Rare, spontaneous
alterations in the base sequence of a particular gene arise from a number of
sources, such as errors in DNA replication and the aftermath of DNA damage.
These errors are called mutations. The cell contains many DNA repair
mechanisms for preventing mutations and maintaining the integrity of the
genome; however, in some casesâsuch as breaks in both DNA strands of a
chromosome â repairing the physical damage to the molecule is a higher
priority than producing an exact copy. Due to the degeneracy of the genetic
code, some mutations in protein-coding genes are silent, or produce no change
in the amino acid sequence of the protein for which they code; for example,
the codons UCU and UUC both code for serine, so the UâC mutation has no
effect on the protein. Mutations that do have phenotypic effects are most
often neutral or deleterious to the organism, but sometimes they confer
benefits to the organism's fitness.

Mutations propagated to the next generation lead to variations within a
species' population. Variants of a single gene are known as alleles, and
differences in alleles may give rise to differences in traits. Although it is
rare for the variants in a single gene to have clearly distinguishable
phenotypic effects, certain well-defined traits are in fact controlled by
single genetic loci. A gene's most common allele is called the wild type
allele, and rare alleles are called mutants. However, this does not imply that
the wild-type allele is the ancestor from which the mutants are descended.

## [edit] Genome

### [edit] Chromosomal organization

The total complement of genes in an organism or cell is known as its genome.
In prokaryotes, the vast majority of genes are located on a single chromosome
of circular DNA, while eukaryotes usually possess multiple individual linear
DNA helices packed into dense DNA-protein complexes called chromosomes. Genes
that appear together on one chromosomes of one species may appear on separate
chromosomes in another species. Many species carry more than one copy of their
genome within each of their somatic cells. Cells or organisms with only one
copy of each chromosome are called haploid; those with two copies are called
diploid; and those with more than two copies are called polyploid. The copies
of genes on the chromosomes are not necessarily identical. In sexually
reproducing organisms, one copy is normally inherited from each parent.

### [edit] Number of genes

Early estimates of the number of human genes that used expressed sequence tag
data put it at 50 000â100 000.[17] Following the sequencing of the human
genome and other genomes, it has been found that rather few genes (~20 000 in
human, mouse and fly, ~13 000 in roundworm, >46 000 in rice) encode all the
proteins in an organism.[18] These protein-coding sequences make up 1â2% of
the human genome.[19] Most of the genome gives rise to RNA products however,
but not much is known about the function of these non-coding RNAs.[18][19]

### [edit] Genetic and genomic nomenclature

Gene nomenclature has been established by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee
(HGNC) for each known human gene in the form of an approved gene name and
symbol (short-form abbreviation). All approved symbols are stored in the HGNC
Database. Each symbol is unique and each gene is only given one approved gene
symbol. It is necessary to provide a unique symbol for each gene so that
people can talk about them. This also facilitates electronic data retrieval
from publications. In preference each symbol maintains parallel construction
in different members of a gene family and can be used in other species,
especially the mouse.

## [edit] Evolutionary concept of a gene

George C. Williams first explicitly advocated the gene-centric view of
evolution in his 1966 book Adaptation and Natural Selection. He proposed an
evolutionary concept of gene to be used when we are talking about natural
selection favoring some genes. The definition is: "that which segregates and
recombines with appreciable frequency." According to this definition, even an
asexual genome could be considered a gene, insofar that it have an appreciable
permanency through many generations.

The difference is: the molecular gene transcribes as a unit, and the
evolutionary gene inherits as a unit.

Richard Dawkins' books The Selfish Gene (1976) and The Extended Phenotype
(1982) defended the idea that the gene is the only replicator in living
systems. This means that only genes transmit their structure largely intact
and are potentially immortal in the form of copies. So, genes should be the
unit of selection. In The Selfish Gene Dawkins attempts to redefine the word
'gene' to mean "an inheritable unit" instead of the generally accepted
definition of "a section of DNA coding for a particular protein". In River Out
of Eden, Dawkins further refined the idea of gene-centric selection by
describing life as a river of compatible genes flowing through geological
time. Scoop up a bucket of genes from the river of genes, and we have an
organism serving as temporary bodies or survival machines. A river of genes
may fork into two branches representing two non-interbreeding species as a
result of geographical separation.

## [edit] Gene targeting and implications

Gene targeting is commonly referred to techniques for altering or disrupting
mouse genes and provides the mouse models for studying the roles of individual
genes in embryonic development, human disorders, aging and diseases. The mouse
models, where one or more of its genes are deactivated or made inoperable, are
called knockout mice. Since the first reports in which homologous
recombination in embryonic stem cells was used to generate gene-targeted
mice,[20] gene targeting has proven to be a powerful means of precisely
manipulating the mammalian genome, producing at least ten thousand mutant
mouse strains and it is now possible to introduce mutations that can be
activated at specific time points, or in specific cells or organs, both during
development and in the adult animal.[21][22]

Gene targeting strategies have been expanded to all kinds of modifications,
including point mutations, isoform deletions, mutant allele correction, large
pieces of chromosomal DNA insertion and deletion, tissue specific disruption
combined with spatial and temporal regulation and so on. It is predicted that
the ability to generate mouse models with predictable phenotypes will have a
major impact on studies of all phases of development, immunology,
neurobiology, oncology, physiology, metabolism, and human diseases. Gene
targeting is also in theory applicable to species from which totipotent
embryonic stem cells can be established, and therefore may offer a potential
to the improvement of domestic animals and plants.[22][23]

## [edit] Changing concept

The concept of the gene has changed considerably (see history section). From
the original definition of a "unit of inheritance", the term evolved to mean a
DNA-based unit that can exert its effects on the organism through RNA or
protein products. It was also previously believed that one gene makes one
protein; this concept was overthrown by the discovery of alternative splicing
and trans-splicing.[6]

The definition of a gene is still changing. The first cases of RNA-based
inheritance have been discovered in mammals.[11] Evidence is also accumulating
that the control regions of a gene do not necessarily have to be close to the
coding sequence on the linear molecule or even on the same chromosome.
Spilianakis and colleagues discovered that the promoter region of the
interferon-gamma gene on chromosome 10 and the regulatory regions of the T(H)2
cytokine locus on chromosome 11 come into close proximity in the nucleus
possibly to be jointly regulated.[24]

The concept that genes are clearly delimited is also being eroded. There is
evidence for fused proteins stemming from two adjacent genes that can produce
two separate protein products. While it is not clear whether these fusion
proteins are functional, the phenomena is more frequent than previously
thought.[25] Even more ground-breaking than the discovery of fused genes is
the observation that some proteins can be composed of exons from far away
regions and even different chromosomes.[26][2] This new data has led to an
updated, and probably tentative, definition of a gene as "a union of genomic
sequences encoding a coherent set of potentially overlapping functional
products."[6] This new definition categorizes genes by functional products,
whether they be proteins or RNA, rather than specific DNA loci; all regulatory
elements of DNA are therefore classified as gene-associated regions.[6]

## [edit] See also

  * DNA
  * Full genome sequencing
  * Epigenetics
  * Gene-centric view of evolution
  * Gene expression
  * Gene family
  * Gene pool
  * Gene therapy
  * Genetic algorithm
  * Genetics
  * Genome
  * Genomics
  * List of notable genes
  * Meme
  * Pseudogene
  * Predictive Medicine

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Pearson H (2006). "Genetics: what is a gene?". Nature 441 (7092): 398â401. doi:10.1038/441398a. PMID 16724031.
  2. ^ a b c Elizabeth Pennisi (2007). "DNA Study Forces Rethink of What It Means to Be a Gene". Science 316 (5831): 1556â1557. doi:10.1126/science.316.5831.1556. PMID 17569836.
  3. ^ see eg Martin Nowak's Evolutionary Dynamics
  4. ^ Gerstein MB, Bruce C, Rozowsky JS, Zheng D, Du J, Korbel JO, Emanuelsson O, Zhang ZD, Weissman S, Snyder M (2007). "What is a gene, post-ENCODE? History and updated definition". Genome Research 17 (6): 669â681. doi:10.1101/gr.6339607. PMID 17567988.
  5. ^ a b Vries, H. de (1889) Intracellular Pangenesis [1] ("pangen" definition on page 7 and 40 of this 1910 translation in English)
  6. ^ a b c d e Mark B. Gerstein et al., "What is a gene, post-ENCODE? History and updated definition," Genome Research 17(6) (2007): 669-681
  7. ^ Steinman RM, Moberg CL (February 1994). "A triple tribute to the experiment that transformed biology". J. Exp. Med. 179 (2): 379â84. doi:10.1084/jem.179.2.379. PMID 8294854.
  8. ^ Min Jou W, Haegeman G, Ysebaert M, Fiers W (1972). "Nucleotide sequence of the gene coding for the bacteriophage MS2 coat protein". Nature 237 (5350): 82â8. doi:10.1038/237082a0. PMID 4555447.
  9. ^ "The Human Genome Project Timeline". http://www.genome.gov/Pages/Education/Kit/main.cfm?pageid=24. Retrieved on 2006-09-13.
  10. ^ Darwin C. (1868). Animals and Plants under Domestication (1868).
  11. ^ a b Rassoulzadegan M, Grandjean V, Gounon P, Vincent S, Gillot I, Cuzin F (2006). "RNA-mediated non-mendelian inheritance of an epigenetic change in the mouse". Nature 441 (7092): 469â74. doi:10.1038/nature04674. PMID 16724059.
  12. ^ Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B (May 2008). "Mapping and quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq". Nat. Methods 5: 621. doi:10.1038/nmeth.1226. PMID 18516045.
  13. ^ Woodson SA (1998). "Ironing out the kinks: splicing and translation in bacteria". Genes Dev. 12 (9): 1243â7. doi:10.1101/gad.12.9.1243. PMID 9573040. http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/content/full/12/9/1243.
  14. ^ Braig M, Schmitt C (2006). "Oncogene-induced senescence: putting the brakes on tumor development". Cancer Res 66 (6): 2881â4. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-4006. PMID 16540631.
  15. ^ International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (2004). "Finishing the euchromatic sequence of the human genome". Nature 431 (7011): 931â45. doi:10.1038/nature03001. PMID 15496913. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v431/n7011/full/nature03001.html.
  16. ^ a b Watson JD, Baker TA, Bell SP, Gann A, Levine M, Losick R (2004). Molecular Biology of the Gene (5th ed.). Peason Benjamin Cummings (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press). ISBN 080534635X.
  17. ^ Schuler GD, Boguski MS, Stewart EA, et al (October 1996). "A gene map of the human genome". Science 274 (5287): 540â6. doi:10.1126/science.274.5287.540. PMID 8849440. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=8849440.
  18. ^ a b Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y (April 2007). "Noncoding RNA transcription beyond annotated genes". Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 17 (2): 139â44. doi:10.1016/j.gde.2007.02.008. PMID 17317145.
  19. ^ a b Claverie JM (September 2005). "Fewer genes, more noncoding RNA". Science 309 (5740): 1529â30. doi:10.1126/science.1116800. PMID 16141064.
  20. ^ Thomas KR, Capecchi MR. Site-directed mutagenesis by gene targeting in mouse embryo-derived stem cells. Cell. 1987;51:503-12
  21. ^ The 2007 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine - Press Release
  22. ^ a b Deng C. In Celebration of Dr. Mario R. Capecchi's Nobel Prize. Int J Biol Sci 2007; 3:417-419. http://www.biolsci.org/v03p0417.htm
  23. ^ Mario R. Capecchi
  24. ^ Spilianakis & colleagues (2005) Interchromosomal associations between alternatively expressed loci. PMID 15880101
  25. ^ Parra & colleagues (2006) Tandem chimerism as a means to increase protein complexity in the human genome. PMID 16344564
  26. ^ Kapranov & colleagues (2005) Examples of the complex architecture of the human transcriptome revealed by RACE and high-density tiling arrays. PMID 15998911

## [edit] Further reading

  * Dawkins, Richard (1990). The Selfish Gene. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-286092-5. Google Book Search; first published 1976.
  * Dawkins, Richard (1995). River Out of Eden. Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-06990-8.
  * Ridley, Matt (1999). Genome: The Autobiography of a Species in 23 Chapters. Fourth Estate. ISBN 0-00-763573-7.

## [edit] External links

Listen to this article (info/dl)  

Play sound

Spoken Wikipedia

This audio file was created from a revision dated 2005-04-21, and does not
reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles

This is a spoken version of the article. Click here to listen.

  * Comparative Toxicogenomics Database
  * DNA From The Beginning - a primer on genes and DNA
  * Entrez Gene - a searchable database of genes
  * IDconverter - converts gene IDs between public databases
  * iHOP - Information Hyperlinked over Proteins

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gene"

Categories: Spoken articles | Cloning | Genetics | Molecular biology | Units
of morphological analysis

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 01:54.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



