
# On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences (OEIS), also cited simply as
Sloane's, is an extensive searchable database of integer sequences, freely
available on the Web.

OEIS records information on integer sequences of interest to both professional
mathematicians and amateurs, and is widely cited. It contains over 156,351
sequences (March 11 2009), making it the largest database of its kind.

Each entry contains the leading terms of the sequence, keywords, mathematical
motivations, literature links, and more, including the option to generate a
graph or play a musical representation of the sequence. The database is
searchable by keyword and by subsequence.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Non-integers
  * 3 Conventions
    * 3.1 Special meaning of zero
    * 3.2 Lexicographic ordering
  * 4 Self-referential sequences
  * 5 An abridged example of a typical OEIS entry
  * 6 Entry fields
    * 6.1 ID number
    * 6.2 URL
    * 6.3 Sequence
    * 6.4 Signed
    * 6.5 Name
    * 6.6 Comments
    * 6.7 Maple, Mathematica, and other programs
    * 6.8 See also
    * 6.9 Keywords
    * 6.10 Offset
    * 6.11 Author(s)
  * 7 Searching the OEIS
    * 7.1 Enter a sequence
    * 7.2 Enter a word
    * 7.3 Enter a sequence number
    * 7.4 Searching from a web browser
  * 8 External links
    * 8.1 Papers on OEIS by Neil Sloane
    * 8.2 Other references

  
## [edit] History

Neil Sloane started collecting integer sequences as a student in the
mid-1960's to support his work in combinatorics. The database was at first
stored on punch cards. He published selections from the database in book form
twice:

  1. A Handbook of Integer Sequences (1973, ISBN 0-12-648550-X), containing 2,400 sequences.
  2. The Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences with Simon Plouffe (1995, ISBN 0-12-558630-2), containing 5,487 sequences.

These books were well received and, especially after the second publication,
mathematicians supplied Sloane with a steady flow of new sequences. The
collection became unmanageable in book form, and when the database had reached
16,000 entries Sloane decided to go onlineâfirst as an e-mail service
(August 1994), and soon after as a web site (1995). The database continues to
grow at a rate of some 10,000 entries a year.

Sloane has personally managed 'his' sequences for almost 40 years, but
starting in 2002, a board of associate editors and volunteers has helped
maintain the database.[1]

As a spin-off from the database work, Sloane founded the Journal of Integer
Sequences in 1998.

In 2004, Sloane celebrated the addition of the 100,000th sequence to the
database, A100000, which counts the marks on the Ishango bone. In 2006, the
user interface was overhauled and more advanced search capabilities were
added.

## [edit] Non-integers

Besides integer sequences, the OEIS also catalogs sequences of fractions, the
digits of transcendental numbers, complex numbers and so on by transforming
them into integer sequences.

Sequences of rationals are represented by two sequences (named with the
keyword 'frac'): the sequence of numerators and the sequence of denominators.
For example, the fifth order Farey sequence, {1 \\over 5}, {1 \\over 4}, {1
\\over 3}, {2 \\over 5}, {1 \\over 2}, {3 \\over 5}, {2 \\over 3}, {3 \\over
4}, {4 \\over 5}, is catalogued as the numerator sequence 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 3, 2,
3, 4 (A006842) and the denominator sequence 5, 4, 3, 5, 2, 5, 3, 4, 5
(A006843).

Important irrational numbers such as Ï = 3.1415926535897... are catalogued
under representative integer sequences such as decimal expansions (here 3, 1,
4, 1, 5, 9, 2, 6, ... (A000796)) or continued fraction expansions (here 3, 7,
15, 1, 292, 1, ... (A001203)).

## [edit] Conventions

The OEIS is currently limited to plain ASCII text, so it uses a linear form of
conventional mathematical notation (such as f(n) for functions, n for running
variables, etc.). Greek letters are usually represented by their full names,
e.g., mu for Î¼, phi for Ï.

Every sequence is identified by the letter A followed by six digits, sometimes
referred to without the leading zeros, e.g., A315 rather than A000315.

Individual terms of sequences are separated by commas. Digit groups are not
separated by commas, periods, or spaces.

In comments, formulas, etc., `a(n)` represents the nth term of the sequence.

### [edit] Special meaning of zero

Zero is often used to represent non-existent sequence elements. For example,
A104157 enumerates the "smallest prime of nÂ² consecutive primes to form an
nÃn magic square of least magic constant, or 0 if no such magic square
exists." The value of a(1) (a 1Ã1 magic square) is 2; a(3) is 1480028129. But
there is no such 2Ã2 magic square, so a(2) is 0.

This special usage has a solid mathematical basis in certain counting
functions. For example, the totient valence function NÏ(m) (A014197) counts
the solutions of Ï(x) = m. There are 4 solutions for 4, but no solutions for
14, hence a(14) of A014197 is 0âthere are no solutions.

Occasionally -1 is used for this purpose instead, as in A094076.

### [edit] Lexicographic ordering

The OEIS maintains the lexicographic order of the sequences, so each sequence
has a predecessor and a successor (its "context"). OEIS normalizes the
sequences for lexicographic ordering, (usually) ignoring initial zeros or ones
and also the sign of each element. Sequences of weight distribution codes
often omit periodically recurring zeros.

For example, consider: the prime numbers, the palindromic primes, the
Fibonacci sequence, the lazy caterer's sequence, and the coefficients in the
series expansion of {\\zeta\(n + 2\)} \\over {\\zeta\(n\)}. In OEIS
lexicographic order, they are:

Sequence #1: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, 59,
61, 67, 71, 73, 79, 83, 89, 97, ...

Sequence #2: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 101, 131, 151, 181, 191, 313, 353, 373, 383, 727,
757, 787, 797, 919, 929, ...

Sequence #3: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233, 377, 610, 987,
...

Sequence #4: 1, 2, 4, 7, 11, 16, 22, 29, 37, 46, 56, 67, 79, 92, ...

Sequence #5: 1, â3, â8, â3, â24, 24, â48, â3, â8, 72, â120,
24, â168, 144, ...

whereas unnormalized lexicographic ordering would order these sequences thus:
#3, #5, #4, #1, #2.

## [edit] Self-referential sequences

Very early in the history of the OEIS, sequences defined in terms of the
numbering of sequences in the OEIS itself were proposed. "I resisted adding
these sequences for a long time, partly out of a desire to maintain the
dignity of the database, and partly because A22 was only known to 11 terms !"
Sloane reminisced.

One of the earliest self-referential sequences Sloane accepted into the OEIS
was A031135 (later A091967) "a(n) = n-th term of sequence A_n". This sequence
spurred progress on finding more terms of A000022. Some sequences are both
finite and listed in full (keywords "fini" and "full"); these sequences will
not always be long enough to contain a term that corresponds to their OEIS
sequence number. In this case the corresponding term a(n) of A091967 is
undefined.

A100544 lists the first term given in sequence A_n, but it needs to be updated
from time to time because of changing opinions on offsets. Listing instead
term a(1) of sequence A_n might seem a good alternative if it weren't for the
fact that some sequences have offsets of 2 and greater.

This line of thought leads to the question "Does sequence A_n contain the
number n ?" and the sequences A053873, "Numbers n such that OEIS sequence A_n
contains n", and A053169, "n is in this sequence if and only if n is not in
sequence A_n". Thus, the composite number 2808 is in A053873 because A002808
is the sequence of composite numbers, while the non-prime 40 is in A053169
because it's not in A000040, the prime numbers. Each n is a member of exactly
one of these two sequences, and in principle it can be determined which
sequence each n belongs to, with two exceptions (related to the two sequences
themselves):

  * It cannot be determined whether 53873 is a member of A053873 or not. If it is in the sequence then by definition it should be; if it is not in the sequence then (again, by definition) it should not be.
  * It can be proved that 53169 both is and is not a member of A053169. If it is in the sequence then it should not be; if it is not in the sequence then it should be. This is a form of Russell's paradox.

## [edit] An abridged example of a typical OEIS entry

This entry, A046970, was chosen because, with the exception of a Maple
program, it contains every field an OEIS entry can have.

    
    ID Number: A046970
    URL:       http://www.research.att.com/projects/OEIS?Anum=A046970
    Sequence:  1,3,8,3,24,24,48,3,8,72,120,24,168,144,192,3,288,24,360,72,
               384,360,528,24,24,504,8,144,840,576,960,3,960,864,1152,24,
               1368,1080,1344,72,1680,1152,1848,360,192,1584,2208,24,48,72,
               2304,504,2808,24,2880,144,2880,2520,3480,576
    Signed:    1,-3,-8,-3,-24,24,-48,-3,-8,72,-120,24,-168,144,192,-3,-288,
               24,-360,72,384,360,-528,24,-24,504,-8,144,-840,-576,-960,-3,
               960,864,1152,24,-1368,1080,1344,72,-1680,-1152,-1848,360,
               192,1584,-2208,24,-48,72,2304,504,-2808,24,2880,144,2880,
               2520,-3480,-576
    Name:      Generated from Riemann Zeta function: coefficients in series
                  expansion of Zeta(n+2)/Zeta(n).
    Comments:  ...
               Apart from signs also Sum_{d|n} core(d)^2*mu(n/d) where core(x) is
                  the squarefree part of x. - Benoit Cloitre
                  (abcloitre(AT)modulonet.fr), May 31 2002
    References M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions,
                  Dover Publications, 1965, pp. 805-811.
    Links:     Wikipedia, Riemann zeta function.
    Formula:   Multiplicative with a(p^e) = 1-p^2. a(n) = Sum_{d|n} mu(d)*d^2.
    Example:   a(3) = -8 because the divisors of 3 are {1, 3}, and mu(1)*1^2 + mu(3)*3^2 =
                  -8.
               a(4) = -3 because the divisors of 4 are {1, 2, 4}, and mu(1)*1^2 +
                  mu(2)*2^2 + mu(4)*4^2 = -3
    Math'ca:   muDD[d_] := MoebiusMu[d]*d^2; Table[Plus @@ muDD[Divisors[n]], {n,
                  60}] (Lopez)
    Program:   (PARI) A046970(n)=sumdiv(n,d,d^2*moebius(d)) (Benoit Cloitre)
    See also:  Sequence in context: A016623 A046543 A035292 this_sequence A058936
                  A002017 A086179
               Adjacent sequences: A046967 A046968 A046969 this_sequence A046971
                  A046972 A046973
               Cf. A027641 and A027642.
    Keywords:  sign,mult
    Offset:    1
    Author(s): Douglas Stoll, dougstoll(AT)email.msn.com
    Extension: Corrected and extended by Vladeta Jovovic (vladeta(AT)Eunet.yu),
                  Jul 25 2001
               ...
    
## [edit] Entry fields

### [edit] ID number

Every sequence in the OEIS has a serial number, a six-digit positive integer,
prefixed by A (and zero-padded on the left prior to November 2004). The letter
"A" stands for "absolute." Numbers are either assigned by the editor(s) or by
an A number dispenser, which is handy for when contributors wish to send in
related sequences at once and be able to create cross-references. An A number
from the dispenser expires a month from issue if not used. But as the
following table of arbitrarily selected sequences show, the rough
correspondence holds.

A059097 Numbers n such that the binomial coefficient C(2n,n) is not divisible
by the square of an odd prime. January 1, 2001  
A060001 Fibonacci(n)!. March 14, 2001  
A066288 Number of 3-dimensional polyominoes (or polycubes) with n cells and
symmetry group of order exactly 24. January 1, 2002  
A075000 Smallest number such that n*a(n) is a concatenation of n consecutive
integers ... August 31, 2002  
A078470 Continued fraction for Zeta(3/2) January 1, 2003  
A080000 Number of permutations satisfying -k<=p(i)-i<=r and p(i)-i February
10, 2003  
A090000 Length of longest contiguous block of 1's in binary expansion of n-th
prime. November 20, 2003  
A091345 Exponential convolution of A069321(n) with itself, where we set
A069321(0)=0. January 1, 2004  
A100000 Marks from the 22000-year-old Ishango bone from the Congo. November 7,
2004  
A102231 Column 1 of triangle A102230, and equals the convolution of A032349
with A032349 shift right. January 1, 2005  
A110030 Number of consecutive integers starting with n needed to sum to a
Niven number. July 8, 2005  
A112886 Triangle-free positive integers. January 12, 2006  
A120007 MÃ¶bius transform of sum of prime factors of n June 2, 2006  
Even for sequences in the book predecessors to the OEIS, the ID numbers are
not the same. The 1973 Handbook of Integer Sequences contained about 2400
sequences, which were numbered by lexicographic order (the letter M plus 4
digits, zero-padded where necessary), and the 1995 Encyclopedia of Integer
Sequences contained 5487 sequences, also numbered by lexicographic order (the
letter N plus 4 digits, zero-padded where necessary). These old M and N
numbers, as applicable, are contained in the ID number field in parentheses
after the modern A number.

### [edit] URL

The URL field gives the preferred format for the URL to link to the sequence
in question, to simplify cut and paste.

### [edit] Sequence

The sequence field lists the numbers themselves, or at least about four lines'
worth. The sequence field makes no distinction between sequences that are
finite but still too long to display and sequences that are infinite. To help
make that determination, you need to look at the keywords field for "fini,"
"full," or "more." To determine to which n the values given correspond, see
the offset field, which gives the n for the first term given.

Any negative signs are stripped from this field, and the values with signs are
put in the Signed field.

### [edit] Signed

The signed field is almost the same thing as the sequence field except that it
shows negative signs. This field is only included for sequences that have
negative values. Any entry with this field must have the keyword "sign".

### [edit] Name

The name field usually contains the most common name for the sequence, and
sometimes also the formula. For example, 1, 8, 27, 64, 125, 216, 343, 512,
(A000578) is named "The cubes: a(n) = n^3."

### [edit] Comments

The comments field is for information about the sequence that doesn't quite
fit in any of the other fields. The comments field often points out
interesting relationships between different sequences and less obvious
applications for a sequence. For example, Lekraj Beedassy in a comment to
A000578 notes that the cube numbers also count the "total number of triangles
resulting from criss-crossing cevians within a triangle so that two of its
sides are each n-partitioned," while Sloane points out the unexpected
relationship between centered hexagonal numbers (A003215) and second Bessel
polynomials (A001498) in a comment to A003215.

If no name is given for a comment, the comment was made by the original
submitter of the sequence.

### [edit] Maple, Mathematica, and other programs

Maple and Mathematica are the preferred programs for calculating sequences in
the OEIS, and they both get their own field labels, "Maple" and "Mathematica."
As of Jan 2009, Mathematica is the most popular choice with over over 25,000
Mathematica programs followed by 13,000 Maple programs. There are 11,000
programs in PARI and 3000 in other languages, all of which are labelled with a
generic "Program" field label and the name of the program in parentheses. The
popularity of Mathematica may be because it provides functions algorithmic
sequence recognition and generating function creation. [1]

If there is no name given, the program was written by the original submitter
of the sequence.

### [edit] See also

Sequence cross-references originated by the original submitter are usually
denoted by "Cf."

Except for new sequences, the see also field also includes information on the
lexicographic order of the sequence (its "context") and provides links to
sequences with close A numbers (A046967, A046968, A046969, A046971, A046972,
A046973, in our example). The following table shows the context of our example
sequence, A046970:

A016623 3, 8, 3, 9, 4, 5, 2, 3, 1, 2, ... Decimal expansion of ln(93/2).  
A046543 1, 1, 1, 3, 8, 3, 10, 1, 110, 3, 406, 3 First numerator and then
denominator of the central  
elements of the 1/3-Pascal triangle (by row).  
A035292 1, 3, 8, 3, 12, 24, 16, 3, 41, 36, 24, ... Number of similar
sublattices of Z^4 of index n^2.  
A046970 1, â3, â8, â3, â24, 24, â48, â3, â8, 72, ... Generated
from Riemann Zeta function...  
A058936 0, 1, 3, 8, 3, 30, 20, 144, 90, 40, 840,  
504, 420, 5760, 3360, 2688, 1260 Decomposition of Stirling's S(n, 2) based on  
associated numeric partitions.  
A002017 1, 1, 1, 0, -3, -8, -3, 56, 217, 64, -2951, -12672, ... Expansion of
exp(sin x).  
A086179 3, 8, 4, 1, 4, 9, 9, 0, 0, 7, 5, 4, 3, 5, 0, 7, 8 Decimal expansion of
upper bound for the r-values  
supporting stable period-3 orbits in the logistic equation.  
### [edit] Keywords

The OEIS has its own standard set of four or five letter keywords that
characterize each sequence:[2]

  * base The results of the calculation depend on a specific positional base. For example, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 101, 131, 151, 181 ... A002385 are prime numbers regardless of base, but they are palindromic specifically in base 10. Most of them are not palindromic in binary. Some sequences rate this keyword depending on how they're defined. For example, the Mersenne primes 3, 7, 31, 127, 8191, 131071, ... A000668 does not rate "base" if defined as "primes of the form 2^n - 1." However, defined as "repunit primes in binary," the sequence would rate the keyword "base."
  * bref "sequence is too short to do any analysis with", for example, A079243, Number of isomorphism classes of associative non-commutative non-anti-associative anti-commutative closed binary operations on a set of order n.
  * cofr The sequence represents a continued fraction.
  * cons The sequence is a decimal expansion of an important mathematical constant, like e or Ï.
  * core A sequence that is of foundational importance to a branch of mathematics, such as the prime numbers, the Fibonacci sequence, etc.
  * dead This keyword used for erroneous sequences that have appeared in papers or books, or for duplicates of existing sequences. For example, A088552 is the same as A000668.
  * dumb One of the more subjective keywords, for "unimportant sequences," which may or may not directly relate to mathematics. A001355, "Mix digits of pi and e." is one example of the former, and A082390, "Numbers on a computer keyboard, read in a spiral." is an example of the latter.
  * easy The terms of the sequence can be easily calculated. Perhaps the sequence most deserving of this keyword is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, ... A000027, where each term is 1 more than the previous term. The keyword "easy" is sometimes given to sequences "primes of the form f(m)" where f(m) is an easily calculated function. (Though even if f(m) is easy to calculate for large m, it might be very difficult to determine if f(m) is prime).
  * eigen A sequence of eigenvalues.
  * fini The sequence is finite, although it might still contain more terms than can be displayed. For example, the sequence field of A105417 shows only about a quarter of all the terms, but a comment notes that the last term is 3888.
  * frac A sequence of either numerators or denominators of a sequence of fractions representing rational numbers. Any sequence with this keyword ought to be cross-referenced to its matching sequence of numerators or denominators, though this may be dispensed with for sequences of Egyptian fractions, such as A069257, where the sequence of numerators would be A000012. This keyword should not be used for sequences of continued fractions, cofr should be used instead for that purpose.
  * full The sequence field displays the complete sequence. If a sequence has the keyword "full," it should also have the keyword "fini." One example of a finite sequence given in full is that of the supersingular primes A002267, of which there are precisely fifteen.
  * hard The terms of the sequence cannot be easily calculated, even with raw number crunching power. This keyword is most often used for sequences corresponding to unsolved problems, such as "How many spheres can touch another sphere of the same size?" A001116 lists the first ten known solutions.
  * less A "less interesting sequence".
  * more More terms of the sequence are wanted. Readers can submit an extension.
  * mult The sequence corresponds to a multiplicative function. Term a(1) should be 1, and term a(mn) can be calculated by multiplying a(m) by a(n) if m and n are coprime. For example, in A046970, a(12) = a(3)a(4) = -8 Ã -3.
  * new For sequences that were added in the last couple of weeks, or had a major extension recently. This keyword is not given a checkbox in the Web form for submitting new sequences, Sloane's program adds it by default where applicable.
  * nice Perhaps the most subjective keyword of all, for "exceptionally nice sequences."
  * nonn The sequence consists of nonnegative integers (it may include zeroes). No distinction is made between sequences that consist of nonnegative numbers only because of the chosen offset (e.g, n3, the cubes, which are all positive from n = 0 forwards) and those that by definition are completely nonnegative (e.g., n2, the squares).
  * obsc The sequence is considered obscure and needs a better definition.
  * probation Sequences that "may be deleted later at the discretion of the editor."
  * sign Some (or all) of the values of the sequence are negative. The entry includes both a Signed field with the signs and a Sequence field consisting of all the values passed through the absolute value function.
  * tabf "An irregular (or funny-shaped) array of numbers made into a sequence by reading it row by row." For example, A071031, "Triangle read by rows giving successive states of cellular automaton generated by "rule 62."
  * tabl A sequence obtained by reading a geometric arrangement of numbers, such as a triangle or square, row by row. The quintessential example is Pascal's triangle read by rows, A007318.
  * uned Sloane has not edited the sequence but believes it could be worth including in the OEIS. The sequence could contain computational or typographical errors. Contributors are invited to ponder the sequence and send Sloane their edition.
  * unkn "Little is known" about the sequence, not even the formula that produces it. For example, A072036, which was presented to an Internet oracle to ponder.
  * walk "Counts walks (or self-avoiding paths)."
  * word Depends on the words of a specific language. For example, zero, one, two, three, four, five, etc., 4, 3, 3, 5, 4, 4, 3, 5, 5, 4, 3, 6, 6, 8, 8, 7, 7, 9, 8, 8 ... A005589, "Number of letters in the English name of n, excluding spaces and hyphens."

Some keywords are mutually exclusive, namely: core and dumb, easy and hard,
full and more, less and nice, and nonn and sign.

### [edit] Offset

The offset is the index of the first term given. For some sequences, the
offset is obvious. For example, if we list the sequence of square numbers as
0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25 ..., the offset is 0; while if we list it as 1, 4, 9, 16,
25 ..., the offset is 1. The default offset is 0, and most sequences in the
OEIS have offset of either 0 or 1. Sequence A073502, the magic constant for
nÃn magic square with prime entries (regarding 1 as a prime) with smallest
row sums, is an example of a sequence with offset 3, and A072171, "Number of
stars of visual magnitude n." is an example of a sequence with offset -1.

Sometimes there can be disagreement over what the initial terms of the
sequence are, and correspondingly what the offset should be. In the case of
the lazy caterer's sequence, the maximum number of pieces you can cut a
pancake into with n cuts, the OEIS gives the sequence as 1, 2, 4, 7, 11, 16,
22, 29, 37, ... A000124, with offset 0, while Mathworld gives the sequence as
2, 4, 7, 11, 16, 22, 29, 37, ... (implied offset 1). It can be argued that
making no cuts to the pancake is technically a number of cuts, namely n = 0.
But it can also be argued that an uncut pancake is irrelevant to the problem.

Although the offset is a required field, some contributors don't bother to
check if the default offset of 0 is appropriate to the sequence they are
sending in.

The internal format actually shows two numbers for the offset. The first is
the number described above, while the second represents the index of the first
entry (counting from 1) that has an absolute value greater than 1. This second
value is used to speed up the process of searching for a sequence. Thus
A000001, which starts 1, 1, 1, 2 with the first entry representing a(1) has 1,
4 as the internal value of the offset field.

### [edit] Author(s)

The author of the sequence is the person who submitted the sequence, even if
the sequence has been known since ancient times. The name of the submitter is
given first name (spelled out in full), middle initial(s) (if applicable) and
last name; this in contrast to the way names are written in the reference
fields. The e-mail of the submitter is also given, with the @ character
replaced by "(AT)". For most sequences after A055000, the author field also
includes the date the submitter sent in the sequence. But when the submitter
is one of the most frequent contributors the author field just has initials;
"njas" for Neil Sloane himself, for example. [3]

## [edit] Searching the OEIS

The previous version of the main look-up page of the OEIS offered three ways
to look up sequences, and the right radio button had to be selected. There was
an advanced look-up page, but its usefulness has been integrated into the main
look-up page in a major redesign of the interface in January 2006.

### [edit] Enter a sequence

Enter a few terms of the sequence, separated by either spaces or commas (or
both).

You can enter negative signs, but they will be ignored. For example, 0, 3, 7,
13, 20, 28, 36, 43, 47, 45, 32, 0, -64, n2 minus the nth Fibonacci number, is
a sequence that is technically not in the OEIS, but the very similar sequence
0, -3, -7, -13, -20, -28, -36, -43, -47, -45, -32, 0, 64, is in the OEIS and
will come up when one searches for its reversed signs counterpart.

However, the search can be forced to match signs by using the prefix "sign:"
in the search string. This is especially useful for sequences like A008836
that consist exclusively of positive and negative ones.

One can enter as little as a single integer or as much as four lines of terms.
Sloane recommends entering six terms, a(2) to a(7), in order to get enough
results, but not too many results. There are cases where entering just one
integer gives precisely one result, such as 6610199 brings up just A133207,
the strobogrammatic primes which are not palindromic). And there are also
cases where one can enter many terms and still not narrow the results down all
that much.

### [edit] Enter a word

Enter a string of alphanumerical characters. Certain characters, like accented
foreign letters, are not allowed. Thus, to search for sequences relating to
ZnÃ¡m's problem, try enter it without the accents: "Znam's problem." The
handling of apostrophes has been greatly improved in the 2006 redesign. The
search strings "Pascal's triangle," "Pascals triangle" and "Pascal triangle"
all give the desired results.

To look up most polygonal numbers by word, try "n-gonal numbers" rather than
"Greek prefix-gonal numbers" (e.g., "47-gonal numbers" instead of
"heptaquartagonal numbers"). Beyond "dodecagonal numbers," word searching with
the Greek prefixes might fail to yield the desired results.

### [edit] Enter a sequence number

Enter the modern OEIS A number of the sequence, with the letter A and with or
without zero-padding. As of 2006, the old M and N sequence numbers will yield
the proper result as search strings, e.g., a search for M0422 will correctly
bring up A006047, the number of entries in nth row of Pascal's triangle not
divisible by 3 (M0422 in the book The Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences) and
not A000422, concatenation of numbers from n down to 1.

### [edit] Searching from a web browser

An OpenSearch compatible web browser (such as Firefox 2.0 or Internet Explorer
7) can have OEIS added to its toolbar based search list by adding a provider
with the following URL:
http://www.research.att.com/~njas/sequences/?q=TEST&language=english One can
then directly enter the sequence, e.g. "1,2,6,24,120" (without quotes) into
the search bar and search OEIS easily.

## [edit] External links

  * The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences

### [edit] Papers on OEIS by Neil Sloane

  * Sloane, N. J. A. (1999), "My favorite integer sequences", in Ding, C.; Helleseth, T.; Niederreiter, H., Sequences and their Applications (Proceedings of SETA '98), London: Springer-Verlag, pp. 103â130 , arÎ§iv:math/0207175.

  * Sloane, N. J. A. (2003), "The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences", Notices of the American Mathematical Society 50 (8): 912â915, http://www.ams.org/notices/200308/comm-sloane.pdf .

### [edit] Other references

  1. ^ Integer Sequence Analysis Mathematica Feature Lists

  * J. Borwein, R. Corless, SIAM Review of ``An Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences by N. J. A. Sloane & Simon Plouffe
  * H. Catchpole, Exploring the number jungle online News in Science Australian Broadcasting Corporation
  * A. Delarte, "Mathematician reaches 100k milestone for online integer archive," The South End, November 11, 2004, page 5
  * B. Hayes, A Question of Numbers, American Scientist January - February 1996
  * I. Peterson, Sequence Puzzles, Science News Online, Vol. 163 (2003), No. 20
  * I. Peterson, Next in Line, Science News Online, November 16, 1996.
  * N. J. A. Sloane, S. Plouffe (1995). The Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences. San Diego: Academic Press. pp. 587\. ISBN 0-12-558630-2. http://www.research.att.com/~njas/sequences/book.html.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On-
Line_Encyclopedia_of_Integer_Sequences"

Categories: Mathematical databases | Integer sequences | Encyclopedias on
science and mathematics | Online encyclopedias

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 March 2009, at 22:27.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



