
# Tat Tvam Asi

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Tat Tvam Asi (Sanskrit: à¤¤à¤¤à¥ à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤®à¥ à¤ à¤¸à¤¿ or
à¤¤à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤®à¤¸à¤¿), a Sanskrit sentence, translating variously to
"Thou art that," "That thou art," or "You are that," is one of the
MahÄvÄkyas (Grand Pronouncements) in Vedantic Hinduism. It originally occurs
in the Chandogya Upanishad 6.8.7, in the dialogue between UddÄlaka and his
son Åvetaketu; it appears at the end of a section, and is repeated at the end
of the subsequent sections as a refrain. The meaning of this saying is that
the Self \- in its original, pure, primordial state - is wholly or partially
identifiable or identical with the Ultimate Reality that is the ground and
origin of all phenomena. The knowledge that this is so characterises the
experience of liberation or salvation that accompanies the Unio Mystica.

Major Vedantic schools offer different interpretations of the phrase Tat
(That) Tvam (You jiva) Asi (Are):

  * Advaita \- absolute equality of 'tat', the Ultimate Reality, Brahman, and 'tvam', the individual self, jiva.
  * Shuddhadvaita \- oneness in "essence" between 'tat' and individual self; but 'tat' is the whole and self is a part.
  * Vishishtadvaita \- identity of individual self as a part of the whole which is 'tat', Brahman.
  * Dvaitadvaita \- equal non-difference and difference between the individual self as a part of the whole which is 'tat'.
  * Dvaita \- âSa atmaa-tat tvam asiâ in Sanskrit is actually âSa atma-atat tvam asiâ or âAtman, thou art not thatâ.
  * Acintya Bheda Abheda \- inconceivable oneness and difference between individual self as a part of the whole which is 'tat'.

## Contents

  * 1 In Advaita
    * 1.1 Who is this 'Thou'?
    * 1.2 That and This
    * 1.3 Brahman minus its MÄyÄ and Ätman minus its avidyÄ are identical
  * 2 In Vishishtadvaita
    * 2.1 Objections to the Advaita interpretation
    * 2.2 Ramanuja on the Mahavakya
    * 2.3 Meaning of the Mahavakya
  * 3 See also
  * 4 External links
  * 5 References

  
## [edit] In Advaita

Tat tvam asi is the MahÄvÄkya (Grand Pronouncement) from Chandogya
Upanishad. The Advaita school of Shankara assigns a fundamental importance to
this MahÄvÄkya and three others of the same kind from three other
Upanishads. This is actually a statement meted out by Sage Äruni to
Shvetaketu, his son. It says literally 'That thou art'. In other words that
Brahman which is the common Reality behind everything in the cosmos is the
same as the essential Divinity, namely the Atman, within you. It is this
identity which is the grand finale of Upanishadic teaching, according to
Advaita. The realisation of this arises only by an intuitive experience and is
totally different from any objective experience. It cannot be inferred from
some other bit of knowledge. To comprehend the meaning an analysis of the
three words in the pronouncement is needed.

### [edit] Who is this 'Thou'?

'Thou' stands for the inherent substratum in each one of us without which our
very existence is out of question. Certainly it is not the body, mind, the
senses, or anything that we call ours. It is the innermost Self, stripped of
all egoic tendencies. It is Ätman.

The entity indicated by the word 'That' according to the notation used in the
Vedas, is Brahman, the transcendent Reality which is beyond everything that is
finite, everything that is conceived or thought about. You cannot give a full
analogy to it and that is why the Vedas say words cannot describe it. It
cannot even be imagined because when there is nothing else other than Brahman
it has to be beyond space and time. We can imagine space without earth,water,
fire and air. But it is next to impossible to imagine something outside space.
Space is the most subtle of the five elemental fundamentals. As we proceed
from the grossest to the subtle, that is, from earth to water, to fire, to
air, and to space the negation of each grosser matter is possible to be
imagined within the framework of the more subtle one. But once we reach the
fifth one, namely space or ÄkÄsha, the negation of that and the conception
of something beyond, where even the space is merged into something more
subtle, is not for the finite mind. The Vedas therefore declare the existence
of this entity and call it 'sat' (existence), also known as Brahman.

### [edit] That and This

The Ätman or the innermost core of our self seems to have an individuality of
its own. So, in saying that it is the same as the unqualified Brahman in the
Infinite Cosmos, we seem to be identifying two things: one that is unlimited
and unconditioned, and one that is limited and conditioned. Whenever someone
says, for instance, that the person B whom you are meeting just now is the
same as the person A whom you saw twenty years ago at such and such a place,
what is actually meant is not the identity of the dresses of the two
personalities of A and B, nor of the features (those of B may be totally
different from A), but of the essential person behind the names. So whenever
such an identity is talked about we have to throw away certain aspects which
are temporarily distinctive or indicative in both and cling on only to those
essentials without which they are not what they are. B and A may have distinct
professions, may have different names, may have different attitudes towards
you or towards a certain issue, or may have an additional identity,
exemplified by, say, having different passports -- but still they are the
same, is what is being asserted by the statement 'B is the same as A'.

### [edit] Brahman minus its MÄyÄ and Ätman minus its avidyÄ are identical

In the same way, when Brahman and Atman are identified by this MahÄvÄkya, we
have to discard those inessential qualities that are only indicative and
therefore extraneous and to explore what commonality or essentialness there is
in them that is being identified. Brahman is the Cause of this Universe. But
this is a predication of Brahman and so is extraneous to the identity we are
talking about. The Self or the Ätman, appears to be limited by an
individuality which keeps it under the spell of ignorance; this is extraneous
to the essentiality of the Ätman. So what is being identified is Brahman,
minus its feature of being the Cause of this Universe and Ätman minus its
limitations of ignorance-cum-delusion. That these two are the same is the
content of the statement 'Tat tvam asi'. The cosmic MÄyÄ is what makes
Brahman the cause of this Universe. The individual avidyÄ (ignorance) is what
makes the Ätman circumscribed and delimited. So the MahÄvÄkya says that
Brahman minus its MÄyÄ and Atman minus its avidyÄ are identical.

## [edit] In Vishishtadvaita

The Vedas form the fundamental source text for everything in Hinduism. Each of
the four Vedas has metaphysical speculations, known as Upanishads, at the end.
Among the various discussions in these Upanishads there are mahavakyas (Grand
pronouncements), which are of foundational import and deep significance. Tat
tvam asi (meaning, That Thou Art) is one such. This is from Chandogya
Upanishad. Different schools of philosophy interpret such fundamental
statements in significantly different ways, so as to be consistent with their
own philosophical thought. Below is the interpretation of the Vishishtadvaita
school.

### [edit] Objections to the Advaita interpretation

The proclamation of Åankaracarya 'Tat Tvam Asi' is correct that both ÄtmÄ
and ParamÄtmÄ are sat-cit-Änanda, meaning qualitative unity of the Soul and
God. However ÄtmÄ, being localized ParamÄtmÄ consequently has localized
consciousness. ParamÄtma, being the reservoir of ÄtmÄ is situated within
every heart is aware of all its localized undivided parts. Therefore 'Tat Tvam
Asi' falls short to understand that the Soul is not equal to the Absolute
Truth in all respects. For example, as a single drop of water has the same
qualities as an ocean of water, so has our consciousness the qualities of
God's consciousness but is proportionally subordinate. Furthermore, if ÄtmÄ
and ParamÄtmÄ were indeed one and the same, it would be possible for any
ordinary person to claim omnipotence, omniscience, and omnipresence in
equivalence to God. Scientifically we know this to be false.

According to Advaita, there are 3 orders of reality:

1\. paramarthika satyam (absolute reality) 2. vyavaharika satyam (empirical
reality) 3. pratibhasika satyam (subjective reality)

"I salute that Govinda who is the extreme limit of happiness, Who is pretty,
cause of causes, primeval, without beginning and a form of time, Who danced
again and again on the head of serpent Kaliya in the river Yamuna, Who is
black in colour, ever present in time and destroys the evil effects of Kali,
And who is the cause of the march of time from the past to the future." -Adi
Sankara Bhagwat Pada

"My dear DevÄ«, sometimes I preach MÄyÄvÄdÄ« philosophy for those who are
engrossed in the mode of ignorance. But if a person in the mode of goodness
happens to hear this MÄyÄvÄdÄ« philosophy, he falls down, for when I preach
this MÄyÄvÄdÄ« philosophy, I say that the living entity and the Supreme
Lord are one and the same." -Lord Åiva, Padma-PurÄna

### [edit] Ramanuja on the Mahavakya

In the expression 'Blue Lotus' for example, the two attributes of 'blueness'
and 'lotus nature' both inhere in a common substratum without losing their
individuality. Such subsistence of many attributes in a common substratum is
the correct apposition (samÄnÄdhikaranya), rather than the mere apposition
as propounded by the advaita school. Direct meanings of the expressions should
be taken, simultaneously fulfilling the conditions of SamÄnÄdhikaranya.

### [edit] Meaning of the Mahavakya

The mighty Iswara, who is the indweller in the cosmic Body is also the
indweller in every Jiva. Every Jiva individually is the body of Isvara, just
as the Cosmos as a whole is. The 'Tat' of the statement refers to Iswara who
resides in the Cosmic Body and the 'Tvam' refers to the same Iswara who
indwells the Jiva and has got the Jiva as the body. All the bodies, the Cosmic
and the individual, are held in adjectival relationship (aprthak-siddhi) in
the one Isvara. Tat Tvam Asi declares that oneness of Isvara.

## [edit] See also

  * Vedanta
  * Brahman
  * Jiva
  * Soham (Sanskrit)

## [edit] External links

  * [1]
  * Mahavakyas
  * Chandogya Uanishad
  * Chandogya Upanishad
  * Tat tvam asi, a blog entry

## [edit] References

  * Sri Vidyaranya: Panchadashi. Ed. in Tamil with notes by Swami Gnanananda Bharati. Gnanananda Bharati Publications Trust, Madurai, 1972.
  * S. Radhakrishnan: The Principal Upanishads.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tat_Tvam_Asi"

Categories: Hindu philosophical concepts | Robert M. Pirsig

Hidden categories: Articles containing Sanskrit language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 February 2009, at 19:40.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



