
# Black swan theory

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

    For Taleb's book on the subject, see The Black Swan.
<IMG>

<IMG>

The Black Swan (Cygnus atratus)

The Black Swan theory (in Nassim Nicholas Taleb's version) refers to a large-
impact, hard-to-predict, and rare event beyond the realm of normal
expectations. Unlike the philosophical "black swan problem", the "Black Swan"
theory (capitalized) refers only to events of large consequence and their
dominant role in history. Black Swan events may also be called outliers.

## Contents

  * 1 Background
  * 2 Coping with Black Swan Events
  * 3 Identifying a Black Swan Event
  * 4 Non-philosophical epistemological approach
  * 5 See also
    * 5.1 Books by Taleb
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Background

The theory was described by Nassim Nicholas Taleb in his 2007 book The Black
Swan. Taleb regards many scientific discoveries as "black swans" â
undirected and unpredicted. He gives the rise of the Internet, the personal
computer, World War I, and the September 11, 2001 attacks as examples of Black
Swan events.[1][2]

The term Black Swan comes from the assumption that 'All swans are white'. In
that context, a black swan was a metaphor for something that could not exist.
The 17th Century discovery of black swans in Australia metamorphosed the term
to connote that the perceived impossibility actually came to pass. Taleb notes
that John Stuart Mill first used the Black Swan narrative to discuss
falsification.

## [edit] Coping with Black Swan Events

The main idea in Taleb's book is not to try to predict Black Swan events, but
to build robustness to the negative ones, while being able to exploit positive
ones. Taleb contends that banks and trading firms are very vulnerable to
hazardous Black Swan events and are exposed to losses beyond that predicted by
their defective models.

## [edit] Identifying a Black Swan Event

Based on the author's criteria:

  1. The event is a surprise.
  2. The event has a major impact.

After the fact, it is usually the case that the event is rationalized by
hindsight, as if it was expected to occur.

## [edit] Non-philosophical epistemological approach

Taleb's black swan is different from the earlier (philosophical) versions of
the problem as it concerns a phenomenon with specific empirical/statistical
properties which he calls "the fourth quadrant".[3] Before Taleb, those who
dealt with the notion of the improbable, like Hume, Mill and Popper, focused
on the problem of induction in logic, specifically that of drawing general
conclusions from specific observations. Taleb's Black Swan has a central and
unique attribute: the high impact. His claim is that almost all consequential
events in history come from the unexpectedâwhile humans convince themselves
that these events are explainable in hindsight (bias).

One problem, labeled the ludic fallacy by Taleb, is the belief that the
unstructured randomness found in life resembles the structured randomness
found in games. This stems from the assumption that the unexpected can be
predicted by extrapolating from variations in statistics based on past
observations, especially when these statistics are assumed to represent
samples from a bell curve. These concerns are often highly relevant to
financial markets, where major players use value at risk models (which imply
normal distributions) but market return distributions have fat tails.

More generally, decision theory based on a fixed universe or model of possible
outcomes ignores and minimizes the impact of events which are "outside model".
For instance, a simple model of daily stock market returns may include extreme
moves such as Black Monday (1987) but might not model the market breakdowns
following the September 11 attacks. A fixed model considers the "known
unknowns", but ignores the "unknown unknowns".

Taleb notes that other distributions are often more descriptive, such as the
fractal, power law, or scalable distributions; awareness of these might help
to temper expectations.[4] Beyond this, he emphasizes that many events are
simply without precedent, undercutting the basis of this sort of reasoning
altogether. Taleb also argues for the use of counterfactual reasoning when
considering risk.[5][6]

## [edit] See also

  * Taleb Distribution
  * List of cognitive biases
  * Quasi-empiricism in mathematics
  * The Long Tail
  * Randomness
  * Force majeure
  * Uncertainty
  * Kurtosis risk

### [edit] Books by Taleb

  * Fooled by Randomness
  * The Black Swan
  * Dynamic Hedging - Managing vanilla and Exotic options

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Nassim Nicholas Taleb, "[1]"
  2. ^ Â« Nassim Nicholas Taleb - What is a "Black Swan?" Â», peoplestar.co.uk, 2008-12-21.
  3. ^ The Fourth Quadrant and The Limits of Statistics
  4. ^ Andrew Gelman, Columbia Univ, "Statistical Modeling, Causal Inference, and Social Science"
  5. ^ Nassim Nicholas Taleb, NY Times, "The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable" (First Chapter)
  6. ^ ANALYSIS: Mispriced risk tests market faith in a prized formula by Anuj Gangahar (New York), Financial Times. 16 April 2008

## [edit] External links

  * The Fourth Quadrant and The Limits of Statistics -Taleb's idea on the limits of statistics
  * The Black Swan Theory of Chance \- A treatise regarding unpredictable aspects of life. Guardian Newspapers, August 2008.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_swan_theory"

Categories: Philosophy of mathematics | Philosophical theories | Mathematical
finance

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 02:25 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



