
# Geodesic

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

It has been suggested that geodesic (general relativity) be merged into this
article or section. (Discuss)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

A geodesic triangle on the sphere. The geodesics are great circle arcs.

In mathematics, a geodesic /ËdÊiÉËdÉsÉªk, -ËdisÉªk/[jee-uh-des-ik, -dee-
sik] is a generalization of the notion of a "straight line" to "curved
spaces". In the presence of a metric, geodesics are defined to be (locally)
the shortest path between points on the space. In the presence of an affine
connection, geodesics are defined to be curves whose tangent vectors remain
parallel if they are transported along it.

The term "geodesic" comes from geodesy, the science of measuring the size and
shape of Earth; in the original sense, a geodesic was the shortest route
between two points on the Earth's surface, namely, a segment of a great
circle. The term has been generalized to include measurements in much more
general mathematical spaces; for example, in graph theory, one might consider
a geodesic between two vertices/nodes of a graph.

Geodesics are of particular importance in general relativity, as they describe
the motion of inertial test particles.

## Contents

  * 1 Introduction
    * 1.1 Examples
  * 2 Metric geometry
  * 3 (Pseudo-)Riemannian geometry
    * 3.1 Existence and uniqueness
    * 3.2 Geodesic flow
    * 3.3 Geodesic spray
  * 4 Affine and projective geodesics
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Introduction

The shortest path between two points in a curved space can be found by writing
the equation for the length of a curve (a function f from an open interval of
R to the manifold), and then minimizing this length using the calculus of
variations. This has some minor technical problems, because there is an
infinite dimensional space of different ways to parametrize the shortest path.
It is simpler to demand not only that the curve locally minimize length but
also that it is parametrized "with constant velocity", meaning that the
distance from f(s) to f(t) along the geodesic is proportional to |sât|.
Equivalently, a different quantity may be defined, termed the energy of the
curve; minimizing the energy leads to the same equations for a "constant
velocity" geodesic. Intuitively, one can understand this second formulation by
noting that an elastic band stretched between two points will contract its
length, and in so doing will minimize its energy; the resulting shape of the
band is a geodesic.

In Riemannian geometry geodesics are not the same as "shortest curves" between
two points, though the two concepts are closely related. The difference is
that geodesics are only locally the shortest distance between points, and are
parametrized with "constant velocity". Going the "long way round" on a great
circle between two points on a sphere is a geodesic but not the shortest path
between the points. The map tât2 from the unit interval to itself gives the
shortest path between 0 and 1, but is not a geodesic because the velocity of
the corresponding motion of a point is not constant.

Geodesics are commonly seen in the study of Riemannian geometry and more
generally metric geometry. In relativistic physics, geodesics describe the
motion of point particles under the influence of gravity alone. In particular,
the path taken by a falling rock, an orbiting satellite, or the shape of a
planetary orbit are all geodesics in curved space-time. More generally, the
topic of sub-Riemannian geometry deals with the paths that objects may take
when they are not free, and their movement is constrained in various ways.

This article presents the mathematical formalism involved in defining,
finding, and proving the existence of geodesics, in the case of Riemannian and
pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. The article geodesic (general relativity)
discusses the special case of general relativity in greater detail.

### [edit] Examples

The most familiar examples are the straight lines in Euclidean geometry. On a
sphere, the images of geodesics are the great circles. The shortest path from
point A to point B on a sphere is given by the shorter piece of the great
circle passing through A and B. If A and B are antipodal points (like the
North pole and the South pole), then there are infinitely many shortest paths
between them.

## [edit] Metric geometry

In metric geometry, a geodesic is a curve which is everywhere locally a
distance minimizer. More precisely, a curve Î³: I â M from an interval I of
the reals to the metric space M is a geodesic if there is a constant v â¥ 0
such that for any t â I there is a neighborhood J of t in I such that for
any t1, t2 â J we have

    d\(\\gamma\(t_1\),\\gamma\(t_2\)\)=v|t_1-t_2|.\\,
This generalizes the notion of geodesic for Riemannian manifolds. However, in
metric geometry the geodesic considered is often equipped with natural
parametrization, i.e. in the above identity v = 1 and

    d\(\\gamma\(t_1\),\\gamma\(t_2\)\)=|t_1-t_2|.\\,
If the last equality is satisfied for all t1, t2 âI, the geodesic is called
a minimizing geodesic or shortest path.

In general, a metric space may have no geodesics, except constant curves. At
the other extreme, any two points in a length metric space are joined by a
minimizing sequence of rectifiable paths, although this minimizing sequence
need not converge to a geodesic.

## [edit] (Pseudo-)Riemannian geometry

A geodesic on a smooth manifold M with an affine connection â is defined as
a curve Î³(t) such that parallel transport along the curve preserves the
tangent vector to the curve, so

     \\nabla_{\\dot\\gamma} \\dot\\gamma= 0
at each point along the curve, where \\dot\\gamma is the derivative with
respect to t.

Using local coordinates on M, we can write the geodesic equation (using the
summation convention) as

    \\frac{d^2x^\\lambda }{dt^2} + \\Gamma^{\\lambda}_{~\\mu \\nu }\\frac{dx^\\mu }{dt}\\frac{dx^\\nu }{dt} = 0\\ ,
where xÎ¼(t) are the coordinates of the curve Î³(t) and \\Gamma^{\\lambda
}_{~\\mu \\nu } are the Christoffel symbols of the connection â. This is
just an ordinary differential equation for the coordinates. It has a unique
solution, given an initial position and an initial velocity. Therefore, from
the point of view of classical mechanics, geodesics can be thought of as
trajectories of free particles in a manifold.Indeed, the equation
\\nabla_{\\dot\\gamma} \\dot\\gamma= 0 means that the acceleration of the
curve has no components in the direction of the surface (and therefore it is
perpendicular to the tangent plane of the surface at each point of the curve).
So, the motion is completely determinded by the bending of the surface. This
is also the idea of the general relativity where particles move on geodesics
and the bending is caused by the gravity.

Geodesics for a (pseudo-)Riemannian manifold M are defined to be geodesics for
its Levi-Civita connection. In a Riemannian manifold a geodesic is the same as
a curve that locally minimizes the length

    l\(\\gamma\)=\\int_\\gamma \\sqrt{  g\(\\dot\\gamma\(t\),\\dot\\gamma\(t\)\) }\\,dt\\ ,
and is parametrized so that the tangent vector has constant length. Geodesics
can also be defined as extremal curves for the following action energy
functional

    S\(\\gamma\)=\\frac{1}{2}\\int g\(\\dot\\gamma\(t\),\\dot\\gamma\(t\)\)\\,dt,
where g is a Riemannian (or pseudo-Riemannian) metric. In pure mathematics,
this quantity would generally be referred to as an energy. The geodesic
equation can then be obtained as the EulerâLagrange equations of motion for
this action.

In a similar manner, one can obtain geodesics as a solution of the
HamiltonâJacobi equations, with (pseudo-)Riemannian metric taken as
Hamiltonian. See Riemannian manifolds in Hamiltonian mechanics for further
details.

### [edit] Existence and uniqueness

The local existence and uniqueness theorem for geodesics states that geodesics
on a smooth manifold with an affine connection exist, and are unique; this is
a variant of the Frobenius theorem. More precisely:

    For any point p in M and for any vector V in TpM (the tangent space to M at p) there exists a unique geodesic \\gamma \\, : I â M such that 
    \\gamma\(0\) = p \\, and
    \\dot\\gamma\(0\) = V,
    where I is a maximal open interval in R containing 0.
In general, I may not be all of R as for example for an open disc in R2. The
proof of this theorem follows from the theory of ordinary differential
equations, by noticing that the geodesic equation is a second-order ODE.
Existence and uniqueness then follow from the Picard-LindelÃ¶f theorem for the
solutions of ODEs with prescribed initial conditions. Î³ depends smoothly on
both p and V.

### [edit] Geodesic flow

Geodesic flow is an \\mathbb R-action on tangent bundle T(M) of a manifold M
defined in the following way

    G^t\(V\)=\\dot\\gamma_V\(t\)
where t\\in \\mathbb R, V\\in T\(M\) and Î³V denotes the geodesic with initial
data \\dot\\gamma_V\(0\)=V.

It defines a Hamiltonian flow on (co)tangent bundle with the
(pseudo-)Riemannian metric as the Hamiltonian. In particular it preserves the
(pseudo-)Riemannian metric g, i.e.

    g(Gt(V),Gt(V)) = g(V,V).
That makes possible to define geodesic flow on unit tangent bundle UT(M) of
the Riemannian manifold M when the geodesic Î³V is of unit speed.

A closed orbit of the geodesic flow corresponds to a closed geodesic on M.

### [edit] Geodesic spray

The geodesic flow defines a family of curves in the tangent bundle. The
derivatives of these curves define a vector field on the total space of the
tangent bundle, known as the geodesic spray.

## [edit] Affine and projective geodesics

In the presence of a metric, geodesics are (locally) the length-minimizing
curves. However, even if a manifold lacks a metric, geodesics are still well-
defined in the presence of an affine connection. A curve in such a manifold is
a geodesic if its tangent vector remains parallel to the curve when it is
transported along it. Geodesics defined in this way carry a preferred class of
affine parametrizations. These are those parametrizations for which

    \\nabla_{\\dot{\\gamma}\(t\)}\\dot{\\gamma}\(t\) = 0.
This equation is invariant under affine reparametrizations; that is,
parametrizations of the form

    t\\mapsto at+b
where a and b are constant real numbers.

An affine connection is determined by its family of affinely parameterized
geodesics, up to torsion (Spivak 1999, Chapter 6, Addendum I). The torsion
itself does not, in fact, affect the family of geodesics, since the geodesic
equation depends only on the symmetric part of the connection. More precisely,
if \\nabla, \\bar{\\nabla} are two connections such that the difference tensor

    D\(X,Y\) = \\nabla_XY-\\bar{\\nabla}_XY
is skew-symmetric, then \\nabla and \\bar{\\nabla} have the same geodesics,
with the same affine parameterizations. Furthermore, there is a unique
connection having the same geodesics as \\nabla, but with vanishing torsion.

Geodesics without a particular parameterization are described by a projective
connection.

## [edit] See also

  * Basic introduction to the mathematics of curved spacetime
  * Clairaut's relation
  * Closed geodesic
  * Complex geodesic
  * Differential geometry of curves
  * Exponential map
  * Geodesic dome
  * Geodesic (general relativity)
  * Geodesics as Hamiltonian flows
  * Hopf-Rinow theorem
  * Intrinsic metric
  * Jacobi field
  * Quasigeodesic
  * Solving the geodesic equations
  * Barnes Wallis, who applied geodesics to aircraft structural design in the design of the Vickers Wellesley and Vickers Wellington aircraft, and the R100 airship.

  * Zoll surface

## [edit] References

  * Adler, Ronald; Bazin, Maurice; Schiffer, Menahem (1975), Introduction to General Relativity (2nd ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, ISBN 978-0-07-000423-8 . See chapter 2.
  * Abraham, Ralph H.; Marsden, Jerrold E. (1978), Foundations of mechanics, London: Benjamin-Cummings, ISBN 978-0-8053-0102-1 . See section 2.7.
  * Jost, JÃ¼rgen (2002), Riemannian Geometry and Geometric Analysis, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-42627-1 . See section 1.4.
  * Landau, L. D.; Lifshitz, E. M. (1975), Classical Theory of Fields, Oxford: Pergamon, ISBN 978-0-08-018176-9 . See section 87.
  * Misner, Charles W.; Thorne, Kip; Wheeler, John Archibald (1973), Gravitation, W. H. Freeman, ISBN 978-0-7167-0344-0
  * OrtÃ­n, TomÃ¡s (2004), Gravity and strings, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-82475-0 . Note especially pages 7 and 10.
  * Spivak, Michael (1999), A Comprehensive introduction to differential geometry (Volume 2), Houston, TX: Publish or Perish, ISBN 978-0-914098-71-3
  * Weinberg, Steven (1972), Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and Applications of the General Theory of Relativity, New York: John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-471-92567-5 . See chapter 3.

## [edit] External links

  * Caltech Tutorial on Relativity â A nice, simple explanation of geodesics with accompanying animation.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geodesic"

Categories: Fundamental physics concepts | Riemannian geometry | Metric
geometry | Hamiltonian mechanics

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since July 2008 | All articles to be
merged

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * æè¨
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 17 March 2009, at 15:37.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



