
# Epiphenomenalism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Sister project Look up epiphenomenalism in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
In philosophy of mind, epiphenomenalism, also known as 'Type-E Dualism' is a
view according to which some or all mental states are mere epiphenomena (side-
effects or by-products) of physical states of the world. Thus,
epiphenomenalism denies that the mind (as in its states, not its processing)
has any influence on the body or any other part of the physical world: while
mental states are caused by physical states, mental states do not have any
influence on physical states. Some versions of epiphenomenalism claim that all
mental states are inert, while others claim that only some mental states are
inert. The latter version often claims that only those types of mental states
that are especially difficult to account for scientifically are epiphenomenal,
such as qualitative mental states (e.g., the sensation of pain).

## Contents

  * 1 Background
    * 1.1 Arguments for
  * 2 Some critical responses
    * 2.1 Arguments against
  * 3 Notes
  * 4 References and further reading
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Background

The history of epiphenomenalism goes back to the post-Cartesian attempt to
solve the riddle of Cartesian dualism, ie, of how mind and body could
interact. La Mettrie, Leibniz and Spinoza all in their own way began this way
of thinking. The idea that even if the animal were conscious nothing would be
added to the production of behavior, even in animals of the human type, was
first voiced by La Mettrie (1745), and then by Cabanis (1802), and was further
explicated by Hodgson (1870) and Huxley(1874).[1] Huxley (1874) likened mental
phenomena to the whistle on a steam locomotive. However, epiphenomenalism
flourished primarily as it found a niche among methodological or scientific
behaviorism. In the early 1900s scientific behaviorists such as Ivan Pavlov,
John B. Watson, and B. F. Skinner began the attempt to uncover laws describing
the relationship between stimuli and responses, without reference to inner
mental phenomena. Instead of adopting a form of eliminativism or mental
fictionalism, positions that deny that inner mental phenomena exists, a
behaviorist was able to adopt epiphenomenalism in order to allow for the
existence of mind. However, by the 1960s, scientific behaviourism met
substantial difficulties and eventually gave way to the cognitive revolution.
Participants in that revolution, such as Jerry Fodor, reject epiphenomenalism
and insist upon the efficacy of the mind. Fodor even speaks of
"epiphobia"âfear that one is becoming an epiphenomenalist.

However, since the cognitive revolution, there have been several who have
argued for a version of epiphenomenalism. These more recent versions, however,
maintain that only the subjective, qualitative aspects of mental states are
epiphenomenal. Imagine both Pierre and a robot eating a cupcake. Unlike the
robot, Pierre is conscious of eating the cupcake while the behavior is under
way. This subjective experience is often called a quale (plural qualia), and
it describes the private "raw feel" or the subjective "what-it-is-like" that
is the inner accompaniment of many mental states. Thus, while Pierre and the
robot are both doing the same thing, only Pierre has the inner conscious
experience.

Frank Jackson (1982), for example, once espoused the following view:

â I am what is sometimes known as a "qualia freak". I think that there are
certain features of bodily sensations especially, but also of certain
perceptual experiences, which no amount of purely physical information
includes. Tell me everything physical there is to tell about what is going on
in a living brain... you won't have told me about the hurtfulness of pains,
the itchiness of itches, pangs of jealousy....[2] â  
According to epiphenomenalism, mental states like Pierre's pleasurable
experienceâor, at any rate, their distinctive qualiaâare just
epiphenomena; they are side-effects or by-products of physical processes in
the body. Pierre, according to epiphenomenalism, might as well be a robot or a
zombie, because conscious mental states do not affect his behavior. If Pierre
takes a second bite, it is not caused by his pleasure from the first; If
Pierre says, "That was good, so I will take another bite", his speech act is
not caused by the preceding pleasure. The conscious experiences that accompany
brain processes are causally impotent.

### [edit] Arguments for

A large body of neurophysiological data seems to support epiphenomenalism.
Some of the oldest such data is the Bereitschaftspotential or "readiness
potential" in which electrical activity related to voluntary actions can be
recorded up to two seconds before the subject is aware of taking a decision to
perform the action. More recently Benjamin Libet et al (1979) have shown that
it can take 0.5 seconds before a stimulus becomes part of conscious experience
even though subjects can respond to the stimulus in reaction time tests within
200 milliseconds. Recent research on the Event Related Potential also shows
that conscious experience does not occur until the late phase of the potential
(P3 or later) that occurs 300 milliseconds or more after the event. In
Bregman's Auditory Continuity Illusion, where a pure tone is followed by
broadband noise and the noise is followed by the same pure tone it seems as if
the tone occurs throughout the period of noise. This also suggests a delay for
processing data before conscious experience occurs. Norretranders has called
the delay "The User Illusion" implying that we only have the illusion of
conscious control, most actions being controlled automatically by non-
conscious parts of the brain with the conscious mind relegated to the role of
spectator.

The scientific data seem to support the idea that conscious experience is
created by non-conscious processes in the brain (i.e., there is subliminal
processing that becomes conscious experience). These results have been
interpreted to suggest that people are capable of action before conscious
experience of the decision to act occurs. Some argue that this supports
epiphenomenalism, since it shows that the feeling of making a decision to act
is actually an epiphenomenon; the action happens before the decision, so the
decision did not cause the action to occur.

## [edit] Some critical responses

The philosophical behaviorists (as opposed to scientific behaviourists) reject
epiphenomenalism on the grounds that it is, in Gilbert Ryle's phrase, a
"category mistake." Just as there is no Cartesian "ghost in the machine",
there are no ghostly events that accompany behavior in an inner theater.
Consciousness belongs not to the category of objects of reference, but rather
to the category of ways of doing things. To be attentive is to do things with
focus and care, not for something to be happening in the ghostly theater that
Ryle lampooned as a dualist dogma.

Functionalists chart a different course, accepting that there is a system of
mental events mediating stimulus and response, but asserting that this system
is "topic neutral" and capable of being realized in various ways. The topic
neutrality of the mind implies the denial of epiphenomenalism, which, as a
kind of property dualism, fixes consciousness as a non-neutral, non-physical
topic.

Eliminative materialists, on the other hand, assert that the concept of mind
aims to fix reference to a non-physical topic; so they disagree with the
philosophical behaviorist analysis, as well as the functionalist analysis.
Eliminative materialism holds, however, that this dualistic aim of "folk
psychology" is a fatal error built into mental concepts. So it would be better
to eliminate the concept of mind, and concepts implicated in it such as desire
and belief, in favor of an emerging neurocomputational account. (A more
moderate eliminativist position would maintain what J. L. Mackie called an
error theory, stripping false beliefs away from the problematic concepts but
not eliminating them, leaving intact a legitimate core of meaning.)

### [edit] Arguments against

Benjamin Libet's results are quoted in favor of epiphenomenalism, but he
believes subjects still have a "conscious veto", since the readiness potential
does not invariably lead to an action. In Freedom Evolves, Daniel Dennett
argues that the no-free-will conclusion is based on dubious assumptions about
the location of consciousness[page needed].

Many argue that data such as the Bereitschaftspotential undermine, rather than
support, epiphenomenalism. Such experiments rely on the subject reporting the
point in time when conscious experience apparently occurs, which relies on the
subject being able to consciously perform an action, and on conscious
experience being effective enough to prompt a response. Such a premise
contradicts epiphenomenalism, which claims that conscious experience has no
effects and therefore cannot be measured. Hence, so the argument goes, any
experiment that detects whether or when conscious experience occurs argues
strongly against, not for, epiphenomenalism.[3]

Another criticism of epiphenomenalism is that the presence of the theory of
epiphenomenalism seems to contradict the very idea. Most would agree that
thinking is a mental process, but, if epiphenomenalism is true, how could
someone ever express the idea of epiphenomenalism? It would be impossible,
because this "expressing" would require the banned connection between mind and
behavior. If epiphenomenalism is true and thinking is a mental process, then
its truth is ineffable. So in the example above, Pierre cannot convey his
pleasure.

Additionally, many[who?] argue that the history of epiphenomenalism is
revealing. It was concocted as a potential solution to a problem facing
dualism: By what mechanism does the mental realm affect the physical?
Epiphenomenalism provides an out: The mental realm simply doesn't affect the
physical, so the issue is moot. Because it arose out of an attempt to save
another conjecture rather than by its own merits, epiphenomenalism can be seen
as suspiciously motivated.

Green (2003) has argued that epiphenomenalism does not even provide a
satisfactory âoutâ from the problem of interaction posed by substance
dualism. According to Green, epiphenomenalism implies a one-way form of
interactionism that is just as hard to conceive of as the two-way form
embodied in substance dualism. If it is a problem how mental events can
influence physical events, how is it any less of a problem how physical events
can influence mental ones? Green suggests that the assumption that it is less
of a problem may arise from the unexamined belief that physical events have
some sort of primacy over mental ones.

If epiphenomenalism is really nothing but a way of rescuing dualism, then the
whole issue can be avoided by rejecting dualism. For instance, if the mind is
identical to the brain, it must have the same causal powers as the brain, by
Leibniz's law.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Gallagher, S. 2006. Where s the action1' Epiphenomenalism and the problem of free will. In W. Banks, S. Pockett, and S. Gallagher. Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? An Investigation of the Nature of Intuition (109-124). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
  2. ^ Jackson, 1982, p. 127.
  3. ^ Flanagan, O. Consciousness Reconsidered, MIT press, 1994

## [edit] References and further reading

  * Chalmers, David. (1996) The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
  * Dennett, Daniel. (2003) Freedom evolves.
  * Green, Celia. (2003) The Lost Cause: Causation and the Mind-Body Problem, Oxford: Oxford Forum.
  * Huxley, Thomas. (1874) "On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata, and its History", The Fortnightly Review, n.s. 16, pp. 555-580. Reprinted in Method and Results: Essays by Thomas H. Huxley (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1898).
  * Jackson, Frank. (1982) "Epiphenomenal Qualia", The Philosophical Quarterly, 32, pp. 127-136. Online text
  * James, William. (1890) The Principles of Psychology, Henry Holt And Company. Online text
  * Libet, Benjamin, E. W. Wright, B. Feinstein, and D. K. Pearl, "Subjective Referral of the Timing for a Conscious Sensory Experience", Brain, 194, pp. 191-221.
  * Libet, Benjamin. (1985) "Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Conscious Will in Voluntary Action", Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8, pp. 529-566.
  * Robinson, William. (2003) "Epiphenomenalism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward Zalta (ed.). Online text
  * Walter, Sven. (2007) "Epiphenomenalism," The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, James Fieser and Bradley Dowden (eds.). Online text

## [edit] See also

  * Problem of mental causation
  * Philosophy of mind
  * Dualism (philosophy of mind)
  * Qualia
  * Frank Jackson
  * George Santayana

## [edit] External links

  * Epiphenomenalism entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy by William Robinson.
  * Epiphenomenalism \- an article by Sven Walter in The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
  * Wikibook on consciousness
  * Exit Epiphenomenalism \- Analysis by Rivas and Van Dongen.
  * Strange Ideas

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epiphenomenalism"

Categories: Dualism | Theories of mind

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations | All
pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded
phrases since July 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * Ãslenska
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Suomi
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 20:41 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



