
# Q document

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (April 2009)  
The Q document or Q (from the German Quelle, "source") is a postulated lost
textual source for the Gospel of Matthew and Gospel of Luke. It is a
theoretical collection of Jesus' sayings, written in Greek. Although many
scholars believe that "Q" was a real document, no actual document or fragment
has been found.

## Contents

  * 1 Introduction
  * 2 The Synoptic Gospels
  * 3 The synoptic problem
  * 4 Markan priority and the Triple Tradition
  * 5 The two-source hypothesis and the double tradition
  * 6 The nature of the Q Document
  * 7 Sayings gospels and the Gospel of Thomas
    * 7.1 Papias's mention of a Q-like sayings gospel
  * 8 The case for a common second source
  * 9 The case against a common second source
  * 10 History of the Q hypothesis
  * 11 Notable contents of Q
  * 12 See also
  * 13 References
  * 14 External links

  
## [edit] Introduction

The recognition of 19th-century New Testament scholars that Matthew and Luke
share much material not found in their generally believed common source, the
Gospel of Mark, has suggested a second common source, termed the Q document.
This hypothetical lost text â also called the Q Gospel, the Sayings Gospel
Q, the Secret of Q, the Synoptic Sayings Source, the Q Manuscript, and (in the
19th century) The Logia â seems most likely to have comprised a collection
of Jesus' sayings. Recognizing such a Q document is one of two key elements in
the "two-source hypothesis" alongside the priority of Mark.

The two-source hypothesis is the most widely accepted solution to the Synoptic
Problem, which concerns the literary relationships between and among the first
three canonical gospels (the Gospels of Mark, Matthew, and Luke), known as the
Synoptic Gospels. Similarity in word choices and event placement shows an
interrelationship. The synoptic problem concerns how this interrelation came
to pass, as well as the nature of this interrelationship. According to the
two-source hypothesis, Matthew and Luke both used the Gospel of Mark,
independently of one another. This necessitates the existence of a
hypothetical third source in order to explain the double tradition material
where there is agreement between Matthew and Luke that is not in Mark. This
hypothetical source is named Q out of convenience.

## [edit] The Synoptic Gospels

Main article: Synoptic Gospels

Almost all of Mark's content is found in Matthew, and much of Mark is
similarly found in Luke. Additionally, Matthew and Luke have a large amount of
material in common that is not found in Mark.

Of the many gospels written in antiquity, only four gospels came to be
accepted as part of the New Testament: the gospels of Mark, Matthew, Luke, and
John. The gospels of Mark, Matthew, and Luke are very similar to one another.
These gospels often recount the same stories about Jesus, generally follow the
same sequence, and use similar wording.

In contrast, it has long been recognized that the Gospel of John differs
significantly from the other three canonical gospels in theme, content, time
duration, order of events, and style. Clement of Alexandria famously
summarized the unique character of the Gospel of John by stating "John last of
all, conscious that the 'bodily' facts had been set forth in those [earlier]
Gospels ... composed a 'spiritual' Gospel." [1]

"Synoptic" is a Greek word meaning "one glimpse" or "one look", referring to
the idea that the events seem to have been seen with one pair of eyes (hence
the similarities between the gospels). In light of the many commonalities
between the gospels of Mark, Matthew, and Luke, these three works are known as
the "Synoptic Gospels".

The synoptic gospels feature an enormous number of parallels between them.
About 80% of the verses in Mark have parallels in both Matthew and Luke[2]
Since this material is common to all three gospels, it is known as the Triple
Tradition. The Triple Tradition is largely narrative but contains some
"sayings material".

Additionally, a substantial block of material is found in both Matthew and
Luke (but absent from Mark). About 25% of the verses in Matthew have parallels
in Luke (but not in Mark). This material which is common to Matthew and Luke
is known as the Double Tradition.

## [edit] The synoptic problem

<IMG>

<IMG>

Two parallel passages from Matthew and Luke. Identical wording is rendered in
red.[3]

Main article: Synoptic problem

The relationships between the three synoptic gospels go beyond mere similarity
in viewpoint. The gospels often recount the same stories, usually in the same
exact order, sometimes using the same exact words. Some sections are repeated
nearly verbatim.

Scholars note that the similarities between Mark, Matthew, and Luke are too
great to be accounted for by mere coincidence.[4] Since multiple eyewitnesses
reporting the same events will never relate a story using exactly the same
word-for-word recounting, scholars and theologians have long assumed that
there was some literary relationship between the three synoptic gospels.

The precise nature of the relationships between the gospels of Mark, Matthew,
and Luke is known as the Synoptic Problem. The recognition of the question,
and attempts to resolve it, date to antiquity. For example, Augustine of
Hippo, a 5th-century bishop, tried to explain the relationships between the
synoptic gospels by proposing that perhaps Matthew was written first, then
Mark was written using Matthew as a source, and finally Luke was written using
Matthew and Mark as sources. Although this specific solution has fallen out of
favor with modern scholars, it represents one of the earliest and most
influential proposed solutions to the synoptic problem.

## [edit] Markan priority and the Triple Tradition

<IMG>

<IMG>

Markan priority hypothesizes Mark was used as a source for Matthew and Luke.

Main article: Markan priority

One of the first steps towards the solution of the synoptic problem was to
note that Mark appeared to be the earliest of the four canonical gospels.

Several lines of evidence suggest that this is so. Mark is the shortest of the
gospels â suggesting that the longer gospels took Mark as a source and added
additional material to it (as opposed to Mark taking longer gospels but
deleting substantial chunks of material). Mark's use of diction and grammar is
less sophisticated than that found in Matthew and Luke â suggesting that
Matthew and Luke "cleaned up" Mark's wording (as opposed to Mark intentionally
"dumbing down" more sophisticated use of language). Mark regularly included
Aramaic quotes (translating them into Greek), whereas Matthew and Luke do not.

For these reasons and others, most scholars accept that the Gospel of Mark was
written first, and the Gospels Matthew and Luke use Mark as a source. If
Markan priority is correct, the triple tradition would be explained as those
parts of Mark which both Matthew and Luke chose to copy.

## [edit] The two-source hypothesis and the double tradition

Main article: Two-source hypothesis

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Gospels of Matthew and Luke were written independently, each using Mark
and a second document called "Q" as a source.

Markan priority, while explaining most of the similarities between the three
synoptic gospels, is unable to provide a complete solution to the synoptic
problem. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke have much material in common. While
most of that material appears to have been copied from The Gospel of Mark,
some of the material common to Matthew and Luke is not found in Mark.

This material (collectively known as the "double tradition") is often
presented in both Matthew and Luke using very similar wording, and often
presented in the same order. Since this material is absent from Mark, the use
of Mark as a source cannot explain how the same stories, using the same words,
came to be found in both Matthew and Luke.

Some scholars therefore suggest that in addition to using Mark as a source,
Matthew and Luke may have both had access to some second source, which they
both independently used in the creation of their gospels-- hence the name
"two-source hypothesis". This hypothetical second source is referred to as Q
(from the German "Quelle" meaning "source").

The two source hypothesis is currently the most widely accepted solution to
the synoptic problem.

## [edit] The nature of the Q Document

If the two-source hypothesis is correct, then the second source, Q, would
almost certainly have to be a written document. If Q were merely a shared oral
tradition, it could not account for the nearly identical word-for-word
similarities between Matthew and Luke when quoting Q material.

Similarly, it is possible to deduce that the Q document, in the form that
Matthew and Luke had access to, was written in Greek. If Matthew and Luke were
referring to a document that had been written in some other language (for
example Aramaic), it is highly unlikely that two independent translations
would have exactly the same wording.

The Q document must have been composed prior to the Gospels of both Matthew
and Luke. Some scholars even suggest Q may have predated Mark.

The Q document, if it did exist, has since been lost, but scholars believe it
can be partially reconstructed by examining elements common to Matthew and
Luke (but absent from Mark). This reconstructed Q is notable in that it
generally does not describe the events of the life of Jesus: Q does not
mention Jesus' birth, his selection of the 12 disciples, his crucifixion, or
the resurrection. Instead, it appears to be a collection of Jesus' sayings and
teachings.

## [edit] Sayings gospels and the Gospel of Thomas

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
<IMG>

This article or section appears to contain speculation and unjustified claims.  
Information must be verifiable and based on reliable published sources. Please
remove speculation from the article. Please see the discussion on this
article's talk page.  
  * Q appears to be a sayings gospel.

### [edit] Papias's mention of a Q-like sayings gospel

Papias, who worked from about 100-150, is reported to have been the bishop of
Hierapolis.

Papias's writing, (as quoted by Eusebius), discuss a Sayings Gospel. Says
Papias:

    Mark having become the interpreter of Peter, wrote down accurately whatsoever he remembered. It was not, however, in exact order that he related the sayings or deeds of Christ. For he neither heard the Lord nor accompanied Him. But afterwards, as I said, he accompanied Peter, who accommodated his instructions to the necessities [of his hearers], but with no intention of giving a regular narrative of the Lord's sayings. Wherefore Mark made no mistake in thus writing some things as he remembered them. For of one thing he took especial care, not to omit anything he had heard, and not to put anything fictitious into the statements.
It is highly doubtful, however, that the document which Papias describes here
is the same document that is modernly known as the the Gospel of Mark. Unlike
Papias's document, the modernly-known Gospel of Mark is most certainly
chronological, and as such, cannot be the same document which Papias is
describing (although, of course, it is possible that Papias' document could
have served as a source or early version for the modern Gospel of Mark.)[5]

Nonetheless, Papias' statement has been used as evidence to show that Q (or
other Q-like sayings gospels) did exist in Early Christianity.[citation
needed]

## [edit] The case for a common second source

<IMG>

Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any
relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (December 2008)  
The existence of Q follows from the argument that neither Matthew nor Luke is
directly dependent on the other in the double tradition (what New Testament
scholars call the material that Matthew and Luke share that does not appear in
Mark). However, the verbal agreement between Matthew and Luke is so close in
some parts of the double tradition that the only reasonable explanation for
this agreement is common dependence on a written source or sources. Even if
Matthew and Luke are independent (see Markan priority), the Q hypothesis
states that they used a common document. Arguments for Q being a written
document include:

  * Sometimes the exactness in wording is striking, for example, Matthew 6:24 = Luke 16:13 (27 and 28 Greek words respectively); Matthew 7:7â8 = Luke 11:9-10 (24 Greek words each).
  * There is sometimes commonality in order between the two, for example Sermon on the Plain/Sermon on the Mount.
  * The presence of doublets, where Matthew and Luke sometimes present two versions of a similar saying but in different contexts. Doublets may be considered a sign of two written sources.
  * Certain themes, such as the Deuteronomistic view of history, are more prominent in Q than in either Matthew or Luke individually.
  * Luke mentions that he knows of other written sources of Jesus' life, and that he has investigated in order to gather the most information. (Luke 1:1-4)

## [edit] The case against a common second source

<IMG>

Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any
relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (December 2008)  
Austin Farrer [6], Michael Goulder [7] and Mark Goodacre[8] have argued
against Q, maintaining Markan priority, claiming the use of Matthew by Luke.
Other scholars argue against Q because they hold to Matthean priority (see:
Augustinian hypothesis). Their arguments include:

  * There is a "prima facie case" that two documents, both correcting Mark's language, adding birth narratives and a resurrection epilogue, and adding a large amount of "sayings material" are likely to resemble each other, rather than to have such similar scope by coincidence.
  * Specifically, there are 347 instances (by Neirynck's count) where one or more words are added to the Markan text in both Matthew and Luke; these are called the "minor agreements" against Mark. Some 198 instances involve one word, 82 involve two words, 35 three, 16 four, and 16 instances involve five or more words in the extant texts of Matthew and Luke as compared to Markan passages.
  * While supporters say that the discovery of the Gospel of Thomas supports the concept of a "sayings gospel," Mark Goodacre points out that Q has a narrative structure as reconstructed and is not simply a list of sayings.
  * Some make an argument based on the fact that there is no extant copy of Q and that no early church writer makes an unambiguous reference to a Q document.
  * Scholars such as William Farmer maintain that Matthew was the first Gospel, Luke the second, and that Mark abbreviated Matthew and Luke (the Griesbach hypothesis). Q, part of the Two-Source Hypothesis, would not have existed if Matthean priority is true, as Luke would have gotten his triple tradition ("Markan") and double tradition ("Q") material from Matthew.
  * Scholars such as John Wenham hold to the Augustinian hypothesis that Matthew was the first Gospel, Mark the second, and Luke the third, and object on similar grounds to those who hold to the Griesbach hypothesis. They enjoy the support of church tradition on this point.
  * In addition, Eta Linnemann rejects the Q document hypothesis and denies the existence of a Synoptic problem at all.[9]
  * Nicholas Perrin has argued that the Gospel of Thomas was based on Tatian's Gospel and harmony with the Diatessaron instead of the Q document.[10]

## [edit] History of the Q hypothesis

If Q ever existed, it must have disappeared very early, since no copies of it
have been recovered and no definitive notices of it have been recorded in
antiquity (but see the discussion of the Papias testimony below).

In modern times, the first person to hypothesize a Q-like source was an
Englishman, Herbert Marsh, in 1801 in a complicated solution to the synoptic
problem that his contemporaries ignored. Marsh labeled this source with the
Hebrew letter beth (×).

The next person to advance the Q hypothesis was the German Schleiermacher in
1832, who interpreted an enigmatic statement by the early Christian writer
Papias of Hierapolis, circa 125: "Matthew compiled the oracles (Greek: logia)
of the Lord in a Hebrew manner of speech". Rather than the traditional
interpretation that Papias was referring to the writing of Matthew in Hebrew,
Schleiermacher believed that Papias was actually giving witness to a sayings
collection that was available to the Evangelists.

In 1838 another German, Christian Hermann Weisse, took Schleiermacher's
suggestion of a sayings source and combined it with the idea of Markan
priority to formulate what is now called the Two-Source Hypothesis, in which
both Matthew and Luke used Mark and the sayings source. Heinrich Julius
Holtzmann endorsed this approach in an influential treatment of the synoptic
problem in 1863, and the Two-Source Hypothesis has maintained its dominance
ever since.

At this time, Q was usually called the Logia on account of the Papias
statement, and Holtzmann gave it the symbol Lambda (Î). Toward the end of the
19th century, however, doubts began to grow on the propriety of anchoring the
existence of the collection of sayings in the testimony of Papias, so a
neutral symbol Q (which was devised by Johannes Weiss based on the German
Quelle, meaning source) was adopted to remain neutrally independent of the
collection of sayings and its connection to Papias.

In the first two decades of the 20th century, more than a dozen
reconstructions of Q were made. However, these reconstructions differed so
much from each other that not a single verse of Matthew was present in all of
them. As a result, interest in Q subsided and it was neglected for many
decades.

This state of affairs changed in the 1960s after translations of a newly
discovered and analogous sayings collection, the Gospel of Thomas, became
available. James M. Robinson and Helmut Koester proposed that collections of
sayings such as Q and Thomas represented the earliest Christian materials at
an early point in a trajectory that eventually resulted in the canonical
gospels.

This burst of interest led to increasingly more sophisticated literary and
redactional reconstructions of Q, notably the work of John S. Kloppenborg.
Kloppenborg, by analyzing certain literary phenomena, argued that Q was
composed in three stages. The earliest stage was a collection of wisdom
sayings involving such issues as poverty and discipleship. Then this
collection was expanded by including a layer of judgmental sayings directed
against "this generation". The final stage included the Temptation of Jesus.

Although Kloppenborg cautioned against assuming that the composition history
of Q is the same as the history of the Jesus tradition (i.e. that the oldest
layer of Q is necessarily the oldest and pure-layer Jesus tradition), some
recent seekers of the Historical Jesus, including the members of the Jesus
Seminar, have done just that. Basing their reconstructions primarily on the
Gospel of Thomas and the oldest layer of Q, they propose that Jesus functioned
as a wisdom sage, rather than a Jewish rabbi, though not all members affirm
the two-source hypothesis. Kloppenborg, it should be noted, is now a fellow of
the Jesus Seminar himself.

Skeptical of Kloppenborg's tripartite division of Q, Bruce Griffin writes:

> This division of Q has received extensive support from some scholars
specializing in Q. But it has received serious criticism from others, and
outside the circle of Q specialists it has frequently been seen as evidence
that some Q specialists have lost touch with essential scholarly rigor. The
idea that we can reconstruct the history of a text which does not exist, and
that must itself be reconstructed from Matthew and Luke, comes across as
something other than cautious scholarship. But the most serious objection to
the proposed revisions of Q is that any attempt to trace the history of
revisions of Q undermines the credibility of the whole Q hypothesis itself.
For despite the fact that we can identify numerous sayings that Matthew and
Luke have in common, we cannot prove that these sayings come from a single
unified source; Q may be nothing but a convenient term for a variety of
sources shared by Matthew and Luke. Therefore any evidence of revision of Q
counts as evidence for disunity in Q, and hence for a variety of sources used
by Matthew and Luke. Conversely, any evidence for unity in Q - which must be
established in order to see Q as a single document - counts as evidence
against the proposed revisions. In order to hold to a threefold revision of Q,
one must pull off an intellectual tight-rope act: one must imagine both that
there is enough unity to establish a single document and that there is enough
disunity to establish revisions. In the absence of any independent attestation
of Q, it is an illusion to believe that scholars can walk this tightrope
without falling off.

However, scholars supporting the hypothesis of the three-stage historical
development of Q, such as Burton L. Mack, argue that the unity of Q comes not
only from its being shared by Matthew and Luke, but also because, in the
layers of Q as reconstructed, the later layers build upon and presuppose the
earlier ones, whereas the reverse is not the case. So evidence that Q has been
revised is not evidence for disunity in Q, since the hypothesised revisions
depend upon asymmetric logical connections between what are posited to be the
later and earlier layers.[11]

## [edit] Notable contents of Q

Some of the most notable portions of the New Testament are believed to have
originated in Q: [12]

  * The Beatitudes
  * Love your enemies
  * The Golden Rule
  * Judge not, lest ye be judged
  * The Test of a Good Person
  * The Parable of the Wise and the Foolish Builders
  * The Parable of the Lost Sheep

  * The Parable of the Wedding Feast
  * The Parable of the Talents
  * The Parable of the Leaven
  * The Parable of the blind leading the blind
  * The Lord's Prayer
  * Expounding of the Law
  * The Birds of Heaven and The Lilies in the Field

  
## [edit] See also

  * Gospel of Thomas
  * List of Gospels
  * Agrapha
  * Logia
  * Markan priority
  * Synoptic problem
  * Two-source hypothesis
  * Talmud Jmmanuel

## [edit] References

  1. ^ In Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica vi.14.7
  2. ^ HonorÃ©, A. M. "A Statistical Study of the Synoptic Problem." Novum Testamentum 10 Aug.-July (1968): 95-147. On page 96 HonorÃ© compares the similarities between the three Gospels with the number of words in common.
  3. ^ Matt 3:7-10 & Luke 3:7-9. Text from 1894 Scrivener New Testament
  4. ^ *Ehrman, Bart D. (2004). The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings. New York: Oxford. pp. pp.84. ISBN 0-19-515462-2.
  5. ^ For a more detailed discussion of this passage, see Raymond E. Brown, An Introduction to the New Testament (New York: Doubleday, 1997), pp. 158ff, on which the material in this paragraph is based.
  6. ^ Austin M. Farrer, "On Dispensing with Q" in D. E. Nineham (ed.), Studies in the Gospels: Essays in Memory of R. H. Lightfoot (Oxford: Blackwell, 1955), pp. 55-88, reproduced at http://NTGateway.com/Q/Farrer.htm.
  7. ^ For example, Michael Goulder, "Is Q a Juggernaut", Journal of Biblical Literature 115 (1996), pp. 667-81, reproduced at http://ntgateway.com/Q/goulder.htm.
  8. ^ See, for example, Mark Goodacre, The Case Against Q: Studies in Marcan Priority and the Synoptic Problem (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 2002)
  9. ^ http://www.biblicalstudies.org.uk/pdf/q_linnemann.pdf
  10. ^ Thomas and Tatian: The Relationship Between the Gospel of Thomas and the Diatessaron by Nicholas Perrin published by the Academia Biblican Society of Biblical Literature 2001 ISBN-10: 1589830458  
see also NT Wright on Trusting the Gospels

  11. ^ The Lost Gospel: The Book Q and Christian Origins Macmillan Co. (1993, paperback 1994).
  12. ^ Reconstruction of Q by Tabor

## [edit] External links

  * Text and on-line resources for the Lost Sayings Gospel Q
  * The New Testament Gateway: The Synoptic Problem and Q
  * The Case Against Q, by Mark Goodacre
  * <IMG> "Jesu Logia ("Sayings of Jesus")". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Catholic_Encyclopedia_(1913)/Jesu_Logia_(%22Sayings_of_Jesus%22).
  * Tabor on Q

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Q_document"

Categories: Biblical criticism | Hypothesized documents | Synoptic problem |
Apocryphal Gospels

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2009 |
Articles to be expanded since August 2008 | All articles to be expanded | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
January 2009 | Articles with trivia sections from December 2008 | Articles
containing Greek language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 12:13 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



