
# Argument from ignorance

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

It has been suggested that Evidence of absence be merged into this article or
section. (Discuss)  
The argument from ignorance, also known as argumentum ad ignorantiam ("appeal
to ignorance" [1]), argument by lack of imagination, or negative evidence, is
a logical fallacy in which it is claimed that a premise is true only because
it has not been proven false, or is false only because it has not been proven
true.

The argument from personal incredulity, also known as argument from personal
belief or argument from personal conviction, refers to an assertion that
because one personally finds a premise unlikely or unbelievable, the premise
can be assumed to be false, or alternatively that another preferred but
unproven premise is true instead.

Both arguments commonly share this structure: a person regards the lack of
evidence for one view as constituting proof that another view is true. The
types of fallacies discussed in this article should not be confused with the
reductio ad absurdum method of argument, in which a valid logical
contradiction of the form "A and not A" is used to disprove a premise.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
    * 1.1 Argument from ignorance
    * 1.2 Argument from personal incredulity
    * 1.3 Negative evidence
    * 1.4 Burden of proof
  * 2 Inductive usage
    * 2.1 Description
  * 3 Examples
  * 4 Law
  * 5 Science
  * 6 References
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

Commonly in an argument from personal incredulity or argument from ignorance,
the speaker considers or asserts that something is false, implausible, or not
obvious to them personally and attempts to use this gap in knowledge as
"evidence" in favor of an alternative view of his or her choice. Examples of
these fallacies are often found in statements of opinion which begin: "It is
hard to see how...," "I cannot understand how...," or "it is obvious that..."
(if "obvious" is being used to introduce a conclusion rather than specific
evidence in support of a particular view).

### [edit] Argument from ignorance

The two most common forms of the argument from ignorance, both fallacious, can
be reduced to the following form:

  * Something is currently unexplained or insufficiently understood or explained, so it is not (or must not be) true.
  * Because there appears to be a lack of evidence for one hypothesis, another chosen hypothesis is therefore considered proven.

### [edit] Argument from personal incredulity

Two common versions of the argument from personal incredulity are:

  * "I can't believe this is possible, so it can't be true." (The person is asserting that a proposition must be wrong because he or she is [or claims to be] unable or unwilling to fully consider that it might be true, or is unwilling to believe evidence which does not support her or his preferred view.)
  * "That's not what people say about this; people instead agree with what I am saying." (Here the person is asserting that a proposition must be inaccurate because the opinion of "people in general" is claimed to agree with the speaker's opinion, without offering specific evidence in support of the alternative view.) This is also called argumentum ad populum.

An argument from personal incredulity is the same as an argument from
ignorance only if the person making the argument has solely their particular
personal belief in the impossibility of the one scenario as "evidence" that
the alternative scenario is true (i.e., the person lacks relevant evidence
specifically for the alternative scenario).

Quite commonly, the argument from personal incredulity is used in combination
with some evidence in an attempt to sway opinion towards a preferred
conclusion. Here too, it is a logical fallacy to the degree that the personal
incredulity is offered as further "evidence." In such an instance, the person
making the argument has inserted a personal bias in an attempt to strengthen
the argument for acceptance of her or his preferred conclusion.

    (Also see similar arguments: wisdom of repugnance and argument from emotion)
### [edit] Negative evidence

A related concept is negative evidence. This is commonly problematic in
cladistics, such as the classification of organisms or languages. If two
members of a group share a feature and a third does not, the two may be
classified together as a subgroup excluding the third. However, without
evidence that the trait was an innovation in the two, rather than a loss of a
common feature in the third, the lack of a feature is not a logically valid
argument for such a classification. Two possible explanations of the situation
are as follows:

common origin acquisition of feature  

A  
  
  
  

B  
  
  
  
  
  

C  
  
  
  
  
common origin  

A  
  
  
  
  

B  
  
  
loss of feature

C  
  
  
  
  
  
  
For example, in the classification of the Kradai languages of southern China
and Southeast Asia, there are four clear branches: the Tai, Kra, KamâSui,
and Hlai languages (excluding for argument's sake the problematic Be
language). Traditionally the KamâSui and Tai branches were classified
together, due to the large amount of vocabulary that they share. It was argued
that this vocabulary was an innovation that defined a genealogical clade
within the family. However, this amounts to a lack of evidence of this
vocabulary in the other branches; another possibility is that it is common
Kradai vocabulary that was lost in Kra and Hlai. Indeed, morphological
evidence suggests that Tai is closer to Hlai, and KamâSui is closer to Kra,
than Tai and KamâSui are to each other, pace the negative evidence from
vocabulary.

### [edit] Burden of proof

An important aspect of the ad ignorantiam argument is establishing the burden
of proof. While this concept is discussed in the law section of this page, it
is important to realize that establishing the burden of proof is important in
other arenas as well. All logic follows from presuppositions (axiomatic
statements, see axiom). These presuppositions are not provable but are assumed
as true.

## [edit] Inductive usage

Inductive usage refers to the extension of an argument to support a wider
generalization of a hypothesis, principle, scientific theory, or universal
law. Many such uses of the Argument from Ignorance are considered fallacious,
especially in academic papers which are expected to be rigorous about their
key premises and empirical foundations. However, in some cases (such as that
which the noted author Irving Copi describes below) where affirmative evidence
could reasonably be expected to be found, but following careful unbiased
examination, this evidence has still not been found, then it might become
expedient, and sometimes even prudent, to infer that this might suggest
(though it does not prove, deductively, it suggests inductively) that the
evidence does not exist. Or, where the speaker can reasonably assume that all
sane people will agree with a premise (e.g. "The sky is blue"), then he might
decide it is unnecessary to provide evidence supporting that assertion;
however, these issues (to which epistemological foundationalism is closely
related, and with which it is also closely intertwined) are still debated.

### [edit] Description

Irving Copi writes that:

    The argumentum ad ignorantiam [fallacy] is committed whenever it is argued that a proposition is true simply on the basis that it has not been proven false, or that it is false because it has not been proven true.
He adds,

    A qualification should be made at this point. In some circumstances it can be safely assumed that if a certain event had occurred, evidence of it could be discovered by qualified investigators. In such circumstances it is perfectly reasonable to take the absence of proof of its occurrence despite searching, as positive evidence towards its non-occurrence. (Copi 1953)
To support this, one might add a third case, the argument that something is
false or true because the speaker cannot (or finds it hard to) conceive
otherwise. This argument by lack of imagination is sometimes expressed in the
form "Y is absurd (because I cannot imagine it), therefore it must be untrue,"
or "It is hard to see how..." [ie I personally cannot see, or lack the
imagination to see, how], and is sometimes confused with the logically valid
method of argument, reductio ad absurdum. A logical argument using reductio ad
absurdum would be framed as "X logically leads to a provably impossible
(absurd) conclusion, therefore it must be false." In reductio ad absurdum, it
is necessary to show that accepting X implies a contradiction (such as "not
X", or "Y and not Y" for some other proposition Y). In an argument from
ignorance, the speaker asserts "X implies not Y", where Y is believed to be,
but cannot be proven, true, rather than something which is provably
contradictory.

Copi's argument concerns the Y condition; that in this case of "X implies not
Y" for some other proposition Y, some weight must be given to the probability
that the speaker's evaluation of Y is correct. For example, if proposition X
is "This man was shot", and proposition Y is "There was no bullet", the
speaker's qualification to assert condition Y must be considered. A coroner
who had examined the body is most likely qualified to draw this conclusion,
but an eyewitness is probably unqualified.

Argument from personal incredulity is very similar, e.g. "I am unable to
believe/understand X, therefore it must be false."

## [edit] Examples

  * "If polar bears are (the) dominant (predator) in the Arctic, then there would seem to have been no need for them to evolve a white-coloured form of camouflage." In his book Probability of God, Anglican Bishop Hugh Montefiore casts doubt on neo-Darwinian evolution with that statement. This argument was addressed by the evolutionary theorist Richard Dawkins in his book The Blind Watchmaker, who wrote that if the writer had thought to imagine a black polar bear trying to sneak up on a seal in the Arctic, he would see the evolutionary value of such fur. The ignorance in this case was assuming that no other purpose could be served.

## [edit] Law

In most modern criminal legal systems there is a presumption of innocence, and
it is the responsibility of the prosecution to prove (usually "beyond
reasonable doubt") that a defendant has in fact committed a particular crime.
It is a logical fallacy to presume that mere lack of evidence of innocence of
a crime is instead evidence of guilt. Similarly, mere lack of evidence of
guilt cannot be taken as evidence of innocence. For this reason (among
others), Western legal systems err on the side of caution. Simply the act of
taking a defendant before a court is not adequate evidence to presume
anything. Courts require evidence of guilt to be presented first, adequate for
the court to find that the charge has been substantiated -- i.e., that the
prosecution's evidentiary burden has been met -- and only after this burden is
met is the defense obliged to present counterevidence of innocence. If the
burden of proof is not met, that does not imply that the defendant is
innocent. Hence, in such a case, the defendant is found "not guilty", except
in Scotland, where the jury also has the option to return a verdict of not
proven.

Also, as a hypothetical example of an "argument from personal incredulity,"
defined above, suppose someone were to argue:

  * I cannot imagine any way for Person P to have executed action X without committing a crime Y
  * Therefore, Person P must be guilty of crime Y.

Merely because the person making the argument cannot imagine how scenario "A"
might have happened does not necessarily mean that the person's preferred
conclusion (scenario "B") is correct. As with other forms of the argument from
ignorance, the arguer in this instance has arrived at a conclusion without any
evidence supporting the preferred hypothesis, merely for lack of being able to
imagine the alternative.

The same principles of logic apply to the civil law, although the required
burdens of proof generally are different. As well, these principles of logic
apply to the introduction of a given component of a legal case by either a
complainant or a defendant. That is, the mere lack of evidence in favor of a
proposition put forth by a party in a legal proceeding (e.g., the assertion
"she couldn't have left the house and returned in time to do X..." is offered
without evidence in support) would not properly be taken as evidence in favor
of an alternative explanation (e.g., "she did leave the house and return in
time to do X...").

## [edit] Science

Unexplained phenomena are an indication that a particular scientific theory
does not provide a satisfactory model sufficient to explain or predict all
outcomes. For example, the wave theory of light does not explain the
photoelectric effect, though it successfully predicts the results of the
double-slit experiment. However, later theories based around quantum mechanics
provide an adequate explanatory model of both.

It is a logical mistake to assert that because a phenomenon is unpredictable
by current scientific theories, that a better scientific theory cannot be
found that provides an adequate natural explanatory model for the phenomena in
question; and that therefore, one must assert that the only viable explanation
of the unexplained phenomena is the supernatural action of God. This variant
is known as the God-of-the-gaps argument. This mistake is also made when the
lack of a scientific theory to explain a phenomenon is explained away by 'some
as yet undiscovered theory will explain this'; this implies the assertion that
the only viable explanation is an undiscovered naturalistic theory.

However, it is also logically incorrect to assume that because a theory does
explain all known relevant phenomena, it must be correct. The fact that no
counter-examples are known to exist is not in itself proof of a given theory,
since there is always the possibility of some yet-to-be-observed counter-
example. For example, there are no known phenomena that are inconsistent with
the Big Bang theory. This by no means constitutes definitive proof that the
universe actually did originate with the Big Bang.

## [edit] References

  * Irving M. Copi & Carl Cohen, Introduction to Logic. Prentice Hall College Div; 10th edition (1998). ISBN 0-13-010202-4.

  1. ^ Argumentum ad Ignorantiam

## [edit] See also

  * Negative proof
  * Truthiness (Stephen Colbert's ironic term for belief regardless of truth in politics.)
  * God of the gaps
  * Argument from silence
  * Russell's teapot
  * Indeterminacy problem
  * False dilemma

## [edit] External links

  * Fallacy Files article on Appeal to Ignorance

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Fallacies of relevance  
General

Absurdity â¢ Accident â¢ Ad nauseam â¢ Argument from ignorance â¢ Argument
from silence â¢ Argumentum ad populum â¢ Base rate â¢ Compound question â¢
Loaded question â¢ Argument to moderation â¢ Moralistic â¢ Naturalistic â¢
Proof by assertion â¢ Irrelevant conclusion â¢ Special pleading â¢ Straw
man â¢ Style over substance â¢ Two wrongs make a right  
Appeals to emotion

Fear â¢ Flattery â¢ Nature â¢ Novelty â¢ Pity â¢ Ridicule â¢ Repugnance
â¢ Spite  
Genetic fallacies

Ad hominem (Ad hominem tu quoque) â¢ Appeal to authority â¢ Appeal to motive
â¢ Appeal to tradition â¢ Appeal to wealth â¢ Appeal to poverty â¢
Association â¢ Bulverism â¢ Chronological snobbery â¢ Ipse-dixitism â¢
Poisoning the well â¢ Appeal to etymology â¢ Reductio ad Hitlerum â¢
Appeals to intellectual and mental stability or capability  
Appeals to consequences

Appeal to force â¢ Wishful thinking  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_from_ignorance"

Categories: Relevance fallacies

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since March 2009 | All articles to be
merged

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 11:48.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



