
# Utilitarianism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article discusses utilitarian ethical theory. For a discussion of John
Stuart Mill's essay Utilitarianism (1861), see Utilitarianism (book).

The Utilitarianism series,  
part of the Politics series  
Utilitarian Thinkers

  * Jeremy Bentham
  * John Stuart Mill
  * Henry Sidgwick
  * Peter Singer

Forms

  * preference utilitarianism
  * rule utilitarianism
  * act utilitarianism
  * Two-level utilitarianism
  * Total utilitarianism
  * Average utilitarianism
  * Negative utilitarianism
  * animal welfare
  * Abolitionism (bioethics)
  * Hedonism
  * Enlightened self-interest

Predecessors

  * Epicurus
  * David Hume
  * William Godwin

Key concepts

  * Pain
  * Suffering
  * Pleasure
  * Utility
  * Happiness
  * Eudaimonia
  * Consequentialism
  * Felicific calculus

Problems

  * Mere addition paradox
  * Paradox of hedonism
  * Utility monster

See Also

  * Rational choice theory
  * Game theory
  * Social choice
  * Economics

  
Portal:Politics  
Utilitarianism is the idea that the moral worth of an action is determined
solely by its contribution to overall utility: that is, its contribution to
happiness or pleasure as summed among all persons. It is thus a form of
consequentialism, meaning that the moral worth of an action is determined by
its outcome: put simply, the ends justify the means. Utility, the good to be
maximized, has been defined by various thinkers as happiness or pleasure
(versus suffering or pain), although preference utilitarians like Peter Singer
define it as the satisfaction of preferences. It may be described as a life
stance, with happiness or pleasure being of ultimate importance.

Originally described by the phrase "the greatest good for the greatest
number", its advocates eventually dropped "the greatest number".[1]
Utilitarianism can thus be characterised as a quantitative and reductionist
approach to ethics. It can be contrasted with deontological ethics (which do
not regard the consequences of an act as the sole determinant of its moral
worth) and virtue ethics (which focuses on character), as well as with other
varieties of consequentialism. Adherents of these opposing views have
extensively criticised the utilitarian view, but utilitarians have been
similarly critical of other schools of thought. And like any ethical theory,
the application of utilitarianism is heavily dependent on the moral agent's
full range of wisdom, experience, social skills, and life skills.

In general, the term utilitarian refers to a somewhat narrow economic or
pragmatic viewpoint. Philosophical utilitarianism, however, is much broader:
most approaches, for example, consider non-humans in addition to people.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Origins of the word
  * 3 Types
    * 3.1 Act vs. rule
      * 3.1.1 Collapse of rule utilitarianism into act utilitarianism
    * 3.2 Motive
    * 3.3 Two-level
    * 3.4 Negative
    * 3.5 Average vs. total
    * 3.6 Other species
    * 3.7 Combinations with other ethical schools
  * 4 Biological explanation
  * 5 Criticism and defence
    * 5.1 Aggregating utility
    * 5.2 Predicting consequences
    * 5.3 Importance of intentions
    * 5.4 Human rights
    * 5.5 Individual interests vs. a greater sum of lesser interests
    * 5.6 Case for morality
    * 5.7 Karl Marx's arguments
    * 5.8 The Wittgensteinian Critique
  * 6 Criticism of other schools
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 References and further reading
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jeremy Bentham

The origins of utilitarianism are often traced as far back as the Greek
philosopher Epicurus, but, as a specific school of thought, it is generally
credited to Jeremy Bentham.[2] Bentham found pain and pleasure to be the only
intrinsic values in the world: "nature has placed mankind under the governance
of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure." From this, he derived the rule
of utility: the good is whatever brings the greatest happiness to the greatest
number of people. Later, after realising that the formulation recognised two
different and potentially conflicting principles, he dropped the second part
and talked simply about "the greatest happiness principle".

Bentham's foremost proponent was James Mill, a significant philosopher in his
day and the father of John Stuart Mill. The younger Mill was educated
according to Bentham's principles, including transcribing and summarising much
of his father's work while still in his teens.[3]

In his famous short work, Utilitarianism, the younger Mill argues that
cultural, intellectual and spiritual pleasures are of greater value than mere
physical pleasure because the former would be valued higher than the latter by
competent judges. A competent judge, according to Mill, is anyone who has
experienced both the lower pleasures and the higher. Like Bentham's
formulation, Mill's utilitarianism deals with pleasure or happiness. Mill
thought Bentham's focus around pain and pleasure was almost animalistic, he
regarded this focus and work around this to be "Pig Philosophy".

<IMG>

<IMG>

John Stuart Mill

The classic utilitarianism of Bentham and Mill influenced many other
philosophers as well as the development of the broader concept of
consequentialism. As a result, there now exist many different accounts of the
good, and, therefore, many different types of consequentialism besides
utilitarianism. Some philosophers reject the sole importance of well-being,
arguing that there are intrinsic values other than happiness or pleasure, such
as knowledge and autonomy.

Other past advocates of utilitarianism include William Godwin, David Hume and
Henry Sidgwick; modern-day advocates include R. M. Hare, Peter Singer and
TorbjÃ¶rn TÃ¤nnsjÃ¶.

Up to and including John Stuart Mill, utilitarianism was mainly the province
of practical reformers. The publication of Henry Sidgwick's The Methods of
Ethics in 1874 can be viewed as the date utilitarianism began to be more
commonly associated with academic philosophy.

Utilitarianism has been used as an argument for many different political
views. In his essay On Liberty, as well as in other works, John Stuart Mill
argues that utilitarianism requires that political arrangements satisfy the
"liberty principle" (or harm principle), according to which "the only purpose
for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised
community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others."[4] Prevention of
self-harm by other persons was considered expressly forbidden. Instead, Mill
states that only persuasion can be rightfully used to prevent self-
harm.[citation needed]

Ludwig von Mises advocated libertarianism using utilitarian arguments.
Likewise, some Marxist philosophers have used these principles as arguments
for political socialism.

## [edit] Origins of the word

Mill claims that he "did not invent the word, but found it in one of Galt's
novels, the 'Annals of the Parish,' in which the Scottish clergyman, of whom
the book is a supposed autobiography, is represented as warning his
parishioners not to leave the Gospel and become utilitarians. With a boy's
fondness for a name and a banner I seized upon the word [....]"[5] Mill
subsequently named his society of like-minded thinkers the "Utilitarian
Society", which met for three and a half years.

Bentham took the phrase 'the greatest good for. the greatest number' from
Joseph Priestley's essay on government, which may have inspired his
theory.[citation needed]

## [edit] Types

### [edit] Act vs. rule

Main articles: Act utilitarianism and Rule utilitarianism

Act utilitarianism states that, when faced with a choice, we must first
consider the likely consequences of potential actions and, from that, choose
to do what we believe will generate most pleasure. The rule utilitarian, on
the other hand, begins by looking at potential rules of action. To determine
whether a rule should be followed, he looks at what would happen if it were
constantly followed. If adherence to the rule produces more happiness than
otherwise, it is a rule that morally must be followed at all times. The
distinction between act and rule utilitarianism is therefore based on a
difference about the proper object of consequentialist calculation â
specific to a case or generalised to rules.

Rule utilitarianism has been criticised for advocating general rules that will
in some specific circumstances clearly decrease happiness if followed. Never
to kill another human being may seem to be a good rule, but it could make
self-defence against malevolent aggressors very difficult. Rule utilitarians
add, however, that there are general exception rules that allow the breaking
of other rules if such rule-breaking increases happiness, one example being
self-defence. Critics argue that this reduces rule utilitarianism to act
utilitarianism and makes rules meaningless. Rule utilitarians retort that
rules in the legal system (i.e. laws) that regulate such situations are not
meaningless. Self-defence is legally justified, while murder is not.

Rule utilitarianism should not be confused with heuristics (rules of thumb),
but many act utilitarians agree that it makes sense to formulate certain rules
of thumb to follow if they find themselves in a situation whose consequences
are difficult, costly or time-consuming to calculate exactly. If the
consequences can be calculated relatively clearly and without much doubt,
however, the rules of thumb can be ignored.

#### [edit] Collapse of rule utilitarianism into act utilitarianism

It has been argued[6] that rule utilitarianism collapses into act
utilitarianism, because for any given rule, in the case where breaking the
rule produces more utility, the rule can be sophisticated by the addition of a
sub-rule that handles cases like the exception. This process holds for all
cases of exceptions, and so the 'rules' will have as many 'sub-rules' as there
are exceptional cases, which, in the end, makes an agent seek out whatever
outcome produces the maximum utility.[7]

### [edit] Motive

Motive utilitarianism, first developed by Robert Adams (Journal of Philosophy,
1976), can be viewed either as a hybrid between act and rule or as a unique
approach on its own terms. The motive approach attempts to deal realistically
with how human beings actually function psychologically. We are indeed
passionate, emotional creatures, we do much better with positive goals than
with negative prohibitions, we long to be taken seriously, and so on and so
forth. Motive utilitarianism proposes that our initial moral task is to
inculcate within ourselves and others skills, inclinations, and mental focuses
that are likely to be useful across the spectrum of situations we are
realistically likely to face, rather than the hypothetical situations
seemingly so common in philosophical publications (almost as if there were an
unofficial rule against textured situations; motive utilitarianism is somewhat
of a response to this). For example, similar to the 80-20 rule in business and
entrepreneurship, we might be able to most improve the future prospects of
sentient creatures if we do a large number of activities in honest
partnerships with others, even imperfectly, instead of a few perfect things
privately or sneakily by ourselves.Two examples of motive utilitarianism in
practice might be a gay person coming out of the closet and a politician
publicly breaking with a war. In both cases, there is likely to be an initial
surge of power and confidence, as well as a transitional period in which one
is likely to be losing old friends before making new friends, and
unpredictably so on both counts. Another example might be a doctor who is a
skilled diagnostician. Such a physician is likely to spend most of his or her
serious time available for professional growth on current research and better
communication, and only occasionally return to first principles. That is, he
or she will only occasionally do something of the sort as an interesting study
in biochemistry, and then as much as a hobby as anything else.

### [edit] Two-level

Main article: Two-level utilitarianism

Two-level utilitarianism states that one should normally use 'intuitive' moral
thinking, in the form of rule utilitarianism, because it usually maximizes
happiness. However there are some times when we must ascend to a higher
'critical' level of reflection in order to decide what to do, and must think
as an act utilitarian would. Richard Hare supported this theory with his
concept of the Archangel, which holds that if we were all 'archangels' we
could be act utilitarians all the time as we would be able to perfectly
predict consequences. However we are closer to 'proles' in that we are
frequently biased and unable to foresee all possible consequence of our
actions, and thus we require moral guidelines. When these principles clash we
must attempt to think like an archangel in order to choose the right course of
action.

### [edit] Negative

See also: Abolitionism (bioethics)

Most utilitarian theories deal with producing the greatest amount of good for
the greatest number. Negative utilitarianism (NU) requires us to promote the
least amount of evil or harm, or to prevent the greatest amount of suffering
for the greatest number. Proponents argue that this is a more effective
ethical formula, since, they contend, the greatest harms are more
consequential than the greatest goods. The founder of NU referred to an
epistemological argument: âIt adds to clarity in the fields of ethics, if we
formulate our demands negatively, i.e. if we demand the elimination of
suffering rather than the promotion of happiness.â (Karl R.Popper, The Open
Society and its Enemies, London 1945). In the practical implementation of this
idea the following versions can be distinguished:

1\. Some advocates of the utilitarian principle were quick to suggest that the
ultimate aim of NU would be to engender the quickest and least painful method
of killing the entirety of humanity, as this ultimately would effectively
minimize suffering. NU would seem to call for the destruction of the world
even if only to avoid the pain of a pinprick [1].

2\. Newer, moderate versions of NU do not attempt to minimize all kinds of
suffering but only those kinds that are created by the frustration of
preferences[2]. In most supporters of moderate NU the preference to survive is
stronger than the wish to be freed from suffering, so that they refuse the
idea of a quick and painless destruction of life. Some of them believe that,
in time, the worst cases of suffering will be defeated and a world of minor
suffering can be realized. The principal agents of this direction can be found
in the environment of transhumanism [3].

Supporters of moderate NU who do not believe in the promises of transhumanism
would prefer a reduction of the population (and in the extreme case an empty
world). This seems to come down to the position of radical NU, but in moderate
NU the world could only be sacrificed to prevent extreme suffering and not to
avoid the pain of a pinprick. And from the claim that an empty world would be
a preferable state of affairs, it does not follow that a political movement
should be formed with the aim of achieving such a state of affairs. The latter
would definitely (and in analogy to radical NU) be counterproductive.
Pessimistic supporters of moderate NU therefore tend towards a retreat
oriented way of living.

3\. Finally there are theoreticians who see NU as a branch within classical
utilitarianism, rather than an independent theory. This interpretation
overlooks Derek Parfit's âRepugnant Conclusionâ [4]. NU is precisely
characterized by overcoming this theoretical weakness of classical
utilitarianism.

### [edit] Average vs. total

Total utilitarianism advocates measuring the utility of a population based on
the total utility of its members. This type of utilitarianism falls victim to
the Repugnant Conclusion, whereby large numbers of people with very low but
non-negative utility values can be seen as a better goal than a population of
a less extreme size living in comfort. In other words, according to the
theory, it is a moral good to breed more people on the world for as long as
total happiness rises: a state, dubbed by Derek Parfit as the repugnant
conclusion, in which there is an enormous population of members whose
individual lives are barely worth living.[citation needed]

Average utilitarianism, on the other hand, advocates measuring the utility of
a population based on the average utility of that population. It avoids
Parfit's repugnant conclusion, but causes other problems like the Mere
Addition Paradox. For example, bringing a moderately happy person in a very
happy world would be seen as an immoral act; aside from this, the theory
implies that it would be a moral good to eliminate all people whose happiness
is below average, as this would raise the average happiness.[8].

### [edit] Other species

Further information: Speciesism, animal welfare

Peter Singer, along with many animal rights activists, has argued that the
well-being of all sentient beings (conscious ones who feel pain, including
some non-humans[9]) deserves equal consideration to that given human beings;
otherwise, it would be a case of speciesism. In fact, Singer considers that an
intelligent ape may be given more consideration than a baby, since it is
better at planning for its future (or "expectation utility").[citation needed]
Bentham made a similar argument. Even those utilitarians arguing to the
contrary have noted that suffering in animals often causes humans to suffer,
often making it immoral to harm an animal, even if the animal itself is not
given a moral status.

This view may be contrasted with deep ecology, which holds that an intrinsic
value is attached to all forms of life and nature. According to
utilitarianism, most forms of life are unable to experience anything akin to
pleasure or discomfort, and are therefore denied moral status. Thus, the moral
value of organisms that do not experience pleasure or discomfort, or natural
entities like a river, is only in the benefit they provide to sentient beings.
Similarly, utilitarianism places no intrinsic value on biodiversity.

### [edit] Combinations with other ethical schools

In order to overcome the perceived shortcomings of both systems, several
attempts have been made to reconcile utilitarianism with Kant's categorical
imperative. James Cornman proposes that, in any given situation, we should
treat as "means" as few people as possible and as "ends" as many as are
consistent with those "means". He refers to this as the "Utilitarian Kantian
Principle".

Other consequentialists may consider happiness an important consequence but
argue in addition that consequences such as justice or equality should also be
valued, regardless of whether or not they increase happiness.

## [edit] Biological explanation

It has been suggested that sociobiology, the study of the evolution of human
society, provides support for the utilitarian point of view. For example, in
The Expanding Circle: Ethics and Sociobiology, the utilitarian philosopher
Peter Singer argues that fundamentally utilitarian ethical reasoning has
existed from the time primitive foraging bands had to cooperate, compromise,
and make group decisions to survive. He elaborates: "In a dispute between
members of a cohesive group of reasoning beings, the demand for a reason is a
demand for a justification that can be accepted by the group as a whole."
Thus, consideration of others' interests has long been a necessary part of the
human experience. Singer believes that reason now compels the equal
consideration of all people's interests:

â "If I have seen that from an ethical point of view I am just one person
among the many in my society, and my interests are no more important, from the
point of view of the whole, than the similar interests of others within my
society, I am ready to see that, from a still larger point of view, my society
is just one among other societies, and the interests of members of my society
are no more important, from that larger perspective, than the similar
interests of members of other societiesâ¦ Taking the impartial element in
ethical reasoning to its logical conclusion means, first, accepting that we
ought to have equal concern for all human beings." â  
This conclusion â that everybody's interests should be considered equally
when making decisions â is a core tenet of utilitarianism.

Singer elaborates that viewing oneself as equal to others in one's society and
at the same time viewing one's society as fundamentally superior to other
societies may cause an uncomfortable cognitive dissonance. This is the sense
in which he means that reason may push people to accept a broader utilitarian
stance. Critics (e.g., Binmore 2005) point out that this cognitive dissonance
is apparently not very strong, since people often knowingly ignore the
interests of faraway societies quite similar to their own. They also note that
the "ought" of the quoted paragraph applies only to someone who has already
accepted the premise that all societies are equally important. Singer has
responded that his argument in Expanding the Circle wasn't intended to provide
a complete philosophical justification for a utilitarian categorical
imperative, but merely to provide a plausible explanation for how some people
come to accept utilitarianism.

## [edit] Criticism and defence

### [edit] Aggregating utility

John Rawls gives a critique of Utilitarianism in A Theory Of Justice that
rejects the idea that the happiness of two distinct persons could be
meaningfully counted together. He argues that this entails treating a group of
many as if it were a single sentient entity, mistakenly ignoring the
separation of consciousness. [10] Animal Rights advocate Richard Ryder calls
this the 'boundary of the individual', through which neither pain nor pleasure
may pass. [11] Thus the aggregation of utility becomes futile as both pain and
happiness are intrinsic to and inseparable from the consciousness in which
they are felt, rendering impossible the task of adding up the various
pleasures of multiple individuals.

### [edit] Predicting consequences

Daniel Dennett uses the example of the Three Mile Island accident as another
example of the difficulty in calculating happiness.[12] Was the near-meltdown
that occurred at this nuclear power plant a good or a bad thing (according to
utilitarianism)? He points out that its long-term effects on nuclear policy
would be considered beneficial by many and might outweigh the negative
consequences. His conclusion is that it is still too early, 29 years after the
event, for utilitarianism to weigh all the evidence and reach a definite
conclusion. Utilitarians note that utilitarianism seems to be the unspoken
principle used by both advocates and critics of nuclear power.[citation
needed] That something cannot be determined at the moment is common in science
and frequently resolved with later advancements.

Utilitarians, however, are not required to have perfect knowledge; indeed,
certain knowledge of consequences is impossible because consequences are in
the unexperienced future. Utilitarians simply try their best to maximise
happiness (or other forms of utility) and, to do this, make their best
estimates of the consequences. If the consequences of a decision are
particularly unclear, it may make sense to follow an ethical rule which has
promoted the most utility in the past. Utilitarians also note that people
trying to further their own interests frequently run into situations in which
the consequences of their decisions are very unclear. This does not mean,
however, that they are unable to make a decision; much the same applies to
utilitarianism.

Anthony Kenny argues against utilitarianism on the grounds that determinism is
either true or false: if it is true, we have no choice over our actions; if it
is false, the consequences of our actions are unpredictable, not least because
they depend upon the actions of others whom we cannot predict.[13]

### [edit] Importance of intentions

Utilitarianism has been criticised for looking only at the results of actions,
not at the desires or intentions that motivate them, which many consider
important, too. An action intended to cause harm but which inadvertently
causes good would be judged equal to the good result of an action done with
the best intentions. Many utilitarians argue that utilitarianism applies not
only to results but also to desires and dispositions, praise and blame, and
rules, institutions and punishment. Bad intentions may cause harm (to the
agent and to others) even if they do not result in bad acts. Once this is
recognised, supporters argue that utilitarianism becomes a much more complex,
and rich, moral theory, and may align far more closely with our moral
intuitions.

Furthermore, many utilitarians view morality as a personal guide rather than a
means to judge the actions of other people, or actions which have already been
performed: morality is something to be looked at when deciding what to do. In
this sense, intentions are all that matter, because the consequences cannot be
known with certainty until the decision has been made.

One philosopher to take this view is Henry Sidgwick, in his main work The
Methods of Ethics (1874).

### [edit] Human rights

Utilitarians argue that justification of slavery, torture or mass murder would
require unrealistically large benefits to outweigh the direct and extreme
suffering to victims. Utilitarianism would also require the indirect impact of
social acceptance of inhumane policies to be taken into consideration, and
general anxiety and fear could increase for all if human rights are commonly
ignored.

Act and rule utilitarians differ in how they treat human rights themselves.
Under rule utilitarianism, a human right can easily be considered a moral
rule. Act utilitarians, on the other hand, do not accept human rights as moral
principles in and of themselves, but that does not mean that they reject them
altogether: first, most act utilitarians, as explained above, would agree that
acts such as enslavement and genocide always cause great unhappiness and very
little happiness; second, human rights could be considered rules of thumb so
that, although torture might be acceptable under some circumstances, as a rule
it is immoral; and, finally, act utilitarians often support human rights in a
legal sense because utilitarians support laws that cause more good than harm.

### [edit] Individual interests vs. a greater sum of lesser interests

Another criticism of utilitarianism is that it is not proven, either by
science or by logic, to be the correct ethical system. Supporters claim that
this is common to all ethical schools, and indeed the system of logic itself,
and will always remain so unless the problem of the regress argument, or at
least the is-ought problem, is satisfactorily resolved. Indeed, utilitarians
are among the first to recognize this problem.[citation needed] It might
instead be argued that almost all political arguments about a future society
use an unspoken utilitarian principle, all sides claiming that their proposed
solution is the one that increases human happiness the most. Some degree of
utilitarianism may very well be genetically hard-coded into humans.[citation
needed]

Mill's argument for utilitarianism holds that pleasure is the only thing
desired and that, therefore, pleasure is the only thing desirable. Critics
argue that this is like saying that things visible are things seen, or that
the only things audible are things heard. A thing is "visible" if it can be
seen and "desirable" if it ought to be desired. Thus the word "desirable"
presupposes an ethical theory: we cannot infer what is desirable from what is
desired. This criticism, however, reads the word "desirable" as "able to be
desired" rather than "worth being desired", and does not take into account the
moral assessment that must take place in order to categorise something as
"desirable", which does not occur when categorising the same thing as
"visible" or "audible".

### [edit] Case for morality

Critics have also asked why one should follow utilitarianism instead of
ethical egoism. The legal system might punish behaviour that harms others, but
this incentive is not active in a situation where one can personally gain by
breaking it without punishment. One egoist, however, may propose means to
maximise self-interest that conflict with the means proposed by another
egoist. As a result, it behooves them to compromise with one another in order
to avoid conflict, out of self-interest. The means proposed may incidentally
coincide with those prescribed by utilitarianism, but the foundational ethical
imperative would not, of course, be utilitarian. Another reason for an egoist
to become a utilitarian was proposed by Peter Singer in Practical Ethics. He
presents the paradox of hedonism, which holds that, if your only goal in life
is personal happiness, you will never be happy: you need something to be happy
about. One goal that Singer feels is likely to bring about personal happiness
is the desire to improve the lives of others; that is, to make others happy.
This argument is similar to the one for virtue ethics.

### [edit] Karl Marx's arguments

Karl Marx, in Das Kapital, writes:

â Not even excepting our philosopher, Christian Wolff, in no time and in no
country has the most homespun commonplace ever strutted about in so self-
satisfied a way. The principle of utility was no discovery of Bentham. He
simply reproduced in his dull way what HelvÃ©tius and other Frenchmen had said
with esprit in the 18th century. To know what is useful for a dog, one must
study dog-nature. This nature itself is not to be deduced from the principle
of utility. Applying this to man, he that would criticise all human acts,
movements, relations, etc., by the principle of utility, must first deal with
human nature in general, and then with human nature as modified in each
historical epoch. Bentham makes short work of it. With the driest naivetÃ© he
takes the modern shopkeeper, especially the English shopkeeper, as the normal
man. Whatever is useful to this queer normal man, and to his world, is
absolutely useful. This yard-measure, then, he applies to past, present, and
future. The Christian religion, e.g., is "useful," "because it forbids in the
name of religion the same faults that the penal code condemns in the name of
the law." Artistic criticism is "harmful," because it disturbs worthy people
in their enjoyment of Martin Tupper, etc. With such rubbish has the brave
fellow, with his motto, "nulla dies sine line!," piled up mountains of
books.[14] â  
Marx's accusation is twofold. In the first place, he says that the theory of
utility is true by definition and thus does not really add anything
meaningful. For Marx, a productive inquiry would have to investigate what
sorts of things are good for people; that is, what our nature (which he
believes is alienated under capitalism) really is. Second, he says that
Bentham fails to take account of the changing character of people, and hence
the changing character of what is good for them. This criticism is especially
important for Marx, because he believed that all important statements were
contingent upon particular historical conditions. Marx argues that human
nature is dynamic, so the concept of a single utility for all humans is one-
dimensional and not useful. When he decries Bentham's application of the 'yard
measure' of now to 'the past, present and future', he decries the implication
that society, and people, have always been, and will always be, as they are
now; that is, he criticizes essentialism. As he sees it, this implication is
conservatively used to reinforce institutions he regarded as reactionary. Just
because in this moment religion has some positive consequences, says Marx,
doesn't mean that viewed historically it isn't a regressive institution that
should be abolished.

Marx's criticism is more a criticism of Bentham's views (or similar views) of
utility, than utilitarianism itself. Utilitarians would not deny that
different things make different people happy, and that what promotes happiness
changes over time. Neither would utilitarians deny the importance of
investigations into what promotes utility.

Marx's criticism applies to all philosophy which does not take explicit
account of the movement of history (against dialectics). While he's right that
all things change, and that it is necessary to take account of this when
making practical judgements, this doesn't mean that it isn't useful to have a
theory which gives some means to evaluate those changes themselves.

Also, utilitarianism was originally developed as a challenge to the status
quo. The demand that everyone count for one, and one only, was anathema to the
elitist society of Victorian Britain.[citation needed]

### [edit] The Wittgensteinian Critique

Contemporary philosophers such as Cora Diamond and Matthew Ostrow have
critiqued utilitarianism from a distinctly Wittgensteinian perspective.
According to these philosophers, utilitarians have expanded the very meaning
of pleasure to the point of linguistic incoherence. The utilitarian
groundlessly places pleasure as his or her first principle, and in doing so
subordinates the value of asceticism, self-sacrifice or any other "secondary"
desire. Of course, the utilitarian will deny this contention altogether,
claiming that ascetics also seek pleasure, but have merely chosen an
alternative path in which to achieve it. Yet such an argument is implicitly
tautological ("What is it that people want? Pleasure. But what is pleasure?
What people want."). The utilitarian therefore has no ultimate justification
for primarily valuing pleasure, other than to say that "this is the way it
should be." In this critique, utilitarianism is thus ultimately reduced to a
form of dishonest ethical intuitionism, unable to recognize or acknowledge its
own groundlessness. Or in the words of Wittgenstein, utilitarianism is blind
to its "own metaphysical impulse" (a trap which Deontology also undoubtedly
falls victim to).[citation needed]

## [edit] Criticism of other schools

One utilitarian criticism of other schools is that many of them cannot even in
theory solve real-world ethical problems when various inviolable principles
collide, like triage or the rightness or otherwise of the atomic bombings of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

A criticism of Kantianism is levelled by R. M. Hare in Could Kant Have Been a
Utilitarian? Hare argues that a number of different ethical positions could
fit with Kant's description of his Categorical Imperative. Although Kant did
not agree with this assessment, utilitarianism could be among them.

## [edit] See also

    This entry is related to, but not included in the Political ideologies series or one of its sub-series. Other related articles can be found at the Politics Portal.
  * Appeal to consequences
  * Altruism (ethical doctrine)
  * Eudaimonism
  * Greedy reductionism \- Daniel Dennett describes utilitarianism as a form of this
  * Gross National Happiness
  * Hedonism
  * List of utilitarians
  * Social Choice and Individual Values for Arrow's theorem on the impossibility of a consistent ordinalist (behavior-based) utilitarianism satisfying certain apparently reasonable conditions
  * Utilitarian bioethics
  * Utility monster

## [edit] Notes

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)  
  1. ^ See the mere addition paradox.
  2. ^ Rosen, Frederick (2003). Classical Utilitarianism from Hume to Mill. Routledge, p. 28. ISBN 0415220947 "It was Hume and Bentham who then reasserted most strongly the Epicurean doctrine concerning utility as the basis of justice."
  3. ^ Mill, John Stuart. 'On Liberty', ed. Himmelfarb. Penguin Classics, 1974, Ed.'s introduction, p.11.
  4. ^ Mill, John Stuart. 'On Liberty', ed. Himmelfarb. Penguin Classics, 1974, 'Introductory' of main text, p. 68.
  5. ^ Borchard, Ruth (1957), John Stuart Mill, The Man. London: Watts.
  6. ^ David Lyons, Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism, 1965.
  7. ^ Allen Habib (2008), "Promises", in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
  8. ^ Shaw, William H. Contemporary Ethics: taking account of utilitarianism. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Inc., 1999. pp. 31-35
  9. ^ Exactly which (if any) non-humans share the property of consciousness (the "distribution question") is by no means clear: see animal consciousness.
  10. ^ Rawls, John A Theory Of Justice. Harvard Univerity Press, 1971. pp. 22-27
  11. ^ Ryder, Richard D. Painism: A Modern Morality. Centaur Press, 2001. pp. 27-29
  12. ^ Dennett, Daniel (1995), Darwin's Dangerous Idea, Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-684-82471-X.
  13. ^ Anthony Kenny What I Believe p75â80
  14. ^ Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I - Chapter Twenty-Four

## [edit] References and further reading

  * Cornman, James, et al. Philosophical Problems and Arguments - An Introduction, 4th edition Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Co., 1992.
  * Harwood, Sterling, "Eleven Objections to Utilitarianism," in Louis P. Pojman, ed., Moral Philosophy: A Reader, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Co., 2003), and in Sterling Harwood, ed., Business as Ethical and Business as Usual, Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1996, Chapter 7.
  * Lyons, David, "Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism". Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1965.
  * Martin, Michael, "A Utilitarian Kantian Principle," Philosophical Studies, (with H. Ruf), 21, 1970, pp. 90â91.
  * Rosen, Frederick (2003). Classical Utilitarianism from Hume to Mill. Routledge, p. 28. ISBN 0415220947
  * Silverstein, Harry S. A Defence of Cornmanâs Utilitarian Kantian Principle, Philosophical Studies (Dordrecht u.a.) 23, 212â215. 1972
  * Singer, Peter. The Expanding Circle: Ethics and Sociobiology, New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1981. [ISBN 0-374-15112-1]
  * Singer, Peter. Practical Ethics, 2nd edition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. [ISBN 0-521-43971-X]
  * Sumner, L. Wayne, Abortion: A Third Way, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

## [edit] External links

  * Utilitarianism entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
  * The English Utilitarians, Volume l by Sir Leslie Stephen
  * The English Utilitarians, Volume ll by Sir Leslie Stephen
  * Utilitarian Philosophers. Large compendium of writings by and about the major utilitarian philosophers, both classic and contemporary.
  * Utilitarian Resources. Collection of definitions, articles and links.
  * Felicifia. Currently the web's only Utilitarianism forum.
  * Felicifia. Utilitarianism blogs.
  * Charity International. The only utilitarian organization in the world.
  * Primer on the Elements and Forms of Utilitarianism. A convenient summary of the major points of utilitarianism.
  * Consequentialism From the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
  * A Critique of Utilitarianism (PDF) Bernard Williams' criticism of utilitarianism.
  * Utilitarianism as Secondary Ethic A concise review of Utilitarianism, its proponents and critics.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Philosophy  
Eastern philosophy Â· Western philosophy  
History

Ancient

Buddhist Â· Chinese Â· Greek Â· Hellenistic Â· Hindu Â· Indian Â· Jain Â·
Persian  
Medieval

Christian Â· Early Islamic Â· Islamic Â· Jewish Â· Judeo-Islamic  
Modern

Empiricism Â· Rationalism  
Contemporary

Analytic Â· Continental  
Lists

Basic topics Â· Topic list Â· Philosophers Â· Glossary of philosophical
theories Â· List of philosophical theories Â· Movements Â· more  
Branches

Aesthetics Â· Ethics Â· Epistemology Â· Logic Â· Metaphysics  
Philosophy of

Action Â· Biology Â· Chemistry Â· Education Â· Economics Â· Environment Â·
Geography Â· Information Â· Healthcare Â· History Â· Human nature Â· Humor Â·
Language Â· Law Â· Literature Â· Mathematics Â· Mind Â· Music Â· Being Â·
Philosophy Â· Physics Â· Politics Â· Psychology Â· Religion Â· Science Â·
Social science Â· Technology Â· War  
Schools

Aristotelianism Â· Averroism Â· Avicennism Â· Critical theory Â· Cynicism Â·
Deconstructionism Â· Deontology Â· Dialectical materialism Â· Dualism Â·
Egoism Â· Epicureanism Â· Epiphenomenalism Â· Existentialism Â· Feminist Â·
Functionalism Â· Hedonism Â· Hegelianism Â· Hermeneutics Â· Humanism Â·
Idealism Â· Kantianism Â· Kyoto School Â· Individualism Â· Logical positivism
Â· Marxism Â· Materialism Â· Monism Â· Naturalism Â· Neoplatonism Â· New
Philosophers Â· Nihilism Â· Ordinary language Â· Particularism Â· Peripatetic
Â· Phenomenology Â· Platonism Â· Positivism Â· Posthumanism Â· Postmodernism
Â· Poststructuralism Â· Pragmatism Â· Presocratic Â· Process Â· Solipsism Â·
Realism Â· Relativism Â· Scholasticism Â· Skepticism Â· Stoicism Â·
Structuralism Â· Thomism Â· Utilitarianism  
Portal Â· Category listings  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Political ideologies  
Anarchism Â· Christian democracy Â· Communism Â· Communitarianism Â·
Conservatism Â· Fascism Â· Feminism Â· Green politics Â· Liberalism Â·
Libertarianism Â· Nationalism Â· Social democracy Â· Socialism

<IMG> Politics portal  
List of political ideologies Â· List of political parties by ideology  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utilitarianism"

Categories: Classical liberalism | Utilitarianism

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 |
Articles with unsourced statements since August 2007 | Articles with unsourced
statements since June 2008 | Articles needing additional references from
August 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * á áá­á
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 14:56.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



