
# n-body problem

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the problem in classical mechanics. For the problem in
quantum mechanics, see Many-body problem.

The n-body problem is the problem of finding, given the initial positions,
masses, and velocities of n bodies, their subsequent motions as determined by
classical mechanics, i.e., Newton's laws of motion and Newton's law of
gravity.

## Contents

  * 1 Mathematical formulation of the n-body problem
    * 1.1 General considerations: solving the n-body problem
  * 2 Two-body problem
  * 3 Three-body problem
  * 4 King Oscar II Prize about the solution for the n-body problem
  * 5 Sundman's theorem for the 3-body problem
  * 6 The global solution of the n-body problem
    * 6.1 Singularities of the n-body problem
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Mathematical formulation of the n-body problem

The general n-body problem of celestial mechanics is an initial-value problem
for ordinary differential equations. Given initial values for the positions
\\mathbf{q}_j\(0\) and velocities \\dot\\mathbf{q}_j\(0\) of n particles (j =
1,...,n) with \\mathbf{q}_j\(0\) \\neq \\mathbf{q}_k\(0\)  for all mutually
distinct j and k , find the solution of the second order system

 m_j    \\ddot{\\mathbf{q}}_j   = \\gamma \\sum\\limits_{k\\neq j }
\\frac{m_j
m_k\(\\mathbf{q}_k-\\mathbf{q}_j\)}{|\\mathbf{q}_k-\\mathbf{q}_j|^3},
j=1,\\ldots,n \\qquad \\qquad \\qquad \(1\)

where  m_1,m_2,\\ldots m_n  are constants representing the masses of n point-
masses and \\mathbf{q}_1,\\mathbf{q}_2,\\ldots,\\mathbf{q}_n  are
3-dimensional vector functions of the time variable t, describing the
positions of the point masses. This equation is simply Newton's second law of
motion; the left-hand side is the mass times acceleration for the jth
particle, whereas the right-hand side is the sum of the forces on that
particle. The forces are assumed here to be gravitational and given by
Newton's law of universal gravitation; thus, they are proportional to the
masses involved, and vary as the inverse square of the distance between the
masses. The power of three in the denominator is correct, since it balances
the vector difference in the numerator, which is necessary to specify the
direction of the force.

For n = 2, the problem was completely solved by Johann Bernoulli (see Two-body
problem below).

### [edit] General considerations: solving the n-body problem

In the physical literature about the n-body problem (n â¥ 3), sometimes
reference is made to the impossibility of solving the n-body problem. However
one has to be careful here, as this applies to the method of first integrals
(compare the theorems by Abel and Galois about the impossibility of solving
algebraic equations of degree five or higher by means of formulas only
involving roots).

The n-body problem contains 6n variables, since each point particle is
represented by three space (displacement) and three velocity components. First
integrals (for ordinary differential equations) are functions that remain
constant along any given solution of the system, the constant depending on the
solution. In other words, integrals provide relations between the variables of
the system, so each scalar integral would normally allow the reduction of the
system's dimension by one unit. Of course, this reduction can take place only
if the integral is an algebraic function not very complicated with respect to
its variables. If the integral is transcendent the reduction cannot be
performed.

The n-body problem has 10 independent algebraic integrals

  1. three for the center of mass
  2. three for the linear momentum
  3. three for the angular momentum
  4. one for the energy.

This allows the reduction of variables to 6n â 10\. The question at that
time was whether there exist other integrals besides these 10. The answer was
given in 1887 by H. Bruns.

Theorem (First integrals of the n-body problem) The only linearly independent
integrals of the n-body problem, which are algebraic with respect to q, p and
t are the 10 described above.

(This theorem was later generalized by PoincarÃ©). These results however do
not imply that there does not exist a general solution of the n-body problem
or that the perturbation series (Lindstedt series) diverges. Indeed Sundman
provided such a solution by means of convergent series. (See Sundman's theorem
for the 3-body problem).

## [edit] Two-body problem

Main article: Two-body problem

If the common center of mass of the two bodies is considered to be at rest,
each body travels along a conic section which has a focus at the center of
mass of the system (in the case of a hyperbola: the branch at the side of that
focus). The two conics will be in the same plane. The type of conic (circle,
ellipse, parabola or hyperbola) is determined by finding the sum of the
combined kinetic energy of two bodies and the potential energy when the bodies
are far apart. (This potential energy is always a negative value; energy of
rotation of the bodies about their axes is not counted here).

  * If the sum of the energies is negative, then they both trace out ellipses.
  * If the sum of both energies is zero, then they both trace out parabolas. As the distance between the bodies tends to infinity, their relative speed tends to zero.
  * If the sum of both energies is positive, then they both trace out hyperbolas. As the distance between the bodies tends to infinity, their relative speed tends to some positive number.

Note: The fact that a parabolic orbit has zero energy arises from the
assumption that the gravitational potential energy goes to zero as the bodies
get infinitely far apart. One could assign any value (e.g. 42 joules) to the
potential energy in the state of infinite separation. That state is assumed to
have zero potential energy (i.e. 0 joules) by convention.

See also Kepler's first law of planetary motion.

## [edit] Three-body problem

For n â¥ 3 very little is known about the n-body problem. The case n = 3 was
most studied and for many results can be generalised to larger n. Many of the
early attempts to understand the 3-body problem were quantitative, aiming at
finding explicit solutions for special situations.

  * In 1687 Isaac Newton published in the Principia the first steps taken in the definition and study of the problem of the movements of three bodies subject to their mutual gravitational attractions. His descriptions were verbal and geometrical, see especially Book 1, Proposition 66 and its corollaries (Newton, 1687 and 1999(transl.), see also Tisserand, 1894).
  * In 1767 Euler found the collinear periodic orbits, in which three bodies of any masses move such that they oscillate along a rotation line.
  * In 1772 Lagrange discovered some periodic solutions which lie at the vertices of a rotating equilateral triangle that shrinks and expands periodically. Those solutions led to the study of central configurations , for which \\ddot q=kq  for some constant k>0 .

Specific solutions to three-body problem result in chaotic motion with no
obvious sign of a repetitious path. A major study of the Earth-Moon-Sun system
was undertaken by Charles-EugÃ¨ne Delaunay, who published two volumes on the
topic, each of 900 pages in length, in 1860 and 1867. Among many other
accomplishments, the work already hints at chaos, and clearly demonstrates the
problem of so-called "small denominators" in perturbation theory.

The restricted three-body problem assumes that the mass of one of the bodies
is negligible; the circular restricted three-body problem is the special case
in which two of the bodies are in circular orbits (approximated by the Sun-
Earth-Moon system and many others). For a discussion of the case where the
negligible body is a satellite of the body of lesser mass, see Hill sphere;
for binary systems, see Roche lobe; for another stable system, see Lagrangian
point.

The restricted problem (both circular and elliptical) was worked on
extensively by many famous mathematicians and physicists, notably Lagrange in
the 18th century and PoincarÃ© at the end of the 19th century. PoincarÃ©'s
work on the restricted three-body problem was the foundation of deterministic
chaos theory. In the circular problem, there exist five equilibrium points.
Three are collinear with the masses (in the rotating frame) and are unstable.
The remaining two are located on the third vertex of both equilateral
triangles of which the two bodies are the first and second vertices. This may
be easier to visualize if one considers the more massive body (e.g., Sun) to
be "stationary" in space, and the less massive body (e.g., Jupiter) to orbit
around it, with the equilibrium points maintaining the 60 degree-spacing ahead
of and behind the less massive body in its orbit (although in reality neither
of the bodies is truly stationary; they both orbit the center of mass of the
whole system). For sufficiently small mass ratio of the primaries, these
triangular equilibrium points are stable, such that (nearly) massless
particles will orbit about these points as they orbit around the larger
primary (Sun). The five equilibrium points of the circular problem are known
as the Lagrange points.

## [edit] King Oscar II Prize about the solution for the n-body problem

The problem of finding the general solution of the n-body problem was
considered very important and challenging. Indeed in the late 1800s King Oscar
II of Sweden, advised by GÃ¶sta Mittag-Leffler, established a prize for anyone
who could find the solution to the problem. The announcement was quite
specific:

> Given a system of arbitrarily many mass points that attract each according
to Newton's law, under the assumption that no two points ever collide, try to
find a representation of the coordinates of each point as a series in a
variable that is some known function of time and for all of whose values the
series converges uniformly.

In case the problem could not be solved, any other important contribution to
classical mechanics would then be considered to be prize-worthy. The prize was
finally awarded to PoincarÃ©, even though he did not solve the original
problem. (The first version of his contribution even contained a serious
error; for details see the article by Diacu). The version finally printed
contained many important ideas which led to the theory of chaos. The problem
as stated originally was finally solved by Karl Fritiof Sundman for n=3.

## [edit] Sundman's theorem for the 3-body problem

In 1912, the Finnish mathematician Karl Fritiof Sundman proved that there
exists a series solution in powers of t1 / 3 for the 3-body problem. This
series is convergent for all real t, except initial data which correspond to
zero angular momentum. However these initial data are not generic since they
have Lebesgue measure zero.

An important issue in proving this result is the fact that the radius of
convergence for this series is determined by the distance to the nearest
singularity. Therefore it is necessary to study the possible singularities of
the 3-body problems. As it will be briefly discussed in the next section, the
only singularities in the 3-body problem are

  1. binary collisions
  2. triple collisions.

Now collisions, whether binary or triple (in fact of arbitrary order), are
somehow improbable since it has been shown that they correspond to a set of
initial data of measure zero. However there is no criterion known to be put on
the initial state in order to avoid collisions for the corresponding solution.
So Sundman's strategy consisted of the following steps:

  1. He first was able, using an appropriate change of variables, to continue analytically the solution beyond the binary collision, a process known as regularization .
  2. He then proved that triple collisions only occur when the angular momentum c vanishes. By restricting the initial data to  \\mathbf{c}\\neq 0  he removed all real singularities from the transformed equations for the 3-body problem.
  3. The next step consisted in showing that if \\mathbf{c}\\neq 0   then not only can there be no triple collision, but the system is strictly bounded away from a triple collision. This implies, by using the Cauchy existence theorem for differential equations, that there are no complex singularities in a strip (depending on the value of c) in the complex plane centered around the real axis.
  4. The last step is then to find a conformal transformation which maps this strip into the unit disc. For example if s = t1 / 3 (the new variable after the regularization) and if |\\mathop{\\text{Im}} \\, s| \\leq \\beta  then this map is given by

    
     \\sigma = \\frac{e^{\\pi s/\(2\\beta\)} - 1}{e^{\\pi s/\(2\\beta\) }+1}. 
This finishes the proof of Sundman's theorem. Unfortunately the corresponding
convergent series converges very slowly. That is, getting the value to any
useful precision requires so many terms that his solution is of little
practical use.

## [edit] The global solution of the n-body problem

In order to generalize Sundman's result for the case n>3 (or n=3 and c=0) one
has to face two obstacles:

  1. As it has been shown by Siegel, that collisions which involve more than 2 bodies cannot be regularized analytically, hence Sundman's regularization cannot be generalized.
  2. The structure of singularities is more complicated in this case, other types of singularities may occur.

Finally Sundman's result was generalized to the case of n>3 bodies by Q. Wang
in the 1990s. Since the structure of singularities is more complicated, Wang
had to leave out completely the questions of singularities. The central point
of his approach is to transform, in an appropriate manner, the equations to a
new system, such that the interval of existence for the solutions of this new
system is

\[0,\\infty\)

.

### [edit] Singularities of the n-body problem

Main article: PainlevÃ©'s conjecture

There can be two types of singularities of the n-body problem:

  * collisions of one, two or n particles, but for which q(t) remains finite.
  * singularities in which a collapse does not occur, but q(t) does not remain finite. The latter ones are called no-collisions singularities. Their existence has been conjectured for n > 3 by PainlevÃ© (see PainlevÃ©'s conjecture). Examples of this behavior have been constructed by Xia[1] and Gerver.

## [edit] See also

  * Many-body problem (quantum mechanics)
  * Euler's three-body problem
  * Virial theorem
  * Few-body systems
  * natural units
  * N-body simulation

## [edit] References

  * Diacu, F.: The solution of the n-body Problem, The Mathematical Intelligencer,1996,18,p.66â70
  * Mittag-Leffler, G.: The n-body problem (Price Announcement), Acta Matematica, 1885/1886,7
  * Saari, D.: A visit to the Newtonian n-body Problem via Elementary Complex Variables, American Mathematical Monthly, 1990, 89, 105â119
  * Newton, I.: Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, London, 1687: also English translation of 3rd (1726) edition by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman (Berkeley, CA, 1999).
  * Wang, Qiudong: The global solution of the n-body problem (Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy (ISSN 0923-2958), vol. 50, no. 1, 1991, p. 73â88., URI retrieved on 2007-05-05)
  * Sundman, K. E.: Memoire sur le probleme de trois corps, Acta Mathematica 36 (1912): 105â179.
  * Tisserand, F-F.: Mecanique Celeste, tome III (Paris, 1894), ch.III, at p.27.
  * Hagihara, Y: Celestial Mechanics. (Vol I and Vol II pt 1 and Vol II pt 2.) MIT Press, 1970.
  * Boccaletti, D. and Pucacco, G.: Theory of Orbits (two volumes). Springer-Verlag, 1998.

  1. ^ Z. Xia, âThe Existence of Noncollision Singularities in Newtonian Systems,â Annals Math. 135, 411-468, 1992

## [edit] External links

  * Three-Body Problem at Scholarpedia
  * More detailed information on the three-body problem
  * Regular Keplerian motions in classical many-body systems
  * Applets demonstrating many different three-body motions
  * On the integration of the n-body equations
  * Artistic flash simulation of the n-body problem, depicting a fictitious solar system
  * A java applet to simulate the 3-d movement of set of particles under gravitational interaction
  * Javascript Simulation of our Solar System

v â¢ d â¢ e

Orbits  
Types  
General

Box Â· Capture Â· Circular Â· Elliptical / Highly elliptical Â· Escape Â·
Graveyard Â· Hyperbolic trajectory Â· Inclined / Non-inclined Â· Osculating Â·
Parabolic trajectory Â· Parking Â· Synchronous (semi Â· sub)  
Geocentric

Geosynchronous Â· Geostationary Â· Sun-synchronous Â· Low Earth Â· Medium
Earth Â· Molniya Â· Near-equatorial Â· Orbit of the Moon Â· Polar Â· Tundra  
Other

Areosynchronous Â· Areostationary Â· Halo Â· Lissajous Â· Lunar Â·
Heliocentric Â· Heliosynchronous  
Parameters  
Classical

i\\,\\! Inclination Â· \\Omega\\,\\! Longitude of the ascending node Â·
e\\,\\! Eccentricity Â· \\omega\\,\\! Argument of periapsis Â· a\\,\\! Semi-
major axis Â· M_o\\,\\! Mean anomaly at epoch  
Other

\\nu\\,\\! True anomaly Â· b\\,\\! Semi-minor axis Â· \\epsilon\\,\\! Linear
eccentricity Â· E\\,\\! Eccentric anomaly Â· L\\,\\! Mean longitude Â· l\\,\\!
True longitude Â· T\\,\\! Orbital period  
Maneuvers  
Bi-elliptic transfer Â· Geostationary transfer Â· Gravity assist Â· Hohmann
transfer Â· Inclination change Â· Phasing Â· Rendezvous Â· Transposition,
docking, and extraction  
Other orbital mechanics topics  
Apsis Â· Celestial coordinate system Â· Delta-v budget Â· Epoch Â· Ephemeris
Â· Equatorial coordinate system Â· Gravity turn Â· Ground track Â·
Interplanetary Transport Network Â· Kepler's laws of planetary motion Â·
Lagrangian point Â· Low energy transfers Â· n-body problem Â· Oberth effect Â·
Orbit equation Â· Orbital speed Â· Orbital state vectors Â· Perturbation Â·
Retrograde and direct motion Â· Specific orbital energy Â· Specific relative
angular momentum  
List of orbits  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-body_problem"

Categories: Celestial mechanics | Orbits | Classical mechanics | Computational
problems

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 03:50 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



