
# Protein folding

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Protein before and after folding.

Protein folding is the physical process by which a polypeptide folds into its
characteristic and functional three-dimensional structure.[1]

Each protein begins as a polypeptide, translated from a sequence of mRNA as a
linear chain of amino acids. This polypeptide lacks any developed three-
dimensional structure (the left hand side of the neighboring figure). However
each amino acid in the chain can be thought of having certain 'gross' chemical
features. These may be hydrophobic, hydrophilic, or electrically charged, for
example. These interact with each other and their surroundings in the cell to
produce a well-defined, three dimensional shape, the folded protein (the right
hand side of the figure), known as the native state. The resulting three-
dimensional structure is determined by the sequence of the amino acids.[2] The
mechanism of protein folding is not completely understood.

Experimentally determining the three dimensional structure of a protein is
often very difficult and expensive. However the sequence of that protein is
often known. Therefore scientists have tried to use different biophysical
techniques to computationally fold a protein, that is, to predict the
structure of the complete protein from the sequence of the protein.

For many proteins the correct three dimensional structure is essential to
function.[3] Failure to fold into the intended shape usually produces inactive
proteins with different properties (details found under prion). Several
neurodegenerative and other diseases are believed to result from the
accumulation of misfolded (incorrectly folded) proteins.[4]

## Contents

  * 1 Known facts about the process
    * 1.1 The relationship between folding and amino acid sequence
    * 1.2 Disruption of the native state
    * 1.3 Incorrect protein folding and neurodegenerative disease
    * 1.4 Kinetics and the Levinthal Paradox
  * 2 Techniques for studying protein folding
    * 2.1 Circular Dichroism
    * 2.2 Dual Polarization Interferometry
    * 2.3 Modern studies of folding with high time resolution
    * 2.4 Energy landscape theory of protein folding
    * 2.5 Computational prediction of protein tertiary structure
    * 2.6 Techniques for determination of protein structure
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Known facts about the process

### [edit] The relationship between folding and amino acid sequence

<IMG>

<IMG>

Illustration of the main driving force behind protein structure formation. In
the compact fold (to the right), the hydrophobic amino acids (shown as black
spheres) are in general shielded from the solvent.

The amino-acid sequence (or primary structure) of a protein predisposes it
towards its native conformation or conformations. It will fold spontaneously
during or after synthesis. While these macromolecules may be regarded as
"folding themselves", the mechanism depends equally on the characteristics of
the cytosol, including the nature of the primary solvent (water or lipid),
macromolecular crowding,[5] the concentration of salts, the temperature, and
molecular chaperones.

Most folded proteins have a hydrophobic core in which side chain packing
stabilizes the folded state, and charged or polar side chains on the solvent-
exposed surface where they interact with surrounding water molecules. It is
generally accepted that minimizing the number of hydrophobic side-chains
exposed to water is the principal driving force behind the folding process,[6]
although a recent theory has been proposed which reassesses the contributions
made by hydrogen bonding.[7]The strengths of hydrogen bonds in a protein vary,
i.e. they are dependent on their microenvironment, thus H-bonds enveloped in a
hydrophobic core contribute more than H-bonds exposed to the aqueous
environment to the stability of the native state.[8]

The process of folding in vivo often begins co-translationally, so that the
N-terminus of the protein begins to fold while the C-terminal portion of the
protein is still being synthesized by the ribosome. Specialized proteins
called chaperones assist in the folding of other proteins.[9] A well studied
example is the bacterial GroEL system, which assists in the folding of
globular proteins. In eukaryotic organisms chaperones are known as heat shock
proteins. Although most globular proteins are able to assume their native
state unassisted, chaperone-assisted folding is often necessary in the crowded
intracellular environment to prevent aggregation; chaperones are also used to
prevent misfolding and aggregation which may occur as a consequence of
exposure to heat or other changes in the cellular environment.

For the most part, scientists have been able to study many identical molecules
folding together en masse. At the coarsest level, it appears that in
transitioning to the native state, a given amino acid sequence takes on
roughly the same route and proceeds through roughly the same intermediates and
transition states. Often folding involves first the establishment of regular
secondary and supersecondary structures, particularly alpha helices and beta
sheets, and afterwards tertiary structure. Formation of quaternary structure
usually involves the "assembly" or "coassembly" of subunits that have already
folded. The regular alpha helix and beta sheet structures fold rapidly because
they are stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonds, as was first
characterized by Linus Pauling. Protein folding may involve covalent bonding
in the form of disulfide bridges formed between two cysteine residues or the
formation of metal clusters. Shortly before settling into their more
energetically favourable native conformation, molecules may pass through an
intermediate "molten globule" state.

The essential fact of folding, however, remains that the amino acid sequence
of each protein contains the information that specifies both the native
structure and the pathway to attain that state. This is not to say that nearly
identical amino acid sequences always fold similarly.[10] Conformations differ
based on environmental factors as well; similar proteins fold differently
based on where they are found. Folding is a spontaneous process independent of
energy inputs from nucleoside triphosphates. The passage of the folded state
is mainly guided by hydrophobic interactions, formation of intramolecular
hydrogen bonds, and van der Waals forces, and it is opposed by conformational
entropy.

### [edit] Disruption of the native state

In certain solutions and under some conditions proteins will not fold into
their biochemically functional forms. Temperatures above (and sometimes those
below) the range that cells tend to live in will cause thermally unstable
proteins to unfold or "denature" (this is why boiling makes an egg white turn
opaque). High concentrations of solutes, extremes of pH, mechanical forces,
and the presence of chemical denaturants can do the same. A fully denatured
protein lacks both tertiary and secondary structure, and exists as a so-called
random coil. Under certain conditions some proteins can refold; however, in
many cases denaturation is irreversible.[11] Cells sometimes protect their
proteins against the denaturing influence of heat with enzymes known as
chaperones or heat shock proteins, which assist other proteins both in folding
and in remaining folded. Some proteins never fold in cells at all except with
the assistance of chaperone molecules, which either isolate individual
proteins so that their folding is not interrupted by interactions with other
proteins or help to unfold misfolded proteins, giving them a second chance to
refold properly. This function is crucial to prevent the risk of precipitation
into insoluble amorphous aggregates.

### [edit] Incorrect protein folding and neurodegenerative disease

Aggregated proteins are associated with prion-related illnesses such as
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease),
amyloid-related illnesses such as Alzheimer's Disease and familial amyloid
cardiomyopathy or polyneuropathy, as well as intracytoplasmic aggregation
diseases such as Huntington's and Parkinson's disease. These age onset
degenerative diseases are associated with the multimerization of misfolded
proteins into insoluble, extracellular aggregates and/or intracellular
inclusions including cross-beta sheet amyloid fibrils; it is not clear whether
the aggregates are the cause or merely a reflection of the loss of protein
homeostasis, the balance between synthesis, folding, aggregation and protein
turnover. Misfolding and excessive degradation instead of folding and function
leads to a number of proteopathy diseases such as antitrypsin-associated
Emphysema, cystic fibrosis and the lysosomal storage diseases, where loss of
function is the origin of the disorder. While protein replacement therapy has
historically been used to correct the latter disorders, an emerging approach
is to use pharmaceutical chaperones to fold mutated proteins to render them
functional. Christopher M. Dobson, Jeffery W. Kelly, Dennis Selkoe, Stanley
Prusiner, Peter T. Lansbury, William E. Balch, Richard I. Morimoto, Susan L.
Lindquist and Byron C. Caughey have all contributed to this emerging
understanding of diseases that are some of the most menacing of our era.

### [edit] Kinetics and the Levinthal Paradox

The entire duration of the folding process varies dramatically depending on
the protein of interest. The slowest folding proteins require many minutes or
hours to fold, primarily due to proline isomerizations or wrong disulfide bond
formations, and must pass through a number of intermediate states, like
checkpoints, before the process is complete.[12] On the other hand, very small
single-domain proteins with lengths of up to a hundred amino acids typically
fold in a single step.[13] Time scales of milliseconds are the norm and the
very fastest known protein folding reactions are complete within a few
microseconds.[14]

The Levinthal paradox[15] observes that if a protein were to fold by
sequentially sampling all possible conformations, it would take an
astronomical amount of time to do so, even if the conformations were sampled
at a rapid rate (on the nanosecond or picosecond scale). Based upon the
observation that proteins fold much faster than this, Levinthal then proposed
that a random conformational search does not occur in folding, and the protein
must, therefore, fold by a directed process.

## [edit] Techniques for studying protein folding

### [edit] Circular Dichroism

Circular dichroism is one of the most general and basic tools to study protein
folding. Circular dichroism spectroscopy measures the absorption of circularly
polarized light. In proteins, structures such as alpha helicies and beta
sheets are chiral, and thus absorb such light. The absorption of this light
acts as a marker of the degree of foldedness of the protein ensemble. This
technique can be used to measure equilibrium unfolding of the protein by
measuring the change in this absorption as a function of denaturant
concentration or temperature. A denaturant melt measures the free energy of
unfolding as well as the protein's m value, or denaturant dependence. A
temperature melt measures the melting temperature (Tm) of the protein. This
type of spectroscopy can also be combined with fast-mixing devices, such as
stopped flow, to measure protein folding kinetics and to generate chevron
plots.

### [edit] Dual Polarization Interferometry

Dual polarisation interferometry (DPI) has emerged over the past decade as an
analytical technique that can probe protein layers adsorbed to the surface of
a waveguide by using the evanescent wave of a laser beam confined to the
waveguide.

DPI focuses laser light into two waveguides, one, the "sensing" waveguide,
with an exposed surface and one to create a reference beam. A two-dimensional
interference pattern is formed in the far field by combining the light passing
through the two waveguides. The DPI technique uses two polarisation of the
laser to excite two polarisation modes of the waveguides. Measurement of the
interferogram for both polarisations allows both the refractive index (protein
density or fold) and the size (conformation) of the adsorbed layer to be
calculated. Real time measurements of biochemistry take place in a flow-
through system. These measurements can be used to infer structural information
about the molecular interactions at sub atomic resolution and is typically
used to characterise biochemical interactions.

The latest versions of Dual Polarisation Interferometers also have the
capability to quantify the order and disruption in birefringent thin films.
This has been used, for example, to study the formation of lipid bilayers and
their interaction with membrane proteins.

### [edit] Modern studies of folding with high time resolution

The study of protein folding has been greatly advanced in recent years by the
development of fast, time-resolved techniques. These are experimental methods
for rapidly triggering the folding of a sample of unfolded protein, and then
observing the resulting dynamics. Fast techniques in widespread use include
ultrafast mixing of solutions, photochemical methods, and laser temperature
jump spectroscopy. Among the many scientists who have contributed to the
development of these techniques are Heinrich Roder, Harry Gray, Martin
Gruebele, Brian Dyer, William Eaton, Sheena Radford, Chris Dobson, Sir Alan R.
Fersht and Bengt NÃ¶lting.

### [edit] Energy landscape theory of protein folding

The protein folding phenomenon was largely an experimental endeavor until the
formulation of energy landscape theory by Joseph Bryngelson and Peter Wolynes
in the late 1980s and early 1990s. This approach introduced the principle of
minimal frustration, which asserts that evolution has selected the amino acid
sequences of natural proteins so that interactions between side chains largely
favor the molecule's acquisition of the folded state. Interactions that do not
favor folding are selected against, although some residual frustration is
expected to exist. A consequence of these evolutionarily selected sequences is
that proteins are generally thought to have globally "funneled energy
landscapes" (coined by JosÃ© Onuchic) that are largely directed towards the
native state. This "folding funnel" landscape allows the protein to fold to
the native state through any of a large number of pathways and intermediates,
rather than being restricted to a single mechanism. The theory is supported by
both computational simulations of model proteins and numerous experimental
studies, and it has been used to improve methods for protein structure
prediction and design.

### [edit] Computational prediction of protein tertiary structure

De novo or ab initio techniques for computational protein structure prediction
is related to, but strictly distinct from, studies involving protein folding.
Molecular Dynamics (MD) is an important tool for studying protein folding and
dynamics in silico. Because of computational cost, ab initio MD folding
simulations with explicit water are limited to peptides and very small
proteins. MD simulations of larger proteins remain restricted to dynamics of
the experimental structure or its high-temperature unfolding. In order to
simulate long time folding processes (beyond about 1 microsecond), like
folding of small-size proteins (about 50 residues) or larger, some
approximations or simplifications in protein models need to be introduced. An
approach using reduced protein representation (pseudo-atoms representing
groups of atoms are defined) and statistical potential is not only useful in
protein structure prediction, but is also capable of reproducing the folding
pathways.[16]

Because of the many possible ways of folding, there can be many possible
structures. A peptide consisting of just five amino acids can fold into over
100 billion possible structures.[17]

### [edit] Techniques for determination of protein structure

The determination of the folded structure of a protein is a lengthy and
complicated process, involving methods like X-ray crystallography and NMR. One
of the major areas of interest is the prediction of native structure from
amino-acid sequences alone using bioinformatics and computational simulation
methods.

There are distributed computing projects which use idle CPU time of personal
computers to solve problems such as protein folding or prediction of protein
structure. People can run these programs on their computer or PlayStation 3 to
support them. See links below (for example Folding@Home) to get information
about how to participate in these projects.

## [edit] See also

  * Protein structure prediction
  * Folding (chemistry)
  * Anfinsen's dogma
  * Levinthal paradox
  * Denaturation (biochemistry)
  * Protein design
  * Chevron plot
  * Denaturation midpoint
  * Equilibrium unfolding
  * Folding@Home
  * Rosetta@Home
  * Downhill folding
  * Foldit computer game
  * Software for molecular mechanics modeling

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Alberts, Bruce; Alexander Johnson, Julian Lewis, Martin Raff, Keith Roberts, and Peter Walters (2002). "The Shape and Structure of Proteins". Molecular Biology of the Cell; Fourth Edition. New York and London: Garland Science. ISBN 0-8153-3218-1.
  2. ^ Anfinsen C (1972). "The formation and stabilization of protein structure". Biochem. J. 128 (4): 737â49. PMID 4565129.
  3. ^ Jeremy M. Berg, John L. Tymoczko, Lubert Stryer; Web content by Neil D. Clarke (2002). "3. Protein Structure and Function". Biochemistry. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman. ISBN 0-7167-4684-0.
  4. ^ "Science of Folding@Home". July 18, 2005. http://folding.stanford.edu/science.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-22.
  5. ^ van den Berg B, Wain R, Dobson CM, Ellis RJ (August 2000). "Macromolecular crowding perturbs protein refolding kinetics: implications for folding inside the cell". Embo J. 19 (15): 3870â5. doi:10.1093/emboj/19.15.3870. PMID 10921869.
  6. ^ Pace C, Shirley B, McNutt M, Gajiwala K (1996). "Forces contributing to the conformational stability of proteins". Faseb J. 10 (1): 75â83. PMID 8566551. http://www.fasebj.org/cgi/reprint/10/1/75.
  7. ^ Rose G, Fleming P, Banavar J, Maritan A (2006). "A backbone-based theory of protein folding". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103 (45): 16623â33. doi:10.1073/pnas.0606843103. PMID 17075053.
  8. ^ Deechongkit S, Nguyen H, Dawson PE, Gruebele M, Kelly JW (2004). "Context Dependent Contributions of Backbone H-Bonding to Î²-Sheet Folding Energetics". Nature 403 (45): 101â105. doi:10.1073/pnas.0606843103. PMID 17075053.
  9. ^ Lee S, Tsai F (2005). "Molecular chaperones in protein quality control". J. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 38 (3): 259â65. PMID 15943899. http://www.jbmb.or.kr/fulltext/jbmb/view.php?vol=38&page=259.
  10. ^ Alexander PA, He Y, Chen Y, Orban J, Bryan PN. (2007). "The design and characterization of two proteins with 88% sequence identity but different structure and function". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 104 (29): 11963â8. doi:10.1073/pnas.0700922104. PMID 17609385. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?tool=pubmed&pubmedid=17609385.
  11. ^ Shortle D (1996). "The denatured state (the other half of the folding equation) and its role in protein stability". Faseb J. 10 (1): 27â34. PMID 8566543. http://www.fasebj.org/cgi/reprint/10/1/27.
  12. ^ P.S. Kim & R.L. Baldwin (1990). "Intermediates in the folding reactions of small proteins". Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59: 631â660. doi:10.1146/annurev.bi.59.070190.003215.
  13. ^ S.E. Jackson (August 1998). "How do small single-domain proteins fold?" ([dead link] â Scholar search). Fold. Des. 3: R81âR91. doi:10.1016/S1359-0278(98)00033-9. ISSN 1359-0278. http://biomednet.com/elecref/13590278003R0081.
  14. ^ J. Kubelka, et al. (2004). "The protein folding "speed limit"". Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 14: 76â88. doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2004.01.013.
  15. ^ C. Levinthal (1968). "Are there pathways for protein folding?". J. Chim. Phys. 65: 44â45.
  16. ^ Kmiecik S and Kolinski A (2007). "Characterization of protein-folding pathways by reduced-space modeling". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104 (30): 12330â12335. doi:10.1073/pnas.0702265104. PMID 17636132.
  17. ^ Steven Schultz (1999). "Math helps explain protein folding". Princeton Weekly Bulletin 89 (3). http://www.princeton.edu/pr/pwb/99/0927/math.shtml.

## [edit] External links

  * FoldIt - Folding Protein Game
  * Folding@Home
  * Rosetta@Home

v â¢ d â¢ e

Protein tertiary structure  
General

Structural domain | Protein folding | Structure determination methods  
All-Î± folds:

Helix bundle | Globin fold | Homeodomain fold | Alpha solenoid  
All-Î² folds:

Immunoglobulin fold | Beta barrel | Beta-propeller  
Î±/Î² folds:

TIM barrel | Leucine-rich repeat | Flavodoxin fold | Rossmann fold |
Thioredoxin fold | Trefoil knot fold  
Î±+Î² folds:

DNA clamp | Ferredoxin fold | Ribonuclease A | SH2-like fold  
Irregular folds:

Conotoxin  
âSecondary structure

Quaternary structureâ  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Proteins  
Processes

Protein biosynthesis \- Posttranslational modification \- Protein folding \-
Protein targeting \- Proteome \- Protein methods  
Structures

Protein structure \- Protein structural domains \- Proteasome  
Types

List of types of proteins \- List of proteins \- Membrane protein \- Globular
protein (Globulin, Albumin) - Fibrous protein  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protein_folding"

Categories: Protein structure | Protein folds

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 December 2008, at 22:43.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



