
# Schwarzschild radius

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The above diagram illustrates five interrelated properties of mass together
with the proportionality constants that relate these properties. Every sample
of mass is believed to exhibit all five properties, however, due to extremely
large proportionality constants, it is generally impossible to verify more
than two or three properties for a specific sample of mass.

  * The Schwarzschild radius (rs) represents the ability of mass to cause curvature in space and time.
  * The standard gravitational parameter (Î¼) represents the ability of a massive body to exert Newtonian gravitational forces on other bodies.
  * Inertial mass (m) represents the Newtonian response of mass to forces.
  * Rest energy (E0) represents the ability of mass to be converted into other forms of energy.
  * The Compton wavelength (Î») represents the response of mass to local geometry.

The Schwarzschild radius (sometimes historically referred to as the
gravitational radius) is a characteristic radius associated with every mass.
It is the radius for a given mass where, if that mass could be compressed to
fit within that radius, no known force or degeneracy pressure could stop it
from continuing to collapse into a gravitational singularity. The term is used
in physics and astronomy, especially in the theory of gravitation, and general
relativity.

In 1916, Karl Schwarzschild obtained an exact solution[1][2] to Einstein's
field equations for the gravitational field outside a non-rotating,
spherically symmetric body (see Schwarzschild metric). The solution contained
a term of the form 1 / (2M â r); the value of r making this term singular
has come to be known as the Schwarzschild radius. The physical significance of
this singularity, and whether this singularity could ever occur in nature, was
debated for many decades; a general acceptance of the possibility of a black
hole did not occur until the second half of the 20th century.

The Schwarzschild radius of an object is proportional to the mass.
Accordingly, the Sun has a Schwarzschild radius of approximately 3 km[3],
while the Earth's is only about 9 mm, the size of a peanut.

An object smaller than its Schwarzschild radius is called a black hole. The
surface at the Schwarzschild radius acts as an event horizon in a non-rotating
body. (A rotating black hole operates slightly differently.) Neither light nor
particles can escape through this surface from the region inside, hence the
name "black hole". The Schwarzschild radius of the (currently hypothesized)
Supermassive black hole at our Galactic Center would be approximately 7.8
million km.

## Contents

  * 1 Formula for the Schwarzschild radius
  * 2 Classification by Schwarzschild radius
    * 2.1 Supermassive black hole
    * 2.2 Stellar black hole
    * 2.3 Primordial black hole
  * 3 History
  * 4 Other uses for the Schwarzschild radius
    * 4.1 The Schwarzschild radius in gravitational time dilation
    * 4.2 The Schwarzschild radius in Keplerian orbits
    * 4.3 Relativistic circular orbits and the photon sphere
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] Formula for the Schwarzschild radius

The Schwarzschild radius is proportional to the mass with a proportionality
constant involving the gravitational constant and the speed of light:

    r_s = \\frac{2Gm}{c^2},
where

    rs is the Schwarzschild radius,
    G is the gravitational constant,
    m is the mass of the gravitating object, and
    c is the speed of light.
The proportionality constant, 2G / c2, is approximately 1.48Ã10-27 m/kg, or
2.95 km/solar mass.

The formula for the Schwarzschild radius can be found by setting the escape
velocity to the speed of light. Note that although the result is correct,
general relativity must be used to properly derive the Schwarzschild radius.
It is only a coincidence that Newtonian physics produces the same result.

This can be extended to show that an object of any density can be large enough
to fall within its own Schwarzschild radius,

    V_s \\propto \\rho^{-3/2},
where

    Vs is the volume of the object, and
    Ï is its density.
## [edit] Classification by Schwarzschild radius

### [edit] Supermassive black hole

If one accumulates matter at normal density (1000 kg/mÂ³, for example, the
density of water) up to about 150,000,000 times the mass of the Sun, such an
accumulation will fall inside its own Schwarzschild radius and thus it would
be a supermassive black hole of 150,000,000 solar masses. (Supermassive black
holes up to 18 billion solar masses have been observed[4].) The supermassive
black hole in the center of our galaxy (3.7 million solar masses) constitutes
observationally the most convincing evidence for the existence of black holes
in general. It is thought that large black holes like these don't form
directly in one collapse of a cluster of stars. Instead they may start as a
stellar-sized black hole and grow larger by the accretion of matter and other
black holes. The larger the mass of a galaxy, the larger is the mass of the
supermassive black hole in its center.

### [edit] Stellar black hole

If one accumulates matter at nuclear density (the density of the nucleus of an
atom, about 1018 kg/mÂ³; neutron stars also reach this density), such an
accumulation would fall within its own Schwarzschild radius at about 3 solar
masses and thus would be a stellar black hole.

### [edit] Primordial black hole

Conversely, a small mass has an extremely small Schwarzschild radius. A mass
similar to Mount Everest has a Schwarzschild radius smaller than a nanometre.
Its average density at that size would be so high that no known mechanism
could form such extremely compact objects. Such black holes might possibly be
formed in an early stage of the evolution of the universe, just after the Big
Bang, when densities were extremely high. Therefore these hypothetical baby
black holes are called primordial black holes.

## [edit] History

The significance of the singularity at r = 2M (in natural units) was first
raised by Jacques Hadamard, who, during a conference in Paris in 1922, asked
what might happen if a physical system could ever obtain this singularity.
Albert Einstein insisted that it could not, pointing out the dire consequences
for the universe, and jokingly referred to the singularity as the "Hadamard
disaster".[5]

Schwarzschild's original model of a star assumed an incompressible fluid;
Einstein pointed out that this was an unreasonable assumption, as sound waves
would propagate at infinite speed. In his own work, Einstein reconsidered a
model of a star where the components of the star were orbiting masses, and
showed that the orbital velocities would exceed the speed of light at the
Schwarzschild radius. In 1939, he used this to argue that no such thing can
happen, and so the singularity could not occur in nature.[6] The same year,
Robert Oppenheimer and Hartland Snyder considered a model of a dust cloud,
where the dust particles of the cloud were moving radially, towards a single
point, and showed that the dust particles could reach the singularity in
finite proper time. After passing the limit, Oppenheimer and Snyder noted that
light cones were directed inwards, and that no signal could escape outside.[7]

## [edit] Other uses for the Schwarzschild radius

The Schwarzschild radius is primarily used to characterize black holes.
However, every mass has a well defined Schwarzschild radius, and certain
properties of massive bodies can be determined using the bodyâs
Schwarzschild radius.

### [edit] The Schwarzschild radius in gravitational time dilation

Gravitational time dilation near a large, slowly rotating, nearly spherical
body, such as the earth or sun can be reasonably approximated using the
Schwarzschild radius as follows:

     \\frac{t_r}{t} = \\sqrt{1 - \\frac{r_s}{r}} 
where:

  * tr is the elapsed time for an observer at radial coordinate "r" within the gravitational field,
  * t is the elapsed time for an observer distant from the massive object (and therefore outside of the gravitational field),
  * r is the radial coordinate of the observer (which is analogous to the classical distance from the center of the object),
  * rs is the Schwarzschild radius.

The Pound, Rebka experiment in 1959 proved general relativity by measuring the
time dilation of the earthâs gravity. By measuring the earthâs time
dilation, this experiment indirectly measured the earthâs Schwarzschild
radius.

### [edit] The Schwarzschild radius in Keplerian orbits

For all circular orbits around a given central body:

     \\frac{r}{r_s} \\left\( \\frac{v}{c} \\right\)^2 = \\frac{1}{2} 
where:

  * r is the orbit radius,
  * rs is the Schwarzschild radius of the gravitating central body,
  * v is the orbital speed, and
  * c is the speed of light.

This equality can be generalized to elliptic orbits as follows:

     \\frac{a}{r_s} \\left\( \\frac{2 \\pi a}{c T} \\right\)^2 = \\frac{1}{2} 
where:

  * a \\  is the semi-major axis, and
  * T \\  is the orbital period.

### [edit] Relativistic circular orbits and the photon sphere

The Keplerian equation for circular orbits can be generalized to the
relativistic equation for circular orbits by accounting for time dilation in
the velocity term:

     \\frac{r}{r_s} \\left\( \\frac{v}{c} \\sqrt{1 - \\frac{r_s}{r}} \\right\)^2 = \\frac{1}{2} 
     \\frac{r}{r_s} \\left\( \\frac{v}{c} \\right\)^2 \\left\(1 - \\frac{r_s}{r} \\right\) = \\frac{1}{2} 
     \\left\( \\frac{v}{c} \\right\)^2 \\left\( \\frac{r}{r_s} - 1 \\right\) = \\frac{1}{2} 
This final equation indicates that an object orbiting at the speed of light
would have an orbital radius of 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. This is a
special orbit known as the photon sphere.

## [edit] See also

  * black hole, a general survey
  * Chandrasekhar limit, a second requirement for black hole formation

Classification of black holes by type:

  * Schwarzschild or static black hole
  * rotating or Kerr black hole
  * charged black hole or Newman black hole and Kerr-Newman black hole

A classification of black holes by mass:

  * micro black hole and extra-dimensional black hole
  * primordial black hole, a hypothetical leftover of the Big Bang
  * stellar black hole, which could either be a static black hole or a rotating black hole
  * supermassive black hole, which could also either be a static black hole or a rotating black hole
  * visible universe, if its density is the critical density

## [edit] References

  1. ^ K. Schwarzschild, "Uber das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie", Sitzungsberichte der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Klasse fur Mathematik, Physik, und Technik (1916) pp 189.
  2. ^ K. Schwarzschild, "Uber das Gravitationsfeld einer Kugel aus inkompressibler Flussigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie", Sitzungsberichte der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Klasse fur Mathematik, Physik, und Technik (1916) pp 424.
  3. ^ Encyclopedia Britannica [1]
  4. ^ Bryner, Jenna (January 9, 2008). "Colossal Black Hole Shatters the Scales". SPACE.COM. http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/080109-aas-massive-black-holes.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-02.
  5. ^ Hamed Moradi, "An Early History of Black Holes", (2004) Monash University
  6. ^ A. Einstein, "On a Stationary System with Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses", Annals of Mathematics, (1939)
  7. ^ J.R. Oppenheimer, H. Snyder, "On Continued Gravitational Contraction", Physical Review 56 (1939) p455.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Black holes  
Formation

Stellar evolution Â· Collapse Â· Compact star Â· Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff
limit Â· Primordial black hole

<IMG>  
Properties

Thermodynamics Â· Angular momentum Â· Charge Â· Size: Micro Â· Stellar Â·
Intermediate-mass Â· Supermassive  
Features

Event horizon Â· Singularity Â· Photon sphere Â· Ergosphere Â· Hawking
radiation  
Metrics

Schwarzschild Â· Kerr Â· Reissner-NordstrÃ¶m Â· Kerr-Newman  
Issues

No hair theorem Â· Information paradox Â· Cosmic censorship Â· Alternative
models  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schwarzschild_radius"

Categories: Black holes | Coordinate charts in general relativity

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 15:44.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



