
# Atomic nucleus

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The nucleus of an atom is the very dense region, consisting of nucleons
(protons and neutrons), at the center of an atom. Almost all of the mass in an
atom is made up from the protons and neutrons in the nucleus, with a very
small contribution from the orbiting electrons.

The diameter of the nucleus is in the range of 1.6 fm (1.6 Ã 10â15 m) (for
a proton in light hydrogen) to about 15 fm (for the heaviest atoms, such as
uranium). These dimensions are much smaller than the size of the atom itself
by a factor of about 23,000 (uranium) to about 145,000 (hydrogen).

The branch of physics concerned with studying and understanding the atomic
nucleus, including its composition and the forces which bind it together, is
called nuclear physics.

## Contents

  * 1 Introduction
    * 1.1 Etymology
    * 1.2 Nuclear makeup
  * 2 Protons and neutrons
  * 3 Forces
  * 4 Nuclear models
    * 4.1 Liquid drop models
    * 4.2 Shell models and other quantum models
    * 4.3 Consistency between models
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Introduction

### [edit] Etymology

The term nucleus is from Latin nucleus (ââkernelââ), derived from nux
(âânutââ). In 1844, Michael Faraday used the term to refer to the
"central point of an atom". The modern atomic meaning was proposed by Ernest
Rutherford in 1912.[1] The adoption of the term "nucleus" to atomic theory,
however, was not immediate. In 1916, for example, Gilbert N. Lewis stated, in
his famous article The Atom and the Molecule, that "the atom is composed of
the kernel and an outer atom or shell".

<IMG>

<IMG>

A figurative depiction of the helium-4 atom. In the nucleus, the two protons
are shown in red and neutrons blue. This depiction shows the particles as
separate, whereas in an actual helium atom, the protons are superimposed in
space and most likely found at the very center of the nucleus, and the same is
true of the two neutrons. Thus all four particles are most likely found in
exactly the same space. Classical images of separate particles thus fail to
model known charge distributions in very small nuclei

### [edit] Nuclear makeup

The nucleus of an atom consists of protons and neutrons (two types of baryons)
bound by the nuclear force (also known as the residual strong force). These
baryons are further composed of subatomic fundamental particles known as
quarks bound by the strong interaction. Which chemical element an atom
represents is determined by the number of protons in the nucleus. Each proton
carries a single positive charge, and the total electrical charge of the
nucleus is spread fairly uniformly throughout its body, with the exception of
hydrogen and helium, where the charge is concentrated most highly at the
central point, as would be expected for fermions in 1s states without orbital
angular momentum.[2] As each proton carries a unit of charge, the charge
distribution is indicative of the proton distribution, and the neutron
distribution probably is similar.[2]

## [edit] Protons and neutrons

Protons and neutrons are fermions, with different values of the isospin
quantum number, so two protons and two neutrons can share the same space wave
function. They sometimes are viewed as two different states of the same
particle, the nucleon.[3][4]

In the rare case of a hypernucleus, a third baryon called a hyperon, with a
different value of the strangeness quantum number can also share the wave
function. However, the latter type of nuclei are extremely unstable and are
not found on Earth except in high energy physics experiments.

The neutron has a positively charged core of radius â 0.3 fm surrounded by a
compensating negative charge of radius between 0.3 fm and 2 fm. The proton has
an approximately exponentially decaying charge distribution with a mean square
radius of about 0.8 fm.[5]

## [edit] Forces

Nuclei are bound together by the residual strong force (nuclear force). The
residual strong force is minor residuum of the strong interaction which binds
quarks together to form protons and neutrons. This force is much weaker
between neutrons and protons because it is mostly neutalized within them, in
the same way that electromagnetic forces between neutral atoms (such as van
der Waals forces that act between two inert gas atoms) are much weaker than
the electromagnetic forces that hold the parts of the atoms internally
together (i.e., for example, the forces that hold the electrons in an inert
gas atom bound to its nucleus).

The nuclear force is highly attractive at very small distances, and this
overwhelms the repulsion between protons which is due to the electromagnetic
force, thus allowing nuclei to exist. However, because the residual strong
force has a limited range because it decays quickly with distance (see Yukawa
potential), only nuclei smaller than a certain size can be completely stable.
The largest known complete stable nucleus is lead-208 which contains a total
of 208 neutrons and protons. Nuclei larger than this maximal size of 208
particles are unstable and (as a trend) become increasingly short-lived with
larger size, as the number of neutrons and protons which compose them
increases beyond this number.

The residual strong force is effective over a very short range (usually only a
few fermis, roughly one or two nucleon diameters) and causes an attraction
between any pair of nucleons (i.e., between protons and neutrons, and also
between protons and protons, and neutrons and neutrons). The effective
absolute limit of the range of the strong force is represented by halo nuclei
such as lithium-11 or boron-14, in which dineutrons, or other collections of
neutrons, orbit at distances of about ten fermis (roughly similar to the 8
fermi radius of the nucleus of uranium-238). These nuclei are not maximally
dense, and such halos are always composed of neutrons, which have no charge to
disrupt them. Such nuclei are also always unstable and short-lived; for
example, lithium-11 has a half-life of less than 8.6 milliseconds.

## [edit] Nuclear models

Main article: Nuclear size

The nuclear radius (R) is considered to be one of the basic things that any
model must explain. It is roughly proportional to the cube root of the mass
number (A) of the nucleus, and particularly in nuclei containing many
nucleons, as they arrange in more spherical configurations:

The nucleus has approximately a constant density and therefore the nuclear
radius R can be approximated by the following formula,

R = r0A1 / 3

where, A = Atomic mass number (the number of protons, Z, plus the number of
neutrons, N) and r0 = 1.25 fm = 1.25 Ã 10â15 m. In this equation, the
constant r0 varies by 0.2 fm, depending on the nucleus in question, but this
is less than 20% change from a constant.[6]

In other words, packing protons and neutrons in the nucleus gives
approximately the same total size result as packing hard spheres of a constant
size (like marbles) into a tight bag.

### [edit] Liquid drop models

Main article: Liquid-drop model

Early models of the nucleus viewed the nucleus as a rotating liquid drop. In
this model, the trade-off of long-range electromagnetic forces and relatively
short-range nuclear forces, together cause behavior which resembled surface
tension forces in liquid drops of different sizes. This formula is successful
at explaining many important phenomena of nuclei, such as their changing
amounts of binding energy as their size and composition changes (see semi-
empirical mass formula), but it does not explain the special stability which
occurs when nuclei have special "magic numbers" of protons or neutrons.

### [edit] Shell models and other quantum models

Main article: Shell model

A number of models for the nucleus have also been proposed in which nucleons
occupy orbitals, much like the atomic orbitals in atomic physics theory. These
wave models imagine nucleons to be either sizeless point particles in
potential wells, or else probability waves as in the "optical model",
frictionlessly orbiting at high speed in potential wells.

In these models, the nucleons occupy orbitals in pairs, due to being fermions,
but the exact nature and capacity of nuclear shells differs somewhat from
those of electrons in atomic orbitals, primarily because the potential well in
which the nucleons move (especially in larger nuclei) is quite different from
the central electromagnetic potential well which binds electrons in atoms.
Nevertheless, the resemblance to atomic orbital models may be seen in a small
atomic nucleus like that of helium-4, in which the two protons and two
neutrons separately occupy 1s orbitals analogous to the 1s orbitals for the
two electrons in the helium atom, and achieve unusual stability for the same
reason. This stability also underlies the fact that nuclei with 5 nucleons are
all extremely unstable and short-lived.

For larger nuclei, the shells occupied by nucleons begin to differ
significantly from electron shells, but nevertheless, present nuclear theory
does predict the magic numbers of filled nuclear shells for both protons and
neutrons. The closure of the stable shells predicts unusually stable
configurations, analogous to the noble group of nearly-inert gases in
chemistry. An example is the stability of the closed shell of 50 protons,
which allows tin to have 10 stable isotopes, more than any other element.
Similarly, the distance from shell-closure explains the unusual instability of
isotopes which have far from stable numbers of these particles, such as the
radioactive elements 43 (technetium) and 61 (promethium), each of which is
preceded and followed by 17 or more stable elements.

### [edit] Consistency between models

Main article: Nuclear structure

As with the case of superfluid liquid helium, atomic nuclei are an example of
a state in which both (1) "ordinary" particle physical rules for volume and
(2) non-intuitive quantum mechanical rules for a wave-like nature apply. In
superfluid helium, the helium atoms have volume, and essentially "touch" each
other, yet at the same time exhibit strange bulk properties, consistent with a
Bose-Einstein condensation. The latter reveals that they also have a wave-like
nature and do not exhibit standard fluid properties, such as friction. For
nuclei made of hadrons which are fermions, the same type of condensation does
not occur, yet nevertheless, many nuclear properties can only be explained
similarly by a combination of properties of particles with volume, in addition
to the frictionless motion characteristic of the wave-like behavior of objects
trapped in Schroedinger quantum orbitals.

## [edit] See also

  * Atomic mass
  * Atomic number
  * Giant resonance
  * Isotope
  * Liquid drop model
  * List of particles
  * Nuclear fusion
  * Nuclear fission
  * Nuclear medicine
  * Nuclear physics
  * Nuclear structure
  * Radioactivity
  * Semi-empirical mass formula

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Nucleus â Online Etymology Dictionary
  2. ^ a b Jean-Louis Basdevant, James Rich & Michel Spiro (2005). Fundamentals in Nuclear Physics. Springer. p. Fig. 1.1, p. 13. ISBN 0387016724. http://books.google.com/books?id=OFx7P9mgC9oC&pg=PA375&dq=helium+%22nuclear+structure%22&lr=&as_brr=0#PPA13,M1.
  3. ^ A. G. Sitenko, Viktor Konstantinovich TartakovskiÄ­ (1997). Theory of Nucleus: Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Interaction. p. p. 3. ISBN 0792344235. http://books.google.com/books?id=swb9QpqOqtAC&pg=PA464&dq=isbn:0792344235#PPA3,M1.
  4. ^ Mark Allen Srednicki (2007). Quantum Field Theory. Cambridge University Press. p. pp. 522-523. ISBN 9780521864497. http://www.worldcat.org/search?q=9780521864497&qt=owc_search.
  5. ^ Jean-Louis Basdevant, James Rich & Michel Spiro. Fundamentals in Nuclear Physics. p. p. 155. http://books.google.com/books?id=OFx7P9mgC9oC&pg=PA375&dq=helium+%22nuclear+structure%22&lr=&as_brr=0#PPA155,M1.
  6. ^ Literature: Krane, Kenneth S., Introductory Nuclear Physics, Wiley, 1987.

## [edit] External links

  * The Nucleus - a chapter from an online textbook

v â¢ d â¢ e

Particles in physics  
Elementary particles

Fermions: Quarks: u Â· d Â· c Â· s Â· t Â· b â¢ Leptons: eâ Â· e+ Â· Î¼â
Â· Î¼+ Â· Ïâ Â· Ï+ Â· Î½e Â· Î½Î¼ Â· Î½Ï Â· Î½e Â· Î½Î¼ Â· Î½Ï  
Bosons: Gauge bosons: Î³ Â· g Â· WÂ± Â· Z  
Other: Ghosts  
Composite particles

Hadrons: Baryons/Hyperons/Nucleons: p Â· n Â· Î Â· Î Â· Î£ Â· Î Â· Î© â¢
Mesons/Quarkonia: Ï Â· K Â· Ï Â· J/Ï Â· Ï Â· B Â· D Â· Î· Â· Î·â² Â· Ï  
Other: Atomic nuclei â¢ Atoms â¢ Exotic atoms: Positronium Â· Muonium Â·
Onia â¢ Molecules  
Hypothetical elementary particles

Superpartners: Axino Â· Chargino Â· Gaugino Â· Gluino Â· Gravitino Â· Higgsino
Â· Neutralino Â· Sfermion  
Other: A0 Â· Dilaton Â· G Â· H0 Â· J Â· Tachyon Â· X Â· Y Â· W' Â· Z' Â·
Sterile neutrino  
Hypothetical composite particles

Exotic hadrons: Exotic baryons: Dibaryon Â· Pentaquark â¢ Exotic mesons:
Glueball Â· Tetraquark  
Other: Mesonic molecule Â· Pomeron  
Quasiparticles

Davydov soliton Â· Exciton Â· Magnon Â· Phonon Â· Plasmon Â· Polariton Â·
Polaron Â· Roton  
Lists

List of particles Â· List of quasiparticles Â· List of baryons Â· List of
mesons Â· Timeline of particle discoveries  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Nuclear technology  
Science

Physics Â· Fission Â· Fusion Â· Radiation (ionizing) Â· Nucleus Â· Safety Â·
Chemistry Â· Engineering  
Fuels

Fissile Â· Fertile Â· Thorium Â· Uranium (enriched â¢ depleted) Â· Plutonium
Â· Deuterium Â· Tritium Â· Isotope separation  
Power

Reactor technology Â· Economics Â· Propulsion (rocket) Â· Fusion Â· Isotope
thermoelectric (RTG)  
Fission  
reactors  
by  
moderator

Water

Pressurized (PWR) Â· Boiling (BWR) Â· Supercritical (SCWR) Â· Heavy (PHWR Â·
CANDU)  
Carbon

Pebble bed (PBMR) Â· Very high temperature (VHTR) Â· RBMK Â· Magnox Â· AGR  
Li / Be

Molten salt (MSR)  
None  
(Fast)

Breeder (FBR) Â· Liquid-metal-cooled (LMFR) Â· Integral (IFR) Â· SSTAR  
Generation IV (Gas (GFR) Â· Lead (LFR) Â· Sodium (SFR))  
Medical

Imaging

Positron emission (PET) Â· Single photon emission (SPECT) Â· Gamma camera Â·
X-ray  
Therapy

Radiation therapy Â· TomoTherapy Â· Proton Â· Brachytherapy Â· Boron neutron
capture (BNCT)  
Weapon

Topics

History Â· Design Â· War Â· Race Â· Explosion (effects) Â· Testing
(underground) Â· Delivery Â· Proliferation Â· Yield (TNTe)  
Lists

States Â· Tests Â· Weapons Â· Pop culture  
Waste

Disposal

Fuel cycle Â· Spent fuel (pool â¢ cask) Â· Repository Â· Reprocessing Â·
Transmutation  
Types

Reprocessed uranium â¢ Isotopes of plutonium Â· Minor actinide Â· Fission
product (LLFP) Â· Activation product  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_nucleus"

Categories: Nuclear chemistry | Nuclear physics | Subatomic particles |
Radiochemistry

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Basa Banyumasan
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LingÃ¡la
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Seeltersk
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 16:19.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



