
# Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus  
Author Ludwig Wittgenstein  
Subject(s) Philosophy  
Publication date 1921  
Media type paperback  
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus is the only book-length philosophical work
published by the Austrian philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein during his lifetime.
He wrote it as a soldier and a prisoner of war during World War I. First
published in German in 1921 as Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung, it is now
widely considered one of the most important philosophical works of the
twentieth century. The Latin title was originally suggested by G. E. Moore,
and is an homage to Tractatus Theologico-Politicus by Benedictus Spinoza.
Wittgenstein later refuted many of the ideas contained in the Tractatus in his
later works, notably the posthumously published Philosophical Investigations.

Tractatus uses a notoriously austere and succinct literary style. Though
Wittgenstein's later works were less austere, and contained notably different
philosophical ideas, they retained the same basic writing style of short
sentences or paragraphs rather than narrative exposition. It has also been
noted that Tractatus contains almost no arguments as such; merely oracular
statements which are meant to be self-evident.

The slim volume (fewer than eighty pages) comprises a system of short
statements, numbered 1, 1.1, 1.11, 1.12, etc., through to 7, intended to be
such that 1.1 is a comment on or elaboration of 1, 1.11 and 1.12 comments on
1.1, and so forth. It is an ambitious project to identify the relationship
between language and reality and to define the limits of science[1].

Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus was influential chiefly amongst the logical
positivists of the Vienna Circle, such as Rudolf Carnap and Friedrich
Waismann. It is more difficult to determine the extent of the influence of the
ideas of the Tractatus on Bertrand Russell, since it is frequently hard to
determine who is influencing whom, but Russell begins his article "The
Philosophy of Logical Atomism", by presenting as a working out of ideas that
he had learnt from Wittgenstein.

## Contents

  * 1 Main theses
    * 1.1 Propositions 1.*-3.*
    * 1.2 Propositions 4.*-5.*
    * 1.3 Propositions 6.*
    * 1.4 Proposition 7
  * 2 Reception and effects
  * 3 Editions
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Main theses

There are seven main propositions in the text. These are:

  1. The world is everything that is the case.
  2. What is the case (a fact) is the existence of states of affairs.
  3. A logical picture of facts is a thought.
  4. A thought is a proposition with sense.
  5. A proposition is a truth-function of elementary propositions.
  6. The general form of a proposition is the general form of a truth function, which is: \[\\bar p,\\bar\\xi, N\(\\bar\\xi\)\].
  7. Where (or of what) one cannot speak, one must pass over in silence.

### [edit] Propositions 1.*-3.*

The central thesis of 1., 2., 3. and their subsidiary propositions is
Wittgensteinâs picture theory of language. This can be summed up as follows:

  * The world consists of a totality of interconnected atomic facts, and propositions make "pictures" of the world.
  * In order for a picture to represent a certain fact it must in some way possess the same logical structure as the fact. The picture is a standard of reality. In this way, linguistic expression can be seen as a form of geometric projection, where language is the changing form of projection but the logical structure of the expression is the unchanging geometric relationships.
  * We cannot say with language what is common in the structures, rather it must be shown, because any language we use will also rely on this relationship, and so we cannot step out of our language with language.

### [edit] Propositions 4.*-5.*

The 4s are significant as they contain some of Wittgenstein's most explicit
statements concerning the nature of philosophy and the distinction between
what can be said and what can only be shown. It is here, for instance, that he
first distinguishes between material and grammatical propositions, noting:

> 4.003 Most of the propositions and questions to be found in philosophical
works are not false but nonsensical. Consequently we cannot give any answer to
questions of this kind, but can only point out that they are nonsensical. Most
of the propositions and questions of philosophers arise from our failure to
understand the logic of our language. (They belong to the same class as the
question whether the good is more or less identical than the beautiful.) And
it is not surprising that the deepest problems are in fact not problems at
all.

A philosophical treatise attempts to say something where nothing can properly
be said. It is predicated upon the idea that philosophy should be pursued in a
way analogous to the natural sciences; that philosophers are looking to
construct true theories. This sense of philosophy does not coincide with
Wittgenstein's conception of philosophy.

> 4.1 Propositions represent the existence and non-existence of states of
affairs.  
>  4.11 The totality of true propositions is the whole of natural science (or
the whole corpus of the natural sciences).  
>  4.111 Philosophy is not one of the natural sciences. (The word 'philosophy'
must mean something whose place is above or below the natural sciences, not
beside them.)  
>  4.112 Philosophy aims at the logical clarification of thoughts. Philosophy
is not a body of doctrine but an activity. A philosophical work consists
essentially of elucidations. Philosophy does not result in 'philosophical
propositions', but rather in the clarification of propositions. Without
philosophy thoughts are, as it were, cloudy and indistinct: its task is to
make them clear and to give them sharp boundaries.  
>  4.113 Philosophy sets limits to the much disputed sphere of natural
science.  
>  4.114 It must set limits to what can be thought; and, in doing so, to what
cannot be thought. It must set limits to what cannot be thought by working
outwards through what can be thought.  
>  4.115 It will signify what cannot be said, by presenting clearly what can
be said.

  
Wittgenstein is to be credited with the invention of truth tables (4.31) and
truth conditions (4.431) which now constitute the standard semantic analysis
of first-order sentential logic[2]. The philosophical significance of such a
method for Wittgenstein was that it alleviated a confusion, namely the idea
that logical inferences are justified by rules. If an argument form is valid,
the conjunction of the premises will be logically equivalent to the conclusion
and this can be clearly seen in a truth table; it is displayed. The concept of
tautology is thus central to Wittgenstein's Tractarian account of logical
consequence, which is strictly deductive.

> 5.13 When the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of others, we
can see this from the structure of the propositions.  
>  5.131 If the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of others,
this finds expression in relations in which the forms of the propositions
stand to one another: nor is it necessary for us to set up these relations
between them, by combining them with one another in a single proposition; on
the contrary, the relations are internal, and their existence is an immediate
result of the existence of the propositions.  
>  5.132 If p follows from q, I can make an inference from q to p, deduce p
from q. The nature of the inference can be gathered only from the two
propositions. They themselves are the only possible justification of the
inference. 'Laws of inference', which are supposed to justify inferences, as
in the works of Frege and Russell, have no sense, and would be superfluous.

### [edit] Propositions 6.*

In the beginning of 6. Wittgenstein postulates the essential form of all
sentences. He uses the notation \[\\bar p,\\bar\\xi, N\(\\bar\\xi\)\], where

  * \\bar p stands for all atomic propositions,
  * \\bar\\xi stands for any subset of propositions, and
  * N\(\\bar\\xi\) stands for the negation of all propositions making up \\bar\\xi.

What proposition 6. really says is that any logical sentence can be derived
from a series of nand operations on the totality of atomic propositions. This
is in fact a well-known logical theorem produced by Henry M. Sheffer, of which
Wittgenstein makes use. Sheffer's result was, however, restricted to the
propositional calculus, and so, of limited significance. Wittgenstein's
N-operator is however an infinitary analogue of the Sheffer stroke, which
applied to a set of propositions produces a proposition that is equivalent to
the denial of every member of that set. What Wittgenstein then goes on to show
that this operator can cope with the whole of predicate logic with identity -
defining the quantifiers at 5.52, and showing how identity would then be
handled at 5.53-5.532.

The subsidiaries of 6. contain more philosophical reflections on logic,
connecting to ideas of knowledge, thought, and the a priori and
transcendental. The final passages argue that logic and mathematics express
only tautologies and are transcendental, i.e. they lie outside of the
metaphysical subjectâs world. In turn, a logically "ideal" language cannot
supply meaning, it can only reflect the world, and so, sentences in a logical
language cannot remain meaningful if they are not merely reflections of the
facts.

In the final pages Wittgenstein veers towards what might be seen as religious
considerations. This is founded on the gap between propositions 6.3 and 6.4. A
logical positivist might accept the propositions of Tractatus before 6.4. But
6.41 and the succeeding propositions argue that ethics is also transcendental,
and thus we cannot examine it with language, as it is a form of aesthetics and
cannot be expressed. He begins talking of the will, life after death, and God.
In his examination of these issues he argues that all discussion of them is a
misuse of logic. Specifically, since logical language can only reflect the
world, any discussion of the mystical, that which lies outside of the
metaphysical subject's world, is meaningless. This suggests that many of the
traditional domains of philosophy, e.g. ethics and metaphysics, cannot in fact
be discussed meaningfully. Any attempt to discuss them immediately loses all
sense. This also suggests that his own project of trying to explain language
is impossible for exactly these reasons. He suggests that the project of
philosophy must ultimately be abandoned for those logical practices which
attempt to reflect the world, not what is outside of it. The natural sciences
are just such a practice, he suggests.

At the very end of the text he borrows an analogy from Arthur Schopenhauer,
and compares the book to a ladder that must be thrown away after one has
climbed it. In doing so he suggests that through the philosophy of the book
one must come to see the utter meaninglessness of philosophy.

### [edit] Proposition 7

As the last line in the book, proposition 7 has no supplementary propositions.
It ends the book with a rather elegant and stirring proposition: "What we
cannot speak of we must pass over in silence." (In German: "Wovon man nicht
sprechen kann, darÃ¼ber muÃ man schweigen.") The Ogden translation renders
it: "Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent."

Both the first and the final proposition have acquired something of a
proverbial quality in German, employed as aphorisms independently of
discussion of Wittgenstein.

## [edit] Reception and effects

Wittgenstein concluded that with the Tractatus he had resolved all
philosophical problems, and upon its publication he retired to become a
schoolteacher in Austria.

Meanwhile, the book was translated into English by C. K. Ogden with help from
the Cambridge mathematician and philosopher Frank P. Ramsey, then still in his
teens. Ramsey later visited Wittgenstein in Austria. Translation issues make
the concepts hard to pinpoint, especially given Wittgenstein's usage of terms
and difficulty in translating ideas into words.[3]

The Tractatus caught the attention of the philosophers of the Vienna Circle,
especially Rudolf Carnap and Moritz Schlick. The group spent many months
working through the text out loud, line by line. Schlick eventually convinced
Wittgenstein to meet with members of the circle to discuss the Tractatus when
he returned to Vienna (he was then working as an architect). Although the
Vienna Circle's logical positivists appreciated the Tractatus, they argued
that the last few passages, including Proposition 7, are confused. Carnap
hailed the book as containing important insights, but encouraged people to
ignore the concluding sentences. Wittgenstein responded to Schlick commenting,
"...I cannot imagine that Carnap should have so completely misunderstood the
last sentences of the book and hence the fundamental conception of the entire
book."[4]

<IMG>

<IMG>

3.0321 Though a state of affairs that would contravene the laws of physics can
be represented by us spatially, one that would contravene the laws of geometry
cannot.

A more recent interpretation comes from the New Wittgenstein family of
interpretations.[5] This so-called "resolute reading" is controversial and
much debated. The main contention of such readings is that Wittgenstein in the
Tractatus does not provide a theoretical account of language that relegates
ethics and philosophy to a mystical realm of the unsayable. Rather, the book
has a therapeutical aim. By working through the propositions of the book the
reader comes to realize that language is perfectly suited to all his needs,
and that philosophy rests on a confused relation to the logic of our language.
The confusion that the Tractatus seeks to dispel is not a confused theory,
such that a correct theory would be a proper way to clear the confusion,
rather the need of any such theory is confused. The method of the Tractatus is
to make the reader aware of the logic of our language as he is already
familiar with it, and the effect of thereby dispelling the need for a
theoretical account of the logic of our language spreads to all other areas of
philosophy. Thereby the confusion involved in putting forward e.g. ethical and
metaphysical theories is cleared in the same coup. James F. Conant argues that
Wittgenstein's method in the Tractatus mirrors the method of Kierkegaard's
Climacus works.[4] In the appendix of Concluding Unscientific Postscript,
Kierkegaard writes:

> [The reader] can understand that the understanding is a revocation--the
understanding with him as the sole reader is indeed the revocation of the
book. He can understand that to write a book and to revoke it is not the same
as refraining from writing it, that to write a book that does not demand to be
important for anyone is still not the same as letting it be unwritten.[1]

Wittgenstein would not meet the Vienna Circle proper, but only a few of its
members, including Schlick, Carnap, and Waissman. Often, though, he refused to
discuss philosophy, and would insist on giving the meetings over to reciting
the poetry of Rabindranath Tagore with his chair turned to the wall. He
largely broke off formal relations even with these members of the circle after
coming to believe Carnap had used some of his ideas without permission.[6]

Carnap and a number of other members of the Vienna Circle seem according to
modern research to have misinterpreted Wittgenstein's elementary statements as
atomic reports of sensory experience, whence Carnap's attempt at a reduction
of concepts to sense experience in his book The Logical Structure of the
World. While this effort, in which the American philosopher Nelson Goodman
participated in his own book The Structure of Appearance, strangely prefigures
computer reconstruction of analogue experience (where Carnap's examples of
color patches and tones prefigure pixels and sound files), Wittgenstein had
arrived at the necessity for a formal language, which Wittgenstein describes
only schematically, by way of theory, critically Wittgenstein's deduction of
the necessity of ontological structure (if the world had no structure, then
every proposition's meaning would depend on the truth of another proposition).

The Tractatus was the theme of a 1992 film by the Hungarian filmmaker Peter
Forgacs. The 32-minute production named Wittgenstein Tractatus features
citations from the Tractatus and other works by Wittgenstein. Another film
named The Oxford Murders (2008) also cited the seventh proposition and also
described a part of Wittgenstein's life when he was at the war-front.

## [edit] Editions

The Tractatus is the English translation of

  * Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung, Wilhelm Ostwald (ed.), Annalen der Naturphilosophie, 14 (1921)

A notable German Edition of the works of Wittgenstein is:

  * Werkausgabe (Vol. 1 includes the Tractatus). Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag.

Two notable English translations of the Tractatus have appeared in print. Both
include the introduction by Bertrand Russell. Wittgenstein revised the Ogden
translation himself.[7]

  * C. K. Ogden (1922), prepared with assistance from G. E. Moore, F. P. Ramsey, and Wittgenstein himself. Routledge & Kegan Paul, parallel edition including the German text on the facing page to the English text: 1981 printing: ISBN 0-415-05186-X, 1999 Dover reprint: ISBN 0-486-40445-5
  * David Pears and Brian McGuinness (1961), Routledge, hardcover: ISBN 0-7100-3004-5, 1974 paperback: ISBN 0-415-02825-6, 2001 hardcover: ISBN 0-415-25562-7, 2001 paperback: ISBN 0-415-25408-6

A manuscript version of the Tractatus, dubbed and published as the
Prototractatus, was discovered in 1965 by Georg Henrik von Wright.[7]

## [edit] See also

  * Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (6.5)
  * Ludwig Wittgenstein
  * Philosophical Investigations

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ TLP 4.113
  2. ^ Grayling, A.C. Wittgenstein: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford
  3. ^ Richard H. Popkin (November 1985). "Philosophy and the History of Philosophy". Journal of Philosophy 82 (11): 628. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-362X%28198511%2982%3A11%3C625%3APATHOP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T. Retrieved on 2008-01-19. "Many who knew Wittgenstein report that he found it extremely difficult to put his ideas into words and that he had many special usages of terms.".
  4. ^ a b Conant, James F. "Putting Two and Two Together: Kierkegaard, Wittgenstein and the Point of View for Their Works as Authors", in Philosophy and the Grammar of Religious Belief (1995), ed. Timothy Tessin and Marion von der Ruhr, St. Martins Press, ISBN 0-31212394-9
  5. ^ Crary, Alice M. and Rupert Read (eds.). The New Wittgenstein, Routledge, 2000.
  6. ^ Jaakko Hintikka (2000) On Wittgenstein, ISBN 0-534-57594-3 p. 55 cites Wittgenstein's accusation of Carnap upon receiving a 1932 preprint from Carnap.
  7. ^ a b R. W. Newell (January 1973). "Reviewed Work(s): Prototractatus, an Early Version of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus". Philosophy 48 (183): 97â99. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0031-8191%28197301%2948%3A183%3C97%3APAEVOT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9. Retrieved on 2008-01-19.

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus

<IMG> Philosophy portal  
English versions online

  * http://www.kfs.org/~jonathan/witt/tlph.html (Ogden translation)
  * http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/5740 (Pears & McGuinness translation)
  * http://filepedia.org/node/15 (Full Text. PDF version)
  * PhiloSURFical Research software tool aimed at facilitating the study of the Tractatus. The text is available in German and in both English translations (Ogden & Pears-McGuinness)
  * Graphical tabs-centered version of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (based on the Project Gutenberg edition)

German version online

  * http://www.geocities.jp/red_mad_hatter/Tractatus/jonathan/D.html
  * http://www.tractatus.hochholzer.info
  * http://www.kfs.org/~jonathan/witt/tlph.html (Ogden translation (incomplete))
  * PhiloSURFical

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tractatus_Logico-Philosophicus"

Categories: 1921 books | Analytic philosophy | Contemporary philosophy | Books
by Ludwig Wittgenstein | Philosophical logic | Philosophy books | Philosophy
of language literature | Cognitive science literature

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 02:33.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



