
# Irrational number

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

In mathematics, an irrational number is any real number that is not a rational
numberâthat is, it is a number which cannot be expressed as a fraction m/n,
where m and n are integers, with n non-zero. Informally, this means numbers
that cannot be represented as simple fractions. It can be deduced that they
also cannot be represented as terminating or repeating decimals, but the idea
is more profound than that. As a consequence of Cantor's proof that the real
numbers are uncountable (and the rationals countable) it follows that almost
all real numbers are irrational.[1] Perhaps the best-known irrational numbers
are Ï, e and â2.[2][3][4]

When the ratio of lengths of two line segments is irrational, the line
segments are also described as being incommensurable, meaning they share no
measure in common. A measure of a line segment I in this sense is a line
segment J that "measures" I in the sense that some whole number of copies of J
laid end-to-end occupy the same length as I.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The number \\scriptstyle\\sqrt{2} is irrational.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Middle Ages
    * 1.2 Modern period
  * 2 Example proofs
    * 2.1 Square roots
    * 2.2 General roots
    * 2.3 Logarithms
  * 3 Transcendental and algebraic irrationals
  * 4 Decimal expansions
  * 5 Miscellaneous
  * 6 Open questions
  * 7 The set of all irrationals
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] History

The concept of irrationality was implicitly accepted by Indian mathematicians
since the 7th century BC, when Manava (c. 750â690 BC) was aware that the
square roots of certain numbers such as 2 and 61 could not be exactly
determined.[5]

The first proof of the existence of irrational numbers is usually attributed
to Hippasus of Metapontum,[6] a Pythagorean who probably discovered them while
identifying sides of the pentagram.[7] The then-current Pythagorean method
would have claimed that there must be some sufficiently small, indivisible
unit that could fit evenly into one of these lengths as well as the other.
However, Hippasus, in the 5th century BC, was able to deduce that there was in
fact no common unit of measure, and that the assertion of such an existence
was in fact a contradiction. He did this by demonstrating that if the
hypotenuse of an isosceles right triangle was indeed commensurable with an
arm, then that unit of measure must be both odd and even, which is impossible.
His reasoning is as follows:

    
  * The ratio of the hypotenuse to an arm of an isosceles right triangle is a:b expressed in the smallest units possible.
  * By the Pythagorean theorem: a2 = 2b2.
  * Since a2 is even, a must be even as the square of an odd number is odd.
  * Since a:b is in its lowest terms, b must be odd.
  * Since a is even, let a = 2y.
  * Then a2 = 4y2 = 2b2
  * b2 = 2y2 so b2 must be even, therefore b is even.
  * However we asserted b must be odd. Here is the contradiction.[8]

Greek mathematicians termed this ratio of incommensurable magnitudes alogos,
or inexpressible. Hippasus, however, was not lauded for his efforts: according
to one legend, he made his discovery while out at sea, and was subsequently
thrown overboard by his fellow Pythagoreans ââ¦for having produced an
element in the universe which denied theâ¦doctrine that all phenomena in the
universe can be reduced to whole numbers and their ratios.â[9] Another
legend states that Hippasus was merely exiled for this revelation. Whatever
the consequence to Hippasus himself, his discovery posed a very serious
problem to Pythagorean mathematics, since it shattered the assumption that
number and geometry were inseparable--a foundation of their theory.

Theodorus of Cyrene proved the irrationality of the surds of whole numbers up
to 17, but stopped there probably because the algebra he used couldn't be
applied to the square root of 17.[10] It wasn't until Eudoxus developed a
theory of proportion that took into account irrational as well as rational
ratios that a strong mathematical foundation of irrational numbers was
created.[11] A magnitude âwas not a number but stood for entities such as
line segments, angles, areas, volumes, and time which could vary, as we would
say, continuously. Magnitudes were opposed to numbers, which jumped from one
value to another, as from 4 to 5.â[12] Numbers are composed of some
smallest, indivisible unit, whereas magnitudes are infinitely reducible.
Because no quantitative values were assigned to magnitudes, Eudoxus was then
able to account for both commensurable and incommensurable ratios by defining
a ratio in terms of its magnitude, and proportion as an equality between two
ratios. By taking quantitative values (numbers) out of the equation, he
avoided the trap of having to express an irrational number as a number.
âEudoxusâ theory enabled the Greek mathematicians to make tremendous
progress in geometry by supplying the necessary logical foundation for
incommensurable ratios.â[13] Euclid's Elements Book 10 is dedicated to
classification of irrational magnitudes.

### [edit] Middle Ages

The Middle Ages saw the acceptance of zero, negative, integral and fractional
numbers, first by Indian and Chinese mathematicians, and then by Arabic
mathematicians, who were also the first to treat irrational numbers as
algebraic objects,[14] which was made possible by the development of algebra.
Arabic mathematicians also merged the concepts of "number" and "magnitude"
into a more general idea of real numbers, and they criticized Euclid's idea of
ratios, developed the theory of composite ratios, and extended the concept of
number to ratios of continuous magnitude.[15] In his commentary on Book 10 of
the Elements, the Persian mathematician Al-Mahani (d. 874/884) examined and
classified quadratic irrationals and cubic irrationals. He provided
definitions for rational and irrational magnitudes, which he treated as
irrational numbers. He dealt with them freely but explains them in geometric
terms as follows:[16]

> "It will be a rational (magnitude) when we, for instance, say 10, 12, 3%,
6%, etc., because its value is pronounced and expressed quantitatively. What
is not rational is irrational and it is impossible to pronounce and represent
its value quantitatively. For example: the roots of numbers such as 10, 15, 20
which are not squares, the sides of numbers which are not cubes etc."

In contrast to Euclid's concept of magnitudes as lines, Al-Mahani considered
integers and fractions as rational magnitudes, and square roots and cube roots
as irrational magnitudes. He also introduced an arithmetical approach to the
concept of irrationality, as he attributes the following to irrational
magnitudes:[16]

> "their sums or differences, or results of their addition to a rational
magnitude, or results of subtracting a magnitude of this kind from an
irrational one, or of a rational magnitude from it."

The Egyptian mathematician AbÅ« KÄmil ShujÄ ibn Aslam (c. 850â930) was the
first to accept irrational numbers as solutions to quadratic equations or as
coefficients in an equation, often in the form of square roots, cube roots and
fourth roots.[17] In the 10th century, the Iraqi mathematician Al-Hashimi
provided general proofs (rather than geometric demonstrations) for irrational
numbers, as he considered multiplication, division, and other arithmetical
functions.[18] AbÅ« Ja'far al-KhÄzin (900-971) provides a definition of
rational and irrational magnitudes, stating that if a definite quantity
is:[19]

> "contained in a certain given magnitude once or many times, then this
(given) magnitude corresponds to a rational number. . . . Each time when this
(latter) magnitude comprises a half, or a third, or a quarter of the given
magnitude (of the unit), or, compared with (the unit), comprises three, five,
or three fifths, it is a rational magnitude. And, in general, each magnitude
that corresponds to this magnitude (i.e. to the unit), as one number to
another, is rational. If, however, a magnitude cannot be represented as a
multiple, a part (l/n), or parts (m/n) of a given magnitude, it is irrational,
i.e. it cannot be expressed other than by means of roots."

Many of these concepts were eventually accepted by European mathematicians
sometime after the Latin translations of the 12th century. Al-HassÄr, an
Arabic mathematician from the Maghreb (North Africa) specializing in Islamic
inheritance jurisprudence during the 12th century, developed the modern
symbolic mathematical notation for fractions, where the numerator and
denominator are separated by a horizontal bar. This same fractional notation
appears soon after in the work of Fibonacci in the 13th century.[20] During
the 14th to 16th centuries, Madhava of Sangamagrama and the Kerala school of
astronomy and mathematics discovered the infinite series for several
irrational numbers such as pi and certain irrational values of trigonometric
functions. Jyesthadeva provided proofs for these infinite series in the
Yuktibhasa.[21]

### [edit] Modern period

The 17th century saw imaginary numbers become a powerful tool in the hands of
Abraham de Moivre, and especially of Leonhard Euler. The completion of the
theory of complex numbers in the nineteenth century entailed the
differentiation of irrationals into algebraic and transcendental numbers, the
proof of the existence of transcendental numbers, and the resurgence of the
scientific study of the theory of irrationals, largely ignored since Euclid.
The year 1872 saw the publication of the theories of Karl Weierstrass (by his
pupil Kossak), Heine (Crelle, 74), Georg Cantor (Annalen, 5), and Richard
Dedekind. MÃ©ray had taken in 1869 the same point of departure as Heine, but
the theory is generally referred to the year 1872. Weierstrass's method has
been completely set forth by Salvatore Pincherle in 1880,[22] and Dedekind's
has received additional prominence through the author's later work (1888) and
the recent endorsement by Paul Tannery (1894). Weierstrass, Cantor, and Heine
base their theories on infinite series, while Dedekind founds his on the idea
of a cut (Schnitt) in the system of real numbers, separating all rational
numbers into two groups having certain characteristic properties. The subject
has received later contributions at the hands of Weierstrass, Kronecker
(Crelle, 101), and MÃ©ray.

Continued fractions, closely related to irrational numbers (and due to
Cataldi, 1613), received attention at the hands of Euler, and at the opening
of the nineteenth century were brought into prominence through the writings of
Lagrange. Dirichlet also added to the general theory, as have numerous
contributors to the applications of the subject.

Lambert proved (1761) that Ï cannot be rational, and that en is irrational if
n is rational (unless n = 0).[23] While Lambert's proof is often said to be
incomplete, modern assessments support it as satisfactory, and in fact for its
time it is unusually rigorous. Legendre (1794), after introducing the Bessel-
Clifford function, provided a proof to show that Ï2 is irrational, whence it
follows immediately that Ï is irrational also. The existence of
transcendental numbers was first established by Liouville (1844, 1851). Later,
Georg Cantor (1873) proved their existence by a different method, that showed
that every interval in the reals contains transcendental numbers. Charles
Hermite (1873) first proved e transcendental, and Ferdinand von Lindemann
(1882), starting from Hermite's conclusions, showed the same for Ï.
Lindemann's proof was much simplified by Weierstrass (1885), still further by
David Hilbert (1893), and was finally made elementary by Adolf Hurwitz and
Paul Albert Gordan.

## [edit] Example proofs

### [edit] Square roots

The square root of 2 was the first number to be proved irrational and that
article contains a number of proofs. The golden ratio is the next most famous
quadratic irrational and there is a simple proof of its irrationality in its
article. The square root of all non-square natural numbers is irrational and a
proof may be found in quadratic irrationals.

The irrationality of the square root of 2 may be proved by assuming it is
rational and inferring a contradiction, called an argument by reductio ad
absurdum. The following argument appeals twice to the fact that the square of
an odd integer is always odd.

If â2 is rational it has the form m/n for integers m, n not both even. Then
m2 = 2n2 whence m is even, say m = 2p. Thus 4p2 = 2n2 so 2p2 = n2 whence n is
also even, a contradiction.

### [edit] General roots

The proof above for the square root of two can be generalized using the
fundamental theorem of arithmetic which was proved by Gauss in 1798. This
asserts that every integer has a unique factorization into primes. Using it we
can show that if a rational number is not an integer then no integral power of
it can be an integer, as in lowest terms there must be a prime in the
denominator which does not divide into the numerator whatever power each is
raised to. Therefore if an integer is not an exact kth power of another
integer then its kth root is irrational.

### [edit] Logarithms

Perhaps the numbers most easily proved to be irrational are certain
logarithms. Here is a proof by reductio ad absurdum that log2 3 is irrational:

Assume log2 3 is rational. For some positive integers m and n, we have

    \\log_2 3 = \\frac{m}{n}.
It follows that

    2^{m/n}=3\\,
    \(2^{m/n}\)^n = 3^n\\,
    2^m=3^n\\,
However, 2 to any integer power greater than 0 is even (because at least one
of its prime factors is 2) and 3 to any integer power greater than 0 is odd
(because none of its prime factors is 2), so the original assumption is false.

Cases such as log10 2 can be treated similarly.

## [edit] Transcendental and algebraic irrationals

Almost all irrational numbers are transcendental and all transcendental
numbers are irrational: the article on transcendental numbers lists several
examples. e r and Ï r are irrational if r â  0 is rational; eÏ is
irrational.

Another way to construct irrational numbers is as irrational algebraic
numbers, i.e. as zeros of polynomials with integer coefficients: start with a
polynomial equation

    p(x) = an xn \+ anâ1 xnâ1 + ... + a1 x + a0 = 0
where the coefficients ai are integers. Suppose you know that there exists
some real number x with p(x) = 0 (for instance if n is odd and an is non-zero,
then because of the intermediate value theorem). The only possible rational
roots of this polynomial equation are of the form r/s where r is a divisor of
a0 and s is a divisor of an; there are only finitely many such candidates
which you can all check by hand. If neither of them is a root of p, then x
must be irrational. For example, this technique can be used to show that x =
(21/2 + 1)1/3 is irrational: we have (x3 â 1)2 = 2 and hence x6 â 2x3 â
1 = 0, and this latter polynomial does not have any rational roots (the only
candidates to check are Â±1).

Because the algebraic numbers form a field, many irrational numbers can be
constructed by combining transcendental and algebraic numbers. For example 3Ï
+ 2, Ï + â2 and eâ3 are irrational (and even transcendental).

## [edit] Decimal expansions

The decimal expansion of an irrational number never repeats or terminates,
unlike a rational number.

To show this, suppose we divide integers n by m (where m is nonzero). When
long division is applied to the division of n by m, only m remainders are
possible. If 0 appears as a remainder, the decimal expansion terminates. If 0
never occurs, then the algorithm can run at most m â 1 steps without using
any remainder more than once. After that, a remainder must recur, and then the
decimal expansion repeats.

Conversely, suppose we are faced with a recurring decimal, we can prove that
it is a fraction of two integers. For example:

    A=0.7\\,162\\,162\\,162\\,\\dots
Here the length of the repitend is 3. We multiply by 103:

    1000A=7\\,16.2\\,162\\,162\\,\\dots
Note that since we multiplied by 10 to the power of the length of the
repeating part, we shifted the digits to the left of the decimal point by
exactly that many positions. Therefore, the tail end of 1000A matches the tail
end of A exactly. Here, both 1000A and A have repeating 162 at the end.

Therefore, when we subtract A from both sides, the tail end of 1000A cancels
out of the tail end of A:

    999A=715.5\\,.
Then

    A=\\frac{715.5}{999} = \\frac{7155}{9990} = \\frac{135 \\times 53}{135 \\times 74} = \\frac{53}{74},
(135 is the greatest common divisor of 7155 and 9990). Alternatively, since
0.5 = 1/2, one can clear fractions by multiplying the numerator and
denominator by 2:

     A=\\frac{715.5}{999} = \\frac{2 \\times 715.5}{2 \\times 999}
= \\frac{1431}{1998} = \\frac{27 \\times 53}{27 \\times 74} = \\frac{53}{74}

(27 is the greatest common divisor of 1431 and 1998).

The bottom line, 53/74 is a quotient of integers and therefore a rational
number.

## [edit] Miscellaneous

Here is a famous pure existence or non-constructive proof:

It has been shown that there exist two irrational numbers a and b, such that
ab is rational. If â2â2 is rational, then take a = b = â2. Otherwise,
take a to be the irrational number â2â2 and b = â2. Then ab =
(â2â2)â2 = â2â2Â·â2 = â22 = 2 which is rational.

â2â2 is transcendental because of the GelfondâSchneider theorem.

## [edit] Open questions

It is not known whether Ï \+ e or Ï â e is irrational or not. In fact,
there is no pair of non-zero integers m and n for which it is known whether
mÏ + ne is irrational or not. Moreover, it is not known whether the set {Ï,
e} is algebraically independent over Q.

It is not known whether 2e, Ïe, Ïâ2, Catalan's constant, or the Euler-
Mascheroni gamma constant Î³ are irrational.

## [edit] The set of all irrationals

Since the reals form an uncountable set, of which the rationals are a
countable subset, the complementary set of irrationals is uncountable.

Under the usual (Euclidean) distance function d(x, y) = |x â y|, the real
numbers are a metric space and hence also a topological space. Restricting the
Euclidean distance function gives the irrationals the structure of a metric
space. Since the subspace of irrationals is not closed, the induced metric is
not complete. However, being a G-delta setâi.e., a countable intersection of
open subsetsâin a complete metric space, the space of irrationals is
topologically complete: that is, there is a metric on the irrationals inducing
the same topology as the restriction of the Euclidean metric, but with respect
to which the irrationals are complete. One can see this without knowing the
aforementioned fact about G-delta sets: the continued fraction expansion of an
irrational number defines a homeomorphism from the space of irrationals to the
space of all sequences of positive integers, which is easily seen to be
completely metrizable.

Furthermore, the set of all irrationals is a disconnected metric space.

## [edit] See also

  * Dedekind cut
  * Proof that e is irrational
  * Proof that Ï is irrational
  * Trigonometric number
  * nth root
  * Square root of 3
  * Rational numbers

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Cantor, Georg (1955, 1915). Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transfinite Numbers. New York: Dover. ISBN 978-0486600451.
  2. ^ The 15 Most Famous Transcendental Numbers. by Clifford A. Pickover. URL retrieved 24 October 2007.
  3. ^ http://www.mathsisfun.com/irrational-numbers.html; URL retrieved 24 October 2007.
  4. ^ Eric W. Weisstein, Irrational Number at MathWorld. URL retrieved 26 October 2007.
  5. ^ T. K. Puttaswamy, "The Accomplishments of Ancient Indian Mathematicians", pp. 411â2, in Selin, Helaine; D'Ambrosio, Ubiratan (2000), Mathematics Across Cultures: The History of Non-western Mathematics, Springer, ISBN 1402002602 .
  6. ^ Kurt Von Fritz (1945). "The Discovery of Incommensurability by Hippasus of Metapontum". The Annals of Mathematics.
  7. ^ James R. Choike (1980). "The Pentagram and the Discovery of an Irrational Number". The Two-Year College Mathematics Journal. .
  8. ^ Kline, M. (1990). Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press. (Original work published 1972). p.33.
  9. ^ Kline 1990, p. 32.
  10. ^ Robert L. McCabe (1976). "Theodorus' Irrationality Proofs". Mathematics Magazine. .
  11. ^ Charles H. Edwards (1982). The historical development of the calculus. Springer.
  12. ^ Kline 1990, p.48.
  13. ^ Kline 1990, p.49.
  14. ^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Arabic mathematics: forgotten brilliance?", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .
  15. ^ Matvievskaya, Galina (1987), "The Theory of Quadratic Irrationals in Medieval Oriental Mathematics", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 500: 253-277 [254] .
  16. ^ a b Matvievskaya, Galina (1987), "The Theory of Quadratic Irrationals in Medieval Oriental Mathematics", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 500: 253-277 [259] .
  17. ^ Jacques Sesiano, "Islamic mathematics", p. 148, in Selin, Helaine; D'Ambrosio, Ubiratan (2000), Mathematics Across Cultures: The History of Non-western Mathematics, Springer, ISBN 1402002602 .
  18. ^ Matvievskaya, Galina (1987), "The Theory of Quadratic Irrationals in Medieval Oriental Mathematics", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 500: 253-277 [260] .
  19. ^ Matvievskaya, Galina (1987), "The Theory of Quadratic Irrationals in Medieval Oriental Mathematics", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 500: 253-277 [261] .
  20. ^ Prof. Ahmed Djebbar (June 2008). "Mathematics in the Medieval Maghrib: General Survey on Mathematical Activities in North Africa". FSTC Limited. http://muslimheritage.com/topics/default.cfm?ArticleID=952. Retrieved on 2008-07-19.
  21. ^ Katz, V. J. (1995), "Ideas of Calculus in Islam and India", Mathematics Magazine (Mathematical Association of America) 68 (3): 163â74.
  22. ^ Salvatore Pincherle (1880). "Saggio di una introduzione alla teorica delle funzioni analitiche secondo i principi del prof. Weierstrass". Giornale di Matematiche.
  23. ^ J. H. Lambert (1761). "MÃ©moire sur quelques propriÃ©tÃ©s remarquables des quantitÃ©s transcendentes circulaires et logarithmiques". Histoire de l'AcadÃ©mie Royale des Sciences et des Belles-Lettres der Berlin: 265â276.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Adrien-Marie Legendre, ÃlÃ©ments de GÃ©ometrie, Note IV, (1802), Paris
  * Rolf Wallisser, "On Lambert's proof of the irrationality of Ï", in Algebraic Number Theory and Diophantine Analysis, Franz Halter-Koch and Robert F. Tichy, (2000), Walter de Gruyer

## [edit] External links

  * Eric W. Weisstein, Irrational Number at MathWorld.
  * Square root of 2 is irrational

v â¢ d â¢ e

Number systems  
Basic

Natural numbers (\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{N}) Â· Integers
(\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{Z}) Â· Rational numbers (\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{Q}) Â·
Irrational numbers Â· Real numbers (\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{R}) Â· Imaginary
numbers (\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{I}\\,) Â· Complex numbers
(\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{C}) Â· Algebraic numbers
(\\scriptstyle\\overline{\\mathbb{Q}}) Â· Transcendental numbers Â·
Quaternions (\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{H}) Â· Octonions (\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{O})
Â· Sedenions (\\scriptstyle\\mathbb{S}) Â· CayleyâDickson construction Â·
Split-complex numbers  
Complex  
extensions

Bicomplex numbers Â· Biquaternions Â· Split-quaternions Â· Tessarines Â·
Hypercomplex numbers Â· Musean hypernumbers Â· Superreal numbers Â· Hyperreal
numbers Â· Supernatural numbers Â· Surreal numbers  
Other extensions

Dual numbers Â· Transfinite numbers Â· Extended real numbers Â· Cardinal
numbers Â· Ordinal numbers Â· p-adic numbers  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irrational_number"

Categories: Irrational numbers | Articles containing proofs

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * àº¥àº²àº§
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * West-Vlams
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 23 March 2009, at 05:23.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



