
# Millennium Prize Problems

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Millennium Prize Problems are seven problems in mathematics that were
stated by the Clay Mathematics Institute in 2000. Currently, six of the
problems remain unsolved. A correct solution to each problem results in a
US$1,000,000 prize (sometimes called a Millennium Prize) being awarded by the
institute. Only the PoincarÃ© conjecture has been solved, but the solver,
Grigori Perelman, has not pursued the conditions necessary to claim the prize.

## Contents

  * 1 P versus NP
  * 2 The Hodge conjecture
  * 3 The PoincarÃ© conjecture
  * 4 The Riemann hypothesis
  * 5 YangâMills existence and mass gap
  * 6 NavierâStokes existence and smoothness
  * 7 The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] P versus NP

    Main article: P = NP problem
The question is whether, for all problems for which a computer can verify a
given solution quickly (that is, in polynomial time), it can also find that
solution quickly. This is generally considered the most important open
question in theoretical computer science as it has far-reaching consequences
in mathematics, philosophy and cryptography (see P=NP proof consequences).

The official statement of the problem was given by Stephen Cook.

## [edit] The Hodge conjecture

Main article: Hodge conjecture

The Hodge conjecture is that for projective algebraic varieties, Hodge cycles
are rational linear combinations of algebraic cycles.

The official statement of the problem was given by Pierre Deligne.

## [edit] The PoincarÃ© conjecture

Main article: PoincarÃ© conjecture

In topology, a sphere with a two-dimensional surface is essentially
characterized by the fact that it is simply connected. It is also true that
every 2-dimensional surface which is both compact and simply connected is
topologically a sphere. The PoincarÃ© conjecture is that this is also true for
spheres with three-dimensional surfaces. The question had long been solved for
all dimensions above three. Solving it for three is central to the problem of
classifying 3-manifolds.

The official statement of the problem was given by John Milnor.

A proof of this conjecture was given by Grigori Perelman in 2003; its review
was completed in August 2006, and Perelman was selected to receive the Fields
Medal for his solution. Perelman declined the award.[1]

## [edit] The Riemann hypothesis

Main article: Riemann hypothesis

The Riemann hypothesis is that all nontrivial zeros of the analytical
continuation of the Riemann zeta function have a real part of 1/2. A proof or
disproof of this would have far-reaching implications in number theory,
especially for the distribution of prime numbers. This was Hilbert's eighth
problem, and is still considered an important open problem a century later.

The official statement of the problem was given by Enrico Bombieri.

## [edit] YangâMills existence and mass gap

Main article: YangâMills existence and mass gap

In physics, classical Yang-Mills theory is a generalization of the Maxwell
theory of electromagnetism where the chromo-electromagnetic field itself
carries charges. As a classical field theory it has solutions which travel at
the speed of light so that its quantum version should describe massless
particles (gluons). However, the postulated phenomenon of color confinement
permits only bound states of gluons, forming massive particles. This is the
mass gap. Another aspect of confinement is asymptotic freedom which makes it
conceivable that quantum Yang-Mills theory exists without restriction to low
energy scales. The problem is to establish rigorously the existence of the
quantum Yang-Mills theory and a mass gap.

The official statement of the problem was given by Arthur Jaffe and Edward
Witten.

## [edit] NavierâStokes existence and smoothness

Main article: NavierâStokes existence and smoothness

The Navier-Stokes equations describe the motion of liquids and gases. Although
they were found in the 19th century, they still are not well understood. The
problem is to make progress toward a mathematical theory that will give us
insight into these equations.

The official statement of the problem was given by Charles Fefferman.

## [edit] The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture

Main article: Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture

The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture deals with a certain type of
equation, those defining elliptic curves over the rational numbers. The
conjecture is that there is a simple way to tell whether such equations have a
finite or infinite number of rational solutions. Hilbert's tenth problem dealt
with a more general type of equation, and in that case it was proven that
there is no way to decide whether a given equation even has any solutions.

The official statement of the problem was given by Andrew Wiles.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Maths genius declines top prize 22 August 2006

  * Devlin, Keith J. (2002), The Millennium Problems: The Seven Greatest Unsolved Mathematical Puzzles of Our Time, Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-01729-0
  * Carlson, James; Jaffe, Arthur; Wiles, Andrew, eds. (2006), The Millennium Prize Problems, Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society and Clay Mathematics Institute, ISBN 978-0-8218-3679-8

This article incorporates material from Millennium Problems on PlanetMath,
which is licensed under the GFDL.

## [edit] External links

  * The Millennium Grand Challenge in Mathematics
  * The Millennium Prize Problems

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Millennium_Prize_Problems"

Categories: Millennium Prize Problems | Unsolved problems in mathematics

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from PlanetMath

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * àº¥àº²àº§
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Shqip
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 10:42.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



