
# Virtue ethics

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (June 2008)  
<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (September 2006)  
Virtue theory is a branch of moral philosophy that emphasizes character,
rather than rules or consequences, as the key element of ethical thinking. In
the West virtue ethics was the prevailing approach to ethical thinking in the
ancient and medieval periods. The tradition suffered an eclipse during the
early modern period, as Aristotelianism fell out of favour in the West. Virtue
theory returned to prominence in Western philosophical thought in the
twentieth century, and is today one of the three dominant approaches to
normative theories (the other two being deontology and consequentialism)[1].

Although concern for virtue appears in several philosophical traditions,
notably the Chinese, in the West the roots of the tradition lie in the work of
Plato and Aristotle, and even today the traditionâs key concepts derive from
ancient Greek philosophy. These concepts include arete (excellence or virtue),
phronesis (practical or moral wisdom), and eudaimonia (flourishing).

While virtue ethics, in the West, traditionally was born with Plato and
Aristotle, their forms of virtue ethics are by no means the only ones. What
virtue ethics refers to, rather, is a collection of normative ethical
philosophies that place an emphasis on being rather than doing. Another way to
say this is that in virtue ethics, morality stems from the identity and/or
character of the individual, rather than being a reflection of the actions (or
consequences thereof) of the individual. Today, there is a great amount of
debate among various adherents of virtue ethics about what specific virtues
are morally praiseworthy. However, the one thing they all agree upon is that
morality comes as a result of intrinsic virtues--this is the common link that
unites the sometimes disparate normative philosophies into the field known as
virtue ethics.

## Contents

  * 1 Distinctions from other ethical traditions
  * 2 Achieving eudaimonia
  * 3 Historical origins and development
  * 4 Contemporary virtue theory..
  * 5 Virtue theory outside the Western tradition
  * 6 Criticisms of virtue theory
  * 7 Applications of Virtue Ethics
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Distinctions from other ethical traditions

Virtue ethics can be contrasted to deontological ethics and consequentialist
(or see utilitarianism) ethics by an examination of the other two (the three
being together the most predominant contemporary normative ethical theories.
Deontological ethics, sometimes referred to as duty ethics, places the
emphasis on following rules, or doing one's "duty." Which rules to follow is
often a point of contention and criticism in deontological ethics. One of the
predominant rule schemes utilized by deontologists is the Divine Command
Theory. Deontology also depends, at least partially, upon meta-ethical
realism, in that it postulates the existence of moral absolutes that make an
action moral. For more information on deontological ethics refer to the work
of Immanuel Kant. The next predominant school of thought in normative ethics
is consequentialism. While deontology places the emphasis on doing one's duty,
which is established by some kind of moral imperative (in other words, the
emphasis is on obedience to some higher moral absolute), consequentialism
bases the morality of an action upon the consequences of the outcome. Instead
of saying that one has a moral duty to abstain from murder, a consequentialist
would say that we should abstain from murder because it causes some
undesirable effect. The main contention here is what outcomes should/can be
identified as objectively desirable. The Greatest Happiness Principle of John
Stuart Mill is one of the most commonly adopted criterion. Mill asserts that
our determinant of the desirability of an action is the net amount of
happiness it brings, the number of people it brings it to, and the duration of
the happiness. He also tries to delineate classes of happiness, some being
preferable to others, but there is a great deal of difficulty in classifying
such concepts. For a more complete outline of the niceties of Mill's
classification system see the page on utilitarianism or read Mill's works
Utilitarianism, Defense of Utilitarianism, and On Liberty. Examining the meta-
ethical theories of naturalism, upon which many consequentialist theories
rely, may provide further clarification. Having looked at the other two
normative ethical theories we come at last to virtue ethics. As stated before,
deontology focuses on following rules, while consequentialism focuses on the
outcomes (consequences) of actions. Here virtue ethics differs in that the
focus is instead upon being rather than doing. A virtue ethics philosopher
will identify virtues, desirable characteristics, which the moral or virtuous
person embodies. Possessing these virtues, in virtue ethics, are what makes
one moral, and one's actions are a mere reflection of one's inner morality. To
the virtue philosopher, action cannot be used as a demarcation of morality,
because a virtue encompasses more than just a simple selection of action.
Instead, it is about a way of being that would cause the person exhibiting the
virtue to make a certain "virtuous" choice consistently in each situation.
There is a great deal of disagreement within virtue ethics over what are
virtues and what are not. There are also difficulties in identifying what is
the "virtuous" action to take in all circumstances, and how does one define a
virtue?

Consequentialist and deontological theories often still employ the term
'virtue', but in a restricted sense, namely as a tendency or disposition to
adhere to the system's principles or rules. These very different senses of
what constitutes virtue, hidden behind the same word, are a potential source
of confusion. This disagreement over the meaning of virtue points to a larger
conflict between virtue theory and its philosophical rivals. A system of
virtue theory is only intelligible if it is teleological: that is, if it
includes an account of the purpose (telos) of human life, or in popular
language, the meaning of life. Obviously, strong claims about the purpose of
human life, or of what the good life for human beings is, will be highly
controversial. Virtue theory's necessary commitment to a teleological account
of human life thus puts the tradition in sharp tension with other dominant
approaches to normative ethics, which, because they focus on actions, do not
bear this burden.

## [edit] Achieving eudaimonia

Eudaimonia is a state variously translated from Greek as 'well-being',
'happiness', and in the context of virtue ethics, 'human flourishing'[2]
Eudaimonia in this sense is not a subjective, but an objective, state. It
characterizes the well-lived life, irrespective of the emotional state of the
person experiencing it. According to Aristotle, the most prominent exponent of
eudaimonia in the Western philosophical tradition, eudaimonia is the proper
goal of human life. It consists of exercising the characteristic human quality
-- reason \-- as the soul's most proper and nourishing activity. Aristotle,
like Plato before him, argued that the pursuit of eudaimonia was an activity
that could only properly be exercised in the characteristic human community--
the polis or city-state.

Although eudaimonia was first popularized by Aristotle, it now belongs to the
tradition of virtue theories generally. For the virtue theorist, eudaimonia
describes that state achieved by the person who lives the proper human life,
an outcome which can be reached by practicing the virtues. A virtue is a habit
or quality that allows the bearer to succeed at his, her, or its purpose. The
virtue of a knife, for example, is sharpness; among the virtues of a racehorse
is speed. Thus to identify the virtues for human beings, one must have an
account of what the human purpose is. There is, and always has been, sharp
disagreement on this question: thus, as Alasdair MacIntyre observed in After
Virtue, though thinkers as diverse as Homer, Aristotle, the authors of the New
Testament, Thomas Aquinas, and Benjamin Franklin have all proposed lists of
the virtues, these lists often fail to overlap.

Aristotle categorized the virtues as moral and intellectual. Aristotle
identified nine intellectual virtues, the most important of which was wisdom;
sophia (theoretical wisdom) and phronesis (practical wisdom). The other eight
moral virtues included prudence, justice, fortitude, courage, liberality,
magnificence, magnanimity, and temperance. Aristotle argued that each of the
moral virtues was a mean (see Golden Mean) between two corresponding vices.

## [edit] Historical origins and development

Like much of the Western tradition, virtue theory seems to have originated in
ancient Greek philosophy . Discussion of what were known as the Four Cardinal
Virtues \- prudence, justice, fortitude and temperance \- can be found in
Plato's Republic. The virtues also figure prominently in Aristotle's moral
theory (see below). The Greek idea of the virtues was passed on in Latin
philosophy through Cicero and later incorporated into Christian moral theology
by St. Ambrose of Milan. During the scholastic period, the most comprehensive
consideration of the virtues from a theological perspective was provided by
St. Thomas Aquinas in his Summa Theologiae and his Commentaries on the
Nicomachean Ethics.

The tradition was eclipsed in the Renaissance, and throughout the early modern
period, when the Aristotelian synthesis of ethics and metaphysics fell into
disfavour. Though the tradition receded into the background of European
philosophical thought in these centuries, the term "virtue" remained current
during this period, and in fact appears prominently in the tradition of
classical republicanism or classical liberalism. This tradition was prominent
in the intellectual life of sixteenth-century Italy, as well as seventeenth-
and eighteenth-century Britain and America; indeed the term "virtue" appears
frequently in the work of NiccolÃ² Machiavelli, David Hume, the republicans of
the English Civil War period, the eighteenth-century English Whigs, and the
prominent figures among the Scottish Enlightenment and the American Founding.
Despite this common term, classical republicanism should not be conflated with
virtue theory, as the two philosophical traditions draw from different sources
and often address different concerns. Where virtue theory traces its roots to
Aristotle, classical republicanism draws primarily on Tacitus. Virtue theory
emphasizes Aristotle's belief in the polis as the acme of political
organization, and the role of the virtues in enabling human beings to flourish
in that environment. Classical republicanism in contrast emphasizes Tacitus's
concern that power and luxury can corrupt individuals and destroy liberty, as
Tacitus perceived in the transformation of the Roman republic into an empire;
virtue for classical republicans is a shield against this sort of corruption
and a means to preserve the good life one has, rather than a means by which to
achieve the good life one does not yet have. Another way to put the
distinction between the two traditions is that virtue ethics relies on
Aristotle's fundamental distinction between the human-being-as-he-is from the
human-being-as-he-should-be, while classical republicanism relies on the
Tacitean distinction of the human-being-as-he-is from the human-being-as-he-
is-at-risk-of-becoming.[3]

## [edit] Contemporary virtue theory..

Although some Enlightenment philosophers (e.g. Hume) continued to emphasize
the virtues, with the ascendancy of utilitarianism and deontology, virtue
theory moved to the margins of Western philosophy. The contemporary revival of
virtue theory is frequently traced to the philosopher G. E. M. Anscombe's 1958
essay, 'Modern Moral Philosophy' and to Philippa Foot, who published a
collection of essays in 1978 entitled Virtues and Vices. Since the 1980s, in
works like After Virtue and Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry, philosopher
Alasdair MacIntyre has made an effort to reconstruct a virtue-based theory in
dialogue with the problems of modern and postmodern thought. In French
philosophy, Paul Ricoeur has accorded an important place to Aristotelian
teleological ethics in his hermeneutical phenomenology of the subject, most
notably in his book Oneself as Another. Following MacIntyre, American
Methodist theologian Stanley Hauerwas has also found the language of virtue
quite helpful in his own project. More recently, Rosalind Hursthouse has
published On Virtue Ethics and Roger Crisp and Michael Slote have edited a
collection of important essays titled Virtue Ethics, while Martha Nussbaum and
Amartya Sen have employed virtue theory in theorizing the capability approach
to international development.

## [edit] Virtue theory outside the Western tradition

Non-Western moral and religious philosophies, such as Confucianism, also
incorporate ideas that may appear similar to those developed by the ancient
Greeks. Like ancient Greek ethics, Chinese ethical thought makes an explicit
connection between virtue and statecraft. However, where the Greeks focused on
the interior orientation of the soul, Confucianism's definition of virtue
emphasizes interpersonal relations. Normally when the term virtue theory is
used, it is in reference to the western conception of virtue theory, rather
than any of the schools of East Asian ethical thought.

## [edit] Criticisms of virtue theory

Some criticise the theory in relation to the difficulty involved with
establishing the nature of the virtues. Different people, cultures and
societies often have vastly different opinions on what constitutes a virtue.
For example, many would have once considered a virtuous woman to be quiet,
servile, and industrious. This conception of female virtue no longer holds
true in many modern societies (see also cultural relativism). Proponents of
virtue theory sometimes respond to this objection by arguing that a central
feature of a virtue is its universal applicability. In other words, any
character trait defined as a virtue must reasonably be universally regarded as
a virtue for all sentient beings. According to this view, it is inconsistent
to claim for example servility as a female virtue, while at the same time not
proposing it as a male one.

Other proponents of virtue theory, notably Alasdair MacIntyre, respond to this
objection by arguing that any account of the virtues must indeed be generated
out of the community in which those virtues are to be practiced: the very word
'ethics' implies 'ethos'. That is to say that the virtues are, and necessarily
must be, grounded in a particular time and place. What counts as virtue in
fourth-century Athens would be a ludicrous guide to proper behaviour in
twenty-first-century Toronto, and vice-versa. To take this view does not
necessarily commit one to the argument that accounts of the virtues must
therefore be static: moral activity-- that is, attempts to contemplate and
practice the virtues-- can provide the cultural resources that allow people to
change, albeit slowly, the ethos of their own societies. MacIntyre appears to
take this position in his seminal work on virtue ethics, After Virtue. One
might cite (though MacIntyre does not) the rapid emergence of abolitionist
thought in the slave-holding societies of the eighteenth-century Atlantic
world as an example of this sort of change: over a relatively short period of
time, perhaps 1760 to 1800, in Britain, France, and British America, slave-
holding, previously thought to be morally neutral or even virtuous, rapidly
became seen as vicious among wide swathes of society. While the emergence of
abolitionist thought derived from many sources, the work of David Brion Davis,
among others, has established that one source was the rapid, internal
evolution of moral theory among certain sectors of these societies, notably
the Quakers.

Another objection to virtue theory is that the school does not focus on what
sorts of actions are morally permitted and which ones are not, but rather on
what sort of qualities someone ought to foster in order to become a good
person. In other words, while some virtue theorists may not condemn, for
example, murder as an inherently immoral or impermissible sort of action, they
may argue that someone who commits a murder is severely lacking in several
important virtues, such as compassion and fairness. Still, antagonists of the
theory often object that this particular feature of the theory makes virtue
ethics useless as a universal norm of acceptable conduct suitable as a base
for legislation. Some virtue theorists concede this point, but respond by
opposing the very notion of legitimate legislative authority instead,
effectively advocating some form of anarchism as the political ideal. Others
argue that laws should be made by virtuous legislators. Still others argue
that it is possible to base a judicial system on the moral notion of virtues
rather than rules.

Some virtue theorists might respond to this overall objection with the notion
of a "bad act" also being an act characteristic of vice[citation needed]. That
is to say that those acts which do not aim at virtue, or stray from virtue,
would constitute our conception of "bad behavior". Although not all virtue
ethicists agree to this notion, this is one way the virtue ethicist can re-
introduce the concept of the "morally impermissible". One could raise
objection with Foot that she is committing an argument from ignorance by
postulating that what is not virtuous is unvirtuous. In other words, just
because an action or person 'lacks of evidence' for virtue does not, all else
constant, imply that said action or person is unvirtuous.

## [edit] Applications of Virtue Ethics

Virtue ethics has a number of applications. For instance, within the field of
social ethics, Deidre McCloskey [4] argues that virtue ethics can provide a
basis for a balanced approach to understanding capitalism and capitalist
societies. Within the field of philosophy of education, James Page [5] argues
that virtue ethics can provide a rationale and foundation for peace education.

## [edit] See also

  * Seven virtues
  * Virtue
  * Virtue jurisprudence
  * Aretaic turn
  * Stoicism
  * Cynicism
  * Confucianism

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Hursthouse, R. (1999). Introduction. In On Virtue Ethics (pp. 1-24). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
  2. ^ Pojman, L.P. & Fieser, J. (2009). Virtue Theory. In Ethics: Discovering Right and Wrong (pp. 146-169). (6th ed.) Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
  3. ^ J.G.A. Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment
  4. ^ McCloskey, D. The Bourgeois Virtues: Ethics for an Age of Commerce. (2007) Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN:978-0-22655-664-2.
  5. ^ Page, James S. (2008) Peace Education: Exploring Ethical and Philosophical Foundations. Charlotte: Information Age Publishing. ISBN 978-1-59311-889-1. [1][2]

## [edit] Further reading

  * Virtue: Confucius and Aristotle by Jiyuan Yu

## [edit] External links

  * International Society for MacIntyrean Philosophy
  * Virtue Ethics entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, entry by Rosalind Hursthouse;
  * Moral Character entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, entry by Marcia Homiak.
  * Virtue Ethics - summary, criticisms and how to apply the theory
  * Legal theory lexicon: Virtue ethicsby Larry Solum.
  * Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Virtue Ethics
  * A clickable list of Virtues with definitions and famous quotes.
  * The Four Virtues
  * Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

v â¢ d â¢ e

Philosophy  
Eastern philosophy Â· Western philosophy  
History

Ancient

Buddhist Â· Chinese Â· Greek Â· Hellenistic Â· Hindu Â· Indian Â· Jain Â·
Persian  
Medieval

Christian Â· Early Islamic Â· Islamic Â· Jewish Â· Judeo-Islamic  
Modern

Empiricism Â· Rationalism  
Contemporary

Analytic Â· Continental  
Lists

Basic topics Â· Topic list Â· Philosophers Â· Glossary of philosophical isms
Â· List of philosophical theories Â· Movements Â· more  
Branches

Aesthetics Â· Ethics Â· Epistemology Â· Logic Â· Metaphysics  
Philosophy of

Action Â· Biology Â· Chemistry Â· Education Â· Economics Â· Environment Â·
Geography Â· Information Â· Healthcare Â· History Â· Human nature Â· Humor Â·
Language Â· Law Â· Literature Â· Mathematics Â· Mind Â· Music Â· Being Â·
Philosophy Â· Physics Â· Politics Â· Psychology Â· Religion Â· Science Â·
Social science Â· Technology Â· War  
Schools

Aristotelianism Â· Averroism Â· Avicennism Â· Critical theory Â· Cynicism Â·
Deconstructionism Â· Deontology Â· Dialectical materialism Â· Dualism Â·
Egoism Â· Epicureanism Â· Epiphenomenalism Â· Existentialism Â· Feminist Â·
Functionalism Â· Hedonism Â· Hegelianism Â· Hermeneutics Â· Humanism Â·
Idealism Â· Kantianism Â· Kyoto School Â· Individualism Â· Logical positivism
Â· Marxism Â· Materialism Â· Monism Â· Naturalism Â· Neoplatonism Â· New
Philosophers Â· Nihilism Â· Ordinary language Â· Particularism Â· Peripatetic
Â· Phenomenology Â· Platonism Â· Positivism Â· Posthumanism Â· Postmodernism
Â· Poststructuralism Â· Pragmatism Â· Presocratic Â· Process Â· Solipsism Â·
Realism Â· Relativism Â· Scholasticism Â· Skepticism Â· Stoicism Â·
Structuralism Â· Thomism Â· Utilitarianism  
Portal Â· Category listings  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtue_ethics"

Categories: History of philosophy | Normative ethics | Virtue ethics

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2008 | Cleanup
from September 2006 | All pages needing cleanup | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Ãslenska
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 20:18 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



