
# Universal algebra

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Universal algebra (sometimes called general algebra) is the field of
mathematics that studies algebraic structures themselves, not examples
("models") of algebraic structures. For instance, rather than take particular
groups as the object of study, in universal algebra one takes "the theory of
groups" as an object of study.

## Contents

  * 1 Basic idea
    * 1.1 Equations
  * 2 Varieties
    * 2.1 Examples
      * 2.1.1 Groups
  * 3 Basic constructions
  * 4 Some basic theorems
  * 5 Motivations and applications
    * 5.1 Category theory and operads
  * 6 History
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Footnotes
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Basic idea

From the point of view of universal algebra, an algebra (or algebraic
structure) is a set A together with a collection of operations on A. An n-ary
operation on A is a function that takes n elements of A and returns a single
element of A. Thus, a 0-ary operation (or nullary operation) can be
represented simply as an element of A, or a constant, often denoted by a
letter like a. A 1-ary operation (or unary operation) is simply a function
from A to A, often denoted by a symbol placed in front of its argument, like
~x. A 2-ary operation (or binary operation) is often denoted by a symbol
placed between its arguments, like x * y. Operations of higher or unspecified
arity are usually denoted by function symbols, with the arguments placed in
parentheses and separated by commas, like f(x,y,z) or f(x1,...,xn). Some
researchers allow infinitary operations, such as \\bigwedge_{\\alpha\\in J}
x_\\alpha where J is an infinite index set, thus leading into the algebraic
theory of complete lattices. One way of talking about an algebra, then, is by
referring to it as an algebra of a certain type Î©, where Î© is an ordered
sequence of natural numbers representing the arity of the operations of the
algebra.

### [edit] Equations

After the operations have been specified, the nature of the algebra can be
further limited by axioms, which in universal algebra often take the form of
identities, or equational laws. An example is the associative axiom for a
binary operation, which is given by the equation x * (y * z) = (x * y) * z.
The axiom is intended to hold for all elements x, y, and z of the set A.

## [edit] Varieties

Main article: Variety (universal algebra)

An algebraic structure which can be defined by identities is called a variety,
and these are sufficiently important that some authors consider varieties the
only object of study in universal algebra, while others consider them an
object.[citation needed]

Restricting one's study to varieties rules out:

  * Predicate logic, notably quantification, including existential quantification (\\exists) and universal quantification (\\forall)
  * Relations, including inequalities, both a \\neq b and order relations

In this narrower definition, universal algebra can be seen as a special branch
of model theory, in which we are typically dealing with structures having
operations only (i.e. the type can have symbols for functions but not for
relations other than equality), and in which the language used to talk about
these structures uses equations only.

Not all algebraic structures in a wider sense fall into this scope. For
example ordered groups are not studied in mainstream universal algebra because
they involve a binary relation.

A more fundamental restriction is that universal algebra cannot study the
class of fields, because there is no type in which all field laws can be
written as equations.

One advantage of this restriction is that the structures studied in universal
algebra can be defined in any category which has finite products. For example,
a topological group is just a group in the category of topological spaces.

### [edit] Examples

Most of the usual algebraic systems of mathematics are examples of varieties,
but not always in an obvious way â the usual definitions often involve
quantification or inequalities.

#### [edit] Groups

To see how this works, let's consider the definition of a group. Normally a
group is defined in terms of a single binary operation *, subject to these
axioms:

  * Associativity (as in the previous section): x * (y * z) = (x * y) * z.
  * Identity element: There exists an element e such that for each element x, e * x = x = x * e.
  * Inverse element: It can easily be seen that the identiy element is unique. If we denote this unique identity element by e then for each x, there exists an element i such that x * i = e = i * x.

(Sometimes you will also see an axiom called "closure", stating that x * y
belongs to the set A whenever x and y do. But from a universal algebraist's
point of view, that is already implied when you call * a binary operation.)

Now, this definition of a group is problematic from the point of view of
universal algebra. The reason is that the axioms of the identity element and
inversion are not stated purely in terms of equational laws but also have
clauses involving the phrase "there exists ... such that ...". This is
inconvenient; the list of group properties can be simplified to universally
quantified equations if we add a nullary operation e and a unary operation ~
in addition to the binary operation *, then list the axioms for these three
operations as follows:

  * Associativity: x * (y * z) = (x * y) * z.
  * Identity element: e * x = x = x * e.
  * Inverse element: x * (~x) = e = (~x) * x.

(Of course, we usually write "x -1" instead of "~x", which shows that the
notation for operations of low arity is not always as given in the second
paragraph.)

What has changed is that in the usual definition there are:

  * a single binary operation (signature (2))
  * 1 equational law (associativity)
  * 2 quantified laws (identity and inverse)

...while in the universal algebra definition there are

  * 3 operations: one binary, one unary, and one nullary (signature (2,1,0))
  * 3 equational laws (associativity, identity, and inverse)
  * no quantified laws

It's important to check that this really does capture the definition of a
group. The reason that it might not is that specifying one of these universal
groups might give more information than specifying one of the usual kind of
group. After all, nothing in the usual definition said that the identity
element e was unique; if there is another identity element e', then it's
ambiguous which one should be the value of the nullary operator e. However,
this is not a problem, because identity elements can be proved to be always
unique. The same thing is true of inverse elements. So the universal
algebraist's definition of a group really is equivalent to the usual
definition.

## [edit] Basic constructions

We assume that the type, Î©, has been fixed. Then there are three basic
constructions in universal algebra: homomorphic image, subalgebra, and
product.

A homomorphism between two algebras A and B is a function h: A â B from the
set A to the set B such that, for every operation f (of arity, say, n),
h(fA(x1,...,xn)) = fB(h(x1),...,h(xn)). (Here, subscripts are placed on f to
indicate whether it is the version of f in A or B. In theory, you could tell
this from the context, so these subscripts are usually left off.) For example,
if e is a constant (nullary operation), then h(eA) = eB. If ~ is a unary
operation, then h(~x) = ~h(x). If * is a binary operation, then h(x * y) =
h(x) * h(y). And so on. A few of the things that can be done with
homomorphisms, as well as definitions of certain special kinds of
homomorphisms, are listed under the entry Homomorphism. In particular, we can
take the homomorphic image of an algebra, h(A).

A subalgebra of A is a subset of A that is closed under all the operations of
A. A product of some set of algebraic structures is the cartesian product of
the sets with the operations defined coordinatewise.

## [edit] Some basic theorems

  * The Isomorphism theorems, which encompass the isomorphism theorems of groups, rings, modules, etc.
  * Birkhoff's HSP Theorem, which states that a class of algebras is a variety if and only if it is closed under homomorphic images, subalgebras, and arbitrary direct products.

## [edit] Motivations and applications

In addition to its unifying approach, universal algebra also gives deep
theorems and important examples and counterexamples. It provides a useful
framework for those who intend to start the study of new classes of algebras.
It can enable the use of methods invented for some particular classes of
algebras to other classes of algebras, by recasting the methods in terms of
universal algebra (if possible), and then interpreting these as applied to
other classes. It has also provided conceptual clarification; as J.D.H. Smith
puts it, "What looks messy and complicated in a particular framework may turn
out to be simple and obvious in the proper general one."

In particular, universal algebra can be applied to the study of monoids,
rings, and lattices. Before universal algebra came along, many theorems (most
notably the isomorphism theorems) were proved separately in all of these
fields, but with universal algebra, they can be proven once and for all for
every kind of algebraic system.

### [edit] Category theory and operads

Further information: Category theory and Operad theory

A more generalised programme along these lines is carried out by category
theory. Given a list of operations and axioms in universal algebra, the
corresponding algebras and homomorphisms are the objects and morphisms of a
category. Category theory applies to many situations where universal algebra
does not, extending the reach of the theorems. Conversely, many theorems that
hold in universal algebra do not generalise all the way to category theory.
Thus both fields of study are useful.

A more recent development in category theory that generalizes operations is
operad theory â an operad is a set of operations, similar to a universal
algebra.

## [edit] History

In Alfred North Whitehead's book A Treatise on Universal Algebra, published in
1898, the term universal algebra had essentially the same meaning that it has
today. Whitehead credits William Rowan Hamilton and Augustus De Morgan as
originators of the subject matter, and James Joseph Sylvester with coining the
term itself[1].

At the time structures such as Lie algebras and hyperbolic quaternions drew
attention to the need to expand algebraic structures beyond the associatively
multiplicative class. In a review Alexander MacFarlane wrote: "The main idea
of the work is not unification of the several methods, nor generalization of
ordinary algebra so as to include them, but rather the comparative study of
their several structures." At the time George Boole's algebra of logic made a
strong counterpoint to ordinary number algebra, so the term "universal" served
to calm strained sensibilities.

Whitehead's early work sought to unify quaternions (due to Hamilton),
Grassmann's Ausdehnungslehre, and Boole's algebra of logic. Whitehead wrote in
his book:

    "Such algebras have an intrinsic value for separate detailed study; also they are worthy of comparative study, for the sake of the light thereby thrown on the general theory of symbolic reasoning, and on algebraic symbolism in particular. The comparative study necessarily presupposes some previous separate study, comparison being impossible without knowledge."[2]
Whitehead, however, had no results of a general nature. Work on the subject
was minimal until the early 1930s, when Garrett Birkhoff and Ãystein Ore
began publishing on universal algebras. Developments in metamathematics and
category theory in the 1940s and 1950s furthered the field, particularly the
work of Abraham Robinson, Alfred Tarski, Andrzej Mostowski, and their students
(Brainerd 1967).

In the period between 1935 and 1950, most papers were written along the lines
suggested by Birkhoff's papers, dealing with free algebras, congruence and
subalgebra lattices, and homomorphism theorems. Although the development of
mathematical logic had made applications to algebra possible, they came about
slowly; results published by Anatoly Maltsev in the 1940s went unnoticed
because of the war. Tarski's lecture at the 1950 International Congress of
Mathematicians in Cambridge ushered in a new period in which model-theoretic
aspects were developed, mainly by Tarski himself, as well as C.C. Chang, Leon
Henkin, Bjarni JÃ³nsson, R. C. Lyndon, and others.

In the late 1950s, E. Marczewski[3] emphasized the importance of free
algebras, leading to the publication of more than 50 papers on the algebraic
theory of free algebras by Marczewski himself, together with J. Mycielski, W.
Narkiewicz, W. Nitka, J. PÅonka, S. Åwierczkowski, K. Urbanik, and others.

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Mathematics portal  
  * category theory
  * graph algebra
  * homomorphism
  * lattice theory
  * signature
  * variety
  * clone
  * operad theory
  * model theory
  * Universal algebraic geometry

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ GrÃ¤tzer, George. Universal Algebra, Van Nostrand Co., Inc., 1968, p. v.
  2. ^ Quoted in GrÃ¤tzer, George. Universal Algebra, Van Nostrand Co., Inc., 1968.
  3. ^ Marczewski, E. "A general scheme of the notions of independence in mathematics." Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. Ser. Sci. Math. Astronom. Phys. 6 (1958), 731-736.

## [edit] References

  * Bergman, George M., 1998. An Invitation to General Algebra and Universal Constructions (pub. Henry Helson, 15 the Crescent, Berkeley CA, 94708) 398 pp. ISBN 0-9655211-4-1.
  * Birkhoff, Garrett, 1946. Universal algebra. Comptes Rendus du Premier CongrÃ¨s Canadien de MathÃ©matiques, University of Toronto Press, Toronto, pp.310-326.
  * Brainerd, Barron, Aug-Sep 1967. Review of Universal Algebra by P. M. Cohn. American Mathematical Monthly, 74(7): 878-880.
  * Burris, Stanley N., and H.P. Sankappanavar, 1981. A Course in Universal Algebra Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3-540-90578-2 Free online edition.
  * Cohn, Paul Moritz, 1981. Universal Algebra. Dordrecht , Netherlands: D.Reidel Publishing. ISBN 90-277-1213-1 (First published in 1965 by Harper & Row)
  * Freese, Ralph, and Ralph McKenzie, 1987. Commutator Theory for Congruence Modular Varieties, 1st ed. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, 125. Cambridge Univ. Press. ISBN 0-521-34832-3. Free online second edition.
  * GrÃ¤tzer, George, 1968. Universal Algebra D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc.
  * Hobby, David, and Ralph McKenzie, 1988. The Structure of Finite Algebras American Mathematical Society. ISBN 0-8218-3400-2. Free online edition.
  * Jipsen, Peter, and Henry Rose, 1992. Varieties of Lattices, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1533. Springer Verlag. ISBN 0-387-56314-8. Free online edition.
  * Pigozzi, Don. General Theory of Algebras.
  * Smith, J.D.H., 1976. Mal'cev Varieties, Springer-Verlag.
  * Whitehead, Alfred North, 1898. A Treatise on Universal Algebra, Cambridge. (Mainly of historical interest.)

## [edit] External links

  * Utility of Universal Algebraâcomments on MacFarlane's 1899 review of Whitehead's Universal Algebra.
  * Algebra Universalisâa journal dedicated to Universal Alegbra.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_algebra"

Categories: Abstract algebra | Universal algebra | Algebra

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 March 2009, at 00:46.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



