
# Personal identity (philosophy)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help clarify the
article; suggestions may be found on the talk page. (February 2009)  
In philosophy, personal identity refers to the essence of a self-conscious
person, that which makes him or her unique. It persists: though a person may
change in socially important aspects, such as religious belief, these
modifications happen through one single identity.

## Contents

  * 1 Description
    * 1.1 The mind-body problem
    * 1.2 Consciousness basis
    * 1.3 The bundle theory of the self
  * 2 Personal continuity
    * 2.1 Ego identity
  * 3 Criticisms and other analysis
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 References
    * 6.1 General information
    * 6.2 Articles and publications
    * 6.3 Online articles

  
## [edit] Description

<IMG>

<IMG>

Personal identity over time: What does it take for individuals to persist from
moment to moment â or in other words, for the same individual to exist at
different moments?

The question regarding personal identity has addressed the conditions under
which a person at one time is the same person at another time, known as
personal continuity. This sort of analysis of personal identity provides a set
of necessary and sufficient conditions for the identity of the person over
time. In the modern philosophy of mind, this concept of personal identity is
sometimes referred to as the diachronic problem of personal identity. The
synchronic problem is grounded in the question of what features or traits
characterize a given person at one time.

### [edit] The mind-body problem

The mind-body problem concerns the explanation of the relationship, if any,
that exists between minds, or mental processes, and bodily states or
processes. One of the aims of philosophers who work in this area is to explain
how a supposedly non-material mind can influence a material body and vice-
versa.

Our perceptual experiences depend on stimuli which arrive at our various
sensory organs from the external world and these stimuli cause changes in our
mental states; ultimately causing us to feel a sensation, which may be
pleasant or unpleasant. Someone's desire for a slice of pizza, for example,
will tend to cause that person to move their body in a specific manner and in
a specific direction to obtain said pizza. The question, then, is how it can
be possible for conscious experiences to arise out of a lump of grey matter
endowed with nothing but electrochemical properties. A related problem is to
explain how someone's propositional attitudes (e.g. beliefs and desires) can
cause that individual's neurons to fire and his muscles to contract in exactly
the correct manner. These comprise some of the puzzles that have confronted
epistemologists and philosophers of mind from at least the time of RenÃ©
Descartes.

### [edit] Consciousness basis

John Locke considered personal identity (or the self) to be founded on
consciousness (viz. Memory), and not on the substance of either the soul or
the body. Chapter XXVII "On Identity and Diversity" in An Essay Concerning
Human Understanding (1689) has been said to be one of the first modern
conceptualization of consciousness as the repeated self-identification of
oneself. Through this identification, moral responsibility could be attributed
to the subject and punishment and guilt could be justified, as critics such as
Nietzsche would point out.

According to Locke, personal identity (the self) "depends on consciousness,
not on substance" nor on the soul. We are the same person to the extent that
we are conscious of our past and future thoughts and actions in the same way
as we are conscious of our present thoughts and actions. If consciousness is
this "thought" which "that goes along with the substance ... which makes the
same person", then personal identity is only founded on the repeated act of
consciousness: "This may show us wherein personal identity consists: not in
the identity of substance, but... in the identity of consciousness". For
example, one may claim to be a reincarnation of Plato, therefore having the
same soul substance. However, one would be the same person as Plato only if
one had the same consciousness of Plato's thoughts and actions that he himself
did. Therefore, self-identity is not based on the soul. One soul may have
various personalities.

Neither is self-identity founded on the body substance, argues Locke, as the
body may change while the person remains the same. Even the identity of
animals is not founded on their body: "animal identity is preserved in
identity of life, and not of substance", as the body of the animal grows and
changes during its life. On the other hand, identity of humans is based on
their consciousness. Take for example a prince's mind which enters the body of
a cobbler: to all exterior eyes, the cobbler would remain a cobbler. But to
the prince himself, the cobbler would be himself, as he would be conscious of
the prince's thoughts and acts, and not those of the cobbler. A prince's
consciousness in a cobbler's body: thus the cobbler is, in fact, a prince.

But this interesting border-case leads to this problematic thought that since
personal identity is based on consciousness, and that only oneself can be
aware of his consciousness, exterior human judges may never know if they
really are judging - and punishing - the same person, or simply the same body.
In other words, Locke argues that you may be judged only for the acts of your
body, as this is what is apparent to all but God; however, you are in truth
only responsible for the acts for which you are conscious. This forms the
basis of the insanity defense: one cannot be held accountable for acts from
which one was unconscious \- and therefore leads to interesting philosophical
questions:

    "personal identity consists [not in the identity of substance] but in the identity of consciousness, wherein if Socrates and the present mayor of Queenborough agree, they are the same person: if the same Socrates waking and sleeping do not partake of the same consciousness, Socrate waking and sleeping is not the same person. And to punish Socrates waking for what sleeping Socrates thought, and waking Socrates was never conscious of, would be no more right, than to punish one twin for what his brother-twin did, whereof he knew nothing, because their outsides were so like, that they could not be distinguished; for such twins have been seen."
Or again:

    "PERSON, as I take it, is the name for this self. Wherever a man finds what he calls himself, there, I think, another may say is the same person. It is a forensic term, appropriating actions and their merit; and so belong only to intelligent agents, capable of a law, and happiness, and misery. This personality extends itself beyond present existence to what is past, only by consciousness, --whereby it becomes concerned and accountable; owns and imputes to itself past actions, just upon the same ground and for the same reason as it does the present. All which is founded in a concern for happiness, the unavoidable concomitant of consciousness; that which is conscious of pleasure and pain, desiring that that self that is conscious should be happy. And therefore whatever past actions it cannot reconcile or APPROPRIATE to that present self by consciousness, it can be no more concerned in it than if they had never been done: and to receive pleasure or pain, i.e. reward or punishment, on the account of any such action, is all one as to be made happy or miserable in its first being, without any demerit at all. For, supposing a MAN punished now for what he had done in another life, whereof he could be made to have no consciousness at all, what difference is there between that punishment and being CREATED miserable? And therefore, conformable to this, the apostle tells us, that, at the great day, when every one shall 'receive according to his doings, the secrets of all hearts shall be laid open.' The sentence shall be justified by the consciousness all person shall have, that THEY THEMSELVES, in what bodies soever they appear, or what substances soever that consciousness adheres to, are the SAME that committed those actions, and deserve that punishment for them."
Henceforth, Locke's conception of personal identity founds it not on the
substance or the body, but in the "same continued consciousness", which is
also distinct from the soul since the soul may have no consciousness of itself
(as in reincarnation). He creates a third term between the soul and the body -
and Locke's thought may certainly be meditated by those who, following a
scientist ideology, would identify too quickly the brain to consciousness. For
the brain, as the body and as any substance, may change, while consciousness
remains the same. Therefore personal identity is not in the brain, but in
consciousness. However, Locke's theory also reveals his debt to theology and
to Apocalyptic "great day", which by advance excuse any failings of human
justice and therefore humanity's miserable state. The problem of personal
identity is at the center of discussions about life after death, and
immortality. In order to exist after death, there has to be a person after
death who is the same person as the person who died.

### [edit] The bundle theory of the self

David Hume undertook looking at the mind/body problem (and Mind/brain
identity). Hume also investigated a person's character, the relationship
between human and animal nature, and the nature of agency. Hume pointed out
that we tend to think that we are the same person we were five years ago.
Though we've changed in many respects, the same person appears present as was
present then. We might start thinking about which features can be changed
without changing the underlying self. Hume, however, denies that there is a
distinction between the various features of a person and the mysterious self
that supposedly bears those features. When we start introspecting, "we are
never intimately conscious of anything but a particular perception; man is a
bundle or collection of different perceptions which succeed one another with
an inconceivable rapidity and are in perpetual flux and movement".[1]

It is plain, that in the course of our thinking, and in the constant
revolution of our ideas, our imagination runs easily from one idea to any
other that resembles it, and that this quality alone is to the fancy a
sufficient bond and association. It is likewise evident that as the senses, in
changing their objects, are necessitated to change them regularly, and take
them as they lie contiguous to each other, the imagination must by long custom
acquire the same method of thinking, and run along the parts of space and time
in conceiving its objects.[2]

Note in particular that, in Hume's view, these perceptions do not belong to
anything. Hume, similar to the Buddha, compares the soul to a commonwealth,
which retains its identity not by virtue of some enduring core substance, but
by being composed of many different, related, and yet constantly changing
elements. The question of personal identity then becomes a matter of
characterizing the loose cohesion of one's personal experience. (Note that in
the Appendix to the Treatise, Hume said mysteriously that he was dissatisfied
with his account of the self, yet he never returned to the issue.)

In short, what matters for Hume is not that 'identity' exist but that the
relations of causation, contiguity, and resemblances obtain among the
perceptions. Critics of Hume might point out that in order for the various
states and processes of the mind to seem unified, there must be something
which perceives their unity, the existence of which would be no less
mysterious than a personal identity

## [edit] Personal continuity

In psychology (which historically is philosophically concerned with dualism),
personal continuity, also called personal persistence, is the uninterrupted
connection concerning a particular person of his or her private life and
personality. Personal continuity is the union affecting the facets arising
from personality in order to avoid discontinuities from one moment of time to
another time.

Personal continuity is an important part of identity; this is the process of
ensuring that the quality of the mind are consistent from moment to the next,
generally regarded to comprise qualities such as self-awareness, sentience,
sapience, and the ability to perceive the relationship between oneself and
one's environment. Personal continuity is the property of a continuous and
connected period of time and is intimately concerned with a person's body or
physical being. Associationism, or the method of how ideas combine in the
mind, allows events or views to be associated with each other in the mind,
thus leading to a form of learning. Associations can result from contiguity,
similarity, or contrast. Through contiguity, one associates ideas or events
that usually happen to occur at the same time. Some of these events form an
autobiographical memory in which each is a personal representation of the
general or specific events and personal facts.

### [edit] Ego identity

Main article: Id, ego, and super-ego

Ego integrity is the ego's accumulated assurance of its capacity for order and
meaning. Ego identity is the accrued confidence that the inner sameness and
continuity prepared in the past are matched by the sameness and continuity of
one's meaning for others, as evidenced in the promise of a career. Body and
ego must be masters of organ modes and of the other nuclear conflicts in order
to face the fear of ego loss in situations which call for self-abandon.

## [edit] Criticisms and other analysis

The Buddha attacked all attempts to conceive of a fixed self, while stating
that holding the view "I have no self" is also mistaken. This is an example of
the middle way charted by the Buddha.

Eric Olson gives a definition of a human as a biological organism and asserts
that a psychological relation is not necessary for personal continuity.
Olson's personal identity lies in life-sustaining processes instead of bodily
continuity. This biological approach squares with many other psychological
accounts of personal identity but does not fall into common metaphysical
traps.

Other criticisms state that the intuitive concept of self is an evolutionary
artifact. In the monkey-riding-a-tiger model of consciousness the brain models
its own unconscious processes just as it models other people. This modeling
makes the assumption that the model will continue to apply through time, and
so assumes they are the same person they were yesterday. This leads to the
intuitive sense of self. The sense of âselfâ has also become part of our
language, part of our concept of responsibility, and the basis of self based
morality.

According to this line of criticism, the sense of self is an evolutionary
artifact, which saves time in the circumstances it evolved for. But sense of
self breaks down when considering some rare events such as memory loss, split
personality disorder, brain damage, brainwashing, and various thought
experiments. [3] When presented with these imperfections in the intuitive
sense of self and the consequences to this important concept which rely partly
on the strict concept of self, people tend to try to mend the concept,
possibly because of cognitive dissonance. Critics of personal continuity
believe that this leads to extending the concept of self beyond its practical
application and justification. [4]

## [edit] See also

Identity

    Abstract objects, Personal life, Self (philosophy), Identity and change, Mind/brain identity, Ship of Theseus (about identity of things generally, not only of persons)
Continuity

    Mindstream, consciousness, dependent origination, introspect, mnemonic, percept, perdurantism, synchronicity, noumena
People

    Gottlob Frege, Derek Parfit, Anthony Quinton, David Wiggins, Sydney Shoemaker, Bernard Williams, Peter van Inwagen, Carl Jung, Erik Erikson, Hugo MÃ¼nsterberg, Wilhelm Wundt, Dogen (being and time)
Other

    Metaphysical necessity, Personally identifiable information, Privacy, Cerebrum, Brainy, Hemispherectomy, immaterialism, personhood
## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ A Treatise of Human Nature, I, IV, vi
  2. ^ A Treatise of Human Nature, 4.1, 2.
  3. ^ "Staying alive game - Examples of thought experiments on personal identity"
  4. ^ "Criticism of personal identity"

## [edit] References

### [edit] General information

  * Vere Claiborne Chappell, The Cambridge Companion to Locke. Cambridge University Press, 1994. 343 pages. ISBN 0521387728
  * Harold W. Noonan, Personal Identity. Routledge, 2003. 296 pages. ISBN 0415273153
  * Daniel Dennett, Where am I?
  * Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons, part 3.
  * Bernard Williams, The Self and the Future, in Philosophical Review 79.
  * John Locke, Of Ideas of Identity and Diversity
  * E. J. Lowe, A Survey of Metaphysics, chapters 2,3, 4.
  * J. Cim & E.Sosa, A Companion to Metaphysics. Page 380, "persons and personal identity".
  * Mark Siderits, Personal Identity and Buddhist Philosophy. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2003. 231 pages. ISBN 0754634736
  * Marc Slors, The Diachronic Mind. Springer, 2001. 234 pages. ISBN 0792369785
  * Shaun Gallagher, Jonathan Shear, Models of the Self. Imprint Academic, 1999. 524 pages. ISBN 0907845096
  * E. Jonathan Lowe, The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time. Oxford University Press, 2001. 288 pages. ISBN 0199244995
  * Eric Todd Olson, The Human Animal: Personal Identity Without Psychology. Oxford University Press, 1997. 189 pages. ISBN 0195134230
  * John Perry, The problem of personal identity. 1975.
  * John Perry, ed. Personal Identity. Berkeley: University of California Press.
  * Thomas Reid, Of identity. Of Mr. Locke's account of our personal identity. In Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man. Reprinted in Perry, ed. 1975.
  * J. Butler, Of personal identity. In J. Angus, ed. The Analogy of Religion. London.
  * G Kopf, Beyond Personal Identity: Dogen, Nishida, and a Phenomenology of No-Self. Routledge, 2001. ISBN 0700712178
  * John Perry, A Dialogue on Personal Identity and Immortality. ISBN 0-915144-53-0
  * A. E. Pitson, Hume's Philosophy of the Self. Routledge, 2002. 224 pages. ISBN 041524801
  * Brian Garrett, Personal Identity and Self-Consciousness. Routledge, 1998. 137 pages. ISBN 0415165733
  * E.J Lowe, An Introduction to Philosophy of the Mind. Cambridge University Press, 2000.

### [edit] Articles and publications

  * M Kapstein, (Review) Collins, Parfit, and the Problem of Personal Identity in Two Philosophical Traditions. Philosophy East and West, 1986.
  * N Agar, Functionalism and Personal Identity. Nous, 2003.
  * Christine M. Korsgaard, Personal Identity and the Unity of Agency: A Kantian Response to Parfit. Philosophy and Public Affairs, Vol. 18, No. 2 (Spring, 1989), pp. 101-132.
  * Andrew Brennan, Personal identity and personal survival. Analysis, 42, 44-50. 1982.
  * Lloyd Fields, Parfit on personal identity and desert. Phil Quarterly, 37, 432-441. 1987.
  * Brian Garrett, Personal identity and extrinsicness. Mind, 97, 105-109. 1990.
  * Derek Parfit, Personal identity. Philosophical Review, 80, no.1, 3-27. 1971.
  * John Robinson, Personal identity and survival. Journal of Philosophy, 85, 319-328. 1988.
  * E J Borowski, Diachronic Identity as Relative Identity. The Philosophical Quarterly, 1975.
  * R W Perrett, C Barton, Personal Identity, Reductionism and the Necessity of Origins. Erkenntnis, 1999.
  * B Williams, Bodily Continuity and Personal Identity. Analysis, 1960.
  * B Romero, Self-maintenance therapy in Alzheimer's disease. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 2001.
  * BM Ross, Remembering the Personal Past: Descriptions of Autobiographical Memory. Oxford University Press, 1991. ISBN 0195068947
  * D Mohr, Development of attributes of personal identity. Developmental Psychology, 1978.
  * DG Thompson, The Religious Sentiments of the Human Mind. 1888.
  * DJ Kroger, Identity Development: Adolescence Through Adulthood. Sage Publications Inc., 2006. 303 pages. ISBN 0761929606
  * G Foulds, Personal continuity and psycho-pathological disruption. PMID 14197795
  * GF Hellden, Personal Context and Continuity of Human Thought: Recurrent Themes in a Longitudinal Study of Students' Conceptions.
  * MJ Chandler, JE Marcia, B Publishers, Personal Persistence, Identity Development, and Suicide. Blackwell Publishing, 2003. ISBN 1405118792
  * J Copner,The Faith of a Realist. Williams and Norgate, 1890. 351 pages.
  * J Habermas, The paradigm shift in Mead. In M. Aboulafia (Ed.), Philosophy, social theory, and the thought of George Herbert Mead 1991\. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
  * J Jacobson, Islam in Transition: Religion and Identity Among British Pakistani Youth. Routledge, 1998. 177 pages. ISBN 0415170850
  * J Sully, Illusions: A Psychological Study. Appleton, 1881. 372 pages.
  * JC LaVoie, Ego identity formation in middle adolescence. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 1976.
  * JM Shorter, More About Bodily Continuity and Personal Identity. Analysis, 1962.
  * S Seligman, RS Shanok, Subjectivity, Complexity and the Social World. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 1995.
  * SD Bozinovski, Self-Neglect Among the Elderly: Maintaining Continuity of Self. DIANE Publishing, 1998. 434 pages. ISBN 0788174568
  * W Greve, K Rothermund, D Wentura, The Adaptive Self: Personal Continuity and Intentional Self-development. 2005.
  * WE Conn, Eriksonâs âidentityâ: an essay on the psychological foundations of religious ethics.

### [edit] Online articles

  * Carsten Korfmacher, 'Personal Identity', in "The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"
  * Roots, Identity, Nationality A brief critical analysis of the concept of identity
  * Phineas Parkhurst Quimby on Personal Identity
  * Max More, The Diachronic Self : Identity, Continuity, Transformation.
  * Vakhtangi Makhniahvilim Parfit and Whitehead on personal identity.
  * Personal Identity, Reductionism and the Necessity of Origins. Erkenntnis. Volume 51, Numbers 2-3 / November, 1999.
  * V Chappell, Locke on Consciousness. philosophy.fas.nyu.edu.
  * The Unity of Consciousness. science.uva.nl.
  * D Cole, Artificial intelligence and personal identity. Synthese, 1991.
  * Nervous system development -- network origins. benbest.com.
  * 'Brain Death and Technological Change: Personal Identity, Neural Prostheses and Uploading'
  * Forum on Personal Identity
  * The Immateriality of the Soul and Personal Identity
  * Personal Identity â Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
  * 'Personal Identity and the Methodology of Imaginary Cases'
  * Personal Identity Syllabus â 'The Metaphysics of Persons'
  * PHI 330 Homepage â Metaphysics
  * PHL 242-442 â Metaphysics
  * 'Staying Alive  The Personal Identity Game
  * Tannsjo, Torbjorn â 'Morality and Personal Identity'
  * Topics in Metaphysics â Personal Identity
  * 20th WCP: Persons and Personal Identity
  * The Duplicates Paradox by Ben Best; theories about the problem of personal continuity.
  * William H. Swatos (Jr. Editor), Identity. Encyclopedia of Religion and Society.
  * Ego identity formation in middle adolescence. springerlink.com.
  * Personal Identity & Immortality'. individual.utoronto.ca.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_identity_(philosophy)"

Categories: Metaphysics | Philosophy of mind | Identity

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 March 2009, at 14:19.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



