
# Second-order logic

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

In logic and mathematics second-order logic is an extension of first-order
logic, which itself is an extension of propositional logic.[1] Second-order
logic is in turn extended by higher-order logic and type theory.

First-order logic uses only discrete variables (eg. the variable x represents
a person) whereas second-order logic uses variables that range over sets of
individuals. For example, the second-order sentence âP âx (x â P â¨ x
â P) says that for every set P of people and every person x, either x is in
P or it is not (this is the principle of bivalence). Second-order logic also
includes variables quantifying over functions, and other variables as
explained in the section Syntax below. Both first-order and second-order logic
use the idea of a domain of discourse (often called simply the "domain" or the
"universe"). The domain is a set of individual elements which can be
quantified over.

## Contents

  * 1 Expressive power of second order logic
  * 2 Syntax
  * 3 Semantics
  * 4 Deductive systems
  * 5 Why second-order logic is not reducible to first-order logic
  * 6 Second-order logic and metalogical results
  * 7 The history and disputed value of second-order logic
  * 8 Applications to complexity
    * 8.1 Power of the existential fragment
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 References

  
## [edit] Expressive power of second order logic

Second-order logic is more expressive than first-order logic. For example, if
the domain is the set of all real numbers, one can assert in first-order logic
the existence of an additive inverse of each real number by writing âx ây
(x \+ y = 0) but one needs second-order logic to assert the least-upper-bound
property for sets of real numbers, which states that every bounded, nonempty
set of real numbers has a supremum. If the domain is the set of all real
numbers, the following second-order sentence expresses the least upper bound
property:

    \\forall A \\Big\[\(\\exists w \(w \\in A\) \\land \\exists z\\,\\forall w \( w \\in A \\rightarrow w \\leq z\)\) \\rightarrow  \\exists x\\,\\forall y  \(\[\\forall w \(w \\in A \\rightarrow w \\leq y\)\] \\leftrightarrow x \\leq y\)\\Big\].
In second-order logic, it is possible to write formal sentences which say "the
domain is finite" or "the domain is of countable cardinality." To say that the
domain is finite, use the sentence that says that every injective function
from the domain to itself is surjective. To say that the domain has countable
cardinality, use the sentence that says that there is a bijection between
every two infinite subsets of the domain. It follows from the upward
LÃ¶wenheimâSkolem theorem that it is not possible to characterize finiteness
or countability in first-order logic.

## [edit] Syntax

The syntax of second-order logic tells which expressions are well formed
formulas. In addition to the syntax of first-order logic, second-order logic
includes many new sorts (sometimes called types) of variables. These are:

  * A sort of variables that range over sets of individuals. If S is a variable of this sort and t is a first-order term then the expression t â S (also written S(t) or St) is an atomic formula. Sets of individuals can also be viewed as unary relations on the domain.
  * For each natural number k there is a sort of variable that ranges over all k-ary relations on the individuals. If R is such a k-ary relation variable and t1,..., tk are first-order terms then the expression R(t1,...,tk) is an atomic formula.
  * For each natural number k there is a sort of variable that ranges over functions that take k elements of the domain and return a single element of the domain. If f is such a k-ary function symbol and t1,...,tk are first-order terms then the expression f(t1,...,tk) is a first-order term.

For each of the sorts of variable just defined, it is permissible to build up
formulas by using universal and/or existential quantifiers. Thus there are
many sorts of quantifiers, two for each sort of variable.

A sentence in second-order logic, as in first-order logic, is a well-formed
formula with no free variables (of any sort).

In monadic second-order logic, only variables for subsets of the domain are
added. The second-order logic with all the sorts of variables just described
is sometimes called full second-order logic to distinguish it from the monadic
version.

Just as in first-order logic, second-order logic may include non-logical
symbols in a particular second-order language. These are restricted, however,
in that all terms that they form must be either first-order terms (which can
be substituted for a first-order variable) or second-order terms (which can be
substituted for a second-order variable of an appropriate sort).

## [edit] Semantics

The semantics of second-order logic establish the meaning of each sentence.
Unlike first-order logic, which has only one standard semantics, there are two
different semantics that are commonly used for second-order logic: standard
semantics and Henkin semantics. In each of these semantics, the
interpretations of the first-order quantifiers and the logical connectives are
the same as in first-order logic. Only the new quantifiers over second-order
variables need to have semantics defined.

In standard semantics, the quantifiers range over all sets or functions of the
appropriate sort. Thus once the domain of the first-order variables is
established, the meaning of the remaining quantifiers is fixed. It is these
semantics that give second-order logic its expressive power, and they will be
assumed for the remainder of this article.

In Henkin semantics, each sort of second-order variable has a particular
domain of its own to range over, which may be a proper subset of all sets or
functions of that sort. Leon Henkin (1950) defined these semantics and proved
that GÃ¶del's completeness theorem and compactness theorem, which hold for
first-order logic, carry over to second-order logic with Henkin semantics.
This is because Henkin semantics are almost identical to many-sorted first-
order semantics, where additional sorts of variables are added to simulate the
new variables of second-order logic. Second-order logic with Henkin semantics
is not more expressive than first-order logic. Henkin semantics are commonly
used in the study of second-order arithmetic.

## [edit] Deductive systems

A deductive system for a logic is a set of inference rules and logical axioms
that determine which sequences of formulas constitute valid proofs. Several
deductive systems can be used for second-order logic, although none can be
complete for the standard semantics (see below). Each of these systems is
sound, which means any sentence they can be used to prove is logically valid
in the appropriate semantics.

The weakest deductive system that can be used consists of a standard deductive
system for first-order logic (such as natural deduction) augmented with
substitution rules for second-order terms.[2] This deductive system is
commonly used in the study of second-order arithmetic.

The deductive systems considered by Shapiro (1991) and Henkin (1950) add to
the augmented first-order deductive scheme both comprehension axioms and
choice axioms. These axioms are sound for standard second-order semantics.
They are sound for Henkin semantics if only Henkin models that satisfy the
comprehension and choice axioms are considered.[3]

## [edit] Why second-order logic is not reducible to first-order logic

One might attempt to reduce the second-order theory of the real numbers, with
full second-order semantics, to the first-order theory in the following way.
First expand the domain from the set of all real numbers to a two-sorted
domain, with the second sort containing all sets of real numbers. Add a new
binary predicate to the language: the membership relation. Then sentences that
were second-order become first-order, with the former second-order quantifiers
ranging over the second sort instead. This reduction can be attempted in a
one-sorted theory by adding unary predicates that tell whether an element is a
number or a set, and taking the domain to be the union of the set of real
numbers and the power set of the real numbers.

But notice that the domain was asserted to include all sets of real numbers.
That requirement cannot be reduced to a first-order sentence, as the
LÃ¶wenheim-Skolem theorem shows. That theorem implies that there is some
countably infinite subset of the real numbers, whose members we will call
internal numbers, and some countably infinite collection of sets of internal
numbers, whose members we will call "internal sets", such that the domain
consisting of internal numbers and internal sets satisfies exactly the same
first-order sentences satisfied as the domain of real-numbers-and-sets-of-
real-numbers. In particular, it satisfies a sort of least-upper-bound axiom
that says, in effect:

    Every nonempty internal set that has an internal upper bound has a least internal upper bound.
Countability of the set of all internal numbers (in conjunction with the fact
that those form a densely ordered set) implies that that set does not satisfy
the full least-upper-bound axiom. Countability of the set of all internal sets
implies that it is not the set of all subsets of the set of all internal
numbers (since Cantor's theorem implies that the set of all subsets of a
countably infinite set is an uncountably infinite set). This construction is
closely related to Skolem's paradox.

Thus the first-order theory of real numbers and sets of real numbers has many
models, some of which are countable. The second-order theory of the real
numbers has only one model, however. This follows from the classical theorem
that there is only one Archimedean complete ordered field, along with the fact
that all the axioms of an Archimedean complete ordered field are expressible
in second-order logic. This shows that the second-order theory of the real
numbers cannot be reduced to a first-order theory, in the sense that the
second-order theory of the real numbers has only one model but the
corresponding first-order theory has many models.

There are more extreme examples showing that second-order logic with standard
semantics is more expressive than first-order logic. There is a finite second-
order theory whose only model is the real numbers if the continuum hypothesis
holds and which has no model if the continuum hypothesis does not hold. This
theory consists of a finite theory characterizing the real numbers as a
complete Archimedean ordered field plus an axiom saying that the domain is of
the first uncountable cardinality. This example illustrates that the question
of whether a sentence in second-order logic is consistent is extremely subtle.

Additional limitations of second order logic are described in the next
section.

## [edit] Second-order logic and metalogical results

It is a corollary of GÃ¶del's incompleteness theorem that there is no
deductive system (that is, no notion of provability) for second-order formulas
that simultaneously satisfies these three desired attributes:[4]

  * (Soundness) Every provable second-order sentence is universally valid, i.e., true in all domains under standard semantics.

  * (Completeness) Every universally valid second-order formula, under standard semantics, is provable.

  * (Effectiveness) There is a proof-checking algorithm that can correctly decide whether a given sequence of symbols is a valid proof or not.

This corollary is sometimes expressed by saying that second-order logic does
not admit a complete proof theory. In this respect second-order logic with
standard semantics differs from first-order logic, and this is at least one of
the reasons logicians have shied away from its use. (Quine occasionally
pointed to this as a reason for thinking of second-order logic as not logic,
properly speaking.[5])

As mentioned above, Henkin proved that the standard deductive system for
first-order logic is sound, complete, and effective for second-order logic
with Henkin semantics, and the deductive system with comprehension and choice
principles is sound, complete, and effective for Henkin semantics using only
models that satisfy these principles.

## [edit] The history and disputed value of second-order logic

<IMG>

This section of the article does not cite any references or sources. Please
help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally,
using inline citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
(November 2006)  
Predicate logic was primarily introduced to the mathematical community by C.
S. Peirce, who coined the term Second-order logic, and whose notation is most
similar to the modern form. However, today most students of logic are more
familiar with the works of Frege, who actually published his work several
years prior to Peirce but whose works remained in obscurity until Bertrand
Russell and Alfred North Whitehead made them famous. Frege used different
variables to distinguish quantification over objects from quantification over
properties and sets; but he did not see himself as doing two different kinds
of logic. After the discovery of Russell's paradox it was realized that
something was wrong with his system. Eventually logicians found that
restricting Frege's logic in various waysâto what is now called first-order
logicâeliminated this problem: sets and properties cannot be quantified over
in first-order-logic alone. The now-standard hierarchy of orders of logics
dates from this time.

It was found that set theory could be formulated as an axiomatized system
within the apparatus of first-order logic (at the cost of several kinds of
completeness, but nothing so bad as Russell's paradox), and this was done (see
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory), as sets are vital for mathematics. Arithmetic,
mereology, and a variety of other powerful logical theories could be
formulated axiomatically without appeal to any more logical apparatus than
first-order quantification, and this, along with GÃ¶del and Skolem's adherence
to first-order logic, led to a general decline in work in second (or any
higher) order logic.

This rejection was actively advanced by some logicians, most notably W. V.
Quine. Quine advanced the view that in predicate-language sentences like Fx
the "x" is to be thought of as a variable or name denoting an object and hence
can be quantified over, as in "For all things, it is the case that . . ." but
the "F" is to be thought of as an abbreviation for an incomplete sentence, not
the name of an object (not even of an abstract object like a property). For
example, it might mean " . . . is a dog." But it makes no sense to think we
can quantify over something like this. (Such a position is quite consistent
with Frege's own arguments on the concept-object distinction). So to use a
predicate as a variable is to have it occupy the place of a name which only
individual variables should occupy. This reasoning has been rejected by
Boolos.

In recent years second-order logic has made something of a recovery, buoyed by
George Boolos' interpretation of second-order quantification as plural
quantification over the same domain of objects as first-order quantification.
Boolos furthermore points to the claimed nonfirstorderizability of sentences
such as "Some critics admire only each other" and "Some of Fianchetto's men
went into the warehouse unaccompanied by anyone else" which he argues can only
be expressed by the full force of second-order quantification. However,
generalized quantification and partially-ordered, or branching, quantification
may suffice to express a certain class of purportedly nonfirstorderizable
sentences as well and it does not appeal to second-order quantification.

## [edit] Applications to complexity

The expressive power of various forms of second-order logic on finite
structures is intimately tied to computational complexity theory. The field of
descriptive complexity studies which computational complexity classes can be
characterized by the power of the logic needed to express languages in them.
In particular, if we consider second-order logic over finite structures:

  * NP is the set of languages expressible by existential, second-order logic (Fagin's theorem, 1974).
  * co-NP is the set of languages expressible by universal, second-order logic.
  * PH is the set of languages expressible by second-order logic.
  * PSPACE is the set of languages expressible by second-order logic with an added transitive closure operator.
  * EXPTIME is the set of languages expressible by second-order logic with an added least fixed point operator.

Relationships among these classes directly impact the relative expressiveness
of the logics; for example, if PH=PSPACE, then adding a transitive closure
operator to second-order logic would not make it any more expressive.

### [edit] Power of the existential fragment

The existential fragment (EMSO) of monadic second-order logic (MSO) is second-
order logic without universal second-order quantifiers, and without negative
occurrences of existential second-order quantifiers. Over (possibly infinite)
words w â Î£*, every MSO formula can be converted into a deterministic
finite state machine. This again can be converted into an EMSO formula. Thus
EMSO and MSO are equivalent over words. For trees as input, this result holds
as well. However, over the finite grid Î£++, this property does not hold any
more, since the languages recognized by tiling systems are not closed under
complement. Since a universal quantifier is equivalent to a negated
existential quantifier, which cannot be expressed, alternations of universal
and existential quantifiers generate bigger and bigger classes of languages
over Î£++.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Shapiro (1991) and Hinman (2005) give complete introductions to the subject, with full definitions.
  2. ^ Such a system is used without comment by Hinman (2005).
  3. ^ These are the models originally studied by Henkin (1950).
  4. ^ The proof of this corollary is that a sound, complete, and effective deduction system for standard semantics could be used to produce a recursively enumerable completion of Peano arithmetic, which GÃ¶del's theorem shows cannot exist.
  5. ^ W.V. Quine (1970). Philosophy of Logic. Prentice-Hall. pp. 90â91.

## [edit] References

<IMG> Logic portal  
  * Henkin, L. (1950). "Completeness in the theory of types". Journal of Symbolic Logic 15 (2): 81â91. doi:10.2307/2266967. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-4812%28195006%2915%3A2%3C81%3ACITTOT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I.
  * Hinman, P. (2005). Fundamentals of Mathematical Logic. A K Peters. ISBN 1-56881-262-0.
  * Shapiro, S. (2000). Foundations without Foundationalism: A Case for Second-order Logic. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-825029-0.
  * Rossberg, M. (2004). "First-Order Logic, Second-Order Logic, and Completeness". V. Hendricks et al, eds. First-order logic revisited, Berlin: Logos-Verlag.
  * Vaananen, J. (2001). "Second-Order Logic and Foundations of Mathematics". Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 7 (4): 504â520. doi:10.2307/2687796. http://www.math.ucla.edu/~asl/bsl/0704/0704-003.ps.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Logic  
History and core topics  
History

General Â· Chinese Â· Greek Â· Indian Â· Islamic  
Core topics

Reason Â· Philosophical logic Â· Philosophy of logic Â· Mathematical logic Â·
Metalogic Â· Logic in computer science  
Key concepts and logics  
Reasoning

Deduction Â· Induction Â· Abduction  
Informal

Proposition Â· Inference Â· Argument Â· Validity Â· Cogency Â· Term logic Â·
Critical thinking Â· Fallacies Â· Syllogism Â· Argumentation theory  
Philosophy  
of logic

Platonic realism Â· Logical atomism Â· Logicism Â· Formalism Â· Nominalism Â·
Fictionalism Â· Realism Â· Intuitionism Â· Constructivism Â· Finitism  
Mathematical

Formal language Â· Formal system Â· Deductive system Â· Formal proof Â· Formal
interpretation Â· Formal semantics Â· Well-formed formula Â· Set Â· Element Â·
Class Â· Axiom Â· Rule of inference Â· Relation Â· Theorem Â· Logical
consequence Â· Consistency Â· Soundness Â· Completeness Â· Decidability Â·
Satisfiability Â· Independence Â· Set theory Â· Axiomatic system Â· Proof
theory Â· Model theory Â· Recursion theory Â· Type theory Â· Syntax  
Propositional

Boolean functions Â· Monadic predicate calculus Â· Propositional calculus Â·
Logical connectives Â· Quantifiers Â· Truth tables  
Predicate

First-order Â· Quantifiers Â· Predicate Â· Second-order  
Modal

Alethic Â· Axiologic Â· Deontic Â· Doxastic Â· Epistemic Â· Temporal  
Other non  
classical

Computability Â· Fuzzy Â· Linear Â· Relevance Â· Non-monotonic  
Controversies  
Paraconsistent logic Â· Dialetheism Â· Intuitionistic logic Â· Paradoxes Â·
Antinomies Â· Is logic empirical?  
Key figures  
Alfarabi Â· Algazel Â· Alkindus Â· Al-Razi Â· Aristotle Â· Averroes Â·
Avicenna Â· Boole Â· Cantor Â· Carnap Â· Church Â· Dharmakirti Â· DignÄga Â·
Frege Â· Gentzen Â· Kanada Â· GÃ¶del Â· Gotama Â· Hilbert Â· Ibn al-Nafis Â·
Ibn Hazm Â· Ibn Taymiyyah Â· Kripke Â· Leibniz Â· Mozi Â· Nagarjuna Â·
PÄá¹ini Â· Peano Â· Peirce Â· Putnam Â· Quine Â· Russell Â· Skolem Â·
Suhrawardi Â· Tarski Â· Turing Â· Whitehead Â· Zadeh  
Lists  
Topics

General Â· Basic Â· Mathematical logic Â· Boolean algebra Â· Set theory  
Other

Logicians Â· Rules of inference Â· Paradoxes Â· Fallacies Â· Logic symbols  
Portal Â· Category Â· WikiProject Â· Logic stubs Â· Mathlogic stubs Â· Cleanup
Â· Noticeboard  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second-order_logic"

Categories: Systems of formal logic

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from November 2006 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 February 2009, at 18:33 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



