
# Argot

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the fungus, see Ergot.

Argot (IPA: /ËÉrgoÊ/; French, Spanish and Catalan for "slang") is a secret
language used by various groupsâincluding, but not limited to, thieves and
other criminalsâto prevent outsiders from understanding their conversations.
The term argot is also used to refer to the informal specialized vocabulary
from a particular field of study, hobby, job, sport, etc.[citation needed]

Victor Hugo was one of the first to research argot extensively [1]. He
describes it in his novel, Les MisÃ©rables, as the language of the dark; at
one point, he says, "What is argot; properly speaking? Argot is the language
of misery."

Bruce Sterling defines argot as "the deliberately hermetic language of a small
knowledge clique... a super-specialized geek cult language that has no
traction in the real world." For example: "He philosophized and recited
baseball statistics in a Brooklyn argot that was fast-fading."

The earliest known recording of the term "argot" was in 1628, and the word
probably derives from the name, les argotiers, given to a group of thieves at
that time.[1]

Under the strictest definition, an argot is a proper language, with its own
grammar and style. Nevertheless, the term is also often used to describe coded
systems such as verlan and louchÃ©bem, which retain French syntax and only
apply transformations to individual words (and often only to a certain subset
of words, such as nouns, or semantic content words).[2] Such systems are
examples of argots Ã clef, or "coded argots." [2]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Guiraud, Pierre. L'Argot. Que sais-je? 700. Paris: PUF, 1958.
  2. ^ a b Valdman, Albert (2000-05). "La Langue des faubourgs et des banlieues: de l'argot au franÃ§ais populaire". The French Review (American Association of Teachers of French) 73 (6): 1190. http://www.jstor.org/stable/399371. Retrieved on 22 April 2008. (French)

## [edit] See also

<IMG>

Look up argot in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

  * Cant
  * Language game
  * LouchÃ©bem
  * Verlan

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argot"

Categories: Cant languages | Folklore

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 February 2009, at 01:39.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



