
# Nicotine

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the chemical compound. For other uses, see Nicotine
(disambiguation).

<IMG>  
<IMG>  
Nicotine  
Systematic (IUPAC) name  
3-[(2S)-1-methylpyrrolidin-2-yl]pyridine  
Identifiers  
CAS number 54-11-5  
ATC code N07BA01  
PubChem 942  
ChemSpider 80863  
Chemical data  
Formula C10H14N2  
Mol. mass 162.26 g/mol  
SMILES eMolecules & PubChem  
Physical data  
Density 1.01 g/cmÂ³  
Melt. point -79 Â°C (-110 Â°F)  
Boiling point 247 Â°C (477 Â°F)  
Pharmacokinetic data  
Bioavailability 20 to 45% (oral)  
Metabolism ?  
Half life 2 hours  
Excretion ?  
Therapeutic considerations  
Pregnancy cat.

D(US)  
Legal status

Unscheduled(AU) ?(UK) ?(US)  
Dependence Liability Medium to high  
Routes Smoked (as tobacco), Insufflated (as snuff), Chewed  
Nicotine is an alkaloid found in the nightshade family of plants (Solanaceae)
which constitutes approximately 0.6â3.0% of dry weight of tobacco,[1][2]
with biosynthesis taking place in the roots, and accumulating in the leaves.
It functions as an antiherbivore chemical with particular specificity to
insects; therefore nicotine was widely used as an insecticide in the
past[verification needed][citation needed], and currently nicotine analogs
such as imidacloprid continue to be widely used.

In low concentrations (an average cigarette yields about 1 mg of absorbed
nicotine), the substance acts as a stimulant in mammals and is one of the main
factors responsible for the dependence-forming properties of tobacco smoking.
According to the American Heart Association, "Nicotine addiction has
historically been one of the hardest addictions to break." The pharmacological
and behavioral characteristics that determine tobacco addiction are similar to
those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 History and name
  * 2 Chemistry
  * 3 Optical activity
  * 4 Pharmacology
    * 4.1 Pharmacokinetics
    * 4.2 Pharmacodynamics
      * 4.2.1 In CNS
      * 4.2.2 In PNS
      * 4.2.3 In adrenal medulla
  * 5 Psychoactive effects
  * 6 Dependence
  * 7 Toxicology
  * 8 Nicotine and oxidative stress
  * 9 Link to circulatory disease
  * 10 Therapeutic uses
  * 11 Research as a potential basis for an antipsychotic agent
  * 12 See also
  * 13 External links
  * 14 References
  * 15 Further reading

  
## [edit] History and name

Nicotine is named after the tobacco plant Nicotiana tabacum, which in turn is
named after Jean Nicot de Villemain, French ambassador in Portugal, who sent
tobacco and seeds from Brazil to Paris in 1560 and promoted their medicinal
use. Nicotine was first isolated from the tobacco plant in 1828 by German
chemists Posselt & Reimann.[citation needed] Its chemical empirical formula
was described by Melsens in 1843,[4] its structure was discovered by Garry
Pinner in 1893, and it was first synthesized by A. Pictet and Crepieux in
1904.[citation needed]

## [edit] Chemistry

Nicotine is a hygroscopic, oily liquid that is miscible with water in its base
form. As a nitrogenous base, nicotine forms salts with acids that are usually
solid and water soluble. Nicotine easily penetrates the skin. As shown by the
physical data, free base nicotine will burn at a temperature below its boiling
point, and its vapors will combust at 308 K (35 Â°C; 95 Â°F) in air despite a
low vapor pressure. Because of this, most of the nicotine is burned when a
cigarette is smoked; however, enough is inhaled to provide the desired
effects. The amount of nicotine inhaled with tobacco smoke is a fraction of
the amount contained in the tobacco leaves.

## [edit] Optical activity

Nicotine is optically active, having two enantiomeric forms. The naturally-
occurring form of nicotine is levorotatory, with [Î±]D = â166.4 Â°. The
dextrorotatory form, (+)-nicotine, has only one-half the physiological
activity of (â)-nicotine. It is therefore weaker in the sense that a higher
dose is required to attain the same effects.[5] The salts of the (+)-nicotine
are usually dextrorotatory.

## [edit] Pharmacology

### [edit] Pharmacokinetics

As nicotine enters the body, it is distributed quickly through the bloodstream
and can cross the blood-brain barrier. On average it takes about seven seconds
for the substance to reach the brain when inhaled. The half life of nicotine
in the body is around two hours.[6] The amount of nicotine absorbed by the
body from smoking depends on many factors, including the type of tobacco,
whether the smoke is inhaled, and whether a filter is used. For chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco and snuff, which are held in the mouth between the
lip and gum, or taken in the nose, the amount released into the body tends to
be much greater than smoked tobacco. Nicotine is metabolized in the liver by
cytochrome P450 enzymes (mostly CYP2A6, and also by CYP2B6). A major
metabolite is cotinine. Other primary metabolites include nicotine N'-oxide,
nornicotine, nicotine isomethonium ion, 2-hydroxynicotine and nicotine
glucuronide.[7]

### [edit] Pharmacodynamics

Nicotine acts on the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, specifically the
ganglion type nicotinic receptor and one CNS nicotinic receptor. The former is
present in the adrenal medulla and elsewhere, while the latter is present in
the central nervous system (CNS). In small concentrations, nicotine increases
the activity of these receptors. Nicotine also has effects on a variety of
other neurotransmitters through less direct mechanisms.

#### [edit] In CNS

By binding to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, nicotine increases the levels
of several neurotransmitters \- acting as a sort of "volume control". It is
thought that increased levels of dopamine in the reward circuits of the brain
are responsible for the euphoria and relaxation and eventual addiction caused
by nicotine consumption. A single amino-acid difference between brain and
muscle acetylcholine receptors explains why nicotine activates the CNS but
does not activate skeletal muscles and cause instant death. Nicotine addiction
is therefore a biological fluke. [8]

Tobacco smoke contains the monoamine oxidase inhibitors harman and
norharman[9], and significantly decreases MAO activity in smokers.[9][10] MAO
enzymes break down monoaminergic neurotransmitters such as dopamine,
norepinephrine, and serotonin.

Chronic nicotine exposure via tobacco smoking up-regulates alpha4beta2* nAChR
in cerebellum and brainstem regions[11][12] but not habenulopeduncular
structures[13].

#### [edit] In PNS

Nicotine also activates the sympathetic nervous system,[14] acting via
splanchnic nerves to the adrenal medulla, stimulates the release of
epinephrine. Acetylcholine released by preganglionic sympathetic fibers of
these nerves acts on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, causing the release of
epinephrine (and norepinephrine) into the bloodstream.

#### [edit] In adrenal medulla

By binding to ganglion type nicotinic receptors in the adrenal medulla
nicotine increases flow of adrenaline (epinephrine), a stimulating hormone. By
binding to the receptors, it causes cell depolarization and an influx of
calcium through voltage-gated calcium channels. Calcium triggers the
exocytosis of chromaffin granules and thus the release of epinephrine (and
norepinephrine) into the bloodstream. The release of epinephrine (adrenaline)
causes an increase in heart rate, blood pressure and respiration, as well as
higher blood glucose levels[15]

Cotinine is a byproduct of the metabolism of nicotine which remains in the
blood for up to 48 hours. It can therefore be used as an indicator of a
person's exposure to nicotine.[citation needed]

## [edit] Psychoactive effects

Nicotine's mood-altering effects are different by report. First causing a
release of glucose from the liver and epinephrine (adrenaline) from the
adrenal medulla, it causes stimulation. Users report feelings of relaxation,
sharpness, calmness, and alertness.[16] By reducing the appetite and raising
the metabolism, some smokers may lose weight as a consequence.[17][18]

When a cigarette is smoked, nicotine-rich blood passes from the lungs to the
brain within seven seconds and immediately stimulates the release of many
chemical messengers including acetylcholine, norepinephrine, epinephrine,
vasopressin, arginine, dopamine, autocrine agents, and beta-endorphin[citation
needed]. This release of neurotransmitters and hormones is responsible for
most of nicotine effects. Nicotine appears to enhance concentration[19] and
memory due to the increase of acetylcholine. It also appears to enhance
alertness due to the increases of acetylcholine and norepinephrine. Arousal is
increased by the increase of norepinephrine. Pain is reduced by the increases
of acetylcholine and beta-endorphin. Anxiety is reduced by the increase of
beta-endorphin. Nicotine also sensitises brain reward systems.[20] Most
cigarettes (in the smoke inhaled) contain 0.1 to 2.8 milligrams of
nicotine.[21]

Research suggests that, when smokers wish to achieve a stimulating effect,
they take short quick puffs, which produce a low level of blood nicotine.[22]
This stimulates nerve transmission. When they wish to relax, they take deep
puffs, which produce a high level of blood nicotine, which depresses the
passage of nerve impulses, producing a mild sedative effect. At low doses,
nicotine potently enhances the actions of norepinephrine and dopamine in the
brain, causing a drug effect typical of those of psychostimulants. At higher
doses, nicotine enhances the effect of serotonin and opiate activity,
producing a calming, pain-killing effect. Nicotine is unique in comparison to
most drugs, as its profile changes from stimulant to sedative/pain killer in
increasing dosages and use.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 21 mg patch applied to the left arm

Nicotine gum, usually in 2-mg or 4-mg doses, and nicotine patches are
available, as well as smokeless tobacco which do not have all the other
ingredients in smoked tobacco.

## [edit] Dependence

See also: Smoking cessation

Modern research shows that nicotine acts on the brain to produce a number of
effects. Specifically, its addictive nature has been found to show that
nicotine activates reward pathwaysâthe circuitry within the brain that
regulates feelings of pleasure and euphoria.[23]

Dopamine is one of the key neurotransmitters actively involved in the brain.
Research shows that by increasing the levels of dopamine within the reward
circuits in the brain, nicotine acts as a chemical with intense addictive
qualities. In many studies it has been shown to be more addictive than cocaine
and heroin, though chronic treatment has an opposite effect on reward
thresholds[citation needed]. Like other physically addictive drugs, nicotine
causes down-regulation of the production of dopamine and other stimulatory
neurotransmitters as the brain attempts to compensate for artificial
stimulation. In addition, the sensitivity of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
decreases. To compensate for this compensatory mechanism, the brain in turn
upregulates the number of receptors, convoluting its regulatory effects with
compensatory mechanisms meant to counteract other compensatory mechanisms. The
net effect is an increase in reward pathway sensitivity, opposite of other
drugs of abuse such as cocaine and heroin, which reduce reward pathway
sensitivity.[20] This neuronal brain alteration persists for months after
administration ceases. Due to an increase in reward pathway sensitivity,
nicotine withdrawal is relatively mild compared to ethanol or heroin
withdrawal.[citation needed] Nicotine also has the potential to cause
dependence in many animals other than humans. Mice have been administered
nicotine and exhibit withdrawal reactions when its administration is
stopped.[citation needed]

A study found that nicotine exposure in adolescent mice retards the growth of
the dopamine system, thus increasing the risk of substance abuse during
adolescence.[24]

A recent investigation indicates that exposure to nicotine in adolescence in
rats induces a depression-like state in adulthood.

## [edit] Toxicology

See also: Nicotine poisoning

The LD50 of nicotine is 50 mg/kg for rats and 3 mg/kg for mice. 40â60 mg
(0.5-1.0 mg/kg) can be a lethal dosage for adult humans.[25][26] Nicotine
therefore has a high toxicity in comparison to many other alkaloids such as
cocaine, which has an LD50 of 95.1 mg/kg when administered to mice. It is
impossible however to overdose on nicotine through smoking alone (though a
person can overdose on nicotine through a combination of nicotine patches,
nicotine gum, and/or tobacco smoking at the same time.) [27] [28] Spilling an
extremely high concentration of nicotine onto the skin can result in
intoxication or even death since nicotine readily passes into the bloodstream
from dermal contact.[29]

The carcinogenic properties of nicotine in standalone form, separate from
tobacco smoke, have not been evaluated by the IARC, and it has not been
assigned to an official carcinogen group. The currently available literature
indicates that nicotine, on its own, does not promote the development of
cancer in healthy tissue and has no mutagenic properties, but does speed
growth and migration of existing cancerous cells, as well as turning some
precancerous cells cancerous.[30]

The teratogenic properties of nicotine have not yet been adequately
researched, and while the likelihood of birth defects caused by nicotine is
believed to be very small or nonexistent, nicotine replacement product
manufacturers recommend consultation with a physician before using a nicotine
patch or nicotine gum while pregnant or nursing. However, nicotine and the
increased cholinergic activity it causes have been shown to impede apoptosis,
which is one of the methods by which the body destroys unwanted cells
(programmed cell death). Since apoptosis helps to remove mutated or damaged
cells that may eventually become cancerous, the inhibitory actions of nicotine
may create a more favourable environment for cancer to develop, though this
also remains to be proven. [31]

## [edit] Nicotine and oxidative stress

Nicotine is detoxified by the cytochrome p450 in the liver.

## [edit] Link to circulatory disease

Nicotine has very powerful effects on arteries throughout the body. Nicotine
is a stimulant, it raises blood pressure, and is a vasoconstrictor, making it
harder for the heart to pump through the constricted arteries. It causes the
body to release its stores of fat and cholesterol into the blood.[citation
needed]

Nicotine has been speculated[who?] to increase the risk of blood clots by
increasing plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, though this has not been proven.
Plasma fibrinogen levels are elevated in smokers and are further elevated
during acute COPD exacerbation. Also, Factor XIII, which stabilizes fibrin
clots, is increased in smokers. But neither of the two previous effects have
been shown yet to be caused by nicotine, [2] If blood clots in an artery,
blood flow is reduced or halted, and tissue loses its source of oxygen and
nutrients and dies in minutes.

Peripheral circulation, arteries going to the extremities, are also highly
susceptible to the vasoconstrictor effects of nicotine as well as the
increased risk of clots and clogging.[citation needed]

## [edit] Therapeutic uses

The primary therapeutic use of nicotine is in treating nicotine dependence in
order to eliminate smoking with its risks to health. Controlled levels of
nicotine are given to patients through gums, dermal patches, lozenges,
electronic/substitute cigarettes or nasal sprays in an effort to wean them off
their dependence.

However, in a few situations, smoking has been observed to apparently be of
therapeutic value to patients. These are often referred to as "Smokerâs
Paradoxes".[32] Although in most cases the actual mechanism is understood only
poorly or not at all, it is generally believed that the principal beneficial
action is due to the nicotine administered, and that administration of
nicotine without smoking may be as beneficial as smoking, without the higher
risk to health due to tar and other ingredients found in tobacco.

For instance, recent studies suggest that smokers require less frequent
repeated revascularization after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).[32]
Risk of ulcerative colitis has been frequently shown to be reduced by smokers
on a dose-dependent basis; the effect is eliminated if the individual stops
smoking.[33][34] Smoking also appears to interfere with development of
Kaposi's sarcoma,[35] breast cancer among women carrying the very high risk
BRCA gene,[36] preeclampsia,[37] and atopic disorders such as allergic
asthma.[38] A plausible mechanism of action in these cases may be nicotine
acting as an anti-inflammatory agent, and interfering with the inflammation-
related disease process, as nicotine has vasoconstrictive effects.[39]

With regard to neurological diseases, a large body of evidence suggests that
the risks of Parkinson's disease or Alzheimer's disease might be twice as high
for non-smokers than for smokers.[40] Many such papers regarding Alzheimer's
disease[41] and Parkinson's Disease[42] have been published. More recent
studies find that there's no beneficial link between smoking and Alzheimer's,
and in some cases suggest that it actually results in an earlier onset of the
disease.[43][44][45][46]

Recent studies have indicated that nicotine can be used to help adults
suffering from Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy. The same
areas that cause seizures in that form of epilepsy are also responsible for
processing nicotine in the brain.[47]

It has been noted that the majority of people diagnosed with schizophrenia
smoke tobacco. Estimates for the number of schizophrenics that smoke range
from 75% to 90%. It was recently argued that the increased level of smoking in
schizophrenia may be due to a desire to self-medicate with nicotine.[48][49]
More recent research has found the reverse, that it is a risk factor without
long-term benefit, used only for its short term effects.[50] All of these
studies are based only on observation, and no interventional (randomized)
studies have been done. Research on nicotine as administered through a patch
or gum is ongoing.

## [edit] Research as a potential basis for an antipsychotic agent

However, when the metabolites of nicotine were isolated and their effect on
first the animal brain and then the human brain in people with schizophrenia
were studied, it was shown that the effects helped with cognitive and negative
symptoms of schizophrenia. Therefore, the nicotinergic agents, as
antipsychotics which do not contain nicotine but act on the same receptors in
the brain are showing promise as adjunct antipsychotics in early stages of FDA
studies on schizophrenia. "The prepulse inhibition (PPI) is a phenomenon in
which a weak prepulse attenuates the response to a subsequent startling
stimulus. Therefore, PPI is believed to have face, construct, and predictive
validity for the PPI disruption in schizophrenia, and it is widely used as a
model to study the neurobiology of this disorder and for screening
antipsychotics. The prepulse inhibition (PPI) is a phenomenon in which a weak
prepulse attenuates the response to a subsequent startling stimulus. Alpha7
nicotinic receptor agonists have reported to reverse the PPI disruption."
Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Neuroscience, Ehime
University Graduate School of Medicine, Shitsukawa, Toon 791-0295, Japan.

Additionally, studies have shown that there are genes predisposing people with
schizophrenia to nicotine. "Evidence of association between smoking and alpha7
nicotinic receptor subunit gene in schizophrenia patients" .De Luca V, Wong
AH, Muller DJ, Wong GW, Tyndale RF, Kennedy JL. Neurogenetics Section, Clarke
Site, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Therefore with these factors taken together the heavy usage of cigarettes and
other nicotine related products among people with schizophrenia may be
explained and novel antipsychotic agents developed that have these effects in
a manner that is not harmful and controlled and is a promising arena of
research for schizophrenia.

Nicotine and its metabolites are being researched for the treatment of a
number of disorders, including ADHD, Schizophrenia and Parkinson's
Disease.[51]

The therapeutic use of nicotine as a means of appetite-control and to promote
weight loss is anecdotally supported by many ex-smokers who claim to put on
weight after quitting. Studies of nicotine in mice[52] suggest it may play a
role in weight-loss that is independent of appetite and studies involving the
elderly suggest that nicotine affects not only weight loss, but also prevents
some weight gain.[53]

## [edit] See also

  * Addiction
  * Cigar
  * Dipping tobacco
  * Drug addiction
  * Electronic cigarette
  * Health effects of tobacco smoking
  * Myocardial infarction
  * Nicogel
  * Nicotini
  * NicVAX
  * Psychoactive drug
  * Smoking cessation
  * Snuff
  * Snus
  * Stroke

## [edit] External links

  * Description of nicotine addiction
  * Description of nicotine mechanisms

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Determination of the Nicotine Content of Various Edible Nightshades (Solanaceae) and Their Products and Estimation of the Associated Dietary Nicotine Intake". http://pubs.acs.org/cgi-bin/abstract.cgi/jafcau/1999/47/i08/abs/jf990089w.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-05.
  2. ^ "Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph No. 9" (PDF). http://dccps.nci.nih.gov/tcrb/monographs/9/m9_3.PDF.
  3. ^ American Heart Association and Nicotine addiction.
  4. ^ Melsens (1844). "Ueber das Nicotin". Journal fÃ¼r Praktische Chemie 32 (1): 372â377. doi:10.1002/prac.18440320155.
  5. ^ "Optical activity and living matter". http://www.archive.org/stream/opticalactivityl00gauz/opticalactivityl00gauz_djvu.txt.
  6. ^ "Interindividual variability in the metabolism and cardiovascular effects of nicotine in man". http://jpet.aspetjournals.org/cgi/content/citation/221/2/368.
  7. ^ "Metabolism and Disposition Kinetics of Nicotine". http://pharmrev.aspetjournals.org/cgi/content/full/57/1/79.
  8. ^ Xinan Xiu, Nyssa L. Puskar, Jai A. P. Shanata, Henry A. Lester & Dennis A. Dougherty. Nicotine binding to brain receptors requires a strong cationâ interaction. Nature 458, 534-537 (26 March 2009)
  9. ^ a b Herraiz T, Chaparro C (2005). "Human monoamine oxidase is inhibited by tobacco smoke: beta-carboline alkaloids act as potent and reversible inhibitors". Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 326 (2): 378â86. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.11.033. PMID 15582589.
  10. ^ Fowler JS, Volkow ND, Wang GJ, et al (1998). "Neuropharmacological actions of cigarette smoke: brain monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) inhibition". J Addict Dis 17 (1): 23â34. PMID 9549600.
  11. ^ WÃ¼llner U, GÃ¼ndisch D, Herzog H, et al (2008). "Smoking upregulates alpha4beta2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the human brain". Neurosci. Lett. 430 (1): 34â7. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2007.10.011. PMID 17997038.
  12. ^ Walsh H, Govind AP, Mastro R, et al (2008). "Up-regulation of nicotinic receptors by nicotine varies with receptor subtype". J. Biol. Chem. 283 (10): 6022â32. doi:10.1074/jbc.M703432200. PMID 18174175.
  13. ^ Nguyen HN, Rasmussen BA, Perry DC (2003). "Subtype-selective up-regulation by chronic nicotine of high-affinity nicotinic receptors in rat brain demonstrated by receptor autoradiography". J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 307 (3): 1090â7. doi:10.1124/jpet.103.056408. PMID 14560040.
  14. ^ Yoshida T, Sakane N, Umekawa T, Kondo M (Jan 1994). "Effect of nicotine on sympathetic nervous system activity of mice subjected to immobilization stress". Physiol Behav. 55 (1): 53â7. doi:10.1016/0031-9384(94)90009-4. PMID 8140174. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0031-9384(94)90009-4.
  15. ^ Elaine N. Marieb and Katja Hoehn (2007). Human Anatomy & Physiology (7th Ed.). Pearson. pp. ?. ISBN 0-805-35909-5.
  16. ^ Gilbert Lagrue, FranÃ§ois Lebargy, Anne Cormier, "From nicotinic receptors to smoking dependence: therapeutic prospects" Alcoologie et Addictologie Vol. : 23, NÂ° : 2S, juin 2001, pages 39S - 42
  17. ^ Jean-Claude Orsini, "Dependence on tobacco smoking and brain systems controlling glycemia and appetite" Alcoologie et Addictologie Vol. : 23, NÂ° : 2S, juin 2001, pages 28S - 36S
  18. ^ Smokers lose their appetite : Media Releases : News : The University of Melbourne
  19. ^ Rusted, J; Graupner, O'Connell, Nicholls (1994-05-05). "Does nicotine improve cognitive function?". Psychopharmacology (Springer-Verlag) (115): 547â549. http://www.springerlink.com/content/75034q53031260j8/?p=afde608485604678839ab0e950be77f9&pi=0. Retrieved on 2008-11-15.
  20. ^ a b Kenny PJ, Markou A (Jun 2006). "Nicotine self-administration acutely activates brain reward systems and induces a long-lasting increase in reward sensitivity". Neuropsychopharmacology 31 (6): 1203â11. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300905. PMID 16192981. http://www.nature.com/npp/journal/v31/n6/full/1300905a.html. "However, these effects are an illusion brought about by Nicotine addiction. What appears to be relaxation, is merely the effect of ending the craving for Nicotine. The longer the periods between Nicotine intake, the greater the illusion of pleasure will be.".
  21. ^ Erowid Nicotine Vault : Dosage
  22. ^ Einstein, Stanley (1989). Drug and Alcohol Use: Issues and Factors. Springer. pp. 101â118. ISBN 0306413787.
  23. ^ NIDA - Research Report Series - Tobacco Addiction - Extent, Impact, Delivery, and Addictiveness
  24. ^ Nolley EP, Kelley BM (2007). "Adolescent reward system perseveration due to nicotine: studies with methylphenidate". Neurotoxicol Teratol 29 (1): 47â56. doi:10.1016/j.ntt.2006.09.026. PMID 17129706.
  25. ^ Okamoto M, Kita T, Okuda H, Tanaka T, Nakashima T (Jul 1994). "Effects of aging on acute toxicity of nicotine in rats". Pharmacol Toxicol. 75 (1): 1â6. PMID 7971729.
  26. ^ IPCS INCHEM
  27. ^ http://learn.genetics.utah.edu/content/addiction/drugs/overdose.html
  28. ^ http://www.drugtext.org/library/articles/coffin.htm
  29. ^ Lockhart LP (1933). "Nicotine poisoning". Br Med J 1: 246â7.
  30. ^ http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/news/fullstory_70531.html
  31. ^ "Toxicology". http://www.ebasedtreatment.org/drugs/treatment/nicotine/toxicology. Retrieved on 2008-10-05.
  32. ^ a b Cohen, David J.; Michel Doucet, Donald E. Cutlip, Kalon K.L. Ho, Jeffrey J. Popma, Richard E. Kuntz (2001). "Impact of Smoking on Clinical and Angiographic Restenosis After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention". Circulation 104: 773. doi:10.1161/hc3201.094225. PMID 11502701. http://www.data-yard.net/34/circulation_2001_104_773.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  33. ^ Longmore, M., Wilkinson, I., Torok, E. Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine (Fifth Edition) p. 232
  34. ^ Green JT, Richardson C, Marshall RW, et al (Nov 2000). "Nitric oxide mediates a therapeutic effect of nicotine in ulcerative colitis". Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 14 (11): 1429â34. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2036.2000.00847.x. PMID 11069313. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/resolve/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=0269-2813&date=2000&volume=14&issue=11&spage=1429.
  35. ^ "Smoking Cuts Risk of Rare Cancer". UPI. March 29, 2001. http://www.data-yard.net/10b/kaposi.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  36. ^ Recer, Paul (May 19, 1998). "Cigarettes May Have an Up Side". AP. http://www.forces.org/evidence/files/brea.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  37. ^ Lain, Kristine Y.; Robert W. Powers, Marijane A. Krohn, Roberta B. Ness, William R. Crombleholme, James M. Roberts (Nov 1991). "Urinary cotinine concentration confirms the reduced risk of preeclampsia with tobacco exposure". American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 181 (5): 908â14. PMID 11422156. http://www.data-yard.net/2/13/ajog.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  38. ^ Hjern, A; Hedberg A, Haglund B, Rosen M (June 2001). "Does tobacco smoke prevent atopic disorders? A study of two generations of Swedish residents". Clin Exp Allergy 31 (6): 908â14. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2222.2001.01096.x. PMID 11422156. http://www.data-yard.net/30/asthma.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  39. ^ Lisa Melton (June 2006). "Body Blazes". Scientific American: 24. http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?chanID=sa006&colID=5&articleID=00080902-A2CF-146C-9D1E83414B7F0000.
  40. ^ Fratiglioni, L; Wang HX (Aug 2000). "Smoking and Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease: review of the epidemiological studies". Behav Brain Res 113 (1â2): 117â20. doi:10.1016/S0166-4328(00)00206-0. PMID 10942038.
  41. ^ Thompson, Carol. "Alzheimer's disease is associated with non-smoking". http://www.forces.org/evidence/carol/carol16.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  42. ^ Thompson, Carol. "Parkinson's disease is associated with non-smoking". http://www.forces.org/evidence/carol/carol36.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-06.
  43. ^ "Alzheimer's Starts Earlier for Heavy Drinkers, Smokers". Reuters. 2008-04-17. http://www.reuters.com/article/pressRelease/idUS198346+17-Apr-2008+PRN20080417. Retrieved on 2008-06-27.
  44. ^ Peck, Peggy (2002-07-25). "Smoking Significantly Increases Risk of Alzheimer's Disease Among Those Who Have No Genetic Predisposition". http://www.docguide.com/news/content.nsf/news/8525697700573E1885256C010043BDDC?OpenDocument&c=Smoking%20Related%20Disorders&count=10&id=48dde4a73e09a969852568880078c249. Retrieved on 2008-06-27.
  45. ^ Aggarwal NT, Bienias JL, Bennett DA, et al (2006). "The relation of cigarette smoking to incident Alzheimer's disease in a biracial urban community population". Neuroepidemiology 26 (3): 140â6. doi:10.1159/000091654. PMID 16493200.
  46. ^ Lerche Davis,, Jeanie (2004-03-22). "Smoking Speeds Dementia, Alzheimer's Disease". http://www.webmd.com/smoking-cessation/news/20040322/smoking-speeds-dementia-alzheimers-disease. Retrieved on 2008-06-27.
  47. ^ "Nicotine as an antiepileptic agent in ADNFLE: An n-of-one study". http://www.cnsforum.com/commenteditem/3c5dccdc-27fb-4b80-9516-ab81e3e4ea6c/default.aspx.
  48. ^ de Leon J, Tracy J, McCann E, McGrory A, Diaz FJ (Jul 2002). "Schizophrenia and tobacco smoking: a replication study in another US psychiatric hospital". Schizophr Res. 56 (1-2): 55â65. doi:10.1016/S0920-9964(01)00192-X. PMID 12084420. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S092099640100192X.
  49. ^ de Leon J, Dadvand M, Canuso C, White AO, Stanilla JK, Simpson GM (Mar 1995). "Schizophrenia and smoking: an epidemiological survey in a state hospital". Am J Psychiatry 152 (3): 453â5. PMID 7864277. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=7864277.
  50. ^ Aguilar MC, Gurpegui M, Diaz FJ, de Leon J (Mar 2005). "Nicotine dependence and symptoms in schizophrenia: naturalistic study of complex interactions". Br J Psychiatry 186: 215â21. doi:10.1192/bjp.186.3.215. PMID 15738502.
  51. ^ "Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder". Reuters Health. Reuters. December 2001. Archived from the original on 2006-04-26. http://web.archive.org/web/20060426105219/http://www.reutershealth.com/wellconnected/doc30.html. "Nicotine improves ADHD symptoms. Although such findings should certainly not encourage anyone to smoke, some studies are focusing on benefits of nicotine therapy in adults with ADHD."
  52. ^ Schechter MD, Cook PG (July 1976). "Nicotine-induced weight loss in rats without an effect on appetite". Eur J Pharmacol. 38 (1): 63â9. doi:10.1016/0014-2999(76)90201-6. PMID 954834.
  53. ^ Cigarette Smoking and Weight Loss in Nursing Home Residents [1]

  
45\. Suemaru K, Kohnomi S, Umeda K, Araki H (Jun 2008). "[Evaluation of
antipsychotic and relative drugs using disruption of prepulse inhibition as an
animal model for schizophrenia]" (in Japanese). Nihon Shinkei Seishin
Yakurigaku Zasshi 28 (3): 121â6. PMID 18646597. 46\. De Luca V, Wong AH,
Muller DJ, Wong GW, Tyndale RF, Kennedy JL (Aug 2004). "Evidence of
association between smoking and alpha7 nicotinic receptor subunit gene in
schizophrenia patients". Neuropsychopharmacology 29 (8): 1522â6.
doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300466. PMID 15100704.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Bilkei-Gorzo A, RÃ¡cz I, Michel K, Darvas M, Rafael Maldonado LÃ³pez, Zimmer A. (2008 63: 164-71). "A common genetic predisposition to stress sensitivity and stress-induced nicotine craving". Biol. Psychiatry.

  * Willoughby JO, Pope KJ, Eaton V (Sep 2003). "Nicotine as an antiepileptic agent in ADNFLE: an N-of-one study". Epilepsia 44 (9): 1238â40. doi:10.1046/j.1528-1157.2003.11903.x. PMID 12919397. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/resolve/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=0013-9580&date=2003&volume=44&issue=9&spage=1238.
  * Minna JD (Jan 2003). "Nicotine exposure and bronchial epithelial cell nicotinic acetylcholine receptor expression in the pathogenesis of lung cancer". J Clin Invest. 111 (1): 31â3. doi:10.1172/JCI17492. PMID 12511585.
  * Fallon JH, Keator DB, Mbogori J, Taylor D, Potkin SG (Mar 2005). "Gender: a major determinant of brain response to nicotine". Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 8 (1): 17â26. doi:10.1017/S1461145704004730. PMID 15579215. http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=282494.
  * West KA, Brognard J, Clark AS, et al (Jan 2003). "Rapid Akt activation by nicotine and a tobacco carcinogen modulates the phenotype of normal human airway epithelial cells". J Clin Invest. 111 (1): 81â90. doi:10.1172/JCI16147. PMID 12511591.
  * National Institute on Drug Abuse
  * Erowid information on tobacco

v â¢ d â¢ e

Stimulants  
Adamantanes

Adaphenoxate â¢ Adapromine â¢ Bromantane â¢ Chlodantane â¢ Gludantane â¢
Memantine â¢ Midantane  
Alkylamines

Cyclopentamine â¢ Geranamine â¢ Heptaminol â¢ Isometheptene â¢ Octodrine
â¢ Propylhexedrine â¢ Tuaminoheptane (Tuamine)  
Cholinergics

ABT-089 â¢ ABT-418 â¢ Anabasine â¢ Arecoline â¢ Cotinine â¢ Cytisine â¢
Dianicline â¢ Epibatidine â¢ Epiboxidine â¢ GTS-21 â¢ Ispronicline â¢
Nicotine â¢ Rivanicline â¢ TC-5619 â¢ Tebanicline â¢ Varenicline  
Convulsants

Bicuculline â¢ DMCM â¢ Flurothyl â¢ Gabazine â¢ Pentetrazol â¢ Picrotoxin
â¢ Strychnine â¢ Thujone  
Eugeroics

Adrafinil â¢ Armodafinil â¢ Carphedon â¢ Modafinil  
Phenethylamines

1-Phenyl-2-methylaminobutan-1-one â¢ 2-Phenyl-3-aminobutane â¢
2-Phenyl-3-methylaminobutane â¢ 4-Bromomethcathinone â¢ 4-FA â¢
4-Fluoromethamphetamine â¢ 4-Fluoromethcathinone â¢ 4-Ethylamphetamine â¢
4-Hydroxyephedrine (Oxilofrine) â¢ 4-Methylamphetamine â¢
4-Methylmethamphetamine â¢ Mephedrone (4-MMC) â¢ 4-MTA â¢ Alfetamine â¢
Alpha-ethyl-phenethylamine â¢ Amfepentorex â¢ Amphechloral â¢ Amphetamine
(Dextroamphetamine, Adderall) â¢ Amphetaminil â¢ Benfluorex â¢
Benzphetamine â¢ Î²-Methylphenethylamine â¢ Bupropion â¢ Cathinone â¢
Chlorphentermine â¢ Clenbuterol â¢ Clobenzorex â¢ Clortermine â¢
Diethylcathinone (Diethylpropion) â¢ Dimethoxyamphetamine â¢
Dimethylamphetamine â¢ Dimethylcathinone â¢ Ephedrine â¢ Epinephrine â¢
Ethcathinone â¢ Ethylamphetamine â¢ Fenbutrazate â¢ Fencamine â¢
Fenethylline â¢ Fenfluramine â¢ Fenproporex â¢ Fludorex â¢ Furfenorex â¢
Levomethamphetamine â¢ Lisdexamfetamine â¢ MDMA (Ecstasy) â¢ Mefenorex â¢
Mephentermine â¢ Methamphetamine â¢ Methcathinone â¢ Methoxyphedrine â¢
Methoxyphenamine â¢ Methylone â¢ Norfenefrine â¢ Octopamine â¢ Ortetamine
â¢ Parahydroxyamphetamine â¢ PCA â¢ PIA â¢ PMA â¢ PMEA â¢ PMMA â¢ PPAP
â¢ Phendimetrazine â¢ Phenmetrazine â¢ Phenpentermine â¢ Phenpromethamine
â¢ Phentermine â¢ Phenylephrine â¢ Phenylpropanolamine â¢
Propylamphetamine â¢ Pseudoephedrine â¢ Selegiline â¢ Synephrine â¢
Tiflorex â¢ Xylopropamine  
Phenylaminooxazoles

4-Methyl-aminorex â¢ Aminorex â¢ Clominorex â¢ Cyclazodone â¢ Fenozolone
â¢ Fluminorex â¢ Pemoline â¢ Thozalinone  
Piperazines

2C-B-BZP â¢ BZP â¢ GBR-12783 â¢ GBR-12935 â¢ GBR-13069 â¢ GBR-13098 â¢
GBR-13119 â¢ MeOPP â¢ MBZP â¢ Vanoxerine  
Piperidines

2-Benzylpiperidine â¢ 4-Benzylpiperidine â¢ Desoxypipradrol â¢
Diphemethoxidine â¢ Ethylphenidate â¢ HDMP-28 â¢
(-)-Methyl-1-methyl-4Î²-(2-naphthyl)piperidine-3Î²-carboxylate â¢
Methylphenidate (Dexmethylphenidate) â¢ Nocaine â¢ Phacetoperane
(Levofacetoperane) â¢ Pipradrol (Meretran)  
Pyrrolidinophenones

Î±-PPP â¢ MDPPP â¢ MDPV â¢ MPBP â¢ MPHP â¢ MPPP â¢ MOPPP â¢
Pyrovalerone  
Tropanes

3Î±-Bis-(4-fluorophenyl)methoxytropane â¢
3Î±-((4-Chlorophenyl)phenylmethoxy)tropane â¢ 3-Pseudotropyl-4-fluorobenzoate
â¢ Altropane (IACFT) â¢ Brasofensine â¢ CFT (WIN 35,428) â¢ Î²-CIT
(RTI-55) â¢ Cocaethylene â¢ Cocaine â¢ Î²-CPPIT â¢ Dichloropane (RTI-111)
â¢ Difluoropine â¢ FE-Î²-CPPIT â¢ FP-Î²-CPPIT â¢ Ioflupane (FPCIT) â¢
Norcocaine â¢ PIT â¢ PTT â¢ RTI-31 â¢ RTI-32 â¢ RTI-51 â¢ RTI-112 â¢
RTI-113 â¢ RTI-121 (IPCIT) â¢ RTI-126 â¢ RTI-150 â¢ RTI-171 â¢ RTI-177
â¢ RTI-336 â¢ Tesofensine â¢ Troparil (Î²-CPT, WIN 35,065-2) â¢ Tropoxane
â¢ WF-23 â¢ WF-33 â¢ WF-60  
Xanthines

Aminophylline â¢ Caffeine â¢ Dimethazan â¢ Paraxanthine â¢ Theobromine â¢
Theophylline  
Others

2-Aminoindane â¢ 5-(2-Aminopropyl)indole â¢ Amfonelic acid â¢ Amineptine
â¢ Amiphenazole â¢ Bemegride â¢ Benzydamine â¢ BPAP â¢ BTCP â¢ BTQ â¢
BTS 74,398 â¢ Clofenciclan â¢ Cropropamide â¢ Crotetamide â¢ Cypenamine
â¢ Cyprodenate â¢ Diclofensine â¢ Dimethocaine â¢ Diphenylprolinol â¢
Etamivan â¢ Fencamfamine â¢ Feprosidnine â¢ Gilutensin â¢ GYKI-52895 â¢
Hexacyclonate â¢ Indanorex â¢ Indatraline â¢ Lefetamine â¢ Leptacline â¢
LR-5182 â¢ Manifaxine â¢ Mazindol â¢ Meclofexonate â¢ Mefexamide â¢
Mesocarb â¢ Naphthylisopropylamine â¢ Nikethamide â¢ Nomifensine â¢ O-2172
â¢ Phthalimidopropiophenone â¢ Prolintane â¢ Sibutramine â¢ UH-232 â¢
Yohimbine â¢ Zylofuramine  
See also Sympathomimetic amines  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Drugs used in addictive disorders (N07B)  
Nicotine dependence/  
(Nicotinic agonist)

Nicotine \- Bupropion \- Dianicline \- Varenicline \- Lobeline \- Mecamylamine
\- Clonidine \- Scopolamine \- Surinabant  
Alcohol dependence

Disulfiram \- Calcium carbimide \- Acamprosate \- Naltrexone \- Nalmefene \-
Topiramate \- Clonidine \- Buprenorphine \- Morphine  
Opioid dependence

Buprenorphine \- Methadone \- Levacetylmethadol \- Fentanyl \- Dihydrocodeine
\- Dihydroetorphine \- Clonidine \- Lofexidine \- Naltrexone \- Ibogaine \-
18-Methoxycoronaridine \- Extended Release Morphine \- Extended Release
Hydromorphone  
Stimulant dependence

Dexamphetamine \- Bupropion \- Vanoxerine \- Nocaine \- Vigabatrin  
Benzodiazepine dependence

Clonidine \- Diazepam \- Phenytoin \- Phenobarbital  
Cocaine dependence

Bupropion \- Vanoxerine \- Nocaine \- Baclofen \- Vigabatrin  
Sedative-Hypnotic dependence

Phenobarbital \- Diazepam \- Lorazepam \- Clonidine \- Chloral Hydrate  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Parasympathomimetics / cholinergic agonists / acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
(N06DA, N07AA)  
Direct  
(at receptor)

muscarinic: Muscarine Â· Oxotremorine Â· M1 (Vedaclidine â¢ Xanomeline)  Â·
M3 (Bethanechol, Pilocarpine, Arecoline, Cevimeline, Aceclidine)  Â·
Methacholine

nicotinic: Nicotine (low doses) Â· Lobeline Â· Varenicline Â· Epibatidine Â·
Dimethylphenylpiperazinium

M & N: Acetylcholine/Choline alfoscerate Â· Carbachol  
Indirect/AIs  
(in synapse)

Reversible

very short acting: Edrophonium

carbamates/stigmine: Ambenonium Â· Rivastigmine Â· Distigmine Â· tertiary/CNS
(Physostigmine) Â· quaternary/peripheral (Neostigmine, Pyridostigmine)

anti-dementia (Galantamine, Donepezil, Tacrine)  
Irreversible/  
organophosphate

ophthalmological (Ecothiopate, Isoflurophate, Demecarium)

antiparasitic (Malathion, Metrifonate)

chemical warfare (see Nerve agent)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Anticholinergics  
Nicotinic antagonists

Ganglionic

nondepolarizing (Mecamylamine, Trimetaphan, Hexamethonium) Â· Nicotine (high
doses)  
note: in PNS, ganglionic blocker can have direct antinicotinic action at
preganglionic terminal, but simulate indirect antimuscarinic activities at
postganglionic terminal  
Neuromuscular

Non-depolarising

Curare alkaloids

Alcuronium Â· Dimethyltubocurarine Â· Tubocurarine  
4Â° ammonium

short duration: Mivacurium

intermediate: Atracurium/Cisatracurium Â· Fazadinium Â· Rocuronium (short
onset) Â· Vecuronium

long: Doxacurium Â· Metocurine Â· Pancuronium Â· Pipecuronium

unsorted: Gallamine Â· Hexafluronium  
Depolarising

choline derivatives (Suxamethonium, Succinylcholine) Â· Decamethonium  
Muscarinic antagonists

nonpolar/tertiary/CNS: Atropine Â· Scopolamine Â· Hyoscyamine Â· antiparkinson
drugs (Benzatropine, Trihexyphenidyl, Biperiden)

polar/quarternary/non-CNS: Glycopyrrolate Â· Ipratropium Â· M1 (Pirenzepine)
Â· M3 (Tiotropium, Darifenacin, Vedaclidine)

unsorted: Tropicamide Â· Cyclopentolate Â· Dicycloverine Â· Tolterodine Â·
Oxybutynin Â· Homatropine Â· Orphenadrine Â· Diphenhydramine Â· Other
ethanolamine class first-generation antihistamines  
Indirect

acetylcholine synthesis inhibitor (Hemicholinium-3) Â· vesicle storage
inhibitor (Vesamicol) Â· acetylcholine release inhibitor (Botulinum toxin) Â·
acetylcholine release stimulator (Alpha-latrotoxin) Â· acetylcholinesterase
reactivators (Pralidoxime, Obidoxime)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicotine"

Categories: Alkaloids | Neurotoxins | Nitrogen heterocycles | Nicotinic
agonists | Plant toxin insecticides | Pyridines | Pyrrolidines | Stimulants |
Tobacco | Smoking

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing
factual verification since March 2009 | All pages needing factual verification
| All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 |
Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles with
unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2007 |
Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles with specifically-marked
weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Hrvatski
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Kiswahili
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Basa Sunda
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 14:01 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



