
# Anthropometry

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Anthropometry (Greek Î¬Î½Î¸ÏÏÏÎ¿Ï, man, and Î¼Î­ÏÏÎ¿Î½, measure,
literally meaning "measurement of humans"), in physical anthropology, refers
to the measurement of the human individual for the purposes of understanding
human physical variation.

Today, anthropometry plays an important role in industrial design, clothing
design, ergonomics and architecture where statistical data about the
distribution of body dimensions in the population are used to optimize
products. Changes in life styles, nutrition and ethnic composition of
populations lead to changes in the distribution of body dimensions (e.g., the
obesity epidemic), and require regular updating of anthropometric data
collections.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Illustration from "The Speaking Portrait" (Pearson's Magazine, Vol XI, January
to June 1901) demonstrating the principles of Bertillon's anthropometry.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Bertillon, Galton, and criminology
    * 1.2 Anthropology and anthropometry
  * 2 Modern anthropometry and biometrics
  * 3 Notes and references
    * 3.1 Historic references
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Resources
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Bertillon record for Francis Galton, from a visit to Bertillon's laboratory
in 1893.

### [edit] Bertillon, Galton, and criminology

The French savant, Alphonse Bertillon (b. 1853), gave this name in 1883 to a
system of identification depending on the unchanging character of certain
measurements of parts of the human frame. He found by patient inquiry that
several physical features and the dimensions of certain bones or bony
structures in the body remain practically constant during adult life. He
concluded from this that when these measurements were made and recorded
systematically every single individual would be found to be perfectly
distinguishable from others. The system was soon adapted to police methods, as
the immense value of being able to fix a person's identity was fully realized,
both in preventing false impersonation and in bringing home to any one charged
with an offense his responsibility for previous wrongdoing. "Bertillonage," as
it was called, became widely popular, and after its introduction into France
in 1883, where it was soon credited with highly gratifying results, was
applied to the administration of justice in most civilized countries. England
followed tardily, and it was not until 1894 that an investigation of the
methods used and results obtained was made by a special committee sent to
Paris for the purpose. It reported favorably, especially on the use of the
measurements for primary classification, but recommended also the adoption in
part of a system of "finger prints" as suggested by Francis Galton, and
already practiced in Bengal.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A chart from Bertillon's Identification anthropomÃ©trique (1893),
demonstrating how to take measurements for his identification system.

There were eleven measurements:

  1. Height
  2. Stretch: Length of body from left shoulder to right middle finger when arm is raised
  3. Bust: Length of torso from head to seat, taken when seated
  4. Length of head: Crown to forehead
  5. Width of head: Temple to temple
  6. Length of right ear
  7. Length of left foot
  8. Length of left middle finger
  9. Length of left cubit: Elbow to tip of middle finger
  10. Width of cheeks
  11. Length of left little finger

From this great mass of details, soon represented in Paris by the collection
of some 100,000 cards, it was possible, proceeding by exhaustion, to sift and
sort down the cards till a small bundle of half a dozen produced the combined
facts of the measurements of the individual last sought. The whole of the
information is easily contained in one cabinet of very ordinary dimensions,
and most ingeniously contrived so as to make the most of the space and
facilitate the search. The whole of the record is independent of names, and
the final identification is by means of the photograph which lies with the
individual's card of measurements.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Anthropometry demonstrated in an exhibit from a 1921 eugenics conference.

Anthropometrics was first used in the 19th and early 20th century in
criminalistics, to identifying criminals by facial characteristics. Francis
Galton was a key contributor as well, and it was in showing the redundancy of
Bertillon's measurements that he developed the statistical concept of
correlation. Bertillon's system originally measured variables he thought were
independentâsuch as forearm length and leg lengthâbut Galton had realized
were both the result of a single causal variable (in this case, stature).

Bertillon's goal was to use anthropometry as a way of identifying
recidivistsâwhat we would today call "repeat-offense" criminals. Previously,
police could only record general descriptions and names, and criminals were
fond of using alternative identities. As such, it was a difficult job to
identify whether or not certain individuals arrested were "first offenders" or
life-long criminals. Photography of criminals had become commonplace but it
had proven ungainly, as there was no coherent way to arrange visually the many
thousands of photographs in a fashion which would allow easy use (an officer
would have to sort through them all with the hope of finding one). Bertillon's
hope was that through the use of measurements of the body, all information
about the individual criminal could be reduced to a set of identifying numbers
which could be entered into a large filing system.

Bertillon also envisioned the system as being organized in such a way that
even if the number of measurements was limited the system could drastically
reduce the number of potential matches, through an easy system of body parts
and characteristics being labeled as "small", "medium", or "large". For
example, if the length of the arm was measured and judged to be within the
"medium" range, and the size of the foot was known, this would drastically
reduce the number of potential records to compare against. With more
measurements of hopefully independent variables, a more precise identification
could be achieved, which could then be matched against photographic evidence.
Certain aspects of this philosophy would also go into Galton's development of
fingerprint identification as well.

Anthropometry, however, gradually fell into disfavor, and it has been
generally supplanted by the superior system of finger prints. Bertillonage
exhibited certain defects which were first brought to light in Bengal. The
objections raised were

  1. the costliness of the instruments employed and their liability to become out of order;
  2. the need for specially instructed measurers, men of superior education;
  3. the errors that frequently crept in when carrying out the processes and were all but irremediable.

Measures inaccurately taken, or incorrectly read off, could seldom, if ever,
be corrected, and these persistent errors defeated all chance of successful
search. The process was slow, as it was necessary to repeat it three times so
as to arrive at a mean result. In Bengal, measurements were already abandoned
by 1897, when the finger print system was adopted throughout British India.
Three years later England followed suit; and as the result of a fresh inquiry
ordered by the Home Office, finger prints were alone relied upon for
identification.

### [edit] Anthropology and anthropometry

Further information: Scientific racism

<IMG>

<IMG>

A "head-measurer" tool designed for anthropological research in the early
1910s.

During the early 20th century, anthropometry was used extensively by
anthropologists in the United States and Europe. One of its primary uses
became the attempted differentiation between differences in the races of man,
and it was often employed to show ways in which races were "inferior" to
others.[citation needed] The wide application of intelligence testing also
became incorporated into a general anthropometric approach, and many forms of
anthropometry were used for the advocacy of eugenics policies. During the
1920s and 1930s, though, members of the school of cultural anthropology of
Franz Boas also began to use anthropometric approaches to discredit the
concept of fixed biological race. Anthropometric approaches to these types of
problems became abandoned in the years after the Holocaust in Nazi Germany,
who also famously relied on anthropometric measurements to distinguish Aryans
from Jews. This school of physical anthropology generally went into decline
during the 1940s.

During the 1940s anthropometry was used by William Sheldon when evaluating his
somatotypes, according to which characteristics of the body can be translated
into characteristics of the mind. Inspired by Cesare Lombroso's criminal
anthropology, he also believed that criminality could be predicted according
to the body type. This use of anthropometry is today also outdated. Because of
his extensive reliance on photographs of nude Ivy League students for his
work, Sheldon ran into considerable controversy when his work became
public.[citation needed]

## [edit] Modern anthropometry and biometrics

Anthropometric studies are today conducted for numerous different purposes.
Academic anthropologists investigate the evolutionary significance of
differences in body proportion between populations whose ancestors lived in
different environmental settings. Human populations exhibit similar climatic
variation patterns to other large-bodied mammals, following Bergmann's rule,
which states that individuals in cold climates will tend to be larger than
ones in warm climates, and Allen's rule, which states that individuals in cold
climates will tend to have shorter, stubbier limbs than those in warm
climates. On a micro evolutionary level, anthropologists use anthropometric
variation to reconstruct small-scale population history. For instance, John
Relethford's studies of early twentieth-century anthropometric data from
Ireland show that the geographical patterning of body proportions still
exhibits traces of the invasions by the English and Norse centuries ago.

Outside academia, scientists working for private companies and government
agencies conduct anthropometric studies to determine what range of sizes
clothing and other items need to be manufactured in. A basically
anthropometric division of body types into the categories endomorphic,
ectomorphic and mesomorphic derived from Sheldon's somatotype theories is
today popular among people doing weight training. Measurements of the foot are
used in the manufacture and sale of footwear; measurement devices may be used
to either directly determine a retail shoe size (e.g. Brannock Device) or
determine the detailed dimensions of the foot for custom manufacture (e.g.
ALINEr).

The US Military has conducted over 40 anthropometric surveys of U.S. Military
personnel between 1945 and 1988, including the 1988 Army Anthropometric Survey
(ANSUR) of men and women with its 240 measures. Statistical data from these
surveys, which encompassed over 75,000 individuals, can be found in [1].

Today people are performing anthropometry with three-dimensional scanners. The
subject has a three-dimensional scan taken of their body, and the
anthropometrist extracts measurements from the scan rather than directly from
the individual. This is beneficial for the anthropometrist in that they can
use this scan to extract any measurement at any time and the individual does
not have to wait for each measurement to be taken separately.

In 2001 the UK conducted the largest sizing survey using scanners up to date.
Since then there have been several national surveys which have followed in the
UK's pioneering steps, notably these are SizeUSA, SizeMexico & Size Thailand,
the latter are still ongoing. Size UK showed that the nation had got taller
and heavier, but not as much as many had expected. Since 1951 when the last
women's survey had taken place the average weight for women had gone up from
62 to 65 kg.

A global collaborative study to examine the uses of three-dimensional scanners
for health care was launched in March 2007. The Body Benchmark Study [2] will
investigate the use of three-dimensional scanners to calculate volumes and
segmental volumes of an individual body scan. The aim is to establish whether
The Body Volume Index has the potential to be used as a long-term computer
based anthropometric measurement for health care. More conventional
anthropometric measurements also have uses in medical anthropology and
epidemiology, for example in helping to determine the relationship between
various body measurements (height, weight, percentage body fat, etc.) and
medical outcomes.

## [edit] Notes and references

  * [3], Anthropometry of US Military Personnel (1991)
  * ISO 7250: Basic human body measurements for technological design, International Organization for Standardization, 1998.
  * ISO 8559: Garment construction and anthropometric surveys â Body dimensions, International Organization for Standardization, 1989.
  * ISO 15535: General requirements for establishing anthropometric databases, International Organization for Standardization, 2000.
  * ISO 15537: Principles for selecting and using test persons for testing anthropometric aspects of industrial products and designs, International Organization for Standardization, 2003.
  * ISO 20685: 3-D scanning methodologies for internationally compatible anthropometric databases, International Organization for Standardization, 2005.

### [edit] Historic references

  * Lombroso, Antropometria di 400 delinquenti (1872)
  * Roberts, Manual of Anthropometry (1878)
  * Ferri, Studi comparati di antropometria (2 vols., 1881-1882)
  * Lombroso, Rughe anomale speciali ai criminali (1890)
  * Bertillon, Instructions signalÃ©tiques pour l'identification anthropomÃ©trique (1893)
  * Livi, Anthropometria (Milan, 1900)
  * FÃ¼rst, Indextabellen zum anthropometrischen Gebrauch (Jena, 1902)
  * Report of Home Office Committee on the Best Means of Identifying Habitual Criminals (1893-1894)

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Anthropometry  
Sister project Look up anthropometry in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * Craniometry
  * Criminology
  * Dermatoglyphics
  * Digit ratio
  * Ergonomics
  * Fingerprinting
  * Genetic fingerprinting
  * Human factors
  * Human height
  * Human weight
  * Osteometry
  * Phrenology
  * Somatotypology
  * Kinanthropometry

This article incorporates text from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, Eleventh
Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

In art Yves Klein termed anthropometries his performance paintings where he
covered nude women with paint, and used their bodies as paintbrushes.

## [edit] Resources

  * Pheasant, Stephen (1986). Bodyspace : anthropometry, ergonomics, and design. London; Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0850663520. (A classic review of human body sizes.)

## [edit] External links

  * Anthropometrics in design resources
  * ANTHROPOMETRY AND BIOMECHANICS according to NASA
  * Anthropometry data at faculty of Industrial Design Engineering at Delft University of Technology
  * Forensic Anthropometry Anthropometry in Forensics
  * [4] DoD and US Government Anthropometry

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthropometry"

Categories: Anthropometry | Physical anthropology | Measurement | Forensics |
Human height

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2008 | Wikipedia articles incorporating
text from the 1911 EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 14:12.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



