
# Visual thinking

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(January 2009)  
<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (January 2009)  
<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)  
Picture thinking, visual thinking , visual/spatial learning or right brained
learning is the common phenomenon of thinking through visual processing using
the part of the brain that is emotional and creative to organize information
in an intuitive and simultaneous way.

Thinking in pictures, is one of a number of other recognized forms of non-
verbal thought such as kinesthetic, musical and mathematical thinking.
Multiple thinking and learning styles, including visual, kinesthetic, musical,
mathematical and verbal thinking styles are a common part of many current
teacher training courses.

While visual thinking and visual learners are not synonymous, those who think
in pictures have generally claimed to be best at visual learning. Also, while
preferred learning and thinking styles may differ from person to person,
precluding perceptual or neurological damage or deficits diminishing the use
of some types of thinking, most people (visual thinkers included) will usually
employ some range of diverse thinking and learning styles whether they are
conscious of the differences or not.

## Contents

  * 1 Controversy about visual thinkers
    * 1.1 Visual Thinking and Eidetic Memory
    * 1.2 Visual Thinking and Dyslexia
    * 1.3 Visual Thinking and Autism
    * 1.4 Visual Thinking and Spatial-Temporal Reasoning or Spatial Visualization ability
  * 2 Research into picture thinking
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Controversy about visual thinkers

### [edit] Visual Thinking and Eidetic Memory

Eidetic Memory (photographic memory) may co-occur in visual thinkers as much
as in any type of thinking style as it is a memory function associated with
having vision rather than a thinking style. Eidetic Memory can still occur in
those with visual agnosia (meaning blindness) who, unlike visual thinkers, may
be limited in the use of visualization skills for mental reasoning.

### [edit] Visual Thinking and Dyslexia

As dyslexia is believed to affect up to 17% percent of the population and
Visual thinking is predominant in around 60%-65%[citation needed] of the
population, there is no clear indication of a link between visual thinking and
dyslexia. As visual thinking is the most common mode of thought, it might be
expected that the incidence of visual thinking in the dyslexia community would
be reflective of that in the general population, around 60%-65%[citation
needed] of each population.

### [edit] Visual Thinking and Autism

Visual thinking has been argued by Temple Grandin as a basis for delayed
speech in people with autism.[1] However, 'picture thinking' is only one form
of "non-linguistic thinking", the others including physical (kinesthetic),
aural (musical) and logical (mathematical/systems) style of thought. Among
those whose main form of thought and learning style is a non-linguistic form,
visual thinking is the most common, though most people have a combination of
thinking and learning styles. It has been suggested that visual thinking has
some necessary connection with autism. However, given that current statistics
by the National Autistic Society UK put the incidence of ASD around 1 person
in 100 has an Autism Spectrum Disorder[2] and that up to 60%-65%[citation
needed] of the population think in pictures, it cannot be concluded that
visual thinking has any necessary connection with autism. However, unless
those with autism have sensory-perceptual disorders limiting their capacity to
develop visual thinking, such as visual agnosias or blindness since infancy,
many people with autism, just as many non-autistic people, are equally likely
to think in pictures. As visual thinking is the most common mode of thought,
it might be expected that the incidence of visual thinking in the autistic
community may be reflective of that in the general population, around
60%-65%[citation needed] of each population.

### [edit] Visual Thinking and Spatial-Temporal Reasoning or Spatial
Visualization ability

Visual thinkers describe thinking in pictures. As approximately
60%-65%[citation needed] of the general population, it's possible that a
visual thinker may be as likely as any human being to also have good spatial-
temporal reasoning or visual spatial ability without the two having any
necessary direct relationship. Acute spatial ability is also a traits of
kinesthetic learners (those who learn through movement, physical patterning
and doing) and logical thinkers (mathematical thinkers who think in patterns
and systems) who may not be strong visual thinkers at all. Similarly, visual
thinking has been described as seeing words as a series of pictures which,
alone, is not exactly the same phenomena spatial-temporal reasoning.

It has to be understood however, that the reasoning employed here uses the
fact that these 60 to 60%[citation needed] percent of people are people who
"strongly" or "sometimes" use thinking in pictures, but also use other forms
of thinking. They think in pictures almost to the exclusion of other kinds of
thinking. Such persons, real "picture thinkers", make up only a very small
percentage of the population. Thus the "Controversy" described above might be
moot when considering this.

## [edit] Research into picture thinking

Research by Child Development Theorist Linda Kreger Silverman suggests that
less than 30% of the population strongly uses visual/spatial thinking, another
45% uses both visual/spatial thinking and thinking in the form of words, and
25% thinks exclusively in words. According to Kreger Silverman, of the 30% of
the general population who use visual/spatial thinking, only a small
percentage would use this style over and above all other forms of thinking,
and can be said to be 'true' "picture thinkers".[3]

Contrary to the apparent lack of interest in "picture thinking" in the US, in
the Netherlands there is a strong and growing interest in this phenomenon.
After a lot of media coverage in the last few years [4] there is now not much
doubt among the general population that picture thinking is a real phenomenon,
meaning that only a small percentage of the population are true picture
thinkers, that is persons who mainly think using pictures to the exclusion of
thinking linearly using language.

Although there is still resistance to the idea even by some Dutch
psychologists and development theorists[5] , a lot of empirical evidence has
been discovered for the existence of this phenomenon, since its first
discovery some ten years ago.

Much research is being done into the phenomenon of âpicture thinkingâ, (a
literal translation of the Dutch term "beelddenken") by the Dutch nonprofit
foundation the "Maria J. Krabbe Stichting Beelddenken" [1].[6] They are
publishing documents, holding congresses and are funding scientific studies
and have even devised a test, (the "Ojemann wereldspel") to recognize children
that are picture thinkers. In this test children are asked to build a village
using toy houses, and a picture is taken from the result. After a few days the
child is asked to re-create the very same village. Children who are picture
thinkers are found to be much more accurate in re-creating the village than
the non picture thinking children.

## [edit] See also

  * Rich pictures
  * Visual language
  * New Epoch Notation Painting
  * Image schema
  * Concept map
  * Intellectual giftedness
  * Rudolf Arnheim

## [edit] References

  1. ^ THINKING IN PICTURES: Autism and Visual Thought
  2. ^ The National Autistic Society - Statistics: how many people have autistic spectrum disorders?
  3. ^ Instructional Strategies
  4. ^ http://beelddenken.startpagina.nl/ "start page" for persons interested "beeld denken" (in Dutch) lists many publications
  5. ^ principally N. van Woerden and R. Wiers
  6. ^ Homepage of Dutch M.J. Krabbe foundation web-site translated with Babel Fish

## [edit] External links

  * http://www.visualspatial.org

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_thinking"

Categories: Visual thinking

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since January
2009 | All articles that may contain original research | Cleanup from January
2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles needing additional references from
January 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 17 February 2009, at 15:47.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



