
# Bujinkan

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)  
<IMG>  
Bujinkan logo, consisting of stylized "Bujin" kanji inside a circle.  
Bujinkan  
(æ­¦ç¥é¤¨)  
Date founded c.1970  
Founder Masaaki Hatsumi  
(born December 2, 1931)  
Current head Masaaki Hatsumi  
Arts taught Bujinkan Budo Taijutsu (æ­¦ç¥é¤¨æ­¦éä½è¡ ,Bujinkan BudÅ
Taijutsu?)  
Ancestor schools Gyokko-ryÅ« Kosshijutsu â¢ KotÅ-ryÅ« KoppÅjutsu â¢
Shinden FudÅ-ryÅ« Dakentaijutsu â¢ Takagi YÅshin-ryÅ« JÅ«taijutsu â¢ Kuki
Shinden-ryÅ« HappÅ Bikenjutsu â¢ Gikan-ryÅ« KoppÅjutsu â¢ Togakure-ryÅ«
NinpÅ â¢ Gyokushin-ryÅ« NinpÅ â¢ Kumogakure-ryÅ« NinpÅ  
Official Site http://www.bujinkan.com  
The Bujinkan (æ­¦ç¥é¤¨) is an international martial arts organization based
in Japan and headed by Masaaki Hatsumi, it is best known for its association
with ninjutsu. The system taught by this group, called Bujinkan BudÅ
Taijutsu, consists of nine separate martial arts traditions.

## Contents

  * 1 RyÅ«ha
  * 2 Training
  * 3 Grades
  * 4 Theme by year
  * 5 Related Kanji
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links
    * 7.1 Official Bujinkan links
    * 7.2 Other links

  
## [edit] RyÅ«ha

The Bujinkan organization incorporates the teachings of nine martial arts
lineages (ryÅ«ha)[1]:

  * Togakure-ryÅ« NinpÅ Taijutsu (æ¸é æµå¿æ³ä½è¡)
  * Gyokko-ryÅ« Kosshijutsu (çèæµéª¨æè¡)
  * Kuki Shinden HappÅ Bikenjutsu (ä¹é¬¼ç¥ä¼æµå «æ³ç§å£è¡)
  * KotÅ-ryÅ« KoppÅjutsu (èåæµéª¨æ³è¡)
  * Shinden FudÅ-ryÅ« Dakentaijutsu (ç¥ä¼ä¸åæµææ³ä½è¡)
  * Takagi YÅshin-ryÅ« JÅ«taijutsu (é«æ¨æå¿æµæä½è¡)
  * Gikan-ryÅ« KoppÅjutsu (ç¾©éæµéª¨æ³è¡)
  * Gyokushin-ryÅ« NinpÅ (çå¿æµå¿æ³)
  * Kumogakure-ryÅ« NinpÅ (é²é æµå¿æ³)

The head of the Bujinkan organisation, Masaaki Hatsumi, is the lineage holder
of several ryÅ«ha taught in the Bujinkan, transferred to him in the middle of
the 20th Century by his teacher Takamatsu Toshitsugu.[2][3][4][5]

From 1968 and onwards, the Bugei Ryuha Daijiten has entries bearing the name
of Hatsumi below his teacher Takamatsu Toshitsugu for the following school
entries: Gyokko-ryÅ« Kosshijutsu, Kuki Shinden HappÅ Bikenjutsu, KotÅ-ryÅ«
KoppÅjutsu, Shinden FudÅ-ryÅ« Dakentaijutsu, Takagi YÅshin-ryÅ«
JÅ«taijutsu, Gikan-ryÅ« KoppÅjutsu, Gyokushin-ryÅ« NinpÅ and Kumogakure-ryÅ«
NinpÅ.

In 1843 several of the Bujinkan ryÅ«ha were mentioned in the Kakutogi no
Rekishi (âThe History of Fighting Artsâ).[6] Although details of the
ryÅ«ha were omitted, the publication states, "even though they are not
mentioned in this particular periodical, there are several schools that are
well-known for being âeffective artsâ (jitsuryoku ha)." Among the schools
listed in this section are Gyokko RyÅ«, Gikan-ryÅ« KoppÅjutsu, Gyokushin-ryÅ«
NinpÅ, Kukishin Ryu, Takagi YÅshin-ryÅ« JÅ«taijutsu and Asayama Ichiden RyÅ«
(which is not part of the Bujinkanâs nine schools but was studied by Hatsumi
via Takashi Ueno). [6] The Bujinkan as a whole has been recognised by the Zen
Nippon Todo Renmei (All Japan Sword Federation).[citation needed] However, the
recorded history and lineage of several of the ryÅ«ha taught in the Bujinkan,
as documented by the Bujinkan, especially of Togakure-ryÅ« NinpÅ Taijutsu,
have been called into question.[7]

Several of the above martial arts taught in the Bujinkan can allegedly be
traced back to the Iga region of Japan and were developed and used by the
Yamabushi and the Ninja. The arts said to be in the Iga-ryu Ninjutsu tradition
include Gyokko Ryu, Koto Ryu, Gikan-ryÅ« and Shinden Fudo Ryu. The alleged
connection to Ninjutsu is through Hatsumi's teacher Takamatsu Toshitsugu who
was, among other things, permitted to copy the Amatsu Tatara scrolls.
Takamatsu Toshitsugu grandfather was a samurai and a direct decedent of the
founder of Gyokko Ryu (the Gikan-ryÅ« was passed to Takamatsu Toshitsugu
through another source). Other arts, such as Takagi Yoshin Ryu and Kukishinden
Ryu were developed and used by members of Japanâs Samurai families. Today
the Bujinkan incorporates techniques from all of the above 9 ryu and others.

## [edit] Training

The training is generally referred to as taijutsu (body arts), and is composed
of both armed and unarmed methods of fighting. Bujinkan training incorporates
bikenjutsu, bÅjutsu, sojutsu, naginatajutsu, tantojutsu, tessenjutsu,
juttejutsu, kusarigama, the use of modern firearms and more. Much of the basic
taijutsu taught to beginners comes from six primary lineages in the Bujinkan
compendium, namely KotÅ-ryÅ«, Gyokko-ryÅ«, Shinden FudÅ-ryÅ«, Takagi
YÅshin-ryÅ«, Kuki Shinden-ryÅ«, and Togakure-ryÅ«.

A large variety of weapons are taught, including swords such as daitÅ,
wakizashi and tantÅ, bamboo shinai, wooden bokken, mogito (a flexible
aluminum replica sword that holds no edge), or swords made by soft modern
materials are employed for safety such as fukuro shinai, staves of varying
lengths (bÅ, jÅ), short staves called (hanbÅ, hanjÅ), nawa (rope), kusari-
fundo (weighted chain), kusarigama (scythe with chain), yari (spear), kamayari
(spear with curved scythe-like blades crossing the principal head), kagiyari
(spear with 2 rearward hooks), bisento (known in Mandarin as 'kwandao'),
kyoketsu shoge (similar to a kama except it has a dagger point and a rope of
several feet attached to an iron ring), jutte (sword trapping truncheon),
tessen (iron fan), naginata (Japanese glaive), kunai (a blunt digging tool),
as well various form of shuriken including bo-shuriken and senban shuriken. In
training, students are encouraged to always use any available weapons,
including the environment. In some dojos, students will practice hiding
training weapons in their uwagi or somewhere on the mat, and surprise their
uke (training partner) during technique. While in many other oriental martial
arts this is seen as dishonorable, the emphasis Bujinkan places on stealth and
deception makes it a valuable exercise when practicing awareness.

Bujinkan BudÅ Taijutsu practice does not normally include participation in
competitions or contests because of the possibility of injury or even death
from the dangerous techniques.[citation needed] Specifically however, the
Bujinkan is mostly known for teaching koshijutsu (pressure point, muscle
attacks/tears and joint dislocations), koppojutsu (bone breaking), jutaijutsu
(throwing, grappling, ground fighting), dakentaijutsu (strikes), happo
bikenjutsu (various modern and traditional weapons), and ninpo tactics and
strategies (Ninjutsu).

## [edit] Grades

The Bujinkan DÅjÅ has a series of nine kyÅ« (grades) below the level of
shodan, starting with mukyu ("without grade") and then from kukyu (9 kyu) to
ikkyu (1 kyu), with 9 kyu being the lowest rank and 1 kyu being the highest.
Just like in other Japanese martial arts, such as karate and judo, unranked
(mukyÅ«) practitioners wear white belts, and those with ranks of shÅdan and
above wear black belts. KyÅ« level practitioners wear colored belts, though
the actual color of the belt varies from place to place. Furthermore, unlike
other martial arts, the color has no relation to the actual kyu-level the
practitioner holds. In Japan, it was once customary for kyu-level men to wear
green belts and women to wear red belts; however, this practice has largely
been abandoned. Now, both male and female Bujinkan practitioners wear green
belts at most Japanese dÅjÅ. Outside of Japan, some countries still follow
the green for men/red for women custom, while others use green for all
practitioners.

There were originally 9 dan levels, as with many other martial arts using the
kyÅ«/dan system, but this was changed by Hatsumi to 10 and later, 15 dan
levels. The grades are divided into three groupings; 1-5 dan Ten (Heaven),
6-10 dan Chi (Earth), 11-15 dan Jin (Man, in the sense of Humanity). The Jin
levels are further divided into the five elements of the Godai; chi (earth),
sui (water), ka (fire), fÅ« (wind) and kÅ« (void).

The practitioner's level is displayed by the color of the art's emblem, called
wappen (ã¯ããã³), inscribed with the kanji "bu"(æ­¦) and "jin" (ç¥).
There are four kinds of wappen (9 to 1 kyÅ«, 1 to 4 dan, 5 to 9 dan, and 10 to
15 dan) sometimes augmented with up to four silver, gold or white stars
(called hoshi) above or around the emblem, representing the individual ranks.

At 4 dan (yondan), practitioners submit to a test before the sÅke to
establish that they are able to sense the presence of danger and evade it,
considered to be a fundamental survival skill. This is called sakki. This is
the test for 5 dan. A practitioner with the level of godan or above is
entitled to apply for a teaching license (shidÅshi menkyo). A shidÅshi is
entitled to open his own dÅjÅ, and grade students up to the level of 4 dan.
A practitioner with the level of between 1 dan to 4 dan may become a licensed
"assistant teacher" (shidÅshi-ho), if backed by and acting under the
supervision of a shidÅshi 5th to 9th dan or a person who holds the level of
10 dan (jÅ«dan). In the Bujinkan a person who holds the level of between 10
dan and 15 dan is often referred to as a shihan.

In addition to the kyÅ«/dan system, a few practitioners have earned menkyo
kaiden "licenses of complete transmission" in individual schools. These menkyo
kaiden essentially establish that the master practitioner has learned all that
there is to learn about the particular lineage. Whereas the kyÅ«/dan ranks are
often made public, those select practitioners who have earned menkyo kaiden
rarely divulge their status, sometimes even being reluctant to recognize their
actual dan ranking to outsiders.

## [edit] Theme by year

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)  
Since 1988 Hatsumi's teaching has focused on a particular theme each year.
This typically means that a specific ryÅ«, or a certain set of techniques from
specific ryÅ« will be taught. Hatsumi announces the years theme, or focus,
each year at the Daikomyosai. Depending on what years a student has studied in
Japan, they may find that their focus reflects the themes or schools taught
during their time. This is one reason that there are often noticeable
differences in techniques from different teachers inside the Bujinkan.
Although Ninpo Taijutsu is an overall theme of the Bujinkan, 2008 marks the
first time that a Ninpo Taijutsu RyÅ« was the focus of the year. However,
prior to founding the Bujinkan organization and teaching the nine RyÅ«
collectively (with particular yearly focus), Hatsumi awarded his students rank
certificates in individual RyÅ«.

  * Theme of 2009 - Mu - No theme
  * Theme of 2008 - Togakure-ryÅ« NinpÅ Taijutsu
  * Theme of 2007 - Kukishin Ryu
  * Theme of 2006 - Shinden Fudo Ryu
  * Theme of 2005 - Gyokko-ryÅ« Kosshijutsu (Bo and Tachi)
  * Theme of 2004 - Daishou Juutaijutsu (Roppo-Kuji-no Biken)
  * Theme of 2003 - Juppo Sessho
  * Theme of 2002 - Jutaijutsu (Takagi Yoshin Ryu)
  * Theme of 2001 - Kosshijutsu (Gyokko Ryu)
  * Theme of 2000 - Koppojutsu (Koto Ryu)
  * Theme of 1999 - Kukishinden Ryu
  * Theme of 1998 - Shinden Fudo Ryu
  * Theme of 1997 - Jojutsu
  * Theme of 1996 - Bokken
  * Theme of 1995 - Naginata
  * Theme of 1994 - Yari
  * Theme of 1993 - Rokushakubojutsu
  * Theme of 1992 - Taijutsu Power
  * Theme of 1991 - Sword and Jutte
  * Theme of 1990 - Hanbo
  * Theme of 1989 - Taijutsu and Weapons
  * Theme of 1988 - Taijutsu

As of yet, no focus has been announced for 2009, though Hatsumi talked about 3
things which are important for a martial artist, these 3 things may be thought
of as a kind of Sanshin. He said that these things were going to become a bit
of a theme for next year.[citation needed]

They are:

  1. Sainou (Ability/talent)
  2. Kokoro (Heart)
  3. Utsuwa (Capacity)

The main meaning of the word 'utsuwa', its first definition in the dictionary,
is 'container/receptacle/vessel'. A secondary meaning, however, is concerning
a person's capacity or potential. Examples of 'utsuwa' in Japanese sentences
include: "Utsuwa no ookii." (a person of high caliber). "Daitouryou ni naru
utsuwa dewa nai." (He [doesn't have what it takes / isn't cut out] to be
president. / He is not of presidential caliber [stature]) So utsuwa can mean
'caliber', to have 'potential', basically to have the 'right stuff'.[citation
needed]

Yet the basic meaning implied by the word 'container' may hold another aspect.
Fish, plants etc. will only grow to the size of the container which they are
in. Their growth is limited by the size of their container. Humans too have a
'limit' to their potential. If their utsuwa is small, they can never grow
bigger than its limits. Such is another possible suggestion of
Hatsumi.[citation needed]

Soon after the theme as herein described was announced, it was proposed by
Hatsumi that the second aspect, Kokoro (Heart), be replaced by Tamashii
(Soul). His reasoning was that the heart is in a constant state of change,
whereas the soul is permanent and unchanging, and therefore is "essential to
the person", as was later stated on George Ohashi's homepage.[citation needed]

## [edit] Related Kanji

  * æ­¦ç¥é¤¨ Bujinkan
  * æ­¦ç¥é¤¨æ­¦éä½è¡ Bujinkan BudÅ Taijutsu
  * åè¦è¯æ­ Masaaki Hatsumi

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Shinkentaijutsu
  2. ^ Tetsuzan: Chapter1 p18; ISBN 4-901619-06-3
  3. ^ Alex Esteve: Exploring the essence of the Martial Arts, ISBN 978-84-85278-30-5
  4. ^ Ninjustsu, History and Tradition; ISBN 0-86568-027-2
  5. ^ Footprints of the Bujinkan dojo soke
  6. ^ a b The History of Fighting Arts. 1843. pp. 508â517.
  7. ^ Skoss, Diane (ed.); Beaubien, Ron; Friday, Karl (1999). http://koryu.com/library/ninjutsu.html "Ninjutsu: is it koryu bujutsu?". Koryu.com. http://web.archive.org/web/20030202135534/ http://koryu.com/library/ninjutsu.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-01.

## [edit] External links

### [edit] Official Bujinkan links

  * Bujinkan Hombu DÅjÅ
  * George Ohashi Shihan - News from the Bujinkan honbu dojo
  * Bujinkan Hombu Dojo-A Localâs Perspective

### [edit] Other links

  * Philosophy site for Bujinkan students
  * Bujinkan Taka-Seigi Dojo offers webcast of Masaaki Hatsumi's current teaching from Japan.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bujinkan"

Categories: Ninjutsu | Bujinkan | Martial arts organizations | Japanese
martial arts

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2009 |
Articles containing Japanese language text | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles
with unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 02:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



