
# Apoptosis

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A section of mouse liver showing an apoptotic cell indicated by an arrow

Apoptosis (IPA: /ËÃ¦pÉpËtoÊsÉs/(the second 'p' is soft) [1]) is the
process of programmed cell death (PCD) that may occur in multicellular
organisms. Programmed cell death involves a series of biochemical events
leading to a characteristic cell morphology and death, in more specific terms,
a series of biochemical events that lead to a variety of morphological
changes, including blebbing, changes to the cell membrane such as loss of
membrane asymmetry and attachment, cell shrinkage, nuclear fragmentation,
chromatin condensation, and chromosomal DNA fragmentation (1-4). (See also
Apoptosis DNA fragmentation.) Processes of disposal of cellular debris whose
results do not damage the organism differentiate apoptosis from necrosis.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Histologic cross section of embryonic foot of mouse (Mus musculus) in 15.5 day
of its development. There are still cells between fingers. (Full development
of mouse lasts 27 days.) (Compare this image with image of leg of mouse.)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Fully developed foot of mouse has separate fingers.

In contrast to necrosis, which is a form of traumatic cell death that results
from acute cellular injury, apoptosis, in general, confers advantages during
an organism's life cycle. For example, the differentiation of fingers and toes
in a developing human embryo occurs because cells between the fingers
apoptose; the result is that the digits are separate. Between 50 billion and
70 billion cells die each day due to apoptosis in the average human adult. For
an average child between the ages of 8 and 14, approximately 20 billion to 30
billion cells die a day. In a year, this amounts to the proliferation and
subsequent destruction of a mass of cells equal to an individual's body
weight.

Research on apoptosis has increased substantially since the early 1990s. In
addition to its importance as a biological phenomenon, defective apoptotic
processes have been implicated in an extensive variety of diseases. Excessive
apoptosis causes hypotrophy, such as in ischemic damage, whereas an
insufficient amount results in uncontrolled cell proliferation, such as
cancer.

## Contents

  * 1 Discovery and etymology
  * 2 Functions
    * 2.1 Cell termination
    * 2.2 Homeostasis
    * 2.3 Development
    * 2.4 Lymphocyte interactions
  * 3 Process
    * 3.1 Mitochondrial regulation
    * 3.2 Direct signal transduction
    * 3.3 Execution
    * 3.4 Removal of dead cells
  * 4 Implication in disease
    * 4.1 Defective apoptotic pathways
    * 4.2 Dysregulation of p53
    * 4.3 HIV progression
    * 4.4 Viral infection
  * 5 Apoptosis in plants
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Discovery and etymology

Main article: History and highlights in apoptosis research

Cell death is a completely normal process in living organisms and was first
discovered by scientists over 100 years ago. A German scientist Carl Vogt was
first to describe the principle of apoptosis in 1842. In 1885, anatomist
Walther Flemming delivered a more precise description of the process of
programmed cell death. However, it was not until 1965 that the topic was
resurrected. While studying tissues using electron microscopy, John Foxton
Ross Kerr at University of Queensland was able to distinguish apoptosis
(Greek: apo \- from, ptosis \- falling) from traumatic cell death.[2]
Following the publication of a paper describing the phenomenon, Kerr was
invited to join Alastair R Currie, as well as Andrew Wyllie, who was Currie's
graduate student, [3] at University of Aberdeen. In 1972, the trio published a
seminal article in the British Journal of Cancer.[4] Kerr had initially used
the term programmed cell necrosis, but in the article, the process of natural
cell death was called apoptosis. Kerr, Wyllie and Currie credited James
Cormack, a professor of Greek language at University of Aberdeen, with
suggesting the term apoptosis. Kerr received the Paul Ehrlich and Ludwig
Darmstaedter Prize on March 14, 2000, for his description of apoptosis. He
shared the prize with Boston biologist Robert Horvitz.[5]

In Greek, apoptosis translates to "dropping off" of petals or leaves from
plants or trees. Cormack reintroduced the term for medical use as it had a
medical meaning for the Greeks over two thousand years before. Hippocrates
used the term to mean "the falling off of the bones". Galen extended its
meaning to "the dropping of the scabs". Cormack was no doubt aware of this
usage when he suggested the name. Debate continues over the correct
pronunciation, with opinion divided between a pronunciation with a silent p
(pronounced /Ã¦pÉËtÉÊsÉªs/) and the p spelt out (pronounced
/Ã¦pÉpËtÉÊsÉªs/),[6][1] as in the original Greek. In English, the p of the
Greek -pt- consonant cluster is typically silent at the beginning of a word
(e.g. pterodactyl), but articulated when used in combining forms preceded by a
vowel, as in helicopter or the orders of insects: diptera, lepidoptera, etc.

It should be noted that in the original Kerr Wyllie and Currie paper, British
Journal of Cancer, 1972 Aug;26(4):239-57, there is a footnote regarding the
pronunciation.

"We are most grateful to Professor James Cormack of the Department of Greek,
University of Aberdeen, for suggesting this term. The word "apoptosis" (Greek
spelling of apoptosis) is used in Greek to describe the "dropping off" or
"falling off" of petals from flowers, or leaves from trees. To show the
derivation clearly, we propose that the stress should be on the penultimate
syllable, the second half of the word being pronounced like "ptosis" (with the
"p" silent), which comes from the same root "to fall", and is already used to
describe the drooping of the upper eyelid."

## [edit] Functions

### [edit] Cell termination

Apoptosis occurs when a cell is damaged beyond repair, infected with a virus,
or undergoing stressful conditions such as starvation. Damage to DNA from
ionizing radiation or toxic chemicals can also induce apoptosis via the
actions of the tumour-suppressing gene p53. The "decision" for apoptosis can
come from the cell itself, from the surrounding tissue, or from a cell that is
part of the immune system. In these cases apoptosis functions to remove the
damaged cell, preventing it from sapping further nutrients from the organism,
or halting further spread of viral infection.

Apoptosis also plays a role in preventing cancer. If a cell is unable to
undergo apoptosis because of mutation or biochemical inhibition, it continues
to divide and develop into a tumour. For example, infection by
papillomaviruses causes a viral gene to interfere with the cell's p53 protein,
an important member of the apoptotic pathway. This interference in the
apoptotic capability of the cell plays a role in the development of cervical
cancer.

### [edit] Homeostasis

In the adult organism, the number of cells is kept relatively constant through
cell death and division. Cells must be replaced when they malfunction or
become diseased, but proliferation must be offset by cell death.[7] This
control mechanism is part of the homeostasis required by living organisms to
maintain their internal states within certain limits. Some scientists have
suggested homeodynamics as a more accurate term.[8] The related term
allostasis reflects a balance of a more complex nature by the body.

Homeostasis is achieved when the rate of mitosis (cell division) in the tissue
is balanced by cell death. If this equilibrium is disturbed, one of two
potentially fatal disorders occurs:

  * the cells are dividing faster than they die, effectively developing a tumor.
  * the cells are dividing slower than they die, causing cell loss.

Homeostasis involves a complex series of reactions, a ongoing process inside
an organism that calls for different types of cell signaling. Any impairment
can cause a disease. For example, dysregulation of signaling pathway has been
implicated in several forms of cancer. The pathway, which conveys an anti-
apoptotic signal, has been found to be activated in pancreatic adenocarcinoma
tissues.

### [edit] Development

<IMG>

<IMG>

Incomplete differentiation in two toes (syndactyly) due to lack of apoptosis

Programmed cell death is an integral part of both plant and animal tissue
development. Development of an organ or tissue is often preceded by the
extensive division and differentiation of a particular cell, the resultant
mass is then "pruned" into the correct form by apoptosis. Unlike necrosis,
cellular death caused by injury, apoptosis results in cell shrinkage and
fragmentation. Such shrinkage and fragmentation allow the cells to be
phagocytosed and their components reused without releasing potentially harmful
intracellular substances such as hydrolytic enzymes into the surrounding
tissue.

Research on chick embryos has suggested how selective cell proliferation,
combined with selective apoptosis, sculpts developing tissues in vertebrates.
During vertebrate embryo development, structures called the notochord and the
floor plate secrete a gradient of the signaling molecule (Shh), and it is this
gradient that directs cells to form patterns in the embryonic neural tube.
Cells that receive Shh in a receptor in their membranes called patched1 (Ptc1)
survive and proliferate. In the absence of Shh, one of the ends of this same
Ptc1 receptor (the carboxyl-terminal, inside the membrane) is cleaved by
caspase-3, an action that exposes an apoptosis-producing domain.[9][10]

During development, apoptosis is tightly regulated and different tissues use
different signals for inducing apoptosis. In birds, bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMP) signaling is used to induce apoptosis in the interdigital
tissue. In Drosophila flies, steroid hormones regulate cell death.
Developmental cues can also induce apoptosis, such as the sex-specific cell
death of hermaphrodite specific neurons in C. elegans males through low TRA-1
transcription factor activity (TRA-1 helps prevent cell death).

### [edit] Lymphocyte interactions

The development of B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes in a human body is a
complex process that creates a large pool of diverse cells and subsequently
eliminates those potentially damaging to the body. Apoptosis is the mechanism
by which the body removes both the ineffective and the potentially damaging
immature cells. In T cells, apoptosis is initiated by the withdrawal of
survival signals.[11]

Cytotoxic T cells are able to directly induce apoptosis by opening up pores in
the target's membrane and releasing chemicals that bypass the normal apoptotic
pathway. The pores are created by the action of secreted perforin, and the
granules contain granzyme B, a serine protease that activates a variety of
caspases by cleaving aspartate residues.[12]

## [edit] Process

<IMG>

The process of apoptosis is controlled by a diverse range of cell signals,
which may originate either extracellularly (extrinsic inducers) or
intracellularly (intrinsic inducers). Extracellular signals may include
toxins[13], hormones, growth factors, nitric oxide[14] or cytokines, and
therefore must either cross the plasma membrane or transduce to effect a
response. These signals may positively or negatively induce apoptosis. The
binding and subsequent initiation of apoptosis by a molecule is termed
positive, whereas the active repression of apoptosis by a molecule is termed
negative.

A cell initiates intracellular apoptotic signalling in response to a stress,
which may bring about cell suicide. The binding of nuclear receptors by
glucocorticoids[12], heat[12], radiation[12], nutrient deprivation[12], viral
infection[12], hypoxia[12] and increased intracellular calcium
concentration[15], for example, by damage to the membrane can all trigger the
release of intracellular apoptotic signals by a damaged cell. A number of
cellular components, such as poly ADP ribose polymerase, may also help
regulate apoptosis.[16]

Before the actual process of cell death is carried out by enzymes, apoptotic
signals must cause regulatory proteins to start off the death pathway. This
step allows apoptotic signals to cause cell death, or the process to be
stopped, should the cell no longer need to die. Several proteins are involved,
but two main methods of regulation have been identified: targeting
mitochondria functionality, or directly transducing the signal via adapter
proteins to the apoptotic mechanisms.

### [edit] Mitochondrial regulation

The mitochondria are essential to multicellular life. Without them, a cell
ceases to respire aerobically and quickly dies, a fact exploited by some
apoptotic pathways. Apoptotic proteins that target mitochondria affect them in
different ways. They may cause mitochondrial swelling through the formation of
membrane pores, or they may increase the permeability of the mitochondrial
membrane and cause apoptotic effectors to leak out.[12] There is also a
growing body of evidence that indicates that nitric oxide is able to induce
apoptosis by helping to dissipate the membrane potential of mitochondria and
therefore make it more permeable.[14]

Mitochondrial proteins known as SMACs (second mitochondria-derived activator
of caspases) are released into the cytosol following an increase in
permeability. SMAC binds to inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) and
deactivates them, preventing the IAPs from arresting the apoptotic process and
therefore allowing apoptosis to proceed. IAP also normally suppresses the
activity of a group of cysteine proteases called caspases,[17] which carry out
the degradation of the cell, therefore the actual degradation enzymes can be
seen to be indirectly regulated by mitochondrial permeability.

Cytochrome c is also released from mitochondria due to formation of a channel,
MAC, in the outer mitochondrial membrane[18], and serves a regulatory function
as it precedes morphological change associated with apoptosis.[12] Once
cytochrome c is released it binds with Apaf-1 and ATP, which then bind to pro-
caspase-9 to create a protein complex known as an apoptosome. The apoptosome
cleaves the pro-caspase to its active form of caspase-9, which in turn
activates the effector caspase-3.

MAC is itself subject to regulation by various proteins, such as those encoded
by the mammalian Bcl-2 family of anti-apoptopic genes, the homologs of the
ced-9 gene found in C. elegans.[19][20] Bcl-2 proteins are able to promote or
inhibit apoptosis either by direct action on MAC or indirectly through other
proteins. It is important to note that the actions of some Bcl-2 proteins are
able to halt apoptosis even if cytochrome c has been released by the
mitochondria.[12]

### [edit] Direct signal transduction

<IMG>

<IMG>

Overview of signal transduction pathways.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Overview of TNF signalling in apoptosis, an example of direct signal
transduction

<IMG>

<IMG>

Overview of Fas signalling in apoptosis, an example of direct signal
transduction

Two theories of the direct initiation of apoptotic mechanisms in mammals have
been suggested: the TNF-induced (tumour necrosis factor) model and the Fas-Fas
ligand-mediated model, both involving receptors of the TNF receptor (TNFR)
family[21] coupled to extrinsic signals.

TNF is a cytokine produced mainly by activated macrophages, and is the major
extrinsic mediator of apoptosis. Most cells in the human body have two
receptors for TNF: TNF-R1 and TNF-R2. The binding of TNF to TNF-R1 has been
shown to initiate the pathway that leads to caspase activation via the
intermediate membrane proteins TNF receptor-associated death domain (TRADD)
and Fas-associated death domain protein (FADD).[22] Binding of this receptor
can also indirectly lead to the activation of transcription factors involved
in cell survival and inflammatory responses.[23] The link between TNF and
apoptosis shows why an abnormal production of TNF plays a fundamental role in
several human diseases, especially in autoimmune diseases.

The Fas receptor (also known as Apo-1 or CD95) binds the Fas ligand (FasL), a
transmembrane protein part of the TNF family.[21] The interaction between Fas
and FasL results in the formation of the death-inducing signaling complex
(DISC), which contains the FADD, caspase-8 and caspase-10. In some types of
cells (type I), processed caspase-8 directly activates other members of the
caspase family, and triggers the execution of apoptosis. In other types of
cells (type II), the Fas-DISC starts a feedback loop that spirals into
increasing release of pro-apoptotic factors from mitochondria and the
amplified activation of caspase-8.[24]

Following TNF-R1 and Fas activation in mammalian cells a balance between pro-
apoptotic (BAX,[25] BID, BAK, or BAD) and anti-apoptotic (Bcl-Xl and Bcl-2)
members of the Bcl-2 family is established. This balance is the proportion of
pro-apoptotic homodimers that form in the outer-membrane of the mitochondrion.
The pro-apoptotic homodimers are required to make the mitochondrial membrane
permeable for the release of caspase activators such as cytochrome c and SMAC.
Control of pro-apoptotic proteins under normal cell conditions of non-
apoptotic cells is incompletely understood, but it has been found that a
mitochondrial outer-membrane protein, VDAC2, interacts with BAK to keep this
potentially-lethal apoptotic effector under control.[26] When the death signal
is received, products of the activation cascade displace VDAC2 and BAK is able
to be activated.

There also exists a caspase-independent apoptotic pathway that is mediated by
AIF (apoptosis-inducing factor).[27]

### [edit] Execution

Many pathways and signals lead to apoptosis, but there is only one mechanism
that actually causes the death of a cell. After a cell receives stimulus, it
undergoes organized degradation of cellular organelles by activated
proteolytic caspases. A cell undergoing apoptosis shows a characteristic
morphology:

  1. Cell shrinkage and rounding are shown because of the breakdown of the proteinaceous cytoskeleton by caspases.
  2. The cytoplasm appears dense, and the organelles appear tightly packed.
  3. Chromatin undergoes condensation into compact patches against the nuclear envelope in a process known as pyknosis, a hallmark of apoptosis.[28][29]
  4. The nuclear envelope becomes discontinuous and the DNA inside it is fragmented in a process referred to as karyorrhexis. The nucleus breaks into several discrete chromatin bodies or nucleosomal units due to the degradation of DNA.[30]
  5. The cell membrane shows irregular buds known as blebs.
  6. The cell breaks apart into several vesicles called apoptotic bodies, which are then phagocytosed.

Apoptosis progresses quickly and its products are quickly removed, making it
difficult to detect or visualize. During karyorrhexis, endonuclease activation
leaves short DNA fragments, regularly spaced in size. These give a
characteristic "laddered" appearance on agar gel after electrophoresis. Tests
for DNA laddering differentiate apoptosis from ischemic or toxic cell
death.[31]

### [edit] Removal of dead cells

Dying cells that undergo the final stages of apoptosis display phagocytotic
molecules, such as phosphatidylserine, on their cell surface.[32]
Phosphatidylserine is normally found on the cytosolic surface of the plasma
membrane, but is redistributed during apoptosis to the extracellular surface
by a hypothetical protein known as scramblase.[33] These molecules mark the
cell for phagocytosis by cells possessing the appropriate receptors, such as
macrophages.[34] Upon recognition, the phagocyte reorganizes its cytoskeleton
for engulfment of the cell. The removal of dying cells by phagocytes occurs in
an orderly manner without eliciting an inflammatory response.

## [edit] Implication in disease

<IMG>

<IMG>

A section of mouse liver showing several apoptotic cells, indicated by arrows

<IMG>

<IMG>

A section of mouse liver stained to show cells undergoing apoptosis (orange)

### [edit] Defective apoptotic pathways

The many different types of apoptotic pathways contain a multitude of
different biochemical components, many of them not yet understood.[7] As a
pathway is more or less sequential in nature, it is a victim of causality;
removing or modifying one component leads to an effect in another. In a living
organism this can have disastrous effects, often in the form of disease or
disorder. A discussion of every disease caused by modification of the various
apoptotic pathways would be impractical, but the concept overlying each one is
the same: the normal functioning of the pathway has been disrupted in such a
way as to impair the ability of the cell to undergo normal apoptosis. This
results in a cell that lives past its "use-by-date" and is able to replicate
and pass on any faulty machinery to its progeny, increasing the likelihood of
the cell becoming cancerous or diseased.

A recently-described example of this concept in action can be seen in the
development of a lung cancer called NCI-H460.[35] The X-linked inhibitor of
apoptosis protein (XIAP) is overexpressed in cells of the H460 cell line.
XIAPs bind to the processed form of caspase-9, and suppress the activity of
apoptotic activator cytochrome c, therefore overexpression leads to a decrease
in the amount of pro-apoptotic agonists. As a consequence, the balance of
anti-apoptotic and pro-apoptotic effectors is upset in favour of the former,
and the damaged cells continue to replicate despite being directed to die.

### [edit] Dysregulation of p53

The tumor-suppressor protein p53 accumulates when DNA is damaged due to a
chain of biochemical reactions. Part of this pathway includes alpha-interferon
and beta-interferon, which induce transcription of the p53 gene and result in
the increase of p53 protein level and enhancement of cancer cell-
apoptosis.[36] p53 prevents the cell from replicating by stopping the cell
cycle at G1, or interphase, to give the cell time to repair, however it will
induce apoptosis if damage is extensive and repair efforts fail. Any
disruption to the regulation of the p53 or interferon genes will result in
impaired apoptosis and the possible formation of tumors.

### [edit] HIV progression

The progression of the human immunodeficiency virus infection to AIDS is
primarily due to the depletion of CD4+ T-helper lymphocytes, which leads to a
compromised immune system. One of the mechanisms by which T-helper cells are
depleted is apoptosis, which results from a series of biochemical
pathways:[37]

  1. HIV enzymes deactivate anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 This does not directly cause cell death, but primes the cell for apoptosis should the appropriate signal be received.In parallel these enzymes activate pro-apoptotic procaspase-8, which does directly activate the mitochondrial events of apoptosis.
  2. HIV may increase the level of cellular proteins which prompt Fas-mediated apoptosis.
  3. HIV proteins decrease the amount of CD4 glycoprotein marker present on the cell membrane.
  4. Released viral particles and proteins present in extracellular fluid are able to induce apoptosis in nearby "bystander" T helper cells.
  5. HIV decreases the production of molecules involved in marking the cell for apoptosis, giving the virus time to replicate and continue releasing apoptotic agents and virions into the surrounding tissue.
  6. The infected CD4+ cell may also receive the death signal from a cytotoxic T cell.

Cells may also die as a direct consequence of viral infection.

### [edit] Viral infection

Viruses can trigger apoptosis of infected cells via a range of mechanisms
including:

  * Receptor binding.
  * Activation of protein kinase R (PKR).
  * Interaction with p53.
  * Expression of viral proteins coupled to MHC proteins on the surface of the infected cell, allowing recognition by cells of the immune system (such as Natural Killer and cytotoxic T cells) that then induce the infected cell to undergo apoptosis.[38]

Most viruses encode proteins that can inhibit apoptosis.[39] Several viruses
encode viral homologs of Bcl-2. These homologs can inhibit pro-apoptotic
proteins such as BAX and BAK, which are essential for the activation of
apoptosis. Examples of viral Bcl-2 proteins include the Epstein-Barr virus
BHRF1 protein and the adenovirus E1B 19K protein.[40] Some viruses express
caspase inhibitors that inhibit caspase activity and an example is the CrmA
protein of cowpox viruses. Whilst a number of viruses can block the effects of
TNF and Fas. For example the M-T2 protein of myxoma viruses can bind TNF
preventing it from binding the TNF receptor and inducing a response.[41]
Furthermore, many viruses express p53 inhibitors that can bind p53 and inhibit
its transcriptional transactivation activity. Consequently p53 cannot induce
apoptosis since it cannot induce the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins. The
adenovirus E1B-55K protein and the hepatitis B virus HBx protein are examples
of viral proteins that can perform such a function.[42]

Interestingly, viruses can remain intact from apoptosis particularly in the
latter stages of infection. They can be exported in the apoptotic bodies that
pinch off from the surface of the dying cell and the fact that they are
engulfed by phagocytes prevents the initiation of a host response. This
favours the spread of the virus.[41]

## [edit] Apoptosis in plants

Programmed cell death in plants has a number of molecular similarities to
animal apoptosis, but it also has differences, mostly obviously the presence
of a cell wall and the lack of an immune system which removes the pieces of
the dead cell. Instead of an immune response, the dying cell synthesizes
substances to break itself down and places them in a vacuole which ruptures as
the cell dies. Whether this whole process resembles animal apoptosis closely
enough to warrant using the name apoptosis (as opposed to the more general
programmed cell death) is unclear.[43]

## [edit] See also

  * Anoikis
  * Apaf-1
  * Apo2.7
  * Apoptosis DNA Fragmentation
  * Autolysis
  * Autophagy
  * Autophagy network
  * Cisplatin
  * Entosis
  * Immunology
  * Necrosis

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Webster.com dictionary entry
  2. ^ Kerr, JF. (1965). "A histochemical study of hypertrophy and ischaemic injury of rat liver with special reference to changes in lysosomes". Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology 90 (90): 419â35. doi:10.1002/path.1700900210.
  3. ^ Agency for Science, Technology and Research. "Prof Andrew H. Wyllie - Lecture Abstract". http://www.a-star.edu.sg/astar/biomed/action/biomed_dvp_abstract.do?id=2901ddeb02dH. Retrieved on 2007-03-30.
  4. ^ Kerr JF, Wyllie AH, Currie AR (August 1972). "Apoptosis: a basic biological phenomenon with wide-ranging implications in tissue kinetics". Br. J. Cancer 26 (4): 239â57. PMID 4561027.
  5. ^ O'Rourke MG, Ellem KA (2000). "John Kerr and apoptosis". Med. J. Aust. 173 (11-12): 616â7. PMID 11379508. http://www.mja.com.au/public/issues/173_11_041200/orourke/orourke.html.
  6. ^ Apoptosis Interest Group (1999). "About apoptosis". http://www.nih.gov/sigs/aig/Aboutapo.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-15.
  7. ^ a b Thompson, CB (1995). "Apoptosis in the pathogenesis and treatment of disease". Science 267 (5203): 1456â62. doi:10.1126/science.7878464. PMID 7878464. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=7878464.
  8. ^ Damasio, Antonio; (1999). The Feeling of What Happens. New York: Harcourt Brace & Co..
  9. ^ Guerrero I, Ruiz i Altaba A (August 2003). "Development. Longing for ligand: hedgehog, patched, and cell death". Science (journal) 301 (5634): 774â6. doi:10.1126/science.1088625. PMID 12907783.
  10. ^ Thibert C, Teillet MA, Lapointe F, Mazelin L, Le Douarin NM, Mehlen P (August 2003). "Inhibition of neuroepithelial patched-induced apoptosis by sonic hedgehog". Science (journal) 301 (5634): 843â6. doi:10.1126/science.1085405. PMID 12907805.
  11. ^ Werlen G, et al. (2003). "Signaling life and death in the thymus: timing is everything". Science 299 (5614): 1859â63. doi:10.1126/science.1067833. PMID 12649474.
  12. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Cotran; Kumar, Collins (1998). Robbins Pathologic Basis of Disease. Philadelphia: W.B Saunders Company. ISBN 0-7216-7335-X.
  13. ^ Popov SG, Villasmil R, Bernardi J, et al (April 2002). "Lethal toxin of Bacillus anthracis causes apoptosis of macrophages". Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 293 (1): 349â55. doi:10.1016/S0006-291X(02)00227-9. PMID 12054607.
  14. ^ a b BrÃ¼ne B (August 2003). "Nitric oxide: NO apoptosis or turning it ON?". Cell Death Differ. 10 (8): 864â9. doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4401261. PMID 12867993.
  15. ^ Calcium orchestrates apoptosis. Mark P. Mattson & Sic L. Chan. Nature Cell Biology 5, 1041 - 1043 (2003). doi:10.1038/ncb1203-1041
  16. ^ Chiarugi A, Moskowitz MA (2002). "PARP-1âa perpetrator of apoptotic cell death?". Science 297 (5579): 259â63. doi:10.1126/science.1074592. PMID 12114611.
  17. ^ Fesik SW, Shi Y. (2001). "Controlling the caspases". Science 294 (5546): 1477â8. doi:10.1126/science.1062236. PMID 11711663.
  18. ^ Laurent M. Dejean, Sonia Martinez-Caballero, Kathleen W. Kinnally (2006). "Is MAC the knife that cuts cytochrome c from mitochondria during apoptosis?". Cell Death and Differentiation 13: 1387â5. doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4401949. http://www.nature.com/cdd/journal/v13/n8/full/4401949a.html.
  19. ^ Dejean LM, Martinez-Caballero S, Manon S, Kinnally KW (February 2006). "Regulation of the mitochondrial apoptosis-induced channel, MAC, by BCL-2 family proteins". Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1762 (2): 191â201. doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2005.07.002. PMID 16055309.
  20. ^ Lodish, Harvey; et al. (2004). Molecular Cell Biology. New York: W.H. Freedman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-4366-3.
  21. ^ a b Wajant H (2002). "The Fas signaling pathway: more than a paradigm". Science 296 (5573): 1635â6. doi:10.1126/science.1071553. PMID 12040174.
  22. ^ Chen G, Goeddel DV (2002). "TNF-R1 signaling: a beautiful pathway". Science 296 (5573): 1634â5. doi:10.1126/science.1071924. PMID 12040173.
  23. ^ Goeddel, DV et al. "Connection Map for Tumor Necrosis Factor Pathway". Science. doi:10.1126/stke.3822007tw132]. http://stke.sciencemag.org/cgi/cm/CMP_7107.
  24. ^ Wajant, H.. "Connection Map for Fas Signaling Pathway". Science. doi:10.1126/stke.3802007tr1]. http://stke.sciencemag.org/cgi/cm/CMP_7966.
  25. ^ Murphy KM, Ranganathan V, Farnsworth ML, Kavallaris M, Lock RB (January 2000). "Bcl-2 inhibits Bax translocation from cytosol to mitochondria during drug-induced apoptosis of human tumor cells". Cell Death Differ. 7 (1): 102â11. doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4400597. PMID 10713725.
  26. ^ Cheng EH (2003). "VDAC2 inhibits BAK activation and mitochondrial apoptosis". Science 301 (5632): 513â7. doi:10.1126/science.1083995. PMID 12881569.
  27. ^ Susin SA, Lorenzo HK, Zamzami N, et al (February 1999). "Molecular characterization of mitochondrial apoptosis-inducing factor". Nature 397 (6718): 441â6. doi:10.1038/17135. PMID 9989411.
  28. ^ Santos A. Susin, et al. (2000). "Two Distinct Pathways Leading to Nuclear Apoptosis". Journal of Experimental Medicine 192 (4): 571â80. doi:10.1073/pnas.191208598v1. PMID 10952727. http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/abstract/192/4/571.
  29. ^ Madeleine Kihlmark, et al. (15 Oct 2001). "Sequential degradation of proteins from the nuclear envelope during apoptosis". Journal of Cell Science 114: 3643â53. PMID 11707516. http://jcs.biologists.org/cgi/content/full/114/20/3643.
  30. ^ Nagata S (April 2000). "Apoptotic DNA fragmentation". Exp. Cell Res. 256 (1): 12â8. doi:10.1006/excr.2000.4834. PMID 10739646.
  31. ^ M Iwata, D Myerson, B Torok-Storb and RA Zager (1996). "An evaluation of renal tubular DNA laddering in response to oxygen deprivation and oxidant injury". http://jasn.asnjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/5/6/1307. Retrieved on 2006-04-17.
  32. '^ Li MO, et al. (2003). "Phosphatidylserine receptor is required for clearance of apoptotic cells". Science 302 (5650): 1560â3. doi:10.1126/science.1087621. PMID 14645847.
  33. ^ Wang X, et al. (2003). "Cell corpse engulfment mediated by C. elegans phosphatidylserine receptor through CED-5 and CED-12". Science 302 (5650): 1563â1566. doi:10.1126/science.1087641. PMID 14645848.
  34. ^ Savill J, Gregory C, Haslett C. (2003). "Eat me or die". Science 302 (5650): 1516â7. doi:10.1126/science.1092533. PMID 14645835.
  35. ^ Yang L, Mashima T, Sato S, et al (February 2003). "Predominant suppression of apoptosome by inhibitor of apoptosis protein in non-small cell lung cancer H460 cells: therapeutic effect of a novel polyarginine-conjugated Smac peptide". Cancer Res. 63 (4): 831â7. PMID 12591734. http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=12591734.
  36. ^ Takaoka A, et al. (2003). "Integration of interferon-alpha/beta signalling to p53 responses in tumour suppression and antiviral defence". Nature 424 (6948): 516â23. doi:10.1038/nature01850. PMID 12872134.
  37. ^ Judie B. Alimonti, T. Blake Ball, Keith R. Fowke (2003). "Mechanisms of CD4+ T lymphocyte cell death in human immunodeficiency virus infection and AIDS". J Gen Virology (84): 1649â61. doi:10.1099/vir.0.19110-0. PMID 12810858. http://vir.sgmjournals.org/cgi/content/full/84/7/1649.
  38. ^ Everett, H. and McFadden, G. (1999). "Apoptosis: an innate immune response to virus infection". Trends Microbiol 7 (4): 160â5. doi:10.1016/S0966-842X(99)01487-0. PMID 10217831.
  39. ^ Teodoro, J.G. Branton, P.E. (1997). "Regulation of apoptosis by viral gene products". J Virol 71 (3): 1739â46. PMID 9032302.
  40. ^ Polster, B.M. Pevsner, J. and Hardwick, J.M. (2004). "Viral Bcl-2 homologs and their role in virus replication and associated diseases". Biochim Biophys Acta 1644 (2â3): 211â27. doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2003.11.001. PMID 14996505.
  41. ^ a b Hay, S. and Kannourakis, G. (2002). "A time to kill: viral manipulation of the cell death program". J Gen Virol 83: 1547â64. PMID 12075073.
  42. ^ Wang, X.W. Gibson, M.K. Vermeulen, W. Yeh, H. Forrester, K. Sturzbecher, H.W. Hoeijmakers, J.H. and Harris, C.C. (1995). "Abrogation of p53-induced Apoptosis by the Hepatitis B Virus X Gene". Cancer Res 55 (24): 6012â6. PMID 8521383.
  43. ^ Cyrelys Collazo, Osmani ChacÃ³n, Orlando BorrÃ¡s (2006), "Programmed cell death in plants resembles apoptosis of animals", BiotecnologÃ­a Aplicada 23: 1â10, http://elfosscientiae.cigb.edu.cu/PDFs/BA/2006/23/1/BA002301RV001-010.pdf

## [edit] External links

  * Apoptosis & Caspase 3, The Proteolysis Map-animation
  * Apoptosis & Caspase 8, The Proteolysis Map-animation
  * Apoptosis & Caspase 7, The Proteolysis Map-animation
  * Apoptosis (Programmed Cell Death) - The Virtual Library of Biochemistry and Cell Biology
  * Apoptosis Research Portal
  * Apoptosis Info Apoptosis protocols, articles, news, and recent publications.
  * Database of proteins involved in apoptosis
  * Apoptosis Video
  * The Mechanisms of Apoptosis Kimball's Biology Pages. Simple explanation of the mechanisms of apoptosis triggered by internal signals (bcl-2), along the caspase-9, caspase-3 and caspase-7 pathway; and by external signals (FAS and TNF), along the caspase 8 pathway. Accessed 25 March 2007.
  * WikiPathways - Apoptosis pathway
  * Finding Cancerâs Self-Destruct Button CR magazine (Spring 2007). Article on apoptosis and cancer.
  * Apoptosis on-line lecture by Wang Xiaodong

v â¢ d â¢ e

Cell cycle  
Interphase

G1 phase \- S phase \- G2 phase

<IMG>  
M phase

Mitosis (Prophase, Prometaphase, Metaphase, Anaphase, Telophase) - Cytokinesis  
Cell cycle checkpoints

Restriction point \- Postreplication checkpoint  
Other cellular phases

G0 phase \- Apoptosis  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Cell signaling  
Key concepts

Signal transduction \- Apoptosis \- Second messenger system (Ca2+ signaling,
Lipid signaling)  
Processes

Paracrine \- Autocrine \- Juxtacrine \- Neurotransmitters \- Endocrine
(Neuroendocrine)  
Signaling pathways

Hedgehog signaling pathway \- Wnt signaling pathway \- TGF beta signaling
pathway \- MAPK/ERK pathway \- Notch signaling pathway \- JAK-STAT signaling
pathway \- cAMP dependent pathway \- Akt/PKB signaling pathway \- Fas
apoptosis signaling pathway \- Hippo signaling pathway  
Agents

Receptor ligands

Hormones \- Neurotransmitters \- Cytokines \- Growth factors  
Receptor

Transmembrane \- Intracellular  
Transcription factor

General \- Preinitiation complex \- TFIID, TFIIH  
Other

Adaptor protein  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Apoptosis signaling pathway  
Fas

Membrane

Fas ligand Â· Fas receptor  
Intracellular

Death-inducing signaling complex

DAXX Â· ASK1

FADD Â· Caspase 8 Â· BID

Cytochrome c Â· Caspase 9 Â· Caspase 3

pro-apoptotic: BAX Â· BAK1/Bcl-2 homologous antagonist killer Â·
Bcl-2-associated death promoter

anti-apoptotic: Bcl-2 Â· Bcl-xL  
TNF

Membrane

Tumor necrosis factors Â· Tumor necrosis factor receptor  
Intracellular

TRADD

FADD Â· Caspase 8 Â· Caspase 3 Â· BID

TRAF2 Â· ASK-1 Â· MEKK1 Â· IKK Â· IÎºBÎ± Â· MKK7 Â· JNK Â· NF-ÎºB  
Other

IAPs

XIAP Â· NAIP Â· Survivin Â· c-IAP-1 Â· c-IAP-2  
Apoptosis-inducing factor  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apoptosis"

Categories: Cell signaling | Death | Immune system | Programmed cell death |
Apoptosis

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Basa Sunda
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 March 2009, at 05:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



