
# Krav Maga

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article
or discuss these issues on the talk page.

  * Its references would be clearer with a different or consistent style of citation, footnoting or external linking. Tagged since November 2008.  

  * It needs sources or references that appear in third-party publications. Tagged since June 2007.  

  
Krav Maga (Hebrew: ×§×¨× ×××¢â, IPA: /krÉËv mÉ'gÉË/, Hebrew IPA:
['kÊav Ëma'ga], lit. contact combat or close combat) is an eclectic hand-to-
hand combat system developed in Israel which emphasizes threat neutralization,
often in a 'him-or-me' context.

Krav Maga has its origins in the 1930s and the Second World War. Imi
Lichtenfeld, its primary founder, fled Czechoslovakia to the British Palestine
Mandate, now Israel, where it was further developed by the Israeli Defence
Forces. There are several organisations teaching variations of Krav Maga
internationally.[citation needed].

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology
    * 1.1 Basic principles
    * 1.2 Basic Training
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Imi Lichtenfeld
    * 2.2 Expansion to the USA
  * 3 Current usage
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Etymology

The name in Hebrew means "Hand-to-hand combat." Krav (×§×¨×) meaning "combat"
or "battle",and Maga (×××¢) meaning "contact" or "touch". (Oxford Hebrew-
English dictionary)[1] Krav Maga teaches combat involving physical body
contact as opposed to combat involving projectile or distance weaponry such as
guns, artillery, tanks and planes.

### [edit] Basic principles

Unlike in martial art sports, there are no hard-and-fast rules for Krav Maga
fighting, and no built-in distinctions in training between men and women.[2]
It has no sporting federation, and there are no official uniforms or attire,
although some organizations, internally, do recognise progress through
training with rank badges and different levels.

Techniques generally focus on training combatants in conditions approximating
real-life scenarios. Krav Maga trains combatants for situations where losing
would be potentially fatal. Its attack and defense maneuvers aim to neutralize
the threat and facilitate rapid and safe escape. These include crippling
attacks to vulnerable body parts, including groin and eye strikes, as well as
headbutts and other efficient and often brutal strikes. The improvised use of
any objects available is encouraged and maximizing personal safety in a fight
is emphasized.

While no limits are placed on techniques to be used in life-threatening
situations, the legal need to minimise damage in other circumstances is
generally recognized and stressed (at least in civillian contexts) and
instructors are required to demonstrate how to moderate the techniques to suit
the seriousness of the circumstances.

Krav Maga basic training emphasizes the following:

  * Do not get hurt
  * Neutralize the attacker fast
  * Transition quickly from defensive into offensive techniques, or employ pre-emptive strikes if appropriate.
  * Use the natural reflexes of the body
  * Exploit the opponent's vulnerabilities
  * Employ the aid of any available objects[2]

Krav Maga trainees learn to deal first with the immediate threat and then
prevent further attacks, if necessary by neutralizing the attacker. Actions
are carried out in a methodical manner. In order to avoid a dangerous
situation developing, some circumstances may call for anticipatory action.

### [edit] Basic Training

Krav Maga has borrowed many techniques from other martial arts and includes
elements from boxing, Muay Thai, Aikido, Judo, and Jujutsu although the
training is often quite different. Unlike the set routines and choreographed
moves in martial arts, Krav Maga teaches realistic fighting and self-defence
even in conditions of stress and exhaustion. Typical training often includes
exercises simulating fighting against several opponents, while protecting
another, with the use of only one arm, while dizzy, and against armed
opponents. Krav Maga training programs involve rapid learning, with offensive
and defensive techniques introduced from the first lesson and retzev
(pronounced ret-zef and meaning "continuous motion or momentum") playing an
important part in both training and maneuvers.[3]

Most instructors emphasize two training rules: (1) there are no rules in a
fight and (2) partner preservation - one must not injure oneself or one's
partner when training.[3]

Basic training is an intense mixed aerobic and anaerobic workout, relying
heavily on the use of protective pads. In striking this helps the trainee
practice his maneuvers at full strength, while the holder learns a little of
the impact they would feel when getting hit. It can be almost as taxing to
hold a pad as to practice against one. Students will also wear head guards,
mouthpieces, groin protectors, shin and forearm guards, etc. during practice
of attack/defense techniques, so that a realistic level of violence may be
attained without risk of injury. Some schools incorporate "Strike and Fight,"
which consists of full-contact sparring intended to familiarize the student
with the stresses of a violent situation.

Training within extreme acoustic, visual, and verbal scenarios prepares
students to ignore peripheral distractions and focus on the needs of the
situation.[citation needed] Other training methods to increase realism might
include blindfolding or exercising trainees to near exhaustion before dealing
with a simulated attack as well as training outdoors on a variety of surfaces
and restrictive situations. Training will usually also cover situational
awareness, to develop an understanding of one's surroundings and potentially
threatening circumstances before an attack is launched. It may also cover
"Self Protection": ways to deal with potentially violent situations, and
physical and verbal methods to avoid violence whenever possible.

A typical session in a civilian school is about an hour long and mixes
conditioning with self-defense training. As levels increase, the instructors
focus a little more on complicated and less common types of attacks, such as
knife attacks, hostage situations and defense under extreme duress.

Classes usually feature a very intense drill to raise the heart rates. This is
often done at the beginning of the lesson. Then, after stretching, the
instructor will teach two or three self-defense techniques. Techniques will
either be combative (punches, hammer-fists, elbows, and knees) or grappling
(breaking out of chokes or wrist-grabs, getting out from under an opponent
while on one's back). After that, the class usually moves to a drill that
combines the techniques just taught with an aerobic technique. Lastly, there
is the final drill intended to burn out the students. Depending on the class,
this drill may be at the very beginning or at the end of the class.[citation
needed]

## [edit] History

### [edit] Imi Lichtenfeld

Krav Maga was developed in Hungary and Czechoslovakia in the 1930s by Imi
Lichtenfeld, also known as Imi Sde-Or. (Sde-Or - "Light Field" - a calque of
his surname into Hebrew) He first taught his fighting system in Bratislava in
order to help protect the local Jewish community from Nazi militia. Upon
arriving in the British Mandate of Palestine, Imi began teaching Kapap to the
Haganah, the Jewish underground army. With the establishment of the State of
Israel in 1948, Imi became the Chief Instructor of Physical Fitness and Krav
Maga at the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) School of Combat Fitness. He served in
the IDF for 15 years, during which time he continued to develop and refine his
hand-to-hand combat method.[4] In 1978, Imi founded the non-profit Israeli
Krav Maga Association with several senior instructors.[5] He died in January
1998 in Netanya, Israel.[6]

### [edit] Expansion to the USA

Prior to 1980, all experts in Krav Maga lived in Israel and trained under the
Israeli Krav Maga Association. That year marks the beginning of contact
between Israeli Krav Maga experts and interested students in the United
States. In 1981, a group of six Krav Maga instructors traveled to the US to
demonstrate their system, primarily to local Jewish Community Centers. The New
York Field Office of the FBI and the FBI's Main Training Center at Quantico,
Virginia saw it and expressed interest. The result was a visit by 22 people
from the US to Israel in the summer of 1981 to attend a basic Krav Maga
instructor course. The graduates from this course returned to the US and began
to establish training facilities in their local areas. Additional students
traveled to Israel in 1984 and again in 1986 to become instructors. At the
same time, instructors from Israel continued to visit the US. Law Enforcement
training in the US began in 1985.[7]

## [edit] Current usage

Krav Maga is the official system of self defense and unarmed combat for the
Israeli Defense Forces. All Israeli soldiers, including all Special Forces
units such as the Sayeret Duvdevan,[8] learn Krav Maga as part of their basic
training[9]. Further, Krav Maga is the defensive tactics system used to train
the Israeli Police[10], Israeli Intelligence and all Security Divisions.[11]
Krav Maga is also taught to civilians, military, law enforcement and security
agencies around the world.

There have also been many spin-offs to Krav Maga, such as Tactical Krav Maga,
founded by Itay Gil; Commando Krav Maga, founded by Moni Aizik; and Special
Forces Krav Maga, founded by Michal Cernohorsky.

Krav Maga can be found in movies, too. Several famous actors practice Krav
Maga and use it in their acting including Christian Bale, Jennifer Lopez,
Jennifer Garner and Lucy Liu. [12]

## [edit] See also

  * Imi Lichtenfeld
  * Jujutsu
  * Kapap

v â¢ d â¢ e

Martial arts by focus  
Martial arts are listed by area of primary focus. Note that they may include
training in the other areas.  
Striking

BÄjÃ­quÃ¡n Â· Boxing Â· Capoeira Â· Dambe Â· Fistfight Â· Fujian White Crane
Â· Karate Â· KenpÅ Â· Kickboxing Â· Lethwei Â· Muay Thai Â· Pradal Serey Â·
Savate Â· Silat Â· Subak Â· Shaolin Kung Fu Â· Taekwondo Â· Tangsoodo Â· Wing
Chun  
Grappling

Aikido Â· Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Â· Glima Â· Judo Â· Jujutsu Â· Kinomichi Â·
Malla-yuddha Â· Varzesh-e Pahlavani Â· Pehlwani Â· Sambo Â· Shuai Jiao Â·
Ssireum Â· Sumo Â· Wrestling  
Weaponry

BattÅjutsu Â· Eskrima Â· Egyptian stick fencing Â· Fencing Â· Gatka Â· IaidÅ
Â· Iaijutsu Â· JÅdÅ Â· Kendo Â· Kenjutsu Â· KyÅ«dÅ Â· KyÅ«jutsu Â·
Shurikenjutsu Â· Silambam Â· SÅjutsu  
Mixed, hybrid,  
and multi-discipline

Baguazhang Â· Bando Â· Bartitsu Â· Hapkido Â· Hung Ga Â· Hwa Rang Do Â· Jeet
Kune Do Â· Kuk Sool Won Â· Kalarippayattu Â· Krav Maga Â· MCMAP Â· Northern
Praying Mantis Â· Ninjutsu Â· Oom Yung Doe Â· Pankration Â· Pencak Silat Â·
San Shou Â· Shootfighting Â· Systema Â· Tai chi chuan Â· Vajra Mushti Â·
Xingyiquan  
For a full list of articles see the List of martial arts  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Krav Maga, a Generalization!". usadojo.com. http://www.usadojo.com/articles/krav-maga.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-19.
  2. ^ a b http://www.tkmc.com.au Tactical Krav Maga Self Defense
  3. ^ a b Israeli Krav Maga - FAQ Page
  4. ^ History of Krav Maga
  5. ^ http://www.israelikrav.com
  6. ^ International Krav Maga Federation
  7. ^ International Krav Maga Federation
  8. ^ Duvdevan Training Documentation
  9. ^ Former Special Forces Operator Still Trains Units
  10. ^ Police Training Documentation
  11. ^ Israeli Presidential Security Staff Trains in Krav Maga \- Article Bottom of Page
  12. ^ "Professionals in law enforcement and military and famous people that do Krav Maga". Fit and Fearless, LLC. http://www.fitandfearless.com/who_practices_krav_maga.php. Retrieved on 2009-03-27.

## [edit] External links

  * History and Development of Krav Maga in Scotland
  * The Complete History of Krav Maga
  * More Krav Maga History
  * Overview of the system from an IKMF perspective

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krav_Maga"

Categories: Krav Maga | Hebrew words and phrases | Israeli martial arts |
Israeli Security Forces | Martial arts by type

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles lacking reliable references
from June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 |
Articles containing Hebrew language text | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 01:20.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



