
# Club of Rome

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008)  
The Club of Rome is a global think tank that deals with a variety of
international political issues. It was founded in April 1968 and raised
considerable public attention in 1972 with its report Limits to Growth. In
1993, it published followup called The First Global Revolution. According to
this book, "It would seem that humans need a common motivation, namely a
common adversary, to organize and act together in the vacuum; such a
motivation must be found to bring the divided nations together to face an
outside enemy, either a real one or else one invented for the purpose....The
common enemy of humanity is man....democracy is no longer well suited for the
tasks ahead.", and "In searching for a new enemy to unite us we came up with
the idea that pollution, the threat of global warming, water shortages, famine
and the like, would fit the bill." [1]

## Contents

  * 1 Formation
  * 2 Organization
  * 3 Offshoots
  * 4 Criticism
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Formation

The Club of Rome was founded in April 1968 by Aurelio Peccei, an Italian
industrialist, and Alexander King, a Scottish scientist. It was formed when a
small international group of people from the fields of academia, civil
society, diplomacy, and industry, met at a villa in Rome, Italy, hence the
name.

Hasan Ãzbekhan, Erich Jantsch and Alexander Christakis were responsible for
conceptualizing the original prospectus of the Club of Rome titled "The
Predicament of Mankind." This prospectus was founded on a humanistic
architecture and the participation of stakeholders in democratic dialogue.
When the Club of Rome Executive Committee in the Summer of 1970 opted for a
mechanistic and elitist methodology for an extrapolated future, they resigned
from their positions.

The Club of Rome raised considerable public attention with its report Limits
to Growth, which has sold 30 million copies in more than 30 translations,
making it the best selling environmental book in world history.[citation
needed] Kevin J. Krizek and Joe Power article: "A Planner's Guide to
Sustainable Development" (Planning Advisory Service Report # 467, American
Planning Assoc.) mentions this source and his author as stating that Paul
Ehrlich's predictions in his 1968 book, "The Population Bomb" will come true
within a century. Published in 1972 and presented for the first time at the
International Students' Committee (ISC) annual Management Symposium in St.
Gallen, Switzerland, it predicted that economic growth could not continue
indefinitely because of the limited availability of natural resources,
particularly oil. The 1973 oil crisis increased public concern about this
problem. However, even before Limits to Growth was published, Eduard Pestel
and Mihajlo Mesarovic of Case Western Reserve University had begun work on a
far more elaborate model (it distinguished ten world regions and involved
200,000 equations compared with 1000 in the Meadows model). The research had
the full support of the Club and the final publication, Mankind at the Turning
Point was accepted as the official Second Report to the Club of Rome in 1974.
In addition to providing a more refined regional breakdown, Pestel and
Mesarovic had succeeded in integrating social as well as technical data. The
Second Report revised the predictions of the original Limits to Growth and
gave a more optimistic prognosis for the future of the environment, noting
that many of the factors were within human control and therefore that
environmental and economic catastrophe were preventable or avoidable, hence
the title.

At that time, the Club of Rome had an informal "inner group" of six, but no
corporate existence. The inner group consisted of:

  * Aurelio Peccei;
  * Alexander King;
  * Hugo Thiemann, Director of the Battelle Memorial Institute in Geneva;
  * Max Kohnstamm (Netherlands), former Secretary General of the ECSC;
  * Jean Saint-Geours, Ministry of Finance in Paris;
  * Erich Jantsch, author of "Technological Forecasting".

## [edit] Organization

According to its website, the Club of Rome is composed of "scientists,
economists, businessmen, international high civil servants, heads of state and
former heads of state from all five continents who are convinced that the
future of humankind is not determined once and for all and that each human
being can contribute to the improvement of our societies."

As of August 2008, the Club has two Co-Presidents, Dr. Ashok Khosla of India
and Dr. Eberhard von Koerber of Germany, and two Vice-Presidents, Professor
Heitor Gurgulino de Souza of Brazil and Dr. Anders Wijkman of Sweden. Other
active members include: Benjamin Bassin, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands,
Juan Luis Cebrian, Orio Giarini, Talat Halman, Fernando Henrique Cardoso,
Javier Solana, Mugur IsÄrescu, Kamal Hossain, Esko Kalimo, Ashok Khosla,
Martin Lees, Roberto Peccei, Maria Ramirez Ribes, Victor A. Sadovnichy, Keith
Suter, Majid Tehranian, Raoul Weiler, and Mikhail Gorbachev.[citation needed]

The Annual Meeting of 2005 took place in Norfolk, Virginia, at Old Dominion
University. It was held for the first time with members of the young think
tank tt30.

## [edit] Offshoots

In 2001 the Club of Rome created tt30 as a spin-off, an anticipatory thinking
youth think tank for people around the age of 30.[2]

There are national CoR associations in many nations, including a number of
European nations, USA, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Puerto Rico, Venezuela, and
Asian nations. These associations analyze national problems in terms of the
same factors and give advice nationally to decision-makers.

## [edit] Criticism

Critics have charged the Club of Rome with "Neo-Malthusianism" and strong
elitism in its membership, which interlocks with European power elite groups
such as the Bilderberg Group and to a lesser degree Anglo-American elite
members. Some people link the Club with various world conspiracies, notably
the New World Order.[3]

## [edit] See also

The British science magazine New Scientist reported on 19 November 2008 a
study by the research organisation CSIRO in Australia found "changes in
industrial production, food production and pollution are all in line with the
Club of Rome's predictions".[4]

  * Futures studies
  * Harlan Cleveland \- DIKW
  * Limits to Growth \- (Memetics) 
    * Authors: Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows, JÃ¸rgen Randers, and W.W. Behrens, III. 
      * W.W. Behrens, Jr. \- NOAA
      * Naval Postgraduate School
    * Peak Oil (Hubbert's peak)
  * The Revenge of Gaia
  * Survivalism

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Alexander King & Bertrand Schneider. The First Global Revolution (The Club of Rome), 1993.
  2. ^ tt30 website.
  3. ^ AMPP: The Systems Method: Bilderberg and Club of Rome
  4. ^ Forecast of economic collapse backed by data New Scientist magazine 19 November 2008

## [edit] External links

  * Club of Rome \- official website
  * Analysis of "Limits to Growth" by Australian Broadcasting Corporation from 1999

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Club_of_Rome"

Categories: Anticipatory thinking | Futurology | Oceanography | Political and
economic think tanks | Organizations established in 1968 | 20th-century Rome |
1968 in Italy | Political and economic think tanks based in Europe

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2008 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since June 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Asturianu
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 15:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



