
# Learning object

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

A learning object is a resource, usually digital and web-based, that can be
used and re-used to support learning.

Learning objects offer a new conceptualization of the learning process: rather
than the traditional "several hour chunk", they provide smaller, self-
contained, re-usable units of learning.[1]

They will typically have a number of different components, that range from
descriptive data to information about rights and educational level. At their
core, however, will be instructional content, and probably assessment tools. A
key issue is the use of metadata.

Learning object design raises issues of portability, and of the object's
relation to a broader learning management system.

## Contents

  * 1 Definitions
  * 2 Components
  * 3 Metadata
  * 4 Mutability
  * 5 Portability
  * 6 Learning object projects
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 References

  
## [edit] Definitions

There are various definitions of the term. As David Wiley observes, "the
proliferation of definitions for the term 'learning object' makes
communication confusing and difficult".[2]

Most generally, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
defines a learning object as "any entity, digital or non-digital, that may be
used for learning, education or training".[3] More specifically, and pointing
out the extreme breadth of the IEEE's definition, Wiley describes a learning
object as "any digital resource that can be reused to support learning".[4]
(Emphasis added.)

Chiappe defined Learning Objects as: "A digital self-contained and reusable
entity, with a clear educational purpose, with at least three internal and
editable components: content, learning activities and elements of context. The
learning objects must have an external structure of information to facilitate
their identification, storage and retrieval: the metadata. " (Chiappe,
Segovia, & Rincon, 2007).[5]

The following definitions focus on the relation between learning object and
digital media. RLO-CETL, a British inter-university Learning Objects Center,
defines "reusable learning objects" as "web-based interactive chunks of
e-learning designed to explain a stand-alone learning objective".[6] Daniel
Rehak and Robin Mason define it as "a digitized entity which can be used,
reused or referenced during technology supported learning".[7]

Adapting a definition from the Wisconsin Online Resource Center, Robert J.
Beck suggests that learning objects have the following key characteristics:

  * Learning objects are a new way of thinking about learning content. Traditionally, content comes in a several hour chunk. Learning objects are much smaller units of learning, typically ranging from 2 minutes to 15 minutes.
  * Are self-contained â each learning object can be taken independently
  * Are reusable â a single learning object may be used in multiple contexts for multiple purposes
  * Can be aggregated â learning objects can be grouped into larger collections of content, including traditional course structures
  * Are tagged with metadata â every learning object has descriptive information allowing it to be easily found by a search[1]

## [edit] Components

The following is a list of some of the types of information that may be
included in a learning object and its metadata:

  * General Course Descriptive Data, including: course identifiers, language of content (English, Spanish, etc.), subject area (Maths, Reading, etc.), descriptive text, descriptive keywords
  * Life Cycle, including: version, status
  * Instructional Content, including: text, web pages, images, sound, video
  * Glossary of Terms, including: terms, definition, acronyms
  * Quizzes and Assessments, including: questions, answers
  * Rights, including: cost, copyrights, restrictions on Use
  * Relationships to Other Courses, including prerequisite courses
  * Educational Level, including: grade level, age range, typical learning time, and difficulty. [IEEE 1484.12.1:2002]

## [edit] Metadata

One of the key issues in using learning objects is their identification by
search engines.[citation needed] This is usually facilitated by assigning
descriptive learning object metadata. Just as a book in a library has a record
in the card catalog, learning objects must also be tagged with metadata.

## [edit] Mutability

A mutated learning object is, according to Michael Shaw, a learning object
that has been "re-purposed and/or re-engineered, changed or simply re-used in
some way different from its original intended design". Shaw also introduces
the term "contextual learning object", to describe a learning object that has
been "designed to have specific meaning and purpose to an intended
learner".[8]

## [edit] Portability

Before any institution invests a great deal of time and energy into building
high-quality e-learning content (which can cost over $10,000 per classroom
hour),[citation needed] it needs to consider how this content can be easily
loaded into a Learning Management System. It is possible for example, to
package learning objects with SCORM specification and load it at Moodle
Learning Management System.

If all of the properties of a course can be precisely defined in a common
format, the content can be serialized into a standard format such as XML and
loaded into other systems. When you consider that some e-learning courses need
to include video, mathematical equations using MathML, chemistry equations
using CML and other complex structures the issues become very complex,
especially if the systems needs to understand and validate each structure and
then place it correctly in a database.[citation needed]

## [edit] Learning object projects

Some examples of learning object projects include:

  * AGORA, a publicly accessible online learning environment at the Virtual Museum of Canada. Content is created and produced by Canadian museum educators.[9]

  * eduSource, a Canada-wide project to create the infrastructure for a network of inter-operable learning object repositories. The eduSource project is based on national and international standards; it is bilingual (French and English) and designed to be fully accessible.[10]

  * MERLOT (Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching), a free and open resource designed primarily for faculty and students of higher education.

  * IQity Reactor is a learning object repository that allows educators to create and share custom curriculum, organized by state educational standards. Reactor is integrated with a learning management system.

## [edit] See also

  * Digital Audio Learning Objects
  * Intelligent tutoring system

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b Beck, Robert J., "What Are Learning Objects?", Learning Objects, Center for International Education, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, http://www.uwm.edu/Dept/CIE/AOP/LO_what.html, retrieved on 2008-04-29
  2. ^ Wiley 2000, p. 5
  3. ^ Learning Technology Standards Committee 2002, p. 45
  4. ^ Wiley 2000, p. 7.
  5. ^ Chiappe 2007, p. 8.
  6. ^ "Learning Objects", RLO-CETL: Reusable Learning Objects, http://www.rlo-cetl.ac.uk/joomla/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=235&Itemid=28, retrieved on 2008-04-29 .
  7. ^ Rehak & Mason 2003, p. ??
  8. ^ Shaw 2003
  9. ^ Learning Centre | Online Classroom | Free Lesson | Virtual Museum of Canada
  10. ^ eduSource Canada: Canadian Network of Learning Object Repositories

## [edit] References

  * Learning Technology Standards Committee (2002) (PDF), Draft Standard for Learning Object Metadata. IEEE Standard 1484.12.1, New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, http://ltsc.ieee.org/wg12/files/LOM_1484_12_1_v1_Final_Draft.pdf, retrieved on 2008-04-29 .
  * Rehak, Daniel R.; Mason, Robin (2003), "Engaging with the Learning Object Economy", in Littlejohn, Allison, Reusing Online Resources: A Sustainable Approach to E-Learning, London: Kogan Page, pp. 22-30, ISBN 9780749439491 .
  * Shaw, Michael (October, 2003), "(Contextual and Mutated) Learning Objects in the Context of Design, Learning and (Re)Use", Teaching and Learning with Technology, http://www.shawmultimedia.com/edtech_oct_03.html, retrieved on 2008-04-29
  * Wiley, David A. (2000), "Connecting Learning Objects to Instructional Design Theory: A Definition, A Metaphor, and A Taxonomy", in Wiley, David A. (DOC), The Instructional Use of Learning Objects: Online Version, http://reusability.org/read/chapters/wiley.doc, retrieved on 2008-04-29 .
  * Chiappe, Andres.; Segovia, Yasbley; Rincon, Yadira (2007), "Toward an instructional design model based on learning objects", in Boston, Springer (html), Educational Technology Research and Development, Boston: Springer, pp. 671-681, ISBN 1042-1629(Print)1556-6501(Online)Spanish Draft available in Blog de AndrÃ©s Chiappe - Objetos de Aprendizaje(http://andreschiappe.blogspot.com/2007/09/que-es-un-objeto-de-aprendizaje-what-is.html), http://www.springerlink.com/content/u84w63873vq77h2h/?p=41be7fbeef9648ee9b554f1835112005&pi=6, retrieved on 2008-08-21 .
  * Northrup, Pamela (2007) (Book), Learning Objects for Instruction: Design and Evaluation, USA: Information Science Publishing .

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_object"

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * PortuguÃªs
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 March 2009, at 08:06.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



