
# Proverb

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(December 2008)  
For other uses, see Proverb (disambiguation).

A proverb (from the Latin proverbium), also called a byword or nayword, is a
simple and concrete saying popularly known and repeated, which expresses a
truth, based on common sense or the practical experience of humanity. They are
often metaphorical. A proverb that describes a basic rule of conduct may also
be known as a maxim. If a proverb is distinguished by particularly good
phrasing, it may be known as an aphorism.

Proverbs are often borrowed from similar languages and cultures, and sometimes
come down to the present through more than one language. Both the Bible (Book
of Proverbs) and medieval Latin have played a considerable role in
distributing proverbs across Europe, although almost every culture has
examples of its own.

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to:
Category:Proverbs  
## Contents

  * 1 Paremiology
  * 2 Sources for proverb study
  * 3 Bibliography
  * 4 References
  * 5 See also

  
## [edit] Paremiology

The study of proverbs is called paremiology (from Greek ÏÎ±ÏÎ¿Î¹Î¼Î¯Î± \-
paroimÃ­a, "proverb") and can be dated back as far as Aristotle.
Paremiography, on the other hand, is the collection of proverbs. A prominent
proverb scholar in the United States is Wolfgang Mieder. He has written or
edited over 50 books on the subject, edits the journal Proverbium, has written
innumerable articles on proverbs, and is very widely cited by other proverb
scholars. Mieder defines the term proverb as follows:

> A proverb is a short, generally known sentence of the folk which contains
wisdom, truth, morals, and traditional views in a metaphorical, fixed and
memorizable form and which is handed down from generation to generation.

> âMieder 1985:119; also in Mieder 1993:24

Subgenres include proverbial comparisons (âas busy as a beeâ), proverbial
interrogatives (âDoes a chicken have lips?â) and twin formulas (âgive
and takeâ).

Another subcategory are wellerisms, named after Sam Weller from Charles
Dickens's The Pickwick Papers (1837). They are constructed in a triadic manner
which consists of a statement (often a proverb), an identification of a
speaker (person or animal) and a phrase that places the statement into an
unexpected situation. Ex.: âEvery evil is followed by some good,â as the
man said when his wife died the day after he became bankrupt.

Yet another category of proverb is the "anti-proverb" (Mieder and Litovkina
2002). In such cases, people twist familiar proverbs to change the meaning.
Sometimes the result is merely humorous, but the most spectacular examples
result in the opposite meaning of the standard proverb. Examples include,
"Nerds of a feather flock together", "Early to bed and early to rise makes a
man healthy, wealthy, and likely to talk about it," and "Absence makes the
heart grow wander".

A similar form is proverbial expressions (âto bite the dustâ). The
difference is that proverbs are unchangeable sentences, while proverbial
expressions permit alterations to fit the grammar of the context.[1]

Another close construction is an allusion to a proverb, such as "The new broom
will sweep clean." [1]

Typical stylistic features of proverbs (as Shirley Arora points out in her
article, The Perception of Proverbiality (1984)) are:

  * alliteration (Forgive and forget)
  * parallelism (Nothing ventured, nothing gained)
  * rhyme (When the cat is away, the mice will play)
  * ellipsis (Once bitten, twice shy)

In some languages, assonance, the repetition of a vowel, is also exploited in
forming artistic proverbs, such as the following extreme example from Oromo,
of Ethiopia.

  * kan mana baala, aâlaa gaala (âA leaf at home, but a camel elsewhere"; somebody who has a big reputation among those who do not know him well.)

Internal features that can be found quite frequently include :

  * hyperbole (All is fair in love and war)
  * paradox (For there to be peace there must first be war)
  * personification (Hunger is the best cook)

To make the respective statement more general most proverbs are based on a
metaphor. Further typical features of the proverb are its shortness (average:
seven words), and the fact that its author is generally unknown (otherwise it
would be a quotation).

In the article âTensions in Proverbs: More Light on International
Understanding,â Joseph Raymond comments on what common Russian proverbs from
the 1700s and 1800s portray: Potent antiauthoritarian proverbs reflected
tensions between the Russian people and the Czar. The rollickingly malicious
undertone of these folk verbalizations constitutes what might be labeled a
âparemiological revolt.â To avoid openly criticizing a given authority or
cultural pattern, folk take recourse to proverbial expressions which voice
personal tensions in a tone of generalized consent. Thus, personal involvement
is linked with public opinion [2] Proverbs that speak to the political
disgruntlement include: âWhen the Czar spits into the soup dish, it fairly
bursts with prideâ; âIf the Czar be a rhymester, woe be to the poetsâ;
and âThe hen of the Czarina herself does not lay swanâs eggs.â While
none of these proverbs state directly, âI hate the Czar and detest my
situationâ (which would have been incredibly dangerous), they do get their
points across.

Proverbs are found in many parts of the world, but some areas seem to have
richer stores of proverbs than others (such as West Africa), while others have
hardly any (North and South America) (Mieder 2004:108,109).

Proverbs are often borrowed across lines of language, religion, and even time.
For example, a proverb of the approximate form âNo flies enter a mouth that
is shutâ is currently found in Spain, Ethiopia, and many countries in
between. It is embraced as a true local proverb in many places and should not
be excluded in any collection of proverbs because it is shared by the
neighbors. However, though it has gone through multiple languages and
millennia, the proverb can be traced back to an ancient Babylonian proverb
(Pritchard 1958:146).

Proverbs are used by speakers for a variety of purposes. Sometimes they are
used as a way of saying something gently, in a veiled way (Obeng 1996). Other
times, they are used to carry more weight in a discussion, a weak person is
able to enlist the tradition of the ancestors to support his position.
Proverbs can also be used to simply make a conversation/discussion more
lively. In many parts of the world, the use of proverbs is a mark of being a
good orator.

The study of proverbs has application in a number of fields. Clearly, those
who study folklore and literature are interested in them, but scholars from a
variety of fields have found ways to profitably incorporate the study
proverbs. For example, they have been used to study abstract reasoning of
children, acculturation of immigrants, intelligence, the differing mental
processes in mental illness, cultural themes, etc. Proverbs have also been
incorporated into the strategies of social workers, teachers, preachers, and
even politicians. (For the deliberate use of proverbs as a propaganda tool by
Nazis, see Mieder 1982.)

There are collections of saying that give suggestions for how to play games,
such as dominoes (Borajo et al 1990) and the Oriental board game go (Mitchell
2001). However, these are not prototypical proverbs in that their application
is limited to one domain.

## [edit] Sources for proverb study

For those interested in further study of proverbs, a number of sources are
available. A seminal work in the field is Archer Taylor's The Proverb, later
republished together with an index, by Wolfgang Mieder (1985). A good
introduction to the study of proverbs is Mieder's 2004 volume, Proverbs: A
Handbook. Mieder has also published a series of bibliography volumes on
proverb research, as well as a large number of articles and other books in the
field. For those interested in proverbs of Africa, Stan Nussbaum has edited a
large collection on proverbs of Africa, published on a CD, including reprints
of out-of-print collections, original collections, and works on analysis,
bibliography, and application of proverbs to Christian ministry (1998). For
those interested in comparing proverbs across Europe, Paczolay has published a
collection of similar proverbs in 55 languages (1997). Mieder edits an
academic journal of proverb study, Proverbium (ISSN: 0743-782X). A volume
containing articles on a wide variety of topics touching on proverbs was
edited by Mieder and Alan Dundes (1994/1981).

There are some serious websites related to the study of proverbs (in addition
to those that list proverbs from various areas):

  * General bibliography: http://cogweb.ucla.edu/Discourse/Proverbs/Bibliography.html
  * English and Irish proverbs: Largest collection of English sayings and proverbs
  * Chinese sayings: best Chinese proverbs
  * Particularly for Biblical studies: http://faculty.gordon.edu/hu/bi/ted_hildebrandt/OTeSources/20-Proverbs/Text/Bibliography/Proverbs-Bibliography.htm
  * Particularly for proverbs in Africa: http://afriprov.org
  * Folklore, particularly from the Baltic region, but many articles on proverbs: http://www.folklore.ee/Folklore/
  * Folk Sayings from Italy (see the thematic list on the left hand side of the page) http://www.italyrevisited.org/

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Borajo, Daniel, Juan Rios, M. Alicia Perez, and Juan Pazos. 1990. Dominoes as a domain where to use proverbs as heuristics. Data & Knowledge Engineering 5:129-137.
  * Grzybek, Peter. "Proverb." Simple Forms: An Encyclopaedia of Simple Text-Types in Lore and Literature, ed. Walter Koch. Bochum: Brockmeyer, 1994. 227-41.
  * Mieder, Wolfgang. 1982. Proverbs in Nazi Germany: The Promulgation of Anti-Semitism and Stereotypes Through Folklore. The Journal of American Folklore 95, No. 378, pp. 435-464.
  * Mieder, Wolfgang. 1982; 1990; 1993. International Proverb Scholarship: An Annotated Bibliography, with supplements. New York: Garland Publishing.
  * Mieder, Wolfgang. 1994. Wise Words. Essays on the Proverb. New York: Garland.
  * Mieder, Wolfgang. 2001. International Proverb Scholarship: An Annotated Bibliography. Supplement III (1990-2000). Bern, New York: Peter Lang.
  * Mieder, Wolfgang. 2004. Proverbs: A Handbook. (Greenwood Folklore Handbooks). Greenwood Press.
  * Mieder, Wolfgang and Alan Dundes. 1994. The wisdom of many: essays on the proverb. (Originally published in 1981 by Garland.) Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
  * Mieder, Wolfgang and Anna Tothne Litovkina. 2002. Twisted Wisdom: Modern Anti-Proverbs. DeProverbio.
  * Mitchell, David. 2001. Go Proverbs (reprint of 1980). ISBN 0-9706193-1-6. Slate and Shell.
  * Nussbaum, Stan. 1998. The Wisdom of African Proverbs (CD-ROM). Colorado Springs: Global Mapping International.
  * Obeng, S. G. 1996. The Proverb as a Mitigating and Politeness Strategy in Akan Discourse. Anthropological Linguistics 38(3), 521-549.
  * Paczolay, Gyula. 1997. European Proverbs in 55 Languages. Veszpreâm, Hungary.
  * Pritchard, James. 1958. The Ancient Near East, vol. 2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
  * Raymond, Joseph. 1956. Tension in proverbs: more light on international understanding. Western Folklore 15.3:153-158.
  * Taylor, Archer. 1985. The Proverb and an index to "The Proverb", with an Introduction and Bibliography by Wolfgang Mieder. Bern: Peter Lang.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b "Proverbial Phrases from California", by Owen S. Adams, Western Folklore, Vol. 8, No. 2 (1949), pp. 95-116 doi:10.2307/1497581
  2. ^ J. Raymond. Tensions in Proverbs: More Light on International Understanding. pg 153-154

## [edit] See also

  * Filipino proverbs
  * Russian proverbs
  * Perverb
  * Wikiquote: English proverbs

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proverb"

Categories: Literature | Oral tradition | Cultural anthropology | Proverbs |
Christian genre types

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 |
All articles with unsourced statements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * AvaÃ±e'áº½
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Brezhoneg
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * Latina
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Limburgs
  * Magyar
  * Malagasy
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * MÄori
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ripoarisch
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Seeltersk
  * Setswana
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Walon
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 March 2009, at 12:22.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



