
# Over-the-counter (finance)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Over-the-counter (OTC) trading is to trade financial instruments such as
stocks, bonds, commodities or derivatives directly between two parties. It is
contrasted with exchange trading, which occurs via facilities constructed for
the purpose of trading (i.e., exchanges), such as futures exchanges or stock
exchanges.

## Contents

  * 1 OTC-traded stocks
    * 1.1 OTC market statistics
  * 2 OTC contracts
  * 3 External links

  
## [edit] OTC-traded stocks

In the U.S., over-the-counter trading in stock is carried out by market makers
that make markets in OTCBB and Pink Sheets securities using inter-dealer
quotation services such as Pink Quote (operated by Pink OTC Markets) and the
OTC Bulletin Board (OTCBB). OTC stocks are not usually listed or traded on any
stock exchange, though exchange listed stocks can be traded OTC on the third
market. Although stocks quoted on the OTCBB must comply with SEC reporting
requirements, other OTC stocks, such as those stocks categorized as Pink
Sheets securities, have no reporting requirements, while those stocks
categorized as OTCQX have met alternative disclosure guidelines through Pink
OTC Markets.

The OTC market presents investment opportunities for informed investors, but
also has a high degree of risk. Many OTC issuers are small companies with
limited operating histories or are economically distressed. Investments in
legitimate OTC companies can often lead to the complete loss of the
investment. Investors should avoid the OTC market unless they can afford a
complete loss of their investment. Investors should never purchase any
security without first evaluating the fundamentals of the company and
carefully reviewing the financial statements, management background and other
data. Investors who purchase securities based on a "hot tip" or the advice of
chat room touts may often be disappointed.

### [edit] OTC market statistics

Data provided by Pink Sheets:

  * Securities quoted exclusively on Pink Sheets - 5,019
  * Securities dually quoted on Pink Sheets and OTCBB - 3,445
  * Securities quoted exclusively on OTCBB - 130

Total OTC securities - 5,149[citation needed]

## [edit] OTC contracts

An over-the-counter contract is a bilateral contract in which two parties
agree on how a particular trade or agreement is to be settled in the future.
It is usually from an investment bank to its clients directly. Forwards and
swaps are prime examples of such contracts. It is mostly done via the computer
or the telephone. For derivatives, these agreements are usually governed by an
International Swaps and Derivatives Association agreement.

This segment of the OTC market is occasionally referred to as the "Fourth
Market."

The NYMEX has created a clearing mechanism for a slate of commonly traded OTC
energy derivatives which allows counterparties of many bilateral OTC
transactions to mutually agree to transfer the trade to ClearPort, the
exchange's clearing house, thus eliminating credit and performance risk of the
initial OTC transaction counterparts.

## [edit] External links

  * Over-the-counter trading - general details and investor cautions
  * OTC Bulletin Board - Overview and History
  * Pink Sheets LLC
  * Comparison of exchange trading and over the counter trading
  * OTC Stock Primer - Markets, Maker Makers, Fraud, and More

v â¢ d â¢ e

Stock market  
Types of stocks

Stock Â· Common stock Â· Preferred stock Â· Outstanding stock Â· Treasury
stock Â· Authorised stock Â· Restricted stock Â· Concentrated stock Â· Golden
share  
Participants

Investor Â· Stock trader/investor Â· Market maker Â· Floor trader Â· Floor
broker Â· Broker-dealer  
Exchanges

Stock exchange Â· List of stock exchanges Â· Over-the-counter Â· Electronic
Communication Network  
Stock valuation

Gordon model Â· Dividend yield Â· Earnings per share Â· Book value Â· Earnings
yield Â· Beta Â· Alpha Â· CAPM Â· Arbitrage pricing theory  
Financial ratios

P/CF ratio Â· P/E Â· PEG Â· Price/sales ratio Â· P/B ratio Â· D/E ratio Â·
Dividend payout ratio Â· Dividend cover Â· SGR Â· ROIC Â· ROCE Â· ROE Â· ROA
Â· EV/EBITDA Â· RSI Â· Sharpe ratio Â· Treynor ratio Â· Cap rate  
Trading theories

Efficient market hypothesis Â· Fundamental analysis Â· Technical analysis Â·
Modern portfolio theory Â· Post-modern portfolio theory Â· Mosaic theory  
Related terms

Dividend Â· Stock split Â· Reverse stock split Â· Growth stock Â· Speculation
Â· Trade Â· IPO Â· Market trends Â· Short Selling Â· Momentum Â· Day trading
Â· Swing trading Â· DuPont Model Â· Dark liquidity Â· Market depth  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Over-the-counter_(finance)"

Categories: Stock market | Derivatives

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 20:49.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



