
# Culture-bound syndrome

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (April 2009)  
In medicine and medical anthropology, a culture-specific syndrome or culture-
bound syndrome is a combination of psychiatric and somatic symptoms that are
considered to be a recognizable disease only within a specific society or
culture. There are no objective biochemical or structural alterations of body
organs or functions, and the disease is not recognized in other cultures.
While a substantial portion of mental disorders, in the way they are
manifested and experienced, are at least partially conditioned by the culture
in which they are found, some disorders are more culture-specific than others.
The concept of culture-bound syndromes is very controversial and many
psychologists, medical doctors, and anthropologists reject the concept. The
term culture-bound syndrome was included in the fourth version of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (American Psychiatric
Association, 1994) which also includes a list of the most common culture-bound
conditions (DSM-IV: Appendix I). American psychiatrist and medical
anthropologist Arthur Kleinman has contributed much to the understanding of
these syndromes.

## Contents

  * 1 The identification of culture-specific syndromes
  * 2 Western medical perspectives
  * 3 Selected list of syndromes
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] The identification of culture-specific syndromes

A culture-specific syndrome is characterized by:

  1. categorization as a disease in the culture (i.e., not a voluntary behaviour or false claim);
  2. widespread familiarity in the culture;
  3. complete lack of familiarity of the condition to people in other cultures;
  4. no objectively demonstrable biochemical or tissue abnormalities (symptoms);
  5. the condition is usually recognized and treated by the folk medicine of the culture.

Some culture-specific syndromes involve somatic symptoms (pain or disturbed
function of a body part), while others are purely behavioral. Some culture-
bound syndromes appear with similar features in several cultures, but with
locally-specific traits, such as penis panics.

A culture-specific syndrome is not the same as a geographically localized
disease with specific, identifiable, causal tissue abnormalities, such as kuru
or sleeping sickness, or genetic conditions limited to certain populations. It
is possible that a condition originally assumed to be a culture-bound
behavioral syndrome is found to have a biological cause; from a medical
perspective it would then be redefined into another nosological category.

## [edit] Western medical perspectives

An interesting aspect of culture-specific syndromes is the extent to which
they are "real". Characterizing them as "imaginary" is as inaccurate as
characterizing them as "malingering", but there is no clear way to understand
them from a Western scientific perspective. Culture-specific syndromes shed
light on how our mind decides that symptoms are connected and how a society
defines a known "disease."

The American Psychiatric Association states that: "The term culture-bound
syndrome denotes recurrent, locality-specific patterns of aberrant behavior
and troubling experience that may or may not be linked to a particular DSM-IV
diagnostic category. Many of these patterns are indigenously considered to be
'illnesses', or at least afflictions, and most have local names. Although
presentations conforming to the major DSM-IV categories can be found
throughout the world, the particular symptoms, course, and social response are
very often influenced by local cultural factors. In contrast, culture-bound
syndromes are generally limited to specific societies or culture areas and are
localized, folk, diagnostic categories that frame coherent meanings for
certain repetitive, patterned, and troubling sets of experiences and
observations" (American Psychiatric Association, 1994:844).

Medical care of the condition is challenging and illustrates a truly
fundamental but rarely discussed aspect of the physician-patient relationship:
the need to negotiate a diagnosis that fits the way of looking at the body and
its diseases of both parties. The physician may

  1. share the way the patient sees the disorder, and offer the folk medicine treatment;
  2. recognize it as a culture-bound syndrome, but pretend to share the patient's perspectives and offer the folk medicine treatment or a new improvised treatment;
  3. recognize it as a culture-bound syndrome but try to educate the patient into seeing the condition as the physician sees it.

The problem with choice 1 is that physicians who pride themselves on their
knowledge of disease like to think they know the difference between culture-
specific disorders and "organic" diseases. While choice 2 may be the quickest
and most comfortable choice, the physician must deliberately deceive the
patient. Currently in Western culture this is considered one of the most
unethical things a physician can do, whereas in other times and cultures
deception with benevolent intent has been an accepted tool of treatment.
Choice 3 is the most difficult and time-consuming to do without leaving the
patient disappointed, insulted, or lacking confidence in the physician, and
may leave both physician and patient haunted by doubts ("maybe the condition
is real" or "maybe this doctor doesn't know what s/he is talking about").

The term culture-bound syndrome has, in many ways, been a controversial topic
since it has reflected the different opinions of anthropologists and
psychiatrists. Anthropologists have a tendency to emphasize the relativistic
and culture-specific dimensions of the syndromes, while physicians tend to
emphasize the universal and neuropsychological dimensions (Prince, 2000;
Jilek, 2001). Guarnaccia & Rogler (1999) have argued in favor of investigating
culture-bound syndromes on their own terms, and believe that the syndromes
have enough cultural integrity to be treated as independent objects of
research.

## [edit] Selected list of syndromes

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)  
  * General 
    * genital retraction syndrome (GRS)
    * arctic hysteria
    * dromomania
    * dhat syndrome
    * kundalini syndrome
  * Western societies 
    * neurasthenia
    * idiopathic postprandial syndrome
    * anorexia mirabilis (religious-associated anorexia)
    * abduction phenomenon
    * multiple chemical sensitivity
    * morgellons
    * Opsophagos (Ancient Greece)
    * Latin American cultures: 
      * mal de pelea
      * susto
    * United States (exclusively) 
      * rootwork, witchcraft attacks
  * Native Americans
    * ghost sickness
    * wendigo
    * Grisi siknis
  * Southeast Asia 
    * amok (Indonesia/Malaysia)
    * latah (Indonesia/Malaysia)
    * koro ~ Genital retraction syndrome
    * pasma (Philippines)
    * pilay (Philippines)
  * East Asia 
    * Shook yang or suoyang (Chinese cultures) ~ Genital retraction syndrome
    * shenkui, "semen loss" syndrome (Chinese)
    * qi-gong psychotic reaction
    * shenjing shuairuo (Chinese cultures)
    * Hwa-Byung (Korea)
    * taijin kyofusho (Japan)
    * hikikomori (Japan)
    * Fan death (Korea)
  * South Asia 
    * Suudu (Tamil culture)
    * Sami (Tamil culture)
    * dhat, semen-loss syndrome
  * Polynesia 
    * cafard, similar to amok
  * Africa 
    * brain fag, mental fatigue

## [edit] References

  * American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic And Statistical Manual Of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association
  * Guarnaccia, Peter J. & Rogler, Lloyd H. (1999) Research on Culture-Bound Syndromes: New Directions. American Journal of Psychiatry 156:1322â1327, September
  * Jilek W.G (2001) Psychiatric Disorders: Culture-specific. International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. Elsevier Science Ltd.
  * Prince, Raymond H. (2000) In Review. Transcultural Psychiatry: Personal Experiences and Canadian Perspectives. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 45: 431â437

## [edit] External links

  * Culture-Bound Syndromes
  * Psychiatric Times â Introduction to Culture-Bound Syndromes
  * Skeptical Inquirer â Culture-bound syndromes as fakery

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture-bound_syndrome"

Categories: Culture-specific syndromes

Hidden categories: Cleanup from April 2009 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles needing additional references from January 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 05:32.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



