
# Chick lit

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

    For the We Are Scientists song, see Chick Lit (We Are Scientists song).
Chick lit is a term used to denote genre fiction within women's fiction
written for and marketed to young women, especially single, working women in
their twenties and thirties. The genre sells well, with chick lit titles
topping bestseller lists and the creation of imprints devoted entirely to
chick lit. It generally deals with the issues of modern women humorously and
lightheartedly. [1]

Although usually including romantic elements, women's fiction (including chick
lit) is generally not considered a direct subcategory of the romance novel
genre, because in women's fiction the heroine's relationship with her family
or friends may be equally as important as her relationship with the hero.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Composition
  * 2 Variations
    * 2.1 Indian chick lit
  * 3 History
    * 3.1 Origins of the term
    * 3.2 Inspiration
  * 4 Influence
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Composition

Chick lit features hip, stylish, career-driven[1] female protagonists, usually
in their twenties and thirties. The women featured in these novels may be
obsessed with appearance or have a passion for shopping.[1]

The setting is generally urban and the plot usually follows the characters'
love lives and struggles for professional success (often in the publishing,
advertising, public relations, or fashion industry). The style is usually of
an airy, irreverent tone and includes frank sexual themes. It frequently makes
use of current slang and cliches.

## [edit] Variations

The genre began targeted at white, single, young females[1], but variations
have developed to appeal to specific audiences, such as "Chica Lit," aimed at
English-dominant, middle-class American Latinas, the top-seller being novelist
and film writer/producer Alisa Valdes-Rodriguez; Christian Chick Lit, Matron
Lit (aka Hen Lit) for middle-aged women, Young Adult Chick Lit (also Teen Lit)
and Indian chick lit.

### [edit] Indian chick lit

Main article: Indian chick lit

The popularity of Indian chick-lit novels like Rajashree's Trust Me [3] and
Swati Kaushal's Piece of Cake [4] can be seen in the context of the rise of
regional varieties of chick-lit. [5] In an interview to the New York Times,
Helen Fielding said, 'I think it had far more to do with zeitgeist than
imitation.' If the chick lit explosion has 'led to great new female writers
emerging from Eastern Europe and India, then it's worth any number of feeble
bandwagon jumpers.' [6] Sunaina Kumar wrote in the Indian Express, 'Ten years
after the publication of Bridget Jones's Diary, the genre of fiction most
recognisable for its pink cover art of stilettos, martini glasses and
lipsticks, is now being colourfully infused with bindis, saris, and bangles. '
Sometimes referred to as 'ladki-lit', Indian chick-lit seems to be coming of
age.[7][8][9]

## [edit] History

### [edit] Origins of the term

"Chick" is an American slang term for young woman and "Lit" is short for
"literature". The phrase "chick lit" is analogous to the term chick flick.

The term appeared in print as early as 1993 as college slang for the "female
literary tradition." [10]. In 1995, Cris Mazza and Jeffrey DeShell used the
term as an ironic title for their edited anthology Chick Lit: Postfeminist
Fiction. The genre was defined as a type of post-feminist or second-wave
feminism that went beyond female-as-victim to include fiction that covered the
breadth of female experiences, including love, courtship and gender. The
collection emphasized experimental work, including violent, perverse and
sexual themes. James Wolcott's 1996 article in The New Yorker "Hear Me Purr"
co-opted the term "chick lit" to proscribe what he called the trend of
"girlishness" evident in the writing of female newspaper columnists at that
time. Works such as Helen Fielding's Bridget Jones's Diary and Candace
Bushnell's Sex and the City are examples of such work that helped establish
contemporary connotations of the term. The success of Bridget Jones and Sex
and the City in book form established chick lit as an important trend in
publishing. The Girls' Guide to Hunting and Fishing by Melissa Bank[11] is
regarded as one of the first chick lit works to originate as a novel (actually
a collection of stories), though the term "chick lit" was in common use at the
time of its publication (1999).

Publishers continue to push the sub-genre because of its viability as a sales
tactic. Various other terms have been coined as variant in attempts to attach
themselves to the perceived marketability of the work.

### [edit] Inspiration

The genre's creation was spurred on, if not exactly created, by Sue Townsend's
Adrian Mole diaries which inspired Adele Lang's Confessions of a Sociopathic
Social Climber: The Katya Livingston Chronicles in the mid-1990s.[citation
needed] Another strong early influence can be seen in the books by M. C.
Beaton about Agatha Raisin and Hamish Macbeth. The style can also be seen to
be somewhat influenced by female teen angst movies like Sixteen Candles and
Clueless and later with the appearance of Helen Fielding's Bridget Jones's
Diary and similar works.

## [edit] Influence

The genre spawned Candace Bushnell's Sex and the City and its accompanying
television series.

## [edit] See also

  * Chick flick

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d In the Classroom or In the Bedroom Chick Lit: The New Womanâs Fiction. Edited by Suzanne Ferris and Mallory Young. Routledge Publishing, 2005. 288 pages. Trade Paperback. Reviewed by Jessica Lynice Hooten.
  2. ^ "What's in a Name?", Publishers Weekly, July 2, 2001, http://www.publishersweekly.com/index.asp?layout=article&articleId=CA91257&display=searchResults, retrieved on 2007-04-30
  3. ^ "Trust Me to spill beans on Bollywood", CNN-IBN, 2007-02-18.
  4. ^ India's Cheeky "Chick Lit" Finds An Audience
  5. ^ Asha Menon "Indian chick lit?"
  6. ^ Rachel Donadio "The Chick-Lit Pandemic", The New York Times, 2006-03-19.
  7. ^ Sunaina Kumar "The Rise of Ladki-Lit", The Indian Express, 2006-10-08.
  8. ^ "Write Up Their Alley"
  9. ^ "Comfort Read"
  10. ^ Oxford English Dictionary (2d ed.), entry for "chick lit", citing an April 13, 1993 Newsday article.
  11. ^ Melissa Bank's Salon Interview

## [edit] External links

  * An Alternative View of Chick-Lit by Dan Wright
  * Chick lit, for better or worse, is here to stay
  * "Hip Lit for Hip Chicks" Library Journal Article on the genre
  * India's Cheeky "Chick Lit" Finds An Audience
  * Teen Chick-Lit Book List

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chick_lit"

Categories: Fiction by genre | Chick lit authors | Chick lit novels

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 15:31 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



