
# Absolute pitch

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Absolute pitch (AP), widely referred to as perfect pitch, is the ability of a
person to identify or recreate a musical note without the benefit of an
external reference.

## Contents

  * 1 Definition
  * 2 Scientific studies
    * 2.1 Difference in cognition, not elementary sensation
    * 2.2 Influence by music experience
    * 2.3 Linguistics
    * 2.4 Perception
    * 2.5 Race and absolute pitch
    * 2.6 Natural vs. nurtured
    * 2.7 Potential problems
    * 2.8 Special populations
  * 3 Correlation with musical talent
    * 3.1 Relative pitch
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Definition

Absolute pitch (AP), or perfect pitch, is the ability to name or reproduce a
tone without reference to an external standard.[1]

The naming/labeling of notes need not be verbal. AP can also be demonstrated
by other codes such as auditory imagery or sensorimotor responses, for
example, reproducing a tone on an instrument. Therefore a musician from an
aural tradition, with no musical notation, can still exhibit AP if allowed to
reproduce a sounded note.[2]

Possessors of absolute pitch exhibit the ability in varying degrees.
Generally, absolute pitch implies some or all of the following abilities:[3]

  * Identify by name individual pitches (e.g. A, B, C#) played on various instruments
  * Name the key of a given piece of tonal music just by listening (without reference to an external tone)
  * Identify and name all the tones of a given chord or other tonal mass
  * Sing a given pitch without an external reference
  * Name the pitches of common everyday noises such as car horns

Individuals may possess both absolute pitch and relative pitch ability in
varying degrees. Both relative and absolute pitch work together in actual
musical listening and practice, although individuals exhibit preferred
strategies in using each skill.[4]

The distinction between the abilities to name the pitch of a note without
reference to another note, and to sing a named note without reference to a
previously sounded note, has long been acknowledged (see, for example,
references in the New Grove Dictionary of Music.[5][6])

Dr. Robert Zatorre's research results support that absolute pitch possessors
have a number of different encoding strategies that may be used concurrently,
for example verbal labeling of tones. Absolute pitch possessors are able to
match pitches of tones to some fixed internal scale allowing them to give the
corresponding label of the tone. However, they can also effect the match
without recourse to the verbal label and can make use of what they know about
the pitch of the tone, provided that the tone matches their individual
internalized template.[7]

## [edit] Scientific studies

### [edit] Difference in cognition, not elementary sensation

Physically and functionally, the auditory system of an absolute listener does
not appear to be measurably different from a non-absolute listener.[8] Rather,
"AP perception is not dependent on a special kind of ear; it reflects a
particular ability to analyze frequency information, presumably involving
high-level cortical processing."[9] Absolute pitch is an act of cognition,
needing memory of the frequency, a label for the frequency (such as "B-flat"),
and exposure to the range of sound encompassed by that categorical label.
Absolute pitch may be directly analogous to recognizing colors, phonemes
(speech sounds) or other categorical perception of sensory stimuli. Just as
most people have learned to recognize and name the color blue by the frequency
of the electromagnetic radiation that is perceived as light, it is possible
that those who have had early (somewhere between the ages of 3 and 6)[10] and
meaningful exposure to the names of musical tones will be likely to identify,
for example, middle C. Absolute pitch, however, may be genetic, possibly an
autosomal dominant genetic trait,[11][12] though it "might be nothing more
than a general human capacity whose expression is strongly biased by the level
and type of exposure to music that people experience in a given culture."[13]

### [edit] Influence by music experience

Absolute pitch sense appears to be influenced by cultural exposure to music,
especially in the familiarization of the equal-tempered C-major scale. Most of
the absolute listeners that were tested in this respect identified the C-major
tones more reliably and, except for B, more quickly than the five "black key"
tones,[14] which corresponds to the higher prevalence of these tones in
ordinary musical experience. One study of Dutch non-musicians also
demonstrated a bias toward using C-major tones in ordinary speech, especially
on syllables related to emphasis.[15]

### [edit] Linguistics

Absolute pitch is more common among speakers of tonal languages such as most
dialects of Chinese or Vietnamese, which depend heavily on pitch variation
across single words for lexical meaning (Mandarin with four possible pitch
variations, Cantonese with six, Minnan with seven or eight (depending on
dialect), and Vietnamese with six).[16][17] Speakers of Sino-Tibetan languages
have been reported to speak a word in the same absolute pitch (within a
quarter-tone) on different days; it has therefore been suggested that absolute
pitch may be acquired by infants when they learn to speak in a tonal
language[18] (and possibly also by infants when they learn to speak in a pitch
stress language). However, the brains of tonal-language speakers do not
naturally process musical sound as language;[19] perhaps such individuals may
be more likely to acquire absolute pitch for musical tones when they later
receive musical training.

It is possible that level-tone languages which are found in Africaâsuch as
Yoruba,[20] with three pitch levels, and Mambila,[21] with fourâmay be
better suited to study the role of absolute pitch in speech than the contour-
tone languages of East Asia.

Further, speakers of European languages have been found to make use of an
absolute, though subconscious, pitch memory when speaking.[22]

### [edit] Perception

Absolute pitch is the ability to perceive chroma and to mentally categorize
sounds according to perceived chroma[23]. Chroma is a tonal quality which
recurs among tones which share the relationship of an octave. While the
boundaries of musical pitch categories vary among human cultures, the
recognition of octave relationships is a natural characteristic of the
mammalian auditory system[24][25][26][27][28][29]. Accordingly, absolute pitch
is not the ability to estimate a pitch value from the dimension of pitch
evoking frequency (30-5000 Hz)[30], but to identify a chroma category within
the dimension of pitch class (e.g., C-C#-D ... B-C).

An absolute listener's sense of hearing is typically no keener than that of a
non-absolute ("normal") listener;[31]. Absolute pitch does not depend upon a
refined ability to perceive and discriminate gradations of sound
frequencies[32]; furthermore, the tasks of identification (recognizing and
naming a pitch) and discrimination (detecting changes or differences in rate
of vibration) are accomplished with different brain mechanisms.[33]

### [edit] Race and absolute pitch

See also: Race and intelligence (test data)

The prevalence of absolute pitch is considerably higher among individuals with
early childhood in East Asia.[34][35][36][37] This difference has been
suggested to be racial in origin.[38] A study has claimed that individuals of
East Asian heritage reared in the United States or Canada have "no significant
difference" in prevalence of absolute pitch than do Caucasians of the same
geographical origin,[37] asserting that the difference in prevalence is more
likely to be explained by linguistic experience than genetic heritage. Many
East Asians speak tone languages such as Mandarin and Cantonese, while others
(such as those in Japan and certain provinces of Korea) speak pitch accent
languages; the prevalence of absolute pitch may be explained by exposure to
pitches together with meaningful labels very early in life.[35][36][37][39]

### [edit] Natural vs. nurtured

Many people have believed that musical ability itself is an inborn talent.[40]
Some scientists currently believe absolute pitch may have an underlying
genetic basis and are trying to locate genetic correlates;[41] most believe
that the acquisition of absolute pitch requires early training during a
critical period of development, regardless of whether or not a genetic
predisposition toward development exists.[42] The "unlearning theory," first
proposed by Abraham,[43] has recently been revived by developmental
psychologists who argue that every person possesses absolute pitch (as a mode
of perceptual processing) as an infant, but that a shift in cognitive
processing styles (from local, absolute processing to global, relational
processing) causes most people to unlearn it; or, at least, causes children
with musical training to discard absolute pitch as they learn to identify
musical intervals.[44] Additionally, any nascent absolute pitch may be lost
simply by the lack of reinforcement or lack of clear advantages in most
activities in which the developing child is involved. An unequivocal
resolution to the ongoing debate would require controlled experiments that are
both impractical and unethical.

Researchers have been trying to teach absolute pitch ability for more than a
century,[45] and various commercial absolute-pitch training courses have been
offered to the public since the early 1900s.[46] It has been shown possible to
learn the naming of tones later in life, although some consider this skill not
to be true absolute pitch.[47] Although it has been shown possible to learn to
identify pitches, keys, and everyday sounds later in life, no training method
for adults has yet been shown to produce abilities comparable to naturally
occurring absolute pitch.[48]

For children aged 2â4, observations have suggested a certain method of music
education[49] may be successful in training absolute pitch,[50] but the same
method has also been shown to fail with students 5 years and older.[51]

### [edit] Potential problems

Persons who have absolute pitch may feel irritated when a piece is transposed
to a different key or played at a nonstandard pitch.[52] Musicians with
absolute pitch may fail to develop relative pitch skills when following
standard curricula, persisting instead in a habit of conceptualizing music as
a sequence of absolute tones; it thus becomes difficult for them to transpose
or play a transposing instrument.[53] Absolute pitch possessors have also been
known to find it difficult to play with an orchestra that is not tuned to
standard concert pitch A4 = 440 hertz (442 Hz in some countries); this may be
due to a perception of pitch which is categorical rather than freely
adjustable.[54]

### [edit] Special populations

The prevalence of absolute pitch is higher among those who are blind from
birth as a result of optic nerve hypoplasia, and it has been claimed that it
is higher among those with Williams Syndrome[55] and those with an autism
spectrum disorder.[56][57]

## [edit] Correlation with musical talent

Absolute pitch is not a prerequisite for developing a high level of talent as
a musician or composer, and musicians may disagree about the overall value and
relevance of absolute pitch ability to musical experience. Owing to
uncertainty in the historical record, and, until recently, lack of objective
tests, it is often impossible to determine whether notable composers and
musicians had absolute pitch or not. Since absolute pitch is rare in European
musical culture,[36] claims that any particular musician possessed it are to
be doubted, unless there is clear contemporary evidence. Among composers of
the Baroque and Classical eras, such evidence is available only for Mozart's
perfect pitch. He famously attained it at the age of 3.[58] Experts have only
surmised that Beethoven had it, merely due to his remarkable ability to
compose undetrimented music long after becoming completely deaf. For 19th
century-musicians such as Camille Saint-SaÃ«ns and John Philip Sousa, it
became more common for the presence of absolute pitch to be
recorded.[citations needed] Nicolas Slonimsky was discovered to have perfect
pitch as a child of six, which led to him being given music lessons by his
aunt Isabelle Vengerova, and a life as a musician. He even titled his 1988
autobiography "Perfect Pitch: A Life Story" (ISBN 0-19-313155-3). The same was
the case with jazz pianist Keith Jarrett, starting with his parents
discovering his ability to reproduce musical lines on the piano at the age of
three.[59]

Absolute pitch may influence the ability to transpose while sight-reading, as
a musician with absolute pitch may focus greater attention on the exact notes
presented in a musical score rather than the structural characteristics
represented by the notation.[52]

### [edit] Relative pitch

Main article: Relative pitch

Many musicians have quite good relative pitch, a skill which can be learned.
With practice, it is possible to listen to a single known pitch once (from a
pitch pipe or a tuning fork) and then have stable, reliable pitch
identification by comparing the notes heard to the stored memory of the tonic
pitch.[60] Unlike absolute pitch, this skill is dependent on a recently
perceived tonal center.

## [edit] See also

  * Ear training
  * Tonal memory
  * Synesthesia

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Ward, W. D. (1998). "Absolute Pitch". in D. Deutsch (Ed.). The Psychology of Music (Second Edition). San Diego: Academic Press. pp. 265â298. ISBN 0-12-213564-4.
  2. ^ Zatorre, Robert (July 2003). "Absolute pitch: a model for understanding the influence of genes and development on neural and cognitive function". Nature Neuroscience 6 (7): 692â695.
  3. ^ Parncutt, R. and Levitin, D. J. (2001). "Absolute Pitch". in Sadie, S. (Ed.). The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. London: Macmillan. ISBN 1-56159-239-0.
  4. ^ Miyazaki, Ken'ichi (June 2004). "How well do we understand absolute pitch?". Acoustical Science and Technology 25 (6): 270â282. doi:10.1250/ast.25.426. Full text
  5. ^ Spender, N. (1980). "Absolute Pitch". in Sadie, S. (Ed.). The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. London: Macmillan. pp. 27â29. ISBN 0-333-23111-2.
  6. ^ Parncutt, R. and Levitin, D. J. (2001). "Absolute Pitch". in Sadie, S. (Ed.). The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. London: Macmillan. ISBN 1-56159-239-0.
  7. ^ Zatorre, Robert (1989). "Multiple coding strategies in the retention of musical tones by possessors of absolute pitch". Memory & Cognition 17 (5): 582â589.
  8. ^ Sergeant, D. (1969). "Experimental investigation of absolute pitch". Journal of Research in Music Education 17: 135â143. doi:10.2307/3344200.
  9. ^ Gregersen, P. K. (1998). "Instant Recognition: The Genetics of Pitch Perception". American Journal of Human Genetics 62: 221â223. doi:10.1086/301734. Full text
  10. ^ Takeuchi, A. H. & Hulse, S. H. (1993). "Absolute pitch". Psychological Bulletin 113: 345â361. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.113.2.345.
  11. ^ Profita, J. & Bidder, T. G. (1988). "Perfect pitch". American Journal of Medical Genetics 29: 763â771. doi:10.1002/ajmg.1320290405.
  12. ^ Baharloo, S., Johnston, P. A., Service, S. K., Gitschier, J. & Freimer, N. B. (1998). "Absolute pitch: An approach for identification of genetic and nongenetic components". American Journal of Human Genetics 62: 224â231. doi:10.1086/301704. Full text
  13. ^ [1]
  14. ^ Miyazaki, K. (1990). "The speed of musical pitch identification by absolute-pitch possessors". Music Perception 8: 177â188.
  15. ^ Braun, M. (2002). "Absolute pitch in emphasized speech". Acoustical Society of America: Acoustics Research Letters Online 3: 77â82. doi:10.1121/1.1472336. Full text
  16. ^ [2] D. Deutsch, T. Henthorn and M. Dolson, "Tone Language Speakers Possess Absolute Pitch", lay language version of Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1999, 106, 2267.
  17. ^ [3] D. Deutsch, T. Henthorn, E. Marvin and H. Xu, "Perfect Pitch in Tone Language Speakers Carries Over to Music", lay language version of Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 2005, 116, 2580.
  18. ^ Deutsch, D., Henthorn, T., and Dolson, M. (2004). "Absolute pitch, speech, and tone language: Some experiments and a proposed framework". Music Perception 21: 339â356. doi:10.1525/mp.2004.21.3.339. Full text
  19. ^ Gandour, J., Wong, D., and Hutchins, G. (1998). "Pitch processing in the human brain is influenced by language experience". Neuroreport 9: 2115â2119. doi:10.1097/00001756-199806220-00038. Full text
  20. ^ Connell, B., Ladd, D. R. (1990). "Aspects of pitch realization in Yoruba". Phonology 7: 1â29.
  21. ^ Connell, B. (2000). "The perception of lexical tone in Mambila". Language and Speech 43: 163â182.
  22. ^ Braun, M. (2001). "Speech mirrors norm-tones: Absolute pitch as a normal but precognitive trait". Acoustical Society of America: Acoustics Research Letters Online 2: 85â90. Full text
  23. ^ Rakowski, A. (1993). "Categorical perception in absolute pitch". Archives of Acoustics Quarterly 18: 515â523.
  24. ^ Morest, D.K. (1965). "The laminar structure of the medial geniculate body of the cat". J. Anat. 99: 143-160.
  25. ^ Cetas, J.S., Price, R.O., Crowe, J.J., Velenovsky, D.S., McMullen, N.T. (2003). "Dendritic orientation and laminar architecture in the rabbit auditory thalamus". J. Comp. Neurol. 458: 307-317.
  26. ^ Imig, T.J., Morel, A. (1985). "Tonotopic organization in ventral nucleus of medial geniculate body in the cat". J Neurophysiol 53: 309-340.
  27. ^ Cetas, J.S., Velenovsky, D.S., Price, R.O., Sinex, D.G., McMullen, N.T. (2001). "Frequency organization and cellular lamination in the medial geniculate body of the rabbit". Hear. Res. 155: 113-123.
  28. ^ Wright, A.A., Rivera, J.J., Hulse, S.H., Shyan, M., Neiworth, J.J. (2000). "Music perception and octave generalization in rhesus monkeys". J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 129: 291-307.
  29. ^ Braun, M., Chaloupka, V. (2005). "Carbamazepine induced pitch shift and octave space representation". Hear. Res. 210: 85-92.
  30. ^ Takeuchi, A. H. & Hulse, S. H. (1993). "Absolute pitch". Psychological Bulletin 113: 345â361. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.113.2.345.
  31. ^ Fujisaki, W. and Kashino, M. (2002). "The basic hearing abilities of absolute pitch possessors". Acoustic Science and Technology 23: 77â83. doi:10.1250/ast.23.77. Full text
  32. ^ Oakes, W. F. (1955). "An experimental study of pitch naming and pitch discrimination reactions". Journal of Genetic Psychology 86: 237â259.
  33. ^ Tervaniemi, M., Alho, K., Paavilainen, P., Sams, M., and NÃ¤Ã¤tÃ¤nen, R. (1993). "Absolute pitch and event-related brain potentials". Music Perception 10: 305â316.
  34. ^ P. K. Gregersen, E. Kowalsky, N. Kohn, and E. Marvin (2000). "Early childhood music education and predisposition to absolute pitch". Am. J. Med. Gen. 98: 280â282. doi:10.1002/1096-8628(20010122)98:3<280::AID-AJMG1083>3.0.CO;2-6.
  35. ^ a b D. Deutsch, T. Henthorn, E. W. Marvin, and H.-S. Xu (2006.). "Absolute pitch among American and Chinese conservatory students: Prevalence differences, and evidence for a speech-related critical period (L)a)". J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 119: 719â722. doi:10.1121/1.2151799. Full Text
  36. ^ a b c Deutsch, D (2006). "The enigma of absolute pitch". Acoustics Today 2: 11â19. doi:10.1002/ajmg.a.31596. Full Text
  37. ^ a b c Henthorn, T. & Deutsch, D. (2007). "Ethnicity versus Early Environment: Comment on 'Early childhood music education and predisposition to absolute pitch: Teasing apart genes and environment' by Peter K. Gregersen, Elena Kowalsky, Nina Kohn, and Elizabeth West Marvin (2000).". American Journal of Medical Genetics 143A: 102â103. doi:10.1002/ajmg.a.31596. Full Text
  38. ^ Zatorre, R.. Absolute Pitch: A model for understanding the influence of genes and development on neural and cognitive function. Full Text
  39. ^ Deutsch, D., Henthorn, T., and Dolson, M. (2004). "Absolute pitch, speech, and tone language: Some experiments and a proposed framework". Music Perception 21: 339â356. doi:10.1525/mp.2004.21.3.339. Full text
  40. ^ Copp, E. F. (1916). "Musical Ability". Journal of Heredity 7: 297â305. Full text
  41. ^ Drayna, D., Manichaikul, A., DeLange, M., Snieder, H., and Spector, T. (2001). "Genetic correlates of musical pitch recognition in humans". Science 291: 1969â1972. doi:10.1126/science.291.5510.1969.
  42. ^ Chin, C. (2003). "The development of absolute pitch". Psychology of Music 31: 155â171.
  43. ^ Abraham, O. (1901). "Das absolute tonbewuÃtsein.". SammelbÃ¤nde der Internationalen Musikgesellschaft 3: 1â86. Full text Full text (English)
  44. ^ Saffran, J. R. & Griepentrog, G. J. (2001). "Absolute pitch in infant auditory learning: Evidence for developmental reorganization". Developmental Psychology 37: 74â85. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.37.1.74. Full text
  45. ^ Meyer, M. (1899). "Is the memory of absolute pitch capable of development by training?". Psychological Review 6: 514â516. doi:10.1037/h0069034. Full text
  46. ^ Maryon, E. (1924). The Science of Tone-Color. Boston: C. C. Birchard & Co.. Full text
  47. ^ Levitin, D. J. & Rogers, S. E. (2005). "Absolute pitch: Perception, coding, and controversies". Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9: 26â33. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2004.11.007. Full text
  48. ^ Takeuchi, A. H. & Hulse, S. H. (1993). "Absolute pitch". Psychological Bulletin 113: 345â361. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.113.2.345.
  49. ^ Oura, Y. & Eguchi, K. (1982). "Absolute pitch training program for children". Music Education Research 32: 162â171.
  50. ^ Sakakibara, A. (1999). "A longitudinal study of a process for acquiring absolute pitch". Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology 47.
  51. ^ Sakakibara, A. (2004). "Why are people able to acquire absolute pitch only during early childhood?: Training age and acquisition of absolute pitch.". Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology 52: 485â496.
  52. ^ a b Miyazaki, K. (1993). "Absolute pitch as an inability: Identification of musical intervals in a tonal context.". Music Perception 11: 55â72.
  53. ^ Although it is not unknown â Ludwig Wittgenstein had perfect pitch and played the clarinet.
  54. ^ Harris, G. B. (1974). Categorical perception and absolute pitch. Ontario: University of Western Ontario.
  55. ^ Lenhoff, H. M., Perales, O., & Hickok, G. (2001). "Absolute pitch in Williams syndrome.". Music Perception 18: 491â503. doi:10.1525/mp.2001.18.4.491.
  56. ^ Heaton, P., Hermelin, B., & Pring, L. (1998). "Autism and pitch processing: A precursor for savant musical ability". Music Perception 15: 291â305.
  57. ^ Sacks, O. (2007). Musicophilia: Tales of Music and the Brain. New York: Knopf. ISBN 1-400-04081-7.
  58. ^ [4] D. Deutsch (2006), "The Enigma of Absolute Pitch", Acoustics Today.
  59. ^ Fresh Air with Terry Gross, September 11, 2000, interview with Keith Jarrett.
  60. ^ Brady, P. T. (1970). "Fixed-scale mechanism of absolute pitch". Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 48: 883â887. doi:10.1121/1.1912227.

## [edit] External links

  * Online absolute pitch survey and test with information about the absolute pitch study conducted at the University of California-San Francisco
  * Comprehensive historical bibliography of absolute pitch research, 1876-present
  * Another bibliography of absolute pitch, with +300 papers

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Absolute_pitch"

Categories: Musical terminology

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since August 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 20:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



