
# LASIK

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

See also: Photorefractive keratectomy

LASIK or Lasik (laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis) is a type of refractive
laser eye surgery performed by ophthalmologists for correcting myopia,
hyperopia, and astigmatism.[1] The procedure is generally preferred to
photorefractive keratectomy, PRK, (also called ASA, Advanced Surface Ablation)
because it requires less time for the patient's recovery, and the patient
feels less pain overall. However, there are instances where a PRK/ASA
procedure is medically justified as being a better alternative to
LASIK.[citation needed]

Many patients choose LASIK as an alternative to wearing corrective eyeglasses
or contact lenses.

## Contents

  * 1 Technology
  * 2 Procedure
    * 2.1 Preoperative
    * 2.2 Operation
      * 2.2.1 Flap creation
      * 2.2.2 Laser remodeling
      * 2.2.3 Repositioning of flap
    * 2.3 Postoperative care
  * 3 Higher-order aberrations
    * 3.1 Wavefront-guided LASIK
  * 4 LASIK surgery results
  * 5 Safety and efficacy
  * 6 Patient dissatisfaction
  * 7 Potential complications
    * 7.1 Intraoperative complications
    * 7.2 Early postoperative complications
    * 7.3 Late postoperative complications
    * 7.4 Other
    * 7.5 Factors affecting surgery
    * 7.6 Age considerations
  * 8 References
  * 9 See also
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Technology

The LASIK technique was made possible by the Colombia-based Spanish
ophthalmologist Jose Barraquer, who, around 1950 in his clinic in BogotÃ¡,
Colombia, developed the first microkeratome, used to cut thin flaps in the
cornea and alter its shape, in a procedure called keratomileusis. Stephan
Schaller assisted in this landmark procedure. Barraquer also researched the
question of how much of the cornea had to be left unaltered to provide stable
long-term results.

Later technical and procedural developments included RK (radial keratotomy),
developed in Russia in the 1970s by Svyatoslav Fyodorov, and PRK
(photorefractive keratectomy), developed in 1983 at Columbia University by Dr.
Steven Trokel, "the father of laser vision correction," who published the
first article on laser correction and was granted U.S. patents on laser
surgery. (RK is a procedure in which radial corneal cuts are made, typically
using a micrometer diamond knife, and is completely different from LASIK).

In 1968 at the Northrup Corporation Research and Technology Center of the
University of California, Mani Lal Bhaumik and a group of scientists were
working on the development of a carbon-dioxide laser. Their work evolved into
what would become the Excimer laser. This type of laser would become the
cornerstone for refractive eye surgery. Dr. Bhaumik announced his team's
breakthrough in May 1973 at a meeting of the Denver Optical Society of America
in Denver, Colorado. He would later patent his discovery.[2]

The general term for changing a patient's optical measurements by means of an
operation is Refractive Surgery. The introduction of lasers in refractive
surgeries stemmed from Rangaswamy Srinivasan's work. In 1980, Srinivasan,
working at IBM Research Lab, discovered that an ultraviolet Excimer laser
could etch living tissue in a precise manner with no thermal damage to the
surrounding area. He named the phenomenon Ablative Photodecomposition
(APD).[3] Stephen Trokel published a paper in the American Journal of
Ophthalmology in 1983 outlining the potential benefits of using the Excimer
laser in refractive surgeries. The first patent for laser correction of the
cornea using an Excimer laser was granted to Dr. Steven Trokel.

The first patent for LASIK was granted by the U.S. Patent Office to Dr. Gholam
A. Peyman on June 20, 1989, U.S. Patent #4,840,175, "Method for modifying
corneal curvature," encompassing the surgical procedure in which a flap is cut
in the cornea and pulled back to expose the corneal bed. The exposed surface
is then ablated to the desired shape with an Excimer laser, after which the
flap is replaced.[citation needed]

The first FDA trial of the Excimer laser was started in 1989. The laser was
unavailable to any doctor other than the ten selected by the FDA for the Visx
trials. The first use of the laser was to change the surface shape of the
cornea, known as PRK. Dr. Joseph Dello Russo was one of the ten original FDA
researchers who tested and got approval for the Visx laser. The LASIK concept
was first introduced by Dr. Palliakaris in 1992 to the group of ten surgeons
who were selected by the FDA to test the Visx laser at 10 centers in the U.S.

Dr. Palliakaris theorized the benefits of performing PRK after the surface was
raised in a layer to be known as a flap performed by the Mikrokeratome
developed by Barraquer in 1950. The blending of a flap and PRK became known as
LASIK, which is an acronym. It quickly became very popular, since it provided
immediate improvements in vision and involved much less pain and discomfort
than PRK.

Today, faster lasers, larger spot areas, bladeless flap incisions,
intraoperative pachymetry, and wavefront-optimized and -guided techniques have
significantly improved the reliability of the procedure compared to that of
1991. Nonetheless, the fundamental limitations of Excimer lasers and
undesirable destruction of the eye's nerves have spawned research into many
alternatives to "plain" LASIK, including LASEK, Epi-LASIK, sub-Bowmanâs
Keratomileusis aka thin-flap LASIK, wavefront-guided PRK and modern
intraocular lenses.

LASIK may one day be replaced by intrastromal ablation[4] via all-femtosecond
correction (like Femtosecond Lenticule Extraction, FLIVC, or IntraCOR), or
other techniques that avoid weakening the cornea with large incisions and
deliver less energy to surrounding tissues. The 20/10 (now Technolas) FEMTEC
laser has recently been used for incision-less ablation on several hundred
human eyes and achieved very successful results for presbyopia,[5] with trials
ongoing for myopia and other disorders.

## [edit] Procedure

There are several necessary preparations in the preoperative period. The
operation itself involves creating a thin flap on the eye, folding it to
enable remodeling of the tissue beneath with a laser. The flap is repositioned
and the eye is left to heal in the postoperative period.

### [edit] Preoperative

Patients wearing soft contact lenses are usually instructed to stop wearing
them 5 to 21 days before surgery. One industry body recommends that patients
wearing hard contact lenses should stop wearing them for a minimum of six
weeks plus another six weeks for every three years the hard contacts have been
worn.[6] Before the surgery, the patient's corneas are examined with a
pachymeter to determine their thickness, and with a topographer to measure
their surface contour. Using low-power lasers, a topographer creates a
topographic map of the cornea. This process also detects astigmatism and other
irregularities in the shape of the cornea. Using this information, the surgeon
calculates the amount and the locations of corneal tissue to be removed during
the operation. The patient typically is prescribed and self-administers an
antibiotic beforehand to minimize the risk of infection after the procedure.

### [edit] Operation

The operation is performed with the patient awake and mobile; however, the
patient is sometimes given a mild sedative (such as Valium) and anesthetic eye
drops.

LASIK is performed in three steps. The first step is to create a flap of
corneal tissue. The second step is remodeling of the cornea underneath the
flap with the laser. Finally, the flap is repositioned.

#### [edit] Flap creation

A corneal suction ring is applied to the eye, holding the eye in place. This
step in the procedure can sometimes cause small blood vessels to burst,
resulting in bleeding or subconjunctival hemorrhage into the white (sclera) of
the eye, a harmless side effect that resolves within several weeks. Increased
suction typically causes a transient dimming of vision in the treated eye.
Once the eye is immobilized, the flap is created. This process is achieved
with a mechanical microkeratome using a metal blade, or a femtosecond laser
microkeratome (procedure known as IntraLASIK) that creates a series of tiny
closely arranged bubbles within the cornea.[7] A hinge is left at one end of
this flap. The flap is folded back, revealing the stroma, the middle section
of the cornea. The process of lifting and folding back the flap can sometimes
be uncomfortable.

#### [edit] Laser remodeling

The second step of the procedure is to use an Excimer laser (193 nm) to
remodel the corneal stroma. The laser vaporizes tissue in a finely controlled
manner without damaging the adjacent stroma. No burning with heat or actual
cutting is required to ablate the tissue. The layers of tissue removed are
tens of micrometres thick. Performing the laser ablation in the deeper corneal
stroma typically provides for more rapid visual recovery and less pain than
the earlier technique, photorefractive keratectomy (PRK).

During the second step, the patient's vision will become very blurry once the
flap is lifted. He/she will be able to see only white light surrounding the
orange light of the laser, which can lead to mild disorientation.

Currently, manufactured Excimer lasers use an eye tracking system that follows
the patient's eye position up to 4,000 times per second, redirecting laser
pulses for precise placement within the treatment zone. Typical pulses are
around 1 millijoule (mJ) of pulse energy in 10 to 20 nanoseconds.[8]

#### [edit] Repositioning of flap

After the laser has reshaped the stromal layer, the LASIK flap is carefully
repositioned over the treatment area by the surgeon and checked for the
presence of air bubbles, debris, and proper fit on the eye. The flap remains
in position by natural adhesion until healing is completed.

### [edit] Postoperative care

Patients are usually given a course of antibiotic and anti-inflammatory eye
drops. These are continued in the weeks following surgery. Patients are
usually told to sleep much more and are also given a darkened pair of shields
to protect their eyes from bright lights and protective goggles to prevent
rubbing of the eyes when asleep and to reduce dry eyes. They also are required
to moisturize the eyes with preservative-free tears and follow directions for
prescription drops. Patients should be adequately informed by their surgeons
of the importance of proper post-operative care to minimize the risk of
complications.

## [edit] Higher-order aberrations

Higher-order aberrations are visual problems that cannot be diagnosed using a
traditional eye exam, which tests only for acuteness of vision. Severe
aberrations can cause significant vision impairment. These aberrations include
starbursts, ghosting, halos, double vision, and a number of other post-
operative complications.

There have always been concerns about LASIK because of its tendency to induce
higher-order aberrations. The advancement of the LASIK technology has helped
reduce the risk of clinically significant visual impairment after surgery. One
of the major discoveries was the correlation between pupil size and
aberrations:[9] Effectively, the larger the pupil size, the greater the risk
of aberrations. This correlation is the result of the irregularity between the
untouched part of the cornea and the reshaped part. Daytime post-lasik vision
is optimal, since the pupil is smaller than the LASIK flap. But at night, the
pupil may expand such that light passes through the edge of the LASIK flap
into the pupil which gives rise to many aberrations, including the appearance
of halos surrounding sources of light. There are other currently unknown
factors in addition to pupil size that also may lead to higher order
aberrations.

In extreme cases in which ideal procedures were not followed by
ophthalmologists, and before key advances, some people could suffer
debilitating symptoms such as serious loss of contrast sensitivity in poor
lighting situations.

Over time, most attention has shifted from other aberrations and centered on
spherical aberration. LASIK and PRK tend to induce spherical aberration,
because of the tendency of the laser to undercorrect as it moves outward from
the center of the treatment zone. This is primarily an issue for major
corrections. There are theories that posit that if the lasers were simply
programmed to adjust for this tendency, no significant spherical aberration
would occur. In eyes with few higher order aberrations, wavefront-optimized
LASIK (rather than wavefront-guided LASIK) may well be the future.[citation
needed]

Higher order aberrations are measured in micrometers (Âµm) on the wavescan
taken during the pre-op examination, while the smallest beam size of FDA
approved lasers is about 1000 times larger, at 0.65 mm. Thus imperfections are
inherent in the procedure and a reason why patients experience halo, glare,
and starburst, even with small naturally-dilated pupils in dim lighting.

### [edit] Wavefront-guided LASIK

Wavefront-guided LASIK[10] is a variation of LASIK surgery in which, rather
than applying a simple correction of focusing power to the cornea (as in
traditional LASIK), an ophthalmologist applies a spatially varying correction,
guiding the computer-controlled Excimer laser with measurements from a
wavefront sensor. The goal is to achieve a more optically perfect eye, though
the final result still depends on the physician's success at predicting
changes which occur during healing. In older patients though, scattering from
microscopic particles plays a major role and may outweigh any benefit from
wavefront correction. Therefore, patients expecting so-called "super vision"
from such procedures may be disappointed. Still, surgeons claim patients are
generally more satisfied with this technique than with previous methods,
particularly regarding lowered incidence of "halos," the visual artifact
caused by spherical aberration induced in the eye by earlier methods.
Currently, there is no research in support of the surgeons' claims.

## [edit] LASIK surgery results

The surveys determining patient satisfaction with LASIK have found most
patients satisfied, with satisfaction range being 92â98
percent.[11][12][13][14] A meta-analysis dated March 2008 performed by the
American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery over 3,000 peer-reviewed
articles published over the past 10 years in clinical journals from around the
world, including 19 studies comprising 2,200 patients that looked directly at
satisfaction, revealed a 95.4 percent patient satisfaction rate among LASIK
patients worldwide. [15]

## [edit] Safety and efficacy

The reported figures for safety and efficacy are open to interpretation. In
2003, the Medical Defence Union (MDU), the largest insurer for doctors in the
United Kingdom, reported a 166 percent increase in claims involving laser eye
surgery; however, the MDU averred that these claims resulted primarily from
patients' unrealistic expectations of LASIK rather than faulty surgery.[16] A
2003 study, reported in the medical journal Ophthalmology, found that nearly
18 percent of treated patients and 12 percent of treated eyes needed
retreatment.[17] The authors concluded that higher initial corrections,
astigmatism, and older age are risk factors for LASIK retreatment.

In 2004, the British National Health Service's National Institute for Health
and Clinical Excellence (NICE) considered a systematic review of four
randomized controlled trials[18][19] before issuing guidance for the use of
LASIK within the NHS.[20] Regarding the procedure's efficacy, NICE reported,
"Current evidence on LASIK for the treatment of refractive errors suggests
that it is effective in selected patients with mild or moderate short-
sightedness," but that "evidence is weaker for its effectiveness in severe
short-sightedness and long-sightedness." Regarding the procedure's safety,
NICE reported that "there are concerns about the procedure's safety in the
long term and current evidence does not appear adequate to support its use
within the NHS without special arrangements for consent and for audit or
research."

Leading refractive surgeons in the United Kingdom and United States, including
at least one author of a study cited in the report, believe NICE relied on
information that is severely dated and weakly researched.[21][22]

On October 10, 2006, WebMD reported that statistical analysis revealed that
contact lens wear infection risk is greater than the infection risk from
LASIK.[23] Daily contact lens wearers have a 1-in-100 chance of developing a
serious, contact lens-related eye infection in 30 years of use, and a
1-in-2,000 chance of suffering significant vision loss as a result of
infection. The researchers calculated the risk of significant vision loss
consequence of LASIK surgery to be closer to 1-in-10,000 cases.

## [edit] Patient dissatisfaction

Some patients with poor outcomes from LASIK surgical procedures report a
significantly reduced quality of life because of vision problems. Patients who
have suffered LASIK complications have created websites and discussion forums
to educate the public about the risks, where prospective and past patients can
discuss the surgery. In 1999, Surgical Eyes[24] was founded[25] in New York
City[26]by RK patient Ron Link[27] as a resource for patients with
complications of LASIK and other refractive surgeries. Other patient-founded
websites to assist those with complications are LaserMyEye[28] founded [29] in
2004 and Vision Surgery Rehab [30] [31] in 2005.[32] Most experienced and
reputable clinics will do a full-dilation medical eye exam prior to surgery
and give adequate post-operative patient education care to minimize the risk
of a negative outcome.

For best results, Steven C. Schallhorn, an ophthalmologist who oversaw the US
Navy's refractive surgery program and whose research partly influenced the
Navy's decision to allow its aviators to get LASIK, recommends patients seek
out what's called "all-laser Lasik" combined with "wavefront-guided"
software.[33][34]

The FDA website on LASIK clearly states: "Before undergoing a refractive
procedure, you should carefully weigh the risks and benefits based on your own
personal value system, and try to avoid being influenced by friends that have
had the procedure or doctors encouraging you to do so."[35] As such,
prospective patients still need to fully understand all the potential issues
and complications, as satisfaction is directly related to expectation.

The FDA received 140 "negative reports relating to LASIK" for the time period
1998â2006.[36]

## [edit] Potential complications

<IMG>

<IMG>

A subconjunctival hemorrhage is a common and minor post-LASIK complication.

The most common complication from refractive surgery is the incidence of "dry
eyes." According to an American Journal of Ophthalmology study of March 2006,
the incidence rate of dry eyes from LASIK after the six month post operative
healing period was 36.36%.[37]. The FDA (Food and Drugs Administration)
website states that "dry eyes" may be permanent.[38]

The risk for a patient of suffering from disturbing visual side effects such
as halos, double vision (ghosting), loss of contrast sensitivity (foggy
vision) and glare after LASIK depends on the degree of ametropia before the
laser eye surgery and other risk factors.[39] For this reason, it is important
to take into account the individual risk potential of a patient and not just
the average probability for all patients.[40] The following are some of the
more frequently reported complications of LASIK[41][42]:

  * Surgery induced dry eyes
  * Overcorrection[43] or undercorrection
  * Visual acuity fluctuation
  * Halos[44] or starbursts[45] around light sources at night
  * Light sensitivity
  * Ghost images[46] or double vision
  * Wrinkles in flap (striae)[47]
  * Decentered ablation
  * Debris or growth under flap
  * Thin or buttonhole flap [48]
  * Induced astigmatism
  * Corneal Ectasia
  * Floaters
  * Epithelium erosion
  * Posterior vitreous detachment[49]
  * Macular hole[50]

Complications due to LASIK have been classified as those that occur due to
preoperative, intraoperative, early postoperative, or late postoperative
sources:[51]

### [edit] Intraoperative complications

  * The incidence of flap complications has been estimated to be 0.244%.[52] Flap complications (such as displaced flaps or folds in the flaps that necessitate repositioning, diffuse lamellar keratitis, and epithelial ingrowth) are common in lamellar corneal surgeries[53] but rarely lead to permanent visual acuity loss; the incidence of these microkeratome-related complications decreases with increased physician experience.[54][55] According to proponents of such techniques, this risk is further reduced by the use of IntraLasik and other non-microkeratome related approaches, although this is not proven and carries its own set of risks of complications from the IntraLasik procedure.
  * A slipped flap (a corneal flap that detaches from the rest of the cornea) is one of the most common complications. The chances of this are greatest immediately after surgery, so patients typically are advised to go home and sleep to let the flap heal. Patients are usually given sleep goggles or eye shields to wear for several nights to prevent them from dislodging the flap in their sleep. A faster operation may decrease the chance of this complication, as there is less time for the flap to dry.
  * Flap interface particles are another finding whose clinical significance is undetermined.[56] A Finnish study found that particles of various sizes and reflectivity were clinically visible in 38.7% of eyes examined via slit lamp biomicroscopy, but apparent in 100% of eyes using confocal microscopy.[56]

### [edit] Early postoperative complications

  * The incidence of diffuse lamellar keratitis (DLK)[57], also known as the Sands of Sahara syndrome, has been estimated at 2.3%.[58] When diagnosed and appropriately treated, DLK resolves with no lasting vision limitation.
  * The incidence of infection responsive to treatment has been estimated at 0.4%.[58] Infection under the corneal flap is possible. It is also possible that a patient has the genetic condition keratoconus that causes the cornea to thin after surgery. Although this condition is screened in the preoperative exam, it is possible in rare cases (about 1 in 5,000) for the condition to remain dormant until later in life (the mid-40s). If this occurs, the patient may need rigid gas permeable contact lenses, Intrastromal Corneal Ring Segments (Intacs),[59] Corneal Collagen Crosslinking with Riboflavin[60] or a corneal transplant.
  * The incidence of persistent dry eye has been estimated to be as high as 28% in Asian eyes and 5% in Caucasian eyes.[61] Nerve fibers in the cornea are important for stimulating tear production. A year after LASIK, subbasal nerve fiber bundles remain reduced by more than half.[62] Some patients experience reactive tearing, in part to compensate for chronic decreased basal wetting tear production.
  * The incidence of subconjunctival hemorrhage has been estimated at 10.5% [58](according to a study undertaken in China; thus results may not be generally applicable due to racial and geographic factors).

### [edit] Late postoperative complications

  * The incidence of epithelial ingrowth has been estimated at 0.1%.[58]
  * Glare is another commonly reported complication of those who have had LASIK.[11]
  * Halos or starbursts around bright lights at night are caused by the irregularity between the lasered part and the untouched part. It is not practical to perform the surgery so that it covers the width of the pupil at full dilation at night, and the pupil may expand so that light passes through the edge of the flap into the pupil.[63] In daytime, the pupil is smaller than the edge. Modern equipment is better suited to treat those with large pupils, and responsible physicians will check for them during examination.
  * Late traumatic flap dislocations have been reported 1â7 years post-LASIK.[64]

### [edit] Other

Lasik and other forms of laser refractive surgery (i.e. PRK, LASEK and Epi-
LASEK) change the dynamics of the cornea. These changes make it difficult for
your optometrist and ophthalmologist to accurately measure your intraocular
pressure, essential in glaucoma screening and treatment. The changes also
affect the calculations used to select the correct intraocular lens implant
when you have cataract surgery. This is known to ophthalmologists as
"refractive surprise." The correct intraocular pressure and intraocular lens
power can be calculated if you can provide your eye care professional with
your preoperative, operative and postoperative eye measurements.

Although there have been improvements in LASIK technology[65][66][67], a large
body of conclusive evidence on the chances of long-term complications is not
yet established. Also, there is a small chance of complications, such as
haziness, halo, or glare, some of which may be irreversible because the LASIK
eye surgery procedure is irreversible.

The incidence of macular hole has been estimated at 0.2 percent[50] to 0.3
percent.[68] The incidence of retinal detachment has been estimated at 0.36
percent.[68] The incidence of choroidal neovascularization has been estimated
at 0.33 percent.[68] The incidence of uveitis has been estimated at 0.18
percent[69]

Although the cornea usually is thinner after LASIK, because of the removal of
part of the stroma, refractive surgeons strive to maintain a minimum thickness
to avoid structurally weakening the cornea. Decreased atmospheric pressure at
higher altitudes has not been demonstrated as extremely dangerous to the eyes
of LASIK patients. However, some mountain climbers have experienced a myopic
shift at extreme altitudes.[70][71]

In situ keratomileusis effected at a later age increases the incidence of
corneal higher-order wavefront aberrations.[72][73] Conventional eyeglasses do
not correct higher order aberrations.

Microfolding has been reported as "an almost unavoidable complication of
LASIK" whose "clinical significance appears negligible."[56]

Blepharitis, or inflammation of the eyelids with crusting of the eyelashes,
may increase the risk of infection or inflammation of the cornea after
LASIK.[citation needed]

Myopic (nearsighted) people who are close to the age (mid- to late-forties)
when they will require either reading glasses or bifocal eyeglasses may find
that they still require reading glasses despite having undergone refractive
LASIK surgery. Myopic people generally require reading glasses or bifocal
eyeglasses at a later age than people who are emmetropic (those who see
without eyeglasses), but this benefit is lost if they undergo LASIK. This is
not a complication but an expected result of the physical laws of optics.
Although there is currently no method to completely eradicate the need for
reading glasses in this group, it may be minimized by performing a variation
of the LASIK procedure called "slight monovision." In this procedure, which is
performed exactly like distance-vision-correction LASIK, the dominant eye is
set for distance vision, while the non-dominant eye is set to the prescription
of the patient's reading glasses. This allows the patient to achieve a similar
effect as wearing bifocals. The majority of patients tolerate this procedure
very well and do not notice any shift between near and distance viewing,
although a small portion of the population has trouble adjusting to the
monovision effect. This can be tested for several days prior to surgery by
wearing contact lenses that mimic the monovision effect.

### [edit] Factors affecting surgery

Typically, the cornea is avascular because it must be transparent to function
normally, and its cells absorb oxygen from the tear film. Thus, low-oxygen-
permeable contact lenses reduce the cornea's oxygen absorption, sometimes
resulting in corneal neovascularizationâthe growth of blood vessels into the
cornea. This causes a slight lengthening of inflammation duration and healing
time and some pain during surgery, because of greater bleeding.

Although some contact lenses (notably modern RGP and soft silicone hydrogel
lenses) are made of materials with greater oxygen permeability that help
reduce the risk of corneal neovascularization, patients considering LASIK are
warned to avoid over-wearing their contact lenses. Usually, it is recommended
that they discontinue wearing contact lenses days or weeks before the LASIK
eye surgery.

A 2004 Wake Forest University study established that heat and humidity affect
LASIK surgery results, both during the procedure and in the two weeks before
the surgery.[74]

### [edit] Age considerations

New advances in eyesight corrective surgery are providing consumers greater
choices. Patients in their 40s or 50s who are considering LASIK surgery to
improve their vision might want to consider to be evaluated for implantable
lenses as well. "Early signs of a cataract might argue for surgery and
implantation of multifocal lenses instead." [75]

The FDA has approved LASIK for age 18 and over[76]. More importantly the
person's eye needs to be stable for two years prior to surgery.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "LASIK." Aetna InteliHealth Inc. Accessed October 18, 2006.
  2. ^ http://www.indianlifeandstyle.com/ILS-Sept-Oct05/looking%20glass.htm
  3. ^ http://www.aip.org/ca/srinivasan.html
  4. ^ http://irvaronsjournal.blogspot.com/2008/10/intrastromal-ablation-technology-whose.html
  5. ^ http://www.2010pv.com/dasat/images/3/100373-luis-ruiz-white-paper-0908-final.PDF
  6. ^ http://www.usaeyes.org/faq/subjects/contacts.htm
  7. ^ http://www.usaeyes.org/lasik/faq/intralase-intralasik.htm
  8. ^ Patent: ultraviolet solid state laser
  9. ^ "Lasik Halo and Starburst; Pupil Size Importance". USAEyes
  10. ^ IROC . Institut fÃ¼r Refraktive und Ophthalmo-Chirurgie
  11. ^ a b Tahzib NG, Bootsma SJ, Eggink FA, Nabar VA, Nuijts RM. "Functional outcomes and patient satisfaction after laser in situ keratomileusis for correction of myopia." J Cataract Refract Surg. 2005 Oct;31(10):1943â51. PMID 16338565.
  12. ^ Saragoussi D, Saragoussi JJ. "[Lasik, PRK and quality of vision: a study of prognostic factors and a satisfaction survey.]" J Fr Ophtalmol. 2004 Sep;27(7):755-64. PMID 15499272.
  13. ^ Bailey MD, Mitchell GL, Dhaliwal DK, Boxer Wachler BS, Zadnik K. "Patient satisfaction and visual symptoms after laser in situ keratomileusis." Ophthalmology. 2003 Jul;110(7):1371â8. PMID 12867394.
  14. ^ McGhee CN, Craig JP, Sachdev N, Weed KH, Brown AD. "Functional, psychological, and satisfaction outcomes of laser in situ keratomileusis for high myopia." J Cataract Refract Surg. 2000 Apr;26(4):497â509. PMID 10771222.
  15. ^ Study On Post-Lasik Quality Of Life http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/103194.php
  16. ^ BBC NEWS | Health | Laser eye surgery complaints up
  17. ^ Incidence and associations of retreatment after LA...[Ophthalmology. 2003] - PubMed Result
  18. ^ http://www.nice.org.uk/pdf/ip/233overview.pdf
  19. ^ http://www.nice.org.uk/pdf/ip/Finalreport%20010605.pdf
  20. ^ http://www.nice.org.uk/pdf/2004_51_launchLASIK.pdf
  21. ^ British LASIK Report Flawed Says Study Author. Press release]
  22. ^ Escrs European Society Of Cataract And Refractive Surgeons Home Page
  23. ^ LASIK Surgery: Safer Than Contacts?
  24. ^ New site details downsides of laser eye surgery http://www.post-gazette.com/healthscience/19991012hlasik4.asp
  25. ^ http://www.nj.com/healthfit/ledger/index.ssf?/news/ledger/stories/021102lasik.html here
  26. ^ http://www.sptimes.com/News/100100/Worldandnation/Seeing_LASIK_s_risks_.shtml
  27. ^ http://www.fwweekly.com/content.asp?article=2439
  28. ^ http://biz.yahoo.com/nytimes/080424/1194768387709.html?.v=4
  29. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/2937512.stm
  30. ^ http://www.thestar.com/News/GTA/article/306877
  31. ^ http://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/13/fashion/13SKIN.html
  32. ^ http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/12/01/AR2006120101546_pf.html
  33. ^ http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,352548,00.html
  34. ^ http://ap.google.com/article/ALeqM5hm4_Y2gN7uuJFU9yGiiiwV0BWDagD908GLF80
  35. ^ US FDA/CDRH: LASIK - What are the risks and how can I find the right doctor for me?
  36. ^ Lasik Surgery: When the Fine Print Applies to You by Abby Ellin, The New York Times, March 13, 2008.
  37. ^ American Journal of Ophthalmology, Volume 141, Issue 3, March 2006, Pages 438-445,Cintia S. De Paiva, Zhuo Chen, Douglas D. Koch, M. Bowes Hamill, Francis K. Manuel, Sohela S. Hassan, Kirk R. Wilhelmus, Stephen C. Pflugfelder
  38. ^ [1]
  39. ^ Pop M, Payette Y. "Risk factors for night vision complaints after LASIK for myopia." Ophthalmology. 2004 Jan;111(1):3-10. PMID 14711706.
  40. ^ "Individual Risk Factors of Halos, Loss of Contrast Sensitivity, Glare and Starbursts after LASIK." operationauge.com
  41. ^ "The most common complications of refractive surgery.". USAEyes.org
  42. ^ http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16465507&query_hl=35&itool=pubmed_docsum
  43. ^ "Lasik Overcorrection - Unexpected, Unwanted, Desired, and Planned.". USAEyes
  44. ^ "Night vision halo after Lasik and similar laser assisted refractive surgery.". USAEyes
  45. ^ "Night vision halo after Lasik and similar laser assisted refractive surgery.". USAEyes
  46. ^ "Ghost or double vision after Lasik and similar vision correction surgery.". USAEyes
  47. ^ "Macro-striae and micro-striae complication of Lasik and All-Laser Lasik." USAEyes
  48. ^ "Buttonhole Incomplete Flap in Lasik and All-Laser Lasik". USAEyes
  49. ^ Mirshahi A, Schopfer D, Gerhardt D, Terzi E, Kasper T, Kohnen T. "Incidence of posterior vitreous detachment after laser in situ keratomileusis." Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2006 Feb;244(2):149-53. Epub 2005 Jul 26. PMID 16044328.
  50. ^ a b Arevalo JF, Mendoza AJ, Velez-Vazquez W, Rodriguez FJ, Rodriguez A, Rosales-Meneses JL, Yepez JB, Ramirez E, Dessouki A, Chan CK, Mittra RA, Ramsay RC, Garcia RA, Ruiz-Moreno JM. "Full-thickness macular hole after LASIK for the correction of myopia." Ophthalmology. 2005 Jul;112(7):1207â12. PMID 15921746.
  51. ^ Majmudar, PA. "LASIK Complications." Focal Points: Clinical Modules for Ophthalmologists. American Academy of Ophthalmology. September, 2004.
  52. ^ Carrillo C, Chayet AS, Dougherty PJ, Montes M, Magallanes R, Najman J, Fleitman J, Morales A. "Incidence of complications during flap creation in LASIK using the NIDEK MK-2000 microkeratome in 26,600 cases." J Refract Surg. 2005 Sep-Oct;21 (5 Suppl):S655-7. PMID 16212299.
  53. ^ Eye Surgery Education Council
  54. ^ PubMed Result
  55. ^ Microkeratome complications of laser in situ kerat...[Ophthalmology. 2000] - PubMed Result
  56. ^ a b c Vesaluoma M, Perez-Santonja J, Petroll WM, Linna T, Alio J, Tervo T. "Corneal stromal changes induced by myopic LASIK." Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000 Feb;41(2):369-76. PMID 10670464.
  57. ^ http://www.usaeyes.org/lasik/faq/lasik-intralasik-dlk.htm
  58. ^ a b c d Sun L, Liu G, Ren Y, Li J, Hao J, Liu X, Zhang Y. "Efficacy and safety of LASIK in 10,052 eyes of 5081 myopic Chinese patients." J Refract Surg. 2005 Sep-Oct;21 (5 Suppl):S633-5. PMID 16212294.
  59. ^ Intacs for Mild Nearsighted Vision Correction and Keratoconus
  60. ^ C3-R Corneal Collagen Crosslinking with Riboflavin
  61. ^ Albietz JM, Lenton LM, McLennan SG. "Dry eye after LASIK: comparison of outcomes for Asian and Caucasian eyes." Clin Exp Optom. 2005 Mar;88(2):89â96.
  62. ^ Lee BH, McLaren JW, Erie JC, Hodge DO, Bourne WM. "Reinnervation in the cornea after LASIK." Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002 Dec;43(12):3660â4. PMID 12454033.
  63. ^ Pupil and Lasik Night Vision Halo - Starburst
  64. ^ Late Traumatic Flap Dislocations After LASIK
  65. ^ [Correction and induction of high-order aberration...[Klin Monatsbl Augenheilkd. 2006] - PubMed Result
  66. ^ Wavefront-guided versus standard LASIK enhancement...[Ophthalmology. 2006] - PubMed Result
  67. ^ Conventional vs wavefront-guided LASIK using the L...[J Refract Surg. 2005 Nov-Dec] - PubMed Result
  68. ^ a b c Ruiz-Moreno JM, Alio JL. "Incidence of retinal disease following refractive surgery in 9,239 eyes." J Refract Surg. 2003 Sep-Oct;19(5):534-47. PMID 14518742.
  69. ^ Suarez E, Torres F, Vieira JC, Ramirez E, Arevalo JF. "Anterior uveitis after laser in situ keratomileusis." J Cataract Refract Surg. 2002 Oct;28(10):1793â8. PMID 12388030.
  70. ^ Effect of high-altitude exposure on myopic laser i...[J Cataract Refract Surg. 2001] - PubMed Result
  71. ^ The ascent of Mount Everest following laser in sit...[J Refract Surg. 2003 Jan-Feb] - PubMed Result
  72. ^ Yamane N, Miyata K, Samejima T, Hiraoka T, Kiuchi T, Okamoto F, Hirohara Y, Mihashi T, Oshika T. "Ocular higher-order aberrations and contrast sensitivity after conventional laser in situ keratomileusis." Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Nov;45(11):3986â90. PMID 15505046.
  73. ^ Oshika T, Miyata K, Tokunaga T, Samejima T, Amano S, Tanaka S, Hirohara Y, Mihashi T, Maeda N, Fujikado T. "Higher order wavefront aberrations of cornea and magnitude of refractive correction in laser in situ keratomileusis." Ophthalmology. 2002 Jun;109(6):1154â8. PMID 12045059.
  74. ^ Walter KA, Stevenson AW. "Effect of environmental factors on myopic LASIK enhancement rates." J Cataract Refract Surg. 2004 Apr;30(4):798â803. PMID 15093641.
  75. ^ The Cataracts and Gone - and so is the Need for Glasses, by Matthew Shulman. US News and World Report December 17, 2007, page 64.
  76. ^ http://www.usaeyes.org/lasik/faq/lasik-age.htm

## [edit] See also

  * Automated lamellar keratoplasty
  * Eye surgery
  * LASEK (Laser-Assisted Sub-Epithelial Keratectomy) or PRK (Photorefractive keratectomy)
  * Radial keratotomy
  * Refractive error
  * Refractive surgery
  * Wavefront

## [edit] External links

  * FDA information page on LASIK Includes detailed animation of the procedure
  * University of Illinois page on LASIK Educational videos and full-text peer-reviewed journal articles on LASIK
  * Vision Surgery Rehab Network Support site for people with complications from LASIK and other eye surgeries.
  * U.S. National library of medicine
  * Eye surgery education council LASIK faqs

v â¢ d â¢ e

Surgery \- eye surgery (ICD-9-CM V3 08-16)  
Eyelids

Blepharoplasty  
Lacrimal system

Dacryocystorhinostomy  
Cornea

Radial keratotomy \- LASIK \- Keratomileusis \- Epikeratophakia \- Corneal
transplantation \- Photorefractive keratectomy \- Intracorneal rings  
Iris, ciliary body, sclera, and anterior chamber

Trabeculectomy \- Iridectomy  
Lens

Phacoemulsification \- Cataract surgery \- Capsulorhexis  
Retina, choroid, vitreous, and posterior chamber

Vitrectomy  
Orbit and eyeball

Enucleation of the Eye  
Other

Harada-Ito procedure  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LASIK"

Categories: Laser applications | Surgical procedures | Ophthalmology

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 01:10 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



