
# Sockpuppet (Internet)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Sock puppetry" redirects here. For puppets made from socks, see Sock puppet.

For the use of Sock puppetry within the Wikipedia community, see
Wikipedia:Sock puppetry.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Humorous depiction of a troll sockpuppet operating a female sockpuppet.

A sockpuppet is an online identity used for purposes of deception within an
online community. In its earliest usage, a sockpuppet was a false identity
through which a member of an Internet community speaks with or about himself
or herself, pretending to be a different person,[1] like a ventriloquist
manipulating a hand puppet.

In current usage, the perception of the term has been extended beyond second
identities of people who already post in a forum to include other uses of
misleading online identities. For example, a NY Times article claims that
"sock-puppeting" is defined as "the act of creating a fake online identity to
praise, defend or create the illusion of support for oneâs self, allies or
company."[2]

The key difference between a sockpuppet and a regular pseudonym (sometimes
termed an "alt" which is short for alternate, as in alternate identity) is the
pretense that the puppet is a third party who is not affiliated with the
puppeteer.

The earliest known[1] usage of the term was on July 9, 1993 by Dana Rollins in
a posting to bit.listserv.fnord-l,[3] but the term was not in common usage in
USENET groups until 1996.

## Contents

  * 1 Notable public examples
  * 2 Strawman sockpuppet
  * 3 Meatpuppet
  * 4 Ballot stuffing
  * 5 U.S. legal implications of Lori Drew verdict for misrepresenting identities online
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Notable public examples

Notable examples involving public figures in recent years include:

  * John Lott, author of More Guns, Less Crime, who, between 2000 and 2003, posted under the "sock puppet" name of "Mary Rosh",[4] praising Lott's teaching, and arguing with Lott's critics on Usenet. The name was also used to post outstanding reviews of his books, and panning books of rivals on online book sites. Lott admitted he had frequently used the name "Mary Rosh" to defend himself, but claimed the book reviews by "Mary Rosh" were written by his son and wife.
  * Lee Siegel, writer for The New Republic magazine, was suspended for defending his articles and blog comments using the user name "Sprezzatura". One such comment, defending Siegel's bad reviews of Jon Stewart: âSiegel is brave, brilliant and wittier than Stewart will ever be.â[5] [6]
  * In 2006, a top staffer for then-Congressman Charlie Bass (R-NH) was caught posing as a "concerned" supporter of Bass's opponent Democrat Paul Hodes on several liberal New Hampshire blogs, using the pseudonyms "IndieNH" or "IndyNH". "IndyNH" was "concerned" that Democrats might just be wasting their time or money on Hodes, because Bass was unbeatable.[7]
  * In January 2007, the press secretary of San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom, Peter Ragone, admitted that he posted pro-Newsom comments to the blog SFist from his computer variously as "John Nelson" (a friend) or as "Byorn." The San Francisco Chronicle reported that Ragone stated that "he answered Newsom's critics using others' names because being online 'was fun â it's where people are having fun.'"[8]
  * In 2007, the CEO of Whole Foods, John Mackey, was discovered to have posted on the Yahoo Finance Message Board, extolling his own company and predicting a dire future for their rival Wild Oats Markets while concealing his own relationship to both companies under the screen name "Rahodeb"[9]
  * On the 13th January 2009, Bournemouth councillor Ben Grower was exposed by the Daily Echo newspaper for repeatedly posting comments praising himself, and fellow Labour councillors, on the newspaper's website using a sock puppet named 'Omegaman'. When questioned about the matter Grower at first denied it but later he admitted it was true saying "I have done nothing against the law. And probably next time I will just use a different pseudonym."[10] The story of Grower's sock puppetry was covered widely in the media.[11][12][13][14][15]

## [edit] Strawman sockpuppet

A strawman sockpuppet is a false flag pseudonym created by a user with one
point of view, but acts as though the puppet has an opposing point of view, in
order to make that point of view look bad and generate negative sentiment
towards that view. Such sockpuppets will typically advance foolish straw man
arguments that their puppeteers can then easily refute. They often act in an
unintelligent, uninformed, or bigoted manner. The effect is to discredit more
rational arguments for the same side.

## [edit] Meatpuppet

The term meatpuppet or "meat puppet" is used as a pejorative description for a
number of quite different online behaviors. Its earlier recorded use is in
cyberpunk novelist William Gibson's Neuromancer (1984).[16] The term had a
long history before the internet, perhaps most famously by the hardcore band
Meat Puppets.

Editors of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia use "meat puppet" to deprecate
contributions from a new community member if the new member was (allegedly)
recruited by an existing member only to back up the recruiting member's
position.[17]

A number of other online sources, however, use the term "meatpuppet" for
varied sockpuppet behaviors. For example, according to one online
encyclopedia, a meat puppet "publishes comments on blogs, wikis and other
public venues about some phenomenon or product in order to generate public
interest and buzz"âthat is, engages in the kind of behavior more widely
known as astroturfing.

A 2006 article in The Chronicle of Higher Education claimed that "[t]he 'meat
puppet' is a peculiar inhabitant of the digital worldâa fictional character
that passes for a real person online."[18]

Yet another online journal says the meat puppet is someone who posts "sick,
insulting things" in order to discredit a point of view that is not the point
of view of the account creator. This behavior is more commonly called
"strawman sockpuppetry."[citation needed]

## [edit] Ballot stuffing

Sockpuppets may be created during an online poll to submit multiple votes in
favour of the puppeteer. A related usage is creating multiple identities each
supporting the puppeteer's views in an argument, attempting to cast the
puppeteer in a positive light and sideline opposition voices. In the abstract
theory of social networks and reputation systems, this is known as a sybil
attack.

A sockpuppet-like use of deceptive fake identities is used in stealth
marketing. The stealth marketer creates one or more pseudonymous accounts,
each one claiming to be owned by a different enthusiastic supporter of the
sponsor's product or book or ideology.[19]

A single such sockpuppet is a shill; creating large numbers of them to fake a
"grass-roots" upswelling of support is known as astroturfing.

## [edit] U.S. legal implications of Lori Drew verdict for misrepresenting
identities online

In 2008, 49 year-old Missouri resident Lori Drew was prosecuted and convicted
in Los Angeles for creating a fake MySpace account where she claimed to be a
16 year-old boy named Josh Evans. Drew's goal had been to create a
relationship with Megan Meier, a 13 year-old girl who had been fighting with
her daughter. After "Josh" broke up with Megan, Megan committed suicide.

Drew's conviction was for misrepresenting her identity, in violation of the
MySpace terms of service. The Los Angeles US Attorney successfully claimed
that this was covered by federal computer fraud legislation against "accessing
a computer without authorization via interstate commerce."[20][21] Drew has
appealed the verdict, saying that her use of a false identity did not
constitute unauthorized access to MySpace, based on a 1973 breach of contract
dispute where a court of appeals ruled that "fraudulently induced consent is
consent nonetheless."[22]

## [edit] See also

  * False flag
  * Troll (Internet)
  * Online reputation
  * Shill
  * Passing (sociology)
  * On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b "definition of sockpuppet". WordSpy.com. http://www.wordspy.com/words/sockpuppet.asp.
  2. ^ Stone, Brad (2007-07-16). "The Hand That Controls the Sock Puppet Could Get Slapped". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/16/technology/16blog.html?ex=1342238400&en=9a3424961f9d2163&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss. Retrieved on 2007-07-16.
  3. ^ "Groups". Google. http://groups.google.com/group/bit.listserv.fnord-l/msg/d1b51c9c2d96469f.
  4. ^ Scholar Invents Fan To Answer His Critics (washingtonpost.com)
  5. ^ Aspan, Maria (2006-09-04). "New Republic Suspends an Editor for Attacks on Blog". NY Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/04/technology/04republic.html?ex=1315022400&en=cc629c6ec5d5805d&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss. Retrieved on 2007-06-11.
  6. ^ Cox, Ana Marie (2006-12-16). "Making Mischief on the Web". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1570701,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-30.
  7. ^ Saunders, Anne (2006-09-26). "Bass aide resigns after posing as opponent's supporter online". Boston Globe (Associated Press). http://www.boston.com/news/local/new_hampshire/articles/2006/09/26/rep_bass_aide_posed_as_opponents_supporter_on_blogs. Retrieved on 2007-03-30.
  8. ^ Sward, Susan (2007-02-18). "Tough times for Peter Ragone". San Francisco Chronicle. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2007/02/18/BAGASO71MR1.DTL. Retrieved on 2008-06-26.
  9. ^ Stewart, James. "Whole Foods CEO Threatens Merger, Fuels Arbitrage". SmartMoney. http://www.smartmoney.com/commonsense/index.cfm?story=20070717. Retrieved on 2007-07-17.
  10. ^ http://www.bournemouthecho.co.uk/news/4041976.Website_praise_for_Bournemouth_councillor_comes_from____councillor_
  11. ^ http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/4228167/Councillor-posted-messages-on-website-praising-his-own-work.html
  12. ^ http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1113946/Mystery-author-heaped-praise-hard-working-councillor-revealed--councillor-himself.html
  13. ^ http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/councillor-used-pseudonym-to-praise-own-work-1333346.html
  14. ^ http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5inxM_Mv7Vk7pKgzhZbnb_-Ie-cmg
  15. ^ http://blogs.journalism.co.uk/editors/2009/01/13/pat-on-own-back-councillor-says-daily-echo-should-take-responsibility-for-his-online-alter-ego/
  16. ^ Nayar, Pramod (2004). Virtual Worlds. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. p. 123\. ISBN 0761932283.
  17. ^ Wikipedia policy on meatpuppets
  18. ^ Read, Brock. (9 October 2006) The Chronicle of Higher Education: The Wired Campus. Attack of the 'Meat Puppets'. See also, Ahrens, Frank. (7 October 2006) Washington Post Emerge as Internet's Effective, and Deceptive, Salesmen. Page D01
  19. ^ "I'd Love This Product Even If I Weren't A Stealth Marketer". The Onion. 14 December 2005. http://www.theonion.com/content/node/43456.
  20. ^ "Cyberbullying verdict turns rule-breakers into criminals". Globe and Mail. December 4, 2008. http://www.theglobeandmail.com/servlet/story/RTGAM.20081204.wgtweb05/BNStory/Technology/home.
  21. ^ "Lori Drew is a meanie". Slate. December 3, 2008. http://www.slate.com/id/2205952/pagenum/all/.
  22. ^ "Lori Drew Files New Bid for Dismissal on Grounds that MySpace Authorized Access". Wiredil. December 15, 2008. http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2008/12/lori-drew-attor.html.

## [edit] External links

  * Sock puppet entry in the Jargon File

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sockpuppet_(Internet)"

Categories: Internet terminology | Internet trolling

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 04:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



