
# Toba catastrophe theory

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Illustration of what the eruption might have looked like from approximately 50
miles (80 km) above Pulau Simeulue

According to the Toba catastrophe theory, 70,000 to 75,000 years ago a
supervolcanic event at Lake Toba, on Sumatra, reduced the world's human
population to 10,000 or even a mere 1,000 breeding pairs, creating a
bottleneck in human evolution. The theory was proposed in 1998 by Stanley H.
Ambrose of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.[1][2]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Evidence
    * 2.1 Analysis of louse genes
    * 2.2 Analysis of Helicobacter pylori genes
  * 3 Migration
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)  
Within the last three to five million years, after human and other ape
lineages diverged from the hominid stem-line, the human line produced a
variety of species, including H. ergaster, H. erectus, H. neanderthalensis and
possibly H. floresiensis.

According to the Toba catastrophe theory, the consequences of a massive
volcanic eruption severely reduced the human population. This may have
occurred around 70,000â75,000 years ago when the Toba caldera in Indonesia
underwent an eruption of category 8 (or "mega-colossal") on the Volcanic
Explosivity Index. This released energy equivalent to about 1 teraton of TNT
(4.2 ZJ), two thousand times greater than the 1980 eruption of Mount St.
Helens[citation needed], and twenty thousand times greater than the largest
human-made explosion, the October 30, 1961 detonation of the Soviet Union's
Tsar Bomba thermonuclear device. According to Ambrose, the Toba explosion
reduced the average global temperature by 5 degrees Celsius (9 degrees
Fahrenheit) for several years and may have triggered an ice age.

Ambrose proposes that this massive environmental change created population
bottlenecks in the species that existed at the time; this in turn accelerated
differentiation of the isolated human populations, eventually leading to the
extinction of all the other human species except for the two branches that
became Neanderthals (H. neanderthalensis) and modern humans (H. sapiens).

## [edit] Evidence

Some geological evidence and computed models support the plausibility of the
Toba catastrophe theory. The Greenland ice core data displays an abrupt change
around this time,[3] but in the corresponding Antarctic data the change is not
easily discernible. Ashes from this eruption of Lake Toba, located near the
equator, should have spread all over the world.

Genetic evidence suggests that all humans alive today, despite their apparent
variety, are descended from a very small population, perhaps between 1,000 to
10,000 breeding pairs about 70,000 years ago.[4][1]

Using the average rates of genetic mutation, some geneticists have estimated
that this population lived at a time coinciding with the Toba event. These
estimates do not contradict the consensus estimates that Y-chromosomal Adam
lived some 60,000 years ago, and that Mitochondrial Eve is estimated to have
lived 140,000 years ago, because Toba is not conjectured to be an extreme
bottleneck event, where the population is reduced to a small number of
breeding pairs.[citation needed]

Gene analysis of some genes shows divergence anywhere from 60,000 to 2 million
years ago, but this does not contradict the Toba theory, once again because
Toba is not conjectured to be an extreme bottleneck event. The complete
picture of gene lineages (including present-day levels of human genetic
variation) allows the theory of a Toba-induced human population bottleneck.[5]

Recent work by archaeologist Michael Petraglia suggests that in fact modern
humans survived relatively unscathed in at least one settlement in
India.[6][7]

### [edit] Analysis of louse genes

Alan Rogers, a co-author of this study and professor of anthropology at the
University of Utah, says: âThe record of our past is written in our
parasites.â Rogers and others have proposed the bottleneck may have occurred
because of a mass die-off of early humans due to a globally catastrophic
volcanic eruption. The analysis of louse genes confirmed that the population
of Homo sapiens mushroomed after a small band of early humans left Africa
sometime between 150,000 and 50,000 years ago.[8]

### [edit] Analysis of Helicobacter pylori genes

Recent research states that genetic diversity in Helicobacter pylori decreases
with geographic distance from East Africa, the birthplace of modern humans.
Using the genetic diversity data, the researchers have created simulations
that indicate the bacteria seems to have spread from East Africa around 58,000
years ago. Their results indicate modern humans were already infected by H.
pylori before their migrations out of Africa, and H. pylori remained
associated with human hosts since that time.[9]

## [edit] Migration

According to this theory, humans once again fanned out from Africa after Toba
when the climate and other factors permitted. They migrated first to Arabia
and India and onwards to Indochina and Australia (Ambrose, 1998, p. 631), and
later to the Middle East and what would become the Fertile Crescent following
the end of the last glacial period (110,000â10,000 years ago).

## [edit] See also

  * Supervolcano
  * Volcanic winter
  * Wallace line
  * Year Without a Summer
  * Recent African origin of modern humans

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Stanley H. Ambrose (1998). "Late Pleistocene human population bottlenecks, volcanic winter, and differentiation of modern humans". Journal of Human Evolution 34 (6): 623â651. doi:10.1006/jhev.1998.0219.
  2. ^ Ambrose, Stanley H. (2005). "Volcanic Winter, and Differentiation of Modern Humans". Bradshaw Foundation. http://www.bradshawfoundation.com/evolution/. Retrieved on 2006-04-08.
  3. ^ Zielinski, G.A.; P.A. Mayewski, L.D. Meeker, S. Whitlow and M. Twickler (March 1996). "A 110,000-year record of explosive volcanism from the GISP2 (Greenland) ice core". Quaternary Research (University of Washington) 45 (2): 109â118. doi:10.1006/qres.1996.0013.
  4. ^ "When humans faced extinction". BBC. 2003-06-09. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/2975862.stm. Retrieved on 2007-01-05.
  5. ^ Dawkins, Richard (2004). "The Grasshopper's Tale". The Ancestor's Tale, A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Life. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. pp. 416\. ISBN 0-618-00583-8.
  6. ^ "Mount Toba Eruption - Ancient Humans Unscathed, Study Claims". http://anthropology.net/2007/07/06/mount-toba-eruption-ancient-humans-unscathed-study-claims/. Retrieved on 2008-04-20.
  7. ^ Sanderson, Katherine (July 2007). "Super-eruption: no problem?" ([dead link] â Scholar search). Nature. doi:10.1038/news070702-15. http://www.nature.com/news/2007/070702/full/news070702-15.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-12.
  8. ^ "Of Lice And Men: Parasite Genes Reveal Modern & Archaic Humans Made Contact". University Of Utah. http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2004/10/041005075751.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-17.
  9. ^ Linz B, Balloux F, Moodley Y, et al (February 2007). "An African origin for the intimate association between humans and Helicobacter pylori". Nature 445 (7130): 915â8. doi:10.1038/nature05562. PMID 17287725.

## [edit] External links

  * Population Bottlenecks and Volcanic Winter
  * 1998 article based on news release regarding Ambrose's paper
  * Homepage of Professor Stanley H. Ambrose
  * Toba Volcano, by George Weber
  * Article in The Economist
  * Journey of Mankind by The Bradshaw Foundation - includes discussion on Toba eruption, DNA and human migrations
  * Geography Predicts Human Genetic Diversity ScienceDaily (Mar. 17, 2005) â By analyzing the relationship between the geographic location of current human populations in relation to East Africa and the genetic variability within these populations, researchers have found new evidence for an African origin of modern humans.
  * Out Of Africa -- Bacteria, As Well: Homo Sapiens And H. Pylori Jointly Spread Across The Globe ScienceDaily (Feb. 16, 2007) â When man made his way out of Africa some 60,000 years ago to populate the world, he was not alone: He was accompanied by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori...; illus. migration map.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toba_catastrophe_theory"

Categories: Human evolution | Theories | Volcanic events | Extinction events |
Lake Toba

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since February 2009 | Articles needing additional references
from September 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Simple English
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 04:05 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



