
# Anhedonia

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the 2007 album by The Graduate, see Anhedonia (album).

In psychology, anhedonia (< Greek Î±Î½- an-, without \+ Î·Î´Î¿Î½Î® hÄdonÄ,
pleasure ) is an inability to experience pleasure from normally pleasurable
life events such as eating, exercise, and social or sexual interaction.

Anhedonia is recognized as one of the key symptoms of the mood disorder
depression according to both the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders Fourth Edition (DSM IV) and the International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD). Other than
anhedonia, the DSM considers only depressed mood to be a key symptom.[citation
needed] The ICD lists both depressed mood and fatigue or loss of energy as the
other key symptoms. Anhedonia is also seen in schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorder, schizoid personality disorder and other mental disorders.

## Contents

  * 1 Causes
  * 2 Significance in depression
  * 3 Sexual anhedonia
  * 4 Popular culture
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Causes

Researchers theorize that anhedonia may result from the breakdown in the
brain's reward system, involving dopamine pathways. Two 2005 studies by Paul
Keedwell MD of King's College found that certain sections of the brain in
depressed subjects had to work harder to process happy thoughts.[1][2]

Anhedonia is often experienced by drug addicts following withdrawal; in
particular, stimulants like cocaine and amphetamines cause anhedonia and
depression by depleting dopamine and other important neurotransmitters. Very
long-term addicts are sometimes said to suffer a permanent physical breakdown
of their pleasure pathways, leading to anhedonia on a permanent or semi-
permanent basis due to the extended overworking of the neural pleasure
pathways during active addiction, particularly as regards cocaine and
methamphetamine. In this circumstance, activities still may be pleasurable,
but can never be as pleasurable to people who have experienced the
comparatively extreme pleasure of the drug experience. The result is apathy
towards healthy routines by the addict. Extended periods of healthy lifestyles
away from active addiction have been shown to reverse these feelings.[citation
needed]

Anhedonia may also be an effect of prolonged fatigue.

## [edit] Significance in depression

As a clinical symptom in depression, anhedonia rates highly in making a
diagnosis of this disorder. The DSM describes a "lack of interest or pleasure"
but these can be hard to tell apart given that people become less interested
in things which do not give them pleasure. The DSM criterion of weight loss is
probably related to it and many depressed people with this symptom describe a
lack of enjoyment from food.

## [edit] Sexual anhedonia

Sexual anhedonia is known as 'ejaculatory anhedonia'. This rare condition
means that the person will ejaculate with no accompanying sense of pleasure.
This condition is most frequently found in males, but women can suffer from
lack of pleasure when the body goes through the orgasm process as well.

Sexual anhedonia may be caused by:

  * Hyperprolactinaemia
  * Hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD), also called inhibited sexual desire
  * Low levels of the hormone testosterone
  * Spinal cord injury
  * Use (or previous use) of SSRI antidepressants[3]
  * Fatigue
  * Physical illness

A urological examination and blood tests can determine the cause of a specific
case of sexual anhedonia.

Patients may be prescribed sustained-release bupropion to aid in treatment,
because bupropion has been shown to increase sexual desire and intensity of
orgasm.[citation needed]

## [edit] Popular culture

  * Anhedonia was the title Woody Allen originally intended to call his 1977 film Annie Hall.[4]
  * "Anhedonia" is also one of the songs of the Canadian Jimmy Swift Band.
  * The episode of House entitled "Joy" featured a patient with anhedonia.

## [edit] See also

<IMG>

Look up anhedonia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

  * Dysthymia
  * Clinical depression

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "No Pleasure, No Reward -- Plenty of Depression" by John McManamy; URL accessed 2007-02-08
  2. ^ "Neural systems underlying affective disorders" by Simon Surguladze, et al., Advances in Psychiatric Treatment (2003) 9: 446-455; URL accessed 2008-02-08
  3. ^ "Persistent Sexual Dysfunction after Discontinuation of Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors" By Csoka et al., Journal of Sexual Medicine 5 (1) , 227â233; URL accessed 2008-02-28
  4. ^ [New York Times], Movies, Critics' Pick: [Annie Hall] (1977) http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/2547/Annie-Hall/overview

## [edit] External links

  * Anhedonia - Bipolar Disorder Symptoms
  * No Pleasure, No Reward
  * Discussion of male orgasmic dysfunction (ejaculation without orgasm) on the Sexual Health Forums of HisandHerHealth.com

v â¢ d â¢ e

Bipolar disorder  
History

Emil Kraepelin Â· Karl Leonhard Â· Lithium pharmacology Â· John Cade  
Symptoms

Anhedonia Â· Delusion Â· Dysphoria Â· Emotional dysregulation Â· Hallucination
Â· Hypersomnia Â· Hypomania Â· Insomnia Â· Major depressive episode Â· Mania
Â· Mixed state Â· Psychosis Â· Racing thoughts Â· Rapid cycling Â· Suicidal
ideation  
Spectrum

Bipolar I Â· Bipolar II Â· Cyclothymia Â· Dysthymia Â· Major depressive
disorder Â· Schizoaffective disorder  
Treatment

Mood stabilizers: Carbamazepine Â· Gabapentin Â· Lamotrigine Â· Lithium
carbonate Â· Oxcarbazepine Â· Sodium valproate Â· Topiramate Â· Valproate
semisodium Â· Valproic acid Â· Other treatments: Antipsychotics Â·
Anticonvulsants Â· Clinical psychology Â· Electroconvulsive therapy Â·
Involuntary commitment Â· Light therapy Â· Psychotherapy Â· Transcranial
magnetic stimulation  
Related

Mood disorder Â· Affective spectrum Â· List of people affected by bipolar
disorder Â· Bipolar disorder in children  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anhedonia"

Categories: Symptoms | Mood disorders | Symptoms of bipolar disorder

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 03:54.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



