
# Allergy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Allergy  
Classification and external resources  
ICD-10 T78.4  
ICD-9 995.3  
DiseasesDB 33481  
MedlinePlus 000812  
eMedicine med/1101  
MeSH D006967  
Allergy is a disorder of the immune system often also referred to as atopy.
Allergic reactions occur to environmental substances known as allergens; these
reactions are acquired, predictable and rapid. Strictly, allergy is one of
four forms of hypersensitivity and is called type I (or immediate)
hypersensitivity. It is characterized by excessive activation of certain white
blood cells called mast cells and basophils by a type of antibody known as
IgE, resulting in an extreme inflammatory response. Common allergic reactions
include eczema, hives, hay fever, asthma, food allergies, and reactions to the
venom of stinging insects such as wasps and bees.[1]

Mild allergies like hay fever are highly prevalent in the human population and
cause symptoms such as allergic conjunctivitis, itchiness, and runny nose.
Allergies can play a major role in conditions such as asthma. In some people,
severe allergies to environmental or dietary allergens or to medication may
result in life-threatening anaphylactic reactions and potentially death.

A variety of tests now exist to diagnose allergic conditions; these include
testing the skin for responses to known allergens or analyzing the blood for
the presence and levels of allergen-specific IgE. Treatments for allergies
include allergen avoidance, use of anti-histamines, steroids or other oral
medications, immunotherapy to desensitize the response to allergen, and
targeted therapy.

## Contents

  * 1 Classification and history
  * 2 Signs and symptoms
  * 3 Cause
    * 3.1 Genetic basis
    * 3.2 Hygiene Hypothesis
    * 3.3 Other Environmental factors
  * 4 Pathophysiology
    * 4.1 Acute response
    * 4.2 Late-phase response
  * 5 Diagnosis
    * 5.1 Skin testing
    * 5.2 Blood testing
  * 6 Treatment
    * 6.1 Pharmacotherapy
    * 6.2 Immunotherapy
    * 6.3 Unproven and ineffective treatments
  * 7 Epidemiology
  * 8 Medical specialty
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Classification and history

The concept of "allergy" was originally introduced in 1906 by the Viennese
pediatrician Clemens von Pirquet, after he noted that some of his patients
were hypersensitive to normally innocuous entities such as dust, pollen, or
certain foods.[2] Pirquet called this phenomenon "allergy" from the Greek
words allos meaning "other" and ergon meaning "work".[3] Historically, all
forms of hypersensitivity were classified as allergies, and all were thought
to be caused by an improper activation of the immune system. Later, it became
clear that several different disease mechanisms were implicated, with the
common link to a disordered activation of the immune system. In 1963, a new
classification scheme was designed by Philip Gell and Robin Coombs that
described four types of hypersensitivity reactions, known as Type I to Type IV
hypersensitivity.[4] With this new classification, the word "allergy" was
restricted to only type I hypersensitivities (also called immediate
hypersensitivity), which are characterized as rapidly developing reactions.

A major breakthrough in understanding the mechanisms of allergy was the
discovery of the antibody class labeled immunoglobulin E (IgE) - Kimishige
Ishizaka and co-workers were the first to isolate and describe IgE in the
1960s.[5]

## [edit] Signs and symptoms

Common symptoms of allergy Affected organ Symptom  
Nose swelling of the nasal mucosa (allergic rhinitis)  
Sinuses allergic sinusitis  
Eyes redness and itching of the conjunctiva (allergic conjunctivitis)  
Airways Sneezing, coughing, bronchoconstriction, wheezing and dyspnea,
sometimes outright attacks of asthma, in severe cases the airway constricts
due to swelling known as angioedema  
Ears feeling of fullness, possibly pain, and impaired hearing due to the lack
of eustachian tube drainage.  
Skin rashes, such as eczema and hives (urticaria)  
Gastrointestinal tract abdominal pain, bloating, vomiting, diarrhea  
Many allergens such as dust or pollen are airborne particles. In these cases,
symptoms arise in areas in contact with air, such as eyes, nose and lungs. For
instance, allergic rhinitis, also known as hay fever, causes irritation of the
nose, sneezing, and itching and redness of the eyes.[6] Inhaled allergens can
also lead to asthmatic symptoms, caused by narrowing of the airways
(bronchoconstriction) and increased production of mucus in the lungs,
shortness of breath (dyspnea), coughing and wheezing.[7]

Aside from these ambient allergens, allergic reactions can result from foods,
insect stings, and reactions to medications like aspirin and antibiotics such
as penicillin. Symptoms of food allergy include abdominal pain, bloating,
vomiting, diarrhea, itchy skin, and swelling of the skin during hives. Food
allergies rarely cause respiratory (asthmatic) reactions, or rhinitis.[8]
Insect stings, antibiotics, and certain medicines produce a systemic allergic
response that is also called anaphylaxis; multiple organ systems can be
affected, including the digestive system, the respiratory system, and the
circulatory system.[9][10][11] Depending of the rate of severity, it can cause
cutaneous reactions, bronchoconstriction, edema, hypotension, coma, and even
death. This type of reaction can be triggered suddenly, or the onset can be
delayed. The severity of this type of allergic response often requires
injections of epinephrine, sometimes through a device known as the EpiPen
auto-injector. The nature of anaphylaxis is such that the reaction can seem to
be subsiding, but may recur throughout a prolonged period of time. [11]

Substances that come into contact with the skin, such as latex, are also
common causes of allergic reactions, known as contact dermatitis or
eczema.[12] Skin allergies frequently cause rashes, or swelling and
inflammation within the skin, in what is known as a "wheal and flare" reaction
characteristic of hives and angioedema.[13]

## [edit] Cause

Risk factors for allergy can be placed in two general categories, namely host
and environmental factors. Host factors include heredity, sex, race, and age,
with heredity being by far the most significant. However, there have been
recent increases in the incidence of allergic disorders that cannot be
explained by genetic factors alone. Four major environmental candidates are
alterations in exposure to infectious diseases during early childhood,
environmental pollution, allergen levels, and dietary changes.[14]

### [edit] Genetic basis

Allergic diseases are strongly familial: identical twins are likely to have
the same allergic diseases about 70% of the time; the same allergy occurs
about 40% of the time in non-identical twins.[15] Allergic parents are more
likely to have allergic children,[16] and their allergies are likely to be
more severe than those from non-allergic parents. Some allergies, however, are
not consistent along genealogies; parents who are allergic to peanuts may have
children who are allergic to ragweed. It seems that the likelihood of
developing allergies is inherited and related to an irregularity in the immune
system, but the specific allergen is not.[16]

The risk of allergic sensitization and the development of allergies varies
with age, with young children most at risk.[17] Several studies have shown
that IgE levels are highest in childhood and fall rapidly between the ages of
10 and 30 years.[17] The peak prevalence of hay fever is highest in children
and young adults and the incidence of asthma is highest in children under
10.[18] Overall, boys have a higher risk of developing allergy than girls,[16]
although for some diseases, namely asthma in young adults, females are more
likely to be affected.[19] Sex differences tend to decrease in adulthood.[16]
Ethnicity may play a role in some allergies, however racial factors have been
difficult to separate from environmental influences and changes due to
migration.[16] Interestingly, it has been suggested that different genetic
loci are responsible for asthma, specifically, in people of Caucasian,
Hispanic, Asian, and African origins.[20]

### [edit] Hygiene Hypothesis

According to the hygiene hypothesis, proposed by David P. Strachan, allergic
diseases are caused by inappropriate immunological responses to harmless
antigens driven by a TH2-mediated immune response. Many bacteria and viruses
elicit a TH1-mediated immune response, which down-regulates TH2 responses. The
first proposed mechanism of action of the hygiene hypothesis stated that
insufficient stimulation of the TH1 arm of the immune system lead to an
overactive TH2 arm, which in turn led to allergic disease.[21] In other words,
individuals living in too sterile an environment are not exposed to enough
pathogens to keep the immune system busy. Since our bodies evolved to deal
with a certain level of such pathogens, when it is not exposed to this level
the immune system will attack harmless antigens, and thus normally benign
microbial objects, like pollen, will trigger an immune response. [22]

The hygiene hypothesis was developed to explain the observation that hay fever
and eczema, both allergic diseases, were less common in children from larger
families, which were presumably exposed to more infectious agents through
their siblings, than in children from families with only one child. The
hygiene hypothesis has been extensively investigated by immunologists and
epidemiologists and has become an important theoretical framework for the
study of allergic disorders. It is used to explain the increase in allergic
diseases that has been seen since industrialization, and the higher incidence
of allergic diseases in more developed countries. The hygiene hypothesis has
now expanded to include exposure to symbiotic bacteria and parasites as
important modulators of immune system development, along with infectious
agents.

Epidemiological data supports the hygiene hypothesis. Studies have shown that
various immunological and autoimmune diseases are much less common in the
developing world than the industrialized world and that immigrants to the
industrialized world from the developing world increasingly develop
immunological disorders in relation to the length of time since arrival in the
industrialized world.[23] Longitudinal studies in the third world demonstrate
an increase in immunological disorders as a country grows more affluent and,
presumably, cleaner[24]. The use of antibiotics in the first year of life has
been linked to asthma and other allergic diseases.[25] The use of
antibacterial cleaning products has also been associated with higher incidence
of asthma, as has birth by Caesarean section rather than vaginal
birth.[26][27]

### [edit] Other Environmental factors

International differences have been associated with the number of individuals
within a population that suffer from allergy. Allergic diseases are more
common in industrialized countries than in countries that are more traditional
or agricultural, and there is a higher rate of allergic disease in urban
populations versus rural populations, although these differences are becoming
less defined.[28]

Exposure to allergens, especially in early life, is an important risk factor
for allergy. Alterations in exposure to microorganisms is another plausible
explanation, at present, for the increase in atopic allergy.[14] Endotoxin
exposure reduces release of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-Î±, IFNÎ³,
interleukin-10, and interleukin-12 from white blood cells (leukocytes) that
circulate in the blood.[29] Certain microbe-sensing proteins, known as Toll-
like receptors, found on the surface of cells in the body are also thought to
be involved in these processes.[30]

Gutworms and similar parasites are present in untreated drinking water in
developing countries, and were present in the water of developed countries
until the routine chlorination and purification of drinking water
supplies.[31] Recent research has shown that some common parasites, such as
intestinal worms (e.g. hookworms), secrete chemicals into the gut wall (and
hence the bloodstream) that suppress the immune system and prevent the body
from attacking the parasite.[32] This gives rise to a new slant on the hygiene
hypothesis theory â that co-evolution of man and parasites has led to an
immune system that only functions correctly in the presence of the parasites.
Without them, the immune system becomes unbalanced and oversensitive.[33] In
particular, research suggests that allergies may coincide with the delayed
establishment of gut flora in infants.[34] However, the research to support
this theory is conflicting, with some studies performed in China and Ethiopia
showing an increase in allergy in people infected with intestinal worms.[28]
Clinical trials have been initiated to test the effectiveness of certain worms
in treating some allergies.[35] It may be that the term 'parasite' could turn
out to be inappropriate, and in fact a hitherto unsuspected symbiosis is at
work.[35] For more information on this topic, see Helminthic therapy.

## [edit] Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of allergic responses can be divided into two phases. The
first is an acute response that occurs immediately after exposure to an
allergen. This phase can either subside or progress into a "late phase
reaction" which can substantially prolong the symptoms of a response, and
result in tissue damage.

### [edit] Acute response

<IMG>

<IMG>

Degranulation process in allergy.1 \- antigen; 2 \- IgE antibody; 3 \- FcÎµRI
receptor; 4 \- preformed mediators (histamine, proteases, chemokines,
heparine); 5 \- granules; 6 \- mast cell; 7 \- newly formed mediators
(prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes, PAF)

In the early stages of allergy, a type I hypersensitivity reaction against an
allergen, encountered for the first time, causes a response in a type of
immune cell called a TH2 lymphocyte, which belongs to a subset of T cells that
produce a cytokine called interleukin-4 (IL-4). These TH2 cells interact with
other lymphocytes called B cells, whose role is production of antibodies.
Coupled with signals provided by IL-4, this interaction stimulates the B cell
to begin production of a large amount of a particular type of antibody known
as IgE. Secreted IgE circulates in the blood and binds to an IgE-specific
receptor (a kind of Fc receptor called FcÎµRI) on the surface of other kinds
of immune cells called mast cells and basophils, which are both involved in
the acute inflammatory response. The IgE-coated cells, at this stage are
sensitized to the allergen.[14]

If later exposure to the same allergen occurs, the allergen can bind to the
IgE molecules held on the surface of the mast cells or basophils. Cross-
linking of the IgE and Fc receptors occurs when more than one IgE-receptor
complex interacts with the same allergenic molecule, and activates the
sensitized cell. Activated mast cells and basophils undergo a process called
degranulation, during which they release histamine and other inflammatory
chemical mediators (cytokines, interleukins, leukotrienes, and prostaglandins)
from their granules into the surrounding tissue causing several systemic
effects, such as vasodilation, mucous secretion, nerve stimulation and smooth
muscle contraction. This results in rhinorrhea, itchiness, dyspnea, and
anaphylaxis. Depending on the individual, allergen, and mode of introduction,
the symptoms can be system-wide (classical anaphylaxis), or localized to
particular body systems; asthma is localized to the respiratory system and
eczema is localized to the dermis.[14]

### [edit] Late-phase response

After the chemical mediators of the acute response subside, late phase
responses can often occur. This is due to the migration of other leukocytes
such as neutrophils, lymphocytes, eosinophils and macrophages to the initial
site. The reaction is usually seen 2-24 hours after the original reaction.[36]
Cytokines from mast cells may also play a role in the persistence of long-term
effects. Late phase responses seen in asthma are slightly different from those
seen in other allergic responses, although they are still caused by release of
mediators from eosinophils, and are still dependent on activity of TH2
cells.[37]

## [edit] Diagnosis

<IMG>

<IMG>

An allergy testing machine being operated in the diagnostic immunology lab at
Lackland Air Force Base

Before a diagnosis of allergic disease can be confirmed, the other possible
causes of the presenting symptoms should be carefully considered.[38]
Vasomotor rhinitis, for example, is one of many maladies that shares symptoms
with allergic rhinitis, underscoring the need for professional differential
diagnosis.[39] Once a diagnosis of asthma, rhinitis, anaphylaxis, or other
allergic disease has been made, there are several methods for discovering the
causative agent of that allergy.

### [edit] Skin testing

<IMG>

<IMG>

Skin testing on arm

<IMG>

<IMG>

Skin testing on back

For assessing the presence of allergen-specific IgE antibodies, allergy skin
testing is preferred over blood allergy tests because it is more sensitive and
specific, simpler to use, and less expensive.[40] Skin testing is also known
as "puncture testing" and "prick testing" due to the series of tiny puncture
or pricks made into the patient's skin. Small amounts of suspected allergens
and/or their extracts (pollen, grass, mite proteins, peanut extract, etc.) are
introduced to sites on the skin marked with pen or dye (the ink/dye should be
carefully selected, lest it cause an allergic response itself). A small
plastic or metal device is used to puncture or prick the skin. Sometimes, the
allergens are injected "intradermally" into the patient's skin, with a needle
and syringe. Common areas for testing include the inside forearm and the back.
If the patient is allergic to the substance, then a visible inflammatory
reaction will usually occur within 30 minutes. This response will range from
slight reddening of the skin to a full-blown hive (called "wheal and flare")
in more sensitive patients. Interpretation of the results of the skin prick
test is normally done by allergists on a scale of severity, with +/- meaning
borderline reactivity, and 4+ being a large reaction. Increasingly, allergists
are measuring and recording the diameter of the wheal and flare reaction.
Interpretation by well-trained allergists is often guided by relevant
literature.[41] Some patients may believe they have determined their own
allergic sensitivity from observation, but a skin test has been shown to be
much better than patient observation to detect allergy.[42]

If a serious life threatening anaphylactic reaction has brought a patient in
for evaluation, some allergists will prefer an initial blood test prior to
performing the skin prick test. Skin tests may not be an option if the patient
has widespread skin disease or has taken antihistamines sometime the last
several days.

### [edit] Blood testing

Various blood allergy testing methods are also available for detecting allergy
to specific substances. This kind of testing measures a "total IgE level" - an
estimate of IgE contained within the patient's serum. This can be determined
through the use of radiometric and colormetric immunoassays. Radiometric
assays include the radioallergosorbent test (RAST) test method, which uses
IgE-binding (anti-IgE) antibodies labeled with radioactive isotopes for
quantifying the levels of IgE antibody in the blood.[40] Other newer methods
use colorimetric or fluorometric technology in the place of radioactive
isotopes. Some "screening" test methods are intended to provide qualitative
test results, giving a "yes" or "no" answer in patients with suspected
allergic sensitization. One such method has a sensitivity of about 70.8% and a
positive predictive value of 72.6% according to a large study.[43]

A low total IgE level is not adequate to rule out sensitization to commonly
inhaled allergens.[44] Statistical methods, such as ROC curves, predictive
value calculations, and likelihood ratios have been used to examine the
relationship of various testing methods to each other. These methods have
shown that patients with a high total IgE have a high probability of allergic
sensitization, but further investigation with specific allergy tests for a
carefully chosen allergens is often warranted.

## [edit] Treatment

There have been enormous improvements in the medical treatments used to treat
allergic conditions. With respect to anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity
reactions to foods, drugs, and insects and in allergic skin diseases, advances
have included the identification of food proteins to which IgE binding is
associated with severe reactions and development of low-allergen foods,
improvements in skin prick test predictions; evaluation of the atopy patch
test; in wasp sting outcomes predictions and a rapidly disintegrating
epinephrine tablet, and anti-IL-5 for eosinophilic diseases.[45]

Traditionally treatment and management of allergies involved simply avoiding
the allergen in question or otherwise reducing exposure. For instance, people
with cat allergies were encouraged to avoid them. While avoidance may help to
reduce symptoms and avoid life-threatening anaphylaxis, it is difficult to
achieve for those with pollen or similar air-borne allergies. Strict avoidance
still has a role in management though, and is often used in managing food
allergies.

### [edit] Pharmacotherapy

Several antagonistic drugs are used to block the action of allergic mediators,
or to prevent activation of cells and degranulation processes. These include
antihistamines, cortisone, dexamethasone, hydrocortisone, epinephrine
(adrenaline), theophylline and cromolyn sodium. Anti-leukotrienes, such as
Montelukast (Singulair) or Zafirlukast (Accolate), are FDA approved for
treatment of allergic diseases.[citation needed] Anti-cholinergics,
decongestants, mast cell stabilizers, and other compounds thought to impair
eosinophil chemotaxis, are also commonly used. These drugs help to alleviate
the symptoms of allergy, and are imperative in the recovery of acute
anaphylaxis, but play little role in chronic treatment of allergic disorders.

### [edit] Immunotherapy

Desensitization or hyposensitization is a treatment in which the patient is
gradually vaccinated with progressively larger doses of the allergen in
question. This can either reduce the severity or eliminate hypersensitivity
altogether. It relies on the progressive skewing of IgG antibody production,
to block excessive IgE production seen in atopys. In a sense, the person
builds up immunity to increasing amounts of the allergen in question. Studies
have demonstrated the long-term efficacy and the preventive effect of
immunotherapy in reducing the development of new allergy.[46] Meta-analyses
have also confirmed efficacy of the treatment in allergic rhinitis in children
and in asthma.[citation needed] A review by the Mayo Clinic in Rochester
confirmed the safety and efficacy of allergen immunotherapy for allergic
rhinitis and conjunctivitis, allergic forms of asthma, and stinging insect
based on numerous well-designed scientific studies.[47] Additionally, national
and international guidelines confirm the clinical efficacy of injection
immunotherapy in rhinitis and asthma, as well as the safety, provided that
recommendations are followed.[48]

A second form of immunotherapy involves the intravenous injection of
monoclonal anti-IgE antibodies. These bind to free and B-cell associated IgE;
signalling their destruction. They do not bind to IgE already bound to the Fc
receptor on basophils and mast cells, as this would stimulate the allergic
inflammatory response. The first agent of this class is Omalizumab. While this
form of immunotherapy is very effective in treating several types of atopy, it
should not be used in treating the majority of people with food
allergies.[citation needed]

A third type, Sublingual immunotherapy, is an orally-administered therapy
which takes advantage of oral immune tolerance to non-pathogenic antigens such
as foods and resident bacteria. This therapy currently accounts for 40 percent
of allergy treatment in Europe.[citation needed] In the United States,
sublingual immunotherapy is gaining support among traditional allergists and
is endorsed by doctors who treat allergy.[citation needed]

Allergy shot treatment is the closest thing to a âcureâ for allergic
symptoms. This therapy requires a long-term commitment.

### [edit] Unproven and ineffective treatments

An experimental treatment, enzyme potentiated desensitization (EPD), has been
tried for decades but is not generally accepted as effective.[49] EPD uses
dilutions of allergen and an enzyme, beta-glucuronidase, to which T-regulatory
lymphocytes are supposed to respond by favouring desensitization, or down-
regulation, rather than sensitization. EPD has also been tried for the
treatment of autoimmune diseases but again is not approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration or of proven effectiveness.[49]

In alternative medicine, a number of allergy treatments are described by its
practitioners, particularly naturopathic, herbal medicine, homeopathy,
traditional Chinese medicine and applied kinesiology. Systematic literature
searches conducted by the Mayo Clinic through 2006, involving hundreds of
articles studying multiple conditions, including asthma and upper respiratory
tract infection showed no effectiveness of any alternative treatments, and no
difference compared with placebo. The authors concluded that, based on
rigorous clinical trials of all types of homeopathy for childhood and
adolescence ailments, there is no convincing evidence that supports the use of
alternative treatments.[50]

## [edit] Epidemiology

Many diseases related to inflammation such as type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid
arthritis and allergic diseasesâhay fever and asthmaâhave increased in the
Western world over the past 2-3 decades.[51] Rapid increases in allergic
asthma and other atopic disorders in industrialized nations probably began in
the 1960s and 1970s, with further increases occurring during the 1980s and
1990s,[52] although some suggest that a steady rise in sensitization has been
occurring since the 1920s.[53] The incidence of atopy in developing countries
has generally remained much lower.[52]

Allergic conditions: Statistics and Epidemiology Allergy type United States
United Kingdom[54]  
Allergic rhinitis 35.9 million[55] (about 11% of the population[56]) 3.3
million (about 5.5% of the population[57])  
Asthma 10 million suffer from allergic asthma (about 3% of the population).
The prevalence of asthma increased 75% from 1980-1994. Asthma prevalence is
39% higher in African Americans than in Anglo Saxons.[58] 5.7 million (about
9.4%). In six and seven year olds asthma increased from 18.4% to 20.9% over
five years, during the same time the rate decreased from 31% to 24.7% in 13 to
14 year olds.  
Atopic eczema About 9% of the population. Between 1960 and 1990 prevalence has
increased from 3% to 10% in children.[59] 5.8 million (about 1% severe).  
Anaphylaxis At least 40 deaths per year due to insect venom. About 400 deaths
due to penicillin anaphylaxis. About 220 cases of anaphylaxis and 3 deaths per
year are due to latex allergy.[60] An estimated 150 people die annually from
anaphylaxis due to food allergy.[61] Between 1999 and 2006, 48 deaths occurred
in people ranging from five months to 85 years old.  
Insect venom Around 15% of adults have mild, localized allergic reactions.
Systemic reactions occur in 3% of adults and less than 1% of children. [62]
Unknown  
Drug allergies Anaphylactic reactions to penicillin cause 400 deaths per year.
Unknown  
Food allergies About 6% of US children under age 3 and 3.5-4% of the overall
US population.[citation needed] Peanut and/or tree nut (e.g. walnut, almond
and cashew) allergy affects about three million Americans, or 1.1% of the
population.[61] 5-7% of infants and 1-2% of adults. A 117.3% increase in
peanut allergies was observed from 2001 to 2005, an estimated 25,700 people in
England are affected.  
Multiple allergies  
(Asthma, eczema and allergic rhinitis together) Unknown 2.3 million (about
3.7%), prevalence has increased by 48.9% between 2001 and 2005.  
Although genetic factors fundamentally govern susceptibility to atopic
disease, increases in atopy have occurred within too short a time frame to be
explained by a genetic change in the population, thus pointing to
environmental or lifestyle changes.[52] Several hypotheses have been
identified to explain this increased prevalence; increased exposure to
perennial allergens due to housing changes and increasing time spent indoors,
and changes in cleanliness or hygiene that have resulted in the decreased
activation of a common immune control mechanism, coupled with dietary changes,
obesity and decline in physical exercise.[51] The hygiene hypothesis
maintains[63] that high living standards and hygienic conditions exposes
children to fewer infections. It is thought that reduced bacterial and viral
infections early in life direct the maturing immune system away from TH1 type
responses, leading to unrestrained TH2 responses that allow for an increase in
allergy.[64][65]

Changes in rates and types of infection alone however, have been unable to
explain the observed increase in allergic disease, and recent evidence has
focused attention on the importance of the gastrointestinal microbial
environment. Evidence has shown that exposure to food and fecal-oral
pathogens, such as hepatitis A, Toxoplasma gondii, and Helicobacter pylori
(which also tend to be more prevalent in developing countries), can reduce the
overall risk of atopy by more than 60%,[66] and an increased prevalence of
parasitic infections has been associated with a decreased prevalence of
asthma.[67] It is speculated that these infections exert their effect by
critically altering TH1/TH2 regulation.[68] Important elements of newer
hygiene hypotheses also include exposure to endotoxins, exposure to pets and
growing up on a farm.[68]

## [edit] Medical specialty

In the United States physicians who hold certification by the American Board
of Allergy and Immunology (ABAI) have successfully completed an accredited
educational program and an evaluation process, including a secure, proctored
examination to demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and experience to the
provision of patient care in allergy and immunology.[69] An allergist-
immunologist is a physician specially trained to manage and treat asthma and
the other allergic diseases. Becoming an allergist-immunologist requires
completion of at least nine years of training. After completing medical school
and graduating with a medical degree, a physician will then undergo three
years of training in internal medicine (to become an internist) or pediatrics
(to become a pediatrician). Once physicians have finished training in one of
these specialties, they must pass the exam of either the American Board of
Pediatrics (ABP) or the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM). Internists
or pediatricians who wish to focus on the sub-specialty of allergy-immunology
then complete at least an additional two years of study, called a fellowship,
in an allergy-immunology training program. Allergist-immunologists who are
listed as ABAI-certified have successfully passed the certifying examination
of the American Board of Allergy and Immunology (ABAI), following their
fellowship.[70]

In the United Kingdom, allergy is a subspecialty of general medicine or
pediatrics. After obtaining postgraduate exams (MRCP or MRCPCH respectively) a
doctor works as several years as a specialist registrar before qualifying for
the General Medical Council specialist register. Allergy services may also be
delivered by immunologists. A 2003 Royal College of Physicians report
presented a case for improvement of what were felt to be inadequate allergy
services in the UK.[71] In 2006, the House of Lords convened a subcommittee
that reported in 2007. It concluded likewise that allergy services were
insufficient to deal with what the Lords referred to as an "allergy epidemic"
and its social cost; it made several other recommendations.[72]

## [edit] See also

  * Allergic inflammation
  * Basophil activation
  * Allergen
  * Hypersensitivity
  * Hypoallergenic
  * IgE
  * Immunoglobulin
  * Multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS)
  * Oral allergy syndrome
  * Urticaria
  * Medical tattoo

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Kay AB (2000). "Overview of 'allergy and allergic diseases: with a view to the future'". Br. Med. Bull. 56 (4): 843â64. doi:10.1258/0007142001903481. PMID 11359624.
  2. ^ Clemens Peter Pirquet von Cesenatico at Who Named It?
  3. ^ Von Pirquet C (1906). "Allergie". Munch Med Wochenschr 53: 1457.
  4. ^ Gell PGH, Coombs RRA. (1963). Clinical Aspects of Immunology. London: Blackwell.
  5. ^ Ishizaka K, Ishizaka T, Hornbrook MM (1966). "Physico-chemical properties of human reaginic antibody. IV. Presence of a unique immunoglobulin as a carrier of reaginic activity". J. Immunol. 97 (1): 75â85. PMID 4162440.
  6. ^ Bope, Edward T.; Rakel, Robert E.. Conn's Current Therapy 2005. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders Company. pp. 880\. ISBN 0721 6386 43.
  7. ^ Holgate ST (1998). "Asthma and allergy--disorders of civilization?". QJM 91 (3): 171â84. doi:10.1093/qjmed/91.3.171. PMID 9604069.
  8. ^ Rusznak C, Davies RJ (1998). "ABC of allergies. Diagnosing allergy". BMJ 316 (7132): 686â9. PMID 9522798.
  9. ^ Golden DB (2007). "Insect sting anaphylaxis". Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 27 (2): 261â72, vii. doi:10.1016/j.iac.2007.03.008. PMID 17493502.
  10. ^ Schafer JA, Mateo N, Parlier GL, Rotschafer JC (2007). "Penicillin allergy skin testing: what do we do now?". Pharmacotherapy 27 (4): 542â5. doi:10.1592/phco.27.4.542. PMID 17381381.
  11. ^ a b Tang AW (2003). "A practical guide to anaphylaxis". Am Fam Physician 68 (7): 1325â32. PMID 14567487.
  12. ^ Brehler R, KÃ¼tting B (2001). "Natural rubber latex allergy: a problem of interdisciplinary concern in medicine". Arch. Intern. Med. 161 (8): 1057â64. doi:10.1001/archinte.161.8.1057. PMID 11322839.
  13. ^ Muller BA (2004). "Urticaria and angioedema: a practical approach". Am Fam Physician 69 (5): 1123â8. PMID 15023012.
  14. ^ a b c d Janeway, Charles; Paul Travers, Mark Walport, and Mark Shlomchik (2001). Immunobiology; Fifth Edition. New York and London: Garland Science. pp. e-book. ISBN 0-8153-4101-6. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?call=bv.View..ShowTOC&rid=imm.TOC&depth=10. .
  15. ^ Galli SJ (2000). "Allergy". Curr. Biol. 10 (3): R93â5. doi:10.1016/S0960-9822(00)00322-5. PMID 10679332.
  16. ^ a b c d e De Swert LF (1999). "Risk factors for allergy". Eur. J. Pediatr. 158 (2): 89â94. PMID 10048601.
  17. ^ a b Croner S (1992). "Prediction and detection of allergy development: influence of genetic and environmental factors". J. Pediatr. 121 (5 Pt 2): S58â63. PMID 1447635.
  18. ^ Jarvis D, Burney P (1997) Epidemiology of atopy and atopic disease In: Kay AB (ed) Allergy and allergic diseases, vol 2. Blackwell Science London, pp 1208â1224
  19. ^ Anderson HR, Pottier AC, Strachan DP (1992). "Asthma from birth to age 23: incidence and relation to prior and concurrent atopic disease". Thorax 47 (7): 537â42. PMID 1412098.
  20. ^ Barnes KC, Grant AV, Hansel NN, Gao P, Dunston GM (2007). "African Americans with asthma: genetic insights". Proc Am Thorac Soc 4 (1): 58â68. doi:10.1513/pats.200607-146JG. PMID 17202293. http://pats.atsjournals.org/cgi/content/full/4/1/58.
  21. ^ Folkerts G, Walzl G, Openshaw PJ. Do common childhood infections 'teach' the immune system not to be allergic? Immunol Today 2000; 21(3):118-120. PubMed
  22. ^ [1]
  23. ^ Gibson PG, Henry RL, Shah S, Powell H, Wang H (September 2003). "Migration to a western country increases asthma symptoms but not eosinophilic airway inflammation". Pediatr. Pulmonol. 36 (3): 209â15. doi:10.1002/ppul.10323. PMID 12910582.
  24. ^ Addo-Yobo EO, Woodcock A, Allotey A, Baffoe-Bonnie B, Strachan D, Custovic A (February 2007). "Exercise-induced bronchospasm and atopy in Ghana: two surveys ten years apart". PLoS Med. 4 (2): e70. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040070. PMID 17326711. PMC: 1808098. http://medicine.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?request=get-document&doi=10.1371/journal.pmed.0040070. Retrieved on 2008-07-06.
  25. ^ Marra F, Lynd L, Coombes M "et al." (2006). "Does antibiotic exposure during infancy lead to development of asthma?: a systematic review and metaanalysis". Chest 129 (3): 610â8. doi:10.1378/chest.129.3.610. PMID 16537858.
  26. ^ Thavagnanam S, Fleming J, Bromley A, Shields MD, Cardwell, CR (2007). "A meta-analysis of the association between Caesarean section and childhood asthma". Clin. And Exper. Allergy online ahead of print: 629. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2222.2007.02780.x.
  27. ^ Zock JP, Plana E, Jarvis D "et al." (2007). "The use of household cleaning sprays and adult asthma: an international longitudinal study". Am J Respir Crit Care Med 176 (8): 735â41. doi:10.1164/rccm.200612-1793OC. PMID 17585104.
  28. ^ a b Cooper PJ (2004). "Intestinal worms and human allergy". Parasite Immunol. 26 (11-12): 455â67. doi:10.1111/j.0141-9838.2004.00728.x. PMID 15771681.
  29. ^ Braun-FahrlÃ¤nder C, Riedler J, Herz U, et al (2002). "Environmental exposure to endotoxin and its relation to asthma in school-age children". N. Engl. J. Med. 347 (12): 869â77. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa020057. PMID 12239255.
  30. ^ Garn H, Renz H (2007). "Epidemiological and immunological evidence for the hygiene hypothesis". Immunobiology 212 (6): 441â52. doi:10.1016/j.imbio.2007.03.006. PMID 17544829.
  31. ^ Macpherson CN, Gottstein B, Geerts S (2000). "Parasitic food-borne and water-borne zoonoses". Rev. - Off. Int. Epizoot. 19 (1): 240â58. PMID 11189719.
  32. ^ Carvalho EM, Bastos LS, AraÃºjo MI (2006). "Worms and allergy". Parasite Immunol. 28 (10): 525â34. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3024.2006.00894.x. PMID 16965288.
  33. ^ Yazdanbakhsh M, Kremsner PG, van Ree R (2002). "Allergy, parasites, and the hygiene hypothesis". Science 296 (5567): 490â4. doi:10.1126/science.296.5567.490. PMID 11964470.
  34. ^ Emanuelsson C, Spangfort MD (2007). "Allergens as eukaryotic proteins lacking bacterial homologues". Mol. Immunol. 44 (12): 3256â60. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2007.01.019. PMID 17382394.
  35. ^ a b Falcone FH, Pritchard DI (2005). "Parasite role reversal: worms on trial". Trends Parasitol. 21 (4): 157â60. doi:10.1016/j.pt.2005.02.002. PMID 15780835.
  36. ^ Grimbaldeston MA, Metz M, Yu M, Tsai M, Galli SJ (2006). "Effector and potential immunoregulatory roles of mast cells in IgE-associated acquired immune responses". Curr. Opin. Immunol. 18 (6): 751â60. doi:10.1016/j.coi.2006.09.011. PMID 17011762.
  37. ^ Holt PG, Sly PD (2007). "Th2 cytokines in the asthma late-phase response". Lancet 370 (9596): 1396â8. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61587-6. PMID 17950849.
  38. ^ Allergic and Environmental Asthma at eMedicine \- Includes discussion of differentials
  39. ^ Wheeler PW, Wheeler SF (2005). "Vasomotor rhinitis". American family physician 72 (6): 1057â62. PMID 16190503. http://www.aafp.org/afp/20050915/1057.html.
  40. ^ a b Ten RM, Klein JS, Frigas E (1995). "Allergy skin testing". Mayo Clin. Proc. 70 (8): 783â4. PMID 7630219. http://www.mayoclinicproceedings.com/inside.asp?AID=3978&UID=.
  41. ^ Verstege A, Mehl A, Rolinck-Werninghaus C, et al (2005). "The predictive value of the skin prick test weal size for the outcome of oral food challenges". Clin. Exp. Allergy 35 (9): 1220â6. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2222.2005.2324.x. PMID 16164451.
  42. ^ Li JT, Andrist D, Bamlet WR, Wolter TD (2000). "Accuracy of patient prediction of allergy skin test results". Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 85 (5): 382â4. PMID 11101180.
  43. ^ Vidal C, Gude F, Boquete O, et al (2005). "Evaluation of the phadiatop test in the diagnosis of allergic sensitization in a general adult population". Journal of investigational allergology & clinical immunology 15 (2): 124â30. PMID 16047713.
  44. ^ Kerkhof M, Dubois AE, Postma DS, Schouten JP, de Monchy JG (2003). "Role and interpretation of total serum IgE measurements in the diagnosis of allergic airway disease in adults". Allergy 58 (9): 905â11. doi:10.1034/j.1398-9995.2003.00230.x. PMID 12911420.
  45. ^ Sicherer SH, Leung DY (2007). "Advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects". J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 119 (6): 1462â9. doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2007.02.013. PMID 17412401.
  46. ^ Ross RN, Nelson HS, Finegold I (2000). "Effectiveness of specific immunotherapy in the treatment of allergic rhinitis: an analysis of randomized, prospective, single- or double-blind, placebo-controlled studies". Clinical therapeutics 22 (3): 342â50. doi:10.1016/S0149-2918(00)80038-7. PMID 10963288.
  47. ^ Rank MA, Li JT (September 2007). "Allergen immunotherapy". Mayo Clin. Proc. 82 (9): 1119â23. PMID 17803880.
  48. ^ Passalacqua G, Durham SR (2007). "Allergic rhinitis and its impact on asthma update: allergen immunotherapy". J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 119 (4): 881â91. doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2007.01.045. PMID 17418661.
  49. ^ a b Terr AI (2004). "Unproven and controversial forms of immunotherapy". Clinical allergy and immunology 18: 703â10. PMID 15042943.
  50. ^ AltunÃ§ U, Pittler MH, Ernst E (2007). "Homeopathy for childhood and adolescence ailments: systematic review of randomized clinical trials". Mayo Clin. Proc. 82 (1): 69â75. PMID 17285788.
  51. ^ a b Platts-Mills TA, Erwin E, Heymann P, Woodfolk J (2005). "Is the hygiene hypothesis still a viable explanation for the increased prevalence of asthma?". Allergy 60 Suppl 79: 25â31. doi:10.1111/j.1398-9995.2005.00854.x. PMID 15842230.
  52. ^ a b c Bloomfield SF, Stanwell-Smith R, Crevel RW, Pickup J (2006). "Too clean, or not too clean: the hygiene hypothesis and home hygiene". Clin. Exp. Allergy 36 (4): 402â25. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2222.2006.02463.x. PMID 16630145.
  53. ^ Isolauri E, Huurre A, Salminen S, Impivaara O (2004). "The allergy epidemic extends beyond the past few decades". Clin. Exp. Allergy 34 (7): 1007â10. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2222.2004.01999.x. PMID 15248842.
  54. ^ "Chapter 4: The Extent and Burden of Allergy in the United Kingdom". House of Lords - Science and Technology - Sixth Report. 2007-07-24. http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200607/ldselect/ldsctech/166/16607.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  55. ^ "AAAAI - rhinitis, sinusitis, hay fever, stuffy nose, watery eyes, sinus infection". http://www.aaaai.org/patients/gallery/rhinitissinusitis.asp?item=1a. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  56. ^ Based on an estimated population of 303 million in 2007 U.S. POPClock. U.S. Census Bureau.
  57. ^ Based on an estimated population of 60.6 million UK population grows to 60.6 million
  58. ^ "AAAAI - asthma, allergy, allergies, prevention of allergies and asthma, treatment for allergies and asthma". http://www.aaaai.org/patients/gallery/prevention.asp?item=1a. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  59. ^ "AAAAI - skin condition, itchy skin, bumps, red irritated skin, allergic reaction, treating skin condition". http://www.aaaai.org/patients/gallery/skinallergies.asp?item=1a. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  60. ^ "AAAAI - anaphylaxis, cause of anaphylaxis, prevention, allergist, anaphylaxis statistics". http://www.aaaai.org/patients/gallery/anaphylaxis.asp?item=1a. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  61. ^ a b "AAAAI - food allergy, food reactions, anaphylaxis, food allergy prevention". http://www.aaaai.org/patients/gallery/foodallergy.asp?item=1a. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  62. ^ "AAAAI - stinging insect, allergic reaction to bug bite, treatment for insect bite". http://www.aaaai.org/patients/gallery/insect.asp?item=1a. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  63. ^ Strachan DP (1989). "Hay fever, hygiene, and household size". BMJ 299 (6710): 1259â60. PMID 2513902. Full text at PMC: 1838109
  64. ^ Yazdanbakhsh M, Kremsner PG, van Ree R (2002). "Allergy, parasites, and the hygiene hypothesis". Science 296 (5567): 490â4. doi:10.1126/science.296.5567.490. PMID 11964470.
  65. ^ Renz H, BlÃ¼mer N, Virna S, Sel S, Garn H (2006). "The immunological basis of the hygiene hypothesis". Chem Immunol Allergy 91: 30â48. doi:10.1159/000090228. PMID 16354947.
  66. ^ Matricardi PM, Rosmini F, Riondino S, et al (2000). "Exposure to foodborne and orofecal microbes versus airborne viruses in relation to atopy and allergic asthma: epidemiological study". BMJ 320 (7232): 412â7. doi:10.1136/bmj.320.7232.412. PMID 10669445. Full text at PMC: 27285
  67. ^ Masters S, Barrett-Connor E (1985). "Parasites and asthma--predictive or protective?". Epidemiol Rev 7: 49â58. PMID 4054238.
  68. ^ a b Sheikh A, Strachan DP (2004). "The hygiene theory: fact or fiction?". Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 12 (3): 232â6. PMID 15167035.
  69. ^ "ABAI: American Board of Allergy and Immunology". http://www.abai.org/training.asp. Retrieved on 2007-08-05.
  70. ^ "AAAAI - What is an Allergist?". http://www.aaaai.org/media/resources/allergist.asp. Retrieved on 2007-08-05.
  71. ^ Royal College of Physicians (2003). Allergy: the unmet need. London, UK: Royal College of Physicians. ISBN 1-86016-183-9. PDF versionPDF (1.03 MiB)
  72. ^ House of Lords - Science and Technology Committee (2007). Allergy - HL 166-I, 6th Report of Session 2006-07 - Volume 1: Report. London, UK: TSO (The Stationery Office). ISBN 0104011491. http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200607/ldselect/ldsctech/166/16602.htm.

## [edit] External links

  * American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology
  * American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology
  * Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America â patient advocacy organization
  * Allergy & Asthma Network Mothers of Asthmatics
  * American Board of Allergy and Immunology â ABAI establishes qualifications and examines physicians to become recognized specialists in allergy and immunology in the U.S.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Health science \- Medicine \- Allergic conditions  
Respiratory system

Allergic rhinitis Â· Asthma Â· Hypersensitivity pneumonitis Â· Eosinophilic
pneumonia Â· Churg-Strauss syndrome Â· Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Â· Farmer's lung  
Skin

Angioedema Â· Urticaria Â· Atopic dermatitis Â· Allergic contact dermatitis Â·
Hypersensitivity vasculitis  
Blood and immune system

Serum sickness  
Circulatory system

Anaphylaxis  
Digestive system

Coeliac disease Â· Eosinophilic gastroenteritis Â· Food allergy Â· Milk
intolerance  
Nervous system

Eosinophilic meningitis  
Genitourinary system

Acute interstitial nephritis  
Other conditions

Drug allergy Â· Allergic conjunctivitis Â· Latex allergy  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Consequences of external causes (T66-T88, 990-999)  
Temperature/radiation

elevated: Hyperthermia Â· Heat syncope Â· Radiation poisoning  
reduced: Hypothermia Â· Immersion foot Â· Chilblain  
Air/food

Aerosinusitis Â· Hypoxia Â· Barotrauma Â· Altitude sickness Â· Chronic
mountain sickness Â· Decompression sickness Â· Asphyxia  
Starvation  
Maltreatment

Physical abuse Â· Sexual abuse Â· Psychological abuse  
Emesis

Motion sickness Â· Seasickness Â· Airsickness Â· Space adaptation syndrome  
Other

Electric shock Â· Anaphylaxis Â· Angioedema

Hypersensitivity (Allergy, Arthus reaction)

Subcutaneous emphysema  
Certain early complications of trauma

embolism (Air, Fat)

Crush syndrome/Rhabdomyolysis

Contracture/Volkmann's contracture/Compartment syndrome  
Complications of surgical and medical care

transfusion reactions: Transfusion hemosiderosis Â· TRALI Â· TACO Â· TA-GvHD
Â· FNHTR Â· Acute/Delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction  
other: Serum sickness Â· Malignant hyperthermia Â· Herxheimer reaction Â·
Graft-versus-host disease Â· Tumor lysis syndrome  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Immune disorders: Hypersensitivity and autoimmune diseases  
Type I/allergy/atopy  
(IgE)

Foreign

Atopic dermatitis Â· Allergic urticaria Â· Hay fever Â· Allergic asthma Â·
Anaphylaxis Â· Food allergy (Milk, Egg, Peanut, Tree nut, Seafood, Soy, Wheat)  
Autoimmune

none  
Type II/ADCC  
(IgM, IgG)

Foreign

Pernicious anemia Â· Hemolytic disease of the newborn Â· Penicillin allergy  
Autoimmune

Cytotoxic

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia Â· Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Â· Bullous
pemphigoid Â· Pemphigus vulgaris Â· Rheumatic fever Â· Goodpasture's syndrome  
"Type 5"/receptor

Graves' disease Â· Myasthenia gravis  
Type III  
(Immune complex)

Foreign

Henoch-SchÃ¶nlein purpura Â· Hypersensitivity vasculitis Â· Reactive arthritis
Â· Rheumatoid arthritis Â· Farmer's lung Â· Post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis Â· Serum sickness Â· Arthus reaction  
Autoimmune

Systemic lupus erythematosus Â· Subacute bacterial endocarditis  
Type IV/cell-mediated  
(T-cells)

Foreign

Contact dermatitis Â· Mantoux test  
Autoimmune

Diabetes mellitus type 1 Â· Hashimoto's thyroiditis Â· Guillain-BarrÃ©
syndrome Â· Multiple sclerosis Â· Coeliac disease Â· Giant cell arteritis  
GVHD

Transfusion-associated graft versus host disease  
Unknown/  
multiple

Foreign

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis) Â·
Transplant rejection Â· Latex allergy (I+IV)  
Autoimmune

SjÃ¶gren's syndrome Â· Autoimmune hepatitis Â· Autoimmune polyendocrine
syndrome (APS1, APS2) Â· Autoimmune adrenalitis  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allergy"

Categories: Allergology | Immunology | Cutaneous conditions | Pulmonology |
Immune system

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * O'zbek
  * Ù¾ÚØªÙ
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VÃ¨neto
  * VÃµro
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 01:41.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



