
# Holophonics

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Holophonics is a trademark for a specific form of sound recording that is
based on the (unproven) hypothesis that the auditory system acts as an
interferometer. The sound characteristics of Holophonics are most clearly
heard through headphones, though can be demonstrated to be effective with
ordinary 2 channel stereo speakers. To optimize this effect, loudspeakers have
also been specifically designed for reproducing Holophonic recordings.

There has been some controversy over the claims made by Zucharelli regarding
this recording technique. The effects achieved are comparable to traditional
binaural recording using mannequin heads, or via more traditional 3D audio
techniques via HRTF's. There is no evidence nor studies conducted that
indicate that the Holophonic technique is substantially different from or
superior to these methods, nor has Zucharelli ever published his technique,
nor has he allowed independent study of the results.

While otoacoustic emissions do exist, there is no evidence to support his
assertion that these play a role in sound localization, nor is any mechanism
for this "interference" effect claimed by Zucharelli supported. On the
contrary, there is abundant literature proving that properly presented spatial
cues via HRTF synthesis (mimicing binaural heads) or binaural recording is
adequate to reproduce realistic spatial recordings comparable to real
listening.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Recordings released using holophonics
  * 3 Examples of holophonic sound
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] History

Holophonics was created by Argentine Hugo Zuccarelli in 1980, during his
studies at the Polytechnic of Milan, Italy. It, along with Zuccarelli, rose to
fame in 1983 with the release of a recording entitled Zuccarelli Holophonics
(The Matchbox Shaker) released in the UK by CBS which consisted entirely of
short recordings of sound effects designed to show off the system. These
included the shaking matchbox, haircut & blower, bees, balloon, plastic bag,
birds, airplanes, fireworks, thunder, and racing cars. In its early years,
Holophonics was used by various artists including Michael Jackson, who used
Holophonics on his album "Bad", Paul McCartney, and Richard Branson. It has
been used in film soundtrack, popular music, television and themeparks.[2]

Zuccarelli states that the human auditory system is a sound emitter, producing
a reference sound that combines with incoming sound to form an interference
pattern inside the ear. The nature of this pattern is sensitive to the
direction of the incoming sound. According to the hypothesis, the cochlea
detects and analyzes this pattern as if it were an acoustic hologram. The
brain then interprets this data and infers the direction of the sound. An
article from Zuccarelli presenting this theory was printed in the magazine New
Scientist in 1983. This article was followed soon after by two letters casting
doubt on Zuccarelli's theory and his scientific abilities.[3][4]

Holophonics, like binaural recording, reproduces the interaural differences
(arrival time and amplitude between the ears), as well as rudimentary head-
related transfer functions (HRTF). These create the illusion that sounds
produced in the membrane of a speaker emanate from specific directions. To
produce digital holophonic or binaural recordings, a mono source requires many
HRTF channels combined.[citation needed].

## [edit] Recordings released using holophonics

  * Pink Floyd, "The Final Cut" Harvest/E.M.I, 7243 8 31242 2 0 (1982).[5]
  * Roger Waters, "The Pros and Cons of Hitchhiking", Harvest, CDP 7 46029 2 (1984).[5]
  * Psychic TV, "Dreams Less Sweet", Some Bizzare (1983).

## [edit] Examples of holophonic sound

  * Holophonics Sound Samples:
  * From holophonic.ch: â An example of holophonics: you hear someone lighting two matches, first on your right and then your left. You then hear the box of matches shaking all around your head. Listen with headphones. It appears that Zuccarelli and Maggi have worked together in Italy in the '80s. Another example from holophonic.ch is the sensual voice of a woman whispering into your ears going from the left to right.
  * Blowdryer
  * Bell

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Gilkey & Anderson, "Binaural and Spatial Hearing in Real and Virtual Environments"
  2. ^ Holophonics Media History
  3. ^ Zuccarelli, Hugo; "Ears Hear by Making Sounds," New Scientist, 438-440 1983
  4. ^ Baxter, A.J., and Kemp, David T.; "Zuccarelli's Theory," New Scientist, 606-606 1983
  5. ^ a b Mabbett, Andy (1995). The Complete Guide to the Music of Pink Floyd. London: Omnibus,. pp. 150p.. ISBN 071194301x.

## [edit] External links

  * Acoustic Integrity â This is the official contact page and site for Hugo Zuccarelli and his technologies. It contains technical clarifications, historical notes on the use of Holophonics in the 80's and 90's, some sound samples, interviews, videos, and updates on his inventions for the market.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holophonics"

Categories: Sound recording technology | Headphones

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 March 2009, at 11:40 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



