
# Necker Cube

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Necker Cube: a wire frame cube with no depth cues.

The Necker Cube is an optical illusion first published in 1832 by Swiss
crystallographer Louis Albert Necker.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Ambiguity
  * 2 Epistemology
  * 3 Impossible cube
  * 4 See also
  * 5 External links
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] Ambiguity

See also: Ambiguity#Visual art

The Necker Cube is an ambiguous line drawing. It is a wire-frame drawing of a
cube in isometric perspective, which means that parallel edges of the cube are
drawn as parallel lines in the picture. When two lines cross, the picture does
not show which is in front and which is behind. This makes the picture
ambiguous; it can be interpreted two different ways. When a person stares at
the picture, it will often seem to flip back and forth between the two valid
interpretations (so-called multistable perception).

<IMG>

Necker Cube on the left, impossible cube on the right.

<IMG>

<IMG>

One possible interpretation of the Necker Cube, often claimed to be the most
common interpretation[citation needed]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Another possible interpretation

The effect is interesting because each part of the picture is ambiguous by
itself, yet the human visual system picks an interpretation of each part that
makes the whole consistent. The Necker Cube is sometimes used to test computer
models of the human visual system to see whether they can arrive at consistent
interpretations of the image the same way humans do.

Humans do not usually see an inconsistent interpretation of the cube. A cube
whose edges cross in an inconsistent way is an example of an impossible
object, specifically an impossible cube (compare Penrose triangle).

With the cube on the left, most people see the lower-left face as being in
front most of the time. This is possibly because people view objects from
above, with the top side visible, far more often than from below, with the
bottom visible, so the brain "prefers" the interpretation that the cube is
viewed from above.

There is evidence that by focusing on different parts of the figure one can
force a more stable perception of the cube. The intersection of the two faces
that are parallel to the observer forms a rectangle, and the lines that
converge on the square form a "y-junction" at the two diagonally opposite
sides. If an observer focuses on the upper "y-junction" the lower left face
will appear to be in front. The upper right face will appear to be in front if
the eyes focus on the lower junction (Einhauser, et al., 2004).

<IMG>

<IMG>

This is an example of two exactly identical necker cubes, the one on the left
showing an intermediate object going in "down from the top" while the one on
the right shows the object going in "up from the bottom" which shows how the
image can change its perspective simply by changing which face (front or back)
appears behind the intervening object.

It is possible to cause the switch to occur by focussing on different parts of
the cube. If one sees the first interpretation on the right it is possible to
cause a switch to the second by focussing on the base of the cube until the
switch occurs to the second interpretation. Similarly, if one is viewing the
second interpretation, focussing on the left side of the cube may cause a
switch to the first.  
The Necker Cube has shed light on the human visual system. The phenomenon has
served as evidence of the human brain being a neural network with two distinct
equally possible interchangeable stable states.[2] Sidney Bradford, blind from
the age of ten months but regaining his sight following an operation at age
52, did not perceive the ambiguity that normal-sighted observers do.[citation
needed]

## [edit] Epistemology

The Necker Cube is used in epistemology (the study of knowledge) and provides
a counter-attack against naÃ¯ve realism. NaÃ¯ve realism (also known as direct
or common-sense realism) states that the way we perceive the world is the way
the world actually is. The Necker Cube seems to disprove this claim because we
see one or the other of two cubes, but really, there is no cube there at all:
only a two-dimensional drawing of twelve lines. We see something which is not
really there, thus (allegedly) disproving naÃ¯ve realism. This criticism of
naÃ¯ve realism supports representative realism.

A rotating Necker Cube was used to demonstrate that the human visual system
can recruit new visual cues that affect the way things look.

Richard Dawkins in his 1982 book The Extended Phenotype, and later new preface
to a later edition of The Selfish Gene, uses a Necker Cube as an analogy of
two ways to view the same object to introduce the gene-centric view of
evolution. He again refers to the Necker Cube in his book, The God Delusion

## [edit] Impossible cube

<IMG>

<IMG>

Viewed from a certain angle, this cube appears to defy the laws of geometry.

The impossible cube or irrational cube is an impossible object that draws upon
the ambiguity present in a Necker Cube illustration[citation needed]. An
impossible cube is usually rendered as a Necker Cube in which the edges are
apparently solid beams. This apparent solidity gives the impossible cube
greater visual ambiguity than the Necker Cube, which is less likely to be
perceived as an impossible object. The illusion plays on the human eye's
interpretation of two-dimensional pictures as three-dimensional objects.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Viewed from another angle, however, the non-impossibility of the shape is
apparentâits cubic nature itself is an illusion.

In M. C. Escher's lithograph Belvedere, the figure of a boy seated at the foot
of the building is holding a type of impossible cube; the rest of the scene is
based on the same principle that makes the impossible cube. In the scene, a
ladder from the inside of the first story leads to the outside of the second.
However, this is not appreciated by the prisoner in the basement cell because
the basement is a possible cuboid and he is unambiguously on the inside.

A doctored photograph purporting to be of an impossible cube was published in
the June 1966 issue of Scientific American, where it was called a "Freemish
Crate".

## [edit] See also

  * Penrose triangle
  * The Spinning Dancer
  * Blivet

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Necker cubes  
  * History of the cube and a Java applet
  * Modelling human perception of the cube
  * Explanation of the Necker cube and other gestalt phenomena
  * Video demonstration of the Necker Cube

## [edit] References

  1. ^ David Marr: Vision. 1983. p26
  2. ^ David Marr: Vision. 1982.

  * EinhÃ¤user, Wolfgang, Martin, Kevan A. C. & KÃ¶nig, Peter (2004) Are switches in perception of the Necker cube related to eye position?. European Journal of Neuroscience 20 (10), 2811-2818.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Necker_Cube"

Categories: Optical illusions | Impossible objects

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 March 2009, at 19:56.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



