
# Baseball metaphors for sex

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The game of baseball is often used as a euphemistic metaphor for physical
intimacy in the United States and other places the game is played, especially
to describe the level of sexual intimacy achieved in intimate encounters or
relationships.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 List of sexual metaphors
  * 3 Recent changes
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] History

In the baseball metaphor, sexual activities are described as if they are moves
in a game of baseball. In the United States from the end of World War II to
present, men of all ages would sometimes use this competitive analogy to
describe their successes in "making it" with girls.[2][3]

## [edit] List of sexual metaphors

Although details vary, the most broadly accepted description of what each base
represented is as follows:

  * First base is commonly understood to be French kissing, but can also mean any mouth-to-mouth kissing.[4][5]
  * Second base is groping or feeling up underneath the shirt.
  * Third base usually refers to mutual masturbation, fondling or groping of male or female genitals[5] or oral sex[6] (although historically used to mean fingering or giving a handjob[5][7])
  * Scoring a Run, Hitting a Home Run, (or "Fourth base", "scoring", "going all the way", "coming home", "rounding the bases" etc.) is sexual intercourse.[4][5][8][9]

Other baseball sexual metaphors:

  * Striking out is often used to describe rejection and sexual frustration.[10]
  * Pitcher and catcher are used to describe the participants in male homosexual anal intercourse.[10]
  * Switch-hitter refers to bisexuals, while a "switch" may refer to someone who takes both a "top" or "bottom" role in domination play.[citation needed]

## [edit] Recent changes

<IMG>

This article is written like an advertisement. Please help rewrite this
article from a neutral point of view. For blatant advertising that would
require a fundamental rewrite to become encyclopedic, use `{{db-spam}}` to
mark for speedy deletion. (February 2009)  
This sequence of "running the bases" is often regarded as script, or pattern,
for young people who are experimenting with sexual relationships. The script
has changed slightly since the 1960s. Kohl and Francoeur note that with the
growing emphasis in the 1990s on safe sex and efforts by the feminist movement
to expand sex beyond phallo-vaginal intercourse, the "home run" has taken on
the additional dimension of oral-genital sexual intercourse. Richters and
Rissel similarly point out that "third base" has since become seen, by some
people, to comprise oral sex as part of the accepted pattern of activities, as
a pre-cursor to "full" (i.e. phallo-vaginal) sex.[11][12]

Mullaney reports the idea that the introduction of oral sex is in fact a "new
teen model", that is replacing the "traditional base system", in part as an
"unintended offspring of 'abstinence-only' education". In this new model, sex
acts, including many that were not included as part of the traditional "base"
system, are classified in a wholly different way. The acts that count as "sex"
are distinguished from those that do not count as "sex" according to whether
it is possible to become pregnant from them. Thus oral sex, anal sex, and "a
variety of other acts" are reclassified in the new model as "not a big deal"
and "part of the realm of abstinence". Mullaney states that "obviously, not
all teens subscribe to this revised model of classification".[13]

Educators have found the baseball metaphor an effective instructional tool
when providing sex education to middle school students.[10] Levin and Bell, in
their book A Chicken's Guide to Talking Turkey With Your Kids About Sex, make
use of it to aid parents in the discussion of puberty with their children,
dividing the topics into "first base" ("Changes from the neck up"), "second
base" ("Changes from the neck to the waist"), "third base" ("Changes from the
waist down"), and "home plate" ("The Big 'It'").[14] The bases may be
different for different people, and genders.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Steven L. Hellermann and Andrei S. Markovits (2001). Offside: soccer and American exceptionalism. Princeton University Press. p. 66\. ISBN 069107447X.
  2. ^ Suzanne Romaine (1999). Communicating Gender. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. p. 210\. ISBN 0805829261.
  3. ^ Marty Jezer (1982). The Dark Ages, Life in the United States, 1945â1960. South End Press. p. 248\. ISBN 0896081273.
  4. ^ a b Ava L. Siegler (1997). The Essential Guide to the New Adolescence: How to Raise an Emotionally Healthy Teenager. Dutton. p. 27\. ISBN 0525939709.
  5. ^ a b c d teenwire.com Editors (2001-01-06). "Ask the Experts: What do people mean by going to first base, second base, third base, and hitting a homerun?". teenwire.com. http://www.teenwire.com/ask/2001/as-20010601p227.php.
  6. ^ Homeword.com Information of Adolescent sex and sexuality
  7. ^ Sex and Baseball: Covering the Bases, student.com, 7 November 2005.
  8. ^ Eye Weekly
  9. ^ Houston - News - Podnography
  10. ^ a b c Alvin L. Hall and Thomas L. Altherr (2002). "Eros at the Bat: American Baseball and Sexuality in Historical Context". The Cooperstown Symposium on Baseball and American Culture 1998. McFarland & Company. pp. 157â182. ISBN 0786409541.
  11. ^ Juliet Richters and Chris Rissel (2005). Doing it Down Under: The Sexual Lives of Australians. Allen & Unwin. p. 32\. ISBN 1741143268.
  12. ^ James V. Kohl and Robert T. Francoeur (2002). The Scent of Eros: Mysteries of Odor in Human Sexuality. iUniverse. pp. 153â154. ISBN 059523383X.
  13. ^ Jamie L. Mullaney (2005). Everyone Is NOT Doing It: Abstinence and Personal Identity. University of Chicago. pp. 153â154. ISBN 0226547566.
  14. ^ Kevin Leman and Kathy Flores Bell (2004). A Chicken's Guide to Talking Turkey With Your Kids About Sex: A Healthy Look at Sexuality for. Zondervan. ISBN 031025096X.

## [edit] External links

  * David Dale (2004-02-10). "Strike me lucky, it just isn't cricket". The Sun-Herald. http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2004/02/09/1076175089032.html?from=storyrhs.
  * Nikki Sen. "Moving Beyond First Base". Lifestyle. Indiainfo. http://lifestyle.indiainfo.com/relationships/kamasutra/moving_beyond_first_base.html.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baseball_metaphors_for_sex"

Categories: Intimate relationships | Sexual acts | Human sexuality

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since September 2008 | Wikipedia articles needing style
editing from February 2009 | All articles needing style editing

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 April 2009, at 19:50 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



