
# Pyramid scheme

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The unsustainable geometric progression of a classic pyramid scheme

A pyramid scheme is a non-sustainable business model that involves the
exchange of money primarily for enrolling other people into the scheme, often
without any product or service being delivered.

Pyramid schemes are illegal in many countries, including the United States[1],
the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Canada, Romania[2], Colombia[3],
Malaysia, Norway, Bulgaria, Australia[4], New Zealand[5], Japan[6], Italy[7],
Nepal[citation needed], Philippines[8], South Africa[9], Sri Lanka[10],
Thailand[11], Iran[citation needed], and the People's Republic of China[12].
These types of schemes have existed for at least a century.

## Contents

  * 1 Concept and basic models
    * 1.1 "8-ball" model
    * 1.2 Matrix schemes
  * 2 Notable recent cases
    * 2.1 Internet
    * 2.2 Others
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Concept and basic models

<IMG>

This section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss
these issues on the talk page.

  * It may contain original research or unverifiable claims. Tagged since February 2009.  

  * Its neutrality or factuality may be compromised by weasel words. Tagged since February 2009.  

  
A successful pyramid scheme combines a fake yet seemingly credible business
with a simple-to-understand yet sophisticated-sounding money-making formula
The essential idea is that the mark, Mr. X, makes only one payment. To start
earning, Mr. X has to recruit others like him who will also make one payment
each. Mr. X gets paid out of receipts from those new recruits. They then go on
to recruit others. As each new recruit makes a payment, Mr. X gets a cut. He
is thus promised exponential benefits as the ''business'' expands.

Such ''businesses'' seldom involve sales of real products or services to which
a money value might be easily attached. However, sometimes the ''payment''
itself may be a non-cash valuable. To enhance credibility, most such scams are
well equipped with fake referrals, testimonials, and information. Clearly, the
flaw is that there is no end benefit. The money simply travels up the chain.
Only the originator (sometimes called the "pharaoh") and a very few at the top
levels of the pyramid make significant amounts of money. The amounts dwindle
steeply down the pyramid slopes. Of course, the worst off are at the bottom of
the pyramid: those who subscribed to the plan, but were not able to recruit
any followers themselves.

Some network or multi-level marketing businesses, which sell real products and
rely on the price differentials between the manufacturer's dispatch ramp and
the retail counter, may verge on the borderline between ''smart'' and
''scam''. When a pyramid does involve a real product, such as Holiday Magic
cosmetics in the United States in the 1970s, new "dealers" who've paid
enrolling fees are encouraged, in addition to selling their products, to
become "managers" and recruit more new "dealers" who will also pay enrolling
fees. As the number of layers of the pyramid increases, new recruits find it
harder and harder to sell the product because there are so many competing
salespeople. Those near or at the top of the pyramid make a lot of money on
their percentage of the enrolling fees and on commissions for the supplied
products, but those at the bottom are left with inventories of products they
can't sell. However, most multi-level marketing businesses are not pyramid
schemes.[citation needed]

  

### [edit] "8-ball" model

Many pyramids are more sophisticated than the simple model. These recognize
that recruiting a large number of others into a scheme can be difficult so a
seemingly simpler model is used. In this model each person must recruit two
others, but the ease of achieving this is offset because the depth required to
recoup any money also increases. The scheme requires a person to recruit two
others, who must each recruit two others, who must each recruit two others.

<IMG>

The "8-ball" model contains a total of 15 members. Note that unlike in the
picture, the triangular setup in the cue game of eight-ball corresponds to an
arithmetic progression 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 = 15. The pyramid scheme in the
picture in contrast is a geometric progression 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 = 15.

  
Prior instances of this scam have been called the "Airplane Game" and the four
tiers labelled as "captain", "co-pilot", "crew", and "passenger" to denote a
person's level. Another instance was called the "Original Dinner Party" which
labelled the tiers as "dessert", "main course", "side salad", and "appetizer".
A person on the "dessert" course is the one at the top of the tree. Another
variant "Treasure Traders" variously used gemology terms such as "polishers",
"stone cutters", etc. or gems "rubies", "sapphires", "diamonds", etc.

Such schemes may try to downplay their pyramid nature by referring to
themselves as "gifting circles" with money being "gifted". Popular scams such
as the "Women Empowering Women"[13] do exactly this. Joiners may even be told
that "gifting" is a way to skirt around tax laws.

Whichever euphemism is used, there are 15 total people in four tiers (1 + 2 +
4 + 8) in the scheme - the person at the top of this tree is the "captain",
the two below are "co-pilots", the four below are "crew" and the bottom eight
joiners are the "passengers".

The eight passengers must each pay (or "gift") a sum (e.g. $1000) to join the
scheme. This sum (e.g. $8000) goes to the captain who leaves, with everyone
remaining moving up one tier. There are now two new captains so the group
splits in two with each group requiring eight new passengers. A person who
joins the scheme as a passenger will not see a return until they exit the
scheme as a captain. This requires that 14 others have been persuaded to join
underneath them.

Therefore, the bottom 3 tiers of the pyramid always lose their money when the
scheme finally collapses. Consider a pyramid consisting of tiers with 1, 2, 4,
8, 16, 32, and 64 members. The highlighted section corresponds to the previous
diagram.

<IMG>

No matter how large the model becomes before collapse, approximately 88% of
all people will lose.

If the scheme collapses at this point, only those in the 1, 2, 4, and 8 got
out with a return. The remainder in the 16, 32, and 64 tier lose everything.
112 out of the total 127 members or 88% lost all of their money.

During a wave of pyramid activity, a surge frequently develops once a
significant fraction of people know someone personally who exited with a $8000
payout for example. This spurs others to seek to get in on one of the many
pyramids before the wave collapses.

The figures also hide the fact that the confidence trickster would make the
lion's share of the money. They would do this by filling in the first 3 tiers
(with 1, 2, and 4 people) with phoney names, ensuring they get the first 7
payouts, at 8 times the buy-in sum, without paying a single penny themselves.
So if the buy-in were $1000, they would receive $56,000, paid for by the first
56 investors. They would continue to buy in underneath the real investors, and
promote and prolong the scheme for as long as possible in order to allow them
to skim even more from it before the collapse.

Other cons may also be effective. For example, rather than using fake names, a
group of seven people may agree to form the top three layers of a pyramid
without investing any money. They then work to recruit eight paying
passengers, and pretend to follow the pyramid payout rules, but in reality
split any money received. Ironically, though they are being conned, the eight
paying passengers are not really getting anything less for their money than if
they were buying into a 'legitimate' pyramid which had split off from a parent
pyramid. They truly are now in a valid pyramid, and have the same opportunity
to earn a windfall if they can successfully recruit enough new members and
reach captain. This highlights the fact that by 'buying' in to a pyramid,
passengers are not really obtaining anything of value they couldn't create
themselves other than a vague sense of "legitimacy" or history of the pyramid,
which may make it marginally easier to sell passenger seats below them.

### [edit] Matrix schemes

Main article: Matrix scheme

Matrix schemes use the same fraudulent non-sustainable system as a pyramid;
here, the victims pay to join a waiting list for a desirable product which
only a fraction of them can ever receive. Since matrix schemes follow the same
laws of geometric progression as pyramids, they are subsequently as doomed to
collapse. Such schemes operate as a queue, where the person at head of the
queue receives an item such as a television, games console, digital camcorder,
etc. when a certain number of new people join the end of the queue. For
example ten joiners may be required for the person at the front to receive
their item and leave the queue. Each joiner is required to buy an expensive
but worthless item, such as an e-book, for their position in the queue. The
scheme organizer profits because the income from joiners far exceeds the cost
of sending out the item to the person at the front. Organizers can further
profit by starting a scheme with a queue with shill names that must be cleared
out before genuine people get to the front. The scheme collapses when no more
people are willing to join the queue. Schemes may not reveal, or may attempt
to exaggerate, a prospective joiner's queue position which essentially means
the scheme is a lottery. Some countries have ruled that matrix schemes are
illegal on that basis.

## [edit] Notable recent cases

### [edit] Internet

In 2003, an internet-based "pyramid scam"[14] was uncovered by the United
States Federal Trade Commission (FTC), where customers would pay a
registration fee to join a program and purchase a package which included
Internet mail and related goods and services. The FTC's complaint states that
the company assured consumers who purchased the package that it would allow
them to earn significant commissions for every website sold.

The FTC alleged that the company deceptively represented that consumers who
participated in their scheme would earn substantial income, when in fact most
consumers lost money in the operation, and that the defendants provided
deceptive marketing material to affiliates - providing them with the means to
deceive others; and finally, the company failed to disclose that a substantial
percentage of participants would lose money, and that the scheme was actually
an illegal pyramid scheme.

Pyramid schemes generally spread through emails, many of which may use
confusing language, with the intent to make you think it is a multi-level
marketing (MLM) business plan. MLM plans have their share of detractors, but
they are legal because they have a product to sell. Examples of successful MLM
plans are Amway, Mary Kay, Tupperware, and Avon Products. The difference
between MLM plans and pyramid schemes is that pyramid schemes do not offer a
genuine product.[15]

### [edit] Others

In early 2006 Ireland was hit by a wave of schemes with major activity in Cork
and Galway. Participants were asked to contribute â¬20,000 each to a
"Liberty" scheme which followed the classic 8-ball model. Payments were made
in Munich, Germany to skirt Irish tax laws concerning gifts. Spin-off schemes
called "Speedball" and "People in Profit" prompted a number of violent
incidents and calls were made by politicians to tighten existing
legislation.[16] Ireland has launched a website to better educate consumers to
pyramid schemes and other scams.[17]

On November 12, 2008 riots broke out in the municipalities of Pasto, Tumaco,
Popayan and Santander de Quilichao, Colombia after the collapse of several
pyramid schemes. Thousands of victims had invested their money in pyramids
that promised them extraordinary interest rates. The lack of regulation laws
allowed those pyramids to grow excessively during several years. Finally,
after the riots the Colombian government was forced to declare the country in
economical emergency in order to seize and stop those schemes. Several of the
pyramid's managers were arrested and are being prosecuted for the crime of
"illegal massive money reception".[18]

November 2008: The Kyiv Post reported on November 26th 2008 that American
citizen Robert Fletcher (Robert T. Fletcher III; aka "Rob") was arrested by
the SBU (Ukraine State Police) after being accused by Ukrainian investors of
running a ponzi scheme and associated pyramid scam netting $20 Million USD
(Kiev Post also reports that some estimates are as high as $150M USD).

In early 2008, allegations of cheating were made against QuestNet India based
on an unverified complaint from a single customer which received intense media
attention leading to mass panic among the public. Many customers filed
complaints against the company and the MD of Questnet India, Ms. Pushpam was
taken into police custody where she remained for five months. [19] Based on
media reports, it is learnt that various allegations have been made about the
company having defrauded people of several hundred crores of rupees. Police in
Tamilnadu state are currently investigating the complaints and Ms.Pushpam has
been released on bail. No charge sheet has been filed against the company so
far. The company has denied all allegations against it and has stated
repeatedly through advertisements in newspapers that it runs a legitimate
network marketing business. The company has pointed out that due to lack of
any legislation governing network marketing, direct sales or Multi-Level
marketing industries in India, there is a lack of awareness about the business
model and hence is open to misinterpretation and misrepresentation that leads
to complaints from customers who do not fully understand what they are signing
up for.

  
Pyramid Schemes were outlawed in the UK by The Trading Schemes Act 1996.
However, the legislation was so worded that legitimate Franchise Schemes were
caught by the legislation and following lobbying by the British Franchise
Association a memo was issued to the British Franchise Association by the
Department of Trade and Industry on the 19th July 1997 which amended the
wording of the legislation. The law on statute is now impossible to follow
without reference to the memo.

## [edit] See also

  * Amway
  * Autosurf
  * BurnLounge
  * High-yield investment program
  * Holiday Magic
  * Ponzi scheme
  * Primerica
  * Sali Berisha
  * Make Money Fast
  * Multi-level marketing
  * Vector Marketing
  * Bernard Madoff
  * Bux.to

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Pyramid Schemes Debra A. Valentine, General Counsel, Federal Trade Commission
  2. ^ Explozia piramidelor Ziarul Ziua, 12.07.2006
  3. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/7736124.stm
  4. ^ Trade Practices Amandment Act (No. 1) 2002 Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth) ss 65AAA - 65AAE, 75AZO
  5. ^ Laws and Regulations Covering Multi-Level Marketing Programs and Pyramid Schemes Consumer Fraud Reporting.com
  6. ^ ç¡éé£éè¬ã®é²æ­¢ã«é¢ããæ³å¾ (in Japanese)
  7. ^ Legge 17 agosto 2005, n. 173 (in Italian)
  8. ^ [1] Investors in Philippine Pyramid Scheme Lose over $2 Billion
  9. ^ [2] Pyramid Schemes
  10. ^ Pyramid Schemes Illegal Under Section 83c of the Banking Act of Sri LankaDepartment of Government Printing, Sri Lanka
  11. ^ à¸à¹à¸­à¸¡à¸¹à¸¥à¹à¸à¸´à¹à¸¡à¹à¸à¸´à¸¡à¹à¸à¸£à¸°à¸à¸à¸à¸¸à¸£à¸à¸´à¸à¸à¸²à¸¢à¸à¸£à¸à¹à¸¥à¸°à¸à¸¸à¸£à¸à¸´à¸à¸à¸µà¸£à¸°à¸¡à¸´à¸ by Thai Direct Selling Association (in Thai)
  12. ^ Regulations for the Prohibition of Pyramid Sales
  13. ^ Pyramid selling scam that preys on women to be banned
  14. ^ FTC Charges Internet Mall Is a Pyramid Scam Federal Trade Commission
  15. ^ MySecureCyberSpace
  16. ^ GardaÃ­ hold firearm after pyramid scheme incident Irish Examiner
  17. ^ National Consumer Agency Ireland
  18. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/7726069.stm
  19. ^ http://www.hindu.com/2008/05/25/stories/2008052560330100.htm

## [edit] External links

  * An information graphic that describes a pyramid scheme
  * FTC consumer complaint form
  * Article by Financial Crimes Investigator, Bill E. Branscum
  * Spoof article
  * The Math Behind Pyramid Schemes, Chain Letters, and 2-Up Schemes \- Investigates the mathematics of the geometric series involved.
  * IMF feature on "The Rise and Fall of Albania's Pyramid Schemes"
  * Cockeyed.com presents: Pyramid Schemes \- A thorough description of the 8-ball model and matrix schemes which is a close cousin to pyramid schemes.
  * National Consumer Agency on Pyramid Schemes \- Irish consumer site describes two local pyramid schemes and offers advice to would-be participants.
  * National Consumer Agency Ireland
  * Australian Trade Practices Amendment Act (No. 1) 2002 Australian Law Online
  * Public Warning on Pyramid Schemes Central Bank of Sri Lanka

v â¢ d â¢ e

Confidence tricks and con artists  
Terminology

Confidence trick Â· Error account Â· Mark Â· Shill Â· Sucker list

<IMG>  
Notable confidence tricks

Advance fee fraud Â· Badger game Â· Black money scam Â· Bogus escrow Â· Clip
joint Â· Drop Swindle Â· Embarrassing cheque Â· Employment scams Â· Hustling
Â· Mock auction Â· Penny-and-dime scam Â· Pig in a poke Â· Pigeon drop Â·
Reloading scam Â· Shell game Â· Slavery reparations scam Â· Spanish Prisoner
Â· Thai gem scam Â· Thai tailor scam Â· Three-card Monte Â· White van speakers  
Pyramid and Ponzi schemes  
(List of Ponzi schemes)

Dona Branca Â· Caritas Â· Bernard Cornfeld Â· Foundation for New Era
Philanthropy Â· High-yield investment program Â· Investors Overseas Service Â·
MMM Â· Make Money Fast Â· Reed Slatkin  
Notable con artists

Frank Abagnale Â· Tino De Angelis Â· Philip Arnold Â· Nicky Arnstein Â· Scotty
Â· Lou Blonger Â· Ed "Big Ed" Burns Â· David "Race" Bannon Â· Matthew Cox Â·
Louis Enricht Â· Billie Sol Estes Â· Arthur Furguson Â· Peter Foster Â· Oscar
Hartzell Â· Sante Kimes Â· Henri Lemoine Â· Victor Lustig Â· Gregor MacGregor
Â· Bernard Madoff Â· George C. Parker Â· Charles Ponzi Â· Steven Jay Russell
Â· Casey Serin Â· Soapy Smith Â· Titanic Thompson Â· William Thompson Â·
Joseph Weil Â· Fictional con artists  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pyramid_scheme"

Categories: Pyramid and Ponzi schemes | Business models | Direct marketing |
Promotion and marketing communications | Marketing

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles that may contain original
research since February 2009 | Articles with weasel words from February 2009 |
Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 18:24.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



