
# Cyberculture

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the cyber subculture, see Cyber (subculture).

Cyberculture is the culture that has emerged, or is emerging, from the use of
computer networks for communication, entertainment and business.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Manifestations of Cyberculture
  * 3 Qualities of Cyberculture
  * 4 Identity in Cyberculture
  * 5 Cyberculture studies
  * 6 References
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Further Reading
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

Since the boundaries of cyberculture are difficult to define, the term is used
flexibly, and its application to specific circumstances can be controversial.
It generally refers at least to the cultures of virtual communities, but
extends to a wide range of cultural issues relating to "cyber-topics", e.g.
cybernetics, and the perceived or predicted cyborgization of the human body
and human society itself. It can also embrace associated intellectual and
cultural movements, such as cyborg theory and cyberpunk. The term often
incorporates an implicit anticipation of the future.

The Oxford English Dictionary lists the earliest usage of the term
"cyberculture" in 1963, when A.M. Hilton wrote, "In the era of cyberculture,
all the plows pull themselves and the fried chickens fly right onto our
plates."[1] This example, and all others, up through 1995 are used to support
the definition of cyberculture as "the social conditions brought about by
automation and computerization."[1] The American Heritage Dictionary broadens
the sense in which "cyberculture" is used by defining it as, "The culture
arising from the use of computer networks, as for communication,
entertainment, work, and business".[2] However, what both the OED and the
American Heritage Dictionary miss is that cyberculture is the culture within
and among users of computer networks. This cyberculture may be purely an
online culture or it may span both virtual and physical worlds. This is to
say, that cyberculture is a culture endemic to online communities; it is not
just the culture that results from computer use, but culture that is directly
mediated by the computer. Another way to envision cyberculture is as the
electronically-enabled linkage of like-minded, but potentially geographically
disparate (or physically disabled and hence less mobile) persons.

Cyberculture is a wide social and cultural movement closely linked to advanced
information science and information technology, their emergence, development
and rise to social and cultural prominence between the 1960s and the 1990s.
Cyberculture was influenced at its genesis by those early users of the
internet, frequently including the architects of the original project. These
individuals were often guided in their actions by the hacker ethic. While
early cyberculture was based on a small cultural sample, and its ideals, the
modern cyberculture is a much more diverse group of users and the ideals that
they espouse.

Numerous specific concepts of cyberculture have been formulated by such
authors as Lev Manovich,[3][4] Arturo Escobar and Fred Forest.[5] However,
most of these concepts concentrate only on certain aspects, and they do not
cover these in great detail. Some authors aiming to achieve a more
comprehensive understanding distinguish between early and contemporary
cyberculture (Jakub Macek),[5] or between cyberculture as the cultural context
of information technology and cyberculture (more specifically cyberculture
studies) as "a particular approach to the study of the 'culture + technology'
complex" (David Lister et al.).[6]

## [edit] Manifestations of Cyberculture

Manifestations of Cyberculture include various human interactions mediated by
computer networks. They can be activities, pursuits, games, places and
metaphors, and include a diverse base of applications. Some are supported by
specialized software and others work on commonly accepted web protocols.
Examples include but are not limited to:

  * Blogs
  * Social Networks
  * Games

  * Chat
  * USENET
  * Bulletin Board Systems

  * E-Commerce
  * Peer to Peer Networks
  * Virtual worlds

  
## [edit] Qualities of Cyberculture

First and foremost, cyberculture derives from traditional notions of culture,
as the roots of the word imply. In non-cyberculture, it would be odd to speak
of a single, monolithic culture. In cyberculture, by extension, searching for
a single thing that is cyberculture would likely be problematic. The notion
that there is a single, definable cyberculture is likely the complete
dominance of early cyber territory by affluent North Americans. Writing by
early proponents of cyberspace tends to reflect this assumption (see Howard
Rheingold[7]).

The ethnography of cyberspace is an important aspect of cyberculture that does
not reflect a single unified culture. It "is not a monolithic or placeless
'cyberspace'; rather, it is numerous new technologies and capabilities, used
by diverse people, in diverse real-world locations." It is malleable,
perishable, and can be shaped by the vagaries of external forces on its users.
For example, the laws of physical world governments, social norms, the
architecture of cyberspace, and market forces shape the way cybercultures form
and evolve. As with physical world cultures cybercultures lend themselves to
identification and study.

That said, there are several qualities that cybercultures share that make them
warrant the prefix âcyber-â. Some of those qualities are that
cyberculture:

  * Is a community mediated by ICTs.
  * Is culture âmediated by computer screens.â[8]
  * Relies heavily on the notion of information and knowledge exchange.
  * Depends on the ability to manipulate tools to a degree not present in other forms of culture (even artisan culture, e.g., a glass-blowing culture).
  * Allows vastly expanded weak ties and has been criticized for overly emphasizing the same (see Bowling Alone and other works).
  * Multiplies the number of eyeballs on a given problem, beyond that which would be possible using traditional means, given physical, geographic, and temporal constraints.
  * Is a âcognitive and social culture, not a geographic one.â[9]
  * Is âthe product of like-minded people finding a common âplaceâ to interact."[10]
  * Is inherently more "fragile" than traditional forms of community and culture (John C. Dvorak).

## [edit] Identity in Cyberculture

Cyberculture, like culture in general, relies on establishing identity and
credibility. However, in the absence of direct physical interaction, it could
be argued that the process for such establishment is more difficult.

How does cyberculture rely on and establish identity and credibility? This
relationship is two way, with identity and credibility being both used to
define community in cyberspace and to be created within and by online
communities.

In some senses, online credibility is established in much the same way that it
is established in the off line world, however, since there are two separate
worlds, it is not surprising that there are both differences in the mechanisms
found in each and interactions of the markers found in each.

Architectures of Credibility  
Following the model put forth by Lawrence Lessig in Code 2.0[11], the
architecture of a given online community may be the single most important
factor regulating the establishment of credibility within online communities.
Some factors may be:

  * Anonymous versus Known
  * Linked to Physical Identity versus Internet-based Identity Only
  * Unrated Commentary System versus Rated Commentary System
  * Positive Feedback-oriented versus Mixed Feedback (positive and negative) oriented
  * Moderated versus Unmoderated

Anonymous versus Known  
Many sites allow anonymous commentary, where the user-id attached to the
comment is something like "guest" or "anonymous user". In an architecture that
allows anonymous posting about other works, the credibility being impacted is
only that of the product for sale, the original opinion expressed, the code
written, the YouTube video, or other entity about which comments are made
(e.g., a Slashdot post). Sites that require "known" postings can vary widely
from simply requiring some kind of name to be associated with the comment to
requiring registration, wherein the identity of the registrant is visible to
other readers of the comment. These "known" identities allow and even require
commentators to be aware of their own credibility, based on the fact that
other users will associate particular content and styles with their identity.
By definition, then, all blog postings are "known" in that the blog exists in
a consistently defined virtual location, which helps to establish an identity,
around which credibility can gather. Note that a "known" identity need have
nothing to do with a given identity in the physical world.

Linked to Physical Identity versus Internet-based Identity Only  
Architectures can require that physical identity be associated with
commentary, as in Lessig's example of Counsel Connect.[12] However, to require
linkage to physical identity, many more steps must be taken (collecting and
storing sensitive information about a user) and safeguards for that collected
information must be established-the users must have more trust of the sites
collecting the information (yet another form of credibility). Irrespective of
safeguards, as with Counsel Connect[12], using physical identities links
credibility across the frames of the internet and real space, influencing the
behaviors of those who contribute in those spaces. However, even purely
internet-based identities have credibility. Just as Lessig describes linkage
to a character or a particular online gaming environment, nothing inherently
links a person or group to their internet-based persona, but credibility
(similar to "characters") is "earned rather than bought, and because this
takes time and (credibility is) not fungible, it becomes increasingly hard" to
create a new persona[13].

Unrated Commentary System versus Rated Commentary System  
In some architectures those who review or offer comments can, in turn, be
rated by other users. This technique offers the ability to regulate the
credibility of given authors by subjecting their comments to direct
"quantifiable" approval ratings.

Positive Feedback-oriented versus Mixed Feedback (positive and negative)
oriented  
Architectures can be oriented around positive feedback or a mix of both
positive and negative feedback. While a particular user may be able to equate
fewer stars with a "negative" rating, the semantic difference is potentially
important. The ability to actively rate an entity negatively may violate laws
or norms that are important in the jurisdiction in which the internet property
is important. The more public a site, the more important this concern may be,
as noted by Goldsmith & Wu regarding eBay[14].

Moderated versus Unmoderated  
Architectures can also be oriented to give editorial control to a group or
individual. Many email lists are worked in this fashion (e.g., Freecycle). In
these situations, the architecture usually allows, but does not require that
contributions be moderated. Further, moderation may take two different forms:
reactive or proactive. In the reactive mode, an editor removes posts, reviews,
or content that is deemed offensive after it has been placed on the site or
list. In the proactive mode, an editor must review all contributions before
they are made public.

In a moderated setting, credibility is often given to the moderator. However,
that credibility can be damaged by appearing to edit in a heavy-handed way,
whether reactive or proactive (as experienced by digg.com). In an unmoderated
setting, credibility lies with the contributors alone. It should be noted that
the very existence of an architecture allowing moderation may lend credibility
to the forum being used (as in Howard Rheingold's examples from the WELL)[7],
or it may take away credibility (as in corporate web sites that post feedback,
but edit it highly).

## [edit] Cyberculture studies

See also: List of human-computer interaction topics

The field of cyberculture studies examines the topics explained above,
including the communities emerging within the networked spaces sustained by
the use of modern technology. Students of cyberculture engage with political,
philosophical, sociological, and psychological issues that arise from the
networked interactions of human beings by humans who act in various relations
to information science and technology.

Donna Haraway, Sadie Plant, Manuel De Landa, Bruce Sterling, Hendrik Speck,
Kevin Kelly, Wolfgang Schirmacher, Victor J.Vitanza, Gregory Ulmer, Charles D.
Laughlin, and Jean Baudrillard are among the key theorists and critics who
have produced relevant work that speaks to, or has influenced studies in,
cyberculture.

Following the lead of Rob Kitchin, in his work Cyberspace: The World in the
Wires, we might view cyberculture from different critical perspectives. These
perspectives include: Futurism/Techno-utopianism, Technological Determinism,
Social Constructionism, Postmodernism, Poststructuralism, and Feminist
Theory.[15]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b "cyberculture, n". OED online. Oxford University Press. December 2001.
  2. ^ "cyberculture, n". American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 2000.
  3. ^ Manovich, Lev (2003). "New Media from Borges to HTML". in Noah Wardrip-Fruin, Nick Montfort (PDF). The New Media Reader. MIT Press. pp. 13â25.
  4. ^ Manovich, Lev (2001). The Language of a New Media. MIT Press.
  5. ^ a b Forest, Fred. Pour un art actuel, l'art Ã l'heure d'Internet. http://www.fredforest.org/artactuel/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-15.
  6. ^ Lister, David; Jon Dovey, Seth Giddings, Iain Grant, Kieran Kelly (2003). New Media: A Critical Introduction. Routledge.
  7. ^ a b Rheingold, Howard (1993). "Daily Life in Cyberspace". The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. HarperCollins.
  8. ^ Rheingold, Howard (1993). "Daily Life in Cyberspace". The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. HarperCollins. p. 63.
  9. ^ Rheingold, Howard (1993). "Daily Life in Cyberspace". The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. HarperCollins. p. 61.
  10. ^ Kitchin, Rob (1998). "Theoretical Perspective: Approaching Cyberspace". Cyberspace: The World in the Wires. New York: Wiley. p. 58.
  11. ^ Lessig, Lawrence (2006). Code 2.0: Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. Basic Books.
  12. ^ a b Lessig, Lawrence (2006). Code 2.0: Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. Basic Books. pp. 94â97.
  13. ^ Lessig, Lawrence (2006). Code 2.0: Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. Basic Books. p. 113.
  14. ^ Goldsmith, Jack; Wu, Tim (2006). Who Controls the Internet? Illusions of a Borderless World. Oxford University Press (US). p. 143.
  15. ^ Kitchin, Rob (1998). "Theoretical Perspective: Approaching Cyberspace". Cyberspace: The World in the Wires. New York: Wiley. pp. 56â72.

## [edit] See also

  * Cyber law
  * Digitalism
  * Information ethics
  * Infosphere
  * Internet memes

  * Techno-progressivism
  * Technocriticism
  * Technology and society
  * Technorealism
  * Wifipicning

  
## [edit] Further Reading

  * N. Katherine Hayles (1999),"How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature and Informatics", Chicago University Press, Chicago, IL
  * Donna Haraway (1991),"Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature", Routledge, New York, NY
  * Donna Haraway (1997),"Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium.FemaleManÂ©Meets_OncoMouseâ¢", Routledge, New York, NY
  * Sherry Turkle (1997),"Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet", Simon & Schuster Inc, New York, NY

## [edit] External links

  * Haraway, Donna (1991). A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century. http://www.stanford.edu/dept/HPS/Haraway/CyborgManifesto.html. (retrieved February 4th 2009)
  * Hayles, N. Katherine (Fall 1993). Virtual Bodies and Flickering Signifiers. http://www.english.ucla.edu/faculty/hayles/Flick.html. (retrieved February 4th 2009)
  * Resource Centre for Cyberculture Studies
  * Defining Cyberculture by Jakub Macek
  * Voices in My Head - MindVox: The Overture by Patrick Kroupa
  * A place where Cyberculture is a topic of research and thought
  * Cyberpunk Project: Cyberculture, Technoculture, Future Culture
  * Roger Clarke's 'Encouraging Cyberculture'
  * Virtual Innervation (wikigroup): Futureweb Thoughts and Projections
  * Cybercultura.it - a rich collection of resources about cyberculture

v â¢ d â¢ e

Cyberpunk and derivatives  
Cyberpunk and derivatives

Cyberpunk (List) Â· Steampunk (List) Â· Biopunk Â· other derived genres  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyberculture"

Categories: Computing culture | Cyberspace | Internet culture

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 18 March 2009, at 08:45.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



