
# Snoezelen

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

Children in a room designed for snoezelen.  
Photo credit: Het Balanske, Tielt-Winge, Belgium.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Room for snoezelen in the home of a child with a mental handicap in the
Netherlands.

Snoezelen or controlled multisensory stimulation is used for people with
mental disabilities, and involves exposing them to a soothing and stimulating
environment, the "snoezelen room". These rooms are specially designed to
deliver stimuli to various senses, using lighting effects, color, sounds,
music, scents, etc. The combination of different materials on a wall may be
explored using tactile senses, and the floor may be adjusted to stimulate the
sense of balance.

Originally developed in the Netherlands in the 1970s, snoezelen rooms have
been established in institutions all over the world and are especially common
in Germany, where more than 1200 exist. The term "snoezelen" (pronounced like
"SNOOzelen") is a neologism formed from the Dutch "snuffelen" (to sniff, to
snuffle) and "doezelen" (to doze, to snooze).

Ideally, snoezelen is a non-directive therapy and can be staged to provide a
multi-sensory experience or single sensory focus, simply by adapting the
lighting, atmosphere, sounds, and textures to the specific needs of the client
at the time of use. There is no formal focus on therapeutic outcome - the
focus is to assist users to gain the maximum pleasure from the activity in
which they and the enabler are involved. An advantage of snoezelen is that it
does not rely on verbal communication and may be beneficial for people with
profound autism, as it may provide stimulation for those who would otherwise
be almost impossible to reach.

Snoezelen is used for people with autism and other developmental disabilities,
dementia, and brain injury. However, research on the benefits of treatment is
scarce, with variable study designs.[1][2]

A small research study carried out in Brussels compared the behavior of nine
adult clients with profound autism in both classroom and Snoezelen settings.
Though individual results varied, the study claimed a 50% reduction in
distress and stereotypical behavior, and seventy-five percent less aggression
and self-injury in the Snoezelen environment.[citation needed]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Chung JCC, Lai CKY. Snoezelen for dementia. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2002, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD003152. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003152.
  2. ^ Lancioni GE, Cuvo AJ, O'Reilly MF. Snoezelen: an overview of research with people with developmental disabilities and dementia. Disabil Rehabil. 2002; 24: 175-84. PMID 11926258

## [edit] External links

  * International Snoezelen Association, with definition of snoezelen, bibliography, meetings etc.
  * Report on the use of a snoezelen room at Jackson Memorial Hospital, fall 2004
  * Photo galleries of various snoezelen rooms
  * Italian section of the Snoezelen Foundation presentation of various snoezelen rooms and home care applications through telematics links
  * Website about snoezelen in German
  * Snoezelen in Switzerland Further Information, Seminares, Teaching and Coaching etc.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snoezelen"

Categories: Therapy | Disability | Autism

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 01:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



