
# Immortality

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Immortality (disambiguation).

See also List of long-living organisms

See also: TranshumanismâControversy

<IMG>

<IMG>

Fountain of Eternal Life, Cleveland, Ohio. It symbolizes "Man rising above
death, reaching upward to his God and toward Peace."[1]

Immortality (or eternal life) is the concept of living in a physical or
spiritual form for an infinite or inconceivably vast length of time.[2]

As immortality is the negation of mortalityânot dying or not being subject
to deathâit has been a subject of fascination to mankind since at least the
beginning of history. The Epic of Gilgamesh, one of the first literary works,
dating back at least to the 22nd century BCE, is primarily a quest of a hero
seeking to become immortal.[3] What form an unending human life would take, or
whether the soul exists and possesses immortality, has been a major point of
focus of religion, as well as the subject of speculation, fantasy, and debate.

It is not known whether human physical immortality is an unachievable
phenomenon or not. Biological forms have inherent limitations â for example,
their fragility and slow adaptability to changing environments, which may or
may not be able to be overcome through medical interventions, engineering,
etc. On the other hand, biological immortality already exists among some
simple, but multicellular life-forms.

Some scientists, futurists, and philosophers, such as scientists Aubrey de
Grey and Ray Kurzweil believe that human immortality is achievable in the next
few decades. Others are somewhere in the middle of these two extreme
viewpoints, thinking that immortality is achievable in some period of time
longer than 20â30 years, but not impossible.

Biological immortality is what life extension advocates feel is likely in
decades to come. Specifically this refers to the absence of aging of the body
due to baseline biological human limitations, but acknowledgement that
complete immortality in a human form is unlikely due to the fact that even
when you remain biologically young, once every few hundred years individuals
will get killed in an accident (4.4% of U.S. deaths now) or by other means
[4].

Ultimately, a timeless existence is also not known for certain to be
achievable, or even definable, despite millennia of arguments for eternity.
Wittgenstein, in a notably non-theological interpretation of eternal life,
writes in the Tractatus that, "If we take eternity to mean not infinite
temporal duration but timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those who
live in the present."[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Definitions
    * 1.1 Spiritual
    * 1.2 Hypothetical
    * 1.3 Physical
  * 2 Physical immortality
    * 2.1 Causes of death
      * 2.1.1 Aging
      * 2.1.2 Disease
      * 2.1.3 Trauma
    * 2.2 Biological immortality
      * 2.2.1 Biologically immortal species
      * 2.2.2 Evolution of aging
    * 2.3 Prospects for human biological immortality
      * 2.3.1 Scientific "Elixir of Youth"
      * 2.3.2 Technological immortality
      * 2.3.3 Cryonics
      * 2.3.4 Mind-to-computer uploading
      * 2.3.5 Cyborgology
    * 2.4 Mystical and religious pursuits of physical immortality
  * 3 Religious traditions
    * 3.1 Hinduism
    * 3.2 Shintoism
    * 3.3 Zoroastrianism
    * 3.4 Buddhism
    * 3.5 Judaism
    * 3.6 Christianity
      * 3.6.1 Roman Catholicism
      * 3.6.2 Jehovah's Witnesses
      * 3.6.3 Mormonism
      * 3.6.4 Other Christian beliefs
    * 3.7 Islam
    * 3.8 Taoism
  * 4 Ethics of immortality
    * 4.1 Undesirability of immortality
    * 4.2 Desirablity of immortality
  * 5 Symbols
  * 6 Fiction
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 External links
    * 10.1 Scientific and engineering prospects for immortality
    * 10.2 Religious and spiritual prospects for immortality
    * 10.3 In literature

  
## [edit] Definitions

### [edit] Spiritual

  * The belief in an afterlife experienced by an immortal soul is a fundamental tenet of many branches of Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith.

### [edit] Hypothetical

  * Fame itself has been described as a method to "achieve immortality", if only semantically,[6] so that the name or works of a famous individual would "live on" after his or her death. This view of immortality places value on how one will be remembered by generations to come. For example, in Homer's Iliad, Achilles is already nigh-invincible, so his primary motive for fighting in the Trojan War is recognition and everlasting fame.
  * Mystic approaches to immortality include those of the ancient Chinese Taoists and European medieval alchemists, seeking an elixir of life.
  * Should metaphysical universals and abstract phenomena have an eternal existence, and if they can be interacted with by human beings, then a person might obtain a degree of immortality by interacting with them.[citation needed]
  * Quantum immortality is not widely regarded by the scientific community as being a verifiable or even necessarily correct offshoot of the many worlds interpretation. In the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, the wavefunction never collapses, and thus all possible outcomes of a quantum event exist simultaneously, with each event apparently spawning an entirely new universe in which a single possible outcome exists. In this theory, a person could hypothetically live forever as there might exist a string of possible quantum outcomes in which that individual never dies.

### [edit] Physical

  * The persistence of life itself across time is a form of immortality, insofar as leaving surviving offspring or genetic material is a means of defeating death. Sociobiology and Richard Dawkins' theory of the selfish gene are related to this understanding of immortality.[citation needed]
  * Life extension technologies promise a path to complete rejuvenation. Cryonics holds out the hope that the dead can be revived in the future, following sufficient medical advancements.
  * Mind uploading is the concept of transference of consciousness from a human brain to an alternative medium providing the same functionality. Assuming the process to be possible and repeatable, this would provide immortality to the consciousness, as predicted by futurists such as Ray Kurzweil.[7]

## [edit] Physical immortality

Physical immortality is a state of life that allows a person to avoid death
and maintain conscious thought. It can mean the unending existence of a person
from a physical source other than organic life, such as a computer. In the
early 21st century, physical immortality remains a goal rather than a current
reality. Active pursuit of physical immortality can either be based on
scientific trends, such as cryonics, breakthroughs in rejuvenation or
predictions of an impending technological singularity, or because of a
spiritual belief, such as those held by Rastafarians or Rebirthers.

### [edit] Causes of death

<IMG>

This section includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (May 2008)  
Main article: Death

By definition, all causes of death must be overcome or avoided for physical
immortality to be achieved. There are three main causes of death: ageing,
disease and trauma.

#### [edit] Aging

Aubrey de Grey, a leading researcher in the field,[3] defines ageing as
follows: âa collection of cumulative changes to the molecular and cellular
structure of an adult organism, which result in essential metabolic processes,
but which also, once they progress far enough, increasingly disrupt
metabolism, resulting in pathology and death.â The current causes of ageing
in humans are cell loss (without replacement), oncogenic nuclear mutations and
epimutations, cell senescence, mitochondrial mutations, lysosomal aggregates,
extracellular aggregates, random extracellular cross-linking, immune system
decline, and endocrine changes. Eliminating ageing would require finding a
solution to each of these causes, a program de Grey calls engineered
negligible senescence.[8][9]

#### [edit] Disease

Disease is theoretically surmountable via technology. Human understanding of
genetics is leading to cures and treatments of myriad previously incurable
diseases.[which?] The mechanisms by which other diseases do their damage are
becoming better understood. Sophisticated methods of detecting diseases early
are being developed. Preventative medicine is becoming better understood.
Neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's may soon be
curable with the use of stem cells. Breakthroughs in cell biology and telomere
research are leading to treatments for cancer. Vaccines are being researched
for AIDS and tuberculosis. Genes associated with type 1 diabetes and certain
types of cancer have been discovered allowing for new therapies to be
developed. Artificial devices attached directly to the nervous system may
restore sight to the blind. Drugs are being developed to treat myriad other
diseases and ailments.

#### [edit] Trauma

Physical trauma would remain as a threat to perpetual physical life, even if
the problems of aging and disease were overcome, as an otherwise immortal
person would still be subject to unforeseen accidents or catastrophes.
Ideally, any methods to achieve physical immortality would mitigate the risk
of encountering trauma. Taking preventative measures by engineering inherent
resistance to injury is thus relevant in addition to entirely reactive
measures more closely associated with the paradigm of medical
treatment.[citation needed]

The speed and quality of paramedic response remains a determining factor in
surviving severe trauma.[10] A body that could automatically treat itself from
severe trauma, such as speculated uses for nanotechnology,[who?] would
mitigate this factor. Without improvements to such things, very few people
would remain alive after several tens of thousands of years purely based on
accident rate statistics, much less millions or billions or more.[citation
needed]

Being the seat of consciousness, the brain cannot be risked to trauma if a
continuous physical life is to be maintained. Therefore, it cannot be replaced
or repaired in the same way other organs can. A method of transferring
consciousness would be required for an individual to survive trauma to the
brain, and this transfer would have to anticipate and precede the damage
itself.[citation needed]

### [edit] Biological immortality

<IMG>

<IMG>

Human chromosomes (grey) capped by telomeres (white)

Main article: Biological immortality

Biological immortality is an absence of aging, specifically the absence of a
sustained increase in rate of mortality as a function of chronological age. A
cell or organism that does not experience aging, or ceases to age at some
point, is biologically immortal.

Biologists have chosen the word immortal to designate cells that are not
limited by the Hayflick limit, where cells no longer divide because of DNA
damage or shortened telomeres. Prior to the work of Leonard Hayflick there was
the erroneous belief fostered by Alexis Carrel that all normal somatic cells
are immortal. By preventing cells from reaching senescence one can achieve
biological immortality; telomeres, a âcapâ at the end of DNA, are thought
to be the cause of cell aging. Every time a cell divides the telomere becomes
a bit shorter; when it is finally worn down, the cell is unable to split and
dies. Telomerase is an enzyme which rebuilds the telomeres in stem cells and
cancer cells, allowing them to replicate an infinite number of times.[11] No
definitive work has yet demonstrated that telomerase can be used in human
somatic cells to prevent healthy tissues from aging. On the other hand,
scientists hope to be able to grow organs with the help of stem cells,
allowing organ transplants without the risk of rejection, another step in
extending human life expectancy. These technologies are the subject of ongoing
research, and are not yet realized.[citation needed]

#### [edit] Biologically immortal species

Life defined as biologically immortal is still susceptible to causes of death
besides aging, including disease and trauma, as defined above. Notable
immortal species include:

  * Bacteria (as a colony) â Bacteria reproduce through cell division. A parent bacterium splits itself into two identical daughter cells. These daughter cells then split themselves in half. This process repeats, thus making the bacterium colony essentially immortal.  
Recent research, however, suggests that even bacteria as a colony may
eventually die since each succeeding generation is slightly smaller, weaker,
and more likely to die than the previous.[12]

  * Hydra can be considered biologically immortal as they do not undergo senescence or aging.
  * Turritopsis nutricula, a jellyfish, after becoming a sexually mature adult, can transform itself back into a child (the polyp stage) using the cell conversion process of transdifferentiation. Turritopsis nutricula repeats this cycle, meaning that it may have an indefinite lifespan.[13]
  * Bristlecone Pines are speculated to be potentially immortal; the oldest known living specimen is over 4800 years old.

#### [edit] Evolution of aging

Main article: Evolution of ageing

As the existence of biologically immortal species demonstrates, there is no
thermodynamic necessity for senescence: a defining feature of life is that it
takes in free energy from the environment and unloads its entropy as waste.
Living systems can even build themselves up from seed, and routinely repair
themselves. Ageing is therefore presumed to be a byproduct of evolution, but
why mortality should be selected for remains a subject of research and debate.
Programmed cell death and the teleomere "end replication problem" are found
even the earliest and simplest of organisms.[14] This may be a tradeoff
between selecting for cancer and selecting for ageing.[15]

Modern theories on the evolution of ageing include the following:

  * Mutation accumulation is a theory formulated by Peter Medawar in 1952 to explain how evolution would select for aging. Essentially, ageing is never selected against, as organisms have offspring before the mortal mutations surface in an individual.
  * Antagonistic pleiotropy is a theory proposed as an alternative by George C. Williams, a critic of Medawar, in 1957. In antagonistic pleiotropy, genes carry effects that are both beneficial and detrimental. In essence this refers to genes that offer benefits early in life, but exact a cost later on, i.e. decline and death.[16]
  * The disposable soma theory was proposed in 1977 by Thomas Kirkwood, which states that an individual body must allocate energy for metabolism, reproduction, and maintenance, and must compromise when there is food scarcity. Compromise in allocating energy to the repair function is what causes the body gradually to deteriorate with age, according to Kirkwood.[17]

### [edit] Prospects for human biological immortality

<IMG>

This section includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (May 2008)  
#### [edit] Scientific "Elixir of Youth"

Scientists believe that boosting the amount or proportion of a naturally
forming enzyme, telomerase, in the body could prevent cells from dying and so
may ultimately lead to extended, healthier, lifespans. Telomerase is a protein
that helps maintain the protective caps at the ends of chromosomes.[18] A team
of researchers at the Spanish National Cancer Centre (Madrid) tested the
hypothesis on mice. It was found that those mice which were genetically
engineered to produce 10 times the normal levels of telomerase lived 50%
longer than normal mice.[19]

In normal circumstances, without the presence of telomerase, if a cell divides
recursively, at some point all the progeny will reach their Hayflick limit.
With the presence of telomerase, each dividing cell can replace the lost bit
of DNA, and any single cell can then divide unbounded. While this unbounded
growth property has excited many researchers, caution is warranted in
exploiting this property, as exactly this same unbounded growth is a crucial
step in enabling cancerous growth.

Embryonic stem cells express telomerase, which allows them to divide
repeatedly and form the individual. In adults, telomerase is highly expressed
in cells that need to divide regularly (e.g., in the immune system), whereas
most somatic cells express it only at very low levels in a cell-cycle
dependent manner.

#### [edit] Technological immortality

Further information: Transhumanism

Technological immortality is the prospect for much longer life spans made
possible by scientific advances in a variety of fields: nanotechnology,
emergency room procedures, genetics, biological engineering, regenerative
medicine, microbiology, and others. Contemporary life spans in the advanced
industrial societies are already markedly longer than those of the past
because of better nutrition, availability of health care, standard of living
and bio-medical scientific advances. Technological immortality predicts
further progress for the same reasons over the near term. An important aspect
of current scientific thinking about immortality is that some combination of
human cloning, cryonics or nanotechnology will play an essential role in
extreme life extension. Robert Freitas, a nanorobotics theorist, suggests tiny
medical nanorobots could be created to go through human bloodstreams, find
dangerous things like cancer cells and bacteria, and destroy them.[20] Freitas
anticipates that gene-therapies and nanotechnology will eventually make the
human body effectively self-sustainable and capable of living indefinitely,
short of severe trauma. This supports the theory that we will be able to
continually create biological or synthetic replacement parts to replace
damaged or dying ones.

#### [edit] Cryonics

Main article: Cryonics

Cryonics, the practice of preserving organisms (either intact specimens or
only their brains) for possible future revival by storing them at cryogenic
temperatures where metabolism and decay are almost completely stopped, is the
answer for those who believe that life extension technologies like
nanotechnology or nanorobots will not develop sufficiently within their
lifetime. Ideally, cryonics would allow clinically dead people to be brought
back in the future after cures to the patients' diseases have been discovered
and aging is reversible. Modern cryonics procedures use a process called
vitrification which creates a glass-like state rather than freezing as the
body is brought to low temperatures. This process reduces the risk of ice
crystals damaging the cell-structure, which would be especially detrimental to
cell structures in the brain, as their minute adjustment evokes the
individuals mind.

#### [edit] Mind-to-computer uploading

Main article: Mind uploading

One idea that has been advanced involves uploading an individual's personality
and memories via direct mind-computer interface.The individuals memory may be
loaded to a computer or to a newly born babies mind. The baby will then grow
with previous persons individuality and may not develop his own
personality.[who?] Extropian futurists like Moravec and Kurzweil have proposed
that, thanks to exponentially growing computing power, it will someday be
possible to upload human consciousness onto a computer system, and live
indefinitely in a virtual environment. This could be accomplished via advanced
cybernetics, where computer hardware would initially be installed in the brain
to help sort memory or accelerate thought processes. Components would be added
gradually until the person's entire brain functions were handled by artificial
devices, avoiding sharp transitions that would lead to issues of identity.
After this point, the human body could be treated as an optional accessory and
the mind could be transferred to any sufficiently powerful computer. Persons
in this state would then be essentially immortal, short of loss or traumatic
destruction of the machines that maintained them.

#### [edit] Cyborgology

Main article: Cyborg

Transforming a human into a cyborg can include brain implants or extracting a
human mind and placing it in a robotic life-support system. Even replacing
biological organs with robotic ones could increase life span (ie pace makers)
and depending on the definition, many technological upgrades to the body, like
genetic modifications or the addition of nanobots would qualify an individual
as a cyborg. Such modifications would make one impervious to aging and disease
and theoretically immortal unless killed or destroyed.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Joseph Wright of Derby, The Alchymist, In Search of the Philosopher's Stone,
1771

### [edit] Mystical and religious pursuits of physical immortality

Many Indian fables and tales include instances of metempsychosis â the
ability to jump into another body â performed by advanced Yogis in order to
live a longer life. There are also entire Hindu sects devoted to the
attainment of physical immortality by various methods, namely the Naths and
the Aghoras.[citation needed]

Long before modern science made such speculation feasible, people wishing to
escape death turned to the supernatural world for answers. Examples include
Chinese Taoists[citation needed] and the medieval alchemists and their search
for the Philosopher's Stone, or more modern religious mystics, who believed in
the possibility of achieving physical immortality through spiritual
transformation.

Individuals claiming to be physically immortal include Comte de Saint-Germain;
in 18th century France, he claimed to be centuries old, and people who adhere
to the Ascended Master Teachings are convinced of his physical
immortality.[citation needed] An Indian saint known as Vallalar claimed to
have achieved immortality before disappearing forever from a locked room in
1874.[21]

Rastafarians believe in physical immortality as a part of their religious
doctrines. They believe that after God has called the Day of Judgment they
will go to what they describe as Mount Zion in Africa to live in freedom for
ever. They avoid the term "everlasting life"' and deliberately use "ever-
living" instead.

Another group that believes in physical immortality are the Rebirthers, who
believe that by following the connected breathing process of rebirthing they
can physically live forever.

## [edit] Religious traditions

<IMG>

The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide
view of the subject. Please improve this article or discuss the issue on the
talk page.  
Main article: Afterlife

Until the late 20th century, there were no creditable scientific forecasts
that physical immortality was obtainable. As late as 1952, the editorial staff
of the Syntopicon found that in their compilation of the Great Books of the
Western World, "The philosophical issue concerning immortality cannot be
separated from issues concerning the existence and nature of man's soul."[22]
Thus, the vast majority of speculation regarding immortality before the 21st
century was regarding the nature of the afterlife.

Spiritual immortality, also known as the immortality of the soul, is the
unending existence of a person from a nonphysical source, or in a nonphysical
state, such as a soul.

It is a belief that is expressed in nearly every religious tradition. In both
Western and Eastern religions, the spirit is an energy or force that
transcends the mortal body, and returns to: (1) the spirit realm whether to
enjoy heavenly bliss or suffer eternal torment in hell, or; (2) the cycle of
life, directly or indirectly depending on the tradition.

The world's major religions hold a number of perspectives on spiritual
immortality.

### [edit] Hinduism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Representation of a soul undergoing punarjanma. Illustration from Hinduism
Today, 2004

Hindus believe in an immortal soul which is reincarnated after death.
According to Hinduism, people repeat a process of life, death, and rebirth in
a cycle called samsara. If they live their life well, their karma improves and
their station in the next life will be higher, and conversely lower if they
live their life poorly. Eventually after many life times of perfecting its
karma, the soul is freed from the cycle and lives in perpetual bliss. There is
no eternal torment in Hinduism, temporal existence being harsh enough,
although if a soul consistently lives very evil lives, it could work its way
down to the very bottom of the cycle.

The Aghoris of India consume human flesh in pursuit of immortality and
supernatural powers.[23] They distinguish themselves from other Hindu sects
and priests by their alcoholic and cannibalistic rituals.[24]

### [edit] Shintoism

Shintoists claim that except for those who choose or are dispatched to the
underground world of Yomi, every living and non-living being may lose its
body, but not its soul (tamashii), and that they live together with mortal
souls as an immortal being called Kami. Shinto allows anything to attain Kami
status regardless of its existence before becoming Kami. Therefore, even those
that do not believe in Shinto may choose to become Kami, as well as things
like a rock, or a tree. Some may be reincarnated for various reasons.

### [edit] Zoroastrianism

Zoroastrians believe that on the fourth day after death, the human soul leaves
the body and the body remains as an empty shell. Souls would go to either
heaven or hell; these concepts of the afterlife in Zoroastrianism may have
influenced Abrahamic religions.

### [edit] Buddhism

Buddhism teaches that there is a cycle of birth, death, and rebirth and that
the process is according to the qualities of a person's actions. This constant
process of becoming ceases at the fruition of Bodhi (enlightenment) at which a
being is no longer subject to causation (karma) but enters into a state that
the Buddha called amata (deathlessness).

According to the philosophical premise of the Buddha, the initiate to Buddhism
who is to be "shown the way to Immortality (amata)",[25] wherein liberation of
the mind (cittavimutta) is effectuated through the expansion of wisdom and the
meditative practices of sati and samÄdhi, must first be educated away from
his former ignorance-based (avijja) materialistic proclivities in that he "saw
any of these forms, feelings, or this body, to be my Self, to be that which I
am by nature".

Thus, desiring a soul or ego (Ätman) to be permanent is a prime consequence
of ignorance, itself the cause of all misery and the foundation of the cycle
of reincarnation (saá¹sÄra). Form and consciousness being two of the five
skandhas, or aggregates of ignorance, Buddhism teaches that physical
immortality is neither a path to enlightenment, nor an attainable goal: even
the gods which can live for eons eventually die. Upon enlightenment, the
"karmic seeds" (saá¹ khÄras or sanskaras) for all future becoming and rebirth
are exhausted. After biological death an arhat, or buddha, enters into
parinirvana, an everlasting state of transcendental happiness.

### [edit] Judaism

Judaism claims that the righteous dead will be resurrected in the Messianic
age with the coming of the messiah. They will then be granted immortality in a
perfect world. The wicked dead, on the other hand, will not be resurrected at
all. This is not the only Jewish belief about the afterlife. The Tanakh is not
specific about the afterlife, so there are wide differences in views and
explanations among believers.

The Hebrew Bible speaks about sheol (×©×××), the underworld to which the
souls of the dead depart. The doctrine of resurrection is mentioned explicitly
only in Daniel 12:1-4 although it may be implied in several other texts. Later
Judaism accepted that there would be a resurrection of all men (cf. Acts
24:14-15) and the intertestamental literature describes in more detail what
the dead experience in sheol. By the second century BC, Jews who accepted the
Oral Torah had come to believe that those in sheol awaited the resurrection
either in comfort (in the bosom of Abraham) or in torment.

### [edit] Christianity

<IMG>

This section is in need of attention from an expert on the subject.
WikiProject Christianity or the Christianity Portal may be able to help
recruit one. (August 2007)  
<IMG>

This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this section if you can. (August 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Adam and Eve condemned to mortality. Hans Holbein the Younger, Danse Macabre,
16th century

Christian theology holds that Adam and Eve lost physical immortality for
themselves and all their descendants in the Fall of Man, though this initial
"imperishability of the bodily frame of man" was "a preternatural
condition."[26]

According to the book of Enoch, the righteous and wicked await the
resurrection in separate divisions of sheol, a teaching which may have
influenced Jesus' parable of Lazarus and Dives.[27] Christians believe that
every person that believes in Christ will be resurrected; Bible passages are
interpreted as teaching that the resurrected body will, like the present body,
be both physical (but a renewed and non-decaying physical body) and spiritual.

Specific imagery of resurrection into immortal form is found in the Pauline
letters:

> Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed,  
>  In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed.  
>  For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.  
>  So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal
shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that
is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.  
>  O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?  
>  The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law.  
>  But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.  
>  Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is
not in vain in the Lord. â1Corinthians 15:51-58

In Romans 2:6-7 Paul declares that God "will render to every man according to
his deeds: To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and
honour and immortality, eternal life", but then in Romans 3 warns that no one
will ever meet this standard.

After the Last Judgment, those who have been born again will live forever in
the presence of God, and those who were never born again will be abandoned to
never-ending consciousness of guilt, separation from God, and punishment for
sin. Eternal death is depicted in the Bible as a realm of constant physical
and spiritual anguish in a lake of fire, and a realm of darkness away from
God. Some see the fires of Hell as a theological metaphor, representing the
inescapable presence of God endured in absence of love for God; others suggest
that Hell represents complete destruction of both the physical body and of
spiritual existence.

#### [edit] Roman Catholicism

Catholic Christians teach that there is a supernatural realm called Purgatory
where souls who have died in a state of grace but have yet to expiate venial
sins or temporal punishments due to past sins are cleansed before they are
admitted into Heaven.

#### [edit] Jehovah's Witnesses

Jehovah's Witnesses believe the word soul (nephesh or psykhe) as used in the
Bible is a person, an animal, or the life a person or animal enjoys. Hence,
the soul is not part of man, but is the whole man â man as a living being.
Hence, when a person or animal dies, the soul dies, and death is a state of
non-existence, based on Ezekiel 18:4.[28] Hell (hades or sheol) is not a place
of fiery torment, but rather the common grave of humankind, a place of
unconsciousness.[29][30]

After the final judgment, it is expected that the righteous will receive
eternal life and live forever in an earth turned into a paradise. Another
group referenced as "the little flock" of 144,000 people will receive
immortality and go to heaven to rule as Kings and Priests. Jehovah's Witnesses
make the distinction that those with 'eternal life' can die though they do not
succumb to disease or old age, whereas immortal ones cannot die by any
cause.[31] They teach that Jesus was the first to be rewarded with heavenly
immortality, but that Revelation 7:4 and Revelation 14:1, 3 refer to a literal
number (144,000) of additional people who will become "self-sustaining," that
is, not needing anything outside themselves (food, sunlight, etc.) to maintain
their own life.[32]

#### [edit] Mormonism

<IMG>

<IMG>

A non-doctrinal illustration of the Mormon Plan of Salvation.

In Mormon theology, there are three degrees of glory which are the ultimate,
eternal dwelling place for nearly all who lived on earth. Prior to mortal
birth individuals existed as men and women in a spirit state. That period of
life is also referred to as the first estate or Pre-existence. Mormon
theologians cite a Biblical scripture, Jeremiah 1:5, as an allusion to the
concept that mankind had a preparation period prior to mortal birth: "Before I
formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the
womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations".[33]
Joseph Smith, Jr., the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, provided a
description of the afterlife based upon a vision he reportedly received,
recorded within the Mormon canonical writings entitled Doctrine and
Covenants.[34] According to this section of LDS scripture, the afterlife
consists of three degrees or kingdoms of glory, called the Celestial Kingdom,
the Terrestrial Kingdom, and the Telestial Kingdom. The few who do not inherit
any degree of glory (though they are resurrected) reside in a state called
outer darkness, which, though not a degree of glory, is often discussed in
this context. The only ones who go there are known as "Sons of Perdition".

#### [edit] Other Christian beliefs

The doctrine of conditional immortality states the human soul is naturally
mortal, and that immortality is granted by God as a gift. The doctrine is a
"significant minority evangelical view" that has "grown within evangelicalism
in recent years". [35]

Some sects who hold to the doctrine of baptismal regeneration also believe in
a third realm called Limbo, which is the final destination of souls who have
not been baptised, but who have been innocent of mortal sin. Souls in Limbo
include unbaptised infants and those who lived virtuously but were never
exposed to Christianity in their lifetimes. Christian Scientists believe that
sin brought death, and that death will be overcome with the overcoming of sin.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Golden Gate in Jerusalem, known as "The Gate of Eternal Life" in Arabic,
as it stood in 1900

### [edit] Islam

<IMG>

This section is in need of attention from an expert on the subject.
WikiProject Islam or the Islam Portal may be able to help recruit one. (May
2008)  
Muslims believe that everyone has an immortal soul which will live on after
death. A soul undergoes correction in Jahannam (Hell) if it has led an evil
life, but once this correction is over, the soul is admitted to Jannah
(Paradise).[citation needed] Souls that commit unforgivable evil will never
leave hell. Some souls will therefore never taste Heaven.

### [edit] Taoism

The taoist believe by Xiu Xing and Lian Dan, one can achieve immortality to
become an enlightened person, or Xian.

## [edit] Ethics of immortality

The possibility of clinical immortality raises a host of medical,
philosophical, and religious issues and ethical questions. These include
persistent vegetative states, the nature of personality over time, technology
to mimic or copy the mind or its processes, social and economic disparities
created by longevity, and survival of the heat death of the universe.

### [edit] Undesirability of immortality

Essential to many of the world's religions is a doctrine of an eternal
afterlife. Narratives from Christianity and Islam assert that eternal
afterlife is not desirable to the unfaithful:

> The rich man also died, and was buried; And in hell he lift up his eyes,
being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. And
he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he
may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented
in this flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime
receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. And beside all this, between us and you
there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you
cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.

> âLuke 16:22-26 King James Bible Translation

> Those who are wretched shall be in the Fire: There will be for them therein
(nothing but) the heaving of sighs and sobs: They will dwell therein for all
the time that the heavens and the earth endure, except as thy Lord willeth:
for thy Lord is the (sure) accomplisher of what He planneth. And those who are
blessed shall be in the Garden: They will dwell therein for all the time that
the heavens and the earth endure, except as thy Lord willeth: a gift without
break.

> âThe Qur'an, 11:106-108

Instances from other religions include the Buddhist concept of eternal
rebirth, which considers that rebirth is caused by ignorance, an essentially
undesirable condition that is to be overcome.[citation needed]

Physical immortality has also been imagined as a form of eternal torment, as
in Mary Shelley's short story "The Mortal Immortal", the protagonist of which
witnesses everyone he cares about dying around him. Jorge Luis Borges explored
the idea that life gets its meaning from death in the short story "'The
Immortal"; an entire society having achieved immortality, they found time
becoming infinite, and so found no motivation for any action.

### [edit] Desirablity of immortality

Many religions promise their faithful an eternal paradise in an afterlife.
These presume perfection, as they are part of a divine plan, and are
categorically desirable.

Physical immortality is considered desirable over its counterpart, death,
which to date has been inevitable for all human beings. This presumes
tolerable living conditions as an incentive for perpetual life, as the
prevalence of suicide demonstrates.

## [edit] Symbols

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ankh

<IMG>

<IMG>

Trefoil knot

There are numerous symbols representing immortality. Pictured here is an
Egyptian symbol of life that holds connotations of immortality when depicted
in the hands of the gods and pharaohs who were seen as having control over the
journey of life, the ankh (left). The MÃ¶bius strip in the shape of a trefoil
knot is another symbol of immortality. Most symbolic representations of
infinity or the life cycle are often used to represent immortality depending
on the context they are placed in. Other examples include the Ouroboros, the
Chinese fungus of longevity, the ten kanji, the phoenix, and the colors
amaranth (in Western culture) and peach (in Chinese culture).  

## [edit] Fiction

Main article: Immortality in fiction

Immortal beings and species abound in fiction, especially fantasy fiction.

## [edit] See also

  * List of life extension-related topics

  * Actuarial escape velocity
  * Amaranth
  * Ambrosia
  * Amrita
  * Bioethics
  * Biogerontology
  * Chiranjeevin
  * Alex Chiu
  * Consciousness
  * Crown of Immortality

  * Cryonics
  * Elixir of life
  * Eternal youth
  * Holy grail
  * Immortal DNA strand hypothesis
  * Immortalist Society
  * Immortality Institute
  * Immortality test
  * Indefinite lifespan

  * Infinity
  * Internal alchemy
  * Henrietta Lacks
  * Lich
  * Life extension
  * List of immortal people
  * Longevity
  * Methuselah Mouse Prize
  * Molecular nanotechnology
  * Omega Point (Tipler)

  * Organlegging
  * Posthuman
  * Queen Mother of the West
  * Real death
  * Rejuvenation (aging)
  * Simulated reality
  * Suspended animation
  * Technological singularity
  * Dyson's eternal intelligence
  * Nikola Tesla
  * Xian (Taoism)

  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ Marshall Fredericks (2003). "GCVM History and Mission". Greater Cleveland Veteran's Memorial, Inc.. http://www.clevelandvetsmemorial.org/GCVM_History.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-14.
  2. ^ (cf Concise Oxford Dictionary
  3. ^ a b Joel Garreau (October 31, 2007). "The Invincible Man". Washington Post: C01. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/10/30/AR2007103002222_pf.html.
  4. ^ Centres for disease control and prevention (October 12, 2004). "Deaths: Final Data for 2002" (PDF). National Vital Statistics Resports. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr53/nvsr53_05acc.pdf.
  5. ^ Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1921). Hypertext Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. pp. 6.4311. http://www.kfs.org/~jonathan/witt/t6431en.html Hypertext.
  6. ^ Morris, William (1979). American Heritage Dictionary. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. pp. 658.
  7. ^ Kurzweil, Raymond (2005). The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. Viking Adult. ISBN 0-670-03384-7.
  8. ^ Aubrey, de Grey (1999). The Mitochondrial Free Radical Theory of Aging. Austin, Texas: Landes Bioscience.
  9. ^ de Grey, Aubrey; & Rae, Michael (September 2007). Ending Aging: The Rejuvenation Breakthroughs that Could Reverse Human Aging in Our Lifetime. New York, NY: St. Martin's Press. pp. 416\. ISBN 0312367066.
  10. ^ Walker, Peter (1991). International Search and Rescue Teams, A League Discussion Paper. Geneva: League of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
  11. ^ Lin Kah Wai (2004). "Telomeres, Telomerase, and Tumorigenesis -- A Review". MedGenMed 6 (3): 19. PMID 15520642. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?tool=pubmed&pubmedid=15520642.
  12. ^ "Bacteria Death Reduces Human Hopes of Immortality". New Scientist magazine, issue 2485, page 19. February 5, 2005. http://www.newscientist.com/channel/health/mg18524855.800-bacteria-death-reduces-human-hopes-of-immortality.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-02.
  13. ^ Scott F. Gilbert (March 5, 2003). "Cheating Death: The Immortal Life Cycle of Turritopsis". Developmental Biology, 8th edition. http://8e.devbio.com/preview_article.php?ch=2&id=6. Retrieved on 2007-04-02.
  14. ^ Clark, W.R. 1999. A Means to an End: The biological basis of aging and death. New York: Oxford University Press. [1] About telomeres and programmed cell death.
  15. ^ Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, Ch. 69, Cancer cell biology and angiogenesis, Robert G. Fenton and Dan L. Longo, p. 454.
  16. ^ Williams, G.C. 1957. Pleiotropy, natural selection and the evolution of senescence. Evolution, 11:398-411. [2] Paper in which Williams describes his theory of antagonistic pleiotropy.
  17. ^ Kirkwood, T.B.L. 1977. Evolution of ageing. Nature, 270: 301-304. [3] Origin of the disposable soma theory.
  18. ^ http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-1087860/Scientists-step-closer-creating-elixir-life.html
  19. ^ http://www.telegraph.co.uk/health/healthnews/3489881/Scientists-take-a-step-closer-to-an-elixir-of-youth.html
  20. ^ Robert A. Freitas Jr., Microbivores: Artificial Mechanical Phagocytes using Digest and Discharge Protocol, self-published, 2001 [4]
  21. ^ vallalar.org
  22. ^ Adler, Mortimer J., ed., et al (1952). The Great Ideas: A Syntopicon of Great Books of the Western World. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica. pp. 788.
  23. ^ Indian doc focuses on Hindu cannibal sect, MSNBC
  24. ^ The Aghoris, Channel 4
  25. ^ Majjhima Nikaya 2.265, Samyutta Nikaya 5.9 (PTS)
  26. ^ Adler, Mortimer J., ed., et al (1952). The Great Ideas: A Syntopicon of Great Books of the Western World. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica. pp. 784.
  27. ^ New Bible Dictionary 3rd edition, IVP Leicester 1996. "Sheol".
  28. ^ "Is There LIFE After Death?", The Watchtower July 15, 2001. Web version available at [5] accessed January 26, 2006.
  29. ^ Hell-Eternal Torture or Common Grave? The Watchtower, April 15, 1993, p. 6.
  30. ^ What Really Is Hell? The Watchtower, July 15, 2002.
  31. ^ The Watchtower, 1 December 1963, 732, "The Gift of Immortality"
  32. ^ Insight on the Scriptures Vol. 1 p. 1196: "Incorruption"
  33. ^ Jeremiah 1:5
  34. ^ Section 76 lds.org
  35. ^ The Nature of Hell. Conclusions and Recommendations by Evangelical Alliance

## [edit] Further reading

  * Allen, Richard James (1999). Thursday's Fictions. Wollongong: Five Islands Press. ISBN 0-86418-596-0.
  * Alexander, Brian (2003). Rapture: How Biotech Became the New Religion. Basic Books. ISBN 0-7382-0761-6.
  * Bova, Ben (2000). Immortality: How Science Is Extending Your Life Span-and Changing the World. Avon: New York. ISBN 0-380-79318-0.
  * Cullmann, Oscar (1955). Immortality of the Soul or Resurrection of the Dead?. http://www.geocities.com/pastorkeith/cullmann.html.
  * de Grey, Aubrey; & Rae, Michael (September 2007). Ending Aging: The Rejuvenation Breakthroughs that Could Reverse Human Aging in Our Lifetime. New York, NY: St. Martin's Press. pp. 416\. ISBN 0312367066.
  * Edwards, Paul (1997). Immortality. Prometheus Books. ISBN 1-57392-130-0.
  * Elixxir (2001). The Immortalist Manifesto: Stay Young & Save the World. Authorhouse Books. ISBN 0-7596-5339-9.
  * Freitas Jr., Robert A. (2002). "Death is an Outrage". http://www.rfreitas.com/Nano/DeathIsAnOutrage.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-14.
  * Hall, Stephen S. (2003). Merchants of Immortality: Chasing the Dream of Human Life Extension. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-09524-1.
  * Immortality Institute (2004). The Scientific Conquest Of Death. Libros En Red. ISBN 987-561-135-2.
  * Perry, R. Michael (2000). Forever For All: Moral philosophy, Cryonics, and the Scientific Prospects for Immortality. New York: Universal Publishers: New York: Universal Publishers. ISBN 1-58112-724-3.
  * Pickover, Clifford (2007). A Beginner's Guide to Immortality: Extraordinary People, Alien Brains, and Quantum Resurrection. New York: Thunder's Mouth Press. ISBN 1-56025-984-1.
  * West, Michael D. (2003). The Immortal Cell: One Scientist's Quest to Solve the Mystery of Human Aging. Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-50928-6.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up immortality in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to:
Immortality  
### [edit] Scientific and engineering prospects for immortality

  * The Methuselah Foundation Aubrey de Grey's non-profit organization dedicated to finding a cure for aging
  * KurzweilAI.net Ray Kurzweil resource site
  * Immortality Online News feeds on immortality and human life extension
  * Pimm - Partial immortalization Blog of Tulane research scientist Attila Chordash
  * BiologicalGerontology.com Chris Smelick's Biogerontology site
  * Vitae Institute Chris Smelick's non-profit organization
  * Immortality Institute Scientific and sociological discussions, activism, research

### [edit] Religious and spiritual prospects for immortality

  * "Death and Immortality" Dictionary of the History of Ideas, etext at the University of Virginia Library
  * The Immortality of the Soul and the Resurrection of the Body Lecture by Heinrich J. Vogel
  * An Essay on the Scriptural Doctrine of Immortality by James Challis
  * Eternity: Christâs Return, Chiliasm, Resurrection of the Dead, Judgment, Hell, Luther on Eternity, Heaven J. P. Meyer, The Northwestern Lutheran, August 22, 1954, Vol. 41, # 17 to April 14, 1957, Vol. 44, #8
  * "How you Can Have Eternal Life" Jack Graham, PowerPoint Ministries, Christianity.com
  * Got Eternal Life? Got Questions Ministries
  * Immortality Taoist essay, personaltao.com

### [edit] In literature

  * Mary Shelley's The Mortal Immortal

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Time  
Major concepts

Time Â· Eternity Â· Arguments for eternity Â· Immortality  
Deep time Â· History Â· Past Â· Present Â· Future Â· Futurology  

<IMG>  
Portal:TimeTime Portal  
Measurement and Standards

Chronometry Â· UTC Â· UT Â· TAI Â· Second Â· Minute Â· Hour Â· Sidereal time
Â· Solar time Â· Time zone  

Clock Â· Horology Â· History of timekeeping devices Â· Astrarium Â· Marine
chronometer Â· Sundial Â· Water clock  

Calendar Â· Day Â· Week Â· Month Â· Year Â· Tropical year Â· Julian Â·
Gregorian Â· Islamic  

Intercalation Â· Leap second Â· Leap year  
Chronology

Astronomical chronology Â· Geologic Time Â· Geological history Â·
Geochronology Â· Archaeological dating  
Calendar era Â· Regnal year Â· Chronicle Â· Timeline Â· Periodization  
Religion and Mythology

Time and fate deities Â· Wheel of time Â· KÄla Â· Kalachakra Â· Prophecy Â·
Dreamtime  
Philosophy

Causality Â· Eternalism Â· Eternal return Â· Event Â· The Unreality of Time Â·
A-series and B-series Â· B-Theory of time  
Endurantism Â· Four dimensionalism Â· Perdurantism Â· Presentism Â· Temporal
finitism Â· Temporal parts  
Physical Sciences

Time in physics Â· Spacetime Â· Absolute time and space Â· T-symmetry  

Arrow of time Â· Chronon Â· Fourth dimension Â· Planck epoch Â· Planck time Â·
Time domain  

Theory of relativity Â· Time dilation Â· Gravitational time dilation Â·
Coordinate time Â· Proper time  
Biology

Chronobiology Â· Circadian rhythms  
Psychology

Consciousness and spacetime Â· Mental chronometry Â· Reaction time Â· Sense of
time Â· Specious present  
Sociology and Anthropology

Futures studies Â· Long Now Foundation Â· Time discipline Â· Time use research  
Economics

Newtonian time in economics Â· Time value of money Â· Time Banking Â· Time-
based currency  
Related topics

Space Â· Duration Â· Time capsule Â· Time travel Â· Time signature Â· System
time Â· Metric time Â· Hexadecimal time Â· Carpe diem Â· Tempus fugit  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Time in religion and mythology  
Major subjects

Time â Cosmology Â· Religion Â· Mythology â Eternity Â· Arguments for
eternity Â· Immortality  

    Ritual Â· Religious festival â Destiny and fate Â· Predestination Â· Prophecy Â· Oracle Â· Divination Â· Eschatology
<IMG>  
Portal:TimeTime Portal  
Time and fate deities  
of antiquity

Egyptian â Hemsut Â· Huh  

Ancient Near East â Ashima Â· Ishtar Â· Mamitu Â· Mammetun Â· Manah Â· Manu
the Great Â· Meni  
Greek â The Fates: Moirae â Atropos Â· Clotho Â· Lachesis

    
    
    Ananke Â· Geras Â· Horae Â· Kairos Â· Khronos Â· Tyche
Roman â The Fates: Parcae â Decima Â· Morta Â· Nona

    
    
    Camenae: Antevorte/Porrima Â· Carmenta Â· Egeria Â· Postverta
    Aeternitas Â· Anna Perenna Â· Caerus Â· Chronos Â· Fortuna Â· Vertumnus
Etruscan â Nortia Â· Tinia  
Norse â Norns (UrÃ°r Â· VerÃ°andi Â· Skuld)  

    
    
    Day: (Dagr Â· Skinfaxi) Â· Night: (NÃ³tt Â· HrÃ­mfaxi) Â· Seasons: (Sumarr and Vetr) Â· Old age: Elli  

Baltic â Dalia Â· Lauma  
Polish â Sudz  
Romanian â Fates: Ursitoare  
Other European â Matres and Matrones Â· Father Time Â· Beten

Philippine â Kan-Laon  
  
Hinduism

Kalpa Â· Manvantara Â· Yuga Â· KÄla (time)  
Hindu calendar Â· Hindu units of measurement Â· Kali  
Buddhism

Wheel of time Â· Kalachakra Â· Maitreya  
Judaism

Ancient of Days Â· Ein Sof (Kabbalah)  
Hebrew calendar Â· Missing years Â· Jewish holidays Â· Passover Â· Shabbat  
Christianity

Gregorian calendar Â· Liturgical year Â· Sabbath in Christianity  
Easter Â· Computus Â· Moveable feast Â· Easter controversy Â· Quartodecimanism
Â· Reform of the date of Easter  
Islam

Islamic calendar Â· Muslim holidays Â· Predestination in Islam  
Other traditions

Dreamtime / The Dreaming Â· Oracle bone Â· Maya calendar  
Related topics

Week-day names  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Death and related topics  
In medicine

Autopsy Â· Brain death Â· Clinical death Â· Euthanasia Â· Lazarus Syndrome Â·
Persistent vegetative state Â· Terminal illness  
Lists

Causes of death by rate Â· Preventable causes of death Â· People by cause of
death Â· Notable deaths in 2007 Â· Notable deaths in 2008  
Mortality

Immortality Â· Infant mortality Â· Legal death Â· Maternal death Â· Mortality
rate  
After death

Body: Burial Â· Cremation Â· Cryonics Â· Promession Â· Resomation Â·
Mummification Â· Decomposition Â·  
Death certificate Â· Funeral Â· Grief Â· Mourning Â· Category:Customs Â·
Afterlife Â· Intermediate state  
Paranormal

Out-of-body experience Â· Near-death experience Â· Near-death studies Â·
Reincarnation research Â· SÃ©ance  
Other

Murder Â· Genocide Â· Suicide Â· Fascination with death Â· Martyrdom Â·
Sacrifices (Human Â· Animal) Â· War Â· Personification of Death Â· Death and
culture Â· Category:Death by country  
Legal

Wills Â· Trust Â· Estate  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immortality"

Categories: Articles needing expert attention since August 2007 | Aging |
Death | Eschatology | Life extension | Fictional superhuman features or
abilities

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles lacking in-text citations |
All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded
phrases since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since December
2008 | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since June 2008
| Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with
limited geographic scope | Christianity articles needing expert attention |
Cleanup from August 2008 | Islam articles needing expert attention | Articles
needing expert attention since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * Italiano
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 22:18.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



