
# Availability heuristic

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(October 2007)  
Psychology  
Greek letter 'psi'  
Portal â¢ History  
Areas  
Research  
Abnormal  
Biological  
Cognitive  
Developmental  
Experimental  
Evolutionary  
Mathematical  
Neuropsychology  
Personality  
Positive  
Psychophysics  
Social  
Transpersonal  
Applied  
Clinical  
Educational  
Forensic  
Health  
Industrial  
Organizational  
School  
Sport  
Lists  
Outline  
Publications  
Topics  
Therapies  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
The availability heuristic is a phenomenon (which can result in a cognitive
bias) in which people base their prediction of the frequency of an event or
the proportion within a population based on how easily an example can be
brought to mind.

Simply stated, where an anecdote ("I know an American guy who...") is used to
"prove" an entire proposition or to support a bias, the availability heuristic
is in play.

In these instances the ease of imagining an example or the vividness and
emotional impact of that example becomes more credible than actual statistical
probability. Because an example is easily brought to mind or mentally
"available," the single example is considered as representative of the whole
rather than as just a single example in a range of data. Several examples:

  * Someone argues that cigarette smoking is not unhealthy because his grandfather smoked three packs of cigarettes a day and lived to be 100. The grandfather's health could simply be an unusual case that does not speak to the health of smokers in general.[1]

  * The president gives the State of the Union address and says that walnut farmers need a special farm subsidy. He points to a farmer in the balcony who is sitting next to his wife and explains how the farmer will benefit. Others who watch and discuss later agree that the subsidy is needed based on the benefit to that farmer. The farmer, however, might be the only person who will benefit from the subsidy. Walnut farmers in general may not necessarily need this subsidy.

  * Someone makes a statement to a group of friends that people who drive red cars get more speeding tickets, and the group agrees with the statement because a member of the group, "Jim," drives a red car and frequently gets speeding tickets. The reality could be that Jim just drives fast and would get a speeding ticket regardless of the color car that he drove. In fact, statistics from the state police may show fewer speeding tickets were given to red cars than to many other colored cars, but since Jim is an available example, the statement may seem more plausible.

  * Someone is asked to estimate the proportion of words that begin with the letter "R" or "K" versus those words that have the letter "R" or "K" in the third position. Most English-speaking people could immediately think of many words that begin with the letters "R" (roar, rusty, ribald) or "K" (kangaroo, kitchen, kale), but it would take a more concentrated effort to think of any words where "R" or "K" is the third letter (street, care, borrow, acknowledge); the immediate answer would probably be that words that begin with "R" or "K" are more common. The reality is that words that have the letter "R" or "K" in the third position are more common. In fact, there are three times as many words that have the letter "K" in the third position. "[2]

This phenomenon was first reported by psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel
Kahneman, who also identified the representativeness heuristic. To see how
availability differs from related terms vividness and salience, see
availability, salience and vividness.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
    * 1.1 Imagining Outcomes
    * 1.2 Denial as a reverse availability heuristic
  * 2 See also
  * 3 References
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

Essentially the availability heuristic operates on the notion that "if you can
think of it, it must be important."[1] Media coverage can help fuel a person's
example bias with widespread and extensive coverage of unusual events, such as
airline accidents, and less coverage of more routine, less sensational events,
such as car accidents. For example, when asked to rate the probability of a
variety of causes of death, people tend to rate more "newsworthy" events as
more likely because they can more readily recall an example from memory. In
fact, people often rate the chance of death by plane crash higher than the
chance by car crash, and death by natural disaster as probable only because
these unusual events are more often reported than more common causes of death.
In actuality, death from car accidents is much more common than airline
accidents. Additional rare forms of death are also seen as more common than
they really are because of their inherent drama such as shark attacks, and
lightning.[original research?]

#### [edit] Imagining Outcomes

One important corollary finding to this heuristic is that people asked to
imagine an outcome tend to immediately view it as more likely than people that
were not asked to imagine the specific outcome. If group A were asked to
imagine a specific outcome and then asked if it were a likely outcome, and
group B were asked whether the same specific outcome were likely without being
asked to imagine it first, the members of group A tend to view the outcome as
more likely than the members of group B, thereby demonstrating the tendency
toward using an availability heuristic as a basis for logic[citation needed].

In one experiment that occurred before the 1976 US Presidential election,
participants were asked simply to imagine Gerald Ford winning the upcoming
election. Those who were asked to do this subsequently viewed Ford as being
significantly more likely to win the upcoming election, and vice versa for
participants that had been asked to imagine Jimmy Carter.[3] Analogous results
were found with vivid versus pallid descriptions of outcomes in other
experiments.

#### [edit] Denial as a reverse availability heuristic

An opposite effect of this bias, called denial, occurs when an outcome is so
upsetting that the very act of thinking about it leads to an increased refusal
to believe it might occur. In this case, being asked to imagine the outcome
actually made participants view it as less likely.

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Psychology portal  
  * Anecdotal Evidence
  * Anecdotal value
  * Gambler's fallacy
  * Misleading vividness
  * Texas sharpshooter fallacy
  * Agenda-setting theory
  * List of cognitive biases

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Esgate, A. & Groome, D. (2004). An Introduction to Applied Cognitive Psychology. New York: Psychology Press.
  2. ^ Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgments under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124-1131.
  3. ^ Carroll, J. S. (1978). The effect of imagining an event on expectations for the event: An interpretation in terms of the availability heuristic. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 14, 88-96.

  * Combs, B. & Slovic, P. (1979). Newspaper coverage of causes of death. Journalism Quarterly 56, 837-843.
  * Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: a heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology 5, 207-232.

## [edit] External links

  * Self test - University of Wisconsin
  * Self test - Annenberg Media

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Availability_heuristic"

Categories: Heuristics | Cognitive biases

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007 | All
articles with unsourced statements | All articles that may contain original
research | Articles that may contain original research since October 2007 |
Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Polski
  * Sicilianu

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 March 2009, at 00:12 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



