
# Authenticity (philosophy)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Authenticity is a technical term in existentialist philosophy, and is also
used in the philosophy of art and psychology. In philosophy, the conscious
self is seen as coming to terms with being in a material world and with
encountering external forces, pressures and influences which are very
different from, and other than, itself. Authenticity is the degree to which
one is true to one's own personality, spirit, or character, despite these
pressures. Existentialists see this process in different ways.

## Contents

  * 1 Definitions
  * 2 Criticisms of authenticity
  * 3 Authenticity today
  * 4 References

  
## [edit] Definitions

It is difficult to determine the origin of the contemporary notion of
authenticity. Writers on the subject of authenticity have often attempted to
ground their views in work from a wide variety of historical periods. Secular
and religious notions of authenticity have coexisted for centuries under
different guises; perhaps the earliest account of authenticity that remains
popular is Socrates' admonition that "the unexamined life is not worth
living". In philosophy of art, "authenticity" describes the perception of art
as faithful to the artist's self, rather than conforming to external values
such as historical tradition, or commercial worth.[citation needed] The
concept of authenticity is often raised in the punk rock and heavy metal
musical subcultures, in which people or bands are criticized for their
purported lack of authenticity by being labeled with the epithet "poseur"[1] .

A common definition of "Authenticity" in psychology refers to the attempt to
live one's life according to the needs of one's inner being, rather than the
demands of society or one's early conditioning. [2][3][4] In the twentieth
century, Anglo-American discussions of authenticity often center around the
writers of a few key figures associated with existentialist philosophy, where
the term originated; because most of these writers wrote in languages other
than English, the process of translating and anthologizing has had a strong
impact on the debate. Walter Kaufmann might be credited with creating a
"canon" of existentialist writers which include SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard, Martin
Heidegger, and Jean-Paul Sartre. For these writers, the conscious self is seen
as coming to terms with being in a material world and with encountering
external forces and influences which are very different from itself;
authenticity is one way in which the self acts and changes in response to
these pressures.

However, one of the greatest problems facing such abstract approaches is that
the drives we call the "needs of one's inner being" are diffuse, subjective
and often culture bound. For this reason among others, authenticity is often
"at the limits" of language; it is described as the negative space around
inauthenticity, with reference to examples of inauthentic living. Sartre's
novels are perhaps the easiest access to this mode of describing authenticity:
they often contain characters and anti-heroes who base their actions on
external pressures -- the pressure to appear to be a certain kind of person,
the pressure to adopt a particular mode of living, the pressure to ignore
one's own moral and aesthetic objections in order to have a more comfortable
existence. His work also includes characters who do not understand their own
reasons for acting, or who ignore crucial facts about their own lives in order
to avoid uncomfortable truths; this connects his work with the philosophical
tradition.

Sartre is concerned also with the "vertiginous" experience of absolute
freedom. Under Sartre's view, this experience, necessary for the state of
authenticity, can be sufficiently unpleasant that it leads people to
inauthentic ways of living. In all writers, authenticity is seen as a very
general concept, not attached to any particular political or aesthetic
ideology. This is a necessary aspect of authenticity: because it concerns a
person's relation with the world, it can not be arrived at by simply repeating
a set of actions or taking up a set of positions. In this manner, authenticity
is connected with creativity: the impetus to action must arise from the person
in question, and not be externally imposed. Heidegger takes this notion to the
extreme, by speaking in very abstract terms about modes of living; his
terminology was adopted and simplified by Sartre in his philosophical works.
Kierkegaard's work (such as the "Panegyric Upon Abraham" from his Fear and
Trembling) often focuses on biblical stories which are (naturally) not
directly imitatable. Sartre, as has been noted above, focused on inauthentic
existence as a way to avoid the paradoxical problem of appearing to provide
prescriptions for a mode of living that rejects external dictates.[5]

These considerations aside, it is the case that authenticity has been
associated with various human activities. For Sartre, Jazz music was a
representation of freedom; this may have been in part because Jazz was
associated with African-American culture, and was thus in opposition to
Western culture generally, which Sartre considered hopelessly inauthentic.
Theodor Adorno, however, another writer and philosopher concerned with the
notion of authenticity, despised Jazz music because he saw it as a false
representation that could give the appearance of authenticity but that was as
much bound up in concerns with appearance and audience as many other forms of
art. Heidegger in his later life associated authenticity with non-
technological modes of existence, seeing technology as distorting a more
"authentic" relationship with the natural world.

Most writers on inauthenticity in the twentieth century considered the
predominant cultural norms to be inauthentic; not only because they were seen
as forced on people, but also because, in themselves, they required people to
behave inauthentically towards their own desires, obscuring true reasons for
acting. Advertising, in as much as it attempted to give people a reason for
doing something that they did not already possess, was a "textbook" example of
how Western culture distorted the individual for external reasons. Race
relations are seen as another limit on authenticity, as they demand that the
self engage with others on the basis of external attributes. An early example
of the connection between inauthenticity and capitalism was made by Karl Marx,
whose notion of "alienation" can be linked to the later discourse on the
nature of inauthenticity.

Hence those concerned with living authentically have often led unusual lives
that opposed cultural norms; the rise of the counter-culture in the 1960s in
Europe and America was seen by many as a new opportunity to live an authentic
existence. Many, however, have pointed out that just because one lives
unusually, one is not necessarily in an authentic state of being. The
connection of the violation of cultural norms to authenticity, however, is
strong and real, and continues today: among artists who explicitly violate the
conventions of their profession, for example. The connection of inauthenticity
to capitalism is contained in the notion of "selling out," used to describe an
artist whose work has become inauthentic after achieving commercial success
and thus becoming to an extent integrated into an inauthentic system.

However, a very different definition of authenticity was proposed by Erich
Fromm in the mid-1900s. He considered behaviour of any kind, even that wholly
in accord with societal mores, to be authentic if it results from personal
understanding and approval of its drives and origins, rather than merely from
conformity with the received wisdom of the society. Thus a Frommean authentic
may behave consistently in a manner that accords with cultural norms, but for
the reason that those norms appear on consideration to be appropriate, rather
than blindly, simply because they happen to be the current norms. Fromm thus
considers authenticity to be a positive outcome of enlightened and informed
motivation rather than a negative outcome of rejection of the expectations of
others. He described the latter condition - the drive to primarly escape
external restraints typified by the "absolute freedom" of Sartre - as "the
illusion of individuality", as opposed to the genuine individuality that
results from authentic living.

Writers tend to agree that authenticity is something to be pursued as a goal
intrinsic to "the good life." And yet it is often described as an
intrinsically difficult state to achieve, due in part to social pressures to
live inauthentically, and in part due to a person's own character. It is also
described as a revelatory state, where one perceives oneself, other people,
and sometimes even things, in a radically new way. Some writers argue that
authenticity also requires self-knowledge, and that it alters a person's
relationships with other people. Authenticity also carries with it its own set
of moral obligations, which often exist regardless of race, gender and class.
The notion of authenticity also fits into utopian ideology, which requires
authenticity among its citizens to exist, or which claims that such a
condition would remove physical and economic barriers to pursuing
authenticity.

## [edit] Criticisms of authenticity

Authenticity has its paradoxical components. Sartre illustrated these in his
extensive writings, pointing to the conflict between seeing the self as unique
and different from the world, but the self is embedded in a world which
clearly contains other such beings. Stated as a doctrine authenticity can be
thought to be self-defeating. This is because it is thereby classified and
becomes part of the non-self, an object of perhaps methodical study among
others. This is opposed to the notion of the individual self which seeks its
own solution independently of competing external ideologies. Another criticism
is that the solution to Sartre's difficulties involves some compromise to
allow unique individuals to co-exist in a way which is acceptable to all of
them. Therefore public ethics or morality may be a limit on authenticity.
Because authenticity is such a slippery concept, and because it can never be
rigorously defined, it can be seen as a threat to rationality or to
Enlightenment ideas about the transparency of laws.

## [edit] Authenticity today

British philosophy has seen authenticity as part of the continuation of the
Continental dualist position stated by Descartes. He held that reality
consists of two kinds of things, mental and physical substances, which are
fundamentally different from each other. Authenticity is based on a clear
distinction between self and the other, non-self, or world. American
philosophy has eagerly pursued the authenticity ideal, seeing it as central to
the values of individuality and independence prevalent in American society.

Those who advocate social reform value the study of authenticity since it can
provide a radical manifesto and an overview of the shortcomings of social
structures. Michael Kernis and Brian Goldman defined authenticity as "the
unimpeded operation of one's true or core self in one's daily enterprise." [1]

## [edit] References

  * Erich Fromm Fear of Freedom; Routledge & Kegan Paul 1942
  * Lionel Trilling Sincerity and Authenticity; ISBN 0-192-81166-5; Harvard UP 1974
  * Charles Taylor The Ethics of Authenticity; ISBN 0-674-26863-6; Harvard UP 1992
  * Alessandro Ferrara Reflective Authenticity; ISBN 0-415-13062-X; Routledge 1998
  * Walter Kaufmann, whose life increasingly focused on a search for authenticity.

  1. ^ http://www.indiecult.com/2006-04/television-personalities-my-dark-places Homeward Bound. Towards a Post-Gendered Pop Music: Television Personalitiesâ My Dark Places April 10th, 2006 by Godfre Leung Television Personalities My Dark Places (Domino, 2006)
  2. ^ Wood, A. M., Linley, P. A., Maltby, J., Baliousis, M., Joseph, S. The authentic personality: A theoretical and empirical conceptualization, and the development of the Authenticity Scale.Journal of Counseling Psychology, 55, 385-399.
  3. ^ Athabasca University
  4. ^ http://psych.eiu.edu/spencer/Existential.html
  5. ^ Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008). From Plato to Derrida. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-158591-6.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authenticity_(philosophy)"

Categories: Philosophical terminology | Martin Heidegger | Existentialism

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 February 2009, at 18:04 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



