
# Radio Station UVB-76

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Coordinates: 56Â°04â²58â³N 37Â°05â²22â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿56.08278Â°N
37.08944Â°Eï»¿ / 56.08278; 37.08944

<IMG>

<IMG>

Satellite photo of UVB-76 transmitter in Povarovo, Russia.

UVB-76 is the callsign of a shortwave radio station that usually broadcasts on
the frequency 4625 kHz (AM full carrier). It's known among radio listeners by
the nickname The Buzzer. It features one of the most unusual, mysterious, and
widely discussed broadcast contents on the shortwave dial: a short, monotonous
(E-natural) buzz tone, repeating at a rate of approximately 25 tones per
minute (sample sound), for 23 hours and 10 minutes per day (transmitter
maintenance apparently takes place between 7:00 and 7:50 GMT).[1] One minute
before the hour, the repeating tone is replaced by a continuous tone, which
continues for one minute until the short repeating buzz resumes.[citation
needed] In rare occasions the buzzer signal is interrupted and a voice
transmission in Russian takes place. Only three such events have been
auditioned. There is much speculation; however, the actual purpose of this
station remains unknown.

## Contents

  * 1 Normal Transmission
  * 2 Voice Messages
  * 3 Location and Function
  * 4 Transmitter
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Normal Transmission

The Buzzer has apparently been broadcasting since at least the early 1980s
(possibly as early as 1973) as a repeating two-second pip, changing to a
buzzer in early 1990.[2][3] It briefly changed to a higher tone of longer
duration (approximately 20 tones per minute) on January 16, 2003, although it
has since reverted to the previous tone pattern.[citation needed]

Frequently, as in the sound sample above, distant conversations and other
background noises can be heard behind the buzzer suggesting that the buzzing
device is behind a live and constantly open microphone, rather than a
recording or automated sound being fed through playback equipment.

## [edit] Voice Messages

Voice messages from UVB-76 are very rare. Only three such messages have been
intercepted in its 20-plus-year history:

  * At 21:58 GMT on December 24, 1997, the buzzing abruptly stopped to be replaced by a short series of beeps, and a male voice speaking Russian announced: "Ya â UVB-76. 18008. BROMAL: Boris, Roman, Olga, Mikhail, Anna, Larisa. 742, 799, 14."[4] The message was repeated verbatim several times before the beep sequence repeated and the buzzer resumed.

  * A similar voice message was broadcast on September 12, 2002, but with extreme distortion (possibly as a result of the source being too close to the microphone head) that rendered comprehension very difficult. This second voice broadcast has been partially translated as "UVB-76, UVB-76. 62691 Izafet 3693 8270."

  * The third voice message (and, as of January 2007, the latest one) was broadcast on February 21, 2006 at 7:57 GMT. (recording of the third voice transmission) Again, the speaking voice was highly distorted, but the message's content translates as: "75-59-75-59. 39-52-53-58. 5-5-2-5. Konstantin-1-9-0-9-0-8-9-8-Tatiana-Oksana-Anna-Elena-Pavel-Schuka. Konstantin 8-4. 9-7-5-5-9-Tatiana. Anna Larisa Uliyana-9-4-1-4-3-4-8."[1] These names are found in some Russian spelling alphabets, similar to the NATO phonetic alphabet.[5]

## [edit] Location and Function

The station's transmitter is located at Povarovo, Russia (N/37Â°05'22â E
(56.08 N/37.08 E)), which is about halfway between Zelenograd and
Solnechnogorsk and 40 km northwest of Moscow, near the village of Lozhki. The
location and callsign were unknown until the first voice broadcast of 1997.

Its purpose is unknown. One website claims the station is meant to "Transmit
orders to the military units and recruitment centers of the Moscow military
district" [2]. This is unconfirmed, and unlikely since the station transmitted
the simple buzz tone for at least 15 years before any words or numbers were
broadcast. Because of the nature of the broadcast and the fact that its
transmitter location is rumored to be a communications hub of the General
Staff of the army [3], UVB-76 is widely believed to be used to transmit
encoded messages to spies, as is generally assumed for the many numbers
stations that populate shortwave frequencies. Transmitter sites for some
numbers stations have been triangulated to military and/or intelligence
installations in several countries[citation needed], although no nation's
government will confirm or deny the existence of the stations or their
purpose. Another possibility is that the constant transmission of its
characteristic sound is supposed to signal the availability, operation or
alertness of some kind of installation, a kind of dead man's switch of a
military or other installation.

## [edit] Transmitter

The station uses Molniya-2M (PKM-15) Molniya-3 (PKM-20) transmitters and a
Viaz-M2 backup transmitter. The antenna model is a Horizontal dipole VGDSh h
â 20 m.[6]

## [edit] See also

  * Numbers station

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Radio Station UVB-76. http://www.geocities.com/uvb76/ Accessed 29 August 2008
  2. ^ http://www.radioscanner.ru/forum/index.php?action=vthread&topic=12415&forum=3&page=2
  3. ^ Ary Boender. Numbers & oddities: Column 1. http://www.cvni.net/radio/nsnl/nsnl000/nsnl0a.html
  4. ^ Posts from the SPOOKS and WUN listservers. http://www.dxworld.com/markers.html Accessed 29 August 2008
  5. ^ Phonetic alphabets http://75.126.69.23/faqs/radio/phonetic-alph/full/ Accessed 29 August 2008
  6. ^ http://www.geocities.com/uvb76/

## [edit] External links

  * Mysteries of the Short Wave \- Article about UVB-76.
  * Number Stations \- Includes discussion of UVB-76.
  * http://www.dxworld.com/markers.html
  * NPR's Lost and Found Sound, 2000-05-26: The Shortwave Numbers Mystery

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radio_Station_UVB-76"

Categories: Russian radio | Secret broadcasting

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since January 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 23 January 2009, at 16:14.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



