
# Monism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2009)  
Monism is any philosophical view which holds that there is unity in a given
field of inquiry, where this is not to be expected. Thus, some philosophers
may hold that the Universe is really just one thing, despite its many
appearances and diversities; or theology may support the view that there is
one God, with many manifestations in different religions.

## Contents

  * 1 Philosophical monism
  * 2 Ancient Western Philosophers
  * 3 Monism, pantheism, and panentheism
  * 4 Monism in religious and spiritual systems
    * 4.1 Hinduism
    * 4.2 Buddhism
    * 4.3 Christianity
    * 4.4 Judaism
    * 4.5 Islam
  * 5 Theological growth and breadth
  * 6 Materialistic monism
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Philosophical monism

Monism in philosophy can be defined according to four kinds:

  1. Idealism, phenomenalism, or mentalistic monism which holds that only mind is real.
  2. Neutral monism, which holds that both the mental and the physical can be reduced to some sort of third substance, or energy.
  3. Physicalism or materialism, which holds that only the physical is real, and that the mental can be reduced to the physical.
  4. Holistic gnoseology, which holds that only a global approach to reality, by means of a global knowledge, is able to get the truth. Holistic gnoseology is therefore an anti-specialist way to get a supposed deeper and comprehensive reality.

    Certain other positions are hard to pigeonhole into the above categories, see links below.
## [edit] Ancient Western Philosophers

The following pre-Socratic philosophers described reality as being monistic:

  * Thales: Water.
  * Anaximander: Apeiron (meaning 'the undefined infinite'). Reality is some, one thing, but we cannot know what.
  * Anaximenes: Air.
  * Heraclitus: Fire (in that everything is in constant flux).
  * Parmenides: Being. Reality is an unmoving perfect sphere, unchanging, undivided.

And post-Socrates:

  * Neopythagorians such as Apollonius of Tyana centered their cosmologies on the Monad or One.
  * Middle Platonism under such works as Numenius express the Universe emanating from the Monad or One.
  * Neoplatonism is Monistic. Plotinus taught that there was an ineffable transcendent God, 'The One,' of which subsequent realities were emanations. From The One emanates the Divine Mind (Nous), the Cosmic Soul (Psyche), and the World (Cosmos).

## [edit] Monism, pantheism, and panentheism

Following a long and still current tradition H.P. Owen (1971: 65) claimed that

    "Pantheists are âmonistsâ...they believe that there is only one Being, and that all other forms of reality are either modes (or appearances) of it or identical with it."
Although almost all pantheists are monists, some pantheists may also be not-
monists, but undeniably monists were the most famous pantheisms as that of
Stoics, Plotinus and Spinoza. Exclusive Monists believe that the universe, the
"God" of naturalistic pantheism, simply does not exist. In addition, monists
can be Deists, Pandeists, Theists or Panentheists; believing in a monotheistic
God that is omnipotent and all-pervading, and both transcendent and immanent.
There are monist pantheists and panentheists in Hinduism (particularly in
Advaita and Vishistadvaita respectively), Judaism (monistic panentheism is
especially found in Kabbalah and Hasidic philosophy), in Christianity
(especially among Oriental Orthodox, Eastern Orthodox, and Anglicans) and in
Islam (among the Sufis, especially the Bektashi).

## [edit] Monism in religious and spiritual systems

### [edit] Hinduism

Monism is found in the Nasadiya Sukta of the Rigveda, which speaks of the One
being-non-being that 'breathed without breath'. The first system in Hinduism
that unequivocally explicated absolute monism was the non-dualist philosophy
of Advaita Vedanta as expounded by Shankara. In short, Advaita declares - All
is Brahman. It is part of the six Hindu systems of philosophy, based on the
Upanishads, and posits that the ultimate monad is a formless, ineffable divine
ground of all being.

Vishishtadvaita, qualified monism, is from the school of Ramanuja.
Shuddhadvaita, in-essence monism, is the school of Vallabha. Dvaitadvaita,
differential monism, is a school founded by Nimbarka. Dvaita, dualist monism,
is a school founded by Madhvacharya. All Vaishnava schools are panentheistic
and view the universe as part of Krishna or Narayana, but see a plurality of
souls and substances within Brahman. Monistic theism, which includes the
concept of a personal God as a universal, omnipotent Supreme Being who is both
immanent and transcendent, is prevalent within many other schools of Hinduism
as well.

Monistic theism is not to be confused with monotheism where God is viewed as
transcendent-only. In monotheism, the notion of immanence or actual presence
of God in all things is absent.

### [edit] Buddhism

Buddhist philosophy is generally suspicious of ontology. The Buddha himself,
and some of his prominent disciples such as Nagarjuna, discouraged ontological
theorizing for its own sake.

According to the Pali Canon, both pluralism (naanatta) and monism (ekatta) are
speculative views. A Theravada commentary notes that the former is similar to
or associated with nihilism (ucchedavada), and the latter is similar to or
associated with eternalism (sassatavada).[1] See middle way.

Among the Madhyamaka school of Mahayana Buddhist philosophy, the ultimate
nature of the world is described as emptiness, which is indistinguishable from
material form. That appears to be a monist position, but the Madhyamaka views
- including variations like Prasangika and Yogacara and the more modern
shentong Tibetan position - will fail to assert in the ultimate nature any
particular point of view. They instead deconstruct any assertions about
ultimate existence as resulting in absurd consequences. The doctrine of
emptiness is also found in earlier Theravada Buddhist literature.

In Soto Zen teaching, it is said that "All is One and All is Different." Since
non-dualism does not recognize a dualism between Oneness and Difference, or
even between dualism and non-dualism, it is difficult to state the meaning of
this doctrine. All discussion of this teaching by Soto Zen masters falls under
the Buddhist concept of skill in means, which is to say, not literally
correct, but suitable for leading others to the Truth. Chinese Soto (Cao-Dong)
master Tozan (Tung Shan, Dongshan) wrote the Verses of the Five Ranks (of the
Ideal and the Actual), which is also important as a set of koans in the Rinzai
school. Dongshan describes the Fifth Rank in part thus:

Unity Attained:  
Who dares to equal him  
Who falls into neither being nor non-being!

Shih-t'ou Hsi-ch'ien's poem "The Harmony of Difference and Sameness" Sandokai
is an important early expression of Zen Buddhism and is chanted in SÅtÅ
temples to this day. Another poem of Tung-shan Liang-chieh on these and
related themes, "The Song of the Jewel Mirror Awareness", is also chanted in
SÅtÅ temples daily.

Other expressions of this teaching include the koan:

A disciple asked, "What is the difference between the enlightened and the
unenlightened man?"

The Master replied, "The unenlightened man sees a difference, but the
enlightened man does not."

and Dogen Zenji's personal koan, "Why are training and enlightenment
differentiated, since the Truth is universal?" (Fukanzazengi, Instructions for
Meditation)

### [edit] Christianity

See also: Christian anthropology

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(March 2009)  
In general[dubious â discuss], Christianity, particularly the Christian
right, strongly maintains the Creator-creature distinction, and so firmly
rejects metaphysical monism[citation needed]. Christianity maintains that God
created the universe ex nihilo[citation needed] and not from himself[citation
needed], nor within himself[citation needed], so that the creator is not to be
confused with creation[citation needed], but rather transcends it
(metaphysical dualism)[citation needed]. God is transcendent[citation needed].
Immanence is defined as God's omnipotence, omnipresence and omniscience, due
to God's desire for intimate contact with his own creation[citation needed].
Another use of the term "monism" is in Christian anthropology to refer to the
innate nature of mankind as being holistic, as opposed to bipartite and
tripartite views.

While the Christian view of reality is dualistic (in regard to
metaphysics)[citation needed] in that it holds to the Creator's transcendence
of creation[dubious â discuss], it firmly rejects other types of dualism (or
pluralism)[citation needed] such as the idea that God must compete with other
(equal) powers such as Satan or Evil[dubious â discuss]. In On Free Choice
of the Will, Augustine argued, in the context of the problem of evil, that
evil is not the opposite of good, but rather merely the absence of good,
something that does not have existence in itself. Likewise, C. S. Lewis
described evil as a "parasite" in Mere Christianity, as he viewed evil as
something that cannot exist without good to provide it with existence. Lewis
went on to argue against dualism from the basis of moral absolutism, and
rejected the dualistic notion that God and Satan are opposites, arguing
instead that God has no equal, hence no opposite. Lewis rather viewed Satan as
the opposite of Michael the archangel.

### [edit] Judaism

According to Chasidic Thought (particularly as propounded by Shneur Zalman of
Liadi) of Chabad, God is held to be immanent within creation for two
interrelated reasons.

  * Firstly, a very strong Jewish belief is that "[t]he Divine life-force which brings [the universe] into existence must constantly be present... were this life-force to forsake [the universe] for even one brief moment, it would revert to a state of utter nothingness, as before the creation..." [1].

  * Secondly, and simultaneously, Judaism holds as axiomatic that God is an absolute unity, and that He is Perfectly Simple \- thus if His sustaining power is within nature, then His essence is also within nature.

However the Vilna Gaon was very much against this philosophy, for he felt that
it would lead to pantheism and heresy. According to some this is the main
reason for the Gaon's ban on Chasidism.

Note that, at the same time, Jewish Thought considers God as separate from all
physical, created things (transcendent) and as existing outside of time
(eternal). For a discussion of the resultant paradox; see Tzimtzum.

    See also Negative theology.
The later, modern Hasidic approach should be contrasted with that of the
earlier scholars, more in pale with mainstream Jewish thought of the time,
such as Maimonides. According to Maimonides, (see Foundations of the Law,
Chapter 1), God is an incorporeal being that caused all other existence. In
fact, God is defined as the necessary existent that caused all other
existence. According to Maimonides, to admit corporeality to God is tantamount
to admitting complexity to God, which is a contradiction to God as the First
Cause and constitutes heresy. While Hasidic mystics considered the existence
of the physical world a contradiction to God's simpleness, Maimonides saw no
contradiction. See the Guide for the Perplexed, especially chapter I:50.

### [edit] Islam

According to non-Sufi Islamic perspective, the creation and the creator cannot
be equal, therefore Monism stands rejected in Islam. Islam claims that God
created the universe from nothing, therefore the concept of anthropomorphism
and viewing God himself as evolving or changing are forms of shirk
(associating partners with God). The belief of God in Islam can be summarized
by chapter 112 of the Qur'an "Say, he is God the one, God is he upon whom all
depend. He does not beget nor was he begotten, and there is nothing that is
like him/equal to him."

Many followers of Sufism advocated monism. Most notably the 13th-century
Persian poet Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Balkhi-Rumi (1207 -73) in his didactic poem
Masnavi espouses monism[2][3]. Rumi says Masnavi, "in the shop for Unity
(wahdat); anything that you see there except the One is an idol."[2]

## [edit] Theological growth and breadth

Many forms of Hinduism (including Vedanta, Yoga, and certain schools of
Shaivism), Taoism, Pantheism, Rastafari and similar systems of thought explore
the mystical and spiritual elements of a monistic philosophy. With increasing
awareness of these systems of thought, western spiritual and philosophical
climate has seen a growing understanding of monism. Moreover, the New Thought
and New Age movements embraced many monistic concepts during the twentieth
century and continue up to the present day.

Monism can be said to oppose religious philosophy altogether by claiming that
the idea of spirituality contradicts the monist principle of an
indistinguishable mind and body. However, one might consider monism more
fundamental than any religious philosophy while taking religion and
spirituality as sources of wisdom.

## [edit] Materialistic monism

Materialistic monism (or monistic materialism) is the philosophical concept
which sees the unity of matter in its globality. For the materialistic monist
the cosmos is âoneâ and comprehensive, then a âone-allâ made up of
parts such as its effects. The matter is then originary and cause of all
reality.

## [edit] See also

  * Forms of monism 
    * Anomalous monism
    * Dialectical monism
    * Indefinite monism
    * Neutral Monism
    * Reflexive monism
  * Monad
  * Mind-body problem
  * Dualism
    * Non-Dualism
  * Eliminativism
  * Functionalism
  * Holism
  * Pluralism
    * Ontological pluralism

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ David Kalupahana, Causality: The Central Philosophy of Buddhism. The University Press of Hawaii, 1975, page 88. The passage is SN 2.77.
  2. ^ a b Reynold Nicholson Rumi
  3. ^ Cyprian Rice, O.P., (1964) The Persian Sufism George Allen, London

## [edit] External links

  * Catholic Encyclopedia \- Monism
  * Hinduism's Online Lexicon \- (search for Monism)
  * Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy \- Monism

v â¢ d â¢ e

Theism  
List of belief systems  
Deity (Divinity Â· Numen Â· Male Â· Female) Â· Singular God (Existence Â·
Gender) Â· Binitarianism Â· Deism Â· Dystheism Â· Henotheism Â· Kathenotheism
Â· Nontheism Â· Monolatrism Â· Monotheism Â· Mysticism Â· Panentheism Â·
Pandeism Â· Pantheism Â· Polydeism Â· Polytheism Â· Spiritualism Â· Theopanism

<IMG> Religion portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Theological thought  
Abrahamism Â· Acosmism Â· Agnosticism Â· Animism Â· Antireligion Â· Atheism Â·
Dharmism Â· Deism Â· Dualism Â· Esotericism Â· Feminist theology Â· Gnosticism
Â· Henotheism Â· Humanism Â· Immanence Â· Monism Â· Monotheism Â· Mysticism Â·
New Age Â· Nondualism Â· Pandeism Â· Pantheism Â· Polytheism Â· Process
theology Â· Religious Naturalism Â· Shamanism Â· Taoic Â· Theism Â·
Transcendence Â· more

<IMG> Religion portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Philosophy  
Eastern philosophy Â· Western philosophy  
History

Ancient

Buddhist Â· Chinese Â· Greek Â· Hellenistic Â· Hindu Â· Indian Â· Jain Â·
Persian  
Medieval

Christian Â· Early Islamic Â· Islamic Â· Jewish Â· Judeo-Islamic  
Modern

Empiricism Â· Rationalism  
Contemporary

Analytic Â· Continental  
Lists

Basic topics Â· Topic list Â· Philosophers Â· Glossary of philosophical isms
Â· List of philosophical theories Â· Movements Â· more  
Branches

Aesthetics Â· Ethics Â· Epistemology Â· Logic Â· Metaphysics  
Philosophy of

Action Â· Biology Â· Chemistry Â· Education Â· Economics Â· Environment Â·
Geography Â· Information Â· Healthcare Â· History Â· Human nature Â· Humor Â·
Language Â· Law Â· Literature Â· Mathematics Â· Mind Â· Music Â· Being Â·
Philosophy Â· Physics Â· Politics Â· Psychology Â· Religion Â· Science Â·
Social science Â· Technology Â· War  
Schools

Aristotelianism Â· Averroism Â· Avicennism Â· Critical theory Â· Cynicism Â·
Deconstructionism Â· Deontology Â· Dialectical materialism Â· Dualism Â·
Egoism Â· Epicureanism Â· Epiphenomenalism Â· Existentialism Â· Feminist Â·
Functionalism Â· Hedonism Â· Hegelianism Â· Hermeneutics Â· Humanism Â·
Idealism Â· Kantianism Â· Kyoto School Â· Individualism Â· Logical positivism
Â· Marxism Â· Materialism Â· Monism Â· Naturalism Â· Neoplatonism Â· New
Philosophers Â· Nihilism Â· Ordinary language Â· Particularism Â· Peripatetic
Â· Phenomenology Â· Platonism Â· Positivism Â· Posthumanism Â· Postmodernism
Â· Poststructuralism Â· Pragmatism Â· Presocratic Â· Process Â· Solipsism Â·
Realism Â· Relativism Â· Scholasticism Â· Skepticism Â· Stoicism Â·
Structuralism Â· Thomism Â· Utilitarianism  
Portal Â· Category listings  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monism"

Categories: Monism | Theology | Metaphysical theories | Theories of mind |
Reductionism

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2009 |
Articles that may contain original research since March 2009 | All articles
that may contain original research | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with
disputed statements from March 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 17:29 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



