
# Human brain

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about features specific to the human brain. For basic
information about brains, see brain.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Drawing of the human brain and skull.

The human brain is the center of the human nervous system and is a highly
complex organ; it is also the most complex object in the known
universe[citation needed]. It has the same general structure as the brains of
other mammals, but is over five times as large as the "average brain" of a
mammal with the same body size.[citation needed] Most of the expansion comes
from the cerebral cortex, a convoluted layer of neural tissue that covers the
surface of the forebrain. Especially expanded are the frontal lobes, which are
involved in executive functions such as self-control, planning, reasoning, and
abstract thought. The portion of the brain devoted to vision is also greatly
enlarged in humans.

Brain evolution, from the earliest shrewlike mammals through primates to
hominids, is marked by a steady increase in encephalization, or the ratio of
brain to body size. The human brain has been estimated to contain 50â100
billion (1011) neurons, of which about 10 billion (1010) are cortical
pyramidal cells. These cells pass signals to each other via around 100
trillion (1014) synaptic connections.

In spite of the fact that it is protected by the thick bones of the skull,
suspended in cerebrospinal fluid, and isolated from the bloodstream by the
blood-brain barrier, the delicate nature of the human brain makes it
susceptible to many types of damage and disease. The most common forms of
physical damage are closed head injuries such as a blow to the head, a stroke,
or poisoning by a wide variety of chemicals that can act as neurotoxins.
Infection of the brain is rare because of the barriers that protect it, but is
very serious when it occurs. More common are genetically based diseases, such
as Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, and many others. A number of
psychiatric conditions, such as schizophrenia and depression, are widely
thought to be caused at least partially by brain dysfunctions, although the
nature of the brain anomalies is not very well understood.

## Contents

  * 1 Structure
    * 1.1 Topography
    * 1.2 Lateralization
  * 2 Sources of information
    * 2.1 EEG
    * 2.2 MEG
    * 2.3 Structural and functional imaging
    * 2.4 Effects of brain damage
  * 3 Language
  * 4 Pathology
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 References
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Structure

<IMG>

<IMG>

Horizontal slice of the head of an adult man, showing the cerebral cortex and
underlying white matter.

The adult human brain weighs on average about 3 lb (1.5 kg)[1] with a size of
around 1130 cubic centimetres (cc) in women and 1260 cc in men, although there
is substantial individual variation.[2] The brain is very soft, having a
consistency similar to tofu. When alive, it is tan-gray on the outside and
mostly yellow-white on the inside, with subtle variations in color. The photo
on the right shows a horizontal slice of the head of an adult man, from the
National Library of Medicine's Visible Human Project. In this project, two
human cadavers (from a man and a woman) were frozen and then sliced into thin
sections, which were individually photographed and digitized. The slice here
is taken from a small distance below the top of the brain, and shows the
cerebral cortex (the convoluted cellular layer on the outside) and the
underlying white matter, which consists of myelinated fiber tracts traveling
to and from the cerebral cortex.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Drawing of the human brain, showing several important structures.

Situated at the top and covered with a convoluted cortex, the cerebral
hemispheres form the largest part of the human brain .[3] Underneath the
cerebrum lies the brainstem, resembling a stalk on which the cerebrum is
attached. At the rear of the brain, beneath the cerebrum and behind the
brainstem, is the cerebellum, a structure with a horizontally furrowed surface
that makes it look different from any other brain area. The same structures
are present in other mammals, although the cerebellum is not so large relative
to the rest of brain. As a rule, the smaller the cerebrum, the less convoluted
the cortex. The cortex of a rat or mouse is almost completely smooth. The
cortex of a dolphin or whale, on the other hand, is more convoluted than the
cortex of a human.

The dominant feature of the human brain is corticalization. The cerebral
cortex in humans is so large that it overshadows every other part of the
brain. A few subcortical structures show alterations reflecting this trend.
The cerebellum, for example, has a medial zone connected mainly to subcortical
motor areas, and a lateral zone connected primarily to the cortex. In humans
the lateral zone takes up a much larger fraction of the cerebellum than in
most other mammalian species. Corticalization is reflected in function as well
as structure. In a rat, surgical removal of the entire cerebral cortex leaves
an animal that is still capable of walking around and interacting with the
environment. In a human, comparable damage produces a permanent state of coma.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The four lobes of the cerebral cortex.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The bones of the human skull.

The cerebral cortex is nearly symmetric in outward form, with left and right
hemispheres. Anatomists conventionally divide each hemisphere into four
"lobes", the frontal lobe, parietal lobe, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe.
It is important to realize that this categorization does not actually arise
from the structure of the cortex itself: the lobes are named after the bones
of the skull that overlie them. There is one exception: the border between the
frontal and parietal lobes is shifted backward to the central sulcus, a deep
fold that marks the line where primary somatosensory cortex and primary motor
cortex come together.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Major gyri and sulci on the lateral surface of the cortex.

The cerebral cortex is essentially a two-dimensional sheet of neural tissue,
folded in a way that allows a large surface area to fit within the confines of
the skull. Each cerebral hemisphere, in fact, has a total surface area of
about 1.3 square feet.[4] Anatomists call each cortical fold a sulcus, and the
smooth area between folds a gyrus. Most human brains show a similar pattern of
folding, but there are enough variations in the shape and placement of folds
to make every brain unique. Nevertheless, the pattern is consistent enough for
each major fold to have a name, such as "superior frontal gyrus", "postcentral
sulcus", "trans-occipital sulcus", etc.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Brodmann's classification of areas of the cortex.

Different parts of the cerebral cortex are involved in different cognitive and
behavioral functions. The differences show up in a number of ways: the effects
of localized brain damage, regional activity patterns when the brain is
examined using functional imaging techniques, connectivity with subcortical
areas, and regional differences in the cellular architecture of the cortex.
Anatomists describe most of the cortexâthe part they call isocortexâas
having six layers, but not all layers are apparent in all areas, and even when
a layer is present, its thickness and cellular organization can vary. Several
anatomists have constructed maps of cortical areas on the basis of variations
in the appearance of the layers as seen with a microscope. One of the most
widely used schemes came from Brodmann, who assigned numbers from 1 to 52 to
brain areas (later anatomists have subdivided many of them). Thus, as a few
random examples, Brodmann area 1 is the primary somatosensory cortex; Brodmann
area 17 is the primary visual cortex; Brodmann area 25 is the anterior
cingulate cortex; etc.

### [edit] Topography

<IMG>

<IMG>

Topography of the primary motor cortex, showing which body part is controlled
by each zone.

Many of these brain areas themselves have complex internal structures. In a
number of cases, brain areas are organized into "topographic maps", where
adjoining bits of the cortex represent adjoining parts of the body, or of some
more abstract entity. One of the simplest examples is the primary motor
cortex, a strip of tissue running along the anterior edge of the central
sulcus, as shown in the image to the right. Motor areas innervating each part
of the body arise from a distinct zone, with neighboring body parts
represented by neighboring zones. Electrical stimulation of the cortex at any
point causes a muscle-contraction in the represented body part. This
"somatotopic" representation is not evenly distributed, however. The head, for
example, is represented by a region about three times as large as the zone for
the entire back and trunk. The level of detail determines the precision of
motor control and sensory discrimination. The areas for the lips, fingers, and
tongue are particularly expanded in proportion to the sizes of the body parts
they represent.

In visual areas, the maps are retinotopicâthat is, they reflect the
topography of the retina, the layer of light-activated neurons lining the back
of the eye. In this case too the representation is uneven: the foveaâthe
area at the center of the visual fieldâis greatly overrepresented compared
to the periphery. The visual circuitry in the human cerebral cortex contains
several dozen distinct retinotopic maps, each devoted to analyzing the visual
input stream in a particular way. The primary visual cortex (Brodmann area
17), which is the main recipient of direct input from the visual part of the
thalamus, contains many neurons that are most easily activated by edges with a
particular orientation moving across a particular point in the visual field.
Visual areas farther downstream extract features such as color, motion, and
shape.

In auditory areas, the primary map is tonotopic. Sounds are parsed according
to frequency (i.e., high pitch vs low pitch) by subcortical auditory areas,
and this parsing is reflected by the primary auditory zone of the cortex. As
with the visual system, there are a number of tonotopic cortical maps, each
devoted to analyzing sound in a particular way.

Within a topographic map there can sometimes be finer levels of spatial
structure. In the primary visual cortex, for example, where the main
organization is retinotopic and the main responses are to moving edges, cells
that respond to different edge-orientations are spatially segregated.

### [edit] Lateralization

Main article: Lateralization of brain function

<IMG>

<IMG>

Routing of neural signals from the two eyes to the brain.

Each hemisphere of the brain interacts mainly with one half of the body, but
for reasons that are unclear, the connections are crossed: the left side of
the brain interacts with the right side of the body, and vice versa. Motor
connections from the brain to the spinal cord, and sensory connections from
the spinal cord to the brain, both cross the midline at brainstem levels.
Visual input follows a more complex rule: the optic nerves from the two eyes
come together at a point called the optic chiasm, and half of the fibers from
each nerve split off to join the other. The result is that connections from
the left half of the retina, in both eyes, go to the left side of the brain,
whereas connections from the right half of the retina go to the right side of
the brain. Because each half of the retina receives light coming from the
opposite half of the visual field, the functional consequence is that visual
input from the left side of the world goes to the right side of the brain, and
vice versa. Thus, the right side of the brain receives somatosensory input
from the left side of the body, and visual input from the left side of the
visual fieldâan arrangement that presumably is helpful for visuomotor
coordination.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The corpus callosum, a nerve bundle connecting the two cerebral hemispheres.

The two cerebral hemispheres are connected by a very large nerve bundle called
the corpus callosum, which crosses the midline above the level of the
thalamus. There are also two much smaller connections, the anterior commisure
and hippocampal commisure, as well as many subcortical connections that cross
the midline. The corpus callosum is the main avenue of communication between
the two hemispheres, though. It connects each point on the cortex to the
mirror-image point in the opposite hemisphere, and also connects to
functionally related points in different cortical areas.

In most respects, the left and right sides of the brain are symmetrical in
terms of function. For example, the counterpart of the left-hemisphere motor
area controlling the right hand is the right-hemisphere area controlling the
left hand. There are, however, several very important exceptions, involving
language and spatial cognition. In most people, the left hemisphere is
"dominant" for language: a stroke that damages a key language area in the left
hemisphere can leave the victim unable to speak or understand, whereas
equivalent damage to the right hemisphere would cause only minor impairment to
language skills.

A substantial part of our current understanding of the interactions between
the two hemispheres has come from the study of "split-brain patients"âpeople
who underwent surgical transection of the corpus callosum in an attempt to
reduce the severity of epileptic seizures. These patients do not show unusual
behavior that is immediately obvious, but in some cases can behave almost like
two different people in the same body, with the right hand taking an action
and then the left hand undoing it. Most such patients, when briefly shown a
picture on the right side of the point of visual fixation, are able to
describe it verbally, but when the picture is shown on the left, are unable to
describe it, but may be able to give an indication with the left hand of the
nature of the object shown.

It should be noted that the differences between left and right hemispheres are
greatly overblown in much of the popular literature on this topic. The
existence of differences has been solidly established, but many popular books
go far beyond the evidence in attributing features of personality or
intelligence to the left or right hemisphere dominance.

## [edit] Sources of information

Information about the structure and function of the human brain comes from a
variety of sources. Most information about the cellular components of the
brain and how they work comes from studies of animal subjects, using
techniques described in the brain article. Some techniques, however, are used
mainly in humans, and therefore are described here.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Computed tomography of human brain, from base of the skull to top. Taken with
intravenous contrast medium.

### [edit] EEG

By placing electrodes on the scalp it is possible to record the summed
electrical activity of the cortex, in a technique known as
electroencephalography (EEG).[5] EEG measures mass changes in population
synaptic activity from the cerebral cortex, but can only detect changes over
large areas of the brain, with very little sensitivity for sub-cortical
activity. EEG recordings can detect events lasting only a few thousandths of a
second, so they have good temporal resolution, but the tradeoff is that they
have very poor spatial resolution.

### [edit] MEG

Apart from measuring the electric field around the skull it is possible to
measure the magnetic field directly in a technique known as
magnetoencephalography (MEG).[6] This technique has the same temporal
resolution as EEG but much better spatial resolution, although not as good as
fMRI. The greatest disadvantage of MEG is that, because the magnetic fields
generated by neural activity are very weak, the method is only capable of
picking up signals from near the surface of the cortex, and even then, only
neurons located in the depths of cortical folds (sulci) have dendrites
oriented in a way that gives rise to detectable magnetic fields outside the
skull.

### [edit] Structural and functional imaging

Main article: Neuroimaging

<IMG>

<IMG>

A scan of the brain using fMRI

There are several methods for detecting brain activity changes by three-
dimensional imaging of local changes in blood flow. The older methods are
SPECT and PET, which depend on injection of radioactive tracers into the
bloodstream. The newest method, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
has considerably better spatial resolution and involves no radioactivity.[7]
Using the most powerful magnets currently available, fMRI can localize brain
activity changes to regions as small as one cubic millimeter. The downside is
that the temporal resolution is poor: when brain activity increases, the blood
flow response is delayed by 1â5 seconds and lasts for at least 10 seconds.
Thus, fMRI is a very useful tool for learning which brain regions are involved
in a given behavior, but gives little information about the temporal dynamics
of their responses. A major advantage for fMRI is that, because it is non-
invasive, it can readily be used on human subjects.

### [edit] Effects of brain damage

Main article: Neuropsychology

A key source of information about the function of brain regions is the effects
of damage to them.[8] In humans, strokes have long provided a "natural
laboratory" for studying the effects of brain damage. Most strokes result from
a blood clot lodging in the brain and blocking the local blood supply, causing
damage or destruction of nearby brain tissue: the range of possible blockages
is very wide, leading to a great diversity of stroke symptoms. Analysis of
strokes is limited by the fact that damage often crosses into multiple regions
of the brain, not along clear-cut borders, making it difficult to draw firm
conclusions.

## [edit] Language

<IMG>

<IMG>

Location of two brain areas that play a critical role in language, Broca's
area and Wernicke's area.

In human beings, it is the left hemisphere that usually contains the
specialized language areas. While this holds true for 97% of right-handed
people, about 19% of left-handed people have their language areas in the right
hemisphere and as many as 68% of them have some language abilities in both the
left and the right hemisphere. The two hemispheres are thought to contribute
to the processing and understanding of language: the left hemisphere processes
the linguistic meaning of prosody, while the right hemisphere processes the
emotions conveyed by prosody.[9] Studies of children have shown that if a
child has damage to the left hemisphere, the child may develop language in the
right hemisphere instead. The younger the child, the better the recovery. So,
although the "natural" tendency is for language to develop on the left, human
brains are capable of adapting to difficult circumstances, if the damage
occurs early enough.

The first language area within the left hemisphere to be discovered is called
Broca's Area, after Paul Broca. The Broca's area doesn't just handle getting
language out in a motor sense, though. It seems to be more generally involved
in the ability to deal with grammar itself, at least the more complex aspects
of grammar. For example, it handles distinguishing a sentence in passive form
from a simpler subject-verb-object sentence. For instance, the sentence: "The
boy was hit by the girl." implies the girl hit the boy, not the other way
around. As a simple subject-verb-object interpretation it could mean: "The boy
was hit by the girl.", and therefore, the boy hit the girl.

The second language area to be discovered is called Wernicke's Area, after
Carl Wernicke, a German neurologist. The problem of not understanding the
speech of others is known as Wernickeâs Aphasia. Wernicke's is not just
about speech comprehension. People with Wernicke's Aphasia also have
difficulty naming things, often responding with words that sound similar, or
the names of related things, as if they are having a very hard time with their
mental "dictionaries."

## [edit] Pathology

<IMG>

<IMG>

A human brain showing frontotemporal lobar degeneration causing frontotemporal
dementia.

Clinically, death is defined as an absence of brain activity as measured by
EEG. Injuries to the brain tend to affect large areas of the organ, sometimes
causing major deficits in intelligence, memory, and movement. Head trauma
caused, for example, by vehicle or industrial accidents, is a leading cause of
death in youth and middle age. In many cases, more damage is caused by
resultant edema than by the impact itself. Stroke, caused by the blockage or
rupturing of blood vessels in the brain, is another major cause of death from
brain damage.

Other problems in the brain can be more accurately classified as diseases
rather than injuries. Neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease,
Parkinson's disease, motor neurone disease, and Huntington's disease are
caused by the gradual death of individual neurons, leading to decrements in
movement control, memory, and cognition. Currently only the symptoms of these
diseases can be treated.

Mental disorders, such as clinical depression, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder
and post-traumatic stress disorder may involve particular patterns of
neuropsychological functioning related to various aspects of mental and
somatic function. These disorders may be treated by psychotherapy, psychiatric
medication or social intervention and personal recovery work; the underlying
issues and associated prognosis vary significantly between individuals.

Some infectious diseases affecting the brain are caused by viruses and
bacteria. Infection of the meninges, the membrane that covers the brain, can
lead to meningitis. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (also known as mad cow
disease), is deadly in cattle and humans and is linked to prions. Kuru is a
similar prion-borne degenerative brain disease affecting humans. Both are
linked to the ingestion of neural tissue, and may explain the tendency in some
species to avoid cannibalism. Viral or bacterial causes have been reported in
multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease, and are established causes of
encephalopathy, and encephalomyelitis.

Many brain disorders are congenital. Tay-Sachs disease, Fragile X syndrome,
and Down syndrome are all linked to genetic and chromosomal errors. Many other
syndromes, such as the intrinsic circadian rhythm disorders, are suspected to
be congenital as well. Malfunctions in the embryonic development of the brain
can be caused by genetic factors, drug use, nutritional deficiencies, and
infectious diseases during pregnancy.

Certain brain disorders are treated by brain neurosurgeons while others are
treated by neurologists and psychiatrists.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Visualization of a diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) measurement of a human
brain. Depicted are reconstructed axon tracts that run through the mid-
sagittal plane. Especially prominent are the U-shaped fibers that connect the
two hemispheres through the corpus callosum (the fibers come out of the image
plane and consequently bend towards the top) and the fiber tracts that descend
toward the spine (blue, within the image plane).

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Carpenter's Human Neuroanatomy, Ch. 1
  2. ^ Cosgrove et al, 2007
  3. ^ Principles of Neural Science, p 324
  4. ^ Toro et al, 2008
  5. ^ Fisch and Spehlmann's EEG primer
  6. ^ Preissl, Magnetoencephalography
  7. ^ Buxton, Introduction to Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
  8. ^ Andrews, Neuropsychology
  9. ^ Manlove, George (February 2005). "Deleted Words". UMaine Today Magazine. http://umainetoday.umaine.edu/issues/v5i1/stroke.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-09.

## [edit] References

  * Andrews, DG (2001). Neuropsychology. Psychology Press. ISBN 9781841691039. http://books.google.com/books?id=kiCtU8wBTfwC.

  * Buxton, RB (2002). An Introduction to Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Principles and Techniques. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521581134. http://books.google.com/books?id=FordF5AN9vwC.

  * Cosgrove, KP; Mazure CM, Staley JK (2007). "Evolving knowledge of sex differences in brain structure, function, and chemistry.". Biol Psychiat 62: 847â55. PMID 17544382. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0006322307001989.

  * Fisch, BJ; Spehlmann R (1999). Fisch and Spehlmann's EEG Primer: Basic Principles of Digital and Analog EEG.. Elsevier Health Sciences. ISBN 9780444821485. http://books.google.com/books?id=YMHsluy4QygC.

  * Kandel, ER; Schwartz JH, Jessel TM (2000). Principles of Neural Science. McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 9780838577011.

  * Parent, A; Carpenter MB (1995). Carpenter's Human Neuroanatomy. Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 9780683067521. http://books.google.com/books?id=IJ5pAAAAMAAJ.

  * Preissl, H (2005). Magnetoencephalography. Academic Press. ISBN 9780123668691. http://books.google.com/books?id=ElTJAAAACAAJ.

  * Toro, R; Perron M, Pike B, Richer L. Veillette S, Pausova Z, Paus T (2008). Brain size and folding of the human cerebral cortex.. 18. pp. 2352â7. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhm261. PMID 18267953. http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/18/10/2352.

  * Simon, Seymour (1999). The Brain. HarperTrophy. ISBN 0-688-17060-9
  * Thompson, Richard F. (2000). The Brain: An Introduction to Neuroscience. Worth Publishers. ISBN 0-7167-3226-2
  * Campbell, Neil A. and Jane B. Reece. (2005). Biology. Benjamin Cummings. ISBN 0-8053-7171-0

## [edit] See also

  * Cephalic disorders, concerning defects of the head, especially the brain
  * Cerebral hemispheres
  * History of the brain
  * Lateralization of brain function
  * Lobes of the brain
  * Neuroanatomy
  * Neuroanthropology
  * Neuroscience
  * Regions in the human brain
  * Common misconceptions about the brain

## [edit] External links

  * The Brain from Top to Bottom
  * The Whole Brain Atlas
  * High-Resolution Cytoarchitectural Primate Brain Atlases
  * Brain Facts and Figures
  * Current Research Regarding the Human Brain ScienceDaily
  * Estimating the computational capabilities of the human brain
  * When will computer hardware match the human brain? â an article by Hans Moravec
  * How the human brain works
  * Everything you wanted to know about the human brain â Provided by New Scientist.
  * Differences between female & male human brains
  * Surface Anatomy of the Brain
  * Scientific American Magazine (May 2005 Issue) His Brain, Her Brain About differences between female and male brains.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Neuropsychology  
Topics

Brain-computer interface â¢ Traumatic brain injury â¢ Brain regions â¢
Clinical neuropsychology â¢ Cognitive neuroscience â¢ Human brain â¢
Neuroanatomy â¢ Neurophysiology â¢ Phrenology â¢ Misconceptions  
Brain functions

Arousal â¢ Attention â¢ Consciousness â¢ Decision making â¢ Executive
functions â¢ Natural language â¢ Learning â¢ Memory â¢ Motor coordination
â¢ Sensory perception â¢ Planning â¢ Problem solving â¢ Thought  
People

Arthur L. Benton â¢ David Bohm â¢ AntÃ³nio DamÃ¡sio â¢ Phineas Gage â¢
Norman Geschwind â¢ Elkhonon Goldberg â¢ Donald O. Hebb â¢ Kenneth Heilman
â¢ Edith Kaplan â¢ Muriel Lezak â¢ Benjamin Libet â¢ Rodolfo LlinÃ¡s â¢
Alexander Luria â¢ Brenda Milner â¢ Karl H. Pribram â¢ Oliver Sacks â¢
Roger W. Sperry â¢ H. M. â¢ K. C.  
Tests

Bender-Gestalt Test â¢ Benton Visual Retention Test â¢ Clinical Dementia
Rating â¢ Continuous Performance Task â¢ Glasgow Coma Scale â¢ Hayling and
Brixton tests â¢ Johari window â¢ Lexical decision task â¢ Mini-mental
state examination â¢ Stroop effect â¢ Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale â¢
Wisconsin card sorting  
Mind and Brain Portal  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_brain"

Categories: Central nervous system | Brain

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Hrvatski
  * Ãslenska
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 07:47.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



