
# Dragonfly

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the insect. For other uses, see Dragonfly
(disambiguation).

"Anisoptera" redirects here. For the tree genus, see Anisoptera (tree).

<IMG>

It has been suggested that Epiprocta be merged into this article or section.
(Discuss)  
Dragonfly  
Yellow-winged Darter  

Yellow-winged Darter  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Animalia  
  
Phylum: Arthropoda  
  
Class: Insecta  
  
Order: Odonata  
  
Suborder: Epiprocta  
  
Infraorder: Anisoptera  
Selys, 1800  
Families  
Aeshnidae  
Austropetaliidae  
Cordulegastridae  
Corduliidae  
Gomphidae  
Libellulidae  
Macromiidae  
Neopetaliidae  
Petaluridae  
A dragonfly is a type of insect belonging to the order Odonata, the suborder
Epiprocta or, in the strict sense, the infraorder Anisoptera. It is
characterized by large multifaceted eyes, two pairs of strong transparent
wings, and an elongated body. Dragonflies are similar to damselflies, but the
adults can be differentiated by the fact that the wings of most dragonflies
are held away from, and perpendicular to, the body when at rest. Even though
dragonflies possess 6 legs like any other insect, they are not capable of
walking.

Dragonflies are valuable predators that eat mosquitoes, and other small
insects like flies, bees, ants and butterflies. They are usually found around
lakes, ponds, streams and wetlands because their larvae, known as "nymphs",
are aquatic.

Nymphs can deliver a painful bite when threatened. Be sure to clean the bite
thoroughly to prevent water-borne infections.

## Contents

  * 1 Life cycle
  * 2 Classification (Anisozygoptera)
  * 3 Dragonflies and damselflies
  * 4 Common species
    * 4.1 Northern Hemisphere
    * 4.2 Southern Hemisphere
  * 5 Dragonflies in culture
    * 5.1 Japan
  * 6 Gallery
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Life cycle

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dragonfly nymph

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dragonfly emerging as an adult

<IMG>

<IMG>

Pair of Yellow Striped Hunters mating

Female dragonfly lay eggs in or near water, often on floating or emergent
plants. When laying eggs, some species will submerge themselves completely in
order to lay their eggs on a good surface. The eggs then hatch into nymphs.
Most of a dragonfly's life is spent in the naiad (that is, nymph) form,
beneath the water's surface, using extendable jaws to catch other
invertebrates or even vertebrates such as tadpoles, fish, etc. They breathe
through gills in their rectum, and can rapidly propel themselves by suddenly
expelling water through the anus.[1] Some nymphs even hunt on land,[2] an
aptitude which could easily have been more common in ancient times when
terrestrial predators were clumsier.

The larval stage of large dragonflies may last as long as five years. In
smaller species, this stage may last between two months and three years. When
the larva is ready to metamorphose into an adult, it climbs up a reed or other
emergent plant. Exposure to air causes the larvae to begin breathing. The skin
splits at a weak spot behind the head and the adult dragonfly crawls out of
its old larval skin, pumps up its wings, and flies off to feed on midges and
flies. The adult stage of larger species of dragonfly can last as long as four
months.

## [edit] Classification (Anisozygoptera)

Formerly, the Anisoptera were given suborder rank beside the "ancient
dragonflies" (Anisozygoptera) which were believed to contain the two living
species of the genus Epiophlebia and numerous fossil ones. More recently it
turned out that the "anisozygopterans" form a paraphyletic assemblage of
morphologically primitive relatives of the Anisoptera. Thus, the Anisoptera
(true dragonflies) are reduced to an infraorder in the new suborder Epiprocta
(dragonflies in general). The artificial grouping Anisozygoptera is disbanded,
its members being largely recognized as extinct offshoots at various stages of
dragonfly evolution. The two living species formerly placed there â the
Asian relict dragonflies â form the infraorder Epiophlebioptera alongside
the Anisoptera.

## [edit] Dragonflies and damselflies

<IMG>

<IMG>

Unusually for a damselfly, the Sydney Flatwing hold their wings horizontal
(perpendicular) to their body

Damselflies (suborder Zygoptera) are often confused with dragonflies, but
these are distinct; most damselflies hold their wings at rest together above
the torso or held slightly open above (such as in the family Lestidae),
whereas most dragonflies at rest hold their wings horizontally or occasionally
slightly down and forward. Also, the back wing of the dragonfly broadens near
the base, caudal to the connecting point at the body, while the back wing of
the damselfly is similar to the front wing. The eyes on a damselfly are apart;
in most dragonflies the eyes touch. Notable exceptions are the Petaluridae
(Petaltails) and the Gomphidae (Clubtails).

## [edit] Common species

### [edit] Northern Hemisphere

<IMG>

<IMG>

Broad-bodied Chaser

  * Emperor, Anax imperator
  * Keeled Skimmer, Orthetrum coerulescens
  * Black-tailed Skimmer, Orthetrum cancellatum
  * Common Whitetail, Libellula lydia
  * Migrant Hawker, Aeshna mixta
  * Azure Hawker, Aeshna caerulea
  * Southern Hawker, Aeshna cyanea
  * Norfolk Hawker, Aeshna isosceles
  * Common Hawker, Aeshna juncea
  * Red-veined Darter, Sympetrum fonscolombii
  * Common Darter, Sympetrum striolatum
  * Vagrant Darter, Sympetrum vulgatum

  * Yellow-winged Darter, Sympetrum flaveolum
  * Broad-bodied Chaser, Libellula depressa
  * Four-spotted Chaser, Libellula quadrimaculata
  * Scarce Chaser, Libellula fulva
  * Green Darner, Anax junius
  * Downy Emerald, Cordulia aenea
  * Blue-eyed Darner, Aeshna multicolor
  * Roseate Skimmer, Orthemis ferruginea
  * Widow Skimmer, Libellula luctuosa
  * Great Pondhawk, Erythemis vesiculosa
  * Comet Darner, Anax longipes
  * Banded Pennant, Celithemis fasciata

  
### [edit] Southern Hemisphere

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Tau Emerald(Hemicordulia tau) in mid flight

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kirby's Dropwing (Trithemis kirbyi) in Tsumeb, Namibia.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Flame Skimmer

  * Glistening Demoiselle Phaon iridipennis
  * Dancing Jewel Platycypha caligata
  * Mountain Malachite Chlorolestes fasciatus
  * Common Spreadwing Lestes plagiatus
  * Common Threadtail Elattoneura glauca
  * Goldtail Allocnemis leucosticta
  * Swamp Bluet Africallagma glaucum
  * Pinhey's Whisp Agriocnemis pinheyi
  * Black-tailed Bluet Azuragrion nigridorsum
  * Common Citril Ceriagrion glabrum
  * Yellow-faced Sprite Pseudagrion citricola
  * Gambel's Sprite Pseudagrion gamblesi
  * Hagen's Sprite Pseudagrion hageni

  * Hamon's Sprite Pseudagrion hamoni
  * Kersten's Sprite Psuedagrion kersteni
  * Masai Sprite Pseudagrion massaicum
  * Salisbury Sprite Pseudagrion salisburyense
  * Natal Sprite Pseudagrion spernatum
  * Orange Emperor Anax speratus
  * Common Thorntail Ceratogomphus pictus

  * Yellowjack Notogomphus praetorius
  * Rock Hooktail Paragomphus cognatus
  * Acisoma Acisoma panorpoides and Acisoma trifidum
  * Banded Groundling Brachythemis leucosticta
  * Broad Scarlet Crocothemis erythraea

  * Little Scarlet Crocothemis sanguinolenta
  * Black Percher Diplacodes lefebvrii
  * Black-tailed Skimmer Nesciothemis farinosa
  * Two-striped Skimmer Orthetrum caffrum
  * Epaulet Skimmer Orthetrum chrysostigma
  * Julia Skimmer Orthetrum julia
  * St. Lucia Widow Palpopleura portia
  * Nomad Sympetrum fonscolombii
  * Red-veined Dropwing Trithemas arteriosa
  * Navy Dropwing Trithemis furva
  * Kirby's Dropwing Trithemis kirbyi
  * Jaunty Dropwing Trithemis stictica

  
## [edit] Dragonflies in culture

In Europe, dragonflies have often been seen as sinister. Some English
vernacular names, such as "devil's darning needle" and "ear cutter", link them
with evil or injury.[3] A Romanian folk tale says that the dragonfly was once
a horse possessed by the devil. This is also seen in the Maltese culture as
the word for dragonfly which is "Debba ta' l-infern" literally means Hell's
mare. Swedish folklore holds that the devil uses dragonflies to weigh people's
souls.[4] Another Swedish legend holds that trolls use the dragonflies as
spindles when weaving their clothes (hence the Swedish word for dragonfly
trollslÃ¤nda, lit. "troll's spindle") as well as sending them to poke out the
eyes of their enemies.[citation needed] The Norwegian name for dragonflies is
"Ãyenstikker", which literally means Eye Poker and in Portugal they are
sometimes called "Tira-olhos" (Eye snatcher). They are often associated with
snakes, as in the Welsh name gwas-y-neidr, "adder's servant".[3] The Southern
United States term "snake doctor" refers to a folk belief that dragonflies
follow snakes around and stitch them back together if they are injured.[5] The
Lithuanian word "LaumÅ¾irgis" is a composite word meaning "the Lauma's horse",
while in Dutch, Aeshna mixta is called "Paardenbijter" or "horse biter". In
some South American countries, dragonflies are also called matacaballo (horse
killer), or caballito del diablo (devil's little horse), since they were
perceived as harmful, some species being quite large for an insect.

In East Asia and among Native Americans, dragonflies have a far better
reputation, one that can also be said to have positively influenced modern day
views about dragonflies in most countries, in the same vein as the insect's
namesake, the dragon, which has a positive image in the east,[citation needed]
but initially had an association with evil in the west.

For some Native American tribes they represent swiftness and activity, and for
the Navajo they symbolize pure water. Dragonflies are a common motif in Zuni
pottery; stylized as a double-barred cross, they appear in Hopi rock art and
on Pueblo necklaces.[6] It is said in some Native American beliefs that
dragonflies are a symbol of renewal after a time of great hardship.

They also have traditional uses as medicine in Japan and China. In some parts
of the world they are a food source, eaten either as adults or larvae; in
Indonesia, for example, they are caught on poles made sticky with birdlime,
then fried in oil as a delicacy.[3]

Vietnamese people have a traditional way to forecast rain by seeing
dragonflies: "Chuá»n chuá»n bay tháº¥p thÃ¬ mÆ°a, bay cao thÃ¬ náº¯ng, bay
vá»«a thÃ¬ rÃ¢m" (Dragonflies fly at low level, it is rainy; dragonflies fly
at high level, it is sunny; dragonflies fly at medium level, it is shadowy).

In some parts of the world it is considered lucky to have a dragonfly land on
you, even to the point of yielding seven years of good luck.

In the United States dragonflies and damselflies are sought out as a hobby
similar to birding and butterflying, known as oding, from the dragonfly's
Latin species name, odonata. Oding is especially popular in Texas, where 225
out of a total of 457 known species of odonates in the world have been
observed. With care, dragonflies can be handled and released by Oders, unlike
butterflies.[7]

Images of dragonflies were common in Art Nouveau, especially in jewelry
designs.[8] They have also been used as a decorative motif on fabrics and home
furnishings.[9]

### [edit] Japan

In Japan dragonflies symbolize "martial success," due to similarity in the
sound of the word "dragonfly" and "victory" in Japanese. As a seasonal symbol,
the dragonfly is associated with late summer and early autumn.[10]

More generally, in Japan dragonflies are symbols of courage, strength, and
happiness, and they often appear in art and literature, especially haiku. In
ancient mythology, Japan was known as Akitsushima, which means "Land of the
Dragonflies". The love for dragonflies is reflected by the fact that there are
traditional names for almost all of the 200 species of dragonflies found in
and around Japan.[11] Japanese children catch large dragonflies as a game,
using a hair with a small pebble tied to each end, which they throw into the
air. The dragonfly mistakes the pebbles for prey, gets tangled in the hair,
and is dragged to the ground by the weight.[12]

Also, in Japan, amongst the Three Great Spears of Japan is one which is called
the Tonbogiri, which when translated is called 'The Dragon Fly Cutter'. The
spear is an important part of Japan's imperial regalia - the spear itself was
once wielded by the legendary Samurai, Honda Tadakatsu. Its name is derived
from the story that the blade is so sharp, a dragonfly once landed on it and
was instantly cut in half.

## [edit] Gallery

<IMG>

Dragonfly from Florida. Yellow and blue that have a tatu on the tail

<IMG>

Australian blue dragonfly

<IMG>

African dragonfly perched on a leaf

<IMG>

Green Darner Dragonfly feeding on honey bee  
<IMG>

Austrogomphus guerini

<IMG>

Flame Skimmer dragonfly, Libellula saturata

<IMG>

Dragonfly in midflight over a creek

<IMG>

The compound eyes of a dragonfly  
<IMG>

Cherry-faced Meadowhawk,  
Sympetrum internum

<IMG>

Dragonflies mating

<IMG>

Mating

<IMG>

Mating  
<IMG>

Dragonfly depositing eggs

<IMG>

Dragonfly from Lower Silesia (Poland) - bottom

<IMG>

Dragonfly from Lower Silesia - top

<IMG>

A perched dragonfly  
<IMG>

California Spreadwing Archilestes californicus

<IMG>

Indian pied paddy skimmer female

<IMG>

Indian pied paddy skimmer male

<IMG>

in Brazos Bend State Park, Texas, USA  
<IMG>

Blue Dragonfly in Kamakura, Japan

<IMG>

Sardinian Dragonfly

<IMG>

Female Red-veined darter. Lisboa, Portugal

<IMG>

Emperor dragonfly in Greece  
## [edit] See also

  * Elliot Pinhey
  * Obelisk posture
  * List of British dragonflies

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Waldbauer, Gilbert (2006). A Walk Around the Pond: Insects in and Over the Water. Harvard University Press. pp. 105\. ISBN 9780674022119. http://books.google.com/books?id=WtUc-YdjZzgC&pg=PA105&lpg=PA105&dq=dragonfly+nymph+water+rectum&source=web&ots=j2hvxI_vHC&sig=D4hXLuWtQAJUW7WIISfMY_K201s#PPA105,M1.
  2. ^ Grzimeck, HC; Bernard (1975). Grzimek's Animal Life Encyclopedia Vol 22. Detroit: Visible Ink Press. pp. 348.
  3. ^ a b c Corbet, Phillip S. (1999). Dragonflies: Behavior and Ecology of Odonata. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. pp. 559â561. ISBN 0-8014-2592-1.
  4. ^ Mitchell, Forrest L.; James L. Lasswell (2005). A Dazzle of Dragonflies. College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press. pp. 25â27. ISBN 1-585-44459-6.
  5. ^ Hand, Wayland D. (1973). "From Idea to Word: Folk Beliefs and Customs Underlying Folk Speech". American Speech 48 (1/2): 67â76. doi:10.2307/3087894. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1283(197321%2F22)48%3A1%2F2%3C67%3AFITWFB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Y. Retrieved on 2007-02-15.
  6. ^ Mitchell and Lasswell, 20-26.
  7. ^ "Dragonflying: The new birding" by Tracy Hobson Lehmann San Antonio Express-News June 19, 2008
  8. ^ Moonan, Wendy (August 13, 1999). "Dragonflies Shimmering as Jewelry". New York Times: pp. E2:38. ProQuest document ID 43893085.
  9. ^ Large, Elizabeth (June 27, 1999). "THE LATEST BUZZ; In the world of design, dragonflies are flying high". The Sun (Baltimore, MD): pp. 6N. ProQuest document ID 42880564.
  10. ^ Baird, Merrily (2001). Symbols of Japan: Thematic Motifs in Art and Design. New York: Rizzoli. pp. 108-9. ISBN 0-8478-2361-X.
  11. ^ Waldbauer, Gilbert (1998). The Handy Bug Answer Book. Detroit: Visible Ink Press. pp. 91\. ISBN 1-57859-049-3.
  12. ^ Mitchell and Lasswell, 38.

justine loves dragonflies shes totally obsessed with them and is soon getting
a large tattoo of one on her back!

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Dragonfly  
  * Tree of Life Odonata
  * Dragonfly at the Open Directory Project
  * Identification key to dragonflies found in Ireland
  * British Dragonfly Society
  * Dragonflies and Damselflies (Odonata) of the United States
  * PHAON (Pinhey's Heritage African Odonata Network)
  * Dragonflies in folklore and art
  * dragonflies and damselflies on the UF / IFAS Featured Creatures Web site

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dragonfly"

Categories: Odonata | Dragonflies | Living fossils | Biological pest control
agents

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since December 2008 | All articles to
be merged | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since April 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since
September 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Sardu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Basa Sunda
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * lea faka-Tonga
  * á£á³á©
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 03:35.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



