
# Secret society

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the Europe album, see Secret Society (Europe album).

<IMG>

The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide
view of the subject. Please improve this article or discuss the issue on the
talk page.  
<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate.  
Secret society is a term used to describe a variety of organizations. Although
the exact meaning of the term is disputed, several of the definitions advanced
indicate a degree of secrecy and secret knowledge, which might include denying
membership or knowledge of the group, negative consequences for acknowledging
one's membership, strong ties between members of the organization, and rites
or rituals which outsiders are not permitted to observe.

## Contents

  * 1 Definition
    * 1.1 Oath taking
    * 1.2 Politics
    * 1.3 Colleges and universities
  * 2 Groups disputed as "secret societies"
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Definition

Several definitions for the term have been put forward. The term "secret
society" is used to describe fraternal organizations that may have secret
ceremonies, ranging from the common and innocuous (collegiate fraternities) to
mythical organizations described in conspiracy theories as immensely powerful,
with self-serving financial or political agendas, global reach, and often
luciferian beliefs.

Application of the term is often hotly disputed, as it can be seen as
pejorative.

Therefore, the criteria that can be adopted as a definition for the term are
important for which organizations any one definition would include or
exclude.[citation needed]

Alan Axelrod, author of the International Encyclopedia of Secret Societies and
Fraternal Orders, defines a secret society where:

  * The organization is exclusive
  * It claims to own special secrets
  * It shows a strong inclination to favor its own

David V. Barrett, author of Secret Societies: From the Ancient and Arcane to
the Modern and Clandestine, uses slightly different terms to define what does
and does not qualify as a secret society. He defines it as any group that
possesses the following characteristics:

  * It has "carefully graded and progressed teachings"
  * Teachings are "available only to selected individuals"
  * Teachings lead to "hidden (and 'unique') truths"
  * Truths bring "personal benefits beyond the reach and even the understanding of the uninitiated."

Barrett goes on to say that "a further characteristic common to most of them
is the practice of rituals which non-members are not permitted to observe, or
even to know the existence of." Unfortunately, Barrett's definition would rule
out many organizations called secret societies; (American college fraternities
do not have graded teachings, nor did groups like the Carbonari, the Know
Nothing Whigs or any of the political secret societies). Indeed any author can
construct a definition so that it includes or excludes a specific group.

### [edit] Oath taking

Many societies require members to take an oath at membership. Parts of an oath
can include a promise to support the organization, to keep its secrets, that
the new member will conceal or deny their membership in the organization.
Sometimes such oaths can include penalties (ranging from the purely symbolic
to the very real) for not living up to the oath.

### [edit] Politics

Since some secret societies have political aims, they are illegal in several
countries. Poland, for example, has included a ban of secret political parties
and political organizations in its constitution. Not all secret societies are
perceived as a threat by the existing political establishment.

### [edit] Colleges and universities

Many student societies established on university campuses in the United States
have been considered secret societies. These such collegiate secret societies
are like the F.H.C. Club, (1750), and Phi Beta Kappa, (1776), both founded at
William & Mary. The most famous member of the F.H.C. Club was Thomas
Jefferson, the third President of the United States. In correspondence,
Jefferson noted that the F.H.C. Club served "no useful object." Perhaps one of
the most famous secret college societies is the Skull and Bones at Yale, of
which both presidents George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush and Senator John
Kerry are members from their college years.

## [edit] Groups disputed as "secret societies"

The term "secret societies" could include criminal organizations, such as the
Triad, Yakuza or the Cosa Nostra organizations.

The United States of America's National Security Agency has been described as
a secret society since for many years, its very existence was a secret, as was
its budget. People (such as James Bamford, in The Puzzle Palace, 1982) used to
say that the letters NSA stood for "No Such Agency" or "Never Say Anything";
and, in the early 1990s, the CIA had a website but the NSA did not. This has
changed: The NSA has had a website for several years, and its activities are
debated in Congress and the press. Its budget is still classified, but it
officially exists. Its activities are authorized and are paid for, although
the details of those activities are closely-held secrets.

## [edit] See also

  * Aurora Society
  * Collegiate secret societies in North America
  * Secret combination (Latter Day Saints)
  * Secret societies in popular culture

## [edit] References

  * Heckethorn, Charles William (1997). The secret societies of all ages and countries, embracing the mysteries of ancient India, China, Japan, Egypt, Mexico, Peru, Greece, and Scandinavia, the Cabbalists, early Christians, heretics, Assassins, Thugs, Templars, the Vehm and Inquisition, mystics, Rosicrucians, Illuminati, Freemasons, Skopzi, Camorristi, Carbonari, nihilists, and other sects. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 1-56459-296-0.
  * Whalen, William Joseph (1966). Handbook of secret organizations. Milwaukee: Bruce Pub. Co.. LCCN 66-026658.
  * Axelrod, Alan (1997). The international encyclopedia of secret societies and fraternal orders. New York: Facts on File. ISBN 0-8160-2307-7.
  * Roberts, J. M. (John Morris) (1972). The mythology of the secret societies. New York: Scribner. ISBN 0-684-12904-3.
  * Robbins, Alexandra (2004). Pledged: the secret life of sororities. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 0-7868-8859-8.

## [edit] Notes

## [edit] External links

  * Secret Societies: a very short history â Documents and illustrations of Freemasons, Jesuits, Illuminati, Carbonari, Burschenschaften and other putative secret societies and clandestine organizations

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secret_society"

Categories: Secret societies

Hidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope | Articles lacking
in-text citations | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 16:51.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



