
# Trigeminal neuralgia

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)  
Trigeminal neuralgia  
Classification and external resources  
<IMG>  
Detailed view of trigeminal nerve, shown in yellow.  
ICD-10 G50.0  
ICD-9 350.1  
DiseasesDB 13363  
eMedicine emerg/617  
MeSH D014277  
Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) or tic doloureux (also known as proeopalgia) is a
neuropathic disorder of the trigeminal nerve that causes episodes of intense
pain in the eyes, lips, nose, scalp, forehead, and jaw.[1] It is estimated
that 1 in 15,000 people suffer from trigeminal neuralgia, although the actual
figure may be significantly higher due to frequent misdiagnosis. TN usually
develops after the age of 50, more commonly in females, although there have
been cases with patients being as young as three years of age [2].

The condition can bring about stabbing, mind-numbing, electric shock-like pain
from just a finger's glance of the cheek.

## Contents

  * 1 About
  * 2 Symptoms
  * 3 Treatment
  * 4 Common hurdles to receiving treatment
    * 4.1 Medications
    * 4.2 Surgery
    * 4.3 Stereotactic radiation therapy
    * 4.4 Social consequences of trigeminal neuralgia
    * 4.5 Other
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] About

The pain of trigeminal neuralgia is often falsely attributed to a pathology of
dental origin. "Rarely do patients come to the surgeon without having many
removed, and not infrequently all, teeth on the affected side or both sides."
[3] Extractions do not help. The pain is originating in the trigeminal nerve
itself - often in its roots - and not in an individual nerve of a tooth, but
real tooth pain may be referred to the same areas of the face as that of
trigmeninal neuralgia. Because of this difficulty, many patients may go
untreated for long periods of time before a correct diagnosis is made. The
trigeminal nerve is the fifth cranial nerve, a mixed cranial nerve responsible
for sensory data such as tactition (pressure), thermoception (temperature),
and nociception (pain) originating from the face above the jawline; it is also
responsible for the motor function of the muscles of mastication, the muscles
involved in chewing but not facial expression. Several theories exist to
explain the possible causes of this pain syndrome. Leading research indicates
that it is a blood vessel - possibly the superior cerebellar artery \-
compressing the microvascular of the trigeminal nerve near its connection with
the pons. Such a compression can injure the nerve's protective myelin sheath
and cause erratic and hyperactive functioning of the nerve. This can lead to
pain attacks at the slightest stimulation of any area served by the nerve as
well as hinder the nerve's ability to shut off the pain signals after the
stimulation ends. This type of injury may rarely be caused by an aneurysm (an
outpouching of a blood vessel); by a tumor; by an arachnoid cyst in the
cerebellopontine angle[4]; or by a traumatic event such as a car accident or
even a tongue piercing. [1] Two to four percent of patients with TN, usually
younger, have evidence of multiple sclerosis, which may damage either the
trigeminal nerve or other related parts of the brain. When there is no
structural cause, the syndrome is called idiopathic. Postherpetic Neuralgia,
which occurs after shingles, may cause similar symptoms if the trigeminal
nerve is affected.

## [edit] Symptoms

People with the condition "are begging to be killed," said Kim Burchiel, M.D.,
professor and chairman of neurological surgery at the Oregon Health & Science
University School of Medicine who sees several new TN cases a week. "I'm
telling you, it's total agony." The episodes of pain may occur paroxysmally.
To describe the pain sensation, patients may describe a trigger area on the
face, so sensitive that touching or even air currents can trigger an episode
of pain. It affects lifestyle as it can be triggered by common activities in a
patient's daily life, such as eating, talking, shaving and toothbrushing. The
attacks are said to feel like stabbing electric shocks, burning, pressing,
crushing or shooting pain that becomes intractable. Individual attacks affect
one side of the face at a time, last several seconds, hours or longer, and
repeat up to hundreds of times throughout the day. The pain also tends to
occur in cycles with complete remissions lasting months or even years. 10-12%
of cases are bilateral, or occurring on both sides. This normally indicates
problems with both trigeminal nerves since one serves strictly the left side
of the face and the other serves the right side. Pain attacks typically worsen
in frequency or severity over time. A great deal of patients develop the pain
in one branch, then over years the pain will travel through the other nerve
branches.

Signs of this can be seen in males who may deliberately miss an area of their
face when shaving, in order to avoid triggering an episode. Successive
recurrences may be incapacitating, and the fear of provoking an attack may
make sufferers reluctant to engage in normal activities.

There is a variant of trigeminal neuralgia called atypical trigeminal
neuralgia. In some cases of atypical trigeminal neuralgia, the sufferer
experiences a severe, relentless underlying pain similar to a migraine in
addition to the stabbing pains. This variant is sometimes called "trigeminal
neuralgia, type 2"[5], based on a recent classification of facial pain[6]. In
other cases, the pain is stabbing and intense, but may feel like burning or
prickling, rather than a shock. Sometimes, the pain is a combination of shock-
like sensations, migraine-like pain, and burning or prickling pain. It can
also feel as if a boring piercing pain is unrelenting. Some recent studies
suggest that ATN may be an early development of Trigeminal Neuralgia.

## [edit] Treatment

There is often no cure for trigeminal neuralgia. Many people however find
relief from medication, chiropractic manipulation or one of the five surgical
options. Atypical trigeminal neuralgia, which involves a more constant and
burning pain, is more difficult to treat, both with medications and surgery.

A recent review recommended carbamazepine as a first line treatment.[7]

If patients do not find sufficient improvement some surgical treatments may be
helpful.[7] Surgery may result in varying degrees of numbness to the patient
and lead occasionally to anesthesia dolorosa, which is numbness with intense
pain. However, some people do find dramatic relief with minimal side effects
from the various surgeries that are now available.[8]

## [edit] Common hurdles to receiving treatment

Owing to the rarity of TN, many physicians and dentists are unfamiliar with
the affliction's symptoms. As a result, TN is often misdiagnosed. A TN
sufferer will often seek the help of numerous clinicians before a firm
diagnosis is made.

Those physicians that do have experience with TN are hesitant to treat
patients under the age of 30 or patients who do not show nerve compression on
their MRIs as nerve compression is not the only cause of TN, it may also be
caused by nerve trauma done during a dental procedure such as a root canal.
Patients under the age of 30 are particularly at risk of not receiving proper
medical attention, as many physicians falsely believe that one must be in the
later years of life in order for pain to strike.[citation needed]

There is some evidence that points towards the need to quickly treat and
diagnose TN. It is thought that the longer a patient suffers from TN, the
harder it may be to reverse the neural pathways associated with the pain.
Therefore it is essential that physicians are made aware of the seriousness of
TN, and the level of pain that their patient is in. TN is called "The suicide
disease." In fact: for those who live with Trigeminal Neuralgia for more than
3 years about half commit suicide.[citation needed]

Dentists that suspect TN should proceed in the most conservative manner
possible, and should ensure that all tooth structures are "truly" compromised
before performing extractions or other procedures.

Because of the hurdles noted above, it is essential for patients who believe
they are suffering from TN to seek the advice of a TN specialist or
neurologist if they find their primary care physician to be dismissive of
their pain.

### [edit] Medications

  * Anticonvulsants such as carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, topiramate, phenytoin, or gabapentin are generally the most effective medications. Generally speaking, opiate-based analgesics offer the best relief from TN attacks. Anticonvulsant effects may be potentiated with moderate to high levels of adjuvant therapies such as baclofen and/or clonazepam. Baclofen may also help some patients eat more normally if jaw movement tends to aggravate the symptoms.
  * The pain may be treated long-term with an opioid such as Morphine, methadone, oxycodone or Duragesic in patch form, and adding clonazepam and/or baclofen.
  * Low doses of some antidepressants are thought to be effective in treating neuropathic pain, but a tremendous amount of controversy exists on this topic, and their use is often limited to treating the depression that is associated with chronic pain, rather than the actual sensation of pain from the trigeminal nerve.
  * Botox can be injected into the nerve by a physician, and has been found helpful using the "migraine" pattern adapted to the patient's special needs.
  * Patients may also find relief by having their neurologist implant a neuro-stimulator.

Many patients cannot tolerate medications for years, and an alternative
treatment is to take a drug such as gabapentin and place it in an externally
applied cream base by a pharmacist who compounds drugs. Also helpful is taking
a "drug holiday" when remissions occur and rotating medications if one becomes
ineffective.

### [edit] Surgery

Surgery may be recommended, either to relieve the pressure on the nerve or to
selectively damage it in such a way as to disrupt pain signals from getting
through to the brain. In trained hands, surgery has been reported to have an
initial success rate approaching 90 percent. However, some patients require
follow-up procedures if a recurrence of the pain begins.

Of the five surgical options, the microvascular decompression is the only one
aimed at fixing the presumed cause of the pain. In this procedure, the surgeon
enters the skull through a 25 mm (one-inch) hole behind the ear. The nerve is
then explored for an offending blood vessel, and when one is found, the vessel
and nerve are separated or "decompressed" with a small pad. When successful,
MVD procedures can give permanent pain relief with little to no facial
numbness.

Three other procedures use needles or catheters that enter through the face
into the opening where the nerve first splits into its three divisions.
Excellent success rates using a cost effective percutaneous surgical procedure
known as balloon compression have been reported[9]. This technique has been
helpful in treating the elderly for whom surgery may not be an option due to
coexisting health conditions. Balloon compression is also the best choice for
patients who have ophthalmic nerve pain or have experienced recurrent pain
after microvascular decompression.

Similar success rates have been reported with glycerol injections and
radiofrequency rhizotomies. Glycerol injections involve injecting an alcohol-
like substance into the cavern that bathes the nerve near its junction. This
liquid is corrosive to the nerve fibers and can mildly injure the nerve enough
to hinder the errant pain signals. In a radiofrequency rhizotomy, the surgeon
uses an electrode to heat the selected division or divisions of the nerve.
Done well, this procedure can target the exact regions of the errant pain
triggers and disable them with minimal numbness.

### [edit] Stereotactic radiation therapy

The nerve can also be damaged to prevent pain signal transmission using Gamma
Knife or a linear accelerator-based radiation therapy (e.g. Trilogy, Novalis,
CyberKnife). No incisions are involved in this procedure. It uses very
precisely targeted radiation to bombard the nerve root, this time targeting
the selective damage at the same point where vessel compressions are often
found. This option is used especially for those people who are medically unfit
for a long general anaesthetic, or who are taking medications for prevention
of blood clotting (e.g., warfarin, heparin, aspirin). A prospective Phase I
trial performed at Marseille, France, showed that 83% of patients were pain-
free at 12 months, with 58% pain-free and off all medications. Side effects
were mild, with 6% experiencing mild tingling and 4% experiencing mild
numbness.[10]

### [edit] Social consequences of trigeminal neuralgia

Most suffers of TN do not present with any outwardly noticeable symptoms,
though some will exhibit brief facial spasms during an attack. As a result, it
is often difficult for friends and family members of TN suffers to accept that
their loved one, who was previously healthy, is now suffering from intractable
pain. That doubt can be a great hindrance to the support of the patient, as
friends and family, as well as physicians, will often seek a psychological
root cause rather than a physiological abnormality. This is especially true of
those suffering from atypical TN, who may not have any compression of the TN
and in whom the sole criterion of the diagnosis may be the complaint of severe
pain (constant electric-like shocks, constant crushing or pressure sensations,
or a constant severe dull ache) and in this case trigeminal neuralgia still
exists but is not visible to physicians because it was caused by the nerve
being damaged during a dental procedure such as root canals, extractions, gum
surgeries, or it may be a condition secondary to multiple sclerosis.

Many TN sufferers are confined to their homes or are unable to work because of
the frequency of their attacks. It is important for friends and family to
educate themselves on the severity of TN pain, and to be understanding of
limitations that TN can place upon the sufferer. However, at the same time,
the TN patient must be extremely proactive in furthering his or her
rehabilitative efforts. Enrolling in a chronic pain support group, or seeking
one-on-one counseling, can help to teach a TN patient how to adapt to the
newfound affliction.

As with any chronic pain syndrome, TN not being the exception, clinical
depression has the potential to set in, especially in younger patients who
often are undertreated for chronic pain. Friends and family, as well as
clinicians, must be alert to the signs of a rapid change in behavior, and
should take appropriate measures when necessary. It must be constantly
reinforced to the sufferer of TN, that treatment options do exist.

### [edit] Other

In one case of trigeminal neuralgia associated with tongue-piercing, the
condition resolved after the jewelry was removed.[11]

Some patients have reported a correlation between dental work and the onset of
their trigeminal nerve pain.

Recently, some researchers have investigated the link between neuropathatic
pain, such as TN, and coeliac disease.[citation needed]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Bayer DB, Stenger TG (1979). "Trigeminal neuralgia: an overview". Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral Pathol. 48 (5): 393â9. doi:10.1016/0030-4220(79)90064-1. PMID 226915.
  2. ^ Bloom, R. "Emily Garland: A young girl's painful problem took more than a year to diagnose" (PDF). http://www.tna-support.org/newlook/sgl_files/library/newsletters/middletenn/2005%20November-December%20web%20pages.pdf.
  3. ^ Dandy, Sir Walter (1987). The Brain. The Classics of Neurology and Neurosurgery (Special ed.). Birmingham: Gryphon editions. pp. 179.
  4. ^ Babu R, Murali R (1991). "Arachnoid cyst of the cerebellopontine angle manifesting as contralateral trigeminal neuralgia: case report". Neurosurgery 28 (6): 886â7. doi:10.1097/00006123-199106000-00018. PMID 2067614.
  5. ^ "Neurological Surgery - Facial Pain". Oregon Health & Science University. http://www.ohsu.edu/facialpain/facial_pain-dx.shtml.
  6. ^ Burchiel KJ (2003). "A new classification for facial pain". Neurosurgery 53 (5): 1164â6; discussion 1166â7. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000088806.11659.D8. PMID 14580284. http://meta.wkhealth.com/pt/pt-core/template-journal/lwwgateway/media/landingpage.htm?issn=0148-396X&volume=53&issue=5&spage=1164.
  7. ^ a b Gronseth G, Cruccu G, Alksne J, et al (October 2008). "Practice parameter: the diagnostic evaluation and treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (an evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the European Federation of Neurological Societies". Neurology 71 (15): 1183â90. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000326598.83183.04.
  8. ^ Weigel, G; Casey, K. (2004). "Striking Back: The Trigeminal Neuralgia and Face Pain Handbook". Trigeminal Neuralgia Association ISBN 0-9672393-2-X.
  9. ^ Natarajan, M (2000). "Percutaneous trigeminal ganglion balloon compression: experience in 40 patients". Neurology (Neurological Society of India) 48 (4): 330â2. PMID 11146595.
  10. ^ RÃ©gis J, Metellus P, Hayashi M, Roussel P, Donnet A, Bille-Turc F (2006). "Prospective controlled trial of gamma knife surgery for essential trigeminal neuralgia". J. Neurosurg. 104 (6): 913â24. doi:10.3171/jns.2006.104.6.913. PMID 16776335.
  11. ^ Gazzeri, R; Mercuri, S. & Galarza M. (2006). "Atypical trigeminal neuralgia associated with tongue piercing". JAMA 296 (15): 1840â1. doi:10.1001/jama.296.15.1840-b. PMID 17047213.

## [edit] External links

  * Trigeminal Neuralgia Association
  * http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2006/04/060406231921.htm
  * About surgery for trigeminal neuralgia
  * Your Complete Guide to Trigeminal Neuralgia
  * Trigeminal Neuralgia Treatment
  * MedlinePlus Overview trigeminalneuralgia
  * "Trigeminal Neuralgia". Facial Neuralgia Resources. http://facial-neuralgia.org/conditions/tn.html.
  * "Trigeminal Neuralgia Association". http://www.fpa-support.org/.
  * Living with TN Online Support Group

v â¢ d â¢ e

Nervous system pathology, PNS (G50-G64, 350-357)  
Somatic

Nerve,  
nerve root,  
plexus

Cranial nerve disease

V (Trigeminal neuralgia) Â· VII (Facial nerve paralysis, Bell's palsy,
Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome, Central seven) Â· XI (Accessory nerve disorder)  
Radiculopathy,  
plexopathy

Brachial plexus lesion Â· Thoracic outlet syndrome Â· Phantom limb  
Mono- neuropathy

upper limb (Carpal tunnel syndrome, Ulnar nerve entrapment, Radial neuropathy)

lower limb (Meralgia paraesthetica, Tarsal tunnel syndrome, Morton's neuroma)

Causalgia Â· Mononeuritis multiplex  
Polyneuropathies

HMSN

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Â· Dejerine Sottas syndrome Â· Refsum's disease  
Polyradiculoneuropathy

autoimmune/demyelinating disease (Guillain-BarrÃ© syndrome, Chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy) Â· Alcoholic polyneuropathy  
Dysautonomia,  
autonomic-  
neuropathy

HSAN (I, II, III/Familial dysautonomia, IV/Congenital insensitivity to pain
with anhidrosis, V) Â· Horner's syndrome Â· Multiple system atrophy  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trigeminal_neuralgia"

Categories: Neurosurgery | Pain | Neurological disorders | Rare diseases

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2008
| All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 14:31.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



