
# Integrity

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

    For other uses of the term Integrity, see integrity (disambiguation).
Integrity is consistency of actions, values, methods, measures, principles,
expectations and outcome. As a holistic concept, it judges the quality of a
system in terms of its ability to achieve its own goals. A value system's
abstraction depth and range of applicable interaction may also function as
significant factors in identifying integrity due to their congruence or lack
of congruence with empirical observation. A value system may evolve over time
while retaining integrity if those who espouse the values account for and
resolve inconsistencies.

Integrity may be seen as the quality of having a sense of honesty and
truthfulness in regard to the motivations for one's actions. The term
"hypocrisy" is used in contrast to integrity for asserting that one part of a
value system demonstrably conflicts with another, and to demand that the
parties holding apparently conflicting values account for the discrepancy or
change their beliefs to improve internal consistency.

## Contents

  * 1 Testing of integrity
    * 1.1 Integrity in relation to value systems
    * 1.2 Testing theories via the Scientific Method
  * 2 Integrity in ethics
    * 2.1 Popular views of integrity
    * 2.2 Integrity in modern ethics
    * 2.3 Law
    * 2.4 Ethical integrity as measured by psychological/work-selection tests
  * 3 Other integrities
  * 4 One line thoughts
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links
  * 7 Footnotes

  
## [edit] Testing of integrity

One can test a value system's accountability either:

  1. subjectively, by a person's individual measures or
  2. objectively, via the Scientific Method or standardized mathematical measure

### [edit] Integrity in relation to value systems

A value consists of an assumption from which one can extrapolate
implementation or other values. A value system comprises a set of consistent
values and measures. The Scientific Method assumes that a system with perfect
integrity yields a singular extrapolation (a hypothesis) that one can test
against observed results.

### [edit] Testing theories via the Scientific Method

Formal measures of integrity rely on a set of testing principles known as the
Scientific Method. To the extent that a proof follows the requirements of the
method, scholars consider that proof scientific. The Scientific Method include
measures to ensure unbiased testing and a requirement that the hypothesis have
falsifiability.

One tests the integrity of a value system scientifically by using the values,
methods and measures of the system to formulate a hypothesis of an expected
cause-and-effect relationship. When the cause creates the expected effect
consistently amongst multiple unbiased testers, the value system is said to
have integrity.

For example, Newtonian physics, general relativity and quantum mechanics are
three distinct systems, each scientifically proven to have integrity according
to their base assumptions and measures. None of them claim to be absolute
truth. Scientific testing is not useful for identifying "absolute truth"
because scientific tests assume principles, values, methods and measures
outside of the scope of the test. Rather, the Scientific Method is used to
proof the integrity of a value system and to establish its conclusions as
consistent with the assumptions used, thereby enabling further extrapolation
within that domain.

## [edit] Integrity in ethics

Ethical meanings of integrity used in medicine and law refer to the wholeness
of the human body with respect for "sacred" qualities such as a sense of
unity, consistency, purity, unspoiledness and uncorruptedness.

In discussions on behavior and morality, one view of the property of integrity
sees it as the virtue of basing actions on an internally-consistent framework
of principles. This scenario may emphasize depth of principles and adherence
of each level to the next.[citation needed] One can describe a person as
having integrity to the extent that everything that that person does or
believes: actions, methods, measures and principles â all derive from the
same core group of values.

In the context of accountability, integrity measures consistency between one's
actions and one's principles and methods used when an expected result appears
incongruent with observed outcome. Some regard integrity as a virtue in that
they see accountability and moral responsibility as necessary tools for
maintaining such consistency.

In the context of value theory, integrity provides the expected causation from
a base value[citation needed] to its extrapolated implementation or other
values. A value system emerges as a set of values and measures that one can
observe as consistent with expectations.[citation needed]

Some commentators[who?] stress the idea of integrity as personal honesty:
acting according to one's beliefs and values at all times. Speaking about
integrity can emphasize the "wholeness" or "intactness" of a moral stance or
attitude. Some views of wholeness may also emphasize commitment and
authenticity.

### [edit] Popular views of integrity

Many people appear to use the word "integrity" in a vague manner as an
alternative to the perceived political incorrectness of using blatantly
moralistic terms such as "good" or ethical. In this sense the term often
refers to a refusal to engage in lying, blaming or other behavior generally
seeming to evade accountability.

Popular discussions of integrity often see the concept as an all-or-nothing
affair: one describes an approved person as "having integrity" (as an
absolute), but condemns an enemy or a collective enemy organization as
"completely lacking in integrity".

English-speakers may measure integrity in non-enumerated units called
"scraps", speaking of preserving one's "last scraps of integrity" or having
"not a scrap of integrity". This may imply that integrity in such situations
can appear brittle or fragile â and apt to tarnish or decay.

### [edit] Integrity in modern ethics

In a formal study of the term "integrity" and its meaning in modern ethics,
law professor Stephen L. Carter sees integrity not only as a refusal to engage
in behavior that evades responsibility[citation needed], but as an
understanding of different modes or styles in which some discourse takes
place, and which aims at the discovery of some truth[citation needed].

Carter writes:

> Integrity [...] requires three steps: (1) discerning what is right and what
is wrong; (2) acting on what you have discerned, even at personal cost; and
(3) saying openly that you are acting on your understanding of right from
wrong.[...] Integrity [...] is not the same as honesty [...][1]

### [edit] Law

An adversarial process can have general integrity when both sides demonstrate
willingness to share evidence, follow guidelines of debate and accept rulings
from an arbitrator in a good-faith effort to arrive at either the truth or a
mutually equitable outcome. An honorable presentation of the case measures
both sides of the argument with a consistent set of priniples. Failure to
present principles in accordance with observation or to try them unequally can
weaken a case.

### [edit] Ethical integrity as measured by psychological/work-selection tests

Integrity (honesty) tests aim to identify which persons or wiki editors may
hide perceived negative or derogatory events from their past or the past of a
favored political figure(such as doing prison time, getting psychiatric
treatment, alcohol problems, etc.) and to identify to a prospective employer
likely causes of strife. These tests make certain assumptions, namely[2] that
such persons report more dishonest behavior, they try to find reasons in order
to justify such behavior, they think others more likely to commit crimes (like
theft, for example), they exhibit impulsive behavior and tend to think that
society should severely punish deviant behavior.

The pretension of such tests to detect fake answers plays a crucial role in
this respect, because the naive really believe such outright lies and behave
accordingly, reporting their past deviance because they fear that otherwise
their answers will reveal it. The more Pollyannaish the answers, the higher
the integrity score.[3]

âIntegrity can be compared to a great smoothie. It consists of many healthy
and tasteful virtues such as discernment, loyalty, courage, honesty, and
humility all mixed together to form one outstanding quality. Not only is it
rewarding in the end, but the act of striving for it is well worth the
effort.â[cite this quote] â Peter Whagenbach

Wiki Integrity: The absence of integrity concerning political issues, ie,
integrity is lacking in policial topics, resulting in scrubbing of articles
cleansing them of truthful but damaging information on political figures and
issues supported by Wiki's editors.

## [edit] Other integrities

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
Disciplines and fields with an interest in integrities include philosophy of
action, philosophy of medicine, the mind, cognition, consciousness, materials
science, structural engineering and politics.

Popular psychology identifies personal integrity, professional integrity,
artistic integrity, and intellectual integrity.

Another use of the term "integrity" defines it as a model of workability.[4]

## [edit] One line thoughts

"Integrity is doing the right thing, especially when no one is watching."

## [edit] See also

  * validity
  * doubt
  * honesty
  * data integrity

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up integrity in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Integrity  
  * Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
  * van Minden, Jack J.R. (2005). Alles over psychologische tests. Business Contact. pp. 206â208. ISBN 978-90-254-0415-4. http://www.nl.bol.com/is-bin/INTERSHOP.enfinity/eCS/Store/nl/-/EUR/BOL_DisplayProductInformation-Start?Section=BOOK&BOL_OWNER_ID=1001004001667648. .
  * A personal definition of Integrity by C. Czach Hidalgo

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Carter, Stephen L (1996). Integrity. New York: BasicBooks/HarperCollins. pp. 7, 10. ISBN 0-06-092807-7. On page 242 Carter credits influence "to some extent by the fine discussion of integrity in Martin Benjamin's book Splitting the Difference: Compromise and Integrity in Ethics and Politics (Lawrence University Press of Kansas, 1990).
  2. ^ van Minden, Jack J.R. (2005) (in Dutch). Alles over psychologische tests. Business Contact. pp. 207\. ISBN 978-90-254-0415-4. http://www.bol.com/nl/p/boeken/alles-over-psychologische-tests/1001004001667648/index.html.
  3. ^ Compare van Minden (2005)
  4. ^ See abstract of Harvard Business School NOM Research Paper NO. 06-11 and Barbados Group Working Paper NO. 06-03 at: Erhard, Werner; Michael C. Jensen; Steve Zaffron (2007). "Integrity: A Positive Model that Incorporates the Normative Phenomena of Morality, Ethics and Legality". Social Science Research Network. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=920625. Retrieved on 2008-12-03. "Integrity exists in a positive realm devoid of normative content. Integrity is thus not about good or bad, or right or wrong, or what should or should not be. [...] We assert that integrity (the condition of being whole and complete) is a necessary condition for workability, and that the resultant level of workability determines the available opportunity for performance."

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrity"

Categories: Core issues in ethics | Virtues | Positive psychology | Evaluation

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-
marked weasel-worded phrases since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced
quotes | Articles to be expanded since May 2008 | All articles to be expanded

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 15:49.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



