
# Eutrophication

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Eutrophication is an increase in chemical nutrients â compounds containing
nitrogen or phosphorus â in an ecosystem, and may occur on land or in water.
However, the term is often used to mean the resultant increase in the
ecosystem's primary productivity (excessive plant growth and decay), and
further effects including lack of oxygen and severe reductions in water
quality, fish, and other animal populations.

## Contents

  * 1 Lakes and rivers
  * 2 Ocean waters
  * 3 Terrestrial ecosystems
  * 4 Ecological effects
    * 4.1 Decreased biodiversity
    * 4.2 New species invasion
    * 4.3 Toxicity
  * 5 Sources of high nutrient runoff
    * 5.1 Point sources
    * 5.2 Nonpoint sources
      * 5.2.1 Soil retention
      * 5.2.2 Runoff to surface water and leaching to groundwater
      * 5.2.3 Atmospheric deposition
    * 5.3 Other causes
  * 6 Prevention and reversal
    * 6.1 Effectiveness
    * 6.2 Minimizing nonpoint pollution: future work
      * 6.2.1 Riparian buffer zones
      * 6.2.2 Prevention policy
      * 6.2.3 Nitrogen testing and modeling
      * 6.2.4 Organic Farming
    * 6.3 Natural state of algal blooms
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Lakes and rivers

<IMG>

<IMG>

Though this image has a noticeable cyan tint, the eutrophication of the
Potomac River is evident from its bright green water, caused by a dense bloom
of cyanobacteria.

Eutrophication is frequently a result of nutrient pollution, such as the
release of sewage effluent, urban stormwater run-off, and run-off carrying
excess fertilizers into natural waters. However, it may also occur naturally
in situations where nutrients accumulate (e.g. depositional environments) or
where they flow into systems on an ephemeral basis. Eutrophication generally
promotes excessive plant growth and decay, favors certain weedy species over
others, and is likely to cause severe reductions in water quality. In aquatic
environments, enhanced growth of choking aquatic vegetation or phytoplankton
(that is, an algal bloom) disrupts normal functioning of the ecosystem,
causing a variety of problems such as a lack of oxygen in the water, needed
for fish and shellfish to survive. The water then becomes cloudy, coloured a
shade of green, yellow, brown, or red. Human society is impacted as well:
eutrophication decreases the resource value of rivers, lakes, and estuaries
such that recreation, fishing, hunting, and aesthetic enjoyment are hindered.
Health-related problems can occur where eutrophic conditions interfere with
drinking water treatment.[1]

Eutrophication was recognized as a pollution problem in European and North
American lakes and reservoirs in the mid-20th century.[2] Since then, it has
become more widespread. Surveys showed that 54% of lakes in Asia are
eutrophic; in Europe, 53%; in North America, 48%; in South America, 41%; and
in Africa, 28%.[3]

Although eutrophication is commonly caused by human activities, eutrophication
can also be a natural process in lakes; thus, eutrophy is a natural condition
for many lakes (e.g., in temperate grasslands). Paleolimnologists now
recognise that climate change, geology and other external influences are
critical in regulating the natural productivity of lakes. Some lakes also
demonstrate the reverse process (meiotrophication), becoming less nutrient
rich with time. [4][5]

Eutrophication can also be a natural process in seasonally inundated tropical
floodplains such as the Barotse Floodplain of the Zambezi River. The first
floodwaters to move down the floodplain after the onset of the rainy season,
called "red waters", are usually hypoxic and kill many fish as a result of
eutrophication brought on by material picked up by the flood from the plain
such as cattle manure, and by the decay of vegetation which grew during the
dry season.[6] The process may be made worse by the use of fertilisers in
crops such as maize, rice and sugarcane grown on the floodplain.

Human activities can accelerate the rate at which nutrients enter ecosystems.
Runoff from agriculture and development, pollution from septic systems and
sewers, and other human-related activities increase the flux of both inorganic
nutrients and organic substances into terrestrial, and aquatic ecosystems.
Elevated atmospheric compounds of nitrogen can increase nitrogen availability.

Phosphorus is often regarded as the main culprit in cases of eutrophication in
lakes subjected to point source pollution from sewage. The concentration of
algae and the trophic state of lakes correspond well to phosphorus levels in
water. Studies conducted in the Experimental Lakes Area in Ontario have shown
a relationship between the addition of phosphorus and the rate of
eutrophication. Humankind has increased the rate of phosphorus cycling on
Earth by four times, mainly due to agricultural fertilizer production and
application. Between 1950 and 1995, 600,000,000 tonnes of phosphorus were
applied to Earth's surface, primarily on croplands.[7] Control of point
sources of phosphorus have resulted in rapid control of eutrophication, mainly
due to policy changes.

## [edit] Ocean waters

Eutrophication is also a common phenomenon in marine, coastal waters. In
contrast to freshwater systems, nitrogen is more commonly the key limiting
nutrient of marine waters; thus, nitrogen levels have greater importance to
understanding eutrophication problems in salt water. Estuaries tend to be
naturally eutrophic because land-derived nutrients are concentrated where run-
off enters the marine environment in a confined channel. Upwelling in coastal
systems also promotes increased productivity by conveying deep, nutrient-rich
waters to the surface, where the nutrients can be assimilated by algae.

The World Resources Institute has identified 375 hypoxic coastal zones in the
world, concentrated in coastal areas in Western Europe, the Eastern and
Southern coasts of the US, and East Asia, particularly in Japan.[8]

In addition to runoff from land, atmospheric anthropogenic fixed nitrogen can
enter the open ocean. A study in 2008 found that this could account for around
one third of the oceanâs external (non-recycled) nitrogen supply and up to
three per cent of the annual new marine biological production.[9] It has been
suggested that accumulating reactive nitrogen in the environment may prove as
serious as putting carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.[10]

## [edit] Terrestrial ecosystems

Although traditionally thought of as enrichment of aquatic systems by addition
of fertilizers into lakes, bays, or other semi-enclosed waters (even slow-
moving rivers), terrestrial ecosystems are subject to similarly adverse
impacts.[11] Increased content of nitrates in soil frequently leads to
undesirable changes in vegetation composition and many plant species are
endangered as a result of eutrophication in terrestrial ecosystems, e.g. the
majority of orchid species in Europe. Ecosystems (like some meadows, forests
and bogs that are characterized by low nutrient content and species-rich,
slowly growing vegetation adapted to lower nutrient levels) are overgrown by
faster growing and more competitive species-poor vegetation, like tall
grasses, that can take advantage of unnaturally elevated nitrogen level and
the area may be changed beyond recognition and vulnerable species may be lost.
Eg. species-rich fens are overtaken by reed or reedgrass species, spectacular
forest undergrowth affected by run-off from nearby fertilized field is turned
into a thick nettle and bramble shrub.

Chemical forms of nitrogen are most often of concern with regard to
eutrophication because plants have high nitrogen requirements so that
additions of nitrogen compounds stimulate plant growth (primary production).
This is also the case with increased levels of phosphorus. Nitrogen is not
readily available in soil because N2, a gaseous form of nitrogen, is very
stable and unavailable directly to higher plants. Terrestrial ecosystems rely
on microbial nitrogen fixation to convert N2 into other physical forms (such
as nitrates). However, there is a limit to how much nitrogen can be utilized.
Ecosystems receiving more nitrogen than the plants require are called
nitrogen-saturated. Saturated terrestrial ecosystems contribute both inorganic
and organic nitrogen to freshwater, coastal, and marine eutrophication, where
nitrogen is also typically a limiting nutrient.[12] However, because
phosphorus is generally much less soluble than nitrogen, it is leached from
the soil at a much slower rate than nitrogen. Consequently, phosphorus is much
more important as a limiting nutrient in aquatic systems.[13]

## [edit] Ecological effects

<IMG>

<IMG>

Eutrophication is apparent as increased turbidity in the northern part of the
Caspian Sea, imaged from orbit.

Many ecological effects can arise from stimulating primary production, but
there are three particularly troubling ecological impacts: decreased
biodiversity, changes in species composition and dominance, and toxicity
effects.

  * Increased biomass of phytoplankton
  * Toxic or inedible phytoplankton species
  * Increases in blooms of gelatinous zooplankton
  * Decreased biomass of benthic and epiphytic algae
  * Changes in macrophyte species composition and biomass
  * Decreases in water transparency (increased turbidity)
  * Colour, smell, and water treatment problems
  * Dissolved oxygen depletion
  * Increased incidences of fish kills
  * Loss of desirable fish species
  * Reductions in harvestable fish and shellfish
  * Decreases in perceived aesthetic value of the water body

### [edit] Decreased biodiversity

When an ecosystem experiences an increase in nutrients, primary producers reap
the benefits first. In aquatic ecosystems, species such as algae experience a
population increase (called an algal bloom). Algal blooms limit the sunlight
available to bottom-dwelling organisms and cause wide swings in the amount of
dissolved oxygen in the water. Oxygen is required by all respiring plants and
animals and it is replenished in daylight by photosynthesizing plants and
algae. Under eutrophic conditions, dissolved oxygen greatly increases during
the day, but is greatly reduced after dark by the respiring algae and by
microorganisms that feed on the increasing mass of dead algae. When dissolved
oxygen levels decline to hypoxic levels, fish and other marine animals
suffocate. As a result, creatures such as fish, shrimp, and especially
immobile bottom dwellers die off.[14] In extreme cases, anaerobic conditions
ensue, promoting growth of bacteria such as Clostridium botulinum that
produces toxins deadly to birds and mammals. Zones where this occurs are known
as dead zones.

### [edit] New species invasion

Eutrophication may cause competitive release by making abundant a normally
limiting nutrient. This process causes shifts in the species composition of
ecosystems. For instance, an increase in nitrogen might allow new, competitive
species to invade and out-compete original inhabitant species. This has been
shown to occur[15] in New England salt marshes.

### [edit] Toxicity

Some algal blooms, otherwise called "nuisance algae" or "harmful algal
blooms", are toxic to plants and animals. Toxic compounds they produce can
make their way up the food chain, resulting in animal mortality.[16]
Freshwater algal blooms can pose a threat to livestock. When the algae die or
are eaten, neuro\- and hepatotoxins are released which can kill animals and
may pose a threat to humans.[17][18] An example of algal toxins working their
way into humans is the case of shellfish poisoning.[19] Biotoxins created
during algal blooms are taken up by shellfish (mussels, oysters), leading to
these human foods acquiring the toxicity and poisoning humans. Examples
include paralytic, neurotoxic, and diarrhoetic shellfish poisoning. Other
marine animals can be vectors for such toxins, as in the case of ciguatera,
where it is typically a predator fish that accumulates the toxin and then
poisons humans. Nitrogen can also cause toxic effects directly. When this
nutrient is leached into groundwater, drinking water can be affected because
concentrations of nitrogen are not filtered out. âBlue baby syndrome, or
methaemoglobinaemia is caused when nitrate (NO3) contaminated water is given
to human babies. The anaerobic environment in their stomach causes the
nitrates to be converted into nitrites (NO2). Nitrite binds to hemoglobin to
form methemoglobin, a form that does not carry oxygen. The baby essentially
suffocates as its body doesn't receive enough oxygen. The problem does not
happen in breast fed babies.[20]

## [edit] Sources of high nutrient runoff

Characteristics of point and nonpoint sources of chemical inputs ([21]
modified from Novonty and Olem 1994) Point Sources

  * Wastewater effluent (municipal and industrial)
  * Runoff and leachate from waste disposal systems
  * Runoff and infiltration from animal feedlots
  * Runoff from mines, oil fields, unsewered industrial sites
  * Overflows of combined storm and sanitary sewers
  * Runoff from construction sites less than 20,000 mÂ² (220,000 ftÂ²)
  * Untreated sewage

  
Nonpoint Sources

  * Runoff from agriculture/irrigation
  * Runoff from pasture and range
  * Urban runoff from unsewered areas
  * Septic tank leachate
  * Runoff from construction sites >20,000 mÂ²
  * Runoff from abandoned mines
  * Atmospheric deposition over a water surface
  * Other land activities generating contaminants

  
In order to gauge how to best prevent eutrophication from occurring, specific
sources that contribute to nutrient loading must be identified. There are two
common sources of nutrients and organic matter: point and nonpoint sources.

### [edit] Point sources

Point sources are directly attributable to one influence. In point sources the
nutrient waste travels directly from source to water. Point sources are
relatively easy to regulate.

### [edit] Nonpoint sources

Nonpoint source pollution (also known as 'diffuse' or 'runoff' pollution) is
that which comes from ill-defined and diffuse sources. Nonpoint sources are
difficult to regulate and usually vary spatially and temporally (with season,
precipitation, and other irregular events).

It has been shown that nitrogen transport is correlated with various indices
of human activity in watersheds,[22][23] including the amount of
development.[15] Agriculture and development are activities that contribute
most to nutrient loading. There are three reasons that nonpoint sources are
especially troublesome:[13]

##### [edit] Soil retention

Nutrients from human activities tend to accumulate in soils and remain there
for years. It has been shown[24] that the amount of phosphorus lost to surface
waters increases linearly with the amount of phosphorus in the soil. Thus much
of the nutrient loading in soil eventually makes its way to water. Nitrogen,
similarly, has a turnover time of decades or more.

##### [edit] Runoff to surface water and leaching to groundwater

Nutrients from human activities tend to travel from land to either surface or
ground water. Nitrogen in particular is removed through storm drains, sewage
pipes, and other forms of surface runoff. Nutrient losses in runoff and
leachate are often associated with agriculture. Modern agriculture often
involves the application of nutrients onto fields in order to maximise
production. However, farmers frequently apply more nutrients than are taken up
by crops[25] or pastures. Regulations aimed at minimising nutrient exports
from agriculture are typically far less stringent than those placed on sewage
treatment plants[26] and other point source polluters.

##### [edit] Atmospheric deposition

Nitrogen is released into the air because of ammonia volatilization and
nitrous oxide production. The combustion of fossil fuels is a large human-
initiated contributor to atmospheric nitrogen pollution. Atmospheric
deposition (e.g., in the form of acid rain) can also affect nutrient
concentration in water,[27] especially in highly industrialized regions.

### [edit] Other causes

Any factor that causes increased nutrient concentrations can potentially lead
to eutrophication. In modeling eutrophication, the rate of water renewal plays
a critical role; stagnant water is allowed to collect more nutrients than
bodies with replenished water supplies. It has also been shown that the drying
of wetlands causes an increase in nutrient concentration and subsequent
eutrophication blooms.[28]

## [edit] Prevention and reversal

Eutrophication poses a problem not only to ecosystems, but to humans as well.
Reducing eutrophication should be a key concern when considering future
policy, and a sustainable solution for everyone, including farmers and
ranchers, seems feasible. While eutrophication does pose problems, humans
should be aware that natural runoff (which causes algal blooms in the wild) is
common in ecosystems and should thus not reverse nutrient concentrations
beyond normal levels.

### [edit] Effectiveness

Cleanup measures have been mostly, but not completely, successful. Finnish
phosphorus removal measures started in the mid-1970s and have targeted rivers
and lakes polluted by industrial and municipal discharges. These efforts have
had a 90% removal efficiency.[29] Still, some targeted point sources did not
show a decrease in runoff despite reduction efforts.

### [edit] Minimizing nonpoint pollution: future work

Nonpoint pollution is the most difficult source of nutrients to manage. The
literature suggests, though, that when these sources are controlled,
eutrophication decreases. The following steps are recommended to minimize the
amount of pollution that can enter aquatic ecosystems from ambiguous sources.

##### [edit] Riparian buffer zones

Studies show that intercepting non-point pollution between the source and the
water is a successful means of prevention.[30] Riparian buffer zones are
interfaces between a flowing body of water and land, and have been created
near waterways in an attempt to filter pollutants; sediment and nutrients are
deposited here instead of in water. Creating buffer zones near farms and roads
is another possible way to prevent nutrients from traveling too far. Still,
studies have shown[31] that the effects of atmospheric nitrogen pollution can
reach far past the buffer zone. This suggests that the most effective means of
prevention is from the primary source.

##### [edit] Prevention policy

Laws regulating the discharge and treatment of sewage have led to dramatic
nutrient reductions to surrounding ecosystems,[13] but it is generally agreed
that a policy regulating agricultural use of fertilizer and animal waste must
be imposed. In Japan the amount of nitrogen produced by livestock is adequate
to serve the fertilizer needs for the agriculture industry.[32] Thus, it is
not unreasonable to command livestock owners to clean up animal waste â
which when left stagnant will leach into ground water.

##### [edit] Nitrogen testing and modeling

Soil Nitrogen Testing (N-Testing) is a technique that helps farmers optimize
the amount of fertilizer applied to crops. By testing fields with this method,
farmers saw a decrease in fertilizer application costs, a decrease in nitrogen
lost to surrounding sources, or both.[33] By testing the soil and modeling the
bare minimum amount of fertilizer needed, farmers reap economic benefits while
the environment remains clean and pure.

##### [edit] Organic Farming

Researchers at the National Academy of Sciences found that organically
fertilizing fields "significantly reduce harmful nitrate leaching" over
conventionally fertilized fields.[34]

### [edit] Natural state of algal blooms

Although the intensity, frequency and extent of algal blooms has tended to
increase in response to human activity and human-induced eutrophication, algal
blooms are a naturally-occurring phenomenon. The rise and fall of algae
populations, as with the population of other living things, is a feature of a
healthy ecosystem. Rectification actions aimed at abating eutrophication and
algal blooms are usually desirable, but the focus of intervention should not
necessarily be aimed at eliminating blooms, but towards creating a sustainable
balance that maintains or improves ecosystem health.

## [edit] See also

  * Biogeochemical cycle
  * Freshwater ecology
  * Algal blooms
  * Nitrogen cycle
  * Phosphorus cycle
  * Hypoxia (environmental)
  * Limnology
  * Drainage basin
  * Riparian zone

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Bartram, J., Wayne W. Carmichael, Ingrid Chorus, Gary Jones, and Olav M. Skulberg. 1999. Chapter 1. Introduction, In: Toxic Cyanobacteria in Water: A guide to their public health consequences, monitoring and management. World Health Organization. URL: WHO document
  2. ^ Rodhe, W. 1969 Crystallization of eutrophication concepts in North Europe. In: Eutrophication, Causes, Consequences, Correctives. National Academy of Sciences, Washington D.C., Standard Book Number 309-01700-9, 50-64.
  3. ^ ILEC/Lake Biwa Research Institute [Eds]. 1988-1993 Survey of the State of the World's Lakes. Volumes I-IV. International Lake Environment Committee, Otsu and United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi.
  4. ^ Walker, I. R. 2006. Chironomid overview. pp.360-366 in S.A. EIias (ed.) Encyclopedia of Quaternary Science, Vo1. 1, Elsevier, Amsterdam
  5. ^ Whiteside. M. C. 1983. The mythical concept of eutrophication. Hydrobiologia 103, 107-111.
  6. ^ [http://www.cbd.int/doc/case-studies/inc/cs-inc-iucn-12-en.pdf "Barotse Floodplain, Zambia: local economic dependence on wetland resources."] Case Studies in Wetland Valuation #2: IUCN, May 2003.
  7. ^ Carpenter, S.R., N.F. Caraco, and V.H. Smith. 1998. Nonpoint pollution of surface waters with phosphorus and nitrogen. Ecological Applications 8:559-568.
  8. ^ Selman, Mindy (2007) Eutrophication: An Overview of Status, Trends, Policies, and Strategies. World Resources Institute.
  9. ^ Duce, R A and 29 others (2008) Impacts of Atmospheric Anthropogenic Nitrogen on the Open Ocean Science. Vol 320, pp 893â89
  10. ^ Addressing the nitrogen cascade Eureka Alert, 2008.
  11. ^ APIS. 2005. Website: Air Pollution Information System Eutrophication
  12. ^ Hornung M., Sutton M.A. and Wilson R.B. [Eds.] (1995): Mapping and modelling of critical loads for nitrogen - a workshop report. Grange-over-Sands, Cumbria, UK. UN-ECE Convention on Long Range Transboundary Air Pollution, Working Group for Effects, 24-26 October 1994. Published by: Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Edinburgh, UK.
  13. ^ a b c Smith, V.H.; G.D. Tilman, and J.C. Nekola (1999). "Eutrophication: impacts of excess nutrient inputs on freshwater, marine, and terrestrial ecosystems". Environmental Pollution 100: 179â196. doi:10.1016/S0269-7491(99)00091-3.
  14. ^ Horrigan, L.; R. S. Lawrence, and P. Walker (2002). "How sustainable agriculture can address the environmental and human health harms of industrial agriculture". Environmental health perspectives 110: 445â456.
  15. ^ a b Bertness et al. 2001
  16. ^ Anderson D.M. 1994. Red tides. Scientific American 271:62-68.
  17. ^ Lawton, L.A.; G.A. Codd (1991). "Cyanobacterial (blue-green algae) toxins and their significance in UK and European waters". Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 40: 87â97.
  18. ^ Martin, A.; G.D. Cooke (1994). "Health risks in eutrophic water supplies". Lake Line 14: 24â26.
  19. ^ Shumway, S.E. (1990). "A review of the effects of algal blooms on shellfish and aquaculture". Journal of the World Aquaculture Society 21: 65â104. doi:10.1111/j.1749-7345.1990.tb00529.x.
  20. ^ Walker, C. H.; S. P. Hopkin, R. M. Sibly and D. B. Peakall (1997). Principles of Ecotoxicology. Taylor & Francis. pp. 7\. ISBN 0748402209.
  21. ^ Carpenter, S.R., N.F. Caraco, and V.H. Smith. 1998. Nonpoint pollution of surface waters with phosphorus and nitrogen. Ecological Applications 8:559-568.
  22. ^ Cole J.J., B.L. Peierls, N.F. Caraco, and M.L. Pace. (1993). Nitrogen loading of rivers as a human-driven process. Pages 141-157 in M.J. McDonnell and S.T.A. Pickett, editors. Humans as components of ecosystems. Springer-Verlag, New York, New York, USA.
  23. ^ Howarth R.W., G. Billen, D. Swaney, A. Townsend, N. Jaworski, K. Lajtha, J.A. Downing, R. Elmgren, N. Caraco, T. Jordan, F. Berendse, J. Freney, V. Kudeyarov, P. Murdoch, and Zhu Zhao-liang. 1996. Regional nitrogen budgets and riverine inputs of N and P for the drainages to the North Atlantic Ocean: natural and human influences. Biogeochemistry 35:75-139.
  24. ^ Sharpley A.N., T.C. Daniel, J.T. Sims, and D.H. Pote. 1996. Determining environmentally sound soil phosphorus levels. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation 51:160-166.
  25. ^ Buol S. W. 1995. Sustainability of Soil Use. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 26:25-44.
  26. ^ Carpenter, S.R., N.F. Caraco, and V.H. Smith. 1998. Nonpoint pollution of surface waters with phosphorus and nitrogen. Ecological Applications 8:559-568.
  27. ^ Paerl H. W. 1997. Coastal Eutrophication and Harmful Algal Blooms: Importance of Atmospheric Deposition and Groundwater as "New" Nitrogen and Other Nutrient Sources. Limnology and Oceanography 42:1154-1165.
  28. ^ Mungall C. and D.J. McLaren. 1991. Planet under stress: the challenge of global change. Oxford University Press, New York, New York, USA.
  29. ^ Raimammake A., O.P. Pietilainen, S. Rekolainen, P. Kauppila, H. Pitkanen, J. Niemi, A. Raateland, J. Vuorenmaa. 2003. Trends of phosphorus, nitrogen, and chlorophyll a concentrations in Finnish rivers and lakes in 1975-2000. The Science of the Total Environment 310:47-59.
  30. ^ Carpenter, S.R., N.F. Caraco, and V.H. Smith. 1998. Nonpoint pollution of surface waters with phosphorus and nitrogen. Ecological Applications 8:559-568.
  31. ^ Angold P. G. 1997. The Impact of a Road Upon Adjacent Heathland Vegetation: Effects on Plant Species Composition. The Journal of Applied Ecology 34:409-417.
  32. ^ Kumazawa K. 2002. Nitrogen fertilization and nitrate pollution in groundwater in Japan: Present status and measures for sustainable agriculture. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems 63:129-137.
  33. ^ Huang W. Y., Y. C. Lu, and N. D. Uri. 2001. An assessment of soil nitrogen testing considering the carry-over effect. Applied Mathematical Modelling 25:843-860.
  34. ^ "Reduced nitrate leaching and enhanced dentrifier activity and efficiency in organically fertilized soils". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2006-03-21.

## [edit] External links

  * International Nitrogen Initiative: Web site

v â¢ d â¢ e

Pollution  
Air pollution

Acid rain Â· Air Quality Index Â· Atmospheric dispersion modeling Â·
Chlorofluorocarbon Â· Global dimming Â· Global distillation Â· Global warming
Â· Indoor air quality Â· Ozone depletion Â· Particulate Â· Smog  
Water pollution

Eutrophication Â· Hypoxia Â· Environmental monitoring Â· Freshwater
environmental quality parameters Â· Marine pollution Â· Marine debris Â· Ocean
acidification Â· Oil spill Â· Ship pollution Â· Surface runoff Â· Thermal
pollution Â· Urban runoff Â· Wastewater Â· Waterborne diseases Â· Water
quality Â· Water stagnation Â·  
Soil contamination

Bioremediation Â· Electrical resistance heating Â· Herbicide Â· Pesticide Â·
Soil Guideline Values (SGVs)  
Radioactive contamination

Actinides in the environment Â· Environmental radioactivity Â· Fission product
Â· Nuclear fallout Â· Plutonium in the environment Â· Radiation poisoning Â·
Radium in the environment Â· Uranium in the environment  
Other types of pollution

Invasive species Â· Light pollution Â· Noise pollution Â· Radio spectrum
pollution Â· Visual pollution  
Inter-government treaties

Montreal Protocol Â· Kyoto Protocol Â· CLRTAP Â· OSPAR Â· Stockholm Convention  
Major organizations

DEFRA Â· Environment Agency (England and Wales) Â· EPA Â· Global Atmosphere
Watch Â· EEA Â· Greenpeace Â· American Lung Association  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eutrophication"

Categories: Aquatic ecology | Water pollution | Environmental science |
Environmental chemistry | Environmental soil science | Limnology | Hydrography
| Lakes | Physical geography | Ecology | Fisheries

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 14:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



