
# Isometric exercise

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Isometric exercise or "isometrics" are a type of strength training in which
the joint angle and muscle length do not change during contraction (compared
to concentric or eccentric contractions, called isotonic movements).
Isometrics are done in static positions, rather than being dynamic through a
range of motion. The joint and muscle are either worked against an immovable
force (overcoming isometric) or are held in a static position while opposed by
resistance (yielding isometric).

## Contents

  * 1 Definition
  * 2 Isometric resistance
  * 3 History
  * 4 Medical uses
  * 5 Comparison with dynamic exercises
  * 6 NASA studies
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Definition

Isometric exercise is a form of exercise involving the static contraction of a
muscle without any visible movement in the angle of the joint. This is
reflected in the name; the term "isometric" combines the prefix "iso" (same)
with "metric" (distance), meaning that in these exercises the length of the
muscle does not change,[1] as compared to isotonic contractions ("tonus" means
"strain" in Latin) in which the contraction strength does not change but the
joint angle does.

## [edit] Isometric resistance

Resistance in isometric exercises typically involve contractions of the muscle
using:

  * the body's own muscle (e.g., pressing the palms together in front of the body)
  * structural items (e.g., pushing against a door frame).
  * free weights, weights machines or elastic equipment (e.g. holding a weight in a fixed position)
  * pressure plate type equipment that has a digital readout of maximal force.

Depending on the goal of the exercise, the exertion can be maximal, or sub-
maximal.

## [edit] History

Isometric exercises are thousands of years old, with examples from the static
holds in certain branches of yoga or Chinese martial arts.

Isometrics were first brought to the modern public's attention in the early
days of physical culture, the precursor to bodybuilding. Many of the great
bodybuilders of the day incorporated isometric exercises into their training
regimes. Contrary to popular opinion, The Charles Atlas "Dynamic Tension"
Course did not include any true isometric exercises, but rather Self-
Resistance (that is: Pitting one limb against the other) and Bodyweight
Calisthenics.[2] which he learned from the "Conscious Evolution" course of
Alois P. Swoboda.[3] Isometrics fell out of favor as it was discovered that
many of the principal advocates were using anabolic steroids to enhance their
gains.[4]

Today many new training protocols exist incorporating isometrics once again.
Isometric exercises are often made into parts of normal, isotonic exercises.
For example, during a set of rows, some people hold their position when the
handles are closest to their chest in order to "squeeze" the muscle, in an
effort to further strain the muscle.

## [edit] Medical uses

Isometric exercises can also be used at the bedside to differentiate various
heart murmurs; the murmur of mitral regurgitation gets louder[5] as compared
to the quieter murmur of aortic stenosis.[6]

## [edit] Comparison with dynamic exercises

Isometric exercises have some differences in training effect as compared to
dynamic exercises. While isometric training increases strength at the specific
joint angles of the exercises performed and additional joint angles to a
lesser extent, dynamic exercises increase strength throughout the full range
of motion[7]. Generally speaking however, people who train isometrically don't
train through a full range of motion as the strength gained at the training
joint angle is where they require it. While dynamic exercises are slightly
better than isometric exercises at enhancing the twitch force of a muscle,
isometrics are significantly better than dynamic exercises at increasing
maximal strength at the joint angle.[8] Flexibility may be increased when
isometrics are performed at joint range of motion extremes. These isometric
contractions recruit muscle fibers that are often neglected in some dynamic
exercises. For example, gymnasts are extremely strong at great ranges of
motion through the practice of isometric holds.

## [edit] NASA studies

NASA has researched the use of isometrics in preventing muscle atrophy
experienced by astronauts as a result of living in a zero gravity environment.
Isometrics, muscle lengthening and muscle shortening exercises were studied
and compared. The outcome showed that while all three exercise types did
indeed promote muscle growth, isometrics failed to prevent a decrease in the
amount of contractile proteins found in the muscle tissue. The result was
muscle degradation at a molecular level. As contractile proteins are what
cause muscles to contract and give them their physical strength, NASA has
concluded that isometrics may not be the best way for astronauts to maintain
muscle tissue.[9]

## [edit] See also

  * Dynamic tension

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Article on static strength training
  2. ^ "Strength Training - Isometric Exercise". SPMESSENGER.com. Archived from the original on 2008-01-29. http://web.archive.org/web/20080129094625/http://www.spmessenger.com/strength/isometric.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-10.
  3. ^ Fillary, R; Waldron G. "Alois P. Swoboda on Sandow Plus". http://www.sandowplus.co.uk/Competition/Swoboda/swoboda.htm. Retrieved on 2008-11-10.
  4. ^ Mirkin, G (2006). "Isometric exercise background". http://www.chronicfitness.com/bodybuilding/training/isometric-exercise-background.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-10.
  5. ^ Ching, W. "Evaluation of Cardiac Murmurs in the Clinic Setting". University of Chicago. http://pediatrics.uchicago.edu/chiefs/ClinicCurriculum/documents/WCEvaluationofMurmursintheClinicSetting.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.
  6. ^ Cassidy J, Aronow WS, Prakash R (1975). "The effect of isometric exercise on the systolic murmur of patients with idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis". Chest 67 (4): 395â7. doi:10.1378/chest.67.4.395. PMID 1168115.
  7. ^ Lindh M (1979). "Increase of muscle strength from isometric quadriceps exercises at different knee angles". Scand J Rehabil Med 11 (1): 33â6. PMID 419396.
  8. ^ Duchateau J, Hainaut K (1984). "Isometric or dynamic training: differential effects on mechanical properties of a human muscle". Journal of applied physiology: respiratory, environmental and exercise physiology 56 (2): 296â301. PMID 6706740.
  9. ^ Barry, PL; Phillips, T (2004-10-12). "Why do Workouts Work?". NASA. http://www.nasa.gov/vision/earth/livingthings/10dec_muscles.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.

## [edit] External links

  * Public domain pamphlets on isometric exercises
  * [http://www.isometric-exercises.com/index.html Isometric exercises

tutorial]

  * [http://www.sandowplus.co.uk/Competition/Zass/zassintro.htm

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Musculoskeletal physiology  
Muscular

Hand strength Â· Muscle tone

Exertion (Exercise) Â· Movement (Eye movement, Gait, Locomotion)

Muscle contraction (Isometric, Isotonic, Contraction)  
Skeletal (Bone/cartilage)

Bone density Â· Bone remodeling (Osseointegration, Bone resorption,
Osteolysis)  
Osteogenesis Â· Chondrogenesis  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isometric_exercise"

Categories: Exercise | Bodybuilding

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 17 April 2009, at 22:36 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



