
# Language acquisition

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Linguistics  
Language  
Theoretical linguistics  
Generative linguistics  
Phonology  
Morphology  
Syntax  
Lexis  
Semantics  
Lexical semantics  
Statistical semantics  
Structural semantics  
Prototype semantics  
Pragmatics  
Systemic functional linguistics  
Descriptive linguistics  
Phonetics  
Historical linguistics  
Comparative linguistics  
Etymology  
Sociolinguistics  
Corpus linguistics  
Applied linguistics  
Language acquisition  
Language assessment  
Language development  
Language education  
Psycholinguistics  
Neurolinguistics  
Linguistic anthropology  
Cognitive linguistics  
Computational linguistics  
Stylistics  
Prescription  
History of linguistics  
List of linguists  
Unsolved problems  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Language acquisition is the study of the processes through which learners
acquire language. By itself, language acquisition refers to first language
acquisition, which studies infants' acquisition of their native language,
whereas second language acquisition deals with acquisition of additional
languages in both children and adults.

One hotly debated issue is whether the biological contribution includes
capacities specific to language acquisition, often referred to as universal
grammar. For fifty years, linguists Noam Chomsky and the late Eric Lenneberg
have argued for the hypothesis that children have innate, language-specific
abilities that facilitate and constrain language learning.[1]

Other researchers, including Elizabeth Bates, Catherine Snow, Brian
MacWhinney, and Michael Tomasello, have hypothesized that language learning
results from general cognitive abilities and the interaction between learners
and their surrounding communities. Recent work by William O'Grady proposes
that complex syntactic phenomena result from an efficiency-driven, linear
computational system. O'Grady describes his work as "nativism without
Universal Grammar."

One of the most important advances in the study of language acquisition was
the creation of the CHILDES database by Brian MacWhinney and Catherine Snow.

## Contents

  * 1 Nativist theories
    * 1.1 Language acquisition device and Universal Grammar
    * 1.2 Critical period hypothesis
    * 1.3 Creolization
    * 1.4 Evolution of language
  * 2 Empiricist theories
    * 2.1 Statistical learning theories of language acquisition
    * 2.2 Chunking theories of language acquisition
    * 2.3 Social interactionism
    * 2.4 Relational Frame Theory
  * 3 Emergentist theories
  * 4 Criticism of nativist theories
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] Nativist theories

Nativist theories hold that children are born with an innate propensity for
language acquisition, and that this ability makes the task of learning a first
language easier than it would otherwise be. These "hidden assumptions"[2]
allow children to quickly figure out what is and isn't possible in the grammar
of their native language, and allow them to master that grammar by the age of
three.[3] Nativists view language as a fundamental part of the human genome,
as the trait that makes humans human, and its acquisition as a natural part of
maturation. They believe that children learning language are as natural and
normal as dolphins learning to swim or songbirds learning to sing.

### [edit] Language acquisition device and Universal Grammar

Noam Chomsky originally theorized that children were born with a hard-wired
language acquisition device (LAD) in their brains.[1] He later expanded this
idea into that of Universal Grammar; a set of innate principles and adjustable
parameters that are common to all human languages. According to Chomsky, the
presence of Universal Grammar in the brains of children allow them to deduce
the structure of their native languages from "mere exposure".

Much of the nativist position is based on the early age at which children show
competency in their native grammars, as well as the ways in which they do (and
do not) make errors. Some research suggests that infants are born able to
distinguish between phonemes in minimal pairs, distinguishing between bah and
pah, for example.[2] Another source of support for this viewpoint is that
young children (under the age of three) do not speak in fully formed
sentences, instead saying things like 'want cookie' or 'my coat.' However,
they do not say things like 'want my' or 'I cookie,' statements that would
break the syntactic structure of the phrase, a component of universal
grammar.[2] Children also seem remarkably immune from error correction by
adults which nativists say would not be the case if children were learning
from their parents.[3]

### [edit] Critical period hypothesis

Main article: Critical Period Hypothesis

The possible existence of a critical period for language acquisition is
another nativist argument. Critical periods are time frames during which
environmental exposure is needed to stimulate an innate trait. Young
chaffinches, for example, must hear the song of an adult chaffinch before
reaching maturity, or else would never be able to sing. Nativists argue that
if a critical period for language acquisition exists (see below), then
language acquisition must be spurred on by the unfolding of the genome during
maturation.[3] Much research on the critical age period or window of
opportunity (Robertson) http://www.asian-efl-journal.com/marcharticles_pr.php
see the Asian EFL Journal http://www.asian-efl-journal.com

Linguist Eric Lenneberg stated, in a 1964 paper, that a critical period of
language acquisition ends around the age of 12 years. He claimed that if no
language is learned before then (see Feral children), it could never be
learned in a normal and fully functional sense. This was called the "Critical
period hypothesis." However, the opponents[who?] of the critical period
hypothesis say that in this example the child is hardly growing up in a
nurturing environment, and that the lack of language acquisition in later life
may be due to the results of a generally abusive environment rather than being
specifically due to a lack of exposure to language.

The critical period hypothesis of brain plasticity and learning capacity has
been called into question. Other factors may account for differences in adult
and child language learning. Childrenâs apparently effortless and rapid
language acquisition may be explained by the fact that the environment is set
up to engage them in frequent and optimal learning opportunities. By contrast,
adults seem to have an initial advantage in their learning of vocabulary and
syntax, but may never achieve native-like pronunciation.[4] A more up-to-date
view of the Critical Period Hypothesis is represented by the University of
Maryland, College Park instructor Robert DeKeyser. DeKeyser argues that
although it is true that there is a critical period, this does not mean that
adults cannot learn a second language perfectly, at least on the syntactic
level. DeKeyser talks about the role of language aptitude as opposed to the
critical period.[citation needed]

### [edit] Creolization

Main article: Creole language

More support for the innateness of language comes from the deaf population of
Nicaragua. Until approximately 1986, Nicaragua had neither education nor a
formalized sign language for the deaf. As Nicaraguans attempted to rectify the
situation, they discovered that children past a certain age had difficulty
learning any language. Additionally, the adults observed that the younger
children were using gestures unknown to them to communicate with each other.
They invited Judy Kegl, an American linguist from MIT, to help unravel this
mystery. Kegl discovered that these children had developed their own,
distinct, Nicaraguan Sign Language with its own rules of "sign-phonology" and
syntax. She also discovered some 300 adults who, despite being raised in
otherwise healthy environments, had never acquired language, and turned out to
be incapable of learning language in any meaningful sense. While it was
possible to teach vocabulary, these individuals were unable to learn
syntax.[3]

Derek Bickerton's (1981) landmark work with Hawaiian pidgin speakers studied
immigrant populations where first-generation parents spoke highly-
ungrammatical "pidgin English". Their children, Bickerton found, grew up
speaking a grammatically rich language -- neither English nor the syntax-less
pidgin of their parents. Furthermore, the language exhibited many of the
underlying grammatical features of many other natural languages. The language
became "creolized", and is known as Hawaii Creole English. This was taken as
powerful evidence for children's innate grammar module.

### [edit] Evolution of language

Main article: Origin of Language

Debate within the nativist position now revolves around how language evolved.
Derek Bickerton suggests a single mutation, a "big bang", linked together
previously evolved traits into full language.[5] Others like Steven Pinker
argue for a slower evolution over longer periods of time.[3]

## [edit] Empiricist theories

Empiricist theories of language acquisition include statistical learning
theories of language acquisition, Relational Frame Theory, functionalist
linguistics, usage-based language acquisition, social interactionism and
others.

### [edit] Statistical learning theories of language acquisition

Some language acquisition researchers, such as Elissa Newport, Richard Aslin,
and Jenny Saffran, believe that language acquisition is based primarily on
general learning mechanisms, namely statistical learning. The development of
connectionist models that are able to successfully learn words and syntactical
conventions[6] supports the predictions of statistical learning theories of
language acquisition, as do empirical studies of children's learning of words
and syntax.[7]

### [edit] Chunking theories of language acquisition

Chunking theories of language acquisition constitute a group of theories
related to statistical learning theories in that they assume that the input
from the environment plays an essential role; however, they postulate
different learning mechanisms. The central idea of these theories is that
language development occurs through the incremental acquisition of
âchunksâ (chunks) of elementary constituents, which can be words,
phonemes, or syllables. Recently, this approach has been highly successful in
simulating several phenomena in the acquisition of syntactic categories [8]
and the acquisition of phonological knowledge [9]. The approach has several
features that make it unique: the models are implemented as computer programs,
which enables clear-cut and quantitative predictions to be made; they learn
from naturalistic input, made of actual child-directed utterances; they
produce actual utterances, which can be compared with childrenâs utterances;
and they have simulated phenomena in several languages, including English,
Spanish, and German.

### [edit] Social interactionism

Social-interactionists, such as Catherine Snow, theorize that adults play an
important part in children's language acquisition (see Moerk, E. L., 1992;
also: http://www.jstor.org/pss/1128444). However, some researchers[who?] claim
that the empirical data on which theories of social interactionism are based
have often been over-representative of middle class American and European
parent-child interactions. Various anthropological studies[which?] of other
human cultures, as well as anecdotal evidence from western families, suggests
rather that many, if not the majority, of the world's children are not spoken
to in a manner akin to traditional language lessons, but nevertheless grow up
to be fully fluent language users. Many researchers[who?] now take this into
account in their analyses.

Nevertheless, Snow's criticisms might be powerful against Chomsky's argument,
if the argument from the poverty of stimulus were indeed an argument about
degenerate stimulus, but it is not. The argument from the poverty of stimulus
is that there are principles of grammar that cannot be learned on the basis of
positive input alone, however complete and grammatical that evidence is. This
argument is not vulnerable to objection based on evidence from interaction
studies such as Snow's, but it is vulnerable to the clear evidence of the
availability of negative input given by conversation analysis. In addition,
meta-analysis has shown that there is a large amount of corrections made to
language produced by children.[10] Moerk (1994) conducted a meta-analysis of
40 studies and found substantial evidence that corrections do indeed play a
role. From this work, corrections are not only abundant but contingent on the
mistakes of the child.[11] (see behavior analysis of child development).

### [edit] Relational Frame Theory

Relational Frame Theory (Hayes, Barnes-Holmes, Roche, 2001), provides a wholly
selectionist/learning account of the origin and development of language
competence and complexity. Based upon the principles of Skinnerian
behaviorism, RFT posits that children acquire language purely through
interacting with the environment. RFT theorists introduced the concept of
functional contextualism in language learning, which emphasizes the importance
of predicting and influencing psychological events, such as thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors, by focusing on manipulable variables in their
context. RFT distinguishes itself from Skinner's work by identifying and
defining a particular type of operant conditioning known as derived relational
responding, a learning process that to date appears to occur only in humans
possessing a capacity for language. Empirical studies supporting the
predictions of RFT suggest that children learn language via a system of
inherent reinforcements, challenging the view that language acquisition is
based upon innate, language-specific cognitive capacities.[12]

## [edit] Emergentist theories

Emergentist theories, such as MacWhinney's Competition Model, posit that
language acquisition is a cognitive process that emerges from the interaction
of biological pressures and the environment. According to these theories,
neither nature nor nurture alone is sufficient to trigger language learning;
both of these influences must work together in order to allow children to
acquire a language. The proponents of these theories argue that general
cognitive processes subserve language acquisition and that the end result of
these processes is language-specific phenomena, such as word learning and
grammar acquisition. The findings of many empirical studies support the
predictions of these theories, suggesting that language acquisition is a more
complex process than many believe.[13]

## [edit] Criticism of nativist theories

Many criticisms of the basic assumptions of generative theory have been put
forth, with little response from its champions. The concept of a Language
Acquisition Device (LAD) is unsupported by evolutionary anthropology, which
shows a gradual adaptation of the human body to the use of language, rather
than a sudden appearance of a complete set of binary parameters (which are
common to digital computers but not to neurological systems such as a human
brain) delineating the whole spectrum of possible grammars ever to have
existed and ever to exist.

The theory has several hypothetical constructs, such as movement, empty
categories, complex underlying structures, and strict binary branching, that
cannot possibly be acquired from any amount of input. Since the theory is, in
essence, unlearnably complex, then it must be innate. A different theory of
language, however, may yield different conclusions. Examples of alternative
theories that do not utilize movement and empty categories are head-driven
phrase structure grammar, lexical functional grammar, and several varieties of
construction grammar. While all theories of language acquisition posit some
degree of innateness, a less convoluted theory might involve less innate
structure and more learning. Under such a theory of grammar, the input,
combined with both general and language-specific learning capacities, might be
sufficient for acquisition.

## [edit] See also

  * Language development
  * Language education
  * Language school
  * Language exchange
  * List of language acquisition researchers

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Chomsky, N. (1975). Reflections on Language. New York: Pantheon Books.
  2. ^ a b c Yang, Charles (2006). The Infinite Gift: How Children Learn and Unlearn All the Languages of the World. New York: Scribner.
  3. ^ a b c d e Pinker, Steven (1994). The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. New York: Harper Collins.
  4. ^ One Language or Two: Answers to Questions about Bilingualism in Language-Delayed Children
  5. ^ Bickerton, Derek (1990). Language and Species. United States: University of Chicago Press.
  6. ^ Seidenberg, Mark S.; J.L. McClelland (1989). "A distributed developmental model of word recognition and naming.". Psychological Review 96: 523-568. PMID 2798649.
  7. ^ Saffran, Jenny; R.N.Aslin, E.L. Newport (1996). "Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants.". Science 274: 1926-1928. PMID 8943209. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/274/5294/1926?ijkey=4tT5xXrt3zjSo. Retrieved on 23 December 2008.
  8. ^ Freudenthal, Daniel; J.M. Pine, F. Gobet (2005). "Modelling the development of children's use of optional infinitives in English and Dutch using MOSAIC.". Cognitive Science 30: 277-310. http://bura.brunel.ac.uk/bitstream/2438/731/1/oi-paper-all.pdf. Retrieved on 2 April 2009.
  9. ^ Jones, Gary; F. Gobet, J.M. Pine (2007). "Linking working memory and long-term memory: A computational model of the learning of new words.". Developmental Science 10: 853-873. http://bura.brunel.ac.uk/bitstream/2438/618/1/DevSci_revised-final.pdf. Retrieved on 2 April 2009.
  10. ^ Moerk, E.L. (1983). A behavioral analysis of controversial topics in first language acquisition: Reinforcements, corrections, modeling, input frequencies, and the three-term contingency pattern. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 12, 129-155
  11. ^ Moerk, E.L. (1994). Corrections in first language acquisition: Theorectial controversies and factual evidence. International Journal of Psycholinguistics, 10, 33-58
  12. ^ Steven C. Hayes, Dermot Barnes-Holmes, Brian Roche, ed (2001). Relational Frame Theory: A Post-Skinnerian Account of Human Language and Cognition (Hardcover). Plenum Press. ISBN 0-306-46600-7.
  13. ^ Brian MacWhinney, ed (1999). The Emergence of Language. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. ISBN 0-8058-3010-3.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language_acquisition"

Categories: Language acquisition | Linguistics | Applied linguistics

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-
marked weasel-worded phrases since September 2007 | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007
| Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since August 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaelg
  * Galego
  * Interlingua
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 14:30.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



