
# Hepatitis C

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This page is for the disease. For the virus, see Hepatitis C virus.

Hepatitis C  
Classification and external resources  
<IMG>  
Electron microscopy of hepatitis C virus  
ICD-10 B17.1, B18.2  
ICD-9 070.4, 070.5  
OMIM 609532  
DiseasesDB 5783  
MedlinePlus 000284  
eMedicine med/993 ped/979  
MeSH D006526  
Hepatitis C is an infectious disease affecting the liver, caused by the
hepatitis C virus (HCV).[1] The infection is often asymptomatic, but once
established, chronic infection can progress to scarring of the liver
(fibrosis), and advanced scarring (cirrhosis). In some cases, those with
cirrhosis will go on to develop liver failure or other complications of
cirrhosis, including liver cancer.[1]

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) is spread by blood-to-blood contact. Most people
have few symptoms after the initial infection, yet the virus persists in the
liver in about 80% of those infected. Persistent infection can be treated with
medication, such as interferon and ribavirin, and currently over half are
cured overall. Those who develop cirrhosis or liver cancer may require a liver
transplant, although the virus generally recurs after transplantion.

An estimated 150-200 million people worldwide are infected with hepatitis C.
Apart from humans, it only infects chimpanzees. No vaccine against hepatitis C
is available. The existence of hepatitis C (originally "non-A non-B
hepatitis") was postulated in the 1970s and proved conclusively in 1989. It is
one of five known hepatitis viruses: A, B, C, D, and E.

## Contents

  * 1 Signs and symptoms
    * 1.1 Acute
    * 1.2 Chronic
  * 2 Virology
    * 2.1 Transmission
    * 2.2 Vertical transmission
  * 3 Diagnosis
  * 4 Treatment
    * 4.1 During pregnancy and breastfeeding
    * 4.2 Alternative therapies
    * 4.3 Experimental treatments
  * 5 Epidemiology
    * 5.1 Co-infection with HIV
  * 6 Prevention
  * 7 History
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links
    * 10.1 Information and resources
    * 10.2 Organizations and programs

  
## [edit] Signs and symptoms

### [edit] Acute

Acute hepatitis C refers to the first 6 months after infection with HCV.
Between 60% to 70% of people infected develop no symptoms during the acute
phase. In the minority of patients who experience acute phase symptoms, they
are generally mild and nonspecific, and rarely lead to a specific diagnosis of
hepatitis C. Symptoms of acute hepatitis C infection include decreased
appetite, fatigue, abdominal pain, jaundice, itching, and flu-like symptoms.

The hepatitis C virus is usually detectable in the blood within one to three
weeks after infection by PCR, and antibodies to the virus are generally
detectable within 3 to 15 weeks. Approximately 15-40% of persons infected with
HCV clear the virus from their bodies during the acute phase as shown by
normalization in liver function tests (LFTs) such as alanine transaminase
(ALT) & aspartate transaminase (AST) normalization, as well as plasma HCV-RNA
clearance (this is known as spontaneous viral clearance). The remaining 60-85%
of patients infected with HCV develop chronic hepatitis C, i.e., infection
lasting more than 6 months.[2][3][4]

Previous practice was to not treat acute infections to see if the person would
spontaneously clear; recent studies have shown that treatment during the acute
phase of genotype 1 infections has a greater than 90% success rate with half
the treatment time required for chronic infections.[5]

### [edit] Chronic

Chronic hepatitis C is defined as infection with the hepatitis C virus
persisting for more than six months. Clinically, it is often asymptomatic
(without symptoms) and it is mostly discovered accidentally.

The natural course of chronic hepatitis C varies considerably from one person
to another. Virtually all people infected with HCV have evidence of
inflammation on liver biopsy, however, the rate of progression of liver
scarring (fibrosis) shows significant variability among individuals. Recent
data suggest that among untreated patients, roughly one-third progress to
liver cirrhosis in less than 20 years. Another third progress to cirrhosis
within 30 years. The remainder of patients appear to progress so slowly that
they are unlikely to develop cirrhosis within their lifetimes. Factors that
have been reported to influence the rate of HCV disease progression include
age (increasing age associated with more rapid progression), gender (males
have more rapid disease progression than females), alcohol consumption
(associated with an increased rate of disease progression), HIV coinfection
(associated with a markedly increased rate of disease progression), and fatty
liver (the presence of fat in liver cells has been associated with an
increased rate of disease progression).

Symptoms specifically suggestive of liver disease are typically absent until
substantial scarring of the liver has occurred. However, hepatitis C is a
systemic disease and patients may experience a wide spectrum of clinical
manifestations ranging from an absence of symptoms to a more symptomatic
illness prior to the development of advanced liver disease. Generalized signs
and symptoms associated with chronic hepatitis C include fatigue, flu-like
symptoms, joint pains, itching, sleep disturbances, appetite changes, nausea,
and depression.

Once chronic hepatitis C has progressed to cirrhosis, signs and symptoms may
appear that are generally caused by either decreased liver function or
increased pressure in the liver circulation, a condition known as portal
hypertension. Possible signs and symptoms of liver cirrhosis include ascites
(accumulation of fluid in the abdomen), bruising and bleeding tendency,
varices (enlarged veins, especially in the stomach and esophagus), jaundice,
and a syndrome of cognitive impairment known as hepatic encephalopathy.
Hepatic encephalopathy is due to the accumulation of ammonia and other
substances normally cleared by a healthy liver.

Liver function tests show variable elevation of ALT and AST. Periodically they
might show normal results. Usually prothrombin and albumin results are normal,
but may become abnormal, once cirrhosis has developed. The level of elevation
of liver tests do not correlate well with the amount of liver injury on
biopsy. Viral genotype and viral load also do not correlate with the amount of
liver injury. Liver biopsy is the best test to determine the amount of
scarring and inflammation. Radiographic studies such as ultrasound or CT scan
do not show liver injury until it is fairly advanced.

Chronic hepatitis C, more than other forms of hepatitis, can be associated
with extrahepatic manifestations associated with the presence of HCV such as
porphyria cutanea tarda, cryoglobulinemia (a form of small-vessel
vasculitis)[6] and glomerulonephritis (inflammation of the kidney),
specifically membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN).[7] Hepatitis C
is also rarely associated with sicca syndrome (an autoimmune disorder),
thrombocytopenia, lichen planus, diabetes mellitus and with B-cell
lymphoproliferative disorders.[8]

## [edit] Virology

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hepatitis C infection in the US by source. (CDC,n.d.[dead link])

Main article: Hepatitis C virus

The Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a small (50 nm in size), enveloped, single-
stranded, positive sense RNA virus. It is the only known member of the
hepacivirus genus in the family Flaviviridae. There are six major genotypes of
the hepatitis C virus, which are indicated numerically (e.g., genotype 1,
genotype 2, etc.).

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) is transmitted by blood-to-blood contact. In
developed countries, it is estimated that 90% of persons with chronic HCV
infection were infected through transfusion of unscreened blood or blood
products or via injecting drug use or, by inhalational drug use. Inhalational
drug usage (snorting) has evolved into one of the most common means of
infection in the United States. In developing countries, the primary sources
of HCV infection are unsterilized injection equipment and infusion of
inadequately screened blood and blood products. There has not been a
documented transfusion-related case of hepatitis C in the United States for
over a decade as the blood supply is vigorously screened with both EIA and PCR
technologies.

Although injection drug use and inhalational drugs are the most common routes
of HCV infection, any practice, activity, or situation that involves blood-to-
blood exposure can potentially be a source of HCV infection. The virus may be
sexually transmitted, although this is rare, and usually only occurs when an
STD (like HIV) is also present and makes blood contact more likely.[9].

### [edit] Transmission

Several activities and practices were initially identified as potential
sources of exposure to the hepatitis C virus. More recent studies question
this route of transmission. Currently it is felt to be a means of rare
transmission of hepatitis C infection.

Injection drug use

Those who currently use or have used drug injection as their delivery route
for illicit drugs are at increased risk for getting hepatitis C because they
may be sharing needles or other drug paraphernalia (includes cookers, cotton,
spoons, water, etc.), which may be contaminated with HCV-infected blood. An
estimated 60% to 80% of all IV drug users in the United States have been
infected with HCV.[10] Harm reduction strategies are encouraged in many
countries to reduce the spread of hepatitis C, through education, provision of
clean needles and syringes, and safer injecting techniques.

Drug use by nasal inhalation (Drugs that are "snorted")

Transmission of HCV is possible through the nasal inhalation (insuffulation)
of illegal drugs such as cocaine and crystal methamphetamine when straws
(containing even trace amounts of mucus and blood) are shared among users.[11]

Blood products

Blood transfusion, blood products, or organ transplantation prior to
implementation of HCV screening (in the U.S., this would refer to procedures
prior to 1992) is a decreasing risk factor for hepatitis C.

The virus was first isolated in 1989 and reliable tests to screen for the
virus were not available until 1992. Therefore, those who received blood or
blood products prior to the implementation of screening the blood supply for
HCV may have been exposed to the virus. Blood products include clotting
factors (taken by hemophiliacs), immunoglobulin, Rhogam, platelets, and
plasma. In 2001, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that
the risk of HCV infection from a unit of transfused blood in the United States
is less than one per million transfused units.

Iatrogenic medical or dental exposure

People can be exposed to HCV via inadequately or improperly sterilized medical
or dental equipment. Equipment that may harbor contaminated blood if
improperly sterilized includes needles or syringes, hemodialysis equipment,
oral hygiene instruments, and jet air guns, etc. Scrupulous use of appropriate
sterilization techniques and proper disposal of used equipment can reduce the
risk of iatrogenic exposure to HCV to virtually zero.

Occupational exposure to blood

Medical and dental personnel, first responders (e.g., firefighters,
paramedics, emergency medical technicians, law enforcement officers), and
military combat personnel can be exposed to HCV through accidental exposure to
blood through accidental needlesticks or blood spatter to the eyes or open
wounds. Universal precautions to protect against such accidental exposures
significantly reduce the risk of exposure to HCV.

Recreational exposure to blood

Contact sports and other activities, such as "slam dancing" that may result in
accidental blood-to-blood exposure are potential sources of exposure to
HCV.[12]

Sexual exposure

Sexual transmission of HCV is considered to be rare. Studies show the risk of
sexual transmission in heterosexual, monogamous relationships is extremely
rare or even null.[13][14] The CDC does not recommend the use of condoms
between long-term monogamous discordant couples (where one partner is positive
and the other is negative).[15] However, because of the high prevalence of
hepatitis C, this small risk may translate into a non-trivial number of cases
transmitted by sexual routes. Vaginal penetrative sex is believed to have a
lower risk of transmission than sexual practices that involve higher levels of
trauma to anogenital mucosa (anal penetrative sex, fisting, use of sex
toys).[16]

Body piercings and tattoos

Tattooing dyes, ink pots, stylets and piercing implements can transmit HCV-
infected blood from one person to another if proper sterilization techniques
are not followed. Tattoos or piercings performed before the mid 1980s,
"underground," or non-professionally are of particular concern since sterile
techniques in such settings may have been or be insufficient to prevent
disease. Despite these risks, it is rare for tattoos to be directly associated
with HCV infection and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's
position on this subject states that, "no data exist in the United States
indicating that persons with exposures to tattooing alone are at increased
risk for HCV infection."[17]

Shared personal care items

Personal care items such as razors, toothbrushes, cuticle scissors, and other
manicuring or pedicuring equipment can easily be contaminated with blood.
Sharing such items can potentially lead to exposure to HCV. Appropriate
caution should be taken regarding any medical condition which results in
bleeding such as canker sores, cold sores, and immediately after flossing.

HCV is not spread through casual contact such as hugging, kissing, or sharing
eating or cooking utensils.[18]

### [edit] Vertical transmission

Vertical transmission refers to the transmission of a communicable disease
from an infected mother to her child during the birth process. Mother-to-child
transmission of hepatitis C has been well described, but occurs relatively
infrequently. Transmission occurs only among women who are HCV RNA positive at
the time of delivery; the risk of transmission in this setting is
approximately 6 out of 100. Among women who are both HCV and HIV positive at
the time of delivery, the risk of transmitting HCV is increased to
approximately 25 out of 100.

The risk of vertical transmission of HCV does not appear to be associated with
method of delivery or breastfeeding.

## [edit] Diagnosis

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cirrhosis of the liver and liver cancer may ensue from hepatitis C.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Serologic profile of Hepatitis C infection

The diagnosis of "hepatitis C" is rarely made during the acute phase of the
disease because the majority of people infected experience no symptoms during
this phase of the disease. Those who do experience acute phase symptoms are
rarely ill enough to seek medical attention. The diagnosis of chronic phase
hepatitis C is also challenging due to the absence or lack of specificity of
symptoms until advanced liver disease develops, which may not occur until
decades into the disease.

Chronic hepatitis C may be suspected on the basis of the medical history
(particularly if there is any history of IV drug abuse or inhaled substance
usage such as cocaine), a history of piercings or tattoos, unexplained
symptoms, or abnormal liver enzymes or liver function tests found during
routine blood testing. Occasionally, hepatitis C is diagnosed as a result of
targeted screening such as blood donation (blood donors are screened for
numerous blood-borne diseases including hepatitis C) or contact tracing.

Hepatitis C testing begins with serological blood tests used to detect
antibodies to HCV. Anti-HCV antibodies can be detected in 80% of patients
within 15 weeks after exposure, in >90% within 5 months after exposure, and in
>97% by 6 months after exposure. Overall, HCV antibody tests have a strong
positive predictive value for exposure to the hepatitis C virus, but may miss
patients who have not yet developed antibodies (seroconversion), or have an
insufficient level of antibodies to detect. Rarely, people infected with HCV
never develop antibodies to the virus and therefore, never test positive using
HCV antibody screening. Because of this possibility, RNA testing (see nucleic
acid testing methods below) should be considered when antibody testing is
negative but suspicion of hepatitis C is high (e.g. because of elevated
transaminases in someone with risk factors for hepatitis C).

Anti-HCV antibodies indicate exposure to the virus, but cannot determine if
ongoing infection is present. All persons with positive anti-HCV antibody
tests must undergo additional testing for the presence of the hepatitis C
virus itself to determine whether current infection is present. The presence
of the virus is tested for using molecular nucleic acid testing methods such
as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), transcription mediated amplification
(TMA), or branched DNA (b-DNA). All HCV nucleic acid molecular tests have the
capacity to detect not only whether the virus is present, but also to measure
the amount of virus present in the blood (the HCV viral load). The HCV viral
load is an important factor in determining the probability of response to
interferon-based therapy, but does not indicate disease severity nor the
likelihood of disease progression.

In people with confirmed HCV infection, genotype testing is generally
recommended. HCV genotype testing is used to determine the required length and
potential response to interferon-based therapy.

## [edit] Treatment

There is a very small chance of clearing the virus spontaneously in chronic
HCV carriers (0.5 to 0.74% per year),[19][20] however, the majority of
patients with chronic hepatitis C will not clear it without treatment.

Current treatment is a combination of pegylated interferon alpha (brand names
Pegasys and PEG-Intron) and the antiviral drug ribavirin for a period of 24 or
48 weeks, depending on genotype. Indications for treatment include patients
with proven hepatitis C virus infection and persistent abnormal liver function
tests. Sustained cure rates (sustained viral response) of 75% or better occur
in people with genotypes HCV 2 and 3 in 24 weeks of treatment,[21] about 50%
in those with genotype 1 with 48 weeks of treatment and 65% for those with
genotype 4 in 48 weeks of treatment. About 80% of hepatitis C patients in the
United States have genotype 1. Genotype 4 is more common in the Middle East
and Africa. Should treatment with pegylated ribivirin-interferon not return a
2-log viral reduction or complete clearance of RNA (termed early virological
response) after 12 weeks for genotype 1, the chance of treatment success is
less than 1%. Early virological response is typically not tested for in non-
genotype 1 patients, as the chances of attaining it are greater than 90%. The
mechanism of action is not entirely clear, because even patients who appear to
have had a sustained virological response still have actively replicating
virus in their liver and peripheral blood mononuclear cells.[22]

The evidence for treatment in genotype 6 disease is currently sparse, and the
evidence that exists is for 48 weeks of treatment at the same doses as are
used for genotype 1 disease.[23] Physicians considering shorter durations of
treatment (e.g., 24 weeks) should do so within the context of a clinical
trial.

Treatment during the acute infection phase has much higher success rates
(greater than 90%) with a shorter duration of treatment; however, this must be
balanced against the 15-40% chance of spontaneous clearance without treatment
(see Acute Hepatitis C section above).

Those with low initial viral loads respond much better to treatment than those
with higher viral loads (greater than 400,000 IU/mL). Current combination
therapy is usually supervised by physicians in the fields of gastroenterology,
hepatology or infectious disease.

The treatment may be physically demanding, particularly for those with a prior
history of drug or alcohol abuse. It can qualify for temporary disability in
some cases. A substantial proportion of patients will experience a panoply of
side effects ranging from a 'flu-like' syndrome (the most common, experienced
for a few days after the weekly injection of interferon) to severe adverse
events including anemia, cardiovascular events and psychiatric problems such
as suicide or suicidal ideation. The latter are exacerbated by the general
physiological stress experienced by the patient.

Current guidelines strongly recommend that hepatitis C patients be vaccinated
for hepatitis A and B if they have not yet been exposed to these viruses, as
infection with a second virus could worsen their liver disease.

Alcoholic beverage consumption accelerates HCV associated fibrosis and
cirrhosis, and makes liver cancer more likely; insulin resistance and
metabolic syndrome may similarly worsen the hepatic prognosis. There is also
evidence that smoking increases the fibrosis (scarring) rate.

### [edit] During pregnancy and breastfeeding

If a pregnant woman has risk factors for hepatitis C, she should be tested for
antibodies against HCV. About 4% infants born to HCV infected women become
infected. There is no treatment that can prevent this from happening. There is
a high chance of the baby ridding the HCV in the first 12 months.

In a mother that also has HIV, the rate of transmission can be as high as 19%.
There are currently no data to determine whether antiviral therapy reduces
perinatal transmission. Ribavirin and interferons are contraindicated during
pregnancy. However, avoiding fetal scalp monitoring and prolonged labor after
rupture of membranes may reduce the risk of transmission to the infant.

HCV antibodies from the mother may persist in infants until 15 months of age.
If an early diagnosis is desired, testing for HCV RNA can be performed between
the ages of 2 and 6 months, with a repeat test done independent of the first
test result. If a later diagnosis is preferred, an anti-HCV test can performed
after 15 months of age. Most infants infected with HCV at the time of birth
have no symptoms and do well during childhood. There is no evidence that
breast-feeding spreads HCV. To be cautious, an infected mother should avoid
breastfeeding if her nipples are cracked and bleeding.[24]

### [edit] Alternative therapies

Several alternative therapies purport to maintain liver functionality, rather
than treat the virus itself, thereby slowing the course of the disease to
retain quality of life. As an example, extract of Silybum marianum and Sho-
saiko-to are sold for their HCV related effects; the first is said to provide
some generic help to hepatic functions, and the second claims to aid in liver
health and provide some antiviral effects.[25]. Unfortunately, there has never
been any verifiable histologic or virologic benefit demonstrated with any of
the alternative therapies.

### [edit] Experimental treatments

The drug viramidine, which is a prodrug of ribavirin that has better targeting
for the liver, and therefore may be more effective against hepatitis C for a
given tolerated dose, is in phase III experimental trials against hepatitis C.
It will be used in conjunction with interferons, in the same manner as
ribavirin. However, this drug is not expected to be active against ribavirin-
resistant strains, and the use of the drug against infections which have
already failed ribavirin/interferon treatment, is unproven.

There are new drugs under development like the protease inhibitors (including
VX 950) and polymerase inhibitors (such as NM 283), but development of some of
these is still in the early phase. VX 950, also known as Telaprevir[26] is
currently in Phase 3 Trials. [27][28] One protease inhibitor, BILN 2061, had
to be discontinued due to safety problems early in the clinical testing. Some
more modern new drugs that provide some support in treating HCV are Albuferon,
Zadaxin, and DAPY.[citation needed] Antisense phosphorothioate oligos have
been targeted to hepatitis C.[29] Antisense Morpholino oligos have shown
promise in preclinical studies[30] however, they were found to cause a limited
viral load reduction.

Immunoglobulins against the hepatitis C virus exist and newer types are under
development. Thus far, their roles have been unclear as they have not been
shown to help in clearing chronic infection or in the prevention of infection
with acute exposures (e.g. needlesticks). They do have a limited role in
transplant patients.

In addition to the standard treatment with interferon and ribavirin, some
studies have shown higher success rates when the antiviral drug amantadine
(Symmetrel) is added to the regimen. Sometimes called "triple therapy", it
involves the addition of 100 mg of amantadine twice a day. Studies indicate
that this may be especially helpful for "nonresponders" - patients who have
not been successful in previous treatments using interferon and ribavirin
only.[31] Currently, amantadine is not approved for treatment of Hepatitis C,
and studies are ongoing to determine when it is most likely to benefit the
patient. Followup studies have shown no benefit to adding this drug and
currently it is not commonly used by experienced hepatologists.

## [edit] Epidemiology

<IMG>

<IMG>

Prevalence of Hepatitis C worldwide (1999, WHO)

Hepatitis C infects nearly 200 million people worldwide and 4 million in the
United States.[32][33] There are about 35,000 to 185,000 new cases a year in
the United States, and hepatitis C is the leading cause of liver transplant in
the USA. Co-infection with HIV is common and rates among HIV positive
populations are higher. 10,000-20,000 deaths a year in the United States are
from HCV; expectations are that this mortality rate will increase, as those
who were infected by transfusion before HCV testing become apparent. A survey
conducted in California showed prevalence of up to 34% among prison
inmates;[34] 82% of subjects diagnosed with hepatitis C have previously been
in jail,[35] and transmission while in prison is well described.[36]

Prevalence is higher in some countries in Africa and Asia.[37] Egypt has the
highest seroprevalence for HCV, up to 20% in some areas. There is a hypothesis
that the high prevalence is linked to a now-discontinued mass-treatment
campaign for schistosomiasis, which is endemic in that country.[38] Regardless
of how the epidemic started, a high rate of HCV transmission continues in
Egypt, both iatrogenically and within the community and household.

### [edit] Co-infection with HIV

Approximately 350,000, or 35% of patients in the USA infected with HIV are
also infected with the hepatitis C virus, mainly because both viruses are
blood-borne and present in similar populations. In other countries co-
infection is less common, and this is possibly related to differing drug
policies.[citation needed] HCV is the leading cause of chronic liver disease
in the USA. It has been demonstrated in clinical studies that HIV infection
causes a more rapid progression of chronic hepatitis C to cirrhosis and liver
failure. This is not to say treatment is not an option for those living with
co-infection.

## [edit] Prevention

The following guidelines will prevent infection with the hepatitis C virus,
which is spread by blood:

  * Avoid sharing drug needles or any other drug paraphernalia including works for injection or bills or straws
  * Avoid unsanitary tattoo methods
  * Avoid unsanitary body piercing methods
  * Avoid unsanitary acupuncture
  * Avoid needlestick injury
  * Avoid sharing personal items such as toothbrushes, razors, and nail clippers.
  * Use latex condoms correctly and every time you have sex if not in a long-term monogamous relationship[39]

Proponents of harm reduction believe that strategies such as the provision of
new needles and syringes, and education about safer drug injection procedures,
greatly decreases the risk of hepatitis C spreading between injecting drug
users.

No vaccine protects against contracting hepatitis C, or helps to treat it.
Vaccines are under development and some have shown encouraging results.[40]

## [edit] History

In the mid 1970s, Harvey J. Alter, Chief of the Infectious Disease Section in
the Department of Transfusion Medicine at the National Institutes of Health,
and his research team demonstrated that most post-transfusion hepatitis cases
were not due to hepatitis A or B viruses. Despite this discovery,
international research efforts to identify the virus, initially called non-A,
non-B hepatitis (NANBH), failed for the next decade. In 1987, Michael
Houghton, Qui-Lim Choo, and George Kuo at Chiron Corporation, collaborating
with Dr. D.W. Bradley from CDC, utilized a novel molecular cloning approach to
identify the unknown organism.[41] In 1988, the virus was confirmed by Alter
by verifying its presence in a panel of NANBH specimens. In April of 1989, the
discovery of the virus, re-named hepatitis C virus (HCV), was published in two
articles in the journal Science. [42][43]

Chiron filed for several patents on the virus and its diagnosis.[44] A
competing patent application by the CDC was dropped in 1990 after Chiron paid
$1.9 million to the CDC and $337,500 to Bradley. In 1994 Bradley sued Chiron,
seeking to invalidate the patent, have himself included as a co-inventor, and
receive damages and royalty income. He dropped the suit in 1998 after losing
before an appeals court.[45]

In 2000, Drs. Alter and Houghton were honored with the Lasker Award for
Clinical Medical Research for "pioneering work leading to the discovery of the
virus that causes hepatitis C and the development of screening methods that
reduced the risk of blood transfusion-associated hepatitis in the U.S. from
30% in 1970 to virtually zero in 2000."[46]

In 2004 Chiron held 100 patents in 20 countries related to hepatitis C and had
successfully sued many companies for infringement. Scientists and competitors
have complained that the company hinders the fight against hepatitis C by
demanding too much money for its technology.[45]

## [edit] See also

  * List of people with hepatitis C
  * World Hepatitis Day

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Ryan KJ; Ray CG (editors) (2004). Sherris Medical Microbiology (4th ed. ed.). McGraw Hill. pp. 551â2. ISBN 0838585299.
  2. ^ Villano SA, Vlahov D, Nelson KE, Cohn S, Thomas DL (1999). "Persistence of viremia and the importance of long-term follow-up after acute hepatitis C infection". Hepatology 29 (3): 908â14. doi:10.1002/hep.510290311. PMID 10051497.
  3. ^ Cox AL, Netski DM, Mosbruger T, et al (2005). "Prospective evaluation of community-acquired acute-phase hepatitis C virus infection". Clin. Infect. Dis. 40 (7): 951â8. doi:10.1086/428578. PMID 15824985.
  4. ^ "NIH Consensus Development Conference on Management of Hepatitis C: 2002". http://consensus.nih.gov/2002/2002HepatitisC2002116main.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-22.
  5. ^ Jaeckel E, Cornberg M, Wedemeyer H, Santantonio T, Mayer J, Zankel M, Pastore G, Dietrich M, Trautwein C, Manns MP (November 2001). "Treatment of acute hepatitis C with interferon alfa-2b". New England Journal of Medicine 345 (20): 1452â1457. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa011232. PMID 11794193.
  6. ^ Pascual M, Perrin L, Giostra E, Schifferli J (1990). "Hepatitis C virus in patients with cryoglobulinemia type II.". J Infect Dis 162 (2): 569â70. PMID 2115556.
  7. ^ Johnson R, Gretch D, Yamabe H, Hart J, Bacchi C, Hartwell P, Couser W, Corey L, Wener M, Alpers C (1993). "Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis associated with hepatitis C virus infection.". N Engl J Med 328 (7): 465â70. doi:10.1056/NEJM199302183280703. PMID 7678440.
  8. ^ Zignego AL, Ferri C, Pileri SA, Caini P, Bianchi FB; for the Italian Association of the Study of Liver (A.I.S.F.) Commission on Extrahepatic Manifestations of HCV infection (2006). "Extrahepatic manifestations of Hepatitis C Virus infection: A general overview and guidelines for a clinical approach". Dig Liver Dis.: E-publication. PMID 16884964.
  9. ^ What is hepatitis?, Planned Parenthood, accessed May 15, 2007
  10. ^ "HCV Prevalence in Selected Groups of Adults by History of Injection Drug Use". http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/hepatitis/partners/nvhpc_2005/Thursday/PL4Alter.ppt. Retrieved on 2008-06-03.
  11. ^ Thompson S, Hernberger F, Wale E, Crofts N (1996). "Hepatitis C transmission through tattooing: a case report". Aust N Z J Public Health 20 (3): 317â8. doi:10.1111/j.1467-842X.1996.tb01035.x. PMID 8768424.
  12. ^ Karmochkine M, Carrat F, Dos Santos O, Cacoub P, Raguin G (2006). "A case-control study of risk factors for hepatitis C infection in patients with unexplained routes of infection". J. Viral Hepat. 13 (11): 775â82. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2893.2006.00742.x. PMID 17052278.
  13. ^ Vandelli C, Renzo F, RomanÃ² L, et al (May 2004). "Lack of evidence of sexual transmission of hepatitis C among monogamous couples: results of a 10-year prospective follow-up study". Am J Gastroenterol. 99 (5): 855â9. doi:10.1111/j.1572-0241.2004.04150.x. PMID 15128350.
  14. ^ Hepatitis Central News, Updates and Commentary
  15. ^ Hepatitis C: FAQ | CDC Viral Hepatitis
  16. ^ Hahn JA (2007). "Sex, Drugs, and Hepatitis C Virus". J Infect Dis 195: 1556â9. doi:10.1086/516792. PMID 17471423.
  17. ^ "Hepatitis C: Tattoo". http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/hepatitis/c/tattoo.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-18.
  18. ^ "Hepatitis C: FAQ". http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/hepatitis/c/faq.htm#5d. Retrieved on 2008-06-13.
  19. ^ Watanabe H, Saito T, Shinzawa H, Okumoto K, Hattori E, Adachi T, Takeda T, Sugahara K, Ito J, Saito K, Togashi H, Suzuki R, Hayashi M, Miyamura T, Matsuura Y, Kawata S (2003). "Spontaneous elimination of serum hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA in chronic HCV carriers: a population-based cohort study". J Med Virol 71 (1): 56â61. doi:10.1002/jmv.10448. PMID 12858409.
  20. ^ Scott J, McMahon B, Bruden D, Sullivan D, Homan C, Christensen C, Gretch D (2006). "High rate of spontaneous negativity for hepatitis C virus RNA after establishment of chronic infection in Alaska Natives". Clin Infect Dis 42 (7): 945â52. doi:10.1086/500938. PMID 16511757.
  21. ^ Shiffman ML, Suter F, Bacon BR, et al. (2007). "Peginterferon Alfa-2a and Ribavirin for 16 or 24 weeks in HCV genotype 2 or 3". N Engl J Med 357 (2): 124â34. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa066403. PMID 17625124. http://content.nejm.org/cgi/content/short/357/2/124?query=TOC.
  22. ^ Castillo I, Rodriguez-IÃ±igo E, LÃ³pez-Alcorocho JM, et al. (2006). "Hepatitis C virus replicates in the liver of patients who have a sustained response to antiviral treatment". Clin Infect Dis 43 (10): 1277â83. doi:10.1086/508198.
  23. ^ Fung J, Lai C-L, Hung I, et al. (2008). "Chronic Hepatitis C virus genotype 6 infection: Response to pegylated interferon and ribavirin". J Infect Dis 198: 808â12. doi:10.1086/591252. PMID 18657036.
  24. ^ Mast E (2004). "Mother-to-infant hepatitis C virus transmission and breastfeeding.". Adv Exp Med Biol 554: 211â6. PMID 15384578.
  25. ^ NCCAM. Hepatitis C and Complementary and Alternative Medicine: 2003 Update. May 2004. Accessed 2007-02-25.
  26. ^ Telaprevir. [1]
  27. ^ Hinrichsen H, Benhamou Y, Wedemeyer H, Reiser M, Sentjens R, Calleja J, Forns X, Erhardt A, CrÃ¶nlein J, Chaves R, Yong C, Nehmiz G, Steinmann G (2004). "Short-term antiviral efficacy of BILN 2061, a hepatitis C virus serine protease inhibitor, in hepatitis C genotype 1 patients.". Gastroenterology 127 (5): 1347â55. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2004.08.002. PMID 15521004.
  28. ^ Lamarre D, Anderson P, Bailey M, Beaulieu P, Bolger G, Bonneau P, BÃ¶s M, Cameron D, Cartier M, Cordingley M, Faucher A, Goudreau N, Kawai S, Kukolj G, LagacÃ© L, LaPlante S, Narjes H, Poupart M, Rancourt J, Sentjens R, St George R, Simoneau B, Steinmann G, Thibeault D, Tsantrizos Y, Weldon S, Yong C, LlinÃ s-Brunet M (2003). "An NS3 protease inhibitor with antiviral effects in humans infected with hepatitis C virus.". Nature 426 (6963): 186â9. doi:10.1038/nature02099. PMID 14578911 doi = 10.1038/nature02099.
  29. ^ Zhang H, Hanecak R, Brown-Driver V, Azad R, Conklin B, Fox M, Anderson K (01 Feb 1999). "Antisense oligonucleotide inhibition of hepatitis C virus (HCV) gene expression in livers of mice infected with an HCV-vaccinia virus recombinant.". Antimicrob Agents Chemother 43 (2): 347â53. PMID 9925530. http://aac.asm.org/cgi/content/full/43/2/347?view=long&pmid=9925530.
  30. ^ McCaffrey A, Meuse L, Karimi M, Contag C, Kay M (2003). "A potent and specific morpholino antisense inhibitor of hepatitis C translation in mice.". Hepatology 38 (2): 503â8. doi:10.1053/jhep.2003.50330. PMID 12883495.
  31. ^ Maynard M, Pradat P, Bailly F, Rozier F, Nemoz C, Si Ahmed S, Adeleine P, TrÃ©po C (2006). "Amantadine triple therapy for non-responder hepatitis C patients. Clues for controversies (ANRS HC 03 BITRI).". J Hepatol 44 (3): 484â90. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2005.11.038. PMID 16426697.
  32. ^ Hepatitis C, WHO
  33. ^ Hepatitis C Infection, The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
  34. ^ Ruiz J, Molitor F, Plagenhoef J (2002). "Trends in hepatitis C and HIV infection among inmates entering prisons in California, 1994 versus 1999.". AIDS 16 (16): 2236â8. doi:10.1097/00002030-200211080-00023. PMID 12409752.
  35. ^ Campbell J, Hagan H, Latka M, Garfein R, Golub E, Coady M, Thomas D, Strathdee S (2006). "High prevalence of alcohol use among hepatitis C virus antibody positive injection drug users in three US cities.". Drug Alcohol Depend 81 (3): 259â65. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2005.07.005. PMID 16129567.
  36. ^ McGovern B, Wurcel A, Kim A, Schulze zur Wiesch J, Bica I, Zaman M, Timm J, Walker B, Lauer G (2006). "Acute hepatitis C virus infection in incarcerated injection drug users.". Clin Infect Dis 42 (12): 1663â70. doi:10.1086/504327. PMID 16705568.
  37. ^ Chapter 4 - Hepatitis, Viral, Type C - Yellow Book, CDC Health Information for International Travel 2008
  38. ^ Frank C, Mohamed M, Strickland G, Lavanchy D, Arthur R, Magder L, El Khoby T, Abdel-Wahab Y, Aly Ohn E, Anwar W, Sallam I (2000). "The role of parenteral antischistosomal therapy in the spread of hepatitis C virus in Egypt.". Lancet 355 (9207): 887â91. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(99)06527-7. PMID 10752705.
  39. ^ "Hepatitis C: Fact Sheet". http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/hepatitis/c/fact.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  40. ^ Manns MP, Foster GR, Rockstroh JK, Zeuzem S, Zoulim F, Houghton M (2007). "The way forward in HCV treatmentâfinding the right path". Nat Rev Drug Discov 6 (12): 991â1000. doi:10.1038/nrd2411. PMID 18049473.
  41. ^ 2000 Albert Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research, The Lasker Foundation. Accessed 20 February 2008
  42. ^ Choo Q, Kuo G, Weiner A, Overby L, Bradley D, Houghton M (1989). "Isolation of a cDNA clone derived from a blood-borne non-A, non-B viral hepatitis genome.". Science 244 (4902): 359â62. doi:10.1126/science.2523562. PMID 2523562.
  43. ^ Kuo G, Choo Q, Alter H, Gitnick G, Redeker A, Purcell R, Miyamura T, Dienstag J, Alter M, Stevens C (1989). "An assay for circulating antibodies to a major etiologic virus of human non-A, non-B hepatitis.". Science 244 (4902): 362â4. doi:10.1126/science.2496467. PMID 2496467.
  44. ^ Houghton, M., Q.-L. Choo, and G. Kuo. NANBV Diagnostics and Vaccines. European Patent No. EP-0-3 18-216-A1. European Patent Office (filed 18 November 1988, published 31 May 1989).
  45. ^ a b Paul Elias. ""Hepatitis Drug-Maker Complaints Reviewed", The Associated Press, 27 February 2004
  46. ^ 2000 Winners Albert Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research, The Lasker Foundation. Accessed 20 February 2008.

## [edit] External links

### [edit] Information and resources

  * CDC's Hepatitis C Fact Sheet
  * Hepatitis C at the Open Directory Project
  * "What I need to know about Hepatitis C". National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. May 2004. http://digestive.niddk.nih.gov/ddiseases/pubs/hepc_ez/.

### [edit] Organizations and programs

  * National Hepatitis C Program U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
  * Hepatitis Australia Hepatitis Australia
  * Hepatitis C homepage of the UK National Health Service
  * National Canadian Research Training Program in Hepatitis C Training program funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Infectious diseases Â· Viral diseases (A80-B34, 042-079)  
Oncovirus

DNA virus: HBV (Hepatocellular carcinoma) Â· HPV (Cervical cancer) Â· Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (Kaposi's sarcoma) Â· Epstein-Barr virus
(Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Burkitt's lymphoma) Â· MCPyV (Merkel cell cancer)
Â· SV40  
RNA virus: HCV (Hepatocellular carcinoma) Â· HTLV-I (Adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma)  
Immune disorders

RNA virus: HIV (AIDS)  
Central nervous system

Encephalitis/  
meningitis

DNA virus: JCV (Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy)  
RNA virus: MeV (Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis) Â· LCV (Lymphocytic
choriomeningitis) Â· Arbovirus encephalitis Â· Orthomyxoviridae (probable)
(Encephalitis lethargica) Â· RV (Rabies)  
Myelitis

RNA virus: Poliovirus (Poliomyelitis, Post-polio syndrome) Â· HTLV-I (Tropical
spastic paraparesis)  
Eye

DNA virus: Cytomegalovirus (Cytomegalovirus retinitis)  
Cardiovascular

CBV (Pericarditis, Myocarditis)  
Respiratory system/  
acute viral nasopharyngitis/  
viral pneumonia

DNA virus

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV infection/Infectious mononucleosis) Â· Cytomegalovirus  
RNA virus

IV: SARS coronavirus (Severe acute respiratory syndrome)  

V, Orthomyxoviridae: Influenzavirus A/B/C (Influenza/Avian influenza)

V, Paramyxovirus: Human parainfluenza viruses (Parainfluenza) Â· RSV Â· hMPV  
Digestive system

Oropharynx

MuV (Mumps)  
Gastroenteritis/  
diarrhea

DNA virus: Adenovirus (Adenovirus infection)  
RNA virus: Rotavirus Â· Norovirus Â· Astrovirus Â· Coronavirus  
Hepatitis

DNA virus: HBV (B)  
RNA virus: CBV Â· HAV (A) Â· HCV (C) Â· HDV (D) Â· HEV (E) Â· HGV (G)  
Pancreatitis

RNA virus: CBV  
Skin and mucous membrane  
lesions, including exanthem

DNA virus

Herpesviridae

HSV (Herpes simplex, Herpetic whitlow) Â· VZV (Chickenpox, Herpes zoster) Â·
Human herpesvirus 6/Roseolovirus (Exanthema subitum) Â· KSHV (Kaposi's
sarcoma) Â· Herpes B Virus  
Poxviridae

Variola (Smallpox) Â· MoxV (Monkeypox) Â· CV (Cowpox) Â· VV (Vaccinia) Â· MCV
(Molluscum contagiosum)  
Other

HPV (Wart/Plantar wart) Â· Parvovirus B19 (Erythema infectiosum,
Reticulocytopenia)  
RNA virus

MeV (Measles) Â· Rubella virus (Rubella, Congenital rubella syndrome)  
picornavirus: CAV (Hand, foot and mouth disease, Herpangina) Â· FMDV (Foot-
and-mouth disease)  
Urogenital

BK virus Â· MuV (Mumps)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Digestive system Â· Digestive disease Â· Gastroenterology (primarily K20-K93,
530-579)  
Upper GI tract

Esophagus

Esophagitis (Candidal) Â· rupture (Boerhaave syndrome, Mallory-Weiss syndrome)
Â· UES (Zenker's diverticulum) Â· LES (Barrett's esophagus) Â· Esophageal
motility disorder (Nutcracker esophagus, Achalasia, Diffuse esophageal spasm,
GERD) Â· Esophageal stricture Â· Megaesophagus  
Stomach

Gastritis (Atrophic, MÃ©nÃ©trier's disease, Gastroenteritis) Â· Peptic
(gastric) ulcer (Cushing ulcer, Dieulafoy's lesion) Â· Dyspepsia Â· Pyloric
stenosis Â· Achlorhydria Â· Gastroparesis Â· Gastroptosis Â· Portal
hypertensive gastropathy Â· Gastric antral vascular ectasia Â· Gastric dumping
syndrome Â· Gastric volvulus  
Intestinal/  
enteropathy

Small intestine/  
(duodenum/jejunum/ileum)

Enteritis (Duodenitis, Jejunitis, Ileitis) â Peptic (duodenal) ulcer
(Curling's ulcer) â Malabsorption: Coeliac Â· Tropical sprue Â· Blind loop
syndrome Â· Whipple's Â· Short bowel syndrome Â· Steatorrhea Â· Milroy disease  
Large intestine  
(appendix/colon)

Appendicitis Â· Colitis (Pseudomembranous, Ulcerative, Ischemic, Microscopic,
Collagenous, Lymphocytic) Â· Functional colonic disease (IBS, Intestinal
pseudoobstruction/Ogilvie syndrome) â Megacolon/Toxic megacolon Â·
Diverticulitis/Diverticulosis  
Large and/or small

Enterocolitis (Necrotizing) Â· IBD (Crohn's disease) â vascular: Abdominal
angina Â· Mesenteric ischemia Â· Angiodysplasia â Bowel obstruction: Ileus
Â· Intussusception Â· Volvulus Â· Fecal impaction â Constipation Â· Diarrhea
(Infectious)  
Rectum/anus

Proctitis (Radiation proctitis) Â· Proctalgia fugax Â· Rectal prolapse Â· Anal
fissure/Anal fistula Â· Anal abscess  
Accessory

Liver

Hepatitis (Viral hepatitis, Autoimmune hepatitis, Alcoholic hepatitis) Â·
Cirrhosis (PBC) Â· Fatty liver (NASH) Â· vascular (Hepatic veno-occlusive
disease, Portal hypertension, Nutmeg liver) Â· Alcoholic liver disease Â·
Liver failure (Hepatic encephalopathy, Acute liver failure) Â· Liver abscess
(Pyogenic, Amoebic) Â· Hepatorenal syndrome Â· Peliosis hepatis  
Gallbladder

Cholecystitis Â· Gallstones/Cholecystolithiasis Â· Cholesterolosis Â·
Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses Â· Postcholecystectomy syndrome  
Bile duct/  
other biliary tree

Cholangitis (PSC, Secondary sclerosing cholangitis, Ascending) Â·
Cholestasis/Mirizzi's syndrome Â· Biliary fistula Â· Haemobilia Â·
Gallstones/Cholelithiasis  
common bile duct (Choledocholithiasis, Biliary dyskinesia)  
Pancreatic

Pancreatitis (Acute, Chronic, Hereditary) Â· Pancreatic pseudocyst Â· Exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency Â· Pancreatic fistula  
Hernia

Diaphragmatic: Congenital diaphragmatic Â· Hiatus â Abdominal hernia:
Inguinal (Indirect, Direct) Â· Umbilical Â· Incisional Â· Femoral â
Obturator hernia Â· Spigelian hernia Â· Internal hernia  
Peritoneal

Peritonitis (Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis) Â· Hemoperitoneum Â·
Pneumoperitoneum  
GI bleeding/BIS

Upper (Hematemesis, Melena) Â· Lower (Hematochezia)  
See also: congenital and neoplasia  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hepatitis_C"

Categories: Hepatitis

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since March 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 14:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



