
# Fight-or-flight response

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2007)  
<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(November 2008)  
<IMG>

It has been suggested that Prey drive#Fight or Flight be merged into this
article or section. (Discuss)  
The fight-or-flight response, also called the fright, fight or flight
response, hyperarousal or the acute stress response, was first described by
Walter Cannon in 1915.[1][2] His theory states that animals react to threats
with a general discharge of the sympathetic nervous system, priming the animal
for fighting or fleeing. This response was later recognized as the first stage
of a general adaptation syndrome that regulates stress responses among
vertebrates and other organisms.

## Contents

  * 1 Biology of the stress response
  * 2 Physiology of the stress response
  * 3 Psychology of the stress response
  * 4 Behavioral manifestations of fight-or-flight
  * 5 Negative effects of the stress response in humans
  * 6 See also
  * 7 External links
  * 8 References

  
## [edit] Biology of the stress response

Normally, when a person is in a serene, unstimulated state, the "firing" of
neurons in the locus ceruleus is minimal. A novel stimulus (which could
include a perception of danger or an environmental stressor such as elevated
sound levels or over-illumination), once perceived, is relayed from the
sensory cortex of the brain through the hypothalamus to the brain stem. That
route of signaling increases the rate of noradrenergic activity in the locus
ceruleus, and the person becomes alert and attentive to the environment.
Similarly, an abundance of catecholamines at neuroreceptor sites facilitates
reliance on spontaneous or intuitive behaviors often related to combat or
escape (White flag 2009).

If a stimulus is perceived as a threat, a more intense and prolonged discharge
of the locus ceruleus activates the sympathetic division of the autonomic
nervous system (Thase & Howland, 1995). This activation is associated with
specific physiological actions in the system, both directly and indirectly
through the release of epinephrine (adrenaline) and to a lesser extent
norepinephrine from the medulla of the adrenal glands. The release is
triggered by acetylcholine released from preganglionic sympathetic nerves. The
other major factor in the acute stress response is the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis (Sternberg 2001).

## [edit] Physiology of the stress response

These catecholamine hormones facilitate immediate physical reactions
associated with a preparation for violent muscular action. (Gleitman, et al,
2008) These include the following:

  * Acceleration of heart and lung action
  * Paling or flushing, or alternating between both
  * Inhibition of stomach and upper-intestinal action (digestion slows down or stops)
  * General effect on the sphincters of the body
  * Constriction of blood vessels in many parts of the body
  * Liberation of nutrients for muscular action
  * Dilation of blood vessels for muscles
  * Inhibition of Lacrimal gland (responsible for tear production) and salivation
  * Dilation of pupil
  * Relaxation of bladder
  * Evacuation of colon
  * Inhibition of erection
  * Auditory Exclusion (loss of hearing)
  * Tunnel Vision (loss of peripheral vision)
  * Acceleration of instantaneous reflexes

## [edit] Psychology of the stress response

A typical example of the stress response is a grazing zebra, calmly
maintaining homeostasis. If the zebra sees a lion closing in for the kill, the
stress response is activated. The escape requires intense muscular effort,
supported by all of the bodyâs systems. The sympathetic nervous systemâs
activation provides for these needs. A similar example involving fight is of a
cat about to be attacked by a dog. The cat shows accelerated heartbeat,
piloerection (hair standing on end, normally for conservation of heat), and
pupil dilation, all signs of sympathetic arousal (Gleitman et al, 2004).

Though Cannon, who first proposed the idea of fight-or-flight, provided
considerable evidence of these responses in various animals, it subsequently
became apparent that his theory of response was too simplistic. Animals
respond to threats in many complex ways. Rats, for instance, try to escape
when threatened, but will fight when cornered. Some animals stand perfectly
still so that predators will not see them. Many animals freeze or play dead
when touched in the hope that the predator will lose interest. Others have
more exotic self-protection methods. Some species of fish change color
swiftly, to camouflage themselves. These responses are triggered by the
sympathetic nervous system, but in order to fit the model of fight or flight,
the idea of flight must be broadened to include escaping capture in either a
physical way or in a sensory way. Thus, flight can be disappearing to another
location or just disappearing in place. And often both fight and flight are
combined in a given situation.

The fight or flight actions also have polarity - the individual can fight or
fly against or away from something that is threatening, such as a hungry lion,
or fight or fly for or towards something that is needed, such as the safety of
the shore of a raging river.

A threat from another animal does not always result in immediate fight or
flight. There may be a period of heightened awareness, during which each
animal interprets behavioral signals from the other. Signs such as paling,
piloerection, immobility, sounds, and body language communicate the status and
intentions of each animal. There may be a sort of negotiation, after which
fight or flight may ensue, but which might also result in playing, mating, or
nothing at all. An example of this is kittens playing: each kitten shows the
signs of sympathetic arousal, but they never inflict real damage.

## [edit] Behavioral manifestations of fight-or-flight

In prehistoric times when the fight or flight response evolved, fight was
manifested in aggressive, combative behavior and flight was manifested by
fleeing potentially threatening situations, such as being confronted by a
predator. In current times, these responses persist, but fight and flight
responses have assumed a wider range of behaviors. For example, the fight
response may be manifested in angry, argumentative behavior, and the flight
response may be manifested through social withdrawal, substance abuse, and
even television viewing (Friedman & Silver 2007).

Males and females tend to deal with stressful situations differently. Males
are more likely to respond to an emergency situation with aggression (fight),
while females are more likely to flee (flight) turn to others for help, or
attempt to diffuse the situation -'tend and befriend'. During stressful times,
a mother is especially likely to show protective responses toward her
offspring and affiliate with others for shared social responses to threat
(Taylor et al, 2000).

## [edit] Negative effects of the stress response in humans

Although the stress response is valuable potentially vital, in modern humans
it can be disruptive and unneeded.[citation needed] Living in modern
societies, humans do not frequently encounter emergencies that require large
amounts of physical effort, yet the human body still provides stress responses
to these emergencies. Humans sometimes may find their stress response
activated in situations where physical action is inappropriate and/or
unnecessary. Inappropriate activation of the stress response in humans can
cause negative physiological and psychological effects.

<IMG>

This section may stray from the topic of the article. Please help improve this
section or discuss this issue on the talk page.  
The stress response halts or slows down various processes such as sexual
responses and digestive systems to focus on the stressor situation and
typically causes negative effects like, constipation, anorexia, erectile
dysfunction, difficulty urinating, and difficulty maintaining sexual
arousal.[citation needed]. These are functions which are controlled by the
parasympathetic nervous system and therefore suppressed by sympathetic
arousal. Prolonged stress responses may result in chronic suppression of the
immune system, leaving the body open to infections, however there is a short
boost of the immune system shortly after the fight or flight response has been
activated. This is due to an ancient need to fight the infections in a wound
that one may have recieved during interaction with a predator.[citation
needed].Stress responses are sometimes a result of mental disorders such as
post-traumatic stress disorder, in which the individual shows a stress
response when remembering a past trauma, and panic disorder, in which the
stress response is activated by the catastrophic misinterpretations of bodily
sensations.

## [edit] See also

  * Adrenaline rush
  * Acute stress reaction
  * Defense Physiology
  * Emotional dysregulation
  * Panic attack
  * Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
  * Rest and digest
  * Stressor
  * Tend and befriend
  * Vasoconstriction

## [edit] External links

  * Anatomy and Physiology I notes from Owensboro community college.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ harvardsquarelibrary: W. B. Cannon Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage: An Account of Recent Researches into the Function of Emotional Excitement, Appleton, New York, 1915
  2. ^ Cannon, Walter (1929). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear, and rage. New York: Appleton.

  * Friedman, H. S., & Silver, R. C. (Eds.) (2007). Foundations of Health Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
  * Taylor, S.E., Klein, L.C., Lewis, B.P., Gruenewald, T.L., Gurung, R.A.R., & Updegraff, J.A. (2000). Biobehavioral responses to stress in females: Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-flight. Psychological Review, 107, 411-429.
  * Thase, M.E.; R.H. Howland (1995). "Biological processes in depression: An updated review and integration". in Beckham & Leber. Handbook of Depression. NY: Guilford Press.
  * Gleitman, Henry; Alan J. Fridlund, Daniel Reisberg (2004). Psychology (6 ed.). NY: Norton. ISBN 0-393-97767-6.
  * Sapolsky, Robert M., 1994. Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers. W.H. Freeman and Company.
  * Sternberg, Esther, 2001. The Balance Within: The Science Connecting Health and Emotions. W.H. Freeman and Company, 76,77,96-98.

This article incorporates text from
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/mentalhealth/chapter4/sec2_1.html, a
public domain work of the United States Government.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fight-or-flight_response"

Categories: Wikipedia articles with off-topic sections | Nervous system |
Sympathetic nervous system | Stress | Anxiety

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2007 |
Articles that may contain original research since November 2008 | All articles
that may contain original research | Articles to be merged since February 2008
| All articles to be merged | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Wikipedia articles
incorporating text from public domain works of the United States Government

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 21:54 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



