
# Popular culture

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Popular culture (commonly abbreviated as pop culture or pop cult) is the
totality of distinct memes, ideas, perspectives and attitudes that are deemed
preferred per an informal consensus within the mainstream of a given culture.
Heavily influenced by mass media (at least from the early 20th century on) and
perpetuated by that culture's vernacular language, this collection of ideas
permeates the everyday lives of the society. Popular culture is often viewed
as being trivial and "dumbed-down" in order to find consensual acceptance
throughout the mainstream. As a result of this perception, it comes under
heavy criticism from various scientific and non-mainstream sources (most
notably religious groups and countercultural groups) which deem it
superficial, consumerist, sensationalist and
corrupted.[1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10]

It is manifest in preferences and acceptance or rejection of features in such
various subjects as cooking, clothing, consumption, and the many facets of
entertainment such as sports, music, film and literature. Popular culture
often contrasts with a more exclusive, even elitist "high culture",[11] that
is, the culture of ruling social groups.[12] The earliest use of "popular" in
English was during the fifteenth century in law and politics, meaning "low",
"base", "vulgar", and "of the common people" 'til the late eighteenth century
by which time it began to mean "widespread" and gain in positive connotation.
(Williams 1985). "Culture" has been used since the 1950s to refer to various
subgroups of society, with emphasis on cultural differences.[13]

## Contents

  * 1 Definitions
    * 1.1 Institutional propagation
    * 1.2 Folklore
  * 2 Popular culture in popular culture
    * 2.1 Examples from American television
  * 3 See also
  * 4 Notes
  * 5 References

  
## [edit] Definitions

Sister project Look up popular culture in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
The meaning of popular and the meaning of culture are essentially contested
concepts and there are multiple competing definitions of popular culture. John
Storey, in Cultural Theory and Popular Culture, discusses six definitions. The
quantitative definition, of culture has the problem that much "high" culture
(e.g. television dramatisations of Jane Austen) is widely favoured. "Pop
culture" can also be defined as the culture that is "left over" when we have
decided what "high culture" is. However, many works straddle or cross the
boundaries e.g. William Shakespeare, Charles Dickens, Puccini-Verdi-
Pavarotti\- Nessun Dorma. Storey draws attention to the forces and relations
which sustain this difference such as the educational system.

A third definition equates pop culture with Mass Culture. This is seen as a
commercial culture, mass produced for mass consumption. From a U.K. (and
European) point of view, this may be equated to American culture.
Alternatively, "pop culture" can be defined as an "authentic" culture of the
people, but this can be problematic because there are many ways of defining
the "people." Storey argues that there is a political dimension to popular
culture; neo-Gramscian hegemony theory "... sees popular culture as a site of
struggle between the 'resistance' of subordinate groups in society and the
forces of 'incorporation' operating in the interests of dominant groups in
society." A postmodernism approach to popular culture would "no longer
recognise the distinction between high and popular culture'

Storey emphasises that popular culture emerges from the urbanisation of the
industrial revolution, which identifies the term with the usual definitions of
'mass culture'. Studies of Shakespeare (by Weimann, Barber or Bristol, for
example) locate much of the characteristic vitality of his drama in its
participation in Renaissance popular culture, while contemporary practitioners
like Dario Fo and John McGrath use popular culture in its Gramscian sense that
includes ancient folk traditions (the commedia dell'arte for example).

Popular culture changes constantly and occurs uniquely in place and time. It
forms currents and eddies, and represents a complex of mutually-interdependent
perspectives and values that influence society and its institutions in various
ways. For example, certain currents of pop culture may originate from, (or
diverge into) a subculture, representing perspectives with which the
mainstream popular culture has only limited familiarity. Items of popular
culture most typically appeal to a broad spectrum of the public.

### [edit] Institutional propagation

> Popular culture and the mass media have a symbiotic relationship: each
depends on the other in an intimate collaboration."

> âK. Turner (1984), p.4[14]

The news media mines the work of scientists and scholars and conveys it to the
general public, often emphasizing "factoids" that have inherent appeal or the
power to amaze.[citation needed] For instance, giant pandas (a species in
remote Chinese woodlands) have become well-known items of popular culture;
parasitic worms, though of greater practical importance, have not. Both
scholarly facts and news stories get modified through popular transmission,
often to the point of outright falsehoods.

Hannah Arendt's 1961 essay 'The Crisis in Culture' suggested that a "market-
driven media would lead to the displacement of culture by the dictates of
entertainment."[15] Susan Sontag argues that in our culture, the most
"...intelligible, persuasive values are [increasingly] drawn from the
entertainment industries", which is "undermining of standards of seriousness."
As a result, "tepid, the glib, and the senselessly cruel" topics are becoming
the norm.[15] Some critics argue that popular culture is âdumbing downâ:
"...newspapers that once ran foreign news now feature celebrity gossip,
pictures of scantily dressed young ladies...television has replaced high-
quality drama with gardening, cookery, and other âlifestyleâ
programmes...[and] reality TV and asinine soaps," to the point that people are
constantly immersed in trivia about celebrity culture.[15]

In Rosenberg and White's book Mass Culture, MacDonald argues that " Popular
culture is a debased, trivial culture that voids both the deep realities (sex,
death, failure, tragedy) and also the simple spontaneous pleasures. . . . The
masses, debauched by several generations of this sort of thing, in turn come
to demand trivial and comfortable cultural products."[15] Van den Haag argues
that "...all mass media in the end alienate people from personal experience
and though appearing to offset it, intensify their moral isolation from each
other, from reality and from themselves." He argues that mass media then
lessens "...people's capacity to experience life itself." ."[16][15]

Critics have lamented the ".. replacement of high art and authentic folk
culture by tasteless industrialised artefacts produced on a mass scale in
order to satisfy the lowest common denominator."[15] This "mass culture
emerged after the Second World War and have led to the concentration of mass-
culture power in ever larger global media conglomerates." The popular press
decreased the amount of news or information that and replaced it with
entertainment or titillation that reinforces "... fears, prejudice,
scapegoating processes, paranoia, and aggression."[15]

Critics of television and film have argued that the quality of TV output has
been diluted as stations relentlessly pursue "populism and ratings" by
focusing on the "glitzy, the superficial, and the popular." In film,
"Hollywood culture and values" are increasingly dominating film production in
other countries. Hollywood films have changed from focusing on scriptwriting
and dialogue to creating formulaic films which emphasize "...shock-value and
superficial thrill[s]" and special effects, with themes that focus on the
"...basic instincts of aggression, revenge, violence, [and] greed." The plots
"...often seem simplistic, a standardised template taken from the shelf, and
dialogue is minimal." The "characters are shallow and unconvincing, the
dialogue is also simple, unreal, and badly constructed."[15]

### [edit] Folklore

Folklore provides a second and very different source of popular culture.[17]
In pre-industrial times, mass culture equaled folk culture. This earlier layer
of culture still persists today, sometimes in the form of jokes or slang,
which spread through the population by word of mouth and via the Internet. By
providing a new channel for transmission, cyberspace has renewed the strength
of this element of popular culture.

Although the folkloric element of popular culture engages heavily with the
commercial element, the public has its own tastes and it may not embrace every
cultural item sold. Moreover, beliefs and opinions about the products of
commercial culture (for example: "My favorite character is SpongeBob
SquarePants") spread by word-of-mouth, and become modified in the process in
the same manner that folklore evolves.

## [edit] Popular culture in popular culture

<IMG>

This article contains weasel words, vague phrasing that often accompanies
biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or
removed. (March 2009)  
Owing to the pervasive and increasingly interconnected nature of popular
culture, especially its intermingling of complementary distribution sources,
some cultural anthropologists[who?] have identified the use of "popular
culture within popular culture" as a distinct phenomenon. Literary and
cultural critics have identified this as following the well-recognized but
variegated concept of intertextuality.

One commentator has suggested this "self-referentiality" reflects the
advancing encroachment of popular culture into every realm of collective
experience. "Instead of referring to the real world, much media output devotes
itself to referring to other images, other narratives; self-referentiality is
all-embracing, although it is rarely taken account of."[18]

Many cultural critics have dismissed this as merely a symptom or side-effect
of mass consumerism, however alternate explanations and critique have also
been offered. One critic asserts that it reflects a fundamental paradox: the
increase in technological and cultural sophistication, combined with an
increase in superficiality and dehumanization.[19]

### [edit] Examples from American television

According to television scholars specializing in quality television, such as
Kristin Thompson, self-referentiality in mainstream American television
(especially comedy) both reflects and exemplifies the type of progression
characterized previously. Thompson[20] argues that shows such as The Simpsons
use a "...flurry of cultural references, intentionally inconsistent
characterization, and considerable self-reflexivity about television
conventions and the status of the programme as a television show."[21] Extreme
examples literally approach a kind of thematic infinite regress wherein the
distinctions between art and life, commerce and critique, ridicule and homage
become intractably blurred.[19]

Examples include:

  * Seinfeld, a show premised on the concept that it is a "show about nothing." The main character of the show has the same name as the actor who plays that character. In one episode, the character George mocks this very premise directly by asking "Who will go for that crap?" Such self-derision represents an especially salient and humorous critique considering the relative success of the show.

  * The Simpsons routinely alludes to mainstream media properties, as well as the commercial content of the show itself. In one episode, Bart complains about the crass commercialism of the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade while watching television. When he turns his head away from the television, he is shown floating by as an oversized inflatable balloon. The show also invokes liberal reference to contemporary issues as depicted in the mainstream, and often merges such references with unconventional and even esoteric associations to classical and postmodernist works of literature, entertainment and art.[citation needed]

  * The comic xkcd references pop culture's rising popularity on this website in the following cartoon. http://xkcd.com/446/ (Hold the mouse cursor over the comic image to display the relevant text.)

## [edit] See also

  * Fads
  * Fashion
  * Low culture
  * High culture
  * MTV Generation
  * Pop icon
  * Cultural icon
  * Pop-culture tourism
  * Popular culture studies
  * General-audience description

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ http://www.auburnpub.com/articles/2008/02/15/lake_life/lakelife05.txt
  2. ^ http://www.truthxchange.com/article/spirit-wars-in-the-third-millennium/
  3. ^ http://www.rebeccasreads.com/Reviews/ReviewBockDethroningJesus.html
  4. ^ http://www.calvin.edu/news/2000-01/eyes.htm
  5. ^ http://www.cracked.com/article_16619_7-things-from-pop-culture-that-apparently-piss-jesus-off.html
  6. ^ http://www.ecampus.com/book/9780813344058
  7. ^ http://www.preaching.com/resources/from_the_lectionary/11550972/
  8. ^ http://www.irishcalvinist.com/?p=1841
  9. ^ http://conqueringthirst.com/?p=16
  10. ^ http://bateszi.animeuknews.net/2007/01/18/japans-increasingly-superficial-pop-culture/
  11. ^ Asa Berger, Arthur (1990). Agit-Pop: Political Culture and Communication Theory. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-88738-315-7.
  12. ^ Bakhtin 1981, p.4
  13. ^ The American Heritapge Dictionary of the English Language (4th ed.). See Usage Note for Culture: Houghton Mifflin Company. 2000. ISBN 0-618-08230-1.
  14. ^ Doctor Morris(1994). Understanding Popular Music, p.4. ISBN 0-415-10723-7.
  15. ^ a b c d e f g h dumbing down
  16. ^ Van den Haag, in Rosenberg and White, Mass Culture, p. 529.
  17. ^ On the Ambiguity of the Three Wise Monkeys A. W. Smith Folklore, Vol. 104, No. 1/2 (1993), pp. 144-150
  18. ^ McRobbie, Angela (1994). Postmodernism and Popular Culture. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-07712-5. Cultural anthropologist and feminist discourse on cultural studies.
  19. ^ a b "Ralph Dumain, Cultural Sophistication and Self-Reference On American Television". http://www.autodidactproject.org/my/northexp.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-22. An essay on self-referentiality and American television.
  20. ^ She is the author of Storytelling in Film and Television. Some of her other publications include Storytelling in the New Hollywood: Understanding Classical Narrative Technique (Harvard University Press, November 1999); Breaking the Glass Armor: Neoformalist Film Analysis (Princeton University Press, August 1988); and, as a co-author with David Bordwell; Film Art: An Introduction (McGraw-Hill College, January 2003); Film History: An Introduction (McGraw-Hill College, August 2002)
  21. ^ Thompson. Available at: http://www.kamera.co.uk/books/new_hollywood_cinema.html

## [edit] References

  * Bakhtin, M. M. and Michael Holquist, Vadim Liapunov, Kenneth Brostrom. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays (University of Texas Press Slavic Series). Ed. Michael Holquist. Trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin and London: University of Texas Press.
  * Storey, John Storey (2001). Pearson Education Limited
  * Hassabian, Anahid (1999). "Popular", Key Terms in Popular Music and Culture, eds.: Horner, Bruce and Swiss, Thomas. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 0-631-21263-9.
  * Seabrook, John. NoBrow : the culture of marketing the marketing of culture, New York : A.A. Knopf, 2000. ISBN 0-375-40504-6
  * Williams, Raymond (1985). Keywords: a Vocabulary of Culture and Society. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-520469-7. Cited in Hassabian (1999).

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Popular_culture"

Categories: Popular culture | Media studies | Youth

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April
2008 | Articles with weasel words from March 2009 | All pages needing cleanup
| Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since July 2008 |
Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Furlan
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Limburgs
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 19:51 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



