
# Clinical lycanthropy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Clinical lycanthropy is defined as a rare psychiatric syndrome which involves
a delusion that the affected person can or has transformed into an animal, or
that he or she is an animal[1]. Its name is connected to the mythical
condition of lycanthropy, a supernatural affliction in which people are said
to physically shapeshift into wolves. The word zoanthropy is also sometimes
used for the delusion that one has turned into an animal in general and not
specifically a wolf.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Symptoms
  * 2 Proposed mechanisms
    * 2.1 Neurological factors
  * 3 References in popular culture
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Symptoms

Affected individuals report a delusional belief that they have transformed, or
are in the process of transforming into another animal. It has been linked
with the altered states of mind that accompany psychosis (the reality-bending
mental state that typically involves delusions and hallucinations) with the
transformation only seeming to happen in the mind and behavior of the affected
person.

A study[3] on lycanthropy from the McLean Hospital reported on a series of
cases and proposed some diagnostic criteria by which lycanthropy could be
recognised:

  * A patient reports in a moment of lucidity or looking back he sometimes feels as an animal or has felt like one.
  * A patient behaves in a manner that resembles animal behaviour, for example crying, grumbling, or creeping.

According to these criteria, either a delusional belief in current or past
transformation, or behaviour that suggests a person thinks of themselves as
transformed, is considered evidence of clinical lycanthropy. The authors go on
to note that although the condition seems to be an expression of psychosis
there is no specific diagnosis of mental or neurological illness associated
with its behavioural consequences.

It also seems that lycanthropy is not specific to an experience of human-to-
wolf transformation; a wide variety of creatures have been reported as part of
the shape-shifting experience. A review[1] of the medical literature from
early 2004 lists over thirty published cases of lycanthropy, only the minority
of which have wolf or dog themes. Canines are certainly not uncommon, although
the experience of being transformed into hyenas, cats, horses, birds and
tigers has been reported on more than one occasion. Transformation into frogs,
and even bees, has been reported in some instances. A 1989 case study[4]
described how one individual reported a serial transformation, experiencing a
change from human, to dog, to horse, and then finally cat, before returning to
the reality of human existence after treatment. There are also reports of
people who experienced transformation into an animal only listed as
'unspecified'.

## [edit] Proposed mechanisms

Clinical lycanthropy is a rare condition and is largely considered to be an
idiosyncratic expression of a psychotic-episode caused by another condition
such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or clinical depression.

However, there are suggestions that certain neurological and cultural
influences may lead to the expression of the human-animal transformation theme
that defines the condition.

### [edit] Neurological factors

One important factor may be differences or changes in parts of the brain known
to be involved in representing body shape (e.g. see proprioception, body
image). A neuroimaging study[5] of two people diagnosed with clinical
lycanthropy showed that these areas display unusual activation, suggesting
that when people report their bodies are changing shape, they may be genuinely
perceiving those feelings. Body image distortions are not unknown in mental
and neurological illness, so this may help explain at least part of the
process. One further puzzle is why an affected person doesn't simply report
that their body "feels like it is changing in odd ways", rather than
presenting with a delusional belief that they are changing into a specific
animal. There is much evidence that psychosis is more than just odd perceptual
experiences so perhaps lycanthropy is the result of these unusual bodily
experiences being understood by an already confused mind, perhaps sifted
through cultural traditions and ideas.

## [edit] References in popular culture

The movie Birdy (1984) by Alan Parker, based on the novel of the same name by
William Wharton, tells the story of a troubled boy who has a morbid fixation
with birds. After the trauma of being sent to Vietnam War he develops a
dissociative psychiatric disorder that makes him think he has transformed into
a bird.

## [edit] See also

  * Lycanthropy
  * Kitsunetsuki
  * Man Into Wolf; An Anthropological Interpretation of Sadism, Masochism and Lycanthropy
  * Therianthropy
  * Werewolf
  * Furry Fandom
  * Wendigo

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Garlipp P, GÃ¶decke-Koch T, Dietrich DE, Haltenhof H (January 2004). "Lycanthropy--psychopathological and psychodynamical aspects". Acta Psychiatr Scand 109 (1): 19â22. doi:10.1046/j.1600-0447.2003.00243.x. PMID 14674954. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/resolve/openurl?genre=article&sid=nlm:pubmed&issn=0001-690X&date=2004&volume=109&issue=1&spage=19.
  2. ^ Degroot, J.J.M. (2003). Religious System of China. Kessinger Publishing. pp. 484.
  3. ^ Keck PE, Pope HG, Hudson JI, McElroy SL, Kulick AR (February 1988). "Lycanthropy: alive and well in the twentieth century". Psychol Med 18 (1): 113â20. PMID 3363031.
  4. ^ Dening TR, West A (1989). "Multiple serial lycanthropy. A case report". Psychopathology 22 (6): 344â7. PMID 2639384.
  5. ^ Moselhy HF (1999). "Lycanthropy: new evidence of its origin". Psychopathology 32 (4): 173â6. PMID 10364725. http://content.karger.com/produktedb/produkte.asp?typ=fulltext&file=psp32173.

## [edit] External links

  * Fahy TA (January 1989). "Lycanthropy: a review". J R Soc Med 82 (1): 37â9. PMID 2647981.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clinical_lycanthropy"

Categories: Psychosis | Shapeshifting | Werewolves | Culture-specific
syndromes

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 20:29 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



