
# Trigger point

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Trigger points are described as hyperirritable spots in skeletal muscle that
are associated with palpable nodules in taut bands of muscle fibers. Trigger
point researchers believe that palpable nodules are small contraction knots
and a common cause of pain. Compression of a trigger point may elicit local
tenderness, referred pain, or local twitch response. The local twitch response
is not the same as a muscle spasm. This is because a muscle spasm refers to
the entire muscle entirely contracting whereas the local twitch response also
refers to the entire muscle but only involves a small twitch, no contraction.

The trigger point model states that unexplained pain frequently radiates from
these points of local tenderness to broader areas, sometimes distant from the
trigger point itself. Practitioners claim to have identified reliable referred
pain patterns, allowing practitioners to associate pain in one location with
trigger points elsewhere. Many chiropractors and massage therapists find the
model useful in practice, but the medical community at large has not embraced
trigger point therapy. Although trigger points do appear to be an observable
phenomenon with defined properties, there is a lack of a consistent
methodology for diagnosing trigger points[1] and a dearth of theory explaining
how trigger points arise and why they produce specific referred pain patterns.

## Contents

  * 1 Definition
  * 2 Myofascial pain syndrome
  * 3 Qualities of trigger points
    * 3.1 Diagnosis of trigger points
    * 3.2 Misdiagnosis of pain
    * 3.3 Demonstration and identification of myofascial trigger points
  * 4 Treatment
    * 4.1 Injection
    * 4.2 Self-treatment
    * 4.3 Risks
  * 5 Mechanism
  * 6 History
    * 6.1 Janet G. Travell, MD
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Definition

The term "trigger point" was coined in 1942 by Dr. Janet Travell to describe a
clinical finding with the following characteristics:

  * Pain related to a discrete, irritable point in skeletal muscle or fascia, not caused by acute local trauma, inflammation, degeneration, neoplasm or infection.
  * The painful point can be felt as a tumor or band in the muscle, and a twitch response can be elicited on stimulation of the trigger point.
  * Palpation of the trigger point reproduces the patient's complaint of pain, and the pain radiates in a distribution typical of the specific muscle harboring the trigger point.
  * The pain cannot be explained by findings on neurological examination.

One criticism of the trigger point concept is that practitioners do not
necessarily agree on what constitutes a trigger point.

A study by Gerwin et al. found that independent examiners were generally able
to identify myofascial trigger points (MTrP), but only with sufficient
training and agreement on the definition and features of MTrP's. Gerwin et al.
said:

    Three previous studies (Nice et al., 1992; Wolfe et al., 1992; Njoo and Van der Does, 1994) have examined this problem, and none of them could establish the reliability of MTrP examination in all of its major manifestations. ... The present study shows that four examiners can achieve statistically significant agreement, at times almost perfect agreement, about the presence or absence of five major features of the MTrP and on the presence or absence of the TrP, whether it be latent or active. This establishes the MTrP as a reliable clinical sign. The present study also shows that these features are identified with greater or lesser reliability depending on the specific feature and the specific muscle being examined. ... A training period was found to be essential in order to achieve these results.[2]
A 2007 review of diagnostic criteria used in studies of trigger points
concluded that

    there is as yet limited consensus on case definition in respect of MTrP pain syndrome. Further research is needed to test the reliability and validity of diagnostic criteria. Until reliable diagnostic criteria have been established, there is a need for greater transparency in research papers on how a case of MTrP pain syndrome is defined, and claims for effective interventions in treating the condition should be viewed with caution.[1]
## [edit] Myofascial pain syndrome

The main innovation of Travell's work was the introduction of the myofascial
pain syndrome concept (myofascial referring to the combination of muscle and
fascia). This is described as a focal hyperirritability in muscle that can
strongly modulate central nervous system functions. Travell and followers
distinguish this from fibromyalgia, which is characterized by widespread pain
and tenderness and is described as a central augmentation of nociception
giving rise to deep tissue tenderness that includes muscles. Studies estimate
that in 75-95 percent of cases, myofascial pain is a primary cause of regional
pain. Myofascial pain is associated with muscle tenderness that arises from
trigger points, focal points of tenderness, a few millimeters in diameter,
found at multiple sites in a muscle and the fascia of muscle tissue. Biopsy
tests found that trigger points were hyperirritable and electrically active
muscle spindles in general muscle tissue.[3]

## [edit] Qualities of trigger points

Trigger points have a number of qualities. They may be classified as
active/latent and also as key/satellites and primary/secondary.

An active trigger point is one that actively refers pain either locally or to
another location (most trigger points refer pain elsewhere in the body along
nerve pathways). A latent trigger point is one that exists, but does not yet
refer pain actively, but may do so when pressure or strain is applied to the
myoskeletal structure containing the trigger point. Latent trigger points can
influence muscle activation patterns, which can result in poorer muscle
coordination and balance.

A key trigger point is one that has a pain referral pattern along a nerve
pathway that activates a latent trigger point on the pathway, or creates it. A
satellite trigger point is one which is activated by a key trigger point.
Successfully treating the key trigger point often will resolve the satellite
and return it from being active to latent, or completely treating it too.

In contrast, a primary trigger point in many cases will biomechanically
activate a secondary trigger point in another structure. Treating the primary
trigger point does not treat the secondary trigger point.

Activation of trigger points may be caused by a number of factors, including
acute or chronic muscle overload, activation by other trigger points
(key/satellite, primary/secondary), disease, psychological distress (via
systemic inflammation), homeostatic imbalances, direct trauma to the region,
radiculopathy, infections and health choices such as smoking.

Trigger points can appear in many myofascial structures including muscles,
tendons, ligaments, skin, joint capsule, periosteal, and scar tissue. When
present in muscles there is often pain and weakness in the associated
structures. These pain patterns in muscles follow specific nerve pathways and
have been readily mapped to allow for identification of the causative pain
factor. Many trigger points have pain patterns that overlap, and some create
reciprocal cyclic relationships that need to be treated extensively to remove
them.

### [edit] Diagnosis of trigger points

Trigger points are diagnosed by examining signs, symptoms, pain patterns and
manual palpation. Usually there is a taut band in muscles containing trigger
points, and a hard nodule can be felt. Often a twitch response can be felt in
the muscle by running your finger perpendicular to the muscle's direction;
this twitch response often activates the "all or nothing" response in a muscle
that causes it to contract. Pressing on an affected muscle can often refer
pain. Clusters of trigger points are not uncommon in some of the larger
muscles, such as the gluteus group (gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, and
gluteus minimus). Often there is a heat differential in the local area of a
trigger point, and many practitioners can sense that. In 2007, a paper was
presented describing images of trigger points taken by modified MRI.[4]

### [edit] Misdiagnosis of pain

The misdiagnosis of pain is the most important issue taken up by Travell and
Simons. Referred pain from trigger points mimics the symptoms of a very long
list of common maladies, but physicians, in weighing all the possible causes
for a given condition, rarely consider a myofascial source. The study of
trigger points has not historically been part of medical education. Travell
and Simons hold that most of the common everyday pain is caused by myofascial
trigger points and that ignorance of that basic concept could inevitably lead
to false diagnoses and the ultimate failure to deal effectively with pain.[5]

### [edit] Demonstration and identification of myofascial trigger points

A 2008 review in Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation of two
recent studies concludes they present groundbreaking findings that can reduce
some of the controversy surrounding the cause and identification of myofascial
trigger points (MTPs). The study by Chen on the use of magnetic resonance
elastography (MRE) imaging of the taut band of an MTP in an upper trapezius
muscle may open a whole new chapter in the centuries-old search for a
convincing demonstration of the cause of MTP symptoms. MRE is a modification
of existing magnetic resonance imaging equipment to image stress produced by
adjacent tissues with different degrees of tension. This report presents an
MRE image of the taut band that shows the chevron signature of the increased
tension compared with surrounding tissues. [6] Results were all consistent
with the concept that taut bands are detectable and quantifiable with MRE
imaging. The findings in the subjects suggest that the stiffness of the taut
bands in patients with myofascial pain may be 50% greater than that of the
surrounding muscle tissue. The findings suggest that MRE can quantitate
asymmetries in muscle tone that could previously only be identified
subjectively by examination.[7]

In the study by Shah and associates, they have shown the feasibility of
continuous, in vivo recovery of small molecules from soft tissue without
harmful effects. With this technique, they have been able to investigate the
biochemical milieu of muscle in subjects with active, latent, or absent
myofascial trigger points (MTrPs) and to contrast this with that of the
noninvolved muscle. [8]

## [edit] Treatment

Prior to treatment commencement, the therapist should be sure that the pain
patterns they are treating lend themselves to Trigger Point Therapy. If the
patient presents with swelling, discoloration, or neurological symptoms, it is
always advisable to refer to another health/medical care provider regarding
further examination and/or investigation.

Treatment of trigger points may be by manual, Myofascial Trigger Point Therapy
by a trained Myofascial Trigger Point Therapist[3], Myotherapy (deep pressure
as in Bonnie Prudden's approach, massage or tapotement as in Dr. Griner's
approach), mechanical vibration, pulsed ultrasound, electrostimulation[9],
ischemic compression, injection (see below), dry-needling, "spray-and-stretch"
using a cooling (vapocoolant) spray, Low Level Laser Therapy and stretching
techniques that invoke reciprocal inhibition within the musculoskeletal
system. Use of elbows, feet or various tools to direct pressure directly upon
the trigger point often occurs, to save practitioner's hands.

A successful treatment protocol relies on identifying trigger points,
resolving them and, if all trigger points have been deactivated, elongating
the structures affected along their natural range of motion and length. In the
case of muscles, which is where most treatment occurs, this involves
stretching the muscle using combinations of passive, active, active isolated
(AIS), muscle energy techniques (MET), and proprioceptive neuromuscular
facilitation (PNF) stretching to be effective. Fascia surrounding muscles
should also be treated, possibly with myofascial release, to elongate and
resolve strain patterns, otherwise muscles will simply be returned to
positions where trigger points are likely to re-develop.

The results of manual therapy are related to the skill level of the therapist.
If trigger points are pressed too short a time, they may activate or remain
active; if pressed too long or hard, they may be irritated or the muscle may
be bruised, resulting in pain in the area treated. This bruising may last for
a 1-3 days after treatment, and may feel like, but is not similar to, delayed
onset muscle soreness (DOMS), the pain felt days after overexerting muscles.
Pain is also common after a massage if the practitioner uses pressure on
unnoticed latent or active trigger points, or is not skilled in myofascial
trigger point therapy. Lack of reduction of pain after one to three treatment
sessions by a trigger point practitioner should be referred to a medical
professional. Evidence based medicine researchers have concluded evidence for
the usefulness of trigger points in the diagnosis of fibromyalgia is thin.[10]
Fibromyalgia patients generally have multiple, recurring trigger points,
typically in a quadrant or more of the body.

### [edit] Injection

Injections provide more immediate relief and can be effective when other
methods fail. Various injections can be used including saline, local
anesthetics such as procaine hydrochloride (Novocain), steroids, and Botox.
Injection with a low concentration, short acting local anesthetic (Procaine
0.5%) without steroids or adrenalin is recommended. High concentrations or
long acting local anesthetics as well as epinephrine cause muscle necrosis.
Use of steroids can cause skin atrophy. Dry needling can be just as effective
but causes more post-injection soreness. Botox is rarely indicated.[11]

Despite the concerns about long acting agents[11], a mixture of lidocaine and
marcaine is often used.[12] A mixture of 1 part 2% lidocaine with 3 parts 0.5%
Marcaine provides 0.5% lidocaine and 0.375% Marcaine. This has the advantages
of immediate anesthesia with lidocaine during injection to minimize injection
pain while providing a longer duration of action with a lowered concentration
of Marcaine.

Sarapin can be used for trigger point injection.[13][14] Blue Cross, Medica,
HealthPartners and other health insurance companies in the US began covering
Trigger Point injections in 2005.

### [edit] Self-treatment

There are a number of ways to self-treat trigger points and these methods are
described in numerous texts. Underlying any attempts at self-treatment should
be a working knowledge of the area to be treated, especially with regard to
the musculature, nerves, glands and vessels.

Trigger points in the male or female pelvis, such as found in chronic pelvic
pain syndrome (CPPS), should be treated by physicians trained in the use of
intra-rectal trigger point and myofascial release techniques.

### [edit] Risks

Treatment, whether by self or by a professional, has some inherent dangers. It
may lead to damage of soft tissue and other organs. The trigger points in the
upper quadratus lumborum, for instance, are very close to the kidneys and
poorly administered treatment (particularly injections) may lead to kidney
damage. Likewise, treating the masseter muscle may damage the salivary glands
superficial to this muscle. Furthermore, some experts believe trigger points
may develop as a protective measure against unstable joints.

## [edit] Mechanism

There are many ideas about how trigger points are formed and why they cause
pain. It was once believed that trigger points were scars or inflammation in
the muscle. This was disproved when biopsies showed no abnormalities.[citation
needed]

More recently it has been proposed that trigger points are spasms or
contractures of voluntary muscle, possibly caused by an abnormality at the
neuromuscular junction where the nerves controlling muscles connect to the
muscle fibers (Travell & Simons). This theory seems unlikely because no
contractions of voluntary muscle have been identified by traditional EMG and
because the trigger points are often not in the location of the neuromuscular
junction.

The most recent proposed mechanism is that trigger points are muscle spindles,
made over-active by adrenalin stimulation. These very short muscle fibers,
only about 1 cm in length, are called intrafusal muscle fibers to distinguish
them from the voluntary muscle fibers which are called extrafusal muscle
fibers. Only the intrafusal muscle fibers inside the spindle are activated by
adrenalin via the sympathetic nervous system which also controls heart rate,
blood pressure and other internal regulatory functions. The âsympathetic
spindle spasmâ theory of trigger points proposes that when spindles are
over-activated by adrenalin they become painful. A clinical research trial is
being conducted and should be completed by the end on 2006 by Dr. David
Hubbard in San Diego, California. Paul Svacina, Engineer and bodyworker also
in California, believes that this theory supports the idea that stress and
decrease of moderate physical activity in modern lives has increased the
occurrence of myofascial pain and trigger points.

The most accepted theory for a trigger point mechanism is that an event of
muscular overload causes a prolonged release of Ca2+ ion from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (storage unit for the muscle cell) which results in a sticking of
the untrained or overloaded cells. This leads to a contracture with
compression of capillaries and results in an increased local energy demand and
local ischemia (loss of blood circulation) to the area. This "energy crisis"
(as it is termed in the seminal work on trigger points) causes the release of
chemicals that augment pain activity. Since an involved muscle is weakened by
this theorised sustained shortening, surrounding muscles themselves may
develop trigger points in a compensatory fashion.[11][15]

Current hypotheses include:

  * Travellâs Initial Trauma Theory
  * Integrated Trigger Point Hypothesis
  * Pain-Spasm-Pain Cycle
  * Muscle Spindle Hypothesis
  * Neuropathic Hypothesis
  * Fibrotic Scar Tissue Hypothesis

A 2008 review in Arch Phys Med Rehabil. of two recent studies, concludes they
present groundbreaking findings that can reduce some of the controversy
surrounding myofascial trigger points (MTrPs). The integrated hypothesis is
the most credible and most complete proposed etiology of MTrPs. However, the
feedback loop suggested in this hypothesis has a few weak links, and studies
by Shah and colleagues in particular supply a solid link for one of them. The
feedback loop connects the hypothesized energy crisis with the milieu changes
responsible for noxious stimulation of local nociceptors that causes the local
and referred pain of MTrPs. Shah's reports quantify the presence of not just 1
noxious stimulant but 11 of them with outstanding concentrations of immune
system histochemicals. The results also strongly place a solid histochemical
base under the important clinical distinction between active and latent MTrPs.
[6] Subjects with active MTrPs in the muscle have a biochemical milieu of
selected inflammatory mediators, neuropeptides, cytokines, and catecholamines
different from subjects with latent or absent MTrPs. [8]

## [edit] History

Trigger points have been a subject of study by a small number of doctors for
several decades although this has not become part of mainstream medicine. The
existence of tender areas and zones of induration in muscles has been
recognized in medicine for many years and was described as muscular rheumatism
or fibrositis in English; German terms included myogelose and myalgie.
However, there was little agreement about what they meant. Important work was
carried out by J. H. Kellgren at University College Hospital, London, in the
1930s and, independently, by Michael Gutstein in Berlin and Michael Kelly in
Australia (the latter two workers continued to publish into the 1950s and
1960s). Kellgren conducted experiments in which he injected hypertonic saline
into healthy volunteers and showed that this gave rise to zones of referred
extremity pain.

Today, much treatment of trigger points and their pain complexes are handled
by myofascial trigger point therapists, massage therapists, physical
therapists, osteopaths, occupational therapists, myotherapists, some
naturopaths, chiropractors, dentists and acupuncturists], and other hands-on
somatic practitioners who have had experience or training in the field of
neuromuscular therapy (NMT).

### [edit] Janet G. Travell, MD

It was, however, an American physician, Janet G. Travell, who was responsible
for the most detailed and important work. Her work treating US President John
F. Kennedy's back pain was so successful that she was asked to be the first
female Personal Physician to the President.[16] She published more than 40
papers between 1942 and 1990 and in 1983 the first volume of The Trigger Point
Manual appeared; this was followed by the second volume in 1992. In her later
years Travell collaborated extensively with her colleague David Simons. A
third edition is soon to be published by Simons and his wife, both of whom
have survived Travell.

The trigger point concept remains unknown to most doctors and is not generally
taught in medical school curricula. Among physicians, typically only
physiatrists (physicians specializing in physical medicine and rehabilitation)
are well versed in trigger point diagnosis and therapy. Other health
professionals, such as physiotherapists, osteopaths, chiropractors, massage
therapists and structural integrators are generally more aware of these ideas
and many of them make use of trigger points in their clinical work[17][18].

Travell and Simons' seminal work on the subject, Myofascial Pain and
Dysfunction: The Trigger Point Manual[11], states the following:

  * Around 75% of pain clinic patients have a trigger point as the sole source of their pain.
  * Arthritis is often cited as the cause for pain even though pain is not always concomitant with arthritis. The real culprit may be a trigger point, normally activated by a certain activity involving the muscles used in the motion, by chronically bad posture, bad mechanics, repetitive motion, structural deficiencies such as a lower limb length inequality or a small hemipelvis, or nutritional deficiencies.
  * The following conditions are also frequently misdiagnosed as the cause of pain when trigger points are the true cause: carpal tunnel syndrome, bursitis, tendinitis, angina pectoris, and sciatic symptoms, along with many other pain problems.

## [edit] See also

  * Pressure point

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b "Variability of criteria used to diagnose myofascial trigger point pain syndrome--evidence from a review of the literature". The Clinical journal of pain. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17314589. Retrieved on 2008-01-25.
  2. ^ Gerwin RD, Shannon S, Hong CZ, Hubbard D, Gevirtz R. Interrater reliability in myofascial trigger point examination. Pain. 1997 Jan;69(1-2):65-73.
  3. ^ Understanding Chronic Pelvic Pain Pelviperineology Vol. 26 N.2 June 2007 - Full open access article
  4. ^ Chen et al., p. 2 2007, Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
  5. ^ Davies, Clair; Davies, Amber (2004). The Trigger Point Therapy Workbook (2nd Ed.). USA: New Harbinger Publication, Inc.. p. 323\. ISBN 1-57224-375-9.
  6. ^ a b Simons DG (2008). "New views of myofascial trigger points: etiology and diagnosis". Arch Phys Med Rehabil 89 (1): 157â9. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2007.11.016. PMID 18164347.
  7. ^ Chen Q, Bensamoun S, Basford JR, Thompson JM, An KN (2007). "Identification and quantification of myofascial taut bands with magnetic resonance elastography". Arch Phys Med Rehabil 88 (12): 1658â61. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2007.07.020. PMID 18047882.
  8. ^ a b Shah JP, Danoff JV, Desai MJ, et al (2008). "Biochemicals associated with pain and inflammation are elevated in sites near to and remote from active myofascial trigger points". Arch Phys Med Rehabil 89 (1): 16â23. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2007.10.018. PMID 18164325.
  9. ^ The Immediate Effectiveness of Electrical Nerve Stimulation and Electrical Muscle Stimulation on Myofascial Trigger Points American Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation. 76(6):471-476, November/December 1997. Hsueh, Tse-Chieh MD, MS 2; Cheng, Pao-Tsai MD, MS; Kuan, Ta-Shen MD, MS; Hong, Chang-Zern MD
  10. ^ Fibromyalgia: diagnosis and treatment, Bandolier Journal
  11. ^ a b c d Travell, Janet; Simons, David; Simons, Lois (1999). Myofascial Pain and Dysfunction: The Trigger Point Manual (2 vol. set, 2nd Ed.). USA: Lippincott Williams & Williams. ISBN 0-683-08363-5.
  12. ^ "Trigger Point Injection". Non-Surgical Orthopaedic & Spine Center. http://www.lowbackpain.com/trigger.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-07.
  13. ^ "Sarapin: A regional Analgesic for control of pain of neuralgic origin.". sarapin.com. http://www.sarapin.com/injection.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  14. ^ "PDR entry for Sarapin". drugs.com. http://www.drugs.com/pdr/Sarapin.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-03.
  15. ^ Simons, D.G. Cardiology and Myofascial Trigger Points: Janet G. Travell's Contribution . Tex Heart Inst J. 2003; 30(1): 3â7.[1]
  16. ^ Bagg J, (2003),The President's Physician,Texas Heart Institute, Houston[2]
  17. ^ American Academy of Family Physicians
  18. ^ Dynamic Chiropractic

## [edit] External links

Trigger Point Pain Guide

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trigger_point"

Categories: Injuries | Massage

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 19:06 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



