
# Saccade

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Eye movement (disambiguation).

For the anti-ship missile, see C-802.

A saccade is a fast movement of an eye, head or other part of an animal's body
or device. It can also be a fast shift in frequency of an emitted signal or
other quick change. However, this article deals with saccadic eye motion.

Eye saccades are quick, simultaneous movements of both eyes in the same
direction.[1] Initiated by eye fields in the frontal and parietal lobes of the
brain, saccades serve as a mechanism for fixation, rapid eye movement and the
fast phase of optokinetic nystagmus.[1] The word appears to have been coined
in the 1880s by French ophthalmologist Ãmile Javal, who used a mirror on one
side of a page to observe eye movement in silent reading, and found that it
involves a succession of discontinuous individual movements.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Function
  * 2 Timing and Kinematics
  * 3 Types
  * 4 Pathophysiologic saccades
  * 5 Saccade adaptation
  * 6 Saccades and Vision
    * 6.1 Saccadic masking
    * 6.2 Spatial Updating
    * 6.3 Trans-saccadic Perception
  * 7 Comparative physiology
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References

  
## [edit] Function

Humans and other animals do not look at a scene in a steady way. Instead, the
eyes move around, locating interesting parts of the scene and building up a
mental 'map' corresponding to the scene. One reason for saccades of the human
eye is that the central part of the retina, the fovea, plays a critical role
in resolving objects. By moving the eye so that small parts of a scene can be
sensed with greater resolution, body resources can be used more efficiently.

In addition, the human eye is in a constant state of vibration, oscillating
back and forth at a rate of about 30-70 Hz. These microsaccades are tiny
movements, roughly 20 arcseconds in excursion and are completely imperceptible
under normal circumstances. They serve to refresh the image being cast onto
the rod cells and cone cells at the back of the eye. Without microsaccades,
staring fixedly at something would cause the vision to cease after a few
seconds since rods and cones only respond to a change in luminance.[citation
needed]

## [edit] Timing and Kinematics

Saccades are the fastest movements produced by the human body. The peak
angular speed of the eye during a saccade reaches up to 1000Â°/sec in monkeys
(somewhat less in humans). Saccades to an unexpected stimulus normally take
about 200 milliseconds to initiate and then last from about 20 to 200
milliseconds, depending on their amplitude. Under certain laboratory
circumstances the latency of saccade production can be cut nearly in half
(express saccades).[citation needed]

The amplitude of a saccade is the angular distance that the eye travels during
the movement. For amplitudes up to about 60 degrees, the velocity of a saccade
linearly depends on the amplitude (the so called "saccadic main sequence").
For instance, a 10Â° amplitude is associated with a velocity of 300Â°/sec, and
30Â° is associated with 500Â°/sec. In saccades larger than 60 degrees, the
peak velocity starts to plateau (non-linearly) toward the maximum velocity
attainable by the eye.

Saccades may rotate the eyes horizontally or vertically, or in any oblique
direction to change gaze direction (the direction of sight that corresponds to
the fovea), but normally saccades do not rotate the eyes torsionally. Torsion
can be defined as clockwise or counterclockwise rotation around the line of
sight when the eye is at its central primary position. Defined this way,
Listing's law says that when the head is motionless, torsion is kept at zero.

Head-fixed saccades can have amplitudes of up to 90Â° (from one edge of the
oculomotor range to the other), but in normal conditions saccades are far
smaller, and any shift of gaze larger than about 20Â° is accompanied by a head
movement. During such gaze saccades, first the eye produces a saccade to get
gaze on target, whereas the head follows more slowly and the vestibulo-ocular
reflex causes the eyes to roll back in the head to keep gaze on the target.
During these head movements Listing's law is no longer obeyed.

Saccades, as well as microsaccades, can be distinguished from other eye
movements (ocular tremor, ocular drift, smooth pursuit) using their ballistic
nature: their top velocity is proportional to their length. This property can
be used in algorithms for saccade detection in eye tracking data. [3]

## [edit] Types

Saccades are measured or investigated in four ways:[4]

  * In a visually guided saccade, an observer's eyes move towards a visual onset, or stimulus. This is typically included as a baseline when measuring other types of saccades.

  * In an antisaccade, an observer's eyes move away from the visual onset. They are more delayed than visually guided saccades, and observers often make erroneous saccades in the wrong direction. A successful antisaccade requires inhibiting a reflexive saccade to the onset location, and voluntarily moving the eye in the other direction.

  * In a memory guided saccade, an observer's eyes move towards a remembered point, with no visual stimulus.

  * In a sequence of predictive saccades, an observer's eyes are kept on an object moving in a temporally and/or spatially predictive manner. In this instance, saccades often coincide (or anticipate) the regularly moving object.

## [edit] Pathophysiologic saccades

Saccadic oscillations not filling the normal function are a deviation from a
healthy or normal condition.

  * Nystagmus is characterised by the combination of 'slow phases', which usually take the eye off the point of regard, interspersed with saccade-like 'quick phases' that serve to bring the eye back on target. Pathological slow phases may either be due to an imbalance in the vestibular system, or damage to the brainstem 'neural integrator' that normally holds the eyes in place.
  * Opsoclonus or ocular flutter, on the other hand, are composed purely of fast-phase saccadic eye movements.

Without the use of objective recording techniques, it may be very difficult to
distinguish between these conditions.

Eye movement measurements are also used to investigate psychiatric disorders.
For example, ADHD is characterized by an increase of antisaccade errors and an
increase in delays for visually guided saccade.[4]

## [edit] Saccade adaptation

When the brain is led to believe that the saccades it is generating are too
large or too small (by an experimental manipulation in which a saccade-target
steps back or forward, contingent on the eye movement made to acquire it),
saccade amplitude gradually decreases (or increases), an adaptation (also
termed gain adaptation) widely seen as a simple form of motor learning,
possibly driven by an effort to correct visual error. This effect was first
discovered in humans with ocular muscle weakness brought on by disease or
tenectomy. In these cases, it was noticed that the patients would make
hypometric (small) saccades with the affected eye, and that they were able to
correct these errors over time. This led to the realization that visual error
(the difference between the intended past-saccadic point of regard and the
target position) played a role in the homeostatic regulation of accurate
saccades. Since then, much scientific research has been devoted to various
experiments employing saccade adaptation.

## [edit] Saccades and Vision

### [edit] Saccadic masking

Main article: Saccadic masking

It is a common but false belief that during the saccade, no information is
passed through the optic nerve to the brain. Whereas low spatial frequencies
(the 'fuzzier' parts) are attenuated, higher spatial frequencies (an image's
fine details) which would otherwise be blurred out by the eye movement remain
unaffected. This phenomenon, known as saccadic masking or saccadic
suppression, is known to occur in the time preceding a saccadic eye movement,
implying neurological reasons for the effect, rather than simply the image's
motion blur.

A person may observe the saccadic masking effect by standing in front of a
mirror and looking from one eye to the next (and vice versa). The subject will
not experience any movement of the eyes nor any evidence that the optic nerve
has momentarily ceased transmitting. Due to saccadic masking, the eye/brain
system not only hides the eye movements from the individual but also hides the
evidence that anything has been hidden. Of course, a second observer watching
the experiment will see the subject's eyes moving back and forth. The
function's main purpose is to prevent smearing of the image.

### [edit] Spatial Updating

When a visual stimulus is seen before a saccade, subjects are still able to
make another saccade back to that image, even if it is no longer visible. This
shows that the brain is somehow able to take into account the intervening eye
movement. It is thought that the brain does this by temporarily recording a
copy of the command for the eye movement, and comparing this to the remembered
image of the target. This is called spatial updating. Neurophysiologists who
have recorded from cortical areas for saccades during spatial updating have
found that memory related signals get remapped during each saccade.

### [edit] Trans-saccadic Perception

It is also thought that perceptual memory is updated during saccades so that
information gathered across fixations can be compared and synthesized.
However, the entire visual image is not updated during each saccade, only 3-4
features or objects if they are attended to. Some scientists believe that this
is the same as visual working memory, but as in spatial updating the eye
movement has to be accounted for. The process of retaining information across
a saccade is called trans-saccadic memory and the process of integrating
information from more than one fixation is called trans-saccadic integration.

## [edit] Comparative physiology

Saccades are a widespread phenomenon across animals with image-forming visual
systems. They have been observed in animals across three phyla, including
animals that do not have a fovea (most vertebrates do not) and animals that
cannot move their eyes independently of their head (such as insects).[5]
Therefore, while saccades serve in humans and other primates to increase the
effective visual resolution of a scene, there must be additional reasons for
the behavior. The most frequently suggested of these reasons is to avoid
blurring of the image, which would occur if the response time of a
photoreceptor is longer than the time a given portion of the image is
stimulating that photoreceptor as the image drifts across the eye.

In birds, saccadic eye movements serve a further function. The avian retina is
highly developed. It is thicker than the mammalian retina and has a higher
metabolic activity, but it lacks proper vasculature. Therefore, the retinal
cells must obtain nutrients via diffusion through the choroid and from the
vitreous humor. The pecten is a specialised structure in the avian retina. It
is a highly vascular structure that projects into the vitreous humor.
Experimentally, it has been shown that during saccadic eye oscillations (which
occupy up to 12% of avian viewing time), the pecten acts as an agitator,
propelling perfusate towards the retina. Thus, in birds, saccadic eye
movements appear to be important in retinal nutrition and respiration.[6]

## [edit] See also

  * Eye movement
  * Eye movement in language reading
  * Eye movement in music reading
  * Frontal eye fields
  * Medial eye fields
  * Paramedian pontine reticular formation
  * Saccadic suppression of image displacement
  * Whip pan

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Cassin, B. and Solomon, S. Dictionary of Eye Terminology. Gainsville, Florida: Triad Publishing Company, 1990
  2. ^ Javal, Ã 'Essai sure la physiologie de la lecture', in Annales d'oculistique 80, pp. 61â73, 1878
  3. ^ Engbert, R. and Kliegl, R. Microsaccades uncover the orientation of covert attention. Vision Research, 43: 1035-1045, 2003.
  4. ^ a b Rommelse NN, Van der Stigchel S, Sergeant JA (2008). "A review on eye movement studies in childhood and adolescent psychiatry". Brain Cogn. doi:10.1016/j.bandc.2008.08.025. PMID 18835079.
  5. ^ Land, MF. "Motion and vision: why animals move their eyes". J Comp Physiol A. 1999 185:341â352.
  6. ^ Pettigrew JD, Wallman J. "Saccadic oscillations facilitate ocular perfusion from the avian pecten". Nature. 1990 Jan 25; 343(6256): 362â3 PMID 14756148.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Sensory system â Visual system and eye movement  
Vision

Retina â Optic nerve â Optic chiasm â Optic tract â Lateral geniculate
nucleus â Optic radiation â Visual cortex (Cuneus, Lingual gyrus) â
Blobs  
Tracking â PPRF

Smooth pursuit: Parietal lobe Â· Occipital lobe  
Saccade: Frontal eye fields  
Physiologic nystagmus â Fixation reflex  
Horizontal gaze

Abducens nucleus â PPRF â MLF â Oculomotor nucleus â Medial rectus
muscle  
Vertical gaze

Rostral interstitial nucleus â Oculomotor nucleus, Trochlear nucleus â
Muscles of orbit  
Pupillary dilation

Ciliospinal center â Superior cervical ganglion â Long ciliary nerves â
Iris dilator muscle  
Pupillary light reflex  
(constriction)

Retina â Optic nerve â Optic chiasm â Optic tract â Pretectum â
Edinger-Westphal nucleus â Oculomotor nerve â Ciliary ganglion â Short
ciliary nerves â Iris sphincter muscle  
Accommodation

Retina â Optic nerve â Optic chiasm â Optic tract â Visual cortex â
Brodmann area 19 â Pretectum â Edinger-Westphal nucleus â Short ciliary
nerves â Ciliary ganglion â Ciliary muscle  
Vestibulo-ocular reflex

Semicircular canal â Vestibulocochlear nerve â Vestibular nuclei â
Medial rectus muscle  
Circadian rhythm

Retina â Hypothalamus (Suprachiasmatic nucleus)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saccade"

Categories: Eye | Vision

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since
January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 February 2009, at 12:37 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



