
# Editor war

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Editor War  
Date 1972 â Present  
Location The Internet  
Result Ongoing  
Belligerents  
<IMG>

Emacs

<IMG>

vi  
Commanders  
Richard Stallman Bill Joy  
Casualties and losses  
Unknown Unknown  
Editor war is the common name for the rivalry between users of the vi and
Emacs text editors. The rivalry has become a lasting part of hacker culture
and the free software community.

Many flame wars have been fought between groups insisting that their editor of
choice is the paragon of editing perfection, and insulting the others. Most
participants in these arguments recognize that it is (largely) tongue-in-
cheek. Unlike the related battles over operating systems, programming
languages, and even source code indent style, choice of editor usually only
affects oneself.

Editor wars are usually fought between the devotees of the two most popular
editors on Unix-like systems: vi and emacs. The arguments usually focus on
modern implementations of these two editors, the most popular of which are Vim
and GNU emacs. Most users of these systems are familiar with both programs to
some extent, knowing them well enough to at least do some basic text editing,
and therefore feel they are well-placed to make judgment calls as to which is
"better". Both editors are extensive and extremely powerful tools, and have
rather steep learning curves, so users invest a lot of time in getting to know
the editor they use. This necessary time investment, naturally, can result in
more opinionated users.

## Contents

  * 1 Differences between vi and Emacs
    * 1.1 Benefits of vi-like editors
    * 1.2 Benefits of Emacs
  * 2 Humor
  * 3 Current state of the editor war
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Differences between vi and Emacs

The most important differences between vi and Emacs are:

  * vi editing retains each permutation of typed keys. This creates a path in the decision tree which unambiguously identifies any command.
  * Emacs commands are a combination of typed keys executed immediately, which leaves the user with the choice of whether or not to use a command.

  * vi is smaller and faster, and (traditionally at least) has limited customization capability.
  * Emacs takes longer to start up and requires more memory. However, it is highly customizable and includes a large number of bells and whistles, as it is essentially a Lisp programming language execution environment which runs a Lisp program designed for text-editing.

  * vi was traditionally used inside of a text-mode console, having no graphical user interface (GUI) (although Vim has one).
  * Whereas Emacs, while initially designed for use on a console, grew a GUI fairly early on. Modern versions of both provide various GUIs.

### [edit] Benefits of vi-like editors

  * Follows a "composition of simple tools" philosophy.
  * Small in size and compatible with the Unix philosophy of "do one thing, and do it well". Avoids featuritis.
  * Faster than Emacs (traditionally at least).
  * Runs on all systems that can implement the standard C library, including DOS, Windows, Mac, BeOS, and POSIX compliant systems.
  * Allows users of the QWERTY keyboard to keep their fingers on the home row, thus requiring less movement to edit.
  * Ubiquitous. Essentially all Unix and Unix-like systems come with vi (or a variant) built-in.

### [edit] Benefits of Emacs

  * "Everything at reach" philosophy.
  * No mode switching (uses metakey chords).
  * Larger set of commands than vi.[citation needed]
  * One of the most ported non-trivial computer programs. It runs on a wide variety of operating systems, including most Unix-like systems (GNU/Linux, the various BSDs, Solaris, AIX, IRIX, Mac OS X,[1][2] etc.), MS-DOS, Microsoft Windows[3][4][5] and OpenVMS. Unix systems, both free and proprietary, frequently provide Emacs bundled with the operating system.
  * Extensible and customizable (Lisp programming language variant - Emacs Lisp), with features that include: 
    * Special editing modes for a large number of programming, markup, typesetting languages (Bash, C, Delphi, Java, Lisp, LaTeX, MediaWiki ...).
    * Ability to emulate vi (known as "viper-mode").
    * A powerful and extensible file manager, integrated debugger, and a large set of tools to work with.

Historical remark:

  * Early on, Emacs included a helpful screen explaining how to exit that was presented when the program started. At the time, vi did not provide such a hint, forcing many users who could not figure out how to exit to simply disconnect their terminals.

## [edit] Humor

Frequently, at some point in the discussion, someone will point out that ed is
the standard text editor.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Richard Stallman appearing as St IGNUâcius, a Â«saintÂ» in the Church of
Emacs.

The Church of Emacs, formed by Richard Stallman, is a joke, and while it
refers to vi as the "editor of the beast" (vi-vi-vi being 6-6-6 in Roman
numerals) , it does not oppose the use of vi; rather, it calls proprietary
software an anathema. ("Using a free version of vi is not a sin but a
penance."[6]) It has its own newsgroup, alt.religion.emacs[7], that has posts
purporting to support this parody religion.

Stallman has jokingly declared himself to be St IGNUâcius, a saint in the
Church of Emacs.[8]

vi supporters have created an opposing Cult of vi, argued by the more hardline
Emacs users to be an attempt to "ape their betters".

Regarding vi's modal nature, some Emacs users joke that vi has two modes â
"beep repeatedly" and "break everything". vi users enjoy joking that Emacs's
key-sequences induce carpal tunnel syndrome, or mentioning one of many
satirical expansions of the acronym EMACS, such as "Escape Meta Alt Control
Shift" (a jab at Emacs's reliance on modifier keys).[9] Others have posited
that this acronym in fact means "Eight Megabytes And Constantly Swapping" (in
a time when that was a great amount of memory) or "EMACS Makes Any Computer
Slow" (a recursive acronym like those Stallman uses), in reference to Emacs's
high system resource requirements.

As a poke at Emacsâ creeping featurism, vi advocates will describe Emacs as
âa great operating system, lacking only a decent editorâ.

There is some additional humor that pokes fun at vi at
http://www.dina.kvl.dk/~abraham/religion/vi-tutorial.html.

Word War vi[10] is a humorous Defender-like shoot 'em up based on the editor
war.

## [edit] Current state of the editor war

In the past, many small editors modeled after or derived from Emacs
flourished. This was due to the importance of conserving memory with the
comparatively minuscule amount available at the time. These days, with a
plenitude of memory, many vi-alikes, Vim in particular, have grown in size and
code complexity. These vi variants of today, as with the old light Emacs
variants, tend to have many of the perceived benefits and drawbacks of the
opposing side. Namely, recent versions of Vim can have more extensions and run
slower than past versions of Emacs. Moreover, with the large amounts of RAM in
modern computers, both vi and Emacs are lightweight compared to large IDEs
such as Eclipse, which tend to draw derision from both vi and Emacs users
alike.

O'Reilly says that its Vim tutorial sells twice as many copies as for
Emacs.[11] This has been taken by some to suggest that around twice as many
individuals prefer Vim over Emacs. However, others suggest[citation needed]
this simply means that those who use Emacs know what they're doing. Both Emacs
and Vim are distributed with complete documentation, so purchasing a manual
isn't necessary for most users. It is also noted that many advanced
programmers use either Emacs and Vim or their various offshoots, including
Linus Torvalds who uses MicroEMACS.[12]

In addition to vi and emacs workalikes, pico and its free software clone nano
and other editors often have their own third-party advocates in the editor
wars, though not to the extent of vi and emacs.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Carbon Emacs Package". http://homepage.mac.com/zenitani/emacs-e.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-27.
  2. ^ "Aquamacs is an easy-to-use, Mac-style Emacs for Mac OS X". http://aquamacs.org/. Retrieved on 2006-09-27.
  3. ^ B, Ramprasad (2005-06-24). "GNU Emacs FAQ For Windows 95/98/ME/NT/XP and 2000". http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/windows/ntemacs.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-27.
  4. ^ Borgman, Lennart (2006). "EmacsW32 Home Page". http://ourcomments.org/Emacs/EmacsW32.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-27.
  5. ^ "GNU Emacs on Windows". Franz Inc.. 2006. http://www.franz.com/emacs/. Retrieved on 2006-09-27.
  6. ^ All about Linux: The unabridged selective transcript of Richard M Stallman's talk at the ANU
  7. ^ alt.religion.emacs newsgroup
  8. ^ Saint IGNUcius - Richard Stallman
  9. ^ satirical expansions of EMACS
  10. ^ Word War vi site
  11. ^ Editor: vi or emacs?
  12. ^ Stifflog: Stiff asks, great programmers answer

  * The Art of Unix Programming: Raymond, Eric S (2003). The Art of UNIX Programming. ISBN 0-13-142901-9. http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/taoup/html/.

## [edit] External links

  * Church of Emacs resources
  * Rules, Sins, Virtues, Gods and more of The Church of Emacs
  * Saint Ignucius â as portrayed by Richard Stallman
  * Vi Lovers Home Page
  * $EDITOR sucks-rules-o-meter measures which editor's activists are more visible on the Web
  * Ed is the standard text editor
  * A transcript of Richard introducing St. IGNUcias and the Church of Emacs

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Editor_war"

Categories: Emacs | Text editors | Software wars | Internet culture | Free
software culture and documents

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 03:39 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



