
# Ambergris

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ambergris

Ambergris (Ambra grisea, Ambre gris, ambergrease, or grey amber) is a solid,
waxy, flammable substance of a dull gray or blackish color produced in the
digestive system of sperm whales.

Ambergris has a peculiar sweet, earthy odor. The principal historical use of
ambergris was as a fixative in perfumery, though it has now been largely
displaced by synthetics.

## Contents

  * 1 Source
  * 2 Physical properties
  * 3 Chemical properties
  * 4 Replacement compounds and economics
  * 5 Historical and cross-cultural uses
  * 6 References in literature and film
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Source

Ambergris occurs as a biliary secretion of the intestines of the sperm whale,
and can be found floating upon the sea, or in the sand near the coast. It is
also sometimes found in the abdomens of whales. Because giant squids' beaks
have been found embedded within lumps of ambergris, scientists have theorized
that the whale's intestine produces the substance as a means of easing the
passage of hard, sharp objects that the whale might have inadvertently eaten.

Ambergris can be found in the Atlantic Ocean; on the coasts of Brazil and
Madagascar; and on the coast of Africa, of the East Indies, The Maldives,
mainland China, Japan, India, Australia, New Zealand and the Molucca islands.
Most commercially collected ambergris comes from the Bahama Islands and
Providence Island in the Caribbean.

## [edit] Physical properties

Ambergris is found in lumps of various shapes and sizes, weighing from 15 g
(Â½ oz) to 50 kg (100 pounds) or more. When initially expelled by or removed
from the whale, the fatty precursor of ambergris is pale white in color
(sometimes streaked with black), soft, with a strong fecal smell. Following
months to years of photo-degradation and oxidation in the ocean, this
precursor gradually hardens, developing a dark gray or black color, a crusty
and waxy texture, and a peculiar odor that is at once sweet, earthy, marine,
and animalic. Its smell has been described by many as a vastly richer and
smoother version of isopropanol without its stinging harshness.

In this developed condition, ambergris has a specific gravity ranging from
0.780 to 0.926. It melts at about 62 Â°C to a fatty, yellow resinous liquid;
and at 100 Â°C it is volatilized into a white vapor. It is soluble in ether,
and in volatile and fixed oils.

## [edit] Chemical properties

Ambergris is relatively nonreactive to acid. White crystals of a substance
called ambrein can be separated from ambergris by heating raw ambergris in
alcohol, then allowing the resulting solution to cool.

## [edit] Replacement compounds and economics

Historically, the primary commercial use of ambergris was in fragrance
chemistry, although it has also been used for medicinal and flavoring
purposes. Ambergris has historically been an important perfume odorant and is
highly sought. However, it is difficult to get a consistent and reliable
supply of high quality ambergris. Due to demand for ambergris and its high
price, replacement compounds have been sought out by the fragrance industry
and chemically synthesized. The most important of these are ambroxan, ambrox
and its steroisomers, which has largely taken its place and is the most widely
used ambergris-replacement odorant in perfume manufacturing [1]. The oldest
and most commercially significant synthesis of ambrox is from sclareol
(primarily extracted from clary sage), although syntheses have been devised
from a variety of other natural products, including cis-abienol and thujone.
Procedures for the microbial production of ambrox have also been devised.[2]

As of 2006, raw ambergris fetched approximately US$10 per gram, with much
higher prices possible for particularly high-quality samples.[3][4] In the
United States, importing, buying, or selling ambergris â including ambergris
that had washed ashore â was considered a violation of the Marine Mammal
Protection Act of 1972.[5] In 2001 this ruling was overturned, and ambergris
was deemed not to be a byproduct of the whaling industry, since the whale
expels this substance naturally.[citation needed]

## [edit] Historical and cross-cultural uses

Ambergris has been mostly known for its use in creating perfume and fragrance
much like musk. While perfumes can still be found with ambergris around the
world, American perfumers usually avoid it due to legal ambiguities. Ancient
Egyptians burned ambergris as incense, while in modern Egypt ambergris is used
for scenting cigarettes.[6]. The ancient Chinese called the substance
"dragon's spittle fragrance."[7]. During the Black Death in Europe, people
believed that carrying a ball of ambergris could help prevent them from
getting the plague. This was because the fragrance covered the smell of the
air which was believed to be the cause of plague.[citation needed]

This substance has also been used historically as a flavouring for food, and
some people consider it an aphrodisiac. During the Middle Ages, Europeans used
ambergris as a medication for headaches, colds, epilepsy, and other
ailments.[7]

Ambergris was also moulded, dried, decorated and worn as jewellery,
particularly during the European Renaissance. It was often formed into
beads.[citation needed]

## [edit] References in literature and film

  * The writer Herman Melville devotes a chapter to ambergris in Moby-Dick. He discusses at length how ambergris was commonly found in dead whales floating in the South Pacific Ocean.
  * Detailed description of the harvesting of ambergris in The Far Side of the World by Patrick O'Brian.
  * Ambergris is also the object of interest during one mystery in the "Encyclopedia Brown" series.
  * Cherry Ames, Cruise Nurse by Helen Wells is centered around a missing piece of ambergris and includes information about it.
  * Jeff Vandermeer's collection of short stories, City of Saints and Madmen and his novel Shriek, An Afterword are both set in a city-state, founded by whalers, named Ambergris.
  * In the book Hannibal by Thomas Harris (as well as the movie by the same name), ambergris is mentioned as an ingredient of a hand-engineered perfume Hannibal Lecter uses to scent a letter he sends to Clarice Starling.
  * In One Thousand and One Nights, Sinbad the Sailor finds a valuable lot of ambergris on an island in one of his adventures.
  * Asey Mayo, the Cape Cod Detective in the series by Phoebe Atwood Taylor, solves a murder around a found lump of ambergris.
  * In Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (film), the character Beadle Bamford wears it as a perfume.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Chauffat, Corinne; Morris, Anthony (March/April 2004), "From Ambergris to Cetalox Laevo", Perfumer & Flavourist 29: 34-41
  2. ^ Cheetham, P. S. J., "The use of biotransformations for the production of flavors and fragrances - flavor, fragrance and cosmetic production by biotransformations by fungus, yeast and bacterium," Trends Biotechnology. 11(11):478-88, 1993.
  3. ^ NYTimes article
  4. ^ BBC article
  5. ^ MMPA
  6. ^ Brady,George Stuart; Clauser, Henry R.; Vaccari, John A. (2002). Materials Handbook: An Encyclopedia for Managers, Technical Professionals, Purchasing and Production Managers, Technicians, and Supervisors. United States: McGraw-Hill Professional. pp. p. 64. ISBN 9780071360760.
  7. ^ a b Strange but True: Whale Waste Is Extremely Valuable: Scientific American

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up ambergris in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * University of Miami Ambergris FAQ (out dated info)
  * Natural History Magazine Article: Floating Gold -- The Romance of Ambergris
  * Ambergris - A Pathfinder and Annotated Bibliography
  * On the chemistry and ethics of Ambergris
  * Scientific American Strange but True: Whale Waste Is Extremely Valuable

This article incorporates text from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica Eleventh
Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Whaling  
International Whaling Commission Â· History of whaling Â· Aboriginal whaling
Â· Sperm whaling Â· Dolphin drive hunting  
By country  
America Â· Australia (Western Australia) Â· Faroe Islands Â· Iceland Â· Japan
Â· Netherlands Â· New Zealand Â· Norway  
Products  
Ambergris Â· Baleen Â· Blubber Â· Spermaceti Â· Whale oil  
Television  
Whale Wars  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ambergris"

Categories: Perfume ingredients | Whale products | Animal glandular products

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since September 2008 | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911
EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 March 2009, at 20:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



