
# Siamese fighting fish

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Betta (Siamese fighting fish)  
A blue veiltail male.  

A blue veiltail male.

Female  

Female  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Animalia  
  
Phylum: Chordata  
  
Class: Actinopterygii  
  
Order: Perciformes  
  
Family: Osphronemidae  
  
Genus: Betta  
  
Species: B. splendens  
  
Binomial name  
Betta splendens  
Regan, 1910  
The Siamese fighting fish (Betta splendens), also known as the "beta fish" or
just "betta", is one of the most popular species of freshwater aquarium fish.
It is native to the rice paddies of Thailand and called pla-kad or pla-kat
("Biting Fish") in its native Thailand.

The Betta fish is a relatively inexpensive way to enter the aquatic species
ownership realm. Because these fish are descendants of the wild betta fish
which live in oxygen-poor environments, Siamese fighting fish are capable of
living in smaller containers than most aquarium fish, without the filters and
aerators that other aquarium fish require, although this isn't the ideal
living situation.[1] The name Betta (or betta) is pronounced /ËbÉtÉ/.[2]
The name Betta is not to be confused with the Greek letter beta. Instead, the
name of the genus is derived from ikan bettah, taken from a local dialect of
Thailand.[3]

B. splendens usually grow to an overall length of about 6.0 centimetres (2.4
in), though some varieties reach 8.0 centimetres (3.1 in) in length. In recent
years[when?] breeders have been able to create "Giant Bettas" that exceed 8.0
centimetres (3.1 in) due to the manipulation of a mutant gene[verification
needed][citation needed]. Although bettas are known for their brilliant colors
and large, flowing fins, the natural coloration of B. splendens is a dull
green and brown, and the fins of wild specimens are relatively short. However,
brilliantly colored and longer finned varieties (i.e. Veiltail; Delta;
Superdelta; and Halfmoon) have been developed through selective breeding.

The betta is a member of the gourami family (family Osphronemidae) of order
Perciformes, but was formerly classified among the Anabantidae. Although there
are nearly 50 other types of bettas, B. splendens is the most popular species
among aquarium hobbyists, particularly in the United States.

## Contents

  * 1 Breathing
  * 2 Diet
  * 3 Reproduction and nests
  * 4 Colors
  * 5 Tail shapes
  * 6 Behavior
  * 7 Tankmates
  * 8 In popular culture
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 See also
  * 11 External links
  * 12 References

  
## [edit] Breathing

Like anabantids and all members of the genus Betta, Siamese fighting fish have
a labyrinth organ in their heads that allows them to take oxygen directly from
the atmosphere in addition to the oxygen taken from water via their gills.
Bettas that cannot reach the surface will drown. If a betta is sick and having
trouble reaching the surface, some owners find it helpful to place a tall,
flat surface in the tank that the betta can rest on and reach the surface more
easily. Pet shops, chain or locally-owned, often through ignorance or
indifference house and display bettas in water heavily contaminated with their
own waste, poisoning the bettas and damaging their gills.[citation needed]

## [edit] Diet

Bettas have upturned mouths and are primarily carnivorous surface feeders. In
the wild, bettas feed on zooplankton and the larvae of mosquitoes and other
insects, such as flies, crickets, or grasshoppers.[citation needed] Bettas
which feed on wide range of foods live longer, have richer colors, and heal
fin damage more quickly. Typically, Betta pellets are a combination of mashed
shrimp meal, fish meal, brine shrimp, bloodworms, and vitamins. Bettas will
also eat live or frozen bloodworms, brine shrimp or daphnia. For variety and
fiber, bettas are fed finely-chopped, high-protein vegetables, such as
soybeans, peas, green beans, broccoli, corn, and carrots. Some bettas subsist
on dried flaked food suitable for tropical fish, because although this feed
reduces their coloring, the bettas are able to digest this better than
pellets. However, bettas are carnivorous and therefore require meat products
as well. Bettas can get constipated, exhibiting a swollen stomach, when their
diet lacks variety.

## [edit] Reproduction and nests

The Siamese fighting fish mate in a fashion that is called "nuptial embrace",
in which the male and female spiral around each other, around 10-41 eggs are
released and fertilized at each embrace, until the female is exhausted of
eggs. Once the female has released all of her eggs, she is removed from the
tank, as it is likely that she'll eat the eggs due to hunger. [4]The male
carefully keeps every egg in his bubble nest, making sure none fall to the
bottom, and repairing the bubble nest as needed. Incubation last 30-40 hours,
and the eggs hatch in 3-4 days.

Betta males build bubble nests of various sizes and thicknesses at the surface
of the water. During and after spawning, the male uses his mouth to retrieve
sinking eggs and deposit them in the bubble nest. After approximately two days
the eggs hatch, and after three more they become free-swimming fry; The male
will try to keep the fry near the bubble nest in order to keep them alive
while their gills develop. Once the fry are older the male fry and male parent
will fight so it is best to remove all males from the tank and place
separately. Betta fry are fed infusoria for the first several days, followed
by newly hatched brine shrimp or similarly sized food.[5]

<IMG>

Blue and red veiltail male with a bubble nest.

<IMG>

A red combtail male Betta with a bubble nest.

<IMG>

A female fan tail with banding showing readiness to mate.  
B. splendens can be hybridized with B. imbellis, Betta sp. Mahachai and B.
smaragdina, though with the latter the fry tend to have low survival rates.

## [edit] Colors

<IMG>

<IMG>

An orange dalmatian male.

Bettas have been affectionately nicknamed "The Jewel of the Orient" due to the
wide range of colors which are produced through selective breeding.

Wild bettas only exhibit strong colors when agitated.[citation needed]
However, breeders have been able to make this coloration permanent, and a wide
variety of hues breed true. Bettas come in a variety of colors, such as red,
blue, turquoise, orange, yellow, white, and green. Most are slightly
iridescent, and can appear to change color with different lighting or viewing
angle. Breeders have also developed different color patterns such as marble
and butterfly, as well as metallic shades such as copper, gold, and opaque.
Children of for eg: a blue fighter and a brown fighter, may turn out blue with
a tint of gold.[citation needed]

Breeders around the world continue to develop new varieties. Often, the male
species are sold preferentially in stores because of their beauty, compared to
the females. Recently, breeders have developed in females the same range of
colors previously only bred in males. However, females never develop fins as
showy as males of the same type and are almost always more subdued in
colouration.

The true albino betta is a 'holy grail' that has been feverishly sought after
since one recorded appearance in 1927, and one in 1953. Neither of them were
able to establish a line of true albino betta. In 1994, a hobbyist named
Tanaka successfully bred it. [3]

## [edit] Tail shapes

<IMG>

<IMG>

A metallic, double-tail male Betta

Breeders have developed several different tail shapes:

  * Veiltail (non-symmetrical tail, only two rays)
  * Crowntail (highly frilled, extended spiny rays, also called fringetail)
  * Combtail (less extended version of the crown tail)
  * Half-moon (large tail fin that forms a 180-degree or larger circle segment)
  * Short-finned fighting style (sometimes called "plakat")
  * Double-tail (the tail fin is split into two lobes and the dorsal fin is significantly elongated)
  * Delta tail (tail span is less than half-moon with sharp edges)
  * Fantail (a rounded delta tail)

## [edit] Behavior

<IMG>

<IMG>

A male "attacking" and flaring at his reflection in a mirror.

Male and female Bettas flare or "puff out" their gill covers (opercula) in
order to appear more impressive, either to intimidate other rivals or as an
act of courtship. Females and males will display horizontal bars (unless they
are too light a colour for this to show) if stressed or frightened. Females
often flare their gills at other females, especially when setting up a pecking
order. Flirting fish behave similarly, with vertical instead of horizontal
stripes indicating a willingness and readiness to breed. Bettas sometimes
require a place to hide, even in the absence of threats. Bettas may set up a
territory centered on a plant or rocky alcove, sometimes becoming highly
possessive of it and aggressive toward trespassing rivals.

On average, males are more aggressive, though individual females,demonstrate a
wide range in level of aggression. The aggression of bettas has been studied
by ethologists and comparative psychologists[6]. Bettas will even respond
aggressively to their own reflections in a mirror; use of a mirror avoids the
risk of physical damage inherent in actual conflict.[citation needed] Bettas
are intensely human-responsive and will initiate games of peekaboo with their
masters or others who are watching them. They are quite curious and will watch
humans going about their business nearby. they enjoy having in their tanks
plants, natural or artificial, that almost reach the surface of the water so
they may rest upon the plants and raise their heads slightly for a sip of air
or for the males to build their bubblenest.

## [edit] Tankmates

Because of the aggressive nature of the Betta splendens species, tank-mates
must be carefully chosen:

Two or more Males: Contrary to popular belief, male betta splendens do not
fight to the death in the wild; when one fish has won the fight, the loser
retreats to safety.[citation needed] In an aquarium, however, there is no
retreat, so the victor fish continues attacking the loser, often resulting in
the loser's death; therefore, hobbyists rarely house two male B. splendens in
the same tank unless they are (a) separated by a partition; (b) they are from
the same batch of eggs and are immature; (c)the tank is fairly large (over 50
gallons) and is heavily planted.

A Male and a Female: In the wild, females stay clear of males, except during
mating. When cohabiting in tanks, males might kill females, and are generally
kept apart unless (a) they are juvenile siblings, (b) they are breeding, (c)
there is a partition, or (d) the tank is large enough for the female or male
to escape attack. Often, before breeding, breeders use a partitioned container
to allow female display without risking harm by the male.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Several female bettas in a community tank with mollies and rainbowfish.

Two or more Females: Bettas are not schooling fish, but in a large tank with
many hiding spaces, female bettas can cohabit. When two females share a tank,
one usually bullies the other; however, four or more females will establish a
hierarchy allowing peaceful co-existence. Nevertheless, females living in
community must be monitored for aggressive females.

Compatible fish of other species: Hobbyists put Betta splendens in tanks with
other species after careful research and preparation. Common tankmates include
platies (moons), Corydoras catfish, and loaches. Females can share a tank with
danios and tetras, but males should not be kept with these species as they
tend to nip at their long fins. Shrimp are popular tank-mates because,
provided with sufficient natural plant cover, they keep the tank clean without
causing stress to the bettas.[citation needed]

The success of a betta in a community aquarium, however, is largely dependent
on the particular betta's level of aggression. Whereas some bettas make
wonderful community fish, particularly belligerent or skittish bettas are best
housed alone. Bettas are very aggressive towards long-finned fish, the guppy
for example.

Incompatible fish of other species:

  * Very small fish (smaller than one inch) may be eaten.
  * Fish with long, flowing fins may trigger aggression. This includes fancy guppies, white cloud mountain minnows (which at any rate are suited to cooler water than bettas), and some long-finned tetra species.
  * Slow-swimming fish, e.g. fancy guppies, will be unable to escape bullying.
  * Mollies tend to bite the fin or (if large enough) eat bettas.
  * Fish belonging to the same biological family as the betta, such as Paradise Fish and gouramis, may attack or be attacked due to their relatively similar appearance and cross species aggression.
  * Goldfish are unsuitable tank-mates because of their great appetites, preference for cold water, and high excretion-rate.
  * Barbs have a tendency to nip at slower-moving fish such as male and female bettas.
  * Cichlids are aggressive and certainly incompatible with bettas except for peaceful cichlids like German rams.

Like many tropical fish, Betta splendens might harass and kill small, slow
fancy goldfish; in return, goldfish have been known to bite a betta's tail.
Goldfish also are best suited to a cooler-water tank than the tropical Betta
splendens. It's commonly thought that bettas are best housed in extremely
small vessels; this is a misconception derived from the limited display space
available in pet shops and the fact that males cannot be housed together. In
fact, bettas need as much living volume as other tropical fish of comparable
size, meaning that a tank of 1.5-2 gallons in capacity is the practical lower
limit for an individual fish. Table-top tanks should be kept in warm
locations, given optimal betta water temperature of 77 to 82 degrees
Fahrenheit, and thus are unsuitable for places that are air-conditioned to
cooler temperatures. If a larger tank is used and the filtration is strong
enough to cause a current, it is important to make sure the betta has plenty
of tank space without a strong current, as this can damage the betta's fins
and make it difficult for the betta to reach the surface.

## [edit] In popular culture

The Siamese fighting fish has been used as the default background in the first
official beta version of the Windows 7 operating system, in an apparent
reference to the name "betta".

The James Bond villain Blofeld compared the strategy of SPECTRE of three
Siamese fighting fish fighting each other, there two will fight each other to
the death while the third will wait on its turn, symbolise the conflict
between the USA and Soviet Union as the two fishes and SPECTRE as the third,
in the movie From Russia with Love.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Simpson, M. J. A. (1968). The display of the Siamese fighting fish Betta splendens. Animal Behaviour Monographs, 1, 1-73.
  * Thompson, T. (1966). Operant and Classically-Conditioned Aggressive Behavior in Siamese Fighting Fish. American Zoologist, 6, 629-741 (doi:10.1093/icb/6.4.629).

## [edit] See also

  * Rumble Fish

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Betta splendens  
Sister project The Wikibook Do-It-Yourself has a page on the topic of

Breed siamese fighting fish  
  * Bettas at the Open Directory Project
  * Betta splendens (TSN 172611). Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved on 19 March 2006.
  * "Betta splendens". FishBase. Ed. Ranier Froese and Daniel Pauly. November 2005 version. N.p.: FishBase, 2005.
  * Species and care information for Siamese fighting fish on the Aquarium Wiki Encyclopaedia.
  * Betta splendens
  * Indian Almond leaves and Siamese fighting fish
  * Betta Brasil WebSite (Port-Br)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ [1] /http://www.bettatalk.com/housing.htm
  2. ^ "Betta". American Heritage Dictionary (4th ed. ed.). http://www.bartleby.com/61/78/B0217800.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-29.
  3. ^ "Betta". FishBase. Ed. Ranier Froese and Daniel Pauly. March 2006 version. N.p.: FishBase, 2006.
  4. ^ Leong, Paul (2004). In "[2]". Google Search. Retrieved on March 13, 2009.
  5. ^ Hemdal, Jay F. (2003). In "Aquarium Fish Breeding". Barron's Educational Series p. 101. ISBN 0764122088. Google Book Search. Retrieved on March 27, 2008.
  6. ^ Bronstein, Paul M. (1998). "Agonistic Sequences and the Assessment of Opponents in Male Betta splendens". American Journal of Psychology 265.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siamese_fighting_fish"

Categories: Osphronemidae | Fauna of Southeast Asia | Fishkeeping | Fauna of
Thailand

Hidden categories: Vague or ambiguous time | All pages needing cleanup |
Wikipedia articles needing factual verification since March 2009 | All pages
needing factual verification | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced
statements since February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Bosanski
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 21:33.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



