
# Unintended consequence

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the 1996 novel by John Ross, see Unintended Consequences (novel).

Unintended consequences are outcomes that are not (or not limited to) the
results originally intended in a particular situation. The unintended results
may be foreseen or unforeseen, but they should be the logical or likely
results of the action. For example, historians have speculated that if the
Treaty of Versailles had not imposed such harsh conditions on Germany, World
War II would not have occurred. From this perspective, one might consider the
war an unintended consequence of the treaty.

Unintended consequences can be grouped into roughly three types:

  * a positive unexpected benefit, usually referred to as serendipity or a windfall
  * a negative or perverse effect, that may be contrary to what was originally intended
  * a potential source of problems, such as described by Murphy's law

Discussions of unintended consequences usually refer to the situation of
perverse results. This situation can arise when a policy has a perverse
incentive and causes actions contrary to what is desired.

## Contents

  * 1 The law of unintended consequences
  * 2 History
  * 3 Causes
  * 4 Examples
    * 4.1 Unexpected benefits
    * 4.2 Perverse results
  * 5 Failure mode and effects analysis
  * 6 Purposeful gaming to achieve unintended consequences
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] The law of unintended consequences

The "law of unintended consequences" (also called the "law of unforeseen
consequences") states that any purposeful action will produce some unintended
consequences. A classic example is a bypass â a road built to relieve
traffic congestion on a congested road â that attracts new development and
with it more traffic, resulting in two congested streets instead of one.

This maxim is not a scientific law; it is more in line with Murphy's law as a
warning against the hubristic belief that humans can fully control the world
around them. Stated in other words, each cause has more than one effect, and
these effects will invariably include at least one unforeseen side effect. The
unintended side effect can potentially be more significant than any of the
intended effects.

## [edit] History

The idea of unintended consequences dates back at least to Adam Smith, the
Scottish Enlightenment, and consequentialism (judging by results). However, it
was the sociologist Robert K. Merton who popularized this concept in the
twentieth century.

In his 1936 paper, "The Unanticipated Consequences of Purposive Social
Action", Merton tried to apply a systematic analysis to the problem of
"unanticipated consequences" of "purposive social action". He emphasized that
his term "purposive actionâ¦ [is exclusively] concerned with 'conduct' as
distinct from 'behavior.' That is, with action that involves motives and
consequently a choice between various alternatives".[1] Merton also stated
that "no blanket statement categorically affirming or denying the practical
feasibility of all social planning is warranted."[2]

## [edit] Causes

Possible causes of unintended consequences include the world's inherent
complexity (parts of a system responding to changes in the environment),
perverse incentives, human stupidity, self-deception or other cognitive or
emotional biases. As a sub-component of complexity (in the scientific sense),
the chaotic nature of the universe â and especially its quality of having
small, apparently insignificant changes with far-reaching effects (e.g., the
Butterfly Effect) â applies.

Robert K. Merton listed five possible causes of unanticipated consequences:[3]

  1. Ignorance (It is impossible to anticipate everything, thereby leading to incomplete analysis)
  2. Error (Incorrect analysis of the problem or following habits that worked in the past but may not apply to the current situation)
  3. Immediate interest, which may override long-term interests
  4. Basic values may require or prohibit certain actions even if the long-term result might be unfavorable (these long-term consequences may eventually cause changes in basic values)
  5. Self-defeating prophecy (Fear of some consequence drives people to find solutions before the problem occurs, thus the non-occurrence of the problem is unanticipated)

## [edit] Examples

<IMG>

This article may contain excessive, poor or irrelevant examples. You can
improve the article by adding more descriptive text and removing less
pertinent examples. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for
further suggestions.  
<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification.  
Please help improve this article by adding reliable references. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed. (May 2008)  
### [edit] Unexpected benefits

  * The medieval policy of setting up large hunting reserves for the nobility has preserved green space, often as parks, throughout England and other places in Europe. Likewise the creation of "no-man's lands" in places such as the Korean Demilitarized Zone have created unique natural habitats. The same has occurred with minefields in the Falkland Islands: since birds are too light to trigger the mines, the minefields have become de facto bird sanctuaries.

  * The sinking of ships in shallow waters during wartime has created many artificial coral reefs: beautiful, scientifically valuable and an attraction for recreational divers.

  * Research carried out by John J. Donohue and Steven Levitt suggests that legalized abortion in the United States can account for much of the drop in crime rates that occurred in the 1990s.[4] States that legalized abortion before Roe v. Wade saw correspondingly earlier drops in crime; and states where abortion is common saw greater drops in crime than states where abortion is rare. Most convincingly, they found that "in high abortion states, only arrests of those born after abortion legalization fall relative to low abortion states."

  * In medicine, most drugs have unintended consequences associated with their use, which are known as 'side effects'. Many are harmful and are more precisely called 'adverse effects'. However, some are beneficialâfor instance, aspirin, a pain reliever, can also thin the blood and help to prevent heart attacks, as well as reduce the severity and damage from strokes. The existence of beneficial side effects also leads to off label use â prescription or use of a drug for a non-intended purpose.

### [edit] Perverse results

  * The Streisand Effect occurs when an attempt to censor or remove a certain piece of information (such as a photograph, document, etc.) instead causes the information to become widely known and distributed. The fact that a piece of information is being restricted assigns to it a previously nonexistent value in the eyes of the public.

  * The introduction of rabbits into Australia for sport led to an explosive growth in the rabbit population; rabbits have become a major feral pest in Australia. The same has occurred in New Zealand.

  * Along the same lines, kudzu has become a major problem in the South Eastern United States since its introduction as a way of preventing erosion in earthworks. Kudzu has displaced native plants, and has effectively taken over significant portions of land.

  * The stiffening of penalties for driving while intoxicated in the United States in the 1980s led, at first, to an increase in hit and run accidents, most of which were believed to have been drunken drivers trying to escape the law. Legislators later stiffened penalties for leaving the scene of an accident.

  * In 1990, the State of Victoria (Australia) made safety helmets mandatory for all bicycle riders. Together with a reduction in the absolute number of head injuries, there was also an unexpected reduction in the number of juvenile cyclists. Research by Vulcan et al. found that the reduction in juvenile cyclists was because the youths considered wearing a bicycle helmet unfashionable.[5]

  * Prohibition in the 1920s U.S., originally enacted to suppress the alcohol trade, drove many small-time alcohol suppliers out of business and consolidated the hold of large-scale organized crime over the illegal alcohol industry. Since alcohol was still popular, criminal organisations producing alcohol were well funded and hence also increased their other activities. The War on Drugs, intended to suppress the illegal drug trade, has likewise consolidated the hold of organized drug cartels over the illegal drug industry.[citation needed]

  * In CIA jargon, "blowback" describes the unintended, undesirable consequences of covert operations. Examples include: 
    * Operation Ajax, which contributed to the 1979 Iranian Revolution & the Iran hostage crisis
    * Covert funding of the Mujahideen, which led to the rise of the Taliban

  * Father Mathew's temperance campaign in 19th-century Ireland â in which thousands of people vowed never to drink alcohol again â led to the consumption of ether, a much more dangerous intoxicant, by those unwilling to break their pledge.

## [edit] Failure mode and effects analysis

Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) is a fault tree method (first
developed for systems engineering) that examines potential failures in
products or processes. It may be used to evaluate risk management priorities
for mitigating known threat-vulnerabilities.

FMEA helps select remedial actions that reduce cumulative impacts of life-
cycle consequences (risks) from a systems failure (fault).[6]

## [edit] Purposeful gaming to achieve unintended consequences

Another more restrictive use of the term unintended consequence is when a
mechanism that has been installed with the intention of producing one result
is used to produce a different (and often conflicting) result. One games the
system when one acts in such a way that gains advantages by exploiting rules
which were intended for some other purpose. For example, computer viruses,
worms, and other such plagues are unintended consequences of the way certain
computer systems are designed. Spam is an unintended consequence of the way
the email system works. The preceding computer examples illustrate this sense
of unintended consequence in that spammers hijack a mechanism, e.g., email,
intended for interpersonal communication, for advertising.

This sense of unintended consequence excludes, for example, the proliferation
of rabbits in Australia as an unintended consequence of their introduction.
The proliferation of rabbits was indeed an unexpected (and unintended)
consequence of their introduction, but it did not result from the exploitation
of a mechanism for some other purpose. The intent to "game the system"
distinguishes this interpretation of unintended consequence from such a
broader interpretation of unintended consequence as a result of simple
historical contingency. See the Museum of Unintended Consequences for more
examples.

## [edit] See also

  * Conflict of interest
  * Counter-intuitive
  * Externality
  * Futures techniques
  * Hawthorne effect
  * Herostratus

  * Hutber's law
  * Invasive species
  * Inverse consequences
  * Kludge
  * Moral hazard
  * Nocebo

  * Parable of the broken window
  * Perverse effects of vaccination
  * Placebo
  * Regression testing
  * "Superiority"

  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ Merton, Robert K.. "The Unanticipated Consequences of Purposive Social Action". American Sociological Review 1 (6): 895. http://www.compilerpress.atfreeweb.com/Anno%20Merton%20Unintended.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-30.
  2. ^ Merton, Robert K.. "The Unanticipated Consequences of Purposive Social Action". American Sociological Review 1 (6): 904. http://www.compilerpress.atfreeweb.com/Anno%20Merton%20Unintended.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-30.
  3. ^ Merton, Robert K. On Social Structure and Science. The University of Chicago Press, 1996. http://www.press.uchicago.edu/cgi-bin/hfs.cgi/00/13087.ctl
  4. ^ Donohue, John J.; Steven Levitt (May 2001). "The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime". Quarterly Journal of Economics (MIT) 116 (2): 379â420. doi:10.1162/00335530151144050. http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?tid=6793&ttype=6.
  5. ^ Cameron, M; Cameron, M., Vulcan, A., Finch, C, and Newstead, S (June 1994). "Mandatory bicycle helmet use following a decade of helmet promotion in Victoria, Australiaâan evaluation". Accident Analysis and Prevention 26 (3): 325â327. doi:10.1016/0001-4575(94)90006-X.
  6. ^ Urban-wetland example showing unintended consequences (secondary and subsequent) of land-use zoning and flooding: Hazard Tree Analysis

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up knock-on effect in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * The Unanticipated Consequences of Purposive Social Action by Robert K. Merton, American Sociological Review, Vol 1 Issue 6, Dec 1936, pp.894-904
  * Atlantic magazine article: "Blowback"
  * Observer article: Why 'blowback' is the hidden danger of war
  * MSNBC article on Bin Laden and blowback
  * Unintended Consequences
  * Museum of Unintended Consequences
  * Edward Tenner, Why Things Bite Back: Technology and the Revenge of Unintended Consequences, Vantage Books, 1997.
  * Tomislav V. Kovandzic, John Sloan III, and Lynne M. Vieraitis. Unintended Consequences of Politically Popular Sentencing Policy: The Homicide-Promoting Effects of 'Three Strikes' in U.S. Cities (1980-1999). Criminology & Public Policy, Vol 1, Issue 3, July 2002.
  * Vulcan, A.P., Cameron, M.H. & Heiman, L., "Evaluation of mandatory bicycle helmet use in Victoria, Australia", 36th Annual Conference Proceedings, Association for the Advancement of Automotive Medicine, Oct 5-7, 1992.
  * Vulcan, A.P., Cameron, M.H. & Watson, W.L., "Mandatory Bicycle Helmet Use: Experience in Victoria, Australia", World Journal of Surgery, Vol.16, No.3, (May/June 1992), pp.389-397.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unintended_consequence"

Categories: Adages | Complex systems theory | Futurology | Risk analysis |
Sociology

Hidden categories: Articles with too many examples | Articles needing
additional references from May 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 May 2009, at 00:57 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



