
# Omega-3 fatty acid

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For an explanation of n and numerical nomenclature (such as nâ3 or 18:3),
see Nomenclature of fatty acids.

Types of fats in food  
  * Unsaturated fat
    * Monounsaturated fat
    * Polyunsaturated fat
    * Trans fat
    * Omega fatty acids: 
      * Ïâ3
      * Ïâ6
      * Ïâ9
  * Saturated fat
    * Interesterified fat

  
See also  
  * Fatty acid
  * Essential fatty acid

  
nâ3 fatty acids (popularly referred to as Ïâ3 fatty acids or omega-3
fatty acids) are a family of unsaturated fatty acids that have in common a
final carbonâcarbon double bond in the nâ3 position; that is, the third
bond from the methyl end of the fatty acid.

Important nutritionally-essential nâ3 fatty acids are: Î±-linolenic acid
(ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), all of
which are polyunsaturated. The human body cannot synthesize nâ3 fatty acids
de novo, but it can form 20- and 22-carbon unsaturated nâ3 fatty acids from
the eighteen-carbon nâ3 fatty acid, Î±-linolenic acid. These conversions
occur competitively with nâ6 fatty acids, which are essential closely
related chemical analogues that are derived from linoleic acid. Both the nâ3
Î±-linolenic acid and nâ6 linoleic acid are essential nutrients which must
be obtained from food. Synthesis of the longer nâ3 fatty acids from
linolenic acid within the body is competitively slowed by the nâ6 analogues.
Thus accumulation of long-chain nâ3 fatty acids in tissues is more effective
when they are obtained directly from food or when competing amounts of nâ6
analogs do not greatly exceed the amounts of nâ3.[citation needed]

## Contents

  * 1 Chemistry
    * 1.1 List of nâ3 fatty acids
  * 2 Biological significances
  * 3 Health benefits
    * 3.1 Cancer
    * 3.2 Cardiovascular disease
    * 3.3 Immune function
    * 3.4 Brain health
    * 3.5 Rheumatoid arthritis
  * 4 Health risks
    * 4.1 Cardiac risk
  * 5 Research frontiers
    * 5.1 Developmental differences
    * 5.2 Low birth weight
    * 5.3 Psychiatric disorders
  * 6 Dietary sources
    * 6.1 Daily values
    * 6.2 Fish
    * 6.3 Flax
    * 6.4 Botanical sources of nâ3 fatty acids
    * 6.5 Eggs
    * 6.6 Meat
    * 6.7 Other sources
  * 7 The nâ6 to nâ3 ratio
  * 8 Conversion efficiency of ALA to EPA and DHA
  * 9 See also
  * 10 Notes and references
    * 10.1 Additional sources
  * 11 Further reading
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Chemistry

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chemical structure of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), an essential nâ3 fatty
acid, (18:3Î9c,12c,15c, which means a chain of 18 carbons with 3 double bonds
on carbons numbered 9, 12 and 15). Although chemists count from the carbonyl
carbon (Blue Numbering), physiologists count from the n (Ï) carbon (red
numbering). Note that from the n end (diagram right), the first double bond
appears as the third carbon-carbon bond (line segment), hence the name
"nâ3". This is explained by the fact that the n end is almost never changed
during physiologic transformations in the human body, as it is more stable
energetically, and other carbohydrates compounds can be synthesized from the
other carbonyl end, for example in glycerides, or from double bonds in the
middle of the chain.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chemical structure of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chemical structure of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).

The term nâ3 (also called Ïâ3 or omega-3) signifies that the first double
bond exists as the third carbon-carbon bond from the terminal methyl end (n)
of the carbon chain.

nâ3 fatty acids which are important in human nutrition are: Î±-linolenic
acid (18:3, nâ3; ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5, nâ3; EPA), and
docosahexaenoic acid (22:6, nâ3; DHA). These three polyunsaturates have
either 3, 5 or 6 double bonds in a carbon chain of 18, 20 or 22 carbon atoms,
respectively. All double bonds are in the cis-configuration, i.e. the two
hydrogen atoms are on the same side of the double bond.

Most naturally-produced fatty acids (created or transformed in animalia or
plant cells with an even number of carbon in chains) are in cis-configuration
where they are more easily transformable. The trans-configuration results in
much more stable chains that are very difficult to further break or transform,
forming longer chains that aggregate in tissues and lacking the necessary
hydrophilic properties. This trans-configuration can be the result of the
transformation in alkaline solutions, or of the action of some bacterias that
are shortening the carbonic chains. Natural transforms in vegetal or animal
cells more rarely affect the last nâ3 group itself. However, nâ3 compounds
are still more fragile than nâ6 because the last double bond is
geometrically and electrically more exposed, notably in the natural cis
configuration.

### [edit] List of nâ3 fatty acids

This table lists several different names for the most common nâ3 fatty acids
found in nature.

Common name Lipid name Chemical name  
16:3 (nâ3) all-cis-7,10,13-hexadecatrienoic acid  
Î±-Linolenic acid (ALA) 18:3 (nâ3) all-cis-9,12,15-octadecatrienoic acid  
Stearidonic acid (STD) 18:4 (nâ3) all-cis-6,9,12,15-octadecatetraenoic acid  
Eicosatrienoic acid (ETE) 20:3 (nâ3) all-cis-11,14,17-eicosatrienoic acid  
Eicosatetraenoic acid (ETA) 20:4 (nâ3) all-cis-8,11,14,17-eicosatetraenoic
acid  
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) 20:5 (nâ3) all-cis-5,8,11,14,17-eicosapentaenoic
acid  
Docosapentaenoic acid (DPA),  
Clupanodonic acid 22:5 (nâ3) all-cis-7,10,13,16,19-docosapentaenoic acid  
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) 22:6 (nâ3) all-
cis-4,7,10,13,16,19-docosahexaenoic acid  
Tetracosapentaenoic acid 24:5 (nâ3) all-cis-9,12,15,18,21-docosahexaenoic
acid  
Tetracosahexaenoic acid (Nisinic acid) 24:6 (nâ3) all-
cis-6,9,12,15,18,21-tetracosenoic acid  
## [edit] Biological significances

    The biological effects of the nâ3 are largely mediated by their interactions with the nâ6 fatty acids; see Essential fatty acid interactions for detail.
A 1992 article by biochemist William E.M. Lands[1] provides an overview of the
research into nâ3 fatty acids, and is the basis of this section.

The 'essential' fatty acids were given their name when researchers found that
they were essential to normal growth in young children and animals. (Note that
the modern definition of 'essential' is more strict.) A small amount of nâ3
in the diet (~1% of total calories) enabled normal growth, and increasing the
amount had little to no additional effect on growth.

Likewise, researchers found that nâ6 fatty acids (such as Î³-linolenic acid
and arachidonic acid) play a similar role in normal growth. However, they also
found that nâ6 was "better" at supporting dermal integrity, renal function,
and parturition. These preliminary findings led researchers to concentrate
their studies on nâ6, and it was only in recent decades that nâ3 has
become of interest.

In 1963 it was discovered that the nâ6 arachidonic acid was converted by the
body into pro-inflammatory agents called prostaglandins. By 1979 more of what
are now known as eicosanoids were discovered: thromboxanes, prostacyclins and
the leukotrienes. The eicosanoids, which have important biological functions,
typically have a short active lifetime in the body, starting with synthesis
from fatty acids and ending with metabolism by enzymes. However, if the rate
of synthesis exceeds the rate of metabolism, the excess eicosanoids may have
deleterious effects. Researchers found that nâ3 is also converted into
eicosanoids, but at a much slower rate. Eicosanoids made from nâ3 fats often
have opposing functions to those made from nâ6 fats (ie, anti-inflammatory
rather than inflammatory). If both nâ3 and nâ6 are present, they will
"compete" to be transformed, so the ratio of nâ3:nâ6 directly affects the
type of eicosanoids that are produced.

This competition was recognized as important when it was found that
thromboxane is a factor in the clumping of platelets, which leads to
thrombosis. The leukotrienes were similarly found to be important in
immune/inflammatory-system response, and therefore relevant to arthritis,
lupus, and asthma. These discoveries led to greater interest in finding ways
to control the synthesis of nâ6 eicosanoids. The simplest way would be by
consuming more nâ3 and fewer nâ6 fatty acids.

## [edit] Health benefits

On September 8, 2004, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration gave "qualified
health claim" status to eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA) nâ3 fatty acids, stating that "supportive but not conclusive research
shows that consumption of EPA and DHA [nâ3] fatty acids may reduce the risk
of coronary heart disease."[2] This updated and modified their health risk
advice letter of 2001 (see below). Currently regulatory agencies do not accept
that there is sufficient evidence for any of the other suggested benefits of
DHA and EPA other than for cardiovascular health, and further claims should be
treated with caution.

Note that taking the 18 carbon Î±-linolenic acid has not been shown to have
the same cardiovascular benefits as DHA or EPA. Currently there are many
products on the market which claim to contain health promoting 'omega 3', but
contain only Î±-linolenic acid (ALA), not EPA or DHA. These products contain
mainly higher plant oils and must be converted by the body to create DHA and
therefore considered less efficient. DHA and EPA are made by microalgae that
live in seawater. These are then consumed by fish and accumulate to high
levels in their internal organs. People with certain circulatory problems,
such as varicose veins, benefit from fish oil because it contains the EPA and
DHA derived from microalgae. Fish oil stimulates blood circulation, increases
the breakdown of fibrin, a compound involved in clot and scar formation, and
additionally has been shown to reduce blood pressure.[3][4] There is strong
scientific evidence that nâ3 fatty acids reduce blood triglyceride
levels[5][6][7][8] and regular intake reduces the risk of secondary and
primary heart attack.[9][10][11][12]

  
Some benefits have been reported in conditions such as rheumatoid
arthritis[13][14] and cardiac arrhythmias.[15][16][17]

  
There is preliminary evidence that n-3 fatty acids supplementation might be
helpful in cases of depression[18][19] and anxiety.[20][21] Studies report
highly significant improvement from n-3 fatty acids supplementation alone and
in conjunction with medication.[22]

Some research suggests that fish oil intake may reduce the risk of ischemic
and thrombotic stroke.[23][24][25] However, very large amounts may actually
increase the risk of hemorrhagic stroke (see below). Lower amounts are not
related to this risk,[25] 3 grams of total EPA/DHA daily are considered safe
with no increased risk of bleeding involved[26] and many studies used
substantially higher doses without major side effects (for example: 4.4 grams
EPA/2.2 grams DHA in 2003 study).[18]

### [edit] Cancer

Several studies report possible anti-cancer effects of nâ3 fatty acids
(particularly breast, colon and prostate cancer).[27][28][29] Omega-3 fatty
acids reduced prostate tumor growth, slowed histopathological progression, and
increased survival[30]. Among n-3 fatty acids [omega-3], neither long-chain
nor short-chain forms were consistently associated with breast cancer risk.
High levels of docosahexaenoic acid, however, the most abundant n-3 PUFA
[omega-3] in erythrocyte membranes, were associated with a reduced risk of
breast cancer.[31].

A 2006 report in the Journal of the American Medical Association concluded
that their review of literature covering cohorts from many countries with a
wide variety of demographic concluded that there was no link between nâ3
fatty acids and cancer.[32] This is similar to the findings of a review by the
British Medical Journal of studies up to February 2002 that failed to find
clear effects of long and shorter chain nâ3 fats on total mortality,
combined cardiovascular events and cancer.[33]

### [edit] Cardiovascular disease

In 1999, the GISSI-Prevenzione Investigators reported in the Lancet, the
results of major clinical study in 11,324 patients with a recent myocardial
infarction. Treatment 1 gram per day of nâ3 fatty acids reduced the
occurrence of death, cardiovascular death and sudden cardiac death by 20%, 30%
and 45% respectively.[34] These beneficial effects were seen already from
three months onwards.[35]

In April 2006, a team led by Lee Hooper at the University of East Anglia in
Norwich, UK, published a review of almost 100 separate studies into nâ3
fatty acids, found in abundance in oily fish. It concluded that they do not
have a significant protective effect against cardiovascular disease.[36] This
meta-analysis was controversial and stands in stark contrast with two
different reviews also performed in 2006 by the American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition[37] and a second JAMA review[38] that both indicated decreases in
total mortality and cardiovascular incidents (i.e. myocardial infarctions)
associated with the regular consumption of fish and fish oil supplements. In
addition nâ3 has been shown to reduce symptoms of other mental disorders
such as aggression and ADHD.[39][40]

Several studies published in 2007 have been more positive. In the March 2007
edition of the journal Atherosclerosis, 81 Japanese men with unhealthy blood
sugar levels were randomly assigned to receive 1800 mg daily of
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA â an nâ3 essential fatty acid from fish oil)
with the other half being a control group. The thickness of the carotid
arteries and certain measures of blood flow were measured before and after
supplementation. This went on for approximately two years. A total of 60
patients (30 in the EPA group and 30 in the control group) completed the
study. Those given the EPA had a statistically significant decrease in the
thickness of the carotid arteries along with improvement in blood flow. The
authors indicated that this was the first demonstration that administration of
purified EPA improves the thickness of carotid arteries along with improving
blood flow in patients with unhealthy blood sugar levels.[41]

In another study published in the American Journal of Health System Pharmacy
March 2007, patients with high triglycerides and poor coronary artery health
were given 4 grams a day of a combination of EPA and DHA along with some
monounsaturated fatty acids. Those patients with very unhealthy triglyceride
levels (above 500 mg/dl) reduced their triglycerides on average 45% and their
VLDL cholesterol by more than 50%. VLDL is a bad type of cholesterol and
elevated triglycerides can also be deleterious for cardiovascular health.[42]

There was another study published on the benefits of EPA in The Lancet in
March 2007. This study involved over 18,000 patients with unhealthy
cholesterol levels. The patients were randomly assigned to receive either
1,800 mg a day of EPA with a statin drug or a statin drug alone. The trial
went on for a total of five years. It was found at the end of the study those
patients in the EPA group had superior cardiovascular function. Non-fatal
coronary events were also significantly reduced in the EPA group. The authors
concluded that EPA is a promising treatment for prevention of major coronary
events, especially non-fatal coronary events.[43]

Similar to those who follow a Mediterranean diet, Arctic-dwelling Inuit \- who
consume high amounts of nâ3 fatty acids from fatty fish - also tend to have
higher proportions of nâ3, increased HDL cholesterol and decreased
triglycerides (fatty material that circulates in the blood) and less heart
disease. Eating walnuts (the ratio of nâ3 to nâ6 is circa 1:4
respectively[44]) was reported to lower total cholesterol by 4% relative to
controls when people also ate 27% less cholesterol.[45]

  
A study carried out involving 465 women showed serum levels of
eicosapentaenoic acid is inversely related to the levels of anti-oxidized-LDL
antibodies. Oxidative modification of LDL is thought to play an important role
in the development of atherosclerosis.[46]

### [edit] Immune function

Another study regarding fish oil was published in the Journal of Nutrition in
April 2007. Sixty four healthy Danish infants from nine to twelve months of
age received either cow's milk or infant formula alone or with fish oil. It
was found that those infants supplemented with fish oil had improvement in
immune function maturation with no apparent reduction in immune
activation.[47]

### [edit] Brain health

There was yet another study on nâ3 fatty acids published in the April 2007
Journal of Neuroscience. A group of mice were genetically modified to develop
accumulation of amyloid and tau proteins in the brain similar to that seen in
people with poor memory. The mice were divided into four groups with one group
receiving a typical American diet (with high ratio of nâ6 to nâ3 fatty
acids being 10 to 1). The other three groups were given food with a balanced 1
to 1 nâ6 to nâ3 ratio and two additional groups supplemented with DHA plus
long chain nâ6 fatty acids. After three months of feeding, all the DHA
supplemented groups were noted to have a lower accumulation of beta amyloid
and tau protein. Some research suggests that these abnormal proteins may
contribute to the development of memory loss in later years.[48]

There is also a study published regarding nâ3 supplementation in children
with learning and behavioral problems. This study was published in the April
2007 edition of the Journal of the Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics
(5), where 132 children, between the ages of seven to twelve years old, with
poor learning, participated in a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-
blinded interventional trial. A total of 104 children completed the trial. For
the first fifteen weeks of this study, the children were given polyunsaturated
fatty acids (nâ3 and nâ6, 3000 mg a day), polyunsaturated fatty acids plus
multi-vitamins and minerals or placebo. After fifteen weeks, all groups
crossed over to the polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) plus vitamins and
mineral supplement. Parents were asked to rate their children's condition
after fifteen and thirty weeks. After thirty weeks, parental ratings of
behavior improved significantly in nine out of fourteen scales. The lead
author of the study, Dr. Sinn, indicated the present study is the largest PUFA
trial to date with children falling in the poor learning and focus range. The
results support those of other studies that have found improvement in poor
developmental health with essential fatty acid
supplementation.[42][43][47][48][49][50]

### [edit] Rheumatoid arthritis

Research in 2005 and 2006 has suggested that the in-vitro anti-inflammatory
activity of nâ3 acids translates into clinical benefits. Cohorts of neck
pain patients and of rheumatoid arthritis sufferers have demonstrated benefits
comparable to those receiving standard NSAIDs.[citation needed] Those who
follow a Mediterranean-style diet tend to have less heart disease, higher HDL
("good") cholesterol levels[51] and higher proportions of nâ3 in tissue
highly unsaturated fatty acids.[52]

A study[53] examining whether omega-3 exerts neuroprotective action in
Parkinson's disease found that it did, using an experimental model, exhibit a
protective effect (much like it did for Alzheimer's disease as well). The
scientists exposed mice to either a control or a high omega-3 diet from two to
twelve months of age and then treated them with a neurotoxin commonly used as
an experimental model for Parkinson's. The scientists found that high doses of
omega-3 given to the experimental group completely prevented the neurotoxin-
induced decrease of dopamine that ordinarily occurs. Since Parkinson's is a
disease caused by disruption of the dopamine system, this protective effect
exhibited could show promise for future research in the prevention of
Parkinson's disease.

## [edit] Health risks

In a letter published October 31, 2000,[54] the United States Food and Drug
Administration Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Office of
Nutritional Products, Labeling, and Dietary Supplements noted that known or
suspected risks of EPA and DHA nâ3 fatty acids may include the possibility
of:

  * Increased bleeding if overused (normally over 3 grams per day) by a patient who is also taking aspirin or warfarin. However, this is disputed.[55]
  * Hemorrhagic stroke (only in case of very large doses). [56]
  * Reduced glycemic control among diabetics.[citation needed]
  * An increase in concentration of LDL cholesterol in some individuals.[citation needed]

Subsequent advices from the FDA and national counterparts have permitted
health claims associated with heart health.

### [edit] Cardiac risk

Persons with congestive heart failure, chronic recurrent angina or evidence
that their heart is receiving insufficient blood flow are advised to talk to
their doctor before taking nâ3 fatty acids. There have been concerns if such
persons take nâ3 fatty acids or eating foods that contain them in
substantial amounts.[57] In a recent large study, nâ3 fatty acids on top of
standard heart failure therapy produced a small but statistically significant
benefit in terms of mortality and hospitalization.[58]

In congestive heart failure, cells that are only barely receiving enough blood
flow become electrically hyperexcitable. This, in turn, can lead to increased
risk of irregular heartbeats, which, in turn, can cause sudden cardiac death.
nâ3 fatty acids seem to stabilize the rhythm of the heart by effectively
preventing these hyperexcitable cells from functioning, thereby reducing the
likelihood of irregular heartbeats and sudden cardiac death. For most people,
this is obviously beneficial and would account for most of the large reduction
in the likelihood of sudden cardiac death. Nevertheless, for people with
congestive heart failure, the heart is barely pumping blood well enough to
keep them alive. In these patients, nâ3 fatty acids may eliminate enough of
these few pumping cells that the heart would no longer be able to pump
sufficient blood to live, causing an increased risk of cardiac death.[57]

## [edit] Research frontiers

### [edit] Developmental differences

Although not supported by current scientific evidence as a primary treatment
for ADHD, autism, and other developmental differences,[59][60] omega-3 fatty
acids have gained popularity for children with these conditions.[59] A 2004
Internet survey found that 29% of surveyed parents used essential fatty acid
supplements to treat children with autism spectrum disorders.[61]

Omega-3 fatty acids offer a promising complementary approach to standard
treatments for ADHD and developmental coordination disorder.[60] Fish oils
appear to reduce ADHD-related symptoms in some children.[60] Double blind
studies have showed "medium to strong treatment effects of omega 3 fatty acids
on symptoms of ADHD" after administering amounts around 1 gram for three to
six months.[40][49][39]

There is very little scientific evidence supporting the effectiveness of
omega-3 fatty acids for autism spectrum disorders.[62] One randomized
controlled trial found that omega-3 fatty acids did not significantly affect
aberrant behavior in autistic children, and although the investigators noted
reduced hyperactivity,[63] their later reanalysis reported that the reduction
was not statistically significant.[64]

### [edit] Low birth weight

In a study of nearly 9,000 pregnant women, researchers found women who ate
fish once a week during their first trimester had 3.6 times less risk of low
birth weight and premature birth than those who ate no fish. Low consumption
of fish was a strong risk factor for preterm delivery and low birth
weight.[65] However, attempts by other groups to reverse this increased risk
by encouraging increased pre-natal consumption of fish were unsuccessful.[66]

### [edit] Psychiatric disorders

nâ3 fatty acids are known to have membrane-enhancing capabilities in brain
cells.[36] One medical explanation is that nâ3 fatty acids play a role in
the fortification of the myelin sheaths. Not coincidentally, nâ3 fatty acids
comprise approximately eight percent of the average human brain according to
Dr. David Horrobin, a pioneer in fatty acid research. Ralph Holman of the
University of Minnesota, another major researcher in studying essential fatty
acids, who gave Omega-3 its name, surmised how nâ3 components are analogous
to the human brain by stating that "DHA is structure, EPA is function."

A benefit of nâ3 fatty acids is helping the brain to repair damage by
promoting neuronal growth.[36] In a six-month study involving people with
schizophrenia and Huntington's disease who were treated with EPA or a placebo,
the placebo group had clearly lost cerebral tissue, while the patients given
the supplements had a significant increase of grey and white matter.[67]

In the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of the brain, low brain nâ3 fatty acids are
thought to lower the dopaminergic neurotransmission in this brain area,
possibly contributing to the negative and neurocognitive symptoms in
schizophrenia. This reduction in dopamine system function in the PFC may lead
to an overactivity in dopaminergic function in the limbic system of the brain
which is suppressively controlled by the PFC dopamine system, causing the
positive symptoms of schizophrenia. This is called the nâ3 polyunsaturated
fatty acid/dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia (Ohara, 2007). This mechanism
may explain why nâ3 supplementation shows effects against both positive,
negative and neurocognitive symptoms in schizophrenia.

Consequently, the past decade of nâ3 fatty acid research has procured some
Western interest in nâ3 fatty acids as being a legitimate 'brain food.'
Still, recent claims that one's intelligence quotient, psychological tests
measuring certain cognitive skills, including numerical and verbal reasoning
skills, are increased on account of nâ3 fatty acids consumed by pregnant
mothers remain unreliable and controversial. An even more significant focus of
research, however, lies in the role of nâ3 fatty acids as a non-prescription
treatment for certain psychiatric and mental diagnoses and has become a topic
of much research and speculation.

In 1998, Andrew L. Stoll, MD and his colleagues at Harvard University
conducted a small double-blind placebo-controlled study in thirty patients
diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Most subjects in this study were already
undergoing psychopharmacological treatment (e.g. 12 out of the 30 were taking
lithium). Over the course of four months, he gave 15 subjects capsules
containing olive oil, and another 15 subjects capsules containing nine grams
of pharmaceutical-quality EPA and DHA. The study showed that subjects in the
nâ3 group were less likely to experience a relapse of symptoms in the four
months of the study. Moreover, the nâ3 group experienced significantly more
recovery than the placebo group. However, a commentary on the Stoll study
notes that the improvement in the nâ3 group was too small to be clinically
significant.[68] Though Stoll believes that the 1999 experiment was not as
optimal as it could have been and has accordingly pursued further research,
the foundation has been laid for more researchers to explore the theoretical
association between absorbed nâ3 fatty acids and signal transduction
inhibition in the brain.[69]

"Several epidemiological studies suggest covariation between seafood
consumption and rates of mood disorders. Biological marker studies indicate
deficits in omegaâ3 fatty acids in people with depressive disorders, while
several treatment studies indicate therapeutic benefits from omega-3
supplementation. A similar contribution of omega-3 fatty acids to coronary
artery disease may explain the well-described links between coronary artery
disease and depression. Deficits in omega-3 fatty acids have been identified
as a contributing factor to mood disorders and offer a potential rational
treatment approach."[70] In 2004, a study found that 100 suicide attempt
patients on average had significantly lower levels of EPA in their blood as
compared to controls.[71]

In 2006, a review of published trials in the American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition found that "the evidence available provides little support" for the
use of fish or the nâ3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids contained in
them to improve depressed mood. The study used results of twelve randomized
controlled trials in its meta-analysis. The review recommended that "larger
trials with adequate power to detect clinically important benefits" be
performed.[72] A further 2007 study published in the British Journal of
Nutrition, which was placebo-controlled and used 218 participants, found that
increasing EPA and DHA in the diet "was found not to have beneficial or
harmful effects on mood in mild to moderate depression," confirming previous
meta-analysis "that there is an overall negligible benefit of n-3 UFA
supplementation for depressed mood". [73]

## [edit] Dietary sources

### [edit] Daily values

As macronutrients, fats are not assigned recommended daily allowances.
Macronutrients have AI (Acceptable Intake) and AMDR (Acceptable Macronutrient
Distribution Range) instead of RDAs. The AI for nâ3 is 1.6 grams/day for men
and 1.1 grams/day for women[74] while the AMDR is 0.6% to 1.2% of total
energy.[75]

"A growing body of literature suggests that higher intakes of Î±-linolenic
acid (ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) may
afford some degree of protection against coronary heart disease. Because the
physiological potency of EPA and DHA is much greater than that for
Î±-linolenic acid, it is not possible to estimate one AMDR for all nâ3 fatty
acids. Approximately 10 percent of the AMDR can be consumed as EPA and/or
DHA."[75] There was insufficient evidence as of 2005 to set a UL (upper
tolerable limit) for nâ3 fatty acids.[74]

A perceived risk of fish oil nâ3 supplementation has been heavy metal
poisoning by the body's accumulation of traces of heavy metals, in particular
mercury, lead, nickel, arsenic and cadmium as well as other contaminants
(PCBs, furans, dioxins), which potentially might be found especially in less-
refined fish oil supplements. An independent test in 2006 of 44 fish oils on
the US market found that all of the products passed safety standards for
potential contaminants.[76] The FDA recommends that total dietary intake of
nâ3 fatty acids from fish not exceed 3 grams per day, of which no more than
2 grams per day are from nutritional supplements.[2]

Historically, the Council for Responsible Nutrition (CRN) and the World Health
Organization (WHO) have published acceptable standards regarding contaminants
in fish oil. The most stringent current standard is the International Fish
Oils Standard (IFOS). Fish oils that typically make this highest grade are
those that are molecularly distilled under vacuum, and have virtually no
measurable level of contaminants (measured parts per billion and parts per
trillion).

nâ3 supplementation in food has been a significant recent trend in food
fortification, with global food companies launching nâ3 fortified bread,
mayonnaise, pizza, yogurt, orange juice, children's pasta, milk, eggs,
confections and infant formula.

### [edit] Fish

The most widely available source of EPA and DHA is cold water oily fish such
as salmon, herring, mackerel, anchovies and sardines. Oils from these fish
have a profile of around seven times as much nâ3 as nâ6. Other oily fish
such as tuna also contain nâ3 in somewhat lesser amounts. Consumers of oily
fish should be aware of the potential presence of heavy metals and fat-soluble
pollutants like PCBs and dioxins which may accumulate up the food chain.[77]
Some supplement manufacturers remove heavy metals and other contaminants from
the oil through various means, such as molecular distillation (see above),
which increases purity, potency and safety. In addition, some companies use
distillation processes to enhance the DHA to EPA ratio of the fish oil.

Even some forms of fish oil may not be optimally digestible. Of four studies
that compare bioavailability of the triglyceride form of fish oil vs. the
ester form, two have concluded that the natural triglyceride form is better,
and the other two studies did not find a significant difference. No studies
have shown the ester form to be superior although it is cheaper to
manufacture.[78][79]

Although fish is a dietary source of nâ3 fatty acids, fish do not synthesize
them; they obtain them from the algae in their diet.[citation needed]

### [edit] Flax

<IMG>

<IMG>

Flax seeds produce linseed oil, which has a very high nâ3 content

Six times richer than most fish oils in nâ3,[80] Flax (aka linseed) (Linum
usitatissimum) and its oil are perhaps the most widely available botanical
source of nâ3. Flaxseed oil consists of approximately 55% ALA (alpha-
linolenic acid). Flax, like chia, contains approximately three times as much
nâ3 as nâ6.

15 grams of flaxseed oil provides ca. 8 grams of ALA, which is converted in
the body to EPA and then DHA at an efficiency of 2â15% and 2â5%,
respectively.[81]

### [edit] Botanical sources of nâ3 fatty acids

Table 1. nâ3 content as the percentage of ALA in the seed oil.[82]

Common name Alternative name Linnaean name % nâ3  
Chia chia sage Salvia hispanica 64  
Kiwifruit Chinese gooseberry Actinidia chinensis 62  
Perilla shiso Perilla frutescens 58  
Flax linseed Linum usitatissimum 55  
Lingonberry Cowberry Vaccinium vitis-idaea 49  
Camelina Gold-of-pleasure Camelina sativa 36  
Purslane Portulaca Portulaca oleracea 35  
Black Raspberry Rubus occidentalis 33  
Table 2. nâ3 content as the percentage of ALA in the whole food.[83][84]

Common name Linnaean name % nâ3  
Flaxseed Linum usitatissimum 18.1  
Butternuts Juglans cinerea 8.7  
Walnuts Juglans regia 6.3  
Pecan nuts Carya illinoinensis 0.6  
Hazel nuts Corylus avellana 0.1  
### [edit] Eggs

Eggs produced by chickens fed a diet of greens and insects produce higher
levels of nâ3 fatty acids (mostly ALA) than chickens fed corn or
soybeans.[85]In addition to feeding chickens insects and greens, fish oils may
be added to their diet to increase the amount of fatty acid concentrations in
eggs.[86]

### [edit] Meat

The nâ6 to nâ3 ratio of grass-fed beef is about 2:1, making it a more
useful source of nâ3 than grain-fed beef, which usually has a ratio of
4:1.[87]

In most countries, commercially available lamb is typically grass-fed, and
thus higher in nâ3 than other grain-fed or grain-finished meat sources. In
the United States, lamb is often finished (i.e. fattened before slaughter)
with grain, resulting in lower nâ3.[88]

The omega-3 content of chicken meat may be enhanced by increasing the animals'
dietary intake of grains that are high in nâ3, such as flax, chia, and
canola.[89]

### [edit] Other sources

Milk and cheese from grass-fed cows may also be good sources of nâ3. One UK
study showed that half a pint of milk provides 10% of the recommended daily
intake (RDI) of ALA, while a piece of organic cheese the size of a matchbox
may provide up to 88%".[90]

Krill, which are small, shrimp-like zooplankton, also contain the nâ3 fatty
acids EPA and DHA. One advantage of extracting nâ3 fatty acids from krill,
as opposed to sources higher in the food chain, is that krill contain fewer
heavy metals and PCBs harmful to humans.[citation needed] However, in
comparison to higher animals, they also contain fewer nâ3 fatty acids per
gram.[citation needed]

The microalgae Crypthecodinium cohnii and Schizochytrium are rich sources of
DHA (22:6 nâ3) and can be produced commercially in bioreactors. This is the
only source of DHA acceptable to vegans. Oil from brown algae (kelp) is a
source of EPA. Walnuts are one of few nuts that contain appreciable nâ3 fat,
with approximately a 1:4 ratio of nâ3 to nâ6.[44] Acai palm fruit also
contains nâ3 fatty acids.

Omega-3 is also found in softgels in pharmacies and nowadays it is also found
in combination with omega-6, omega-9 and shark liver oil [91]

Some vegetables, too, contain a noteworthy amount of n-3, including
strawberries and broccoli.

## [edit] The nâ6 to nâ3 ratio

Main article: Essential fatty acid interactions

Clinical studies[1][92][93][94] indicate that the ingested ratio of nâ6 to
nâ3 (especially Linoleic vs Alpha Linolenic) fatty acids is important to
maintaining cardiovascular health. However, two studies[95][96] published in
2005 and 2007, found no such correlations in humans.

Both nâ3 and nâ6 fatty acids are essential, i.e. humans must consume them
in the diet. nâ3 and nâ6 compete for the same metabolic enzymes, thus the
nâ6:nâ3 ratio will significantly influence the ratio of the ensuing
eicosanoids (hormones), (e.g. prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes
etc.), and will alter the body's metabolic function.[97] Generally, grass-fed
animals accumulate more nâ3 than do grain-fed animals which accumulate
relatively more nâ6. Metabolites of nâ6 are significantly more
inflammatory (esp. arachidonic acid) than those of nâ3. This necessitates
that nâ3 and nâ6 be consumed in a balanced proportion; healthy ratios of
nâ6:nâ3 range from 1:1 to 4:1.[98][99] Studies suggest that the
evolutionary human diet, rich in game animals, seafood and other sources of
nâ3, may have provided such a ratio.[92][100]

Typical Western diets provide ratios of between 10:1 and 30:1 - i.e.,
dramatically skewed toward nâ6.[101] Here are the ratios of nâ6 to nâ3
fatty acids in some common oils: canola 2:1, soybean 7:1, olive 3â13:1,
sunflower (no nâ3), flax 1:3,[102] cottonseed (almost no nâ3), peanut (no
nâ3), grapeseed oil (almost no nâ3) and corn oil 46 to 1 ratio of nâ6 to
nâ3.[103] It should be noted that olive, peanut and canola oils consist of
approximately 80% monounsaturated fatty acids, (i.e. neither nâ6 nor nâ3)
meaning that they contain relatively small amounts of nâ3 and nâ6 fatty
acids. Consequently, the nâ6 to nâ3 ratios for these oils (i.e. olive,
canola and peanut oils) are not as significant as they are for corn, soybean
and sunflower oils.

## [edit] Conversion efficiency of ALA to EPA and DHA

It has been reported that conversion of ALA to EPA and further to DHA in
humans is limited, but varies with individuals.[104] Women have higher ALA
conversion efficiency than men, probably due to the lower rate of utilization
of dietary ALA for beta-oxidation. This suggests that biological engineering
of ALA conversion efficiency is possible. Goyens et al. argue that it is the
absolute amount of ALA, rather than the ratio of nâ3 and nâ6 fatty acids,
which affects the conversion.[105]

## [edit] See also

  * List of nâ3 fatty acids
  * nâ6 fatty acid
  * nâ9 fatty acid
  * Essential fatty acid
  * Essential fatty acid interactions
  * Grape seed oil
  * Herbalism

  * Naturopathic medicine
  * Camelina sativa
  * Hempseed oil
  * Cod liver oil
  * Fish oil
  * Flax
  * Phytonutrients

  * Nutrition
  * Linseed oil
  * Chia
  * Purslane
  * Resolvins
  * Wakame

  
## [edit] Notes and references

  1. ^ a b Lands, William E.M. (01 May 1992). "Biochemistry and physiology of nâ3 fatty acids". FASEB Journal (Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology) 6 (8): 2530â2536. PMID 1592205. http://www.fasebj.org/cgi/reprint/6/8/2530/. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  2. ^ a b United States Food and Drug Administration (September 8, 2004). FDA announces qualified health claims for omega-3 fatty acids. Press release. http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/news/2004/NEW01115.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-10.
  3. ^ Morris, Martha C.; Sacks, Frank; Rosner, Bernard (01 August 1993). "Does fish oil lower blood pressure? A meta-analysis of controlled trials". Circulation (American Heart Association) 88 (2): 523â533. PMID 8339414. http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/reprint/88/2/523/.
  4. ^ Mori, Trevor A.; Bao, Danny Q.; Burke, Valerie; Puddey, Ian B.; Beilin, Lawrence J. (01 August 1993). "Docosahexaenoic acid but not eicosapentaenoic acid lowers ambulatory blood pressure and heart rate in humans". Hypertension (American Heart Association) 34 (2): 253â260. PMID 10454450. http://hyper.ahajournals.org/cgi/reprint/34/2/253/.
  5. ^ Harris, William S. (01 May 1997). "nâ3 fatty acids and serum lipoproteins: human studies". American Journal of Clinical Nutrition (The American Society for Nutrition) 65 (5 Supplement): 1645Sâ1654S. PMID 9129504. http://www.ajcn.org/cgi/reprint/65/5/1645S/.
  6. ^ Sanders, T.A.B.; Oakley, F.R.; Miller, G.J.; Mitropoulos, K.A.; Crook, D.; Oliver, M.F. (01 December 1997). "Influence of nâ6 versus nâ3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in diets low in saturated fatty acids on plasma lipoproteins and hemostatic factors". Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology (American Heart Association) 17 (12): 3449â3460. PMID 9437192. http://atvb.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/17/12/3449.
  7. ^ Roche, H.M.; Gibney, M.J. (28 September 1996). "Postprandial triacylglycerolaemia: the effect of low-fat dietary treatment with and without fish oil supplementation". European Journal of Clinical Nutrition (Nature Publishing Group) 50 (9): 617â624. PMID 8880041. http://cat.inist.fr/?aModele=afficheN&cpsidt=3232572.
  8. ^ Davidson, Michael H.; Stein, Evan A.; Bays, Harold E.; Maki, Kevin C.; Doyle, Ralph T.; Shalwitz, Robert A.; Ballantyne, Christie M.; Ginsberg, Henry N. (July 2007). "Efficacy and tolerability of adding prescription omega-3 fatty acids 4 g/d to Simvastatin 40 mg/d in hypertriglyceridemic patients: An 8-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study". Clinical Therapeutics (Elsevier) 29 (7): 1354â1367. doi:10.1016/j.clinthera.2007.07.018. PMID 17825687.
  9. ^ Bucher, Heiner C.; Hengstler, Peter; Schindler, Christian; Meier, Gabriela (2002). "nâ3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials". The American Journal of Medicine (Elsevier) 112 (4): 298â304. doi:10.1016/S0002-9343(01)01114-7. PMID 11893369.
  10. ^ Burr, Michael L.; Sweetham, P.M.; Fehily, Ann M. (August 1994). "Diet and reinfarction". European Heart Journal (Oxford University Press) 15 (8): 1152â1153. PMID 7988613. http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/15/8/1152.
  11. ^ Willett, Walter C.; Stampfer, M.J.; Colditz, G.A.; Speizer, F.E.; Rosner, B.A.; Hennekens, C.H. (March 1993). "Intake of trans fatty acids and risk of coronary heart disease among women". The Lancet (Elsevier) 341 (8845): 581â585. doi:10.1016/0140-6736(93)90350-P. PMID 8094827.
  12. ^ Stone, Neil J. (01 November 1996). "Fish consumption, fish oil, lipids, and coronary heart disease". Circulation (American Heart Association) 94 (9): 2337â2340. PMID 8901708. http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/94/9/2337.
  13. ^ Fortin, Paul R.; Lew, Robert A.; Liang, Matthew H.; Wright, Elizabeth A.; Beckett, Laurel A.; Chalmers, Thomas C.; Sperling, Richard I. (November 1995). "Validation of a meta-analysis: The effects of fish oil in rheumatoid arthritis". Journal of Clinical Epidemiology (Elsevier) 48 (11): 1379â1390. doi:10.1016/0895-4356(95)00028-3. PMID 7490601.
  14. ^ Kremer, Joel M.; Bigauoette, J.; Michalek, A.V.; Timchalk, M.A.; Lininger, L.; Rynes, R.I.; Huyck, C.; Zieminski, J.; Bartholomew, L.E. (January 1985). "Effects of manipulation of dietary fatty acids on clinical manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.". The Lancet (Elsevier) 1 (8422): 184â187. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(85)92024-0. PMID 2857265. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2857265.
  15. ^ Christensen, Jeppe H.; Gustenhoff, Peter; Ejlersen, Ejler; Jessen, Torben; Korup, Eva; Rasmussen, Klaus; Dyerberg, JÃ¸rn; Schmidt, Erik B. (January 1995). "nâ3 fatty acids and ventricular extrasystoles in patients with ventricular tachyarrhythmias". Nutrition Research (Elsevier) 15 (1): 1â8. doi:10.1016/0271-5317(95)91647-U.
  16. ^ Christensen, Jeppe H.; Gustenhoff, Peter; Korup, Eva; AarÃ¸e, Jens; Toft, Egon; MÃ¸ller, Torn; Rasmussen, Klaus; Dyerberg, JÃ¸rn; Schmidt, Erik B. (1996-03-16). "Effect of fish oil on heart rate variability in survivors of myocardial infarction: a double blind randomised controlled trial.". British Medical Journal (British Medical Association) 312 (7032): 677â678. PMID 8597736. http://www.bmj.com/cgi/content/full/312/7032/677.
  17. ^ Pignier, C.; Revenaz, C.; Rauly-Lestienne, I.; Cussac, D.; Delhon, A.; Gardette, J.; Le Grand, B. (November 2007). "Direct protective effects of poly-unsaturated fatty acids, DHA and EPA, against activation of cardiac late sodium current". Basic Research in Cardiology (Steinkopff Verlag) 102 (6): 553â564. doi:10.1007/s00395-007-0676-x. PMID 17891522. http://www.springerlink.com/content/u454873774830225/.
  18. ^ a b Su, Kuan-Pin; Huang, Shih-Yi; Chiub, Chih-Chiang; Shenc, Winston W. (August 2003). "Omega-3 fatty acids in major depressive disorder: A preliminary double-blind, placebo-controlled trial". European Neuropsychopharmacology (Elsevier) 13 (4): 267â271. doi:10.1016/S0924-977X(03)00032-4. PMID 12888186.
  19. ^ Naliwaiko, K.; AraÃºjo, R.L.; da Fonseca, R.V.; Castilho, J.C.; Andreatini, R.; Bellissimo, M.I.; Oliveira, B.H.; Martins, E.F.; Curi, R.; Fernandes, L.C.; Ferraz, A.C. (April 2004). "Effects of fish oil on the central nervous system: a new potential antidepressant?". Nutritional Neuroscience (Maney) 7 (2): 91â99. doi:10.1080/10284150410001704525. PMID 15279495. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15279495.
  20. ^ Green, Pnina; Hermesh, Haggai; Monselisec, Assaf; Maromb, Sofi; Presburgerb, Gadi; Weizman, Abraham (February 2006). "Red cell membrane omega-3 fatty acids are decreased in nondepressed patients with social anxiety disorder". European Neuropsychopharmacology 16 (2): 107â113. doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2005.07.005. PMID 16243493.
  21. ^ Yehuda S., Rabinovitz S., Mostofsky D.I. (August 2005). "Mixture of essential fatty acids lowers test anxiety". Nutritional Neuroscience (Maney) 8 (4): 265â267. doi:10.1080/10284150500445795. PMID 16491653.
  22. ^ Nemets, Boris; Stahl, Ziva; Belmaker, R.H. (March 2002). "Addition of omega-3 fatty acid to maintenance medication treatment for recurrent unipolar depressive disorder". American Journal of Psychiatry (American Psychiatric Association) 159 (3): 477â479. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.159.3.477. PMID 11870016.
  23. ^ Keli, S.O.; Feskens, E.J.; Kromhout, D. (February 1994). "Fish consumption and risk of stroke: The Zutphen Study". Stroke 25 (2): 328â332. PMID 8303739.
  24. ^ Gillum, R.F.; Mussolino, M.E.; Madans, J.H. (March 1996). "The relationship between fish consumption and stroke incidence: The NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study (National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey)". Archives of Internal Medicine 156 (5): 537â542. doi:10.1001/archinte.156.5.537. PMID 8604960.
  25. ^ a b Iso, H.; Rexrode, K.M.; Stampfer, M.J.; Manson, J.E.; Colditz, G.A.; Speizer, F.E.; Hennekens, C.H.; Willett, W.C. (January 2001). "Intake of fish and omega-3 fatty acids and risk of stroke in women". JAMA 285 (3): 304â312. doi:10.1001/jama.285.3.304. PMID 11176840.
  26. ^ The U.S. Food and Drug Administration classification - GRAS (Generally Recognized as Safe)
  27. ^ Augustsson, Katarina; Michaud, Dominique S.; Rimm, Eric B.; Leitzmann, Michael F.; Stampfer, Meir J.; Willett, Walter C.; Giovannucci, Edward (January 2003). "A prospective study of intake of fish and marine fatty acids and prostate cancer". Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention 12 (1): 64â67. PMID 12540506.
  28. ^ De Deckere, E.A. (July 1999). "Possible beneficial effect of fish and fish nâ3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in breast and colorectal cancer". European Journal of Cancer Prevention 8 (3): 213â221. doi:10.1097/00008469-199906000-00009. PMID 10443950.
  29. ^ Caygill, C.P.; Hill, M.J. (August 1995). "Fish, nâ3 fatty acids and human colorectal and breast cancer mortality". European Journal of Cancer Prevention 4 (4): 329â332. doi:10.1097/00008469-199508000-00008. PMID 7549825.
  30. ^ Yong Q. Chen, at al (2007). "Modulation of prostate cancer genetic risk by omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids". The Journal of Clinical Investigation 117 (7): 1866. doi:10.1172/JCI31494. PMID 1890998. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=1890998. Retrieved on 2008-11-30.
  31. ^ Valeria Pala, Vittorio Krogh, Paola Muti, VÃ©ronique ChajÃ¨s, Elio Riboli, Andrea Micheli, Mitra Saadatian, Sabina Sieri, Franco Berrino (18 Jul 2001). "Erythrocyte Membrane Fatty Acids and Subsequent Breast Cancer: a Prospective Italian Study". JNCL 93 (14): 1088. PMID 11459870. http://jnci.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/93/14/1088. Retrieved on 2008-11-30.
  32. ^ Catherine H. MacLean, MD, PhD et al (January 2006). "Effects of nâ3 Fatty Acids on Cancer Risk". Journal of the American Medical Association 295 (4): 403â415. doi:10.1001/jama.295.4.403. PMID 16434631. http://jama.ama-assn.org/cgi/content/short/295/4/403. Retrieved on 2006-07-07.
  33. ^ Lee Hooper et al (April 2006). "Risks and benefits of omega 3 fats for mortality, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: systematic review". British Medical Journal 332: 752â760. doi:10.1136/bmj.38755.366331.2F. PMID 16565093. http://bmj.bmjjournals.com/cgi/reprint_abr/332/7544/752/. Retrieved on 2006-07-07.
  34. ^ "Dietary supplementation with nâ3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and vitamin E after myocardial infarction: results of the GISSI-Prevenzione trial.". Lancet 354: 447â455. 1999. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(99)07072-5. PMID 10465168.
  35. ^ Marchioli R. (2002). "Early protection against sudden death by n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids after myocardial infarction: time-course analysis of the results of the GISSI-Prevenzione.". Circulation 105: 1897â1903. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000014682.14181.F2. PMID 11997274.
  36. ^ a b c Trivedi, Bijal (2006-09-23). "The good, the fad, and the unhealthy". New Scientist: pp. 42â49. http://www.newscientist.com/channel/health/mg19125701.300-the-good-the-fad-and-the-unhealthy.html.
  37. ^ Wang, Chenchen; Harris, William S.; Chung, Mei; Lichtenstein, Alice H.; Balk, Ethan M.; Kupelnick, Bruce; Jordan, Harmon S.; Lau, Joseph (July 2006). "nâ3 Fatty acids from fish or fish-oil supplements, but not alpha-linolenic acid, benefit cardiovascular disease outcomes in primary- and secondary-prevention studies: a systematic review". The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 84 (1): 5â17. PMID 16825676.
  38. ^ Mozaffarian, Dariush; Rimm, Eric B. (October 2006). "Fish intake, contaminants, and human health: evaluating the risks and the benefits". JAMA 296 (15): 1885â1899. doi:10.1001/jama.296.15.1885. PMID 17047219.
  39. ^ a b Richardson, Alexandra J.; Montgomery, Paul (May 2005). "The Oxford-Durham study: a randomized, controlled trial of dietary supplementation with fatty acids in children with developmental coordination disorder". Pediatrics 115 (5): 1360â1366. doi:10.1542/peds.2004-2164. PMID 15867048.
  40. ^ a b Johnson M, Ostlund S, Fransson G, KadesjÃ¶ B, Gillberg C. (2008 Apr 30). "Omega-3/Omega-6 Fatty Acids for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial in Children and Adolescents.". J Atten Disord. PMID 18448859.
  41. ^ Mita, Tomoya; Watada, Hirotaka; Ogihara, Takeshi; Nomiyama, Takashi; Ogawa, Osamu; Kinoshita, Junichiro; Shimizu, Tomoaki; Hirose, Takahisa; Tanaka, Yasushi; Kawamori, Ryuzo (March 2007). "Eicosapentaenoic acid reduces the progression of carotid intima-media thickness in patients with type 2 diabetes". Atherosclerosis 191 (1): 162â167. doi:10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2006.03.005. PMID 16616147.
  42. ^ a b McKenney, James M.; Sica, Domenic (March 2007). "Prescription omega-3 fatty acids for the treatment of hypertriglyceridemia". American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy 64 (6): 595â605. doi:10.2146/ajhp060164. PMID 17353568.
  43. ^ a b Yokoyama, Mitsuhiro; Origasa, Hideki; Matsuzaki, Masunori; Matsuzawa, Yuji; Saito, Yasushi; Ishikawa, Yuichi; Oikawa, Shinichi; Sasaki, Jun; Hishida, Hitoshi; Itakura, Hiroshige; Kita, Toru; Kitabatake, Akira; Nakaya, Noriaki; Sakata, Toshiie; Shimada, Kazuyuki; Shirato, Kunio (March 2007). "Effects of eicosapentaenoic acid on major coronary events in hypercholesterolaemic patients (JELIS): a randomised open-label, blinded endpoint analysis". Lancet 369 (9567): 1090â1098. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60527-3. PMID 17398308.
  44. ^ a b "Nutrition Facts and Analysis for Nuts, Walnuts, English". NutritionData. http://www.nutritiondata.com/facts-C00001-01c20oc.html.
  45. ^ ZambÃ³n, D.; SabatÃ©, J.; MuÃ±oz, S.; Campero, B.; Casals, E.; Merlos, M.; Laguna, J.C.; Ros, E. (April 2000). "Substituting walnuts for monounsaturated fat improves the serum lipid profile of hypercholesterolemic men and women: A randomized crossover trial". Annals of Internal Medicine 132 (7): 538â546. PMID 10744590.
  46. ^ Garrido-SÃ¡nchez, L.; GarcÃ­a-Fuentes, E.; Rojo-MartÃ­nez, G.; Cardona, F.; Soriguer, F.; Tinahones, F.J. (February 2008). "Inverse relation between levels of anti-oxidized-LDL antibodies and eicosapentanoic acid (EPA)". The British Journal of Nutrition 22: 1â5. doi:10.1017/S0007114508921723. PMID 18252023.
  47. ^ a b Damsgaard, Camilla T.; Lauritzen, Lotte; KjÃ¦r, Tanja M.R.; Holm, Puk M.I.; Fruekilde, Maj-Britt; Michaelsen, Kim F.; FrÃ¸kiÃ¦r, Hanne (01 April 2007). "Fish oil supplementation modulates immune function in healthy infants". The Journal of Nutrition 137 (4): 1031â1036. PMID 17374672. http://jn.nutrition.org/cgi/reprint/137/4/1031.
  48. ^ a b Green, Kim N.; Martinez-Coria, Hilda; Khashwji, Hasan; Hall, Eileen B.; Yurko-Mauro, Karin A.; Ellis, Lorie; LaFerla, Frank M. (April 2007). "Dietary docosahexaenoic acid and docosapentaenoic acid ameliorate amyloid-Î² and tau pathology via a mechanism involving presenilin 1 levels". The Journal of Neuroscience 27 (16): 4385â4395. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0055-07.2007. PMID 17442823.
  49. ^ a b Sinn, Natalie; Bryan, Janet (April 2007). "Effect of supplementation with polyunsaturated fatty acids and micronutrients on learning and behavior problems associated with child ADHD". Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics 28 (2): 82â91. doi:10.1097/01.DBP.0000267558.88457.a5. PMID 17435458.
  50. ^ Lee, Duk-Hee; Lee, In-Kyu; Jin, Soo-Hee; Steffes, Michael; Jacobs, David R. (March 2007). "Association between serum concentrations of persistent organic pollutants and insulin resistance among nondiabetic adults: results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999â2002". Diabetes Care 30 (3): 622â628. doi:10.2337/dc06-2190. PMID 17327331.
  51. ^ Kris-Etherton, P.; Eckel, R.H.; Howard, B.V.; St Jeor, S.; Bazzarre, T.L. (April 2001). "AHA Science Advisory: Lyon Diet Heart Study. Benefits of a Mediterranean-style, National Cholesterol Education Program/American Heart Association Step I dietary pattern on cardiovascular disease". Circulation 103 (13): 1823â1825. PMID 11282918.
  52. ^ Lands, William E.M. (April 2003). "Diets could prevent many diseases". Lipids 38 (4): 317â321. doi:10.1007/s11745-003-1066-0. PMID 12848276.
  53. ^ Bousquet, M.; Saint-Pierre, M.; Julien, C.; Salem, N.; Cicchetti, F.; Calon, F. (April 2008). "Beneficial effects of dietary omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid on toxin-induced neuronal degeneration in an animal model of Parkinson's disease". The Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology Journal 22 (4): 1213â1225. doi:10.1096/fj.07-9677com. PMID 18032633.
  54. ^ Lewis, Christine J., Letter Regarding Dietary Supplement Health Claim for Omega-3 Fatty Acids and Coronary Heart Disease, http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/ds-ltr11.html
  55. ^ "Fish Oils and Stroke/Blood Coagulation". oilofpisces.com. http://www.oilofpisces.com/bloodcoagulation.html.
  56. ^ Kromann, N.; Green, A. (1980). "Epidemiological studies in the Upernavik district, Greenland. Incidence of some chronic diseases 1950-1974". Acta Medica Scandinavica 208 (5): 401â406. PMID 7457208.
  57. ^ a b Ornish, Dean (2006-05-02). "The Dark Side of Good Fats". Newsweek: p. 2. http://www.newsweek.com/id/137192. Retrieved on 2008-06-14.
  58. ^ Gissi-Hf Investigators (August 2008). "Effect of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in patients with chronic heart failure (the GISSI-HF trial): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial". Lancet 372: 1223. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61239-8. PMID 18757090. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0140-6736(08)61239-8.
  59. ^ a b Levy, Susan E.; Hyman, Susan L. (2005). "Novel treatments for autistic spectrum disorders". Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews 11 (2): 131â142. doi:10.1002/mrdd.20062. PMID 15977319.
  60. ^ a b c Richardson, Alexandra J. (April 2006). "Omega-3 fatty acids in ADHD and related neurodevelopmental disorders". International Review of Psychiatry 18 (2): 155â172. doi:10.1080/09540260600583031. PMID 16777670.
  61. ^ Green, Vanessa A.; Pituch, Keenan A.; Itchon, Jonathan; Choi, Aram; O'Reilly, Mark; Sigafoos, Jeff (JanuaryâFebruary 2006). "Internet survey of treatments used by parents of children with autism". Research in Developmental Disabilities 27 (1): 70â84. doi:10.1016/j.ridd.2004.12.002. PMID 15919178.
  62. ^ Bent, Stephen; Bertoglio, Kiah; Hendren, Robert L. (March 2009). "Omega-3 fatty acids for autistic spectrum disorder: a systematic review". J Autism Dev Disord. doi:10.1007/s10803-009-0724-5. PMID 19333748.
  63. ^ Amminger, G. Paul; Berger, Gregor E.; SchÃ¤fer, Miriam R.; Klier, Claudia; Friedrich, Max H.; Feucht, Martha (February 2007). "Omega-3 fatty acids supplementation in children with autism: a double-blind randomized, placebo-controlled pilot study". Biological Psychiatry 61 (4): 551â553. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.05.007. PMID 16920077.
  64. ^ Gilbert, Donald L. (February 2008). "Regarding 'omega-3 fatty acids supplementation in children with autism: a double-blind randomized, placebo-controlled pilot study'". Biological Psychiatry 63 (2): e13. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.03.028. PMID 17555722. Author reply: Amminger, G. Paul; Harrigan, Susan M. (February 2008). "Reply". Biological Psychiatry 63 (2): e15. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.04.002.
  65. ^ Olsen, SjÃºrÃ°ur FrÃ³Ã°i; Secher, Niels JÃ¸rgen (2002-02-23). "Low consumption of seafood in early pregnancy as a risk factor for preterm delivery: prospective cohort study". BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.) 324 (7335): 447. doi:10.1136/bmj.324.7335.447. PMID 11859044.
  66. ^ Odent, Michel; Colson, Suzanne; De Reu, Paul (2002-05-25). "Consumption of seafood and preterm delivery. Encouraging pregnant women to eat fish did not show effect". BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.) 324 (7348): 1279. PMID 12028992.
  67. ^ Puri, Basant K. (April 2006). "High-resolution magnetic resonance imaging sinc-interpolation-based subvoxel registration and semi-automated quantitative lateral ventricular morphology employing threshold computation and binary image creation in the study of fatty acid interventions in schizophrenia, depression, chronic fatigue syndrome and Huntington's disease". International Review of Psychiatry 18 (2): 149â154. PMID 16777669.
  68. ^ Calabrese, J.R.; Rapport, D.J.; Shelton, M.D. (May 1999). "Fish oils and bipolar disorder: A promising but untested treatment". Archives of General Psychiatry 56 (5): 413â414; discussion 415â416. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.56.5.413. PMID 10232295.
  69. ^ Stoll, A.L.; Severus, W.E.; Freeman, M.P.; Rueter, S.; Zboyan, H.A.; Diamond, E.; Cress, K.K.; Marangell, L.B. (May 1999). "Omega 3 fatty acids in bipolar disorder: A preliminary double-blind, placebo-controlled trial". Archives of General Psychiatry 56 (5): 407â412. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.56.5.407. PMID 10232294.
  70. ^ Nemets, Hanah; Nemets, Boris; Apter, Alan; Bracha, Ziva; Belmaker, R.H. (June 2006). "Omega-3 treatment of childhood depression: A controlled, double-blind pilot study". The American Journal of Psychiatry 163 (6): 1098â1100. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.163.6.1098. PMID 16741212.
  71. ^ Huan, Mingming; Hamazaki, Kei; Sun, Yueji; Itomura, Miho; Liu, Hongyan; Kang, Wei; Watanabe, Shiro; Terasawa, Katsutoshi; Hamazaki, Tomohito (October 2004). "Suicide attempt and nâ3 fatty acid levels in red blood cells: a case control study in China". Biological Psychiatry 56 (7): 490â496. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.06.028. PMID 15450784. http://www.journals.elsevierhealth.com/periodicals/bps/article/PIIS0006322304007061/abstract.
  72. ^ Appleton, Katherine M.; Hayward, Robert C.; Gunnell, David; Peters, Tim J.; Rogers, Peter J.; Kessler, David; Ness, Andrew R. (01 December 2006). "Effects of nâ3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids on depressed mood: systematic review of published trials". The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 84 (6): 1308â1316. PMID 17158410. http://www.ajcn.org/cgi/content/abstract/84/6/1308.
  73. ^ Appleton, Katherine M.; Christian, Leonie M.; Hayward, Robert C.; Heatherley, Susan V.; Gunnell, David; Kessler, David; McNaughton, Sarah A.; Peters, Tim J.; Rogers, Peter J.; Ness, Andrew R. (February 2008). "No effect of n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (EPA and DHA) supplementation on depressed mood and cognitive function: a randomised controlled trial". British Journal of Nutrition 99 (2): 421â431. http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?aid=1642264.
  74. ^ a b Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine of the National Academies (2005). Dietary Reference Intakes For Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. pp. 423\. ISBN 0-309-08537-3. http://newton.nap.edu/books/0309085373/html/423.html.
  75. ^ a b Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine of the National Academies (2005). Dietary Reference Intakes For Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. pp. 770\. ISBN 0-309-08537-3. http://newton.nap.edu/books/0309085373/html/770.html.
  76. ^ "Product Review: Omega-3 Fatty Acids (EPA and DHA) from Fish/Marine Oils". ConsumerLab.com. 2005-03-15. http://www.consumerlab.com/results/omega3.asp. Retrieved on 2007-08-14.
  77. ^ "Pollutants found in fish oil capsules". http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/1911312.stm.
  78. ^ Lawson, L.D.; Hughes, B.G. (October 1988). "Absorption of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid from fish oil triacylglycerols or fish oil ethyl esters co-ingested with a high-fat meal". Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 156 (2): 960â963. doi:10.1016/S0006-291X(88)80937-9. PMID 2847723.
  79. ^ Beckermann, B.; Beneke, M.; Seitz, I. (June 1990). "Comparative bioavailability of eicosapentaenoic acid and docasahexaenoic acid from triglycerides, free fatty acids and ethyl esters in volunteers". Arzneimittel-Forschung 40 (6): 700â704. PMID 2144420.
  80. ^ Thomas Bartram (1998). Bartram's Encyclopedia of Herbal Medicine. pp. 271.
  81. ^ "Information Sheet on Omega 3 fats". Vegetarian Society. http://www.vegsoc.org/info/omega3.html.
  82. ^ "Seed Oil Fatty Acids - SOFA Database Retrieval". http://sofa.bfel.de.
  83. ^ DeFilippis, Andrew P.; Laurence S. Sperling. "Understanding omega-3's" (PDF). http://www.biovita.fi/suomi/pdf/understanding_omega3.pdf. Retrieved on 21 October.
  84. ^ Wilkinson, Jennifer. "Nut Grower's Guide: The Complete Handbook for Producers and Hobbyists" (PDF). http://www.publish.csiro.au/samples/Nut%20Growers%20GuideSample.pdf. Retrieved on 21 October.
  85. ^ "How Omega-6s Usurped Omega-3s In US Diet". http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/medicalnews.php?newsid=51575.
  86. ^ TrebunovÃ¡, A.; Vasko, L.; SvedovÃ¡, M.; KasteÄ¾, R.; TuckovÃ¡, M.; Mach, P. (July 2007). "The influence of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids feeding on composition of fatty acids in fatty tissues and eggs of laying hens". Deutsche TierÃ¤rztliche Wochenschrift 114 (7): 275â279. PMID 17724936.
  87. ^ "Omega-3/Omega-6 fatty acid content of Grass Fed Beef". http://www.csuchico.edu/agr/grsfdbef/health-benefits/ben-o3-o6.html.
  88. ^ "Specially Labeled Lamb". http://www.sheep101.info/labeledlamb.html.
  89. ^ Azcona, J.O., Schang, M.J., Garcia, P.T., Gallinger, C., R. Ayerza (h), and Coates, W. 2008. Omega-3 enriched broiler meat: The influence of dietary alpha-linolenic omega-3 fatty acid sources on growth, performance and meat fatty acid composition. Canadian Journal of Animal Science, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 88:257-269.
  90. ^ "More Omega 3 in Organic Milk". http://www.vetscite.org/publish/items/001719/.
  91. ^ "Omega-3 Omega-6 Omega-9 for weight management. A Cardiosterol approach by Alta Care Laboratoires". http://www.articlesbase.com/supplements-and-vitamins-articles/omega-369-for-weight-management-a-cardiosterol-approach-435636.html.
  92. ^ a b Simopoulos, Artemis P. (September 2003). "Importance of the ratio of omega-6/omega-3 essential fatty acids: evolutionary aspects". World Review of Nutrition and Dietetics (Karger) 92 (Omega-6/Omega-3 Essential Fatty Acid Ratio: The Scientific Evidence): 1â174. doi:10.1159/000073788. ISBN 3805576404. PMID 14579680.
  93. ^ Okuyama H (2001). "High nâ6 to nâ3 ratio of dietary fatty acids rather than serum cholesterol as a major risk factor for coronary heart disease.". European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology 103: 418. doi:10.1002/1438-9312(200106)103:6<418::AID-EJLT418>3.0.CO;2-#. Eur J Lipid Sci Technol. 2001; 103:418â422..
  94. ^ Griffin BA (2008). "How relevant is the ratio of dietary nâ6 to nâ3 polyunsaturated fatty acids to cardiovascular disease risk? Evidence from the OPTILIP study" (Subscription required). Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 19 (1): 57â62. doi:10.1097/MOL.0b013e3282f2e2a8. PMID 18196988.
  95. ^ ,NIH
  96. ^ MIH
  97. ^ Tribole, E.F. (2006-03-27). "Excess Omega-6 Fats Thwart Health Benefits from Omega-3 Fats". British Medical Journal Rapid Responses to Hooper, et al., 2006. http://www.bmj.com/cgi/eletters/332/7544/752#130637. Retrieved on 2008-03-23.
  98. ^ Tribole, 2007
  99. ^ Lands, 2005
  100. ^ Simopoulos AP, Leaf A, Salem Jr N. Statement on the essentiality of and recommended dietary intakes for nâ6 and nâ3 fatty acids. Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 2000;63:119â121. PMID 10991764.
  101. ^ Hibbeln et al., 2006
  102. ^ Erasmus, Udo, Fats and Oils. 1986. Alive books, Vancouver, ISBN 0-920470-16-5 p. 263 (round-number ratio within ranges given.)
  103. ^ "Essential Fats in Food Oils, NIH page". http://efaeducation.nih.gov/sig/esstable.html.
  104. ^ "Conversion Efficiency of ALA to DHA in Humans". http://dhaomega3.org/index.php?category=overview&title=Conversion-of-ALA-to-DHA. Retrieved on 21 October.
  105. ^ Goyens, Petra LL; et al. (01 Jul 2006). "Conversion of alpha-linolenic acid in humans is influenced by the absolute amounts of alpha-linolenic acid and linoleic acid in the diet and not by their ratio". American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 84 (1): 44. PMID 16825680. http://www.ajcn.org/cgi/content/abstract/84/1/44. Retrieved on 21 October.

### [edit] Additional sources

  * Robson, A. 2006. "Shellfish view of omega-3 and sustainable fisheries." Nature 444, 1002.
  * Robson, A. 2007. "Preventing the diseases of civilisation: shellfish, the omega-3:6 balance and human health." Shellfish News 23, 25â27
  * Cunnane SC (2006) "Survival of the fattest: the key to human brain evolution." M S-MEDECINE SCIENCES 22 (6â7): 659â663.
  * Bell, J.G., et al. 2004. "Essential fatty acids and phospholipase A2 in autistic spectrum disorders." Prostaglandins Leukot.Essent.Fatty Acids 71(4):201â204.
  * Bartram, Thomas, 1998, Bartram's Encyclopedia of Herbal Medicine, p.271.
  * Ohara, K. "The nâ3 polyunsaturated fatty acid/dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia." Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Mar 30;31(2):469â474.
  * Richardson, A.J., and M.A. Ross. 2000. "Fatty acid metabolism in neurodevelopmental disorder: a new perspective on associations between attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, dyslexia, dyspraxia and the autistic spectrum." Prostaglandins Leukot.Essent.Fatty Acids 63(1â2):1â9.
  * Young, G., and J. Conquer. 2005. "Omega-3 fatty acids and neuropsychiatric disorders." Reprod.Nutr.Dev 45(1):1â28.
  * Hibbeln JR, Nieminen LR, Blasbalg TL, Riggs JA, Lands WE. Healthy intakes of nâ3 and nâ6 fatty acids: estimations considering worldwide diversity. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006 Jun;83(6 Suppl):1483Sâ1493S.
  * Scher, J., and Pillinger, M. "15d-PGJ2: The anti-inflammatory prostaglandin?" Clinical Immunology. 2005 Feb; 114(2):100â109

## [edit] Further reading

  * Allport, Susan. The Queen of Fats: Why Omega-3s Were Removed from the Western Diet and What We Can Do to Replace Them. University of California Press, September 2006. ISBN 978-0-520-24282-1.
  * Chow, Ching Kuang. Fatty Acids in Foods and Their Health Implications. Routledge Publishing. New York, New York. 2001.
  * Clover, Charles. The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. Ebury Press, London 2004. ISBN 0-09-189780-7
  * Stoll, Andrew L. The Omega-3 Connection. Simon & Schuster 2001. ISBN 0-684-87138-6, ISBN 0-684-87139-4 (paperback).
  * Erasmus, Udo. Fats That Heal, Fats That Kill. 3rd ed. Burnaby (BC): Alive Books; 1993.
  * Boyd, Hillary & Basant, Puri K. The Natural Way to Beat Depression: the groundbreaking discovery of EPA to change your life. London. Hodder and Stoughton. 2004. ISBN 0-340-82497-2
  * Tribole, Evelyn. "The Ultimate Omega-3 Diet" New York. McGraw-Hill. 2007 ISBN 13:978-0-07-146986-9
  * Lands, William E.M. "Fish, Omega-3 and Human Health" Champaign. AOCS Press. 2005 ISBN 1-893997-81-2
  * Smithers, Lois. The Food Industry's Greed. How Misleading Labeling of Omega-3 Foods Undermines American Health.

## [edit] External links

<IMG> Food portal  
  * American Heart Assoc "Fish & Omega-3 Fatty Acids"
  * Omega-3 Prevents Macular Degeneration
  * Further topics and latest scientific research: DHA/EPA Omega-3 Institute
  * BBC News report: Oily fish helps cut inflammation, March 12, 2005.
  * University of Maryland Medical Center, omega-3 Fatty Acids
  * Durham Research: Using Fatty Acids for Enhancing Classroom Achievement Website for the Durham Schools Trial, trial on the effects of fatty acids with children who were under performing in class. Funded by the Durham City Council and Oxford University. Their initial results (also available on durhamtrial.org) were published in May 2005.
  * Read criticism of the above mentioned Durham 'trial' by a columnist for the Guardian at badscience.net September 2006
  * Essential (Omega-3 and Omega-6) Fatty Acids: The Linus Pauling Institute Micronutrient Information Center
  * Simopoulos, AP The importance of the ratio of omega-6/omega-3 essential fatty acids.
  * Letter Responding to a Request to Reconsider the Qualified Claim for a Dietary Supplement Health Claim for Omega-3 Fatty Acids and Coronary Heart Disease
  * MedlinePlus Herbs and Supplements: Omega-3 fatty acids, fish oil, alpha-linolenic acid
  * Another reason why men like curves (Daily Telegraph) Omega-3 credited with shaping a woman's figure to be more attractive to men.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Types of Lipids  
General

Saturated fat | Unsaturated fat | Monounsaturated fat | Polyunsaturated fat  
Geometry

Trans fat | Omega-3 fatty acid | Omega-6 fatty acid | Omega-9 fatty acid  
Phospholipids

Phosphatidylserine | Phosphatidylinositol | Phosphatidyl ethanolamine |
Cardiolipin | Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine  
Eicosanoids

Arachidonic acid | Prostaglandin | Prostacyclin | Thromboxane | Leukotriene  
Fatty acids

Lauric acid | Palmitic acid | Myristic acid | Stearic acid | Caprylic acid  
Major families of biochemicals  
Saccharides/Carbohydrates/Glycosides Â· Amino
acids/Peptides/Proteins/Glycoproteins Â· Lipids/Terpenes/Steroids/Carotenoids
Â· Alkaloids/Nucleobases/Nucleic acids Â· Cofactors/
Flavonoids/Polyketides/Tetrapyrroles  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omega-3_fatty_acid"

Categories: Lipids | Fatty acids | Biologically based therapies

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 |
Articles with unsourced statements since March 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Walon
  * ç²µèª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 23:02.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



