
# Deep Web

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(April 2008)  
The deep Web (also called Deepnet, the invisible Web, dark Web or the hidden
Web) refers to World Wide Web content that is not part of the surface Web,
which is indexed by standard search engines.

Mike Bergman, credited with coining the phrase,[1] has said that searching on
the Internet today can be compared to dragging a net across the surface of the
ocean; a great deal may be caught in the net, but there is a wealth of
information that is deep and therefore missed. Most of the Web's information
is buried far down on dynamically generated sites, and standard search engines
do not find it. Traditional search engines cannot "see" or retrieve content in
the deep Web â those pages do not exist until they are created dynamically
as the result of a specific search. The deep Web is several orders of
magnitude larger than the surface Web.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Naming
  * 2 Size
  * 3 Deep resources
  * 4 Accessing
  * 5 Crawling the deep Web
  * 6 Classifying resources
  * 7 Future
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Naming

Bergman, in a seminal, early paper on the deep Web published in the Journal of
Electronic Publishing, mentioned that Jill Ellsworth used the term invisible
Web in 1994 to refer to websites that are not registered with any search
engine.[2] Bergman cited a January 1996 article by Frank Garcia:[3]

> "It would be a site that's possibly reasonably designed, but they didn't
bother to register it with any of the search engines. So, no one can find
them! You're hidden. I call that the invisible Web."

Another early use of the term invisible Web was by Bruce Mount and Matthew B.
Koll of Personal Library Software, in a description of the @1 deep Web tool
found in a December 1996 press release.[4]

The first use of the specific term deep Web, now generally accepted, occurred
in the aforementioned 2001 Bergman study.[2]

## [edit] Size

In 2000, it was estimated that the deep Web contained approximately 7,500
terabytes of data and 550 billion individual documents.[2] Estimates based on
extrapolations from a study done at University of California, Berkeley, show
that the deep Web consists of about 91,000 terabytes. By contrast, the surface
Web (which is easily reached by search engines) is only about 167 terabytes;
the Library of Congress, in 1997, was estimated to have perhaps 3,000
terabytes.[5]

## [edit] Deep resources

Deep Web resources may be classified into one or more of the following
categories:[citation needed]

  * Dynamic content: dynamic pages which are returned in response to a submitted query or accessed only through a form, especially if open-domain input elements (such as text fields) are used; such fields are hard to navigate without domain knowledge.

  * Unlinked content: pages which are not linked to by other pages, which may prevent Web crawling programs from accessing the content. This content is referred to as pages without backlinks (or inlinks).

  * Private Web: sites that require registration and login (password-protected resources).

  * Contextual Web: pages with content varying for different access contexts (e.g., ranges of client IP addresses or previous navigation sequence).

  * Limited access content: sites that limit access to their pages in a technical way (e.g., using the Robots Exclusion Standard, CAPTCHAs, or no-cache Pragma HTTP headers which prohibit search engines from browsing them and creating cached copies[6]).

  * Scripted content: pages that are only accessible through links produced by JavaScript as well as content dynamically downloaded from Web servers via Flash or AJAX solutions.

  * Non-HTML/text content: textual content encoded in multimedia (image or video) files or specific file formats not handled by search engines.

## [edit] Accessing

To discover content on the Web, search engines use web crawlers that follow
hyperlinks. This technique is ideal for discovering resources on the surface
Web but is often ineffective at finding deep Web resources. For example, these
crawlers do not attempt to find dynamic pages that are the result of database
queries due to the infinite number of queries that are possible.[1] It has
been noted that this can be (partially) overcome by providing links to query
results, but this could unintentionally inflate the popularity (e.g.,
PageRank) for a member of the deep Web.

One way to access the deep Web is via federated search based search engines.
Search tools such as Science.gov are being designed to retrieve information
from the deep Web. These tools identify and interact with searchable
databases, aiming to provide access to deep Web content.[citation needed]

Another way to explore the deep Web is by using human crawlers instead of
algorithmic crawlers. In this paradigm, referred to as Web harvesting, humans
find interesting links of the deep Web that algorithmic crawlers can't find.
This human-based computation technique to discover the deep Web has been used
by the StumbleUpon service since February 2002.[citation needed]

In 2005, Yahoo! made a small part of the deep Web searchable by releasing
Yahoo! Subscriptions. This search engine searches through a few subscription-
only Web sites. Some subscription websites display their full content to
search engine robots so they will show up in user searches, but then show
users a login or subscription page when they click a link from the search
engine results page.

## [edit] Crawling the deep Web

Researchers have been exploring how the deep Web can be crawled in an
automatic fashion. In 2001, Sriram Raghavan and Hector Garcia-Molina[7][8]
presented an architectural model for a hidden-Web crawler that used key terms
provided by users or collected from the query interfaces to query a Web form
and crawl the deep Web resources. Alexandros Ntoulas, Petros Zerfos, and
Junghoo Cho of UCLA created a hidden-Web crawler that automatically generated
meaningful queries to issue against search forms.[9] Their crawler generated
promising results, but the problem is far from being solved, as the authors
recognized. Another effort is DeepPeep, a project of the University of Utah
sponsored by the National Science Foundation, which gathered hidden-Web
sources (Web forms) in different domains based on novel focused crawler
techniques.[10] [11] Commercial search engines have begun exploring
alternative methods to crawl the deep Web. Google's Sitemap Protocol and mod
oai are mechanisms that allow search engines and other interested parties to
discover deep Web resources on particular Web servers. Both mechanisms allow
Web servers to advertise the URLs that are accessible on them, thereby
allowing automatic discovery of resources that are not directly linked to the
surface Web. As a deep Web search strategy, Google has developed a smart
warehousing model that tried to accommodate the sheer scale of the Web, by
sending a spider to pull up individual query forms, indexing the content of
the form, and analyzing each form for clues about the topic that it
covers.[citation needed]

## [edit] Classifying resources

It is difficult to automatically determine if a Web resource is a member of
the surface Web or the deep Web. If a resource is indexed by a search engine,
it is not necessarily a member of the surface Web, because the resource could
have been found using another method (e.g., the Sitemap Protocol, mod oai,
OAIster) instead of traditional crawling. If a search engine provides a
backlink for a resource, one may assume that the resource is in the surface
Web. Unfortunately, search engines do not always provide all backlinks to
resources. Even if a backlink does exist, there is no way to determine if the
resource providing the link is itself in the surface Web without crawling all
of the Web. Furthermore, a resource may reside in the surface Web, but it has
not yet been found by a search engine. Therefore, if we have an arbitrary
resource, we cannot know for sure if the resource resides in the surface Web
or deep Web without a complete crawl of the Web.

The concept of classifying search results by topic was pioneered by Yahoo!
Directory search[citation needed] and is gaining importance as search becomes
more relevant in day-to-day decisions.[citation needed] However, most of the
work here has been in categorizing the surface Web by topic. For
classification of deep Web resources, Ipeirotis et al.[12] presented an
algorithm that classifies a deep Web site into the category that generates the
largest number of hits for some carefully selected, topically-focused queries.
Deep Web directories under development include as OAIster at the University of
Michigan, Intute at the University of Manchester, INFOMINE[13] at the
University of California at Riverside, and DirectSearch (by Gary Price). This
classification poses a challenge while searching the deep Web whereby two
levels of categorization are required. The first level is to categorize sites
into vertical topics (e.g., health, travel, automobiles) and sub-topics
according to the nature of the content underlying their databases.

The more difficult challenge is to categorize and map the information
extracted from multiple deep Web sources according to end-user needs. Deep Web
search reports cannot display URLs like traditional search reports. End users
expect their search tools to not only find what they are looking for quickly,
but to be intuitive and user-friendly. In order to be meaningful, the search
reports have to offer some depth to the nature of content that underlie the
sources or else the end-user will be lost in the sea of URLs that do not
indicate what content lies underneath them. The format in which search results
are to be presented varies widely by the particular topic of the search and
the type of content being exposed. The challenge is to find and map similar
data elements from multiple disparate sources so that search results may be
exposed in a unified format on the search report irrespective of their source.

## [edit] Future

The lines between search engine content and the deep Web have begun to blur,
as search services start to provide access to part or all of once-restricted
content. An increasing amount of deep Web content is opening up to free search
as publishers and libraries make agreements with large search engines. In the
future, deep Web content may be defined less by opportunity for search than by
access fees or other types of authentication.[14]

## [edit] See also

  * Dark internet
  * Darknet (file sharing)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Wright, Alex (2009-02-22). "Exploring a 'Deep Web' That Google Canât Grasp". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/23/technology/internet/23search.html?th&emc=th. Retrieved on 2009-02-23.
  2. ^ a b c d Bergman, Michael K. (August 2001). "The Deep Web: Surfacing Hidden Value". The Journal of Electronic Publishing 7 (1). http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=jep;view=text;rgn=main;idno=3336451.0007.104.
  3. ^ Garcia, Frank (January 1996). "Business and Marketing on the Internet". Masthead 9 (1). http://web.archive.org/web/19961205083117/http://tcp.ca/Jan96/BusandMark.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-24.
  4. ^ @1 started with 5.7 terabytes of content, estimated to be 30 times the size of the nascent World Wide Web; PLS was acquired by AOL in 1998 and @1 was abandoned. Personal Library Software (December 1996). PLS introduces AT1, the first 'second generation' Internet search service. Press release. http://web.archive.org/web/19971021232057/www.pls.com/news/pr961212_at1.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-24.
  5. ^ Michael, Lesk. How much information is there in the world?. http://www.lesk.com/mlesk/ksg97/ksg.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-24.
  6. ^ pragma:no-cache/cache-control:no-cache "HTTP 1.1: Header Field Definitions (14.32 Pragma)". HTTP - Hypertext Transfer Protocol. W3C. 2000. http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec14.html#sec14.32 pragma:no-cache/cache-control:no-cache. Retrieved on 2009-02-24.
  7. ^ [|Sriram Raghavan]; Hector Garcia-Molina (2000) (PDF). Crawling the Hidden Web. Stanford Digital Libraries Technical Report. http://ilpubs.stanford.edu:8090/456/1/2000-36.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-12-27.
  8. ^ Raghavan, Sriram; Garcia-Molina, Hector (2001). "Crawling the Hidden Web" (PDF). Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB): 129-138.
  9. ^ Alexandros, Ntoulas; Petros Zerfos, and Junghoo Cho (2005). Downloading Hidden Web Content. UCLA Computer Science. http://oak.cs.ucla.edu/~cho/papers/ntoulas-hidden.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-02-24.
  10. ^ Barbosa, Luciano; Juliana Freire (2007). An Adaptive Crawler for Locating Hidden-Web Entry Points. WWW Conference 2007. http://www.cs.utah.edu/~lbarbosa/publications/ache-www2007.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  11. ^ Barbosa, Luciano; Juliana Freire (2005). Searching for Hidden-Web Databases.. WebDB 2005. http://www.cs.utah.edu/~lbarbosa/publications/webdb2005.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-20.
  12. ^ Ipeirotis, Panagiotis G.; Gravano, Luis; Sahami, Mehran (2001). "Probe, Count, and Classify: Categorizing Hidden-Web Databases" (PDF). Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data: 67-78.
  13. ^ http://infomine.ucr.edu
  14. ^ Cohen. "Internet Tutorials: The Deep Web". http://www.internettutorials.net/deepweb.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-16.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Barker, Joe (Jan 2004). Invisible Web: What it is, Why it exists, How to find it, and its inherent ambiguity UC Berkeley - Teaching Library Internet Workshops.
  * Gruchawka, Steve (June 2006). How-To Guide to the Deep Web TechDeepWeb.com, http://TechDeepWeb.com
  * Hamilton, Nigel (2003). The Mechanics of a Deep Net Metasearch Engine \- 12th World Wide Web Conference poster.
  * He, Bin; Chang, Kevin Chen-Chuan (2003). "Statistical Schema Matching across Web Query Interfaces" (PDF). Proceedings of the 2003 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data.
  * He, Bin; Patel, Mitesh; Zhang, Zhen; Chang, Kevin Chen-Chuan (May 2007). "Accessing the Deep Web: A Survey". Communications of the ACM (CACM) 50 (2): 94â101. doi:10.1145/1230819.1241670. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1230819.1241670.
  * Ipeirotis, Panagiotis G.; Gravano, Luis; Sahami, Mehran (2001). "Probe, Count, and Classify: Categorizing Hidden-Web Databases" (PDF). Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data: 67-78.
  * King, John D.; Li, Yuefeng; Tao, Daniel; Nayak, Richi (November 2007). "Mining World Knowledge for Analysis of Search Engine Content" (PDF). Web Intelligence and Agent Systems: An International Journal 5 (3): 233â253. http://sky.fit.qut.edu.au/~kingj2/downloads/king07mining.pdf.
  * McCown, Frank; Liu, Xiaoming; Nelson, Michael L.; Zubair, Mohammad (Mar/Apr 2006). "Search Engine Coverage of the OAI-PMH Corpus" (PDF). IEEE Internet Computing 10 (2): 66â73. doi:10.1109/MIC.2006.41. http://library.lanl.gov/cgi-bin/getfile?LA-UR-05-9158.pdf.
  * Price, Gary; Sherman, Chris (July 2001). The Invisible Web : Uncovering Information Sources Search Engines Can't See. CyberAge Books. ISBN 0-910965-51-X.
  * Shestakov, Denis (June 2008). Search Interfaces on the Web: Querying and Characterizing. TUCS Doctoral Dissertations 104, University of Turku
  * Wright, Alex (Mar 2004). In Search of the Deep Web, Salon.com, http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2004/03/09/deep_web/

## [edit] External links

  * Firms Push for a More Searchable Federal Web \- article in the Washington Post, Thursday, December 11, 2008; Page D01 by Peter Whoriskey.
  * DeepDyve A research search engine to access content in the Deep Web
  * DeepPeep a search engine project to "discover the hidden web"

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_Web"

Categories: World Wide Web

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since April
2008 | All articles that may contain original research | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007 |
Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced
statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
September 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 23:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



