
# Gothic Lolita

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article
or discuss these issues on the talk page.

  * It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since March 2009.  

  * It may contain original research or unverifiable claims. Tagged since September 2007.  

  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Example of (lighty) Gothic Lolita in the Harajuku area of Shibuya, Tokyo

Gothic Lolita or "GothLoli"(ã´ã¹ã­ãªâ gosurorii) sometimes "Loli-Goth"
has two definitions. The term "Gothic and Lolita" is used by the Japanese to
describe a sub-culture of teenagers who wear a wide range of fashions. It is
used by English language sources mainly to describe a specific subset of
Lolita fashion.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Terminology used by English-language fandom
  * 2 Fashion style
  * 3 Culture
    * 3.1 "Goth" and "Lolita"
    * 3.2 Shopping
    * 3.3 Anime and manga
    * 3.4 Outside of Japan
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] History

The Lolita style began in the 1970's with brands such as Milk and Pink House
making outfits that resembled Canada's Anne of Green Gables (which is widely
loved in Japan) and, to a lesser extent, Little House on the Prairie. Angelic
Pretty opened in 1979, Baby, The Stars Shine Bright opened in the 80's, and
Moi-meme-Moitie opened in 1999.

Mana, ex-Malice Mizer (co-founded with Kozi, also guitar), is widely credited
for having helped popularize Gothic Lolita, though he is not a founder of the
style. He coined the terms "Elegant Gothic Lolita" (EGL) and "Elegant Gothic
Aristocrat" (EGA) to describe the style of his own fashion label Moi-mÃªme-
MoitiÃ©, which was founded in 1999. Other influential figures in the scene
include the singer Kana, who often modeled for Lolita related fashion
magazines, and Mitsukazu Mihara, who drew the first eight covers of the Gothic
& Lolita Bible.

### [edit] Terminology used by English-language fandom

Among English-language fandom, the term Elegant Gothic Lolita was originally
used to describe a sub-set of Lolita fashion that was either all black, or
mostly black with white accents. However, there are many subsets within
'Gothic Lolita,' including, but not limited to shirorori (white lolita),
kurorori (black lolita), gurorori (Gory or grotesque lolita), and punk lolita.
Black (kuro) and white (shiro) lolitas wear all black and white respectively,
guro lolitas are often defined by bandages and an "injured" appearance, and
punk lolita adds a punk touch to lolita fashion. There are fashions similar in
feeling to gothic lolita but they are not regarded by the gothic lolita
community as authentic, rather "lolita-styled".

Elegant Gothic Lolita (EGL) is a term coined by Mana (Guitarist and leader of
Moi dix Mois and Malice Mizer, creator of clothing line Moi-mÃªme-MoitiÃ©). It
can be considered a more mature version of gothic lolita, often worn by older
teens and young women. The male 'counter-part' to EGL is EGA (Elegant Gothic
Aristocrat); it is very tailored and stream-lined, both being mostly black and
white. However, the term Gothloli (gosurori) is used by some foreigners to
describe anyone in gothic or lolita.

Sweet Gothic Lolita refers to a gothic lolita appearance, paired with
accessories such as fruit purse, key chains, and many other colorful
additions. The style of sweet goth lolita can be a black and (insert color,
pink, red...etc...) colored dress along with a cute sweet lolita head-dress.
Even though this style of lolita isn't popular in Japan, it can be found.

## [edit] Fashion style

<IMG>

<IMG>

Two Gothic Lolitas

Lolita fashion draws much of its inspiration from Rococo, Victorian-style and
Edwardian fashion and often aims to imitate the look of Victorian children or
porcelain dolls. Gothic Lolita applies the aesthetics of Gothic fashion to the
childlike, pretty Lolita fashion. The word Gothloli comes, quite naturally,
from a combination of Lolita and Gothic fashion.[1]

Gothic Lolita is the best-known of the various "Lolita" looks. Other
categories include "Classic Lolita", which is often more mature-looking and
contains more muted colors and floral prints and "Sweet Lolita" which is
identified by childish pastel colors and cute prints.

Gothic Lolita style is usually a combination of black and white, often black
with white lace and typically decorated with ribbons and lace trims. Skirts
are knee length and may have a crinoline or petticoat to add volume. As in
mainstream Japanese fashion, over-knee socks or stockings are popular. White
or black tights are also common. Boots, rocking horse shoes, or child-like
shoes such as Mary Janes complete the look. Frilly, ruffled or lace-trimmed
Victorian blouses are also popular with Gothic Lolitas and designs are usually
modest, sometimes with long lace-capped sleeves and/or high-necked blouses.

Some additions may include mini top hats, parasols, and lace headdresses,
which resemble wide, elegantly decorated headbands. Other popular Lolita
headgear are ribbons, lace or bows, an alice band with a bow or sometimes even
a bonnet. Hair is sometimes curled, or a curled wig is worn to complete the
porcelain doll look. Blonde and black are the most popular hair colors, though
as the fashion continues to develop, other colors (such as brown and red and
other vivid colors) are increasing in popularity.

Lolita outfits may be accessorized with other props like handbags, small
backpacks and purses, sometimes in the shape of bats, coffins, and crucifixes,
as well as conspicuous pocket books, pocket watches, and hat boxes. Teddy
bears and other stuffed animals are also common, and some brands make special
"gothic" teddy bears out of black leather or PVC. Some Lolitas own Super
Dollfie or other ball-jointed dolls and carry them when wearing the style,
often going so far as to dress them to match. Gothic Lolita is extremely
common in Japan.

## [edit] Culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gothic Lolita

In Japan it is mass-marketed, though not widely worn, but has visibility
particularly in the streets of Tokyo and Osaka, on television, in manga and
computer games. The fashion is being picked up worldwide, thanks to the
foreign publication of Japanese magazine anthology FRUiTS, where the
outstanding style actually blends in with the other quirky teen trends in
Japan. More "faithful" adherents to the style take many influences from the
Rococo and Victorian periods of European history, believing it to be in the
nature of a Lolita to be respectful, polite, and demure at all times; even
more extreme adherents are often known to attempt to cultivate interest in
hobbies or activities considered appropriate to high-society ladies during
these periods, such as needlework, opera, classical and baroque styles of
music, painting, sewing, and the traditional observance of high tea. For the
most part, however, most Lolitas live a day-to-day life very similar to any
average person.

### [edit] "Goth" and "Lolita"

Lolita as a fashion is not as strongly associated with a particular style of
music or outside interests as Goth, and individual followers of Lolita fashion
may listen to a wide variety of music, from Classic music to pop and rock.

In Japan, Goth is a minor subculture with few followers, partly because the
emphasis upon visual identity in Japanese youth culture makes other factors
such as music and literature less important signifiers, and perhaps partly
because Christianity is a minor religion here. In Japan, people who have heard
the term "Goth" usually assume that it is simply a contraction of "Gothic
Lolita",[citation needed] except for the Goths themselves, who strongly
emphasize the differences. Likewise, some non-Japanese observers assume that
"Gothic Lolita" is the Japanese version of "Goth", purely on the similarities
in fashion.[citation needed]

Previously in Tokyo, the largest "goth" club events, such as "Tokyo Dark
Castle", would also attract a noticeable proportion of Gothic Lolita
customers. However, since 2005 their numbers have dwindled and such events now
primarily attract more typical goth, industrial and metal music fans.[citation
needed] Concerts of visual kei themed bands are often attended by many
Lolitas, but conversely, few goths.

### [edit] Shopping

Currently the commercial center of the Gothic Lolita subculture is the Marui
Young department store in Shinjuku, after its predecessor Marui One closed at
the end of August 2004. This large youth-fashion oriented department store has
4 floors entirely devoted to Gothloli and related fashions. Some Gothloli
boutiques may be found in the area between Harajuku and Shibuya.

### [edit] Anime and manga

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gothic Lolita appear frequently in anime art.

More often than not, "Lolita" in anime and manga is generally considered
cosplay and not genuine lolita.

Some prominent manga and anime featuring Gothic Lolita fashion are Paradise
Kiss, Pandora Hearts,Coyote Ragtime Show, Le Portrait de Petit Cossette, Le
Chevalier d'Eon, Rozen Maiden, Shugo Chara!, Death Note, Godchild, D. Gray
Man, Othello, xxxHolic, Pandora Hearts, Trinity Blood, Pitaten, Venus Versus
Virus, Princess Ai, Chibi vampire, many of the works of Kaori Yuki, Megatokyo,
and all of the works of Mitsukazu Mihara .

Some other types of anime include Negima in which Evangeline A.K. McDowell
forces Asuna to wear Lolita wear in her training sessions.

The 2006 anime, Yamato Nadeshiko Shichi Henge, also known as The Wallflower,
features four sisters who attend the high school of the main characters, who
are called the Goth Loli sisters (Lassine, Madeline, Roxanne, and Yvone). They
are depicted purely as the subject of much comedy and they always leave the
scene chanting "Goth! Goth! Loli! Loli!"

In some manga, such as Othello, lolita fashion is portrayed as a method of
individualizing and becoming less shy. Most of these titles appeal primarily
to male fans rather than the lolitas themselves; however, large numbers of
lolita girls are visible at manga events such as Comiket. They often buy
doujinshi based upon their favorite bands, dolls and movie characters; and
some are interested in other kinds of dressing, including cosplay. However,
the Gothic Lolita style should not be considered a cosplay; it is an
alternative fashion.

Most lolitas, especially those who wear the style on a daily basis, state that
"we say we're not cosplay, but they don't listen. Of course we're not happy,
but there's nothing we can do about it." (translated from the 2ch lolita
fashion messageboard introduction) The comments of this style being cosplay is
usually from the otaku who only know of this fashion through anime and manga.

### [edit] Outside of Japan

Outside of Japan, the Lolita fashion is not very known. Lolita, along with
cosplay and other Japanese cultural phenomena, can sometimes be seen at
concerts and anime conventions throughout North America (see Anime North), the
UK, Australia, Mexico, New Zealand, Brazil, Argentina, France, Russia, and the
Netherlands. The style is not mass marketed outside of Japan, though small
stores have emerged, including "Gothic Lolita" in central Melbourne. Baby, The
Stars Shine Bright has a store in Paris and is rumored to be opening another
in San Francisco.

Major brands, such as Metamorphose temps de fille, Angelic Pretty, h. Naoto,
Baby, The Stars Shine Bright and Moi-mÃªme-MoitiÃ© have recently shipped goods
to the international market. This is still not widespread, as many of the
clothes produced by non-Japanese designers are not accepted by the Lolita
community for being inaccurate in portraying the style as related to the
British 'goth' or French maid look, and not as high-quality as the expensive
Japanese brand clothes. Lolita magazines are widely available for purchase on
the internet and at Japanese bookstores, which also deal in anime and manga.
However, there is a growing group of dedicated western Lolita fans who wear
Lolita clothing on a semi-regular basis, and the Gothic and Lolita Bible now
has an American version which not only features translated content from the
original magazine but also content from a small but growing group of western
Lolita designers from around the world such as Candy Violet, Fanplusfriend
Garden, In the Starlight, and Blasphemina's Closet. Celebrity author Novala
Takemoto, who is an important figure within Lolita culture and was once
involved with Baby, the Stars Shine Bright, traveled to America in 2006 and
remarked at a panel on the resourcefulness of western Lolitas, who often make
or adapt their own clothing.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ David Graham Gothic Lolitas: Goth Girls just wanna have Fun! Lilith Gallery

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Gothic lolita fashion  
  * What is Loli-Goth, GothLoli or Gothic Lolita?

v â¢ d â¢ e

Japanese subcultures  
Subcultures

BÅsÅzoku | Cosplay | Erokawa | Ganguro | Gyaru and Gyaruo | Kogal | Lolita
fashion | Sukeban  
Cultural phenomena

Gyaru-moji | Visual kei  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gothic_Lolita"

Categories: Japanese fashion | Gothic fashion | Japanese words and phrases |
Cosplay

Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from March 2009 |
Articles that may contain original research since September 2007 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 09:37.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



