
# Blood-brain barrier

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Part of a network of capillaries supplying brain cells

The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is a metabolic or cellular structure in the
central nervous system (CNS) that restricts the passage of various chemical
substances and microscopic objects (e.g. bacteria) between the bloodstream and
the neural tissue itself, while still allowing the passage of substances
essential to metabolic function (e.g. oxygen).

## Contents

  * 1 Physiology
  * 2 History
  * 3 Pathophysiology
  * 4 Drugs targeting the brain
    * 4.1 Nanoparticles
  * 5 Diseases
    * 5.1 Meningitis
    * 5.2 Epilepsy
    * 5.3 Multiple sclerosis (MS)
    * 5.4 Neuromyelitis optica
    * 5.5 Late-stage neurological trypanosomiasis (Sleeping sickness)
    * 5.6 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)
    * 5.7 De Vivo disease
    * 5.8 Alzheimer's Disease
    * 5.9 HIV Encephalitis
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] Physiology

This "barrier" results from the selectivity of the tight junctions between
endothelial cells in CNS vessels that restricts the passage of solutes. At the
interface between blood and brain, endothelial cells and associated astrocytes
are stitched together by structures called "tight junctions." The tight
junction is composed of smaller subunits, frequently dimers, that are
transmembrane proteins such as occludin, claudins, junctional adhesion
molecule (JAM), ESAM and others. Each of these transmembrane proteins is
anchored into the endothelial cells by another protein complex that includes
zo-1 and associated proteins.

The blood-brain barrier is composed of high density cells restricting passage
of substances from the bloodstream much more than endothelial cells in
capillaries elsewhere in the body. Astrocyte cell projections called
astrocytic feet (also known as "glia limitans") surround the endothelial cells
of the BBB, providing biochemical support to those cells. The BBB is distinct
from the similar blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier, a function of the
choroidal cells of the choroid plexus, and from the Blood-retinal barrier,
which can be considered a part of the whole.[1]

Several areas of the brain are not "behind" the BBB. One example is the pineal
gland which secretes the hormone melatonin "directly into the systemic
circulation."[2]

## [edit] History

Paul Ehrlich was a bacteriologist studying staining, used for many studies to
make fine structures visible. When he interjected some of these dyes (notably
the aniline dyes that were then popular), the dye would stain all of the
organs of an animal except the brain. At the time, Ehrlich attributed this to
the brain simply not picking up as much of the dye.

However, in a later experiment in 1913, Edwin Goldmann (one of Ehrlich's
students) injected the dye into the spinal fluid of the brain directly. He
found that in this case the brain would become dyed, but the rest of the body
would not. This clearly demonstrated the existence of some sort of
compartmentalization between the two. At the time, it was thought that the
blood vessels themselves were responsible for the barrier, as no obvious
membrane could be found. The concept of the blood-brain barrier (then termed
hematoencephalic barrier) was proposed by Lina Stern in 1921.[3] It was not
until the introduction of the scanning electron microscope to the medical
research fields in the 1960s that the actual membrane could be demonstrated.

It was once believed that astrocytes rather than endothelial cells were the
basis of the blood-brain barrier because of the densely packed astrocyte foot
processes that surround the endothelial cells of the BBB.

## [edit] Pathophysiology

The blood-brain barrier acts very effectively to protect the brain from many
common bacterial infections. Thus, infections of the brain are very rare.
However, since antibodies are too large to cross the blood-brain barrier,
infections of the brain which do occur are often very serious and difficult to
treat. Viruses easily bypass the blood-brain barrier, however, attaching
themselves to circulating immune cells.

## [edit] Drugs targeting the brain

Overcoming the difficulty of delivering therapeutic agents to specific regions
of the brain presents a major challenge to treatment of most brain disorders.
In its neuroprotective role, the blood-brain barrier functions to hinder the
delivery of many potentially important diagnostic and therapeutic agents to
the brain. Therapeutic molecules and genes that might otherwise be effective
in diagnosis and therapy do not cross the BBB in adequate amounts.

Mechanisms for drug targeting in the brain involve going either "through" or
"behind" the BBB. Modalities for drug delivery through the BBB entail its
disruption by osmotic means, biochemically by the use of vasoactive substances
such as bradykinin, or even by localized exposure to high intensity focused
ultrasound (HIFU). Other strategies to go through the BBB may entail the use
of endogenous transport systems, including carrier-mediated transporters such
as glucose and amino acid carriers; receptor-mediated transcytosis for insulin
or transferrin; and blocking of active efflux transporters such as
p-glycoprotein. Strategies for drug delivery behind the BBB include
intracerebral implantation and convection-enhanced distribution.

### [edit] Nanoparticles

Nanotechnology may also help in the transfer of drugs across the BBB.[4]
Recently, researchers have been trying to build liposomes loaded with
nanoparticles to gain access through the BBB. More research is needed to
determine which strategies will be most effective and how they can be improved
for patients with brain tumors. The potential for using BBB opening to target
specific agents to brain tumors has just begun to be explored.

Delivering drugs across the blood brain barrier is one of the most promising
applications of nanotechnology in clinical neuroscience. Nanoparticles could
potentially carry out multiple tasks in a predefined sequence, which is very
important in the delivery of drugs across the blood brain barrier.

A significant amount of research in this area has been spent exploring methods
of nanoparticle mediated delivery of antineoplastic drugs to tumors in the
central nervous system. For example, radiolabeled polyethylene glycol coated
hexadecylcyanoacrylate nanospheres targeted and accumulated in a rat
gliosarcoma. [5] However, this method is not yet ready for clinical trials due
to the accumulation of the nanospheres in surrounding healthy tissue.

It should be noted that vascular endothelial cells and associated pericytes
are often abnormal in tumors and that the blood-brain barrier may not always
be intact in brain tumors. Also, the basement membrane is sometimes
incomplete. Other factors, such as astrocytes, may contribute to the
resistance of brain tumors to therapy.[6][7]

## [edit] Diseases

### [edit] Meningitis

Meningitis is inflammation of the membranes which surround the brain and
spinal cord (these membranes are also known as meninges). Meningitis is most
commonly caused by infections with various pathogens, examples of which are
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. When the meninges are
inflamed, the blood-brain barrier may be disrupted. This disruption may
increase the penetration of various substances (including antibiotics) into
the brain. Antibiotics used to treat meningitis may aggravate the inflammatory
response of the central nervous system by releasing neurotoxins from the cell
walls of bacteria like lipopolysaccharide (LPS) [8] Treatment with third
generation or fourth generation cephalosporin is usually preferred.

### [edit] Epilepsy

Epilepsy is a common neurological disease characterized by frequent and often
untreatable seizures. Several clinical and experimental data have implicated
failure of blood-brain barrier function in triggering chronic or acute
seizures [9][10]. These findings have shown that acute seizures are a
predictable consequence of disruption of the BBB by either artificial or
inflammatory mechanisms. In addition, expression of drug resistance molecules
and transporters at the BBB are a significant mechanism of resistance to
commonly used anti-epileptic drugs [11].

### [edit] Multiple sclerosis (MS)

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is considered an auto-immune disorder in which the
immune system attacks the myelin protecting the nerves in the central nervous
system. Normally, a person's nervous system would be inaccessible for the
white blood cells due to the blood-brain barrier. However, it has been shown
using Magnetic Resonance Imaging that, when a person is undergoing an MS
"attack," the blood-brain barrier has broken down in a section of the brain or
spinal cord, allowing white blood cells called T lymphocytes to cross over and
destroy the myelin. It has been suggested that, rather than being a disease of
the immune system, MS is a disease of the blood-brain barrier.[citation
needed] However, current scientific evidence is inconclusive.

There are currently active investigations into treatments for a compromised
blood-brain barrier. It is believed that oxidative stress plays an important
role into the breakdown of the barrier; anti-oxidants such as lipoic acid may
be able to stabilize a weakening blood-brain barrier[12].

### [edit] Neuromyelitis optica

Neuromyelitis optica, also known as Devic's disease, is similar to and often
confused with multiple sclerosis. Among other differences from MS, the target
of the autoimmune response has been identified. Patients with neuromyelitis
optica have high levels of antibodies against a protein called aquaporin 4 (a
component of the astrocytic foot processes in the blood-brain barrier)[13].

### [edit] Late-stage neurological trypanosomiasis (Sleeping sickness)

Late-stage neurological trypanosomiasis, or sleeping sickness, is a condition
in which trypanosoma protozoa are found in brain tissue. It is not yet known
how the parasites infect the brain from the blood, but it is suspected that
they cross through the choroid plexus, a circumventricular organ.

### [edit] Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a demyelinating disease of
the central nervous system caused by reactivation of a latent papovavirus (the
JC polyomavirus) infection, that can cross the BBB. It affects immune-
compromised patients and is usually seen with patients having AIDS.

### [edit] De Vivo disease

De Vivo disease (also known as GLUT1 deficiency syndrome) is a rare condition
caused by inadequate transport of glucose across the barrier, resulting in
mental retardation and other neurological problems. Genetic defects in glucose
transporter type 1 (GLUT1) appears to be the main cause of De Vivo
disease.[14][15]

### [edit] Alzheimer's Disease

New evidence indicates that disruption of the blood-brain barrier in AD
patients allows blood plasma containing amyloid beta (AÎ²) to enter the brain
where the AÎ² adheres preferentially to the surface of astrocytes. These
findings have led to the hypotheses that (1) breakdown of the blood-brain
barrier allows access of neuron-binding autoantibodies and soluble exogenous
AÎ²42 to brain neurons and (2) binding of these autoantibodies to neurons
triggers and/or facilitates the internalization and accumulation of cell
surface-bound AÎ²42 in vulnerable neurons through their natural tendency to
clear surface-bound autoantibodies via endocytosis. Eventually the astrocyte
is overwhelmed, dies, ruptures, and disintegrates, leaving behind the
insoluble AÎ²42 plaque. Thus, in some patients, Alzheimerâs disease may be
caused (or more likely, aggravated) by a breakdown in the blood brain barrier.
[1]

The herpes virus produces the amyloid beta (AÎ²) and has been found to be the
pathogen responsible for being a major cause of the disease. [2]

### [edit] HIV Encephalitis

It is believed that latent HIV can cross the blood-brain barrier inside
circulating monocytes in the bloodstream ("Trojan horse theory") within the
first 14 days of infection. Once inside, these monocytes become activated and
are transformed into macrophages. Activated macrophages release virions into
the brain tissue proximate to brain microvessels. These viral particles likely
attract the attention of sentinel brain microglia and perivascular macrophages
initiating an inflammatory cascade that may cause a series of intracellular
signaling in brain microvascular endothelial cells and damage the functional
and structural integrity of the BBB. This inflammation is HIV encephalitis
(HIVE). Instances of HIVE probably occur throughout the course of AIDS and are
a precursor for HIV-associated dementia (HAD). The premier model for studying
HIV and HIVE is the simian model.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Hamilton RD, Foss AJ, Leach L (2007). "Establishment of a human in vitro model of the outer blood-retinal barrier". Journal of Anatomy 211: 707. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7580.2007.00812.x. PMID 17922819.
  2. ^ Pritchard, Thomas C.; Alloway, Kevin Douglas (1999) (Google books preview). Medical Neuroscience. Hayes Barton Press. pp. 76-77. ISBN 1889325295. http://books.google.com/books?id=m7Y80PcFHtsC&printsec=frontcover#PPA76,M1. Retrieved on 2009-02-08.
  3. ^ Lina Stern: Science and fate by A.A. Vein. Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands
  4. ^ Silva, GA (December 2008). "Nanotechnology approaches to crossing the blood-brain barrier and drug delivery to the CNS". BMC Neuroscience 9 (Suppl. 3): S4. PMID 19091001. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?tool=pubmed&pubmedid=19091001.
  5. ^ Brigger I, Morizet J, Aubert G, et al (December 2002). "Poly(ethylene glycol)-coated hexadecylcyanoacrylate nanospheres display a combined effect for brain tumor targeting". J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 303 (3): 928â36. doi:10.1124/jpet.102.039669. PMID 12438511.
  6. ^ Hashizume, H; Baluk P, Morikawa S, McLean JW, Thurston G, Roberge S, Jain RK, McDonald DM (April 2000). "Openings between defective endothelial cells explain tumor vessel leakiness". American Journal of Pathology 156 (4): 1363â1380. PMID 10751361.
  7. ^ Schneider, SW; Ludwig T, Tatenhorst L, Braune S, Oberleithner H, Senner V, Paulus W (March 2004). "Glioblastoma cells release factors that disrupt blood-brain barrier features". Acta Neuropathologica 107 (3): 272â276. doi:10.1007/s00401-003-0810-2. PMID 14730455.
  8. ^ Beam, TR Jr.; Allen, JC (December 1977). "Blood, brain, and cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of several antibiotics in rabbits with intact and inflamed meninges". Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 12 (6): 710â6. PMID 931369.
  9. ^ E. Oby and D. Janigro, The Blood-brain barrier and epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2006 Nov;47(11):1761-74
  10. ^ Marchi,N. et al. Seizure-Promoting Effect of Blood-Brain Barrier Disruption. Epilepsia 48(4), 732-742 (2007). Seiffert,E. et al. Lasting blood-brain barrier disruption induces epileptic focus in the rat somatosensory cortex. J. Neurosci. 24, 7829-7836 (2004). Uva,L. et al. Acute induction of epileptiform discharges by pilocarpine in the in vitro isolated guinea-pig brain requires enhancement of blood-brain barrier permeability. Neuroscience (2007). van Vliet,E.A. et al. Blood-brain barrier leakage may lead to progression of temporal lobe epilepsy. Brain 130, 521-534 (2007).
  11. ^ Awasthi,S. et al. RLIP76, a non-ABC transporter, and drug resistance in epilepsy. BMC. Neurosci. 6, 61 (2005). Loscher,W. & Potschka,H. Drug resistance in brain diseases and the role of drug efflux transporters. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 591-602 (2005).
  12. ^ Schreibelt G, Musters RJ, Reijerkerk A, et al (August 2006). "Lipoic acid affects cellular migration into the central nervous system and stabilizes blood-brain barrier integrity". J. Immunol. 177 (4): 2630â7. PMID 16888025. http://www.jimmunol.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=16888025.
  13. ^ Lennon VA, Kryzer TJ, Pittock SJ, Verkman AS, Hinson SR (August 2005). "IgG marker of optic-spinal multiple sclerosis binds to the aquaporin-4 water channel". J. Exp. Med. 202 (4): 473â7. doi:10.1084/jem.20050304. PMID 16087714.
  14. ^ Pascual, JM; Wang D, Lecumberri B, Yang H, Mao X, Yang R, De Vivo DC (May 2004). "GLUT1 deficiency and other glucose transporter diseases". European journal of endocrinology 150 (5): 627â33. doi:10.1530/eje.0.1500627. PMID 15132717.
  15. ^ Klepper, J; Voit T (June 2002). "Facilitated glucose transporter protein type 1 (GLUT1) deficiency syndrome: impaired glucose transport into brain-- a review". European journal of pediatrics 161 (6): 295â304. doi:10.1007/s00431-002-0939-3. PMID 12029447.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood-brain_barrier"

Categories: Neurology | Animal physiology | Pharmacokinetics

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 18:08.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



