
# Konami Code

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Konami Code

The Konami Code, known in Japan as the Konami Command (ã³ããã³ãã³ã
,Konami Komando?), is a cheat code that appears in many Konami video games.[1]
The code also appears in some non-Konami games.[2] The code was first used in
the 1986 release of Gradius for the Nintendo Entertainment System [3] but was
made famous in North America in the NES version of Contra, for which it was
also dubbed the "30 Lives Code". While pausing the game or during the title
screen, the player could press the following sequence of buttons on the game
controller:

â â â â â â â â B A

The code was subsequently re-used in a large number of other games, and has
found a place in popular culture as a reference to the third generation of
video game consoles.

## Contents

  * 1 Variations
  * 2 History
  * 3 See also
  * 4 External links
  * 5 References

  
## [edit] Variations

The original version of the cheat code was designed for the NES controller. In
many popular representations of the code, Start is added at the end of the
sequence. Select is also sometimes inserted at the end of the code. The exact
sequence varies from game to game, and has been adapted to fit the button
layouts of different video game consoles. In mobile phone games by Konami, B
and A are substituted with 5, 7, and 3 on the numerical pad, which is the
goroawase pronunciation for "konami."

## [edit] History

The Konami Code was created by Kazuhisa Hashimoto, who was developing the home
port of the 1985 arcade game Gradius, a scrolling shooter released on the
Nintendo Entertainment System in 1986. Finding the game too difficult to play
through during testing, he created a cheat code which gives the player a full
set of power-ups, which are normally attained gradually throughout the game.
[2] The code has continued to be present in Gradius sequels and spin-offs,
including the SNES version of Gradius III, which actually destroys the
player's ship upon entering the original code (however, substituting â and
â with the L and R triggers of the SNES controller powers up the ship), all
the way through most recent iteration of the series, Gradius V on the
PlayStation 2, where the PS2's and buttons fill in for B and A, respectively.

The Konami code was introduced to many gamers in the 1988 NES version of
Contra. Due to the game's intense difficulty, many Contra players became
reliant on the cheat code, which increased the player's lives from 3 to 30 (9
to 90 including continues), to finish the game. The game's popularity,
combined with the near-necessity of using the code, made it renowned to an
entire generation of video game players. This led to the code being used in
countless games, and even mentioned across popular culture. For example,
references to the Konami code have appeared on web sites[4], in comics[5], TV
shows, music[6], and even professional wrestling.[7]

## [edit] See also

  * List of Konami code games

## [edit] External links

  * Video of the show Cheat! on G4 about the Konami Code

  * Drawing Contra Code on iPhone Touchscreen Reveals Secret

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The editors of GamePro and GamerHelp.com, "The 'Konami Code:' We Must Never Forget," GamePro 235 (April 2008): 63.
  2. ^ a b "Cracking the Code: The Konami Code". 1up.com. http://www.1up.com/do/feature?cId=3108751&did=1. Retrieved on 2008-03-15.
  3. ^ "Geek Trivia: The cheat goes on". techrepublic.com. http://articles.techrepublic.com.com/5100-10878_11-6164935.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-16.
  4. ^ Google Reader Easter Egg
  5. ^ Craig MacIntosh and Francesco Marciuliano, "Sally Forth" Houston Chronicle May 14, 2008.
  6. ^ The Moldy Peaches, "Anyone Else but You"
  7. ^ Obsessed With Wrestling

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Konami_Code"

Categories: Konami | Video game cheating | Video game memes

Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 19:44.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



