
# Demon core

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Demon core was the nickname given to a 6.2-kilogram (14 lb) spherical
subcritical mass of plutonium that accidentally went critical on two separate
instances at the Los Alamos laboratory, in 1945 and 1946. Each incident
resulted in the acute radiation poisoning and subsequent death of a scientist.
After these incidents, the core was referred to as the Demon core.

## Contents

  * 1 First incident
  * 2 Second incident
  * 3 The core in use
  * 4 Popular culture
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External Links

  
## [edit] First incident

<IMG>

<IMG>

A recreation of the 1945 incident. The sphere of plutonium is surrounded by
neutron-reflecting tungsten carbide blocks.

On August 21, 1945, the plutonium core produced a burst of ionizing radiation
that irradiated Harry Daghlian, a physicist who made a mistake while working
alone doing neutron reflection experiments on the core. The core was placed
within a stack of neutron-reflective bricks, the addition of each brick moved
the assembly closer to criticality. Daghlian, while attempting to stack
another brick around the assembly, accidentally dropped one of the bricks onto
the core causing the assembly to go supercritical. Despite moving the brick
off the assembly quickly, Daghlian received a fatal dose of radiation,
succumbing 21 days later.

## [edit] Second incident

<IMG>

<IMG>

A recreation of the 1946 incident. The half-sphere is seen but core inside is
not. Note the beryllium hemisphere held up with a screwdriver.

On May 21, 1946, physicist Louis Slotin and other scientists were in a Los
Alamos laboratory conducting an experiment that involved creating a fission
reaction by placing two half-spheres of beryllium (a neutron reflector) around
the same plutonium core. Slotin's hand holding a screwdriver separating the
hemispheres slipped, the beryllium neutron reflector hemispheres closed, and
the core went supercritical, releasing a very high dose of radiation. He
quickly pulled the two halves apart, stopping the chain reaction and hence
saving the lives of the seven other men in the laboratory. Louis Slotin
himself, however, died 9 days later from acute radiation poisoning. The
scientist assisting received sufficient radiation dosage to cause serious
injuries and some permanent partial disability, while the others in the room
suffered no permanent injuries from the accident.[1]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Crossroads Able, a 23-kiloton air-deployed nuclear weapon detonated on July 1,
1946 using the Demon Core.

## [edit] The core in use

The Demon core was put to use for the Able test of the Crossroads series on
July 1, 1946, demonstrating that the criticality experiments of Daghlian and
Slotin increased the efficiency of the weapon.[2]

## [edit] Popular culture

The Slotin and Daghlian incidents were combined and fictionalized in the film
Fat Man and Little Boy.

## [edit] See also

  * Nuclear and radiation accidents
  * Nuclear criticality safety
  * Criticality accident

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Trinity Atomic Website, retrieved February 2009
  2. ^ Miller, Richard L (1991). Under the Cloud: The Decades of Nuclear Testing. The Woodlands, Texas: Two Sixty Press. pp. 69, 77. ISBN 0029216206.

## [edit] External Links

  * McLaughlin et al. "A Review of Criticality Accidents" by Los Alamos National Laboratory (Report LA-13638), May 2000.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demon_core"

Categories: Nuclear weapons | Nuclear accidents

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 21:33 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



