
# Classic Albums

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this
article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2007)  
Classic Albums is a documentary series about pop and rock albums that are
considered the best or most distinctive of a well known band or musician or
that exemplify a stage in the history of music.

<IMG>

<IMG>

'Classic Albums' series logo

## Contents

  * 1 Format
  * 2 History
  * 3 Episodes
  * 4 False episodes
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Format

The TV series is made by Isis Productions and distributed by Eagle Rock
Entertainment. It is shown on various broadcasters including BBC, ITV, Sky
Arts, VH1 and VH1 Classic. They are also available on DVD.

The music, and its production, is dissected by the musicians and/or producer
playing the multitrack recordings and singling out tracks that one does not
usually consciously hear when listening to the music, giving insight into the
way the sound is built up. Also, the individual musicians play back pieces,
which are then blended with the original recording. Almost all songs are dealt
with, focusing almost entirely on the music itself, how it was
composed/realised. Personal aspects of the band or members are occasionally
dealt with, but mostly only if they serve this purpose. TV episodes are 50
minutes long but the DVD releases contain much additional material. All the
releases in this series are done with the co-operation and full authorisation
of the artists involved.

The most recent episode in the series covered Duran Duran \- Rio. This was
released on DVD in October 2008.

## [edit] History

They were devised by radio producer John Pidgeon as a vehicle for Roger Scott,
following the disc jockeyâs move from Capital Radio to BBC Radio 1 in 1988.
The first hour-long series, produced independently by John and Roger, opened
with Dire Straitsâ Brothers In Arms in May 1989, followed by the Rolling
Stonesâ Beggarâs Banquet, Genesisâ Invisible Touch, Pink Floyd's Dark
Side of the Moon, The Who's Who's Next, Fleetwood Macâs Rumours, the Beach
Boysâ Pet Sounds, Policeâs Synchronicity, the Eaglesâ Hotel California
and U2âs The Joshua Tree. Roger died of cancer five months later, and the
second series aired posthumously. Further programs were presented by Richard
Skinner.

## [edit] Episodes

The albums that have been covered are:[1]

  * The Band \- The Band
  * Bob Marley & The Wailers \- Catch a Fire
  * Cream \- Disraeli Gears
  * Deep Purple \- Machine Head (see Classic Albums: Deep Purple - The Making of Machine Head)
  * Def Leppard \- Hysteria
  * The Doors \- The Doors
  * Duran Duran \- Rio
  * Elton John \- Goodbye Yellow Brick Road
  * Elvis Presley \- Elvis Presley
  * Fleetwood Mac \- Rumours
  * Frank Zappa \- Apostrophe (') / Over-Nite Sensation
  * Grateful Dead \- Anthem of the Sun and American Beauty (see Anthem to Beauty)
  * Iron Maiden \- The Number of the Beast
  * Jay-Z \- Reasonable Doubt
  * Jimi Hendrix \- Electric Ladyland
  * John Lennon \- John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band
  * Judas Priest \- British Steel
  * Lou Reed \- Transformer
  * Meat Loaf \- Bat out of Hell
  * Metallica \- Metallica ("Black Album") (see Classic Albums: Metallica - Metallica)
  * MotÃ¶rhead \- Ace Of Spades
  * Nirvana \- Nevermind (see Classic Albums: Nirvana - Nevermind)
  * Paul Simon \- Graceland
  * Phil Collins \- Face Value
  * Pink Floyd \- The Dark Side of the Moon, (see Classic Albums: Pink Floyd - The Making of The Dark Side of the Moon)
  * Queen \- A Night at the Opera
  * Sex Pistols \- Never Mind the Bollocks
  * Simply Red \- Stars
  * Steely Dan \- Aja
  * Stevie Wonder \- Songs in the Key of Life
  * U2 \- The Joshua Tree
  * The Who \- Who's Next

## [edit] False episodes

There have been some DVD documentaries released with the phrase "Classic
Albums" in the title that are, in truth, of no relation to the Classic Albums
television series. These documentaries are not produced by Eagle Rock
Entertainment and do not air as part of the series on VH1 and BBC. They are
released by a company called Classic Rock Legends [2][3].

They are identifiable by the fact that the Classic Albums logo does not appear
on the box art. They also do not feature the original artwork of the album
under discussion on the DVD cover, but reinterpreted drawings which resemble
said artwork. The program itself does not feature interviews from members of
the bands and suffer a great reduction in general production quality. The most
notable difference is the fact that music from the album on discussion is not
featured, but instead songs by cover bands performing these works.

These titles include:

  * Green Day \- Dookie
  * Guns N' Roses \- Appetite for Destruction

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Eagle Rock Entertainment
  2. ^ Guns N Roses "Classic Albums" DVD on Amazon.com
  3. ^ Green Day "classic Albums" DVD on Amazon

## [edit] External links

  * IMDb Classic Albums listing episode listing
  * Radio Rewind's biography of Roger Scott
  * Rock's Backpages biography of John Pidgeon

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classic_Albums"

Categories: American documentary television series

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Italiano
  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 18 April 2009, at 09:20 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



