
# Super-Kamiokande

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The inner detector region of Super-K

Super-Kamiokande, or Super-K for short, is a neutrino observatory in the city
of Hida, Gifu Prefecture, Japan. The observatory was designed to search for
proton decay, study solar and atmospheric neutrinos, and keep watch for
supernovas in the Milky Way Galaxy.

The Super-K is located 1,000 m (3,281 ft) underground in Kamioka Mining and
Smelting Co.'s Mozumi Mine in Hida's Kamioka area. It consists of a
cylindrical stainless steel tank that is 41.4 m (135.8 ft) tall and 39.3 m
(128.9 ft) in diameter holding 50,000 tons of ultra-pure water. The tank
volume is divided by a stainless steel superstructure into an inner detector
(ID) region that is 33.8 m (110.9 ft) in diameter and 36.2 m (118.8 ft) in
height and outer detector (OD) which consists of the remaining tank volume.
Mounted on the superstructure are 11,146 photomultiplier tubes (PMT) 20 in
(50.8 cm) in diameter that face the ID and 1885 8 in (20.3 cm) PMTs that face
the OD. There is a Tyvex and blacksheet barrier attached to the superstructure
that optically separates the ID and OD.

A neutrino interaction with the electrons or nuclei of water can produce a
charged particle that moves faster than the speed of light in water (although
of course slower than the speed of light in vacuum). This creates a cone of
light known as Cherenkov radiation, which is the optical equivalent to a sonic
boom. The Cherenkov light is projected as a ring on the wall of the detector
and recorded by the PMTs. Using the timing and charge information recorded by
each PMT, the interaction vertex, ring direction and flavor of the incoming
neutrino is determined. From the sharpness of the edge of the ring the type of
particle can be inferred. The multiple scattering of electrons is large, so
electromagnetic showers produce fuzzy rings. Highly relativistic muons, in
contrast, travel almost straight through the detector and produce rings with
sharp edges.

## [edit] History

Construction of Kamioka Underground Observatory, the predecessor of the
present Kamioka Observatory, Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, University of
Tokyo began in 1982 and was completed in April, 1983. The purpose of the
observatory was to detect whether proton decay exists, one of the most
fundamental questions of elementary particle physics.[1][2][3][4][5][6]

The detector, named KamiokaNDE for Kamioka Nucleon Decay Experiment, was a
tank 16.0 m (52.5 ft) in height and 15.6 m (51.2 ft) in width, containing
3,000 tons of pure water and about 1,000 photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) attached
to its inner surface. The detector was upgraded, starting in 1985, to allow it
to observe solar neutrinos. As a result, the detector (KamiokaNDE-II) had
become sensitive enough to detect neutrinos from SN 1987A, a supernova which
was observed in the Large Magellanic Cloud in February 1987, and to observe
solar neutrinos in 1988. The ability of the Kamiokande experiment to observe
the direction of electrons produced in solar neutrino interactions allowed
experimenters to directly demonstrate for the first time that the sun was a
source of neutrinos.

Despite successes in neutrino astronomy and neutrino astrophysics, Kamiokande
did not achieve its primary goal, the detection of proton decay. Higher
sensitivity was also necessary to obtain high statistical confidence in its
results. This led to the construction of Super-Kamiokande, with fifteen times
the water and ten times as many PMTs as Kamiokande. Super-Kamiokande started
operation in 1996.

The Super-Kamiokande Collaboration announced the first evidence of neutrino
oscillation in 1998. This was the first experimental observation consistent
with the theory that the neutrino has non-zero mass, a possibility that
theorists had speculated about for years.

On November 12, 2001, about 6,600 of the photomultiplier tubes in the Super-
Kamiokande detector imploded, apparently in a chain reaction as the shock wave
from the concussion of each imploding tube cracked its neighbours. The
detector was partially restored by redistributing the photomultiplier tubes
which did not implode, and by adding protective acrylic shells that are hoped
would prevent another chain reaction from recurring (SuperKamiokande-II).

In July 2005, preparations began to restore the detector to its original form
by reinstalling about 6,000 PMTs. The work was completed in June 2006,
whereupon the detector was renamed SuperKamiokande-III.

## [edit] See also

  * Masatoshi Koshiba
  * Supernova 1987A
  * Solar neutrino problem
  * Sudbury Neutrino Observatory

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ The official Super-Kamiokande home page
  2. ^ American Super-K home page
  3. ^ Pictures and illustrations
  4. ^ Details about the accident on November 12, 2001
  5. ^ Official report on the accident (in PDF format)
  6. ^ Logbook entry of first neutrinos seen at Super-K generated at KEK

Coordinates: 36Â°14â²N 137Â°11â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿36.233Â°N 137.183Â°Eï»¿ / 36.233;
137.183

v â¢ d â¢ e

Neutrino detectors  
Operating

BNO â¢ KamLAND â¢ MINOS â¢ MiniBooNE â¢ Super-Kamiokande â¢ Sciboone â¢
Borexino

<IMG>  
Construction

IceCube â¢ ANTARES â¢ KM3NeT â¢ SNO+ â¢ NOÎ½A â¢ T2K â¢ Daya Bay  
Retired

IMB â¢ AMANDA â¢ GALLEX â¢ Homestake Experiment â¢ SNO â¢ Kamiokande â¢
Gargamelle â¢ SAGE â¢ K2K â¢ CHOOZ  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super-Kamiokande"

Categories: Neutrino observatories | Research institutes in Japan | Particle
experiments | Gifu Prefecture

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 February 2009, at 05:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



