
# Dots per inch

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

A close-up of the dots produced by an inkjet printer at draft quality. Actual
size is approximately 0.25 inches square (0.635 centimetres square).
Individual coloured droplets of ink are visible; this sample is about 150 DPI.

Dots per inch (DPI) is a measure of spatial printing or video dot density, in
particular the number of individual dots that can be placed within the span of
one linear inch (2.54 cm.) The DPI value tends to correlate with image
resolution, but is related only indirectly.

## Contents

  * 1 DPI measurement in video resolution
  * 2 DPI measurement in printing
    * 2.1 DPI or PPI in digital image files
  * 3 Proposed metrification
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] DPI measurement in video resolution

Because color display units use three coloured sub-pixels (red, green and
blue) per pixel, the DPI measurement is frequently misused, especially in the
automotive market. An example of misuse would be if an LCD monitor
manufacturer claimed that a 320x240 pixel 3" monitor (2.4"x1.8") actually had
a resolution of 400 DPI, (three times the pixels per inch). Technically this
would be correct (as each sub-pixel could be considered a dot), but compared
to the standard accepted practice of using pixels as a means of measuring
resolution, it could mislead customers into thinking the relabeled monitor had
a greater resolution and therefore better picture quality than identical but
normally labeled monitors. Such misuse is commonly found in advertising for
in-car LCD displays.

A less misleading term, therefore, is pixels per inch. Video displays are
almost universally rated in dot pitch, which refers to the spacing between the
sub-pixel red, green and blue dots which make up the pixels themselves. Very
often, DPI is confused with image size, leading to expressions such as "1024 x
768 DPI XGA."

## [edit] DPI measurement in printing

Up to a point, printers with higher DPI produce clearer and more detailed
output. A printer does not necessarily have a single DPI measurement; it is
dependent on print mode, which is usually influenced by driver settings. The
range of DPI supported by a printer is most dependent on the print head
technology it uses. A dot matrix printer, for example, applies ink via tiny
rods striking an ink ribbon, and has a relatively low resolution, typically in
the range of 60 to 90 DPI. An inkjet printer sprays ink through tiny nozzles,
and is typically capable of 300-600 DPI.[1] A laser printer applies toner
through a controlled electrostatic charge, and may be in the range of 600 to
1800 DPI.

The DPI measurement of a printer often needs to be considerably higher than
the pixels per inch (PPI) measurement of a video display in order to produce
similar-quality output. This is due to the limited range of colours for each
dot typically available on a printer. At each dot position, the simplest type
of colour printer can print no dot, or a dot consisting of a fixed volume of
ink in each of four colour channels (typically CMYK with cyan, magenta, yellow
and black ink). Contrast this to a standard sRGB monitor where each pixel
produces 256 intensities of light in each of three channels (RGB) to
additively create 256Â³ = 16,777,216 colours. The number of unique colours for
a printed CMYK dot from this simplest type of inkjet printer is only 8 since
no coloured ink is visible when printed on black and black is used instead of
CMY:

  * white (no ink)
  * cyan
  * magenta
  * yellow
  * blue = cyan + magenta
  * green = cyan + yellow
  * red = magenta+yellow
  * dark brown (not used) = cyan + magenta + yellow
  * black

While some colour printers can produce variable drop volumes at each dot
position, and may use additional ink colour channels, the number of colours is
still typically less than on a monitor. Most printers must therefore produce
additional colours through a halftone or dithering process. The exception to
this rule is a Dye-sublimation printer that utilizes a printing method more
akin to Pixels per inch.

The printing process could require a region from four to six dots (measured
across each side) in order to faithfully reproduce the colour contained in a
single pixel. An image that is 100 pixels wide may need to be 400 to 600 dots
in width in the printed output; if a 100Ã100-pixel image is to be printed
inside a one-inch square, the printer must be capable of 400 to 600 dots per
inch in order to accurately reproduce the image.

<IMG>

A 10Ã10-pixel image on a computer display usually requires many more than
10Ã10 printer dots to accurately reproduce, due to limitations of available
ink colours in the printer.

### [edit] DPI or PPI in digital image files

DPI refers to the physical dot density of an image when it is reproduced as a
real physical entity, for example printed onto paper, or displayed on a
monitor. A digitally stored image has no inherent physical dimensions,
measured in inches or centimetres. Some digital file formats record a DPI
value, or more commonly a PPI (pixels per inch) value, which is to be used
when printing the image. This number lets the printer know the intended size
of the image, or in the case of scanned images, the size of the original
scanned object. For example, a bitmap image may measure 1000Ã1000 pixels, a
resolution of one megapixel. If it is labeled as 250 PPI, that is an
instruction to the printer to print it at a size of 4Ã4 inches. Changing the
PPI to 100 in an image editing program would tell the printer to print it at a
size of 10Ã10 inches. However, changing the PPI value would not change the
size of the image in pixels which would still be 1000Ã1000. An image may also
be resampled to change the number of pixels and therefore the size or
resolution of the image, but this is quite different from simply setting a new
PPI for the file.

For vector images, there is no equivalent of resampling an image when it is
resized, and there is no PPI in the file because it is resolution independent
(prints equally well at all sizes). However there is still a target printing
size. Some image formats, such as Photoshop format, can contain both bitmap
and vector data in the same file. Adjusting the PPI in a Photoshop file will
change the intended printing size of the bitmap portion of the data and also
change the intended printing size of the vector data to match. This way the
vector and bitmap data maintain a consistent size relationship when the target
printing size is changed. Text stored as outline fonts in bitmap image formats
is handled in the same way. Other formats, such as PDF, are primarily vector
formats which can have bitmaps pasted into them. In these formats the target
PPI of the bitmaps is adjusted to match when the target print size of the file
is changed. This is the converse of how it works in a primarily bitmap format
like Photoshop, but has exactly the same result of maintaining the
relationship between the vector and bitmap portions of the data.

## [edit] Proposed metrification

There are some ongoing efforts to abandon DPI in favour of giving the inter-
dot spacing in micrometres (Âµm).[citation needed] A resolution of 72 DPI for
example equals an inter-dot spacing of about 350 Âµm, 96 DPI â 265 Âµm, 160
DPI â 160 Âµm, 300 DPI â 85 Âµm, 4000 DPI â 6.4 Âµm. Going the other
way, 1 Âµm â 25400 DPI, 30 Âµm â 850 DPI, 200 Âµm â 127 DPI. Note that
25400 = 1 DPIÂ·Âµm, so dividing 25400 by a measurement in one of these units
gives the measurement in the other unit.

Some have also proposed using "dots per centimeter" (dpcm). [2]

## [edit] See also

  * Pixels per inch
  * Samples per inch
  * Lines per inch
  * Metric typographic units
  * Display resolution
  * Mouse DPI
  * Twip

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Ask OKIâ"Inkjet Printers"
  2. ^ "Class ResolutionSyntax". Sun Microsystems. http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.4.2/docs/api/javax/print/attribute/ResolutionSyntax.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-12.

## [edit] External links

  * All About Digital Photos - The Myth of DPI

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dots_per_inch"

Categories: Printing | Units of density | Computer printing

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since July 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 19:43.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



