
# Standard Oil

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Standard Oil <IMG>  
Type Ohio Corporation (1870-1882), Business Trust (1882-1892), New Jersey
Holding Company (1899-1911)[1]  
Founded 1870  
Headquarters Cleveland, Ohio (1870-1885)  
New York City, New York (1885-1911)[2]  
Key people John D. Rockefeller, Founder & Chairman  
Henry M. Flagler, Senior Executive  
John D. Archbold, Vice President  
William Rockefeller, Senior Executive & New York Representative  
Samuel Andrews, Chemist & First Chief of Refining Operations  
Charles Pratt, Senior Executive  
Henry H. Rogers, Senior Executive  
Oliver H. Payne, Senior Executive  
Daniel O'Day, Senior Executive  
Jabez A. Bostwick, Senior Executive & First Treasurer  
William G. Warden [3], Senior Executive  
Jacob Vandergrift [4], Senior Executive  
Industry Oil and Gas  
Products Fuels, Lubricants, Petrochemicals  
Employees 60,000 (1909) [5]  
Standard Oil was a predominant American integrated oil producing,
transporting, refining, and marketing company. Established in 1870 as an Ohio
Corporation, it was the largest oil refiner in the world[3] and operated as a
major company trust and was one of the world's first and largest multinational
corporations until it was broken up by the United States Supreme Court in
1911. John D. Rockefeller was a founder, chairman and major shareholder, and
the company made him a billionaire and eventually the richest man in history.

## Contents

  * 1 Early years
  * 2 1895â1920
    * 2.1 Monopoly charges, anti-trust litigation and breakup
    * 2.2 World War II
  * 3 1920â1945
  * 4 1945â1970
  * 5 Legacy and criticism of breakup
  * 6 Successor companies
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
    * 8.1 Bibliography
    * 8.2 Notes
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Early years

<IMG>

<IMG>

Standard Oil Refinery No. 1 in Cleveland, Ohio, 1899

Standard Oil began as an Ohio partnership formed by the well-known
industrialist John D. Rockefeller, his brother William Rockefeller, Henry
Flagler, chemist Samuel Andrews, silent partner Stephen V. Harkness, and
Oliver Burr Jennings, who had married the sister of William Rockefeller's
wife. In 1870 Rockefeller incorporated Standard Oil in Ohio. Of the initial
10,000 shares, John D. Rockefeller received 2,667; William Rockefeller,
Flagler, and Andrews received 1,333 each; Harkness received 1,334; Jennings
received 1,000; and the firm of Rockefeller, Andrews & Flagler received
1,000.[4] Using highly effective tactics, later widely criticized, it absorbed
or destroyed most of its competition in Cleveland in less than two months in
1872 and later throughout the northeastern United States.

In the early years, John D. Rockefeller dominated the combine, for he was the
single most important figure in shaping the new oil industry.[5] He quickly
distributed power and the tasks of policy formation to a system of committees,
but always remained the largest shareholder. Authority was centralized in the
company's main office in Cleveland, but decisions in the office were made in a
cooperative way.[6]

In response to state laws trying to limit the scale of companies, Rockefeller
and his associates developed innovative ways of organizing, to effectively
manage their fast growing enterprise. In 1882, they combined their disparate
companies, spread across dozens of states, under a single group of trustees.
By a secret agreement, the existing thirty-seven stockholders conveyed their
shares "in trust" to nine Trustees: John and William Rockefeller, Oliver H.
Payne, Charles Pratt, Henry Flagler, John D. Archbold, William G. Warden,
Jabez Bostwick, and Benjamin Brewster.[7] This organization proved so
successful that other giant enterprises adopted this "trust" form.

As the company grew through effective business practices, it developed other
strongly anti-competitive strategies, including a systematic program of
offering to purchase competitors. After purchasing them, Rockefeller shut down
those he believed to be inefficient and kept the others. In a seminal deal, in
1868, the Lake Shore Railroad, a part of the New York Central, gave
Rockefeller's firm a going rate of one cent a gallon or forty-two cents a
barrel. (71%) discount off of its listed rates in return for a promise to ship
at least 60 carloads of oil daily and to handle the loading and unloading on
its own, a huge competitive advantage.[citation needed]

Smaller companies decried the deals as unfair because they were not producing
enough oil to qualify for discounts. In 1872, Rockefeller joined the South
Improvement Company which would have allowed him to receive rebates for
shipping and receive drawbacks on oil his competitors shipped. But when this
deal became known, competitors convinced the Pennsylvania Legislature to
revoke South Improvement's charter. No oil was ever shipped under this
arrangement.[citation needed]

In one example of Standard's aggressive practices, a rival oil association
tried to build an oil pipeline to overcome Standard's virtual boycott of its
competitors. In response, the railroad company at Rockefeller's direction
denied the association permission to run the pipeline across railway
land,[citation needed] forcing consortium staff to laboriously decant the oil
into barrels, carry them over the railway crossing in carts, and pump the oil
manually into the pipeline on the other side. When Rockefeller learned of this
tactic, he instructed the railway company to park empty rail cars across the
line, thereby preventing the carts from crossing his property.[citation
needed]

Standard's actions and secret[citation needed] transport deals helped its
kerosene price to drop from 58 to 26 cents from 1865 to 1870. Competitors
disliked the company's business practices, but consumers liked the lower
prices. Standard Oil, being formed well before the discovery of the Spindletop
oil field and a demand for oil other than for heat and light, was well placed
to control the growth of the oil business. The company was perceived to own
and control all aspects of the trade. Oil could not leave the oil field unless
Standard Oil agreed to move it:[citation needed] the "posted price" for oil
was the price that Standard Oil agents printed on flyers that were nailed to
posts in oil producing areas, and producers had no power to negotiate those
prices.[citation needed]

In 1885, Standard Oil of Ohio moved its headquarters from Cleveland to its
permanent headquarters at 26 Broadway in New York City. Concurrently, the
trustees of Standard Oil of Ohio chartered the Standard Oil Company of New
Jersey (SOCNJ) to take advantages of New Jersey's more lenient corporate stock
ownership laws. SOCNJ eventually became one of many important companies that
dominated key markets, such as steel and the railroads.[citation needed]

Also in 1890, Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act â the source of all
American anti-monopoly laws. The law forbade every contract, scheme, deal, or
conspiracy to restrain trade, though the phrase "restraint of trade" remained
subjective. The Standard Oil group quickly attracted attention from antitrust
authorities leading to a lawsuit filed by then Ohio Attorney General David K.
Watson.

From 1882 to 1906, Standard paid out $548,436,000 in dividends at 65.4% payout
ratio. As is common practice in business, a fraction of the profits was put
back into the business, rather than being distributed to stockholders. The
total net earnings from 1882 to 1906 amounted to $838,783,800, exceeding the
dividends by $290,347,800. The latter amount was used for plant expansion.

## [edit] 1895â1920

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

In 1897, John Rockefeller retired from the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey,
the holding company of the group, but remained a major shareholder. Vice-
president John Dustin Archbold took a large part in the running of the firm.
At the same time, state and federal laws sought to counter this development
with "antitrust" laws. In 1911, the US Justice Department sued the group under
the federal antitrust law and ordered its breakup into 34 companies.

Standard Oil's market position was initially established through an emphasis
on efficiency and responsibility. While most companies dumped gasoline in
rivers (this was before the automobile was popular), Standard used it to fuel
its machines. While other companies' refineries piled mountains of heavy
waste, Rockefeller found ways to sell it. For example, Standard created the
first synthetic competitor for beeswax and bought the company that invented
and produced Vaseline, the Chesebrough Manufacturing Company, which was a
Standard company only from 1908 until 1911.

One of the original "muckrakers" was Ida M. Tarbell, an American author and
journalist. Her father was an oil producer whose business had failed due to
Rockefeller's business dealings. After extensive interviews with a sympathetic
senior executive of Standard Oil, Henry H. Rogers, Tarbell's investigations of
Standard Oil fueled growing public attacks on Standard Oil and on monopolies
in general. Her work was published in 19 parts in McClure's magazine from
November 1902 to October 1904, then in 1904 as the book The History of the
Standard Oil Company.

The Standard Oil Trust was controlled by a small group of families.
Rockefeller stated in 1910: "I think it is true that the Pratt family, the
Payne-Whitney family (which were one, as all the stock came from Colonel
Payne), the Harkness-Flagler family (which came into the Company together) and
the Rockefeller family controlled a majority of the stock during all the
history of the Company up to the present time".[8]

These families reinvested most of the dividends in other industries,
especially railroads. They also invested heavily in the gas and the electric
lighting business (including the giant Consolidated Gas Company of New York
City). They made large purchases of stock in US Steel, Amalgamated Copper, and
even Corn Products Refining Company.[9]

### [edit] Monopoly charges, anti-trust litigation and breakup

See also: Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States

By 1890, Standard Oil controlled 88% of the refined oil flows in the United
States. The state of Ohio successfully sued Standard, compelling the
dissolution of the trust in 1892. But Standard only separated off Standard Oil
of Ohio and kept control of it. Eventually, the state of New Jersey changed
its incorporation laws to allow a company to hold shares in other companies in
any state. So, in 1899, the Standard Oil Trust, based at 26 Broadway in New
York, was legally reborn as a holding company, the Standard Oil Company of New
Jersey (SOCNJ), which held stock in 41 other companies, which controlled other
companies, which in turn controlled yet other companies. This conglomerate was
seen by the public as all-pervasive, controlled by a select group of
directors, and completely unaccountable.[10]

<IMG>

<IMG>

U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt depicted as the infant Hercules grappling
with Standard Oil in a 1906 Puck magazine cartoon

In 1904, Standard controlled 91% of production and 85% of final sales. Most of
its output was kerosene, of which 55% was exported around the world.
Standard's plants were about as cost efficient as competitors'.[citation
needed] After 1900 it did not try to force competitors out of business by
underpricing them.[11] The federal Commissioner of Corporations concluded that
beyond question, Standard's dominant position in the refining industry was due
"to unfair practices, to abuse of the control of pipe-lines, to railroad
discriminations, and to unfair methods of competition."[12] Standard's market
share fell gradually to 64% by 1911. It did not try to monopolize the
exploration and pumping of oil (its share in 1911 was 11%).[citation needed]

In 1909, the US Department of Justice sued Standard under federal anti-trust
law, the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, for sustaining a monopoly and
restraining interstate commerce by:[13]

> "Rebates, preferences, and other discriminatory practices in favor of the
combination by railroad companies; restraint and monopolization by control of
pipe lines, and unfair practices against competing pipe lines; contracts with
competitors in restraint of trade; unfair methods of competition, such as
local price cutting at the points where necessary to suppress competition;
[and] espionage of the business of competitors, the operation of bogus
independent companies, and payment of rebates on oil, with the like intent."

The lawsuit argued that Standard's monopolistic practices took place in the
last four years:[14]

> "The general result of the investigation has been to disclose the existence
of numerous and flagrant discriminations by the railroads in behalf of the
Standard Oil Company and its affiliated corporations. With comparatively few
exceptions, mainly of other large concerns in California, the Standard has
been the sole beneficiary of such discriminations. In almost every section of
the country that company has been found to enjoy some unfair advantages over
its competitors, and some of these discriminations affect enormous areas."

The government identified four illegal patterns: 1) secret and semi-secret
railroad rates; (2) discriminations in the open arrangement of rates; (3)
discriminations in classification and rules of shipment; (4) discriminations
in the treatment of private tank cars. The government alleged:[15]

> "Almost everywhere the rates from the shipping points used exclusively, or
almost exclusively, by the Standard are relatively lower than the rates from
the shipping points of its competitors. Rates have been made low to let the
Standard into markets, or they have been made high to keep its competitors out
of markets. Trifling differences in distances are made an excuse for large
differences in rates favorable to the Standard Oil Company, while large
differences in distances are ignored where they are against the Standard.
Sometimes connecting roads prorate on oilâthat is, make through rates which
are lower than the combination of local rates; sometimes they refuse to
prorate; but in either case the result of their policy is to favor the
Standard Oil Company. Different methods are used in different places and under
different conditions, but the net result is that from Maine to California the
general arrangement of open rates on petroleum oil is such as to give the
Standard an unreasonable advantage over its competitors

The government said that Standard raised prices to its monopolistic customers
but lowered them to hurt competitors, often disguising its illegal actions by
using bogus supposedly independent companies it controlled.[16]

> "The evidence is, in fact, absolutely conclusive that the Standard Oil
Company charges altogether excessive prices where it meets no competition, and
particularly where there is little likelihood of competitors entering the
field, and that, on the other hand, where competition is active, it frequently
cuts prices to a point which leaves even the Standard little or no profit, and
which more often leaves no profit to the competitor, whose costs are
ordinarily somewhat higher."

On May 15, 1911, the US Supreme Court upheld the lower court judgment and
declared the Standard Oil group to be an "unreasonable" monopoly under the
Sherman Antitrust Act. It ordered Standard to break up into 34 independent
companies with different boards of directors.[17]

Standard's president, John Rockefeller, had long since retired from any
management role. But, as he owned a quarter of the shares of the resultant
companies, and those share values mostly doubled, he emerged from the
dissolution as the richest man in the world.[18]

### [edit] World War II

In 1941, an investigation exposed a "marriage" cartel between John D.
Rockefeller's United States-based Standard Oil Co. and I.G. Farben.[19][20]
(see[21] and[22]) It also brought new evidence concerning complex price and
marketing agreements between DuPont, a major investor in and producer of
leaded gasoline, U.S. Industrial Alcohol Co. and their subsidiary, Cuba
Distilling Co. The investigation was eventually dropped, like dozens of others
in many different kinds of industries, due to the need to enlist industry
support in the war effort. However, the top directors of many oil companies
agreed to resign and oil industry stocks in molasses companies were sold off
as part of a compromise worked out. (see[23][24] but see[25])

IG Farben built a factory (named Buna Chemical Plant) for producing synthetic
oil and rubber (from coal) in Auschwitz, which was the beginning of SS
activity and camps in this location during the Holocaust. At its peak in 1944,
this factory made use of 83,000 slave laborers.[26] The pesticide Zyklon B,
for which IG Farben held the patent, was manufactured by Degesch (Deutsche
Gesellschaft fÃ¼r SchÃ¤dlingsbekÃ¤mpfung), which IG Farben owned 42.2 percent
of (in shares) and which had IG Farben managers in its Managing Committee.
Zyklon B is the primary form of gas used throughout WWII in Nazi death camps.

## [edit] 1920â1945

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
By 1911, with public outcry at a climax, the Supreme Court of the United
States ruled that Standard Oil must be dissolved and split into 34 companies.
Two of these companies were Jersey Standard ("Standard Oil Company of New
Jersey"), which eventually became Exxon, and Socony ("Standard Oil Company of
New York"), which eventually became Mobil.

Over the next few decades, both companies grew significantly. Jersey Standard,
led by Walter C. Teagle, became the largest oil producer in the world. It
acquired a 50 percent share in Humble Oil & Refining Co., a Texas oil
producer. Socony purchased a 45 percent interest in Magnolia Petroleum Co., a
major refiner, marketer and pipeline transporter. In 1931, Socony merged with
Vacuum Oil Co., an industry pioneer dating back to 1866 and a growing Standard
Oil spin-off in its own right.

In the Asia-Pacific region, Jersey Standard had oil production and refineries
in Indonesia but no marketing network. Socony-Vacuum had Asian marketing
outlets supplied remotely from California. In 1933, Jersey Standard and
Socony-Vacuum merged their interests in the region into a 50-50 joint venture.
Standard-Vacuum Oil Co., or "Stanvac," operated in 50 countries, from East
Africa to New Zealand, before it was dissolved in 1962.

Other Standard Oil breakup companies include "Standard Oil of Ohio" which
became SOHIO, "Standard Oil of Indiana" which became Amoco after other mergers
and a name change in the 1980s, "Standard Oil of California" became the
Chevron Corporation. Additional subsidiary 'breakup information' can be found
under Seven Sisters (oil companies).

## [edit] 1945â1970

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
Mobil Chemical Company was established in 1960. As of 1999, its principal
products included basic olefins and aromatics, ethylene glycol and
polyethylene. The company produced synthetic lubricant base stocks as well as
lubricant additives, propylene packaging films and catalysts. Exxon Chemical
Company (first named Enjay Chemicals) became a worldwide organization in 1965
and in 1999 was a major producer and marketer of olefins, aromatics,
polyethylene and polypropylene along with specialty lines such as elastomers,
plasticizers, solvents, process fluids, oxo alcohols and adhesive resins. The
company was an industry leader in metallocene catalyst technology to make
unique polymers with improved performance.

In 1955, Socony-Vacuum became Socony Mobil Oil Co. and in 1966 simply Mobil
Oil Corp. A decade later, the newly incorporated Mobil Corporation absorbed
Mobil Oil as a wholly owned subsidiary. Jersey Standard changed its name to
Exxon Corporation in 1972 and established Exxon as a trademark throughout the
United States. In other parts of the world, Exxon and its affiliated companies
continued to use its Esso trademark.

## [edit] Legacy and criticism of breakup

The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1911 that antitrust law required Standard Oil
to be broken into smaller, independent companies. Among the "baby Standards"
that still exist are ExxonMobil and Chevron. If not for that court ruling,
Standard Oil would be worth more than $1 trillion today.[27] Whether the
breakup of Standard Oil was beneficial is a matter of some controversy.[28]
Many economists agree that Standard Oil was not a monopoly, citing its much
reduced market presence by the time of the antitrust trial. They also argue
that the intense free market competition resulted in cheaper oil prices and
more diverse petroleum products for consumers. In 1890, Rep. William Mason,
arguing in favor of the Sherman Antitrust Act, said: "trusts have made
products cheaper, have reduced prices; but if the price of oil, for instance,
were reduced to one cent a barrel, it would not right the wrong done to people
of this country by the trusts which have destroyed legitimate competition and
driven honest men from legitimate business enterprise".[29]

The Sherman Act prohibits the restraint of trade. Defenders of Standard Oil
insist that the company did not restrain trade; they were simply superior
competitors. The federal courts ruled otherwise.

Some economic historians have observed that Standard Oil was in the process of
losing its monopoly at the time of its breakup in 1911. Numerous regional
competitors (such as Texaco and Gulf Oil in the Gulf Coast, Cities Service and
Sun in the Midcontinent, Union in California, and Shell overseas and in
California) had organized themselves into competitive vertically integrated
oil companies, the industry structure pioneered years earlier by Standard
itself. In addition, demand for petroleum products was increasing more rapidly
than the ability of Standard to expand. The result was that although in 1911
Standard still controlled most production in the older US regions of the
Appalachian Basin (78% share, down from 92% in 1880), Lima-Indiana (90%, down
from 95% in 1906), and the Illinois Basin (83%, down from 100% in 1906), its
share was much lower in the rapidly-expanding new regions that would dominate
US oil production in the 20th century. In 1911 Standard controlled only 44% of
production in the Midcontinent, 29% in California, and 10% on the Gulf
Coast.[30]

Some analysts argue that the breakup was beneficial to consumers in the long
run, and no one has ever proposed that Standard Oil be reassembled in pre-1911
form.[31] ExxonMobil, however, does represent a substantial part of the
original company.

## [edit] Successor companies

The successor companies from Standard Oil's breakup form the core of today's
US oil industry. (Several of these companies were considered among the Seven
Sisters who dominated the industry worldwide for much of the twentieth
century.) They include:

  * Standard Oil of New Jersey (SONJ) - or Esso (S.O.) â renamed Exxon, now part of ExxonMobil. Standard Trust companies Carter Oil, Imperial Oil (Canada), and Standard of Louisiana were kept as part of Standard Oil of New Jersey after the breakup.
  * Standard Oil of New York â or Socony, merged with Vacuum â renamed Mobil, now part of ExxonMobil.
  * Standard Oil of California â or Socal â renamed Chevron, became ChevronTexaco, but returned to Chevron.
  * Standard Oil of Indiana \- or Stanolind, renamed Amoco (American Oil Co.) â now part of BP.
  * Standard's Atlantic and the independent company Richfield merged to form Atlantic Richfield or ARCO, now part of BP. Atlantic operations were spun off and bought by Sunoco.
  * Standard Oil of Kentucky â or Kyso was acquired by Standard Oil of California \- currently Chevron.
  * Continental Oil Company â or Conoco now part of ConocoPhillips.
  * Standard Oil of Ohio â or Sohio now part of BP.
  * The Ohio Oil Company â more commonly referred to as "The Ohio", and marketed gasoline under the Marathon name. The company is now known as Marathon Oil Company, and was often a rival with the in-state Standard spinoff, Sohio.

Other Standard Oil spin-offs:

  * Standard Oil of Iowa â pre-1911 â became Standard Oil of California.
  * Standard Oil of Minnesota â pre-1911 â bought by Standard Oil of Indiana.
  * Standard Oil of Illinois - pre-1911 - bought by Standard Oil of Indiana.
  * Standard Oil of Kansas â refining only, eventually bought by Indiana Standard.
  * Standard Oil of Missouri â pre-1911 â dissolved.
  * Standard Oil of Louisiana â always owned by Standard Oil of New Jersey (now ExxonMobil).
  * Standard Oil of Brazil â always owned by Standard Oil of New Jersey (now ExxonMobil).

Other companies divested in the 1911 breakup:

  * Anglo-American Oil Co. â acquired by Jersey Standard in 1930, now Esso UK.
  * Buckeye Pipeline Co.
  * Borne-Scrymser Co. (chemicals)
  * Chesebrough Manufacturing (Vaseline)
  * Colonial Oil.
  * Crescent Pipeline Co.
  * Cumberland Pipe Line Co.
  * Eureka Pipe Line Co.
  * Galena-Signal Oil Co.
  * Indiana Pipe Line Co.
  * National Transit Co.
  * New York Transit Co.
  * Northern Pipe Line Co.
  * Prairie Oil & Gas.
  * Solar Refining.
  * Southern Pipe Line Co.
  * South Penn Oil Co. â eventually became Pennzoil, now part of Shell.
  * Southwest Pennsylvania Pipe Line Co.
  * Swan and Finch.
  * Union Tank Lines.
  * Washington Oil Co.
  * Waters-Pierce.

Note: Standard Oil of Colorado was not a successor company; the name was used
to capitalize on the Standard Oil brand in the 1930s. Standard Oil of
Connecticut is a fuel oil marketer not related to the Rockefeller companies.

## [edit] See also

  * History of the United States (1865-1918)
  * Standard Oil Gasoline Station
  * Wamsutta Oil Refinery

## [edit] References

### [edit] Bibliography

  * Bringhurst, Bruce. Antitrust and the Oil Monopoly: The Standard Oil Cases, 1890â1911. New York: Greenwood Press, 1979.
  * Chernow, Ron. Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr. London: Warner Books, 1998.
  * Droz, R.V. Whatever Happened to Standard Oil?, 2004. Retrieved June 25, 2005.
  * Folsom, Jr., Burton W. John D. Rockefeller and the Oil Industry from The Myth of the Robber Barons. New York: Young America, 2003.
  * Giddens, Paul H. Standard Oil Company (Companies and men). New York: Ayer Co. Publishing, 1976.
  * Henderson, Wayne. Standard Oil: The First 125 Years. New York: Motorbooks International, 1996.
  * Hidy, Ralph W. and Muriel E. Hidy. History of Standard Oil Company (New Jersey : Pioneering in Big Business 1882â1911). New York: Ayer Co. Publishing, 1987.
  * Jones; Eliot. The Trust Problem in the United States 1922\. Chapter 5; online edition
  * Klein, Henry H. Dynastic America and Those Who Own It. New York: Kessinger Publishing, [1921] Reprint, 2003.
  * Knowlton, Evelyn H. and George S. Gibb. History of Standard Oil Company: Resurgent Years 1911â1927. New York: Harper & Row, 1956.
  * Larson, Henrietta M., Evelyn H. Knowlton and Charles S. Popple. New Horizons 1927â1950 (History of Standard Oil Company (New Jersey), Volume 3). New York: Harper & Row, 1971.
  * Latham, Earl ed. John D. Rockefeller: Robber Baron or Industrial Statesman?, 1949. Primary and secondary sources.
  * Manns, Leslie D. "Dominance in the Oil Industry: Standard Oil from 1865 to 1911" in David I. Rosenbaum ed, Market Dominance: How Firms Gain, Hold, or Lose it and the Impact on Economic Performance. Praeger, 1998. online edition
  * Montague, Gilbert Holland. The Rise And Progress of the Standard Oil Company. New York: Kessinger Publishing, [1902] Reprint, 2005.
  * Nevins, Allan. John D. Rockefeller: The Heroic Age of American Enterprise. 2 vols. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1940.
  * Nevins, Allan. Study In Power: John D. Rockefeller, Industrialist and Philanthropist. 2 vols. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1953.
  * Nowell, Gregory P. (1994). Mercantile States and the World Oil Cartel, 1900â1939.. Cornell University Press.
  * Standard Oil Company of California. Whatever happened to Standard Oil?, 1980. Retrieved June 25, 2005.
  * Tarbell, Ida M. The History of the Standard Oil Company, 1904. The famous original expose in McClure's Magazine of Standard Oil.
  * Wall, Bennett H. Growth in a Changing Environment: A History of Standard Oil Company (New Jersey), Exxon Corporation, 1950â1975. New York: Harpercollins, 1989.
  * Williamson, Harold F. and Arnold R. Daum. The American Petroleum Industry: The Age of Illumination, 1859â1899, 1959: vol 2, American Petroleum Industry: the Age of Energy 1899â1959, 1964. The standard history of the oil industry. online edition of vol 1
  * Yergin, Daniel. The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1991.

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ "John D. and Standard Oil". Bowling Green State University. http://www.bgsu.edu/departments/acs/1890s/rockefeller/bio2.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-07.
  2. ^ "Rockefellers Timeline". PBS. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/rockefellers/timeline/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-07.
  3. ^ "Exxon Mobil - Our history". Exxon Mobil Corporation. http://www.exxonmobil.com/Corporate/history/about_who_history.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-02-3.
  4. ^ Dies, Edward (1969). Behind the Wall Street Curtain. Ayer. p. 76. http://books.google.com/books?id=DVA2Hdri9XsC.
  5. ^ One of the world's first and biggest multinationals - see Daniel Yergin, The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1991, (p.35).
  6. ^ Hidy, Ralph W. and Muriel E. Hidy. Pioneering in Big Business, 1882â1911: History of Standard Oil Company (New Jersey) (1955).
  7. ^ Josephson, Matthew (1962). The Robber Barons. Harcourt Trade. pp. 277. http://books.google.com/books?id=ZqtTdEcT0iAC.
  8. ^ Standard Oil controlled by a small group of families - see Ron Chernow, Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr., London: Warner Books, 1998, (p.291)
  9. ^ Jones, Eliot. The Trust Problem in the United States pp. 89â90 (1922) (hereinafter Jones).
  10. ^ Standard Oil of New Jersey seen as all-pervasive and unaccountable, holding stock in a myriad of other companies - see Yergin, op. cit., (pp.96â98)
  11. ^ Jones pp 58â59, 64.
  12. ^ Jones. pp. 65â66.
  13. ^ Manns, Leslie D., "Dominance in the Oil Industry: Standard Oil from 1865 to 1911" in David I. Rosenbaum ed., Market Dominance: How Firms Gain, Hold, or Lose it and the Impact on Economic Performance, p. 11 (Praeger 1998).
  14. ^ Jones, p. 73.
  15. ^ Jones, p 75â76.
  16. ^ Jones, p. 80.
  17. ^ See generally Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States, 221 U.S. 1 (1911).
  18. ^ Rockefeller the richest man after the dissolution of 1911 - see Yergin, op. cit., (p.113)
  19. ^ Trading With the Enemy (1983), Charles Higham: Delacorte Press, New York NY; Pp. 32 - 62 ISBN 0-440-09064-4
  20. ^ Wall Street and the Rise of Hitler (2000) By Antony C. Sutton]
  21. ^ Facts and Fascism (1943) by George Seldes
  22. ^ The Senate Military Affairs Subcommittee on War Mobilization (Kilgore Committee), headed by Senator Harley M. Kilgore, held several hearings throughout the second half of 1945 that focused on German economic penetration of neutral countries, elimination of German resources for war, German's resources for a third world war, etc. Archives are at NARA's Center for Legislative Archives in the Archives I building. See the National Archives finding aid for Holocaust research.
  23. ^ World Without Cancer: The Story of Vitamin B17 (Laetrile) (1974-1975) by G. Edward Griffen
  24. ^ I.G. Farben (1947) by Richard Sasuly
  25. ^ Wall Street and the Rise of Hitler (2000) By Antony C. Sutton, a book that describes in detail the money trail from its roots to the bank accounts of the Nazi SS.
  26. ^ http://www.profit-over-life.org/rolls.php?roll=97&pageID=760&expand=no IG Farben Trial Documents
  27. ^ http://www.fool.com/investing/dividends-income/2007/12/03/the-investing-secrets-of-the-richest-man-the-world.aspx
  28. ^ see [1] [2]
  29. ^ Congressional Record, 51st Congress, 1st session, House, June 20, 1890, p. 4100.
  30. ^ Harold F. Williamsson and others, (1963) The American Petroleum Industry, 1899-1959, Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univ. Press, p.4-14.
  31. ^ David I. Rosenbaum, Market Dominance: How Firms Gain, Hold, or Lose it and the Impact on Economic Performance, New York: Praeger Publishers, 1998, (pp.31â33)

## [edit] External links

  * The Dismantling of The Standard Oil Trust
  * Educate Yourself- Standard Oil -- Part I
  * Witch-hunting for Robber Barons: The Standard Oil Story by Lawrence W. Reed \- Argues Standard Oil was not a coercive monopoly.
  * The Truth About the "Robber Barons" Auguring that Stand Oil was not a monopoly.
  * The Robber Barons by Matthew Josephson, (1934)
  * History of the Great American Fortunes by Gustavus Myers, (1909)
  * Google Books: Dynastic America and Those Who Own It, 2003 {1921}, by Henry H. Klein
  * David K. Watson
  * Standard Oil Trust original Stock Certificate signed by John. D. Rockefeller, William Rockefeller, Henry M. Flagler and Jabez Abel Bostwick - 1882
  * Whatever happened to Standard Oil?: Pre-1911 and Post-1911 - Timeline of the various subsidiaries
  * Standard Oil around the World: Post-1911

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_Oil"

Categories: Standard Oil | Rockefeller family | History of the petroleum
industry | Monopolies | Companies established in 1870 | Defunct American oil
companies | 1911 disestablishments | Companies based in Ohio

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007 |
Articles to be expanded since January 2008 | All articles to be expanded

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 15:51 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



