
# BoxâMuller transform

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

  (Redirected from Box-Muller transform)

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Diagram of the Box Muller transform. The initial circles, uniformly spaced
about the origin, are mapped to another set of circles about the origin that
are closely spaced near the origin but quickly spread out. The largest circles
in the domain map to the smallest circles in the range and vice versa.

A BoxâMuller transform (by George Edward Pelham Box and Mervin Edgar Muller
1958)[1] is a method of generating pairs of independent standard normally
distributed (zero expectation, unit variance) random numbers, given a source
of uniformly distributed random numbers.

It is commonly expressed in two forms. The basic form as given by Box and
Muller takes two samples from the uniform distribution on the interval (0, 1]
and maps them to two normally distributed samples. The polar form takes two
samples from a different interval, [â1, +1], and maps them to two normally
distributed samples without the use of sine or cosine functions.

One could use the inverse transform sampling method to generate normally-
distributed random numbers instead; the BoxâMuller transform was developed
to be more computationally efficient.[2] The more efficient Ziggurat algorithm
can also be used.

## Contents

  * 1 Basic form
  * 2 Polar form
  * 3 Contrasting the two forms
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Basic form

Suppose U1 and U2 are independent random variables that are uniformly
distributed in the interval (0, 1]. Let

    Z_0 = R \\cos\(\\Theta\) =\\sqrt{-2 \\ln U_1} \\cos\(2 \\pi U_2\)\\,
and

    Z_1 = R \\sin\(\\Theta\) = \\sqrt{-2 \\ln U_1} \\sin\(2 \\pi U_2\).\\,
Then Z0 and Z1 are independent random variables with a normal distribution of
standard deviation 1.

The derivation[3] is based on the fact that, in a two-dimensional cartesian
system where X and Y coordinates are described by two independent and normally
distributed random variables, the random variables for R2 and Î (shown above)
in the corresponding polar coordinates are also independent and can be
expressed as

    R^2 = -2\\cdot\\ln U_1\\,
and

    \\Theta = 2\\pi U_2.\\,
## [edit] Polar form

<IMG>

<IMG>

Two uniformly distributed values, u and v are used to produce the value s =
R2, which is likewise uniformly distributed. The definitions of the sine and
cosine are then applied to the basic form of the BoxâMuller transform in
order to avoid using trigonometric functions.

The polar form is attributed by Devroye[4] to Marsaglia. It is also mentioned
without attribution in Carter.[5]

Given u and v, independent and uniformly distributed in the closed interval
[â1, +1], set s = R2 = u2 + v2. (Clearly \\scriptstyle R = \\sqrt{s}.) If s
= 0 or s > 1, throw u and v away and try another pair (u, v). Continue until a
pair with s in the open interval (0, 1) is found. Because u and v are
uniformly distributed and because only points within the unit circle have been
admitted, the values of s will be uniformly distributed in the open interval
(0, 1), too. The latter can be seen by calculating the cumulative distribution
function for s in the interval (0, 1). This is the area of a circle with
radius \\scriptstyle \\sqrt{s} divided by \\scriptstyle\\pi. From this we find
the probability density function to have the constant value 1 on the interval
(0, 1). Equally so, the angle Î¸ divided by \\scriptstyle 2 \\pi is uniformly
distributed in the open interval (0, 1) and independent of s.

We now identify the value of s with that of U1 and \\scriptstyle \\theta/\(2
\\pi\) with that of U2 in the basic form. As shown in the figure, the values
of \\scriptstyle \\cos \\theta = \\cos 2 \\pi U_2 and \\scriptstyle \\sin
\\theta = \\sin 2 \\pi U_2 in the basic form can be replaced with the ratios
\\scriptstyle\\cos \\theta = u/R = u/\\sqrt{s} and \\scriptstyle\\sin \\theta
= v/R = v/\\sqrt{s}, respectively. The advantage is that calculating the
trigonometric functions directly can be avoided. This is helpful when they are
comparatively more expensive than the single division that replaces each one.

Just as the basic form produces two standard normal deviates, so does this
alternate calculation.

    z_0 = \\sqrt{-2 \\ln U_1} \\cos\(2 \\pi U_2\) = \\sqrt{-2 \\ln s} \\left\(\\frac{u}{\\sqrt{s}}\\right\) = u \\cdot \\sqrt{\\frac{-2 \\ln s}{s}}
and

    z_1 = \\sqrt{-2 \\ln U_1} \\sin\(2 \\pi U_2\) = \\sqrt{-2 \\ln s}\\left\( \\frac{v}{\\sqrt{s}}\\right\) = v \\cdot \\sqrt{\\frac{-2 \\ln s}{s}}.
## [edit] Contrasting the two forms

The polar method differs from the basic method in that it is a type of
rejection sampling. It throws away some generated random numbers, but it is
typically faster than the basic method because it is simpler to compute
(provided that the random number generator is relatively fast) and is more
numerically robust.[5] It avoids the use of trigonometric functions, which are
comparatively expensive in many computing environments. It throws away 1 â
Ï/4 â 21.46% of the total input uniformly distributed random number pairs
generated, i.e. throws away 4/Ï â 1 â 27.32% uniformly distributed random
number pairs per Gaussian random number pair generated, requiring 4/Ï â
1.2732 input random numbers per output random number.

The basic form requires three multiplications, one logarithm, one square root,
and one trigonometric function for each normal variate.[6]

The polar form requires two multiplications, one logarithm, one square root,
and one division for each normal variate. The effect is to replace one
multiplication and one trigonometric function with a single division.

## [edit] See also

  * Normal distribution
  * Inverse transform sampling
  * Marsaglia polar method, an optimization of the BoxâMuller transform
  * Ziggurat algorithm, a very different way to generate normal random numbers

## [edit] References

  1. ^ G. E. P. Box and Mervin E. Muller, A Note on the Generation of Random Normal Deviates, The Annals of Mathematical Statistics (1958), Vol. 29, No. 2 pp. 610-611
  2. ^ Kloeden and Platen, Numerical Solutions of Stochastic Differential Equations, pp. 11â12
  3. ^ Sheldon Ross, A First Course in Probability, (2002), pp. 279â81
  4. ^ L. Devroye: 'Non-Uniform Random Variate Generation', Springer-Verlag, New York, 1986.
  5. ^ a b Everett F. Carter, Jr., The Generation and Application of Random Numbers, Forth Dimensions (1994), Vol. 16, No. 1 & 2.
  6. ^ Note that the evaluation of 2ÏU1 is counted as a single multiplication because the value of 2Ï can be computed in advance and used repeatedly.

## [edit] External links

  * BoxâMuller running in a Java Applet
  * Generating Gaussian Random Numbers
  * BoxâMuller Transform on MathWorld

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Box%E2%80%93Muller_transform"

Categories: Transforms | Pseudorandom number generators | Monte Carlo methods
| Non-uniform random numbers

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Basa Sunda
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 18:59 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



