
# Bouba/kiki effect

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

This picture is used as a test to demonstrate that people may not attach
sounds to shapes arbitrarily: a Canary Island tribe calls the shape on the
left "kiki" and the one on the right "bouba".

The Bouba/Kiki Effect was discovered by German-American psychologist Wolfgang
KÃ¶hler in 1929.[1] In psychological experiments, first conducted on the
island of Tenerife, KÃ¶hler showed forms similar to those shown at the right,
and found a strong preference to pair the jagged shape with the word "takete"
and the rounded shape with the word "baluba" ("maluma" in the 1947
version).[2] In 2001, Vilayanur S. Ramachandran and Edward Hubbard repeated
KÃ¶hler experiment using the words "kiki" and "bouba" and asked large numbers
of subjects "Which of these shapes is bouba and which is kiki?" In tests
conducted with both English and Tamil speakers, 95% to 98% picked the curvy
shape as bouba and the jagged one as kiki, suggesting that the human brain is
somehow able to extract abstract properties from the shapes and sounds.[3]
Recent work by Daphne Maurer and colleagues has shown that even children as
young as 2.5 (too young to read) show this effect.[4]

Ramachandran and Hubbard[3] suggest that the kiki/bouba effect has
implications for the evolution of language, because it suggests that the
naming of objects is not completely arbitrary. The rounded shape may most
commonly be named bouba because the mouth makes a more rounded shape to
produce that sound while a more taut, angular mouth shape is needed to make
the sound kiki. The sounds of a K are harder and more forceful than those of a
B, as well. The presence of these "synesthesia-like mappings" suggest that
this effect might be the neurological basis for sound symbolism, in which
sounds are non-arbitrarily mapped to objects and events in the world.

Interestingly, individuals with autism do not show this effect. Where average
people agree with the typical result 90% of the time, autistics only agree 60%
of the time.[5]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ KÃ¶hler, W. (1929) Gestalt Psychology. New York: Liveright.
  2. ^ KÃ¶hler, W. (1947) Gestalt Psychology, 2nd Ed. New York: Liveright.
  3. ^ a b Ramachandran, V.S. & Hubbard, E.M. (2001b). Synaesthesia: A window into perception, thought and language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8(12), 3 - 34.
  4. ^ Maurer, D.; T. Pathman & C. J. Mondloch (2006), "The shape of boubas: Sound-shape correspondences in toddlers and adults", Developmental Science 9(3): 316-322, PMID 16669803
  5. ^ Ramachandran, V.S. & L.M. Oberman. Evidence for Deficits in Mirror Neuron Function, Multisensory Integration, and Sound-form Symbolism in Autism Spectrum Disorders

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bouba/kiki_effect"

Categories: Autism | Cognitive science

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 18:54 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



