
# TACACS

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008)  
Terminal Access Controller Access-Control System (TACACS) is a remote
authentication protocol that is used to communicate with an authentication
server commonly used in UNIX networks. TACACS allows a remote access server to
communicate with an authentication server in order to determine if the user
has access to the network.

TACACS allows a client to accept a username and password and send a query to a
TACACS authentication server, sometimes called a TACACS daemon or simply
TACACSD. This server was normally a program running on a host. The host would
determine whether to accept or deny the request and send a response back. The
TIP (routing node accepting dial-up line connections, which the user would
normally want to log in into) would then allow access or not, based upon the
response. In this way, the process of making the decision is "opened up" and
the algorithms and data used to make the decision are under the complete
control of whoever is running the TACACS daemon.

A later version of TACACS introduced by Cisco in 1990 was called XTACACS
(extended TACACS). These two versions have generally been replaced by TACACS+
and RADIUS in newer or updated networks. TACACS+ is a completely new protocol
and is therefore not compatible with TACACS or XTACACS.

In spite of its name, TACACS+ is an entirely new protocol. TACACS+ and RADIUS
have generally replaced the earlier protocols in more recently built or
updated networks. TACACS+ uses the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and
RADIUS uses the User Datagram Protocol (UDP). Some administrators recommend
using TACACS+ because TCP is seen as a more reliable protocol. Whereas RADIUS
combines authentication and authorization in a user profile, TACACS+ separates
the two operations. TACACS is defined in RFC 1492, and uses (either TCP or
UDP) port 49 by default.

Software implementations:

  * TACACS+
  * tac_plus
  * DialWays 3.0
  * TacacsPlus

  

## [edit] Related RFCs

  * RFC 1492 \- An Access Control Protocol, sometimes called TACACS
  * RFC 0927 \- TACACS user identification Telnet option

## [edit] See also

  * List of authentication protocols
  * RADIUS
  * TACACS+
  * Diameter
  * Kerberos

<IMG>This computer network-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia
by expanding it.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TACACS"

Categories: Authentication methods | Identity management systems | Computer
network stubs

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from February 2008 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 January 2009, at 13:52.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



