
# Sriracha

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

A bottle of the Huy Fong brand "Sriracha" hot sauce.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Some different flavors of Sriracha: Garlic, galanga, sour, lemon grass, onion
and ginger.

Sriracha (Thai: à¸¨à¸£à¸µà¸£à¸²à¸à¸², pronounced /siËrÉtÊÉ/ or SEE-rah-
chah) [1] is the generic name for Thai-style hot sauce named after the seaside
city of Si Racha, Thailand, where it was first produced for the local seafood
restaurants. Typically made from sun-ripened chili peppers, vinegar, garlic,
sugar and salt, it is a common condiment in many of America's Asian
restaurants and increasingly in American and European homes.

## Contents

  * 1 Flavor
  * 2 Common Uses
  * 3 U.S. Trademark
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Flavor

The flavor of both Thai and popular non-Thai versions is dominated by its
central ingredient, hot chilies. To achieve a blend of hot, sweet, and spicy,
other items such as sugar, salt, garlic, and vinegar are typically added.
Traditional Thai Sriracha tends to be more tangy and thinner than non-Thai,
which is often thicker in texture. Versions featuring lemon grass, ginger,
galanga and other exotic flavors have been introduced in Thailand for the
export market.

Originally exclusively a fresh sauce domestically consumed, Sriracha sold as a
prepared product typically contains preservatives such as potassium sorbate,
sodium bisulfite, and citric acid to maintain its shelf life before and after
opening.

## [edit] Common Uses

In Thailand, Sriracha is frequently found as a dipping sauce, particularly for
seafood. Beyond its native boundaries Sriracha serves as a general-purpose hot
sauce in a variety of cuisines, appearing anywhere from a condiment for
Vietnamese phá» to a topping for sushi rolls and pizza in the United States.
Increasingly Sriracha is used in snack foods in America, appearing in a sauce
for buffalo wings, atop French fries, sandwiches, pasta sauces, eggs, even
combined with parmesan cheese on hot popcorn.

## [edit] U.S. Trademark

The first mass marketed Thai-produced Sriracha, and widely regarded as the
original, is made by Sriracha Panich (Thai:
à¸¨à¸£à¸µà¸£à¸²à¸à¸²à¸à¸²à¸à¸´à¸à¸¢à¹). Sriracha Panich was eventually
taken over by the Thai Theparos Food Products Public Company Limited of
Thailand which continues to market the sauce under the label "Golden Mountain
Sriracha Panich". Panich is Thai for "commercial".

The popular Tuong Ot Sriracha (Vietnamese for Sriracha Chili Sauce) of
American Asian food shops, restaurants, and tables is a proprietary product
produced by Huy Fong Foods, which has trademarked the name there since
1990.[2] Thai Theparos Food Products filed a trademark for Sriraja Panich in
2002 but the application was never completed.[3] Some Americans refer to Huy
Fong's product as "rooster sauce,"[4] or "cock sauce,"[5] after the fowl posed
in its logo.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ ... by native speakers, due to the fact that the double consonant 'sr' doesn't occur naturally in Thai speech [1].
  2. ^ U.S. Trademark for Tuong Ot Sriracha. Registration #1,617,813, October 16, 1990.
  3. ^ U.S. Trademark for Sriraja Panich Filed July 3, 2002 (Abandoned because mark designs were inconsistent and 6-month waiting period expired.)
  4. ^ Martin, Chuck (October 31, 2001). "Sriracha sauce hot 'Korean ketchup'". The Cincinnati Enquirer. http://www.enquirer.com/editions/2001/10/31/tem_sriracha_sauce_hot.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-27.
  5. ^ Sytsma, Alan (Feb. 8 2008). "A Roosterâs Wake-Up Call". Gourmet magazine. http://www.gourmet.com/food/2008/02/sriracha. Retrieved on 2009-01-27.

## [edit] External links

  * Huy Fong Foods Inc.
  * Golden Mountain brand "Sriraja Panich"
  * David Tran: The Emperor of Hot Sauce, Los Angeles magazine, April 2001

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Thai cuisine  
Individual dishes

Mee krob Â· Nuea pad prik Â· Pad kee mao Â· Pad see ew Â· Pad Thai Â· Rad na
Â· Thai fried rice Â· Khao soi Â· American fried rice Â· Jok  
Shared dishes

Tom yum Â· Tom kha gai Â· Pad khing Â· Kai yat sai Â· Red curry Â· Green curry
Â· Yellow curry Â· Massaman curry Â· Panang beef  
Isan and Lao dishes

Som tam Â· Larb Â· Gai yang Â· Sticky rice Â· Pla ra Â· Nam Tok Â· Padaek Â·
Yam naem  
Snacks and desserts

Curry puff Â· Satay Â· Miang kam Â· Khanom buang Â· Thai tea  
Miscellaneous

Jasmine rice Â· Phrik khii nuu Â· Fish sauce Â· Sriracha hot sauce Â· Nam prik  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sriracha"

Categories: Thai cuisine | Hot sauces | Chinese cuisine

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from February 2008 | All articles
lacking sources | Articles containing Thai language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 25 April 2009, at 03:40 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



