
# Twelve Days of Christmas

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008)  
This article is about the religious period from Christmas to Epiphany. For the
popular Christmas song, see The Twelve Days of Christmas (song).

12 Days of Christmas  
12 Days of Christmas  
The Adoration of the Magi. Fresco in Lower Church, Basilica of San Francesco
d'Assisi  
Observed by Christians  
Type Christian  
Date 1st day 25-Dec  
to 12th day 5-Jan  
Observances varies by culture, country  
Related to Christmas Day, Twelfth Night, Epiphany  
The Twelve Days of Christmas, and the associated evenings of those twelve days
(Twelve-tide), are the festive days beginning on Christmas Day (December 25)
through to the evening of the Twelfth Day of Christmas, (January 5). Thus, the
first night of Christmas is December 25â26 and Twelfth Night is January 5-6.
This period is also known as Christmastide. The day after Twelfth Night is
Epiphany on January 6.

Over the centuries, differing churches and sects of Christianity have changed
the actual traditions, time frame and their interpretations. St. Stephen's Day
(or Boxing Day), for example, is December 26 in the Western Church and
December 27 in the Eastern Church. Boxing Day, the first weekday after
Christmas, is observed as a legal holiday in parts of the Commonwealth of
Nations and was traditionally marked by the giving of Christmas boxes to
service workers (such as postal workers and trades people) in the United
Kingdom; December 28 is Childermas or the Feast of the Innocents. Currently,
the 12 days and nights are celebrated in widely varying ways around the world.
For example, some give gifts only on Christmas Night, some only on Twelfth
Night and some each of the 12 nights.

## Contents

  * 1 Middle Ages
  * 2 Colonial America
  * 3 Modern United States
  * 4 Modern celebrations in the United Kingdom
  * 5 Footnotes
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] Middle Ages

In the Middle Ages, this period was one of continuous feasting and
merrymaking, which climaxed on Twelfth Night, the traditional end of the
Christmas season. Twelfth Night itself was forever solidified in popular
culture when William Shakespeare used it as setting for one of his most famous
stage plays, titled Twelfth Night. Often a Lord of Misrule was chosen to lead
the Christmas revels.[1]

Some of these traditions were adapted from the older pagan customs, including
the Roman Saturnalia.[2] Some also have an echo in modern day pantomime where
traditionally authority is mocked and the principal male lead is played by a
woman, while the leading older female character, or 'Dame', is played by a
man.

## [edit] Colonial America

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008)  
The original American colonists brought their version of the Twelve Days over
from England, and adapted them to their new country, adding their own
variations over the years. For example, it is believed by many that the modern
day Christmas wreath originated with these colonials. A homemade wreath would
be fashioned from local greenery and if fruits were available, they were
added. Making the wreaths was one of the traditions of Christmas Eve, then
they would be hung on each home's front door beginning on Christmas Night (1st
night of Christmas) through Twelfth Night or Epiphany morning. As was already
the tradition in their native England, all decorations would be taken down by
Epiphany morning and the remainder of the edibles would be consumed. A special
cake was also baked then for Epiphany (which some now call the king cake).

## [edit] Modern United States

With the onset of more Americanized and secular traditions throughout the past
two centuries (such as the American "Santa Claus", popularity of Christmas Eve
itself as a holiday, and rise in popularity of New Year's Eve parties as
well), the traditions of the Twelve Days of Christmas have been largely
forgotten in the U.S. This is also heightened by the commercial practice to
have "After-Christmas Sales" begin on December 26 and run usually until New
Year's Eve. Indeed, contemporary marketing and media tend to espouse the
(erroneous) belief that the Twelve Days end on Christmas and thus begin
December 14.[3][4]

However, a small percentage of Christians of many sects have held on to their
own favorite ways to celebrate and those who choose to also have their own
church to guide them in a spiritual way of marking this reverent holiday.
Americans who celebrate various ways include secular Christians of all
backgrounds, religious Catholics, Orthodox Christians, Lutherans,
Episcopalians, Moravians and those of the Amish and Mennonite communities.

Today, some celebrants give gifts each of the Twelve Days, feast and otherwise
celebrate the entire time through to Epiphany morning. Lighting a candle for
each day has become a modern tradition in the U.S. and of course, singing the
appropriate verses of the famous song each day is also an important and fun
part of the American celebrations.

Some still celebrate Twelfth Night as the biggest night for parties and gift-
giving and some also light a Yule Log on the first night (Christmas) and let
it burn some each of the twelve nights. Some Americans also have their own
traditional foods to serve each night.

As in olden days, Twelfth Night to Epiphany morning is then the traditional
time to take down the Christmas tree and decorations.

## [edit] Modern celebrations in the United Kingdom

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008)  
Many in the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth nations still celebrate some
aspects of the Twelve Days of Christmas. Boxing Day (26 December) is a
national holiday in many Commonwealth nations, being the first full day of
Christmas. Victorian-era stories by Charles Dickens (and others), particularly
A Christmas Carol, hold key elements of the celebrations such as the
consumption of plum pudding, roasted goose and wassail. While these foods are
consumed more at the beginning of the Twelve Days in the UK, some dine and
dance in the traditional way throughout, all the way to Twelfth Night. Some
use William Shakespeare's play by that same name (written around 1601) as an
inspiration.

Traditionally, the Twelfth Day is the last day for decorations to be taken
down. It is seen by many to be bad luck to take decorations down after this
date.

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Frazer, James (1922). The Golden Bough. New York: McMillan. ISBN 1-58734-083-6. http://www.bartleby.com/196/145.html.
  2. ^ Count, Earl (1997). 4,000 Years of Christmas. Ulysses Press. ISBN 1569750874.
  3. ^ Jami Delgado, ehow.com ("Consider being non-traditional and celebrating the Twelve Days of Christmas on the days leading up to Christmas (December 14-December 25)."
  4. ^ HumorMatters, Twelve Days of Christmas (reprint of a magazine article); accessed 2008.12.09.

## [edit] References

<IMG> Holidays portal  
  * "Christmas". Catholic Encyclopedia. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03724b.htm. Retrieved on December 22 2005. Primarily subhead Popular Merrymaking under Liturgy and Custom.
  * Bowler, Gerald (2000). The World Encyclopedia of Christmas. Toronto: M&S. ISBN 9780771015311. OCLC 44154451.
  * Caulkins, Mary (2002). Christmas Trivia: 200 Fun & Fascinating Facts About Christmas. New York: Gramercy. ISBN 9780517220702. OCLC 49627774.
  * Collins, Ace; Clint Hansen (2003). Stories Behind the Great Traditions of Christmas. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan. ISBN 9780310248804. OCLC 52311813.
  * Evans, Martin Marix (2002). The Twelve Days of Christmas. White Plains, New York: Peter Pauper Press. ISBN 9780880887762. OCLC 57044650.
  * Wells, Robin Headlam (2005). Shakespeare's Humanism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521824385. OCLC 62132881.
  * Hoh, John L., Jr. (2001). The Twelve Days of Christmas: A Carol Catechism. Vancouver: Suite 101 eBooks.

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Christmas  
Main

Christmas Eve Â· Christmas Day Â· History Â· The Nativity Â· Bringers of gifts
Â· Decorations Â· Economics Â· Customs

Christmas tree  
Christianity

Nativity of Jesus Â· Nativity of Jesus in art Â· Nativity scene Â· Nativity of
Jesus in later culture Â· Jesus Christ Â· Mary Â· Joseph Â· Angel Gabriel Â·
Adoration of the Shepherds Â· Three Wise Men Â· Star of Bethlehem Â· King
Herod Â· Massacre of the Innocents Â· Saint Nicholas Â· Twelfth Night Â·
Epiphany Â· Advent Â· Christmastide  
Folklore

Father Christmas Â· Santa Claus Â· Mrs. Claus Â· Santa Claus's elfs Â· Santa
Claus's reindeer Â· Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer Â· Sinterklaas Â· PÃ¨re
NoÃ«l Â· Joulupukki Â· Christkind Â· Black Peter Â· Krampus Â· Belsnickel Â·
Le PÃ¨re Fouettard Â· North Pole Â· Santa's workshop Â· Korvatunturi Â· Other
characters  
Traditions

Twelve Days of Christmas Â· Christmas trees Â· Wassailing Â· Yule log Â·
Stockings Â· Ornaments Â· Lights Â· Nutcrackers Â· Christmas cards Â·
Christmas music Â· Christmas movies Â· Christmas stamps Â· A Visit from St.
Nicholas Â· A Christmas Carol Â· NORAD Tracks Santa Â· Secret Santa Â· Advent
calendars Â· Yule Goats Â· Santa Claus parades Â· Flying Santa Â· Christmas
markets Â· Plants Â· Food Â· Feasts Â· Events Â· Parades â Worldwide: German
Â· Philippine Â· Polish Â· Serbian Â· Ukrainian  
Media

Fiction Â· Films Â· Plays â TV: Episodes Â· Specials â Music: Albums Â·
Hit singles and tracks Â· Carols Â· Other Christmas music and songs  
Society

Christmas club Â· Christmas controversy Â· Christmas creep Â· Christmas
Mountains Â· Christmas truce Â· Christmas in various language Â· Black Friday
Â· Cyber Monday Â· Boxing Day Â· White Christmas Â· Christmas Day (Trading)
Act 2004 Â· Christmas and holiday season Â· Related holidays Â· List of winter
festivals Â· SantaCon Â· Running of the Santas Â· Christmas in July Â·
Christmas in August Â· Christmas in the American Civil War Â· Christmas in
Puritan New England Â· Christmas in the post-War United States  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twelve_Days_of_Christmas"

Categories: Christian festivals and holy days | Christmas-linked holidays |
December observances | January observances

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2008 |
Cite web templates using unusual accessdate parameters

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 13:16 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



