
# Home roasting coffee

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article contains weasel words, vague phrasing that often accompanies
biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or
removed. (December 2008)  
Home roasting is the process of roasting green coffee beans on a small scale
for personal consumption. Personal roasting of coffee has been practiced for
centuries, and has utilized numerous method of roasting the beans such as
heating over fire coals, roasting in cast iron pans, and rotating iron drums
over a fire or coal bed. Until World War I it was more common to roast coffee
at home than to buy pre-roasted coffee. During the 20th century commercial
coffee roasting companies became common and with the creation of instant
coffee in 1901, home-roasting decreased.[1]

In recent years an increasing number of people have returned to home-roasting
of coffee to get the freshest possible coffee with aroma undiminished by
storage.

## Contents

  * 1 Freshness
  * 2 Bean selection
  * 3 Roasting profile
  * 4 Quality
  * 5 Equipment
    * 5.1 Improvised equipment
      * 5.1.1 Hot air popcorn popper
    * 5.2 Dedicated home coffee roasters
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Freshness

Depending on the origin and method of storage, coffee flavor peaks from 24
hours to 7 days after roasting.[2] Subsequently, flavor declines at a rate
which depends on origin and storage. The flavor of ground coffee deteriorates
much faster. Many factors cause the decline of flavor after roasting,
including the oxidation of oils and other compounds exposed to atmospheric
oxygen after roasting damages bean cell wall integrity, and the evaporation of
flavor-active volatile compounds. Roasting coffee beans produces a significant
amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) gas; this CO2 preserves freshness to the extent
that it excludes atmospheric oxygen. Other means of extending freshness such
as freezing roasted beans and displacing surrounding air with an inert gas
have unproven success.

Home roasters are able to roast smaller volumes of coffee to match consumption
so that the roasted coffee is not stored for long enough to lose flavor or
aroma. Green (unroasted) coffee beans can have a shelf life of one or more
years if properly stored.

## [edit] Bean selection

The origin of beans makes a notable difference in the resulting flavor. There
are regional character associated with coffee which are due to plant genetics,
soil composition and terroir[vague] or the regional climate. Modest changes in
growing conditions can also affect coffee flavor. The method of processing
coffee 'cherries' into dried green beans affects the flavor and aroma of the
resulting beverage. In recent years internet retailers and home roasting co-
operatives have made a very wide selection of beans available to home
roasters, including crops from small plantations that produce too little
volume for commercial roasters.

## [edit] Roasting profile

A roasting profile describes the time the beans spend at each temperature
during roasting. Typical roasting profiles take the beans from ambient
temperature to a peak of between 205Â°C (400Â°F) and 250Â°C (480Â°F) over a
period of 4 to 20 minutes. The beans are then rapidly cooled. The times spent
at various temperatures and the peak temperature greatly affect the flavor and
color of the roast. Rapid cooling of the beans is necessary to prevent the
roast continuing from retained heat. Professional commercial roasting
equipment is usually automated and well-instrumented; the simpler equipment
available to the typical home roasters makes accurate and repeatable profile
control more difficult, though they can become very good with experience.[3]

## [edit] Quality

The home roaster is generally able to consume fresher coffee than typical
commercially roast coffee. Additionally, the home roaster can formulate exact
roast times to suit individual taste. The recent hobby interest in home
roasting and particularly the advent of home roasting cooperatives and
internet green bean vendors have made a very wide selection of high quality
green beans available to home roasters, comparable to or exceeding the variety
available in the best commercial shops.

## [edit] Equipment

<IMG>

<IMG>

Corretto model G with thermocouple

### [edit] Improvised equipment

The simplest technique for roasting green coffee beans is to stir them in a
flat pan over a high heat. This method produces coffee beans with a variety of
roast levels as it is almost impossible to achieve a consistent roast merely
by stirring. The opportunity to automate and better control various aspects of
the roasting process has led to innovative reuse of equipment intended for
other purposes.

Common DIY roasters include hot air popcorn poppers (side-vented models),
stove-top popcorn poppers, heat guns (normally used for stripping paint), and
barbecue roasters using home-made steel drums suspended and rotated over
burners. Heat guns and hot air popcorn poppers are generally the least
expensive home roasters available. Some home-built roasters are based on stir-
arm popcorn poppers coupled with convection ovens. Modified home bread-making
machines have been used to agitate the beans with the high temperatures needed
for coffee roasting provided by heat guns. This method is particularly popular
in Australia where it has become known as a 'Corretto' after the online
nickname of its developer.

#### [edit] Hot air popcorn popper

<IMG>

<IMG>

Home roasting with a popper

Popcorn poppers which use heated air vented from the sides of the popping
chamber can be used to roast small quantities of coffee. These machines are
inexpensive and require only minimal setup. Their lightweight construction can
cause machines to fail sooner when roasting coffee rather than popcorn, as the
heating element is used for longer periods of time and subject to higher
temperatures than it was designed for.

### [edit] Dedicated home coffee roasters

There are an increasing number of consumer coffee roasters including the Imex
CR-100, Hearthware iRoast2, Swissmar Alpenrost, NESCO Professional Coffee
Roaster (formerly Zach & Dani's Home Roaster), FreshRoast +8, HOTTOP Bean
Roaster, Gene Cafe Roaster, and Behmor 1600. They are more expensive than
home-built equipment, but automate the roasting process and avoid the hazards
of using equipment not designed for high temperature operation. The HOTTOP is
notable as having one of the best cooling cycles of any purpose-built home
roasting appliance, coming close to the ability of small professional
roasters.[peacock term]

Most of the purpose-built home roasting appliances are either air or drum
roasters. Fluid-bed or air roasting is believed to produce more acidity in the
coffee beans, while drum roasting tends to produce more "body".[citation
needed] Newer "hybrid" roasters use techniques being explored in the
professional roasting field; most notably the Gene Cafe roaster from Korea,
which uses an oscillating, off-axis drum rotation to agitate the beans and
roast them evenly, and a sealed hot air flow to heat the roasting drum
chamber.

The main drawbacks with many of the dedicated home roasting appliances are
their relatively small capacityâvarying from 75 grams (2.6 oz.) to 300 grams
of green coffee, limitations to the "roasting profiles" available, and often
slow cooling abilities for the freshly roasted beans, which can lead to dull
or flat flavor. Coffee roasting produces smoke and fumes and should be done in
a well-ventilated area which is often difficult to obtain in a home
environment. Coffee roasted outdoors is affected by variation in the ambient
temperature, requiring more complex adjustments to the roasting process to
produce repeatable results.

Roasting with a HOTTOP drum roaster

<IMG>

Start of roast

<IMG>

End of roast

<IMG>

Chaff  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ Pendergrast, Mark (2000) Uncommon Grounds
  2. ^ AllExperts Fresh Coffee
  3. ^ Davids, Kenneth. Home Coffee Roasting: Romance and Revival. St. Martin's Griffin; revised edition, November 2003. ISBN-13: 978-0312312190

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Home roasting coffee  
  * Homeroasters Association \- Information and discussion on how-to roast coffee at home.
  * CoffeeSnobs \- A large and busy coffee forum with a focus on home roasting devices and processes.
  * Absolute Beginner's Guide to Home Coffee Roasting

v â¢ d â¢ e

Coffee  
Production by country

Angola Â· Brazil Â· Colombia Â· Costa Rica Â· Ecuador Â· El Salvador Â·
Ethiopia Â· Guatemala Â· Haiti Â· India Â· Indonesia Â· Jamaica Â· Kenya Â·
Mexico Â· Nicaragua Â· The Philippines Â· Uganda Â· Vietnam  
Coffee topics

History of coffee Â· Economics of coffee Â· Coffee and health Â· Coffee and
the environment  
Species and varieties

List of varieties Â· Coffea arabica: Kenya AA, Kona, Jamaican Blue Mountain Â·
Coffea canephora (Coffea robusta): Kopi Luwak Â· Coffea liberica: Kape Barako
Â· Single-origin  
Major chemicals in coffee

Caffeine Â· Cafestol Â· Caffeic acid  
Coffee processing

Coffee roasting Â· Home roasting coffee Â· Corretto Â· Decaffeination  
Coffee preparation

Coffeemaker Â· Coffee percolator Â· Espresso (lungo, ristretto) Â· Espresso
machine Â· Drip brew Â· French press Â· Turkish coffee Â· Instant coffee Â·
Chemex Â· Moka pot Â· AeroPress Â· Presso  
Popular coffee beverages

Affogato Â· Americano/Long black Â· CafÃ© au lait/CafÃ© con leche Â· CaffÃ¨
corretto/Liqueur coffee Â· Cafe mocha Â· CÃ phÃª sá»¯a ÄÃ¡ Â· Cappuccino Â·
Coffee milk Â· Cortado Â· Espresso Â· Ristretto Â· Flat white Â· Frappuccino
Â· Greek frappÃ© coffee Â· Iced coffee Â· Indian filter coffee Â· Irish coffee
Â· Latte Â· Macchiato (espresso, latte) Â· Red eye  
Coffee substitutes

Dandelion coffee Â· Caro Â· Barley tea Â· Postum Â· Roasted grain beverage Â·
Barleycup  
Coffee and lifestyle

Coffee culture Â· Coffee ceremony Â· Coffeehouse Â· List of coffeehouse chains
Â· Coffee Palace Â· Barista Â· CaffÃ¨ Â· CafÃ© Â· Kopi tiam Â· Viennese cafÃ©
Â· CaffÃ¨ sospeso Â· Coffee cupping Â· Coffee break/Fika  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Home_roasting_coffee"

Categories: Coffee | Coffee preparation

Hidden categories: Articles with weasel words from December 2008 | All pages
needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2009 |
Articles with peacock terms | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 19:25 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



