
# Design pattern

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article discusses design patterns in general. For patterns in computer
science, see design pattern (computer science). For the book by Gamma et al,
see Design Patterns (book)

A design pattern in architecture and computer science is a formal way of
documenting a solution to a design problem in a particular field of expertise.
The idea was introduced by the architect Christopher Alexander in the field of
architecture, and has been adapted for various other disciplines, including
computer science.

An organized collection of design patterns that relate to a particular field
is called a pattern language.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Domain-specific articles
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 Further reading

  
## [edit] Overview

A pattern must explain why a particular situation causes problems, and why the
proposed solution is considered a good one. Christopher Alexander describes
common design problems as arising from "conflicting forces" -- such as the
conflict between wanting a room to be sunny and wanting it not to overheat on
summer afternoons. A pattern would not tell the designer how many windows to
put in the room; instead, it would propose a set of values to guide the
designer toward a decision that is best for their particular application.
Alexander, for example, suggests that enough windows should be included to
direct light all around the room. He considers this a good solution because he
believes it increases the enjoyment of the room by its occupants. Other
authors might come to different conclusions, if they place higher value on
heating costs, or material costs. These values, used by the pattern's author
to determine which solution is "best", must also be documented within the
pattern.

A pattern must also explain when it is applicable. Since two houses may be
very different from one another, a design pattern for houses must be broad
enough to apply to both of them, but not so vague that it doesn't help the
designer make decisions. The range of situations in which a pattern can be
used is called its context. Some examples might be "all houses", "all two-
story houses", or "all places where people spend time." The context must be
documented within the pattern.

For instance, in Christopher Alexander's work, bus stops and waiting rooms in
a surgery are both part of the context for the pattern "A PLACE TO WAIT."

## [edit] Domain-specific articles

  * Pattern (architecture), a way of capturing and communicating design ideas in architecture.
  * Design pattern (computer science), a standard solution to common problems in software design.
  * Architectural pattern (computer science), a standard solution to architectural problems in software engineering.
  * Interaction design pattern, used in interaction design / HCI.
  * Pedagogical patterns, documenting good practices in teaching.

## [edit] See also

  * Anti-pattern
  * Style guide, repeatable graphic design elements and styles.

## [edit] References

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2008)  
## [edit] Further reading

  * Frank Buschmann, Kevlin Henney, Douglas C. Schmidt "On Patterns and Pattern Languages"
  * Christopher Alexander. A Pattern Language
  * Erich Gamma et al. Design Patterns
  * Wolfgang Pree. Design Patterns for Object-Oriented Software Development
  * Jenifer Tidwell. Designing Interfaces

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_pattern"

Categories: Architectural design | Software design patterns

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from October 2008 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 17:47 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



