
# Visual communication

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the non-profit Asian Pacific American media arts organization, see Visual
Communications (VC)

Visual communication as the name suggests is communication through visual aid.
It is the conveyance of ideas and information in forms that can be read or
looked upon. Primarily associated with two dimensional images, it includes:
signs, typography, drawing, graphic design, illustration, colour and
electronic resources. It solely relies on vision. It is form of communication
with visual effect. It explores the idea that a visual message with text has a
greater power to inform, educate or persuade a person. It is communication by
presenting information through Visual form. The evaluation of a good visual
design is based on measuring comprehension by the audience, not on aesthetic
or artistic preference. There are no universally agreed-upon principles of
beauty and ugliness. There exists a variety of ways to present information
visually, like gestures, body languages, video and TV. Here, focus is on the
presentation of text, pictures, diagrams, photos, et cetera, integrated on a
computer display. The term visual presentation is used to refer to the actual
presentation of information. Recent research in the field has focused on web
design and graphically oriented usability. Graphic designers use methods of
visual communication in their professional practice.

Visual communication on the World Wide Web is perhaps the most important form
of communication taking place when users are surfing the Internet. When
experiencing the web, one uses the eyes as the primary sense and therefore the
visual dÃ­splay of a website is important for the users understanding of the
communication taking place.

## [edit] See also

  * Advertising
  * Visual culture
  * Graphic Design
  * Art Director
  * Illustration
  * Communication
  * Typography
  * Illustrations

v â¢ d â¢ e

Visualization of technical information  
Fields

Chemical imaging Â· Crime mapping Â· Data visualization Â· Educational
visualization Â· Flow visualization Â· Geovisualization Â· Information
visualization Â· Mathematical visualization Â· Medical imaging Â· Molecular
graphics Â· Product visualization Â· Scientific visualization Â· Software
visualization Â· Technical drawing Â· Volume visualization  
Image types

Chart Â· Computer graphics Â· Diagram Â· Graph of a function Â· Engineering
drawing Â· Ideogram Â· Information graphics Â· Map Â· Photograph Â· Pictogram
Â· Plot Â· Statistical graphics Â· Table Â· Technical illustration  
Experts

Jacques Bertin Â· Stuart Card Â· Thomas A. DeFanti Â· Michael Friendly Â·
Nigel Holmes Â· Alan MacEachren Â· Jock D. Mackinlay Â· Michael Maltz Â· Bruce
H. McCormick Â· Charles Joseph Minard Â· Otto Neurath Â· William Playfair Â·
Clifford A. Pickover Â· Arthur H. Robinson Â· Lawrence J. Rosenblum Â· Adolphe
Quetelet Â· George G. Robertson Â· Ben Shneiderman Â· Edward Tufte  
Related topics

Cartography Â· Computer graphics Â· Graph drawing Â· Graphic design Â· Imaging
science Â· Information science Â· Mental visualisation Â· Neuroimaging Â·
Scientific modelling Â· Spatial analysis Â· Visual analytics Â· Visual
perception  
<IMG> This communication design related article is a stub. You can help
Wikipedia by expanding it.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_communication"

Categories: Design | Communication design | Communication | Design stubs

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 December 2008, at 18:10.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



