
# Binary XML

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Binary XML, or Binary Extensible Markup Language, refers to any specification
which defines the compact representation of XML in a binary format. While
there are several competing formats, none has been widely adopted by a
standards organization or accepted as a de facto standard. Using a binary XML
format generally reduces the verbosity of XML documents and cost of parsing
[1], but hinders the use of ordinary text editors to view and edit the
document. Other advantages may include enabling random access and indexing of
XML documents.

The major challenge for binary XML is to create a single, widely adopted
standard. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) published the Fast Infoset
standard in 2007 and 2005, respectively. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
has produced the first draft of the EXI format specification. Another standard
(ISO/IEC 23001-1), known as Binary MPEG format for XML (BiM), has been
standardized by the ISO in 2001. BiM is used by many ETSI standards for
Digital TV and Mobile TV. The Open Geospatial Consortium also provides a
Binary XML Encoding Specification (currently a Best Practice Paper) optimized
for geo-related data (GML).

Alternatives to binary XML include using traditional file compression methods
on XML documents (for example gzip); or using an existing standard such as
ASN.1. Traditional compression methods, however, offer only the advantage of
compression, without the advantage of decreased parsing time or random access.
ASN.1 is being used as the basis of Fast Infoset, which is one binary XML
standard. There are also hybrid approaches (e.g., VTD-XML) that attach a small
index file to an XML document to eliminate the overhead of parsing[2].

## [edit] Binary XML projects and formats

  * Fast Infoset, a standard published by ISO/IEC and ITU-T
  * Efficient XML from AgileDelta, Inc., selected as the basis for the W3C Standard for Binary XML (EXI) [1]
  * Extensible Binary Meta Language (EBML) from Matroska
  * Fast Infoset Project, from Sun Microsystems [2]
  * Binary Characterization Working Group, at W3C [3]
  * CBXML, Compact Binary XML, from IBM
  * BXML-CWXML, from CubeWerx
  * Wireless Binary XML (WBXML)
  * Binary XML characterization
  * BXML Encoding Specification [4], a Best Practice Paper [5] from the Open Geospatial Consortium [6]
  * MC-NBFX: .NET Binary Format: XML Data Structure [7]

Other projects that have functionality related to (or competing with) binary
representations include:

  * VTD-XML from XimpleWare and VTD-XML project [8]
  * BiM Standard, from the ISO, developed by the MPEG working group
  * PlainXML project from SourceForge.net

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The performance woe of binary XML http://webservices.sys-con.com/read/250512.htm
  2. ^ Index XML documents with VTD-XML

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_XML"

Categories: XML

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 09:32 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



