
# Volatility (finance)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2009)  
Volatility most frequently refers to the standard deviation of the
continuously compounded returns of a financial instrument with a specific time
horizon. It is often used to quantify the risk of the instrument over that
time period. Volatility is typically expressed in annualized terms, and it may
either be an absolute number ($5) or a fraction of the mean (5%). Volatility
can be traded directly in today's markets through options and variance swaps.

For a financial instrument whose price follows a Gaussian random walk, or
Wiener process, the volatility increases as time increases. Conceptually, this
is because there is an increasing probability that the instrument's price will
be farther away from the initial price as time increases. However, rather than
increase linearly, the volatility increases with the square-root of time as
time increases, because some fluctuations are expected to cancel each other
out, so the most likely deviation after twice the time will not be twice the
distance from zero.

More broadly, volatility refers to the degree of (typically short-term)
unpredictable change over time of a certain variable. It may be measured via
the standard deviation of a sample, as mentioned above. However, price changes
actually do not follow Gaussian distributions. Better distributions used to
describe them actually have "fat tails" although their variance remains
finite. Therefore, other metrics may be used to describe the degree of spread
of the variable. As such, volatility reflects the degree of risk faced by
someone with exposure to that variable.

Historical volatility (or ex-post volatility) is the volatility of a financial
instrument based on historical returns. This phrase is used particularly when
it is wished to distinguish between the actual volatility of an instrument in
the past, and the current (ex-ante, or forward-looking) volatility implied by
the market.

## Contents

  * 1 Volatility for market players
  * 2 Volatility versus direction
  * 3 Volatility over time
  * 4 Mathematical definition
  * 5 Quick-and-dirty (percentage) volatility measurement
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Volatility for market players

Volatility is often viewed as a negative in that it represents uncertainty and
risk. However, volatility can be good in that if one shorts on the peaks, and
buys on the lows one can make money, with greater money coming with greater
volatility. The possibility for money to be made via volatile markets is how
short term market players like day traders hope to make money, and is in
contrast to the long term investment view of buy and hold.

In today's markets, it is also possible to trade volatility directly, through
the use of derivative securities such as options and variance swaps. See
Volatility arbitrage.

## [edit] Volatility versus direction

Volatility does not imply direction. (This is due to the fact that all changes
are squared.) An instrument that is more volatile is likely to increase or
decrease in value more than one that is less volatile.

For example, a savings account has low volatility. While it won't lose 50% in
a year, it also won't gain 50%.

## [edit] Volatility over time

It's common knowledge that types of assets experience periods of high and low
volatility. That is, during some periods prices go up and down quickly, while
during other times they might not seem to move at all.

Periods when prices fall quickly (a crash) are often followed by prices going
down even more, or going up by an unusual amount. Also, a time when prices
rise quickly (a bubble) may often be followed by prices going up even more, or
going down by an unusual amount.

The converse behavior, 'doldrums' can last for a long time as well.

Most typically, extreme movements do not appear 'out of nowhere'; they're
presaged by larger movements than usual. This is termed autoregressive
conditional heteroskedasticity. Of course, whether such large movements have
the same direction, or the opposite, is more difficult to say. And an increase
in volatility does not always presage a further increaseâthe volatility may
simply go back down again.

Over time volatility always increases.

## [edit] Mathematical definition

The annualized volatility Ï is the standard deviation Ï of the instrument's
logarithmic returns in a year.

The generalized volatility ÏT for time horizon T in years is expressed as:

    \\sigma_T = \\sigma \\sqrt{T}.\\,
For example, if the daily logarithmic returns of a stock SigmaSD have a
standard deviation of 0.01 and there are 252 trading days in a year, then the
time period of returns P is 1/252 and annualized volatility is

    \\sigma = {\\sigma_{SD}\\over\\sqrt{P}},\\,
    \\sigma = {0.01 \\over \\sqrt{\\frac{1}{252}}} = 0.1587.
The monthly volatility (i.e., T = 1 / 12 of a year) would be

    \\sigma_\\text{month} = 0.1587 \\sqrt{\\frac{1}{12}} = 0.0458.
Note that the formula used to annualize returns is not deterministic, but is
an extrapolation valid for a random walk process whose steps have finite
variance. Generally, the relation between volatility in different time scales
is more complicated, involving the LÃ©vy stability exponent Î±:

    \\sigma_T = T^{1/\\alpha} \\sigma.\\,
If Î± = 2 you get the Wiener process scaling relation, but some people believe
Î± < 2 for financial activities such as stocks, indexes and so on. This was
discovered by BenoÃ®t Mandelbrot, who looked at cotton prices and found that
they followed a LÃ©vy alpha-stable distribution with Î± = 1.7. (See New
Scientist, 19 April, 1997].) Mandelbrot's conclusion is, however, not accepted
by mainstream financial econometricians.

## [edit] Quick-and-dirty (percentage) volatility measurement

Suppose you notice that a market price index which is approximately 10,000,
moves about 100 points a day on average. This would constitute a 1% (up or
down) daily movement. To annualize this, you can use the "rule of 16", that
is, multiply by 16 to get 16% as the overall (annual) volatility. The
rationale for this is that 16 is the square root of 256, which is
approximately the number of actual trading days in a year. This uses the
statistical result that the standard deviation of the sum of n independent
variables (with equal standard deviations) is \\sqrt{n} times the standard
deviation of the individual variables. It also takes the average magnitude of
the observations as an approximation to the standard deviation of the
variables. Under the assumption that the variables are normally distributed
with mean zero and standard deviation Ï, the expected value of the magnitude
of the observations is \\sqrt{2 \\over \\pi}\\sigma = 0.798\\sigma, thus the
observed average magnitude of the observations may be taken as a rough
approximation to Ï.

## [edit] See also

  * Beta coefficient
  * Derivative (finance)
  * Financial economics
  * Implied volatility
  * Risk
  * Standard deviation
  * Stochastic volatility
  * Volatility arbitrage
  * Volatility smile

## [edit] References

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008)  
## [edit] External links

  * Volatility and Stock Options
  * Volatility drag on return The Investment Scientist
  * An Overview of Historical Volatility Equations The Quant Equation Archive at sitmo.com
  * Complex Options Multi-Leg Option Strategy Calculator
  * Options Calculator ivolatility.com
  * An introduction to volatility and how it can be calculated in excel, by Dr A. A. KotzÃ©
  * Diebold, Francis X.; Hickman, Andrew; Inoue, Atsushi & Schuermannm, Til (1996) "Converting 1-Day Volatility to h-Day Volatility: Scaling by sqrt(h) is Worse than You Think"
  * A short introduction to alternative mathematical concepts of volatility

v â¢ d â¢ e

Volatility  
Modelling volatility

Implied volatility Â· Volatility smile Â· Volatility clustering Â· Local
volatility Â· Stochastic volatility Â· Jump-diffusion models Â· ARCH Â· GARCH  
Trading volatility

Volatility arbitrage Â· Straddle Â· Volatility swap Â· Variance swap Â· VIX  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volatility_(finance)"

Categories: Mathematical finance | Technical analysis

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from February 2009 | All articles
lacking sources | Articles lacking sources from June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 23 March 2009, at 18:00.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



