
# Mephistopheles

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Mephistopheles (disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mephistopheles flying over Wittenberg, in a lithograph by EugÃ¨ne Delacroix.

Mephistopheles (also Mephistophilus, Mephistophilis, Mephostopheles, Mephisto
and variants) is a name often given to one representation of the devil or
Satan. It is also the name used for the demon in the Faust legend.

## Contents

  * 1 In the Faust legend
  * 2 Outside the Faust legend
  * 3 References
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] In the Faust legend

Further information: Faust

<IMG>

<IMG>

MEPHISTO_PHILES in the 1527 Praxis Magia Faustiana, attributed to Faust.

The name is associated with the Faust legend of a scholar who wagers his soul
against the devil being able to make Faust wish to live, even for a moment,
based on the historical Johann Georg Faust.

The name appears in the late 16th century Faust chapbooks. In the 1725 version
which was read by Goethe, Mephostophiles is a devil in the form of a greyfriar
summoned by Faust in a wood outside Wittenberg. The name Mephistophiles
already appears in the 1527 Praxis Magia Faustiana, printed in Passau,
alongside pseudo-Hebrew text. It is best explained as a purposely obscure
pseudo-Greek or pseudo-Hebrew formation of Renaissance magic.

From the chapbook, the name enters Faustian literature and is also used by
authors from Marlowe down to Goethe. In the 1616 edition of The Tragical
History of Doctor Faustus, Mephostophiles became Mephistophilis.

Burton (1992, p. 61) speculates on Greek elements that may have played a part
in the coining of the name, including Greek mÄ "not", phÅs "light" and
philos "lover", suggesting "not a lover of light" in parody of Lucifer
("light-bearer", a common epithet of Satan); in that case the change from the
presumed original mephoto- to mephist- may be due to a suggestion of Latin
mephitis ("pungent"). Alternately, phosto- may be a variation of "Faust",
yielding "not Faust-loving". Hamlin (2001, p. 9) suggests a derivation from
the Hebrew Mephistoph, meaning "destroyer of the good." Another possibility is
a combination of the Hebrew words mephiz ("liar") and tophel ("destroyer").

Mephistopheles in later treatments of the Faust material frequently figures as
a title character: in Meyer Lutz' Mephistopheles, or Faust and Marguerite
(1855), Arrigo Boito's Mefistofele (1868), Klaus Mann's Mephisto, and Franz
Liszt's Mephisto Waltzes.

## [edit] Outside the Faust legend

Main article: List of cultural references to Mephistopheles

Shakespeare mentions "Mephistophilus" in the Merry Wives of Windsor (Act1,
Sc1, line 128), and by the 17th century, the name had begun to lead an
existence independent of the Faust legend. Burton Russell(1992, p. 61) finds,
"That the name is a purely modern invention of uncertain origins makes it an
elegant symbol of the modern Devil with his many novel and diverse forms."  

## [edit] References

  * Burton Russell, Jeffrey, Mephistopheles: The Devil in the Modern World, Ithaca, NY: Cornell (1986); 1990 reprint: ISBN 978-0801497186
  * Hamlin, Cyrus, et al, "Faust", New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company (2001): ISBN 978-0-393-97282-8

## [edit] External links

  * Mephistopheles at the Internet Movie Database

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to:
Mephistopheles  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mephistopheles"

Categories: Fictional demons | Theatre characters | Characters in Goethe's
Faust | Faust

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 17:30.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



