
# Fantastico (web hosting)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to
improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate.
(June 2008)  
Fantastico is a commercial script library that automates the installation of
web applications to a website. Fantastico scripts are executed from the
administration area of a website control panel such as cPanel. Fantastico's
web site claims that they are installed on ten thousand servers, with a
million users worldwide, which would make it the leading product of its type.

## Contents

  * 1 Typical usage
  * 2 Criticism of Hosting Providers Offering Fantastico
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Typical usage

Fantastico scripts are usually executed when a new website is created, or a
new application is added to an existing website. The scripts typically create
tables in a database, install software, adjust permissions, and modify web
server configuration files. Although Fantastico is typically associated with
open-source software, a handful of scripts are also available that install
proprietary products. Once installed, these are available to all of the
domains hosted by a physical server; such as web site builder SohoLaunch,
PerlDesk customer support software, and AccountLab Plus software for
interacting with Internet registrars.

There are more than 50 applications that have Fantastico scripts associated
with them. The most commonly added systems include:

  1. Web content management system
  2. Shopping cart software
  3. Wikis
  4. Blogs
  5. Photo sharing

A full list of Fantastico-supported applications and versions is available.[1]

## [edit] Criticism of Hosting Providers Offering Fantastico

<IMG>

This section contains weasel words, vague phrasing that often accompanies
biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or
removed. (January 2009)  
Hosting providers offering Fantastico have been criticized [2] [3] in several
areas:

  1. The installation scripts, although easy to use, are frequently not maintained by the ISP or webhost, and thus older releases of products with known security problems are in current use.
  2. The default configuration for many applications may not be secure. So although the systems are easy to set up, it also provides opportunities; for example for spammers to write automated scripts which post spam messages on websites.

Although Fantastico includes its own installers, since open source projects do
not all have the financial and legal resources to prevent third parties from
creating alternate installers, there may be many versions in circulation. In
such circumstances, users may have to shoulder the updating of their scripts
themselves, which is often a technically daunting process for beginners.
However, there are two schools of thought on the matter of recent updates:
eager to improve user experience and heighten security, some[who?] like to
have an update as soon as a new release is available, while others[who?]
prefer to use old IT wisdom, waiting and letting others test a new release to
see if it introduces any new and serious problems, before offering it as an
update to their own client base.

## [edit] See also

  * cPanel \-- the platform which Fantastico runs on.
  * installapp \-- Script Installer for Lxadmin
  * Installatron \-- alternative script installer for cPanel...
  * Softaculous \-- alternative script installer for cPanel

## [edit] References

  1. ^ netenberg.com || creating possibilities
  2. ^ http://www.shaibanii.com/2008/09/why-you-shouldnt-use-fantastico-for-anything/
  3. ^ http://drupal.org/forum/fantastico-de-luxe

## [edit] External links

  * Netenberg \-- the developer of Fantastico.
  * (French) Fantastico, Systeme automatique d'installation de scripts. Scripts installer \-- references and details of Fantastico script installer
  * Fantastico De Luxe: an Insecure Recipe for Disaster \-- a disclaimer at the Drupal website, an open source project which is commonly installed by Fantastico.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fantastico_(web_hosting)"

Categories: Web hosting

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2008 |
Articles with weasel words from January 2009 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 April 2009, at 06:58 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



