
# Dewey Decimal Classification

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the similar-sounding base-12 numeral system, see Duodecimal.

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)  
The Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC, also called the Dewey Decimal System)
is a proprietary system of library classification developed by Melvil Dewey in
1876, and has been greatly modified and expanded through 22 major revisions,
the most recent in 2004. This system organizes books on library shelves in a
specific and repeatable order that makes it easy to find any book and return
it to its proper place.

A designation such as Dewey 16 refers to the 16th edition of the DDC.

## Contents

  * 1 How it works
  * 2 DDC compared to other classification systems
  * 3 Ownership and administration
  * 4 Editions and publication
  * 5 Classes
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] How it works

The DDC attempts to organize all knowledge into ten main classes. The ten main
classes are each further subdivided into ten divisions, and each division into
ten sections, giving ten main classes, 100 divisions and 1000 sections. DDC's
advantage in using decimals for its categories allows it to be both purely
numerical and infinitely hierarchical. It also uses some aspects of a faceted
classification scheme, combining elements from different parts of the
structure to construct a number representing the subject content (often
combining two subject elements with linking numbers and geographical and
temporal elements) and form of an item rather than drawing upon a list
containing each class and its meaning.

Except for general works and fiction, works are classified principally by
subject, with extensions for subject relationships, place, time or type of
material, producing classification numbers of at least three digits but
otherwise of indeterminate length with a decimal point before the fourth
digit, where present (e.g. 330 for economics \+ .9 for geographic treatment +
.04 for Europe = 330.94 European economy; 973 for United States \+ .05 form
division for periodicals = 973.05 periodicals concerning the United States
generally).

Books are placed on the shelf in increasing numerical order of the decimal
number, e.g. 050, 220, 330, 330.973, 331. When two books have the same
classification number the second line of the call number (usually the first
letter or letters of the author's last name, the title if there is no
identifiable author) is placed in alphabetical order.

It is a common misconception that all books in the DDC are non-fiction. The
DDC has a number for all books, including fiction: American fiction is
classified in 813. Most libraries create a separate fiction section to allow
shelving in a more generalized fashion than Dewey provides for, or to avoid
the space that would be taken up in the 800s.

## [edit] DDC compared to other classification systems

For more details on this topic, see Comparison of Dewey and Library of
Congress subject classification.

<IMG>

This section may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(November 2008)  
DDC's numbers formed the basis of the more expressive but complex Universal
Decimal Classification (UDC), which combines the basic Dewey numbers with
selected punctuation marks (comma, colon, parentheses etc.). Besides its
frequent revision, DDC's main advantage over its chief American rival, the
Library of Congress Classification system developed shortly afterward, is its
simplicity. Thanks to the use of pure notation, a mnemonics system and a
hierarchical decimal place system, it is generally easier to use.

DDC and UDC are more flexible than Library of Congress Classification because
of greater use of facets (via auxiliary tables) while Library of Congress
Classification is almost totally enumerative.

DDC's decimal system means that it is less hospitable to the addition of new
subjects, as opposed to Library of Congress Classification, which has 21
classes at the top level. DDC notations can be much longer compared to other
classification systems.

Another disadvantage of DDC is that it was developed in the 19th century
essentially by one man and was built on a top-down approach to classify all
human knowledge, which makes it difficult to adapt to changing fields of
knowledge. The Library of Congress Classification system was developed based
mainly on the idea of literary warrant; classes were added (by individual
experts in each area) only when needed for works owned by the Library of
Congress. As a result, while the Library of Congress Classification system was
able to incorporate changes and additions of new branches of knowledge,
particularly in the fields of engineering and computer science (the greater
hospitability of the Library of Congress Classification was also a factor),
DDC has been criticized for being inadequate in covering those areas. It is
asserted that, as a result, most major academic libraries in the US do not use
the DDC because the classification of works in those areas is not specific
enough, although there are other reasons that may truly be more weighty, such
as the much lower expense of using a unique "pre-packaged" catalog number
instead of having highly skilled staff members engaging in the time-consuming
development of catalog numbers.

The Library of Congress Classification system is not without problems. Because
each area is developed by an expert according to demands of cataloging, there
is little consistency. It is also highly US-centric (more so than DDC) because
of the nature of the system, and it has been translated into far fewer
languages than DDC and UDC.

## [edit] Ownership and administration

The Online Computer Library Center of Dublin, Ohio acquired the trademark and
copyrights associated with the DDC when it bought Forest Press in 1988. OCLC
maintains the classification system and publishes new editions of the system.
The work of assigning a DDC number to each newly published book is performed
by a division of the Library of Congress, whose recommended assignments are
either accepted or rejected by the OCLC after review by an advisory board; to
date all have been accepted.

In September 2003, the OCLC sued the Library Hotel for trademark infringement.
The settlement was that the OCLC would allow the Library Hotel to use the
system in its hotel and marketing. In exchange, the Hotel would acknowledge
the Center's ownership of the trademark and make a donation to a nonprofit
organization promoting reading and literacy among children.

## [edit] Editions and publication

The DDC is updated by an editorial staff based partly at the Library of
Congress and partly at OCLC. Their work is reviewed by the Decimal
Classification Editorial Policy Committee (EPC), which is a ten-member
international board that meets twice each year. The four-volume unabridged
edition is published approximately every seven years, the most recent edition
(DDC 22) in mid 2003.[1] The web edition is updated on an ongoing basis, with
changes announced each month.[2]

## [edit] Classes

Main article: List of Dewey Decimal classes

The system is made up of ten main classes or categories, each divided into ten
secondary classes or subcategories, each having ten subdivisions.

  * 000 â Computer science, information, and general works
  * 100 â Philosophy and psychology
  * 200 â Religion
  * 300 â Social sciences
  * 400 â Languages
  * 500 â Science and Mathematics
  * 600 â Technology and applied science
  * 700 â Arts and recreation
  * 800 â Literature
  * 900 â History and geography and biography

## [edit] See also

  * ACM Computing Classification System
  * Bliss bibliographic classification
  * Brinkler classification
  * Chinese Library Classification
  * Colon classification
  * Cutter Expansive Classification
  * Harvard-Yenching Classification
  * Korean Decimal Classification
  * The Library Hotel
  * Library of Congress Classification
  * Comparison of Dewey and Library of Congress subject classification
  * Mathematics Subject Classification
  * New Classification Scheme for Chinese Libraries
  * Nippon Decimal Classification
  * Universal Decimal Classification

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Latest versions - OCLC - Dewey Services
  2. ^ Updates - OCLC - Dewey Services

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)  
## [edit] External links

  * Complete list of Dewey Decimal Classes
  * OCLC's Dewey Decimal website
  * Full text of A Classification and Subject Index for Cataloguing and Arranging the Books and Pamphlets of a Library (Dewey Decimal Classification) (1876) from Project Gutenberg
  * "What's so great about the Dewey Decimal System?" at Straight Dope, 31 January 2006
  * A History of the D.D.C. System and its Creator Melville Dewey by University of British Columbia's mission, the School of Library, Archival and Information Studies
  * A Dewey Decimal System Tutorial by the Illinois State Library, funded by the Gates Foundation
  * An annotated bibliography on Library Classification and Subject Approaches to Information by Salman Haider, Librarian (Cataloging), US Library of Congress, New Delhi Overseas Office
  * http://www.deweybrowse.org/ Browse to (some) sites and articles by DDC numbers

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dewey_Decimal_Classification"

Categories: Library cataloging and classification | Knowledge representation

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2009 |
Articles that may contain original research since November 2008 | All articles
that may contain original research | Articles needing additional references
from November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Cebuano
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 03:52.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



