
# OGame

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

OGame  
<IMG>  
  
Developer(s) Gameforge AG  
Engine PHP  
Version 0.84  
Platform(s) Web browser  
Release date(s) 2002  
Genre(s) Real-time text-based MMO  
Rating(s) 7.8/10 on GameOgre[1]  
Media Internet  
System requirements Web browser, Internet access  
Input methods Keyboard, mouse  
OGame is a text-based, resource-management and space-war themed massively
multiplayer online browser game with over two million accounts.[2] OGame was
created in 2000 and is produced and maintained by Gameforge AG.[3][4][dead
link]. OGame is available in multiple different languages, while different
nationalities have their own communities. The game does not differ between the
nationality communities except in rare cases. Players are generally informed
of news and other things such as changes in rules or new versions through the
official forums [5].

As of February 11, 2009, OGame.org has a total of 43 universes and one Beta
testing universe that is testing the new redesign. More are being added
periodically. OGame also hosts the "pr0game" universe, with different rules,
currently listed on OGame.org as Universe 35.

## Contents

  * 1 Gameplay
    * 1.1 Alliances
    * 1.2 Purchased effects
      * 1.2.1 Commander
      * 1.2.2 Officers
      * 1.2.3 Merchants
  * 2 Rules
  * 3 Awards
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Gameplay

All OGame universes consist of three classifications: galaxies, systems, and
planet slots. All universes have 9 galaxies, each with 499 systems, which have
15 planet slots. Sending fleets between different galaxies takes the longest
time, whereas sending a fleet within the same system takes the least time.

Each player starts with one planet at a randomly assigned coordinate between
slots 4 and 12, in a random system and galaxy. The first planet always
consists of 163 fields, which determine how many building upgrades can be
built on the planet, regardless of the slot in the player's system. The
player's empire can consist of up to 9 planets in any unoccupied planet slot.
All construction, research, and missions are performed and launched from a
planet or moon. Development is done through using three resources: metal,
crystal, and deuterium, and also energy and dark matter. There are different
ways to obtain these resources, including mining and trading. Players are
ranked according to their points, one point is awarded for every one thousand
resource units invested in a construction, research, or defence. No points are
given for unspent resources.

Unlike many other real-time strategy games, OGame does not give the player
constant control of his or her spacecraft. Instead, the player sends the
ship(s) to a location (using the game's coordinate system) and what to do when
the fleet arrives. In OGame, combat is resolved when fleets and/or defenses
meet. The combat takes place instantly and consists of 1 to 6 rounds. Fleet
attacks are usually aimed to obtain other player's resources, although fleet
attacks can also be done to destroy an opponent's fleet and collect the debris
field created from the battle. Defenses are built to defend a planet against
an attacking enemy fleet.

### [edit] Alliances

An alliance is a group of players who have banded together and is mostly used
for solidarity purposes. Alliances are created for players to protect each
other from attacks, join together to raid other planets, or to promote free
trade amongst members. Members of an alliance can use the ACS (Alliance Combat
System), available in some universes, to synchronize fleet movements and
missions with members of the same alliance and temporarily deploy a fleet on
an ally's planet.

### [edit] Purchased effects

All purchased effects are paid with Dark Matter, which can be purchased from
Gameforge with real currency. Dark Matter can also be obtained in much lower
quantities, through in-game expedition missions.

#### [edit] Commander

The Commander provides improved functionality and user interface to the
player. Features include a building queue which allows the player the ability
to order the construction of up to 5 buildings at a time. The player also gets
an âEmpire Viewâ that shows all details on every planet including ships,
defenses, resources, and energy. Other benefits include message filters,
shortcuts, an improved galaxy view and commands, and no advertisements.
Commander was the original officer, giving no direct benefits to the game,
only improved versions of currently existing processes.

#### [edit] Officers

On February 16, 2007, Officers were introduced to the game. The officer
feature gives players a real advantage in the game, for a price, while those
who cannot afford it, or do not have a method of paying for it, go without it.
It is worth noting that GameForge had previously promised its users it would
never introduce pay-to-play options that provided direct benefits, and the
change thus caused a large scale of conflict in the community.

The 5 officers types are:

  * OGame Commander: Allows a building queue, shows a complete empire view, improves galaxy view, allows message filtering, adds shortcuts, removes advertisements. This was a feature offered before February 16th. It gave no direct benefits to gameplay, only an improved user interface.
  * Fleet Admiral: Increases amount of open fleet slots by 2.
  * Engineer: Reduces the losses of defensive structure during an attack by half and gives 10% more energy.
  * Geologist: Increases metal mine, crystal mine and deuterium synthesizer production by 10%.
  * Technocrat: Increases the espionage level for espionage probes by 2 and decreases research time by 25%.

#### [edit] Merchants

Players can hire a merchant using dark matter to trade one resource type for
another. The amount of resources traded is limited to the amount of free space
in one's storage buildings and the amount of dark matter the player has.

## [edit] Rules

OGame is monitored by Game Operators, also known as GOs, Super Game Operators
and Game Administrators each of whom have the rights to ban any player
suspected of misconduct and violation of the rules. The rules can be different
for each OGame universe.[6] Players who have been banned are put into the
pillory [7] of their universe. The pillory shows the reason of banning and the
administrator who made the decision. It also shows the unbanning of a player
when they have clarified the fault. The planets of players that have received
lifelong bans are subject to the one month account deletion due to inactivity.
However, if the banned player has purchased Dark Matter, their accounts will
not be deleted. Deleting these accounts would be, as claimed by GameForge
staff, a violation of German law.

## [edit] Awards

OGame won the bronze Superbrowsergame Award in 2006.[8]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ OGame : Online Games Review Directory 20 February 2009
  2. ^ OGame
  3. ^ www.heise.de article (German)
  4. ^ www.br-online.de article (German)
  5. ^ Official OGame forum
  6. ^ Game rules
  7. ^ Pillory
  8. ^ "Special: Die Wahl zum Superbrowsergame 2006 hat gewonnen ... - Druckversion" (in German). Gamesdynamite. 2006-10-04. http://bgs.gdynamite.de/print_special_853.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-23. (German)

## [edit] External links

  * Official English OGame website
  * Gameforge
  * OGame US website
  * OGame, an external wiki
  * OGame at GameFAQs

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OGame"

Categories: Browser-based games | German games | Online games | Massively
multiplayer online real-time strategy games | MMORPGs in space | Multiplayer
browser-based games

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 13:13 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



