
# LINPACK

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (March 2009)  
LINPACK is a software library for performing numerical linear algebra on
digital computers. It was written in Fortran by Jack Dongarra, Jim Bunch,
Cleve Moler, and Pete Stewart, and was intended for use on supercomputers in
the 1970s and early 1980s. It has been largely superseded by LAPACK, which
will run more efficiently on modern architectures.

LINPACK makes use of the BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms) libraries for
performing basic vector and matrix operations.

The LINPACK Benchmarks are a measure of a system's floating point computing
power. Introduced by Jack Dongarra, they measure how fast a computer solves a
dense N by N system of linear equations Ax=b, which is a common task in
engineering. The solution is obtained by Gaussian elimination with partial
pivoting, with 2/3Â·N3 \+ 2Â·N2 floating point operations. The result is
reported in millions of floating point operations per second (MFLOP/s,
sometimes simply called FLOPS).

For large-scale distributed-memory systems, HPL, a portable implementation of
the High-Performance LINPACK Benchmark, is used as a performance measure for
ranking supercomputers in the TOP500 list of the world's fastest computers.
(There is now also a Green500 list ranking the machines on the TOP500 list
based on energy efficiency, in FLOPs per Watt.) The HPC benchmark is run for
different matrix sizes N searching for the size Nmax for which the maximal
performance Rmax is obtained. The benchmark also reports the problem size N1/2
where half of the performance (Rmax/2) is achieved.

## [edit] External links

  * http://www.netlib.org/linpack/
  * http://www.netlib.org/blas/
  * http://www.top500.org/ Top500
  * http://www.netlib.org/benchmark/linpackjava/ a web-based LINPACK benchmark
  * http://www.netlib.org/benchmark/hpl/ The HPL benchmark used in the TOP500
  * Source code, pre-compiled versions and results for PCs
  * http://www.green500.org/ Green500

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LINPACK"

Categories: Fortran libraries | Supercomputers | Computer benchmarks |
Numerical software

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 06:53 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



