
# Internet exchange point

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

An Internet exchange point (IX or IXP) is a physical infrastructure that
allows different Internet service providers (ISPs) to exchange Internet
traffic between their networks (autonomous systems) by means of mutual peering
agreements, which allow traffic to be exchanged without cost. IXPs reduce the
portion of an ISP's traffic which must be delivered via their upstream transit
providers, thereby reducing the Average Per-Bit Delivery Cost of their
service. Furthermore, the increased number of paths learned through the IXP
improves routing efficiency and fault-tolerance.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The main building of the LINX

The primary purpose of an IXP is to allow networks to interconnect directly,
via the exchange, rather than through one or more 3rd party networks. The
advantages of the direct interconnection are numerous, but the primary reasons
are cost, latency, and bandwidth. Traffic passing through an exchange is
typically not billed by any party, whereas traffic to an ISP's upstream
provider is. The direct interconnection, often located in the same city as
both networks, avoids the need for data to travel to other cities (potentially
on other continents) to get from one network to another, thus reducing
latency. The third advantage, speed, is most noticeable in areas that have
poorly developed long-distance connections. ISPs in these regions might have
to pay between 10 or 100 times more for data transport than ISPs in North
America, Europe or Japan. Therefore, these ISPs typically have slower, more
limited connections to the rest of the internet. However, a connection to a
local IXP may allow them to transfer data without limit, and without cost,
vastly improving the bandwidth between customers of the two adjacent ISPs.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An optical fiber photonic switch at the AMS-IX

A typical IXP consists of one or more network switches, to which each of the
participating ISPs connect. Prior to the existence of switches, IXPs typically
utilized FOIRL hubs or FDDI rings, migrating to Ethernet and FDDI switches as
those became available in 1993 and 1994. ATM switches were briefly used at a
few IXPs in the late 1990s, accounting for approximately 4% of the market at
their peak, and there was an abortive attempt by the Stockholm IXP, NetNod, to
use SRP/DPT (an ill-fated conjoinment of FDDI and SONET), but Ethernet has
prevailed, accounting for more than 95% of all existing Internet exchange
switch fabrics. All Ethernet port speeds are to be found at modern IXPs,
ranging from 10 Mbit/s ports in use in small developing-country IXes, to
ganged 10 Gbit/s ports in major centers like Seoul, New York, London,
Frankfurt, Amsterdam, and Palo Alto.

When an IXP incurs any operating costs, those costs are typically shared among
all of its participants. At the more expensive exchanges, participants pay a
monthly or annual fee, usually determined by the speed of the port or ports
which they're using, or much less commonly by the volume of traffic which
they're passing across the exchange (fees based on volume of traffic are
unpopular because they provide a counterincentive to growth of the exchange).
Some exchanges also have a setup fee, to offset the costs of the switch port
and any media adaptors (GBICs, SFPs, XFPs, XENPAKs, et cetera) which the new
participant requires, and the labor of configuring it to serve them.

## [edit] Interchange of traffic across an Internet Exchange Point

A connection to an IXP does not by itself cause any traffic to be exchanged;
it is a physical presence on a shared medium, nothing more.

In order to have Internet traffic flow between two participants on an IXP, the
two participants must initiate BGP peering between themselves, and choose to
announce routes over the peering relationship - either routes to their own
addresses, or routes to addresses of other ISPs that they connect to, possibly
via other mechanisms. The other party to the peering can then apply route
filtering, where it chooses to accept those routes, and route traffic
accordingly, or to ignore those routes, and use other routes to reach those
addresses.

In many cases, an ISP will both have a direct link to another ISP and accept a
route (normally ignored) to the other ISP through the IXP; if the direct link
fails, traffic will then start flowing over the IXP. In this way, the IXP acts
as a backup link.

## [edit] See also

  * List of Internet exchange points
  * List of Internet exchange points by size

## [edit] External links

  * Packet Clearing House: Directory of Internet Exchange Points
  * Internet Exchanges at the Open Directory Project
  * Exchange point information
  * PeeringDB
  * Internet exchange points
  * European Internet Exchange Association

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_exchange_point"

Categories: Internet exchange points | Routing | Wide area networks

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * àº¥àº²àº§
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 March 2009, at 15:33 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



