
# AIBO

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date
information. Please help improve the article by updating it. There may be
information on the talk page.  
<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2007)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The AIBO ERS-7 resembles a small dog

AIBO (Artificial Intelligence roBOt, homonymous with "pal" in Japanese) was
one of several types of robotic pets designed and manufactured by Sony; there
have been several different models since their introduction in 1999. AIBO was
discontinued in 2006.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Breed lineage
    * 2.1 First generation models
    * 2.2 Second generation models
    * 2.3 Third Generation models
  * 3 See also
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

Being able to walk, "see" its environment via camera, and recognize spoken
commands, the AIBO robotic pets are considered to be autonomous robots, since
they are able to learn and mature based on external stimuli from their owner
or environment, or from other AIBOs. Artist Hajime Sorayama created the
initial designs for the AIBO.

On January 26, 2006 Sony announced that it would discontinue AIBO and several
other products as of March, 2006. It will also stop development of the QRIO
robot. AIBO will still be supported until 2013 (ERS7 model), however, and AIBO
technology will continue to be developed for use in other consumer products.
[1] [2] AIBOware (the name is a trademark of Sony corporation), is the title
given to the software the AIBO runs on its pink Memory Stick. The Life
AIBOware allows the robot to be raised from pup to fully grown adult while
going through various stages of development as its owner interacts with it.
The Explorer AIBOware allows the owner to interact with a fully mature robot
able to understand (though not necessarily willing to obey) 100 voice
commands. Without the AIBOware, the AIBO will run in what is called "clinic
mode" and can only perform basic actions.

Many AIBO owners enjoy teaching their pets new behaviors by reprogramming them
(in Sony's special 'R-CODE' language). However, in October 2001, Sony sent a
cease-and-desist notice to the webmaster of aibopet.com/aibohack.com,
demanding that he stop distributing code that was retrieved by bypassing the
copy protection mechanisms of the robot. Eventually, in the face of many
outraged AIBO owners, see the protest letter, Sony released a programmer's kit
for 'non-commercial' use. The kit has now been expanded into three distinct
tools: R-CODE, AIBO Remote Framework, and the OPEN-R SDK. These three tools
are combined under the name AIBO SDE (Software Development Environment). All
of these tools are free to download and can be used for commercial or non-
commercial use (Except for the OPEN-R SDK, which is specifically for non-
commercial use). Since the first release of OPEN-R, several AIBO programming
tools have been developed by university labs, including URBI, Tekkotsu, Pyro
and Cognitive Vision.

<IMG>

<IMG>

AIBO playing with kids

The AIBO has seen use as an inexpensive platform for artificial intelligence
research, because it integrates a computer, vision system, and articulators in
a package vastly cheaper than conventional research robots. The RoboCup
autonomous soccer competition had a "RoboCup Four-Legged Robot Soccer League"
in which numerous institutions from around the world would participate.
Competitors would program a team of AIBO robots to play games of autonomous
robot soccer against other competing teams.

AIBO's complete vision system uses the SIFT algorithm, to recognise its
charging station. The newest versions are equipped with a Wi-Fi connection,
allowing them to send the pictures they take via email. As a result, the
Roblog originated.

AIBO's sounds were programmed by Japanese DJ/avant-garde composer Nobukazu
Takemura, considered by many to be highly skilled at fusing mechanic and
organic concepts.[citation needed] The bodies of the "3x" series (Latte and
Macaron, the round-headed AIBOs released in 2001) were designed by visual
artist Katsura Moshino.

The AIBO and the rest of Sony's artificial intelligence program was
discontinued after 2005 in Sony's effort to make the company more profitable.

## [edit] Breed lineage

After model name: body color choices; release date; units sold.

### [edit] First generation models

<IMG>

<IMG>

AIBO models ERS-210 (left) and ERS-111 (right)

  * ERS-110: silver; began sales 1 June 1999 for delivery in August; limited production of 3,000 for Japan and 2,000 for the USA
  * ERS-111: grey and black; November 1999; 60,000 (estimated)

### [edit] Second generation models

  * ERS-210: black, silver, gold, red, blue, green, white (3 hues), champagne, etc.; 2001
  * ERS-210A: several colors; 2002
  * ERS-220: silver; 2002 (also available as a conversion kit for the ERS-210)
  * ERS-311 "Latte": cream; 2001
  * ERS-311b "Latte": cream; 2002
  * ERS-312 "Macaron": black; 2001
  * ERS-31L "Pug": brown; 2002
  * ERS-210A: cyber blue; 2003

Estimated sales for all second generation models: 60,000

### [edit] Third Generation models

  * ERS-7: white; November 2003
  * ERS-7M2: white and black; November 2004
  * ERS-7M3: white, black, and champagne brown (called honey brown in Japan); October 2005

Estimated sales for all third generation models: 40,000 to 50,000

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Robotics portal  
  * Domestic robot
  * i-Cybie, another robotic dog
  * Furby, a robot which lent many concepts to the creation of AIBO
  * Sony CISC, which gives telephone technical support for AIBO
  * QRIO, a humanoid robot also developed by Sony
  * Asimo, a humanoid robot
  * Pleo, robotic dinosaur

## [edit] External links

  * Sony Develops OPEN-R Architecture for Entertainment Robots
  * Sony Launches Four-Legged Entertainment Robot

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AIBO"

Categories: Robot Hall of Fame | Virtual pets | Robotics at Sony |
Entertainment robots | Biomorphic robots | 1999 introductions | Artistic and
performing robots

Hidden categories: Articles with obsolete information | Articles lacking
sources from September 2007 | All articles lacking sources | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 21:46.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



