
# Fuzzy set

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Fuzzy sets are sets whose elements have degrees of membership. Fuzzy sets have
been introduced by Lotfi A. Zadeh (1965) as an extension of the classical
notion of set.[1] In classical set theory, the membership of elements in a set
is assessed in binary terms according to a bivalent condition â an element
either belongs or does not belong to the set. By contrast, fuzzy set theory
permits the gradual assessment of the membership of elements in a set; this is
described with the aid of a membership function valued in the real unit
interval [0, 1]. Fuzzy sets generalize classical sets, since the indicator
functions of classical sets are special cases of the membership functions of
fuzzy sets, if the latter only take values 0 or 1.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Definition
  * 2 Fuzzy logic
  * 3 Fuzzy number
  * 4 Fuzzy interval
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Definition

A fuzzy set is a pair (A,m) where A is a set and m : A \\rightarrow \[0,1\].

For each x\\in A, m(x) is the grade of membership of x. If A = {x1,...,xn} the
fuzzy set (A,m) can be denoted {m(x1) / x1,...,m(xn) / xn}.

An element mapping to the value 0 means that the member is not included in the
fuzzy set, 1 describes a fully included member. Values strictly between 0 and
1 characterize the fuzzy members.[3] The set \\{x\\in A\\mid m\(x\)>0\\} is
called the support of the fuzzy set (A,m) and the set \\{x\\in A\\mid
m\(x\)=1\\} is called the kernel of the fuzzy set (A,m).

Sometimes, a more general definition is used, where membership functions take
values in an arbitrary fixed algebra or structure L; usually it is required
that L be at least a poset or lattice. The usual membership functions with
values in [0, 1] are then called [0, 1]-valued membership functions. This
generalization was first considered in 1967 by Joseph Goguen, who was a
student of Zadeh.[4]

## [edit] Fuzzy logic

Main article: Fuzzy logic

As an extension of the case of multi-valued logic, valuations (\\mu :
\\mathit{V}_o \\to \\mathit{W}) of propositional variables (Vo) into a set of
membership degrees (W) can be thought of as membership functions mapping
predicates into fuzzy sets (or more formally, into an ordered set of fuzzy
pairs, called a fuzzy relation). With these valuations, many-valued logic can
be extended to allow for fuzzy premises from which graded conclusions may be
drawn.[5]

This extension is sometimes called "fuzzy logic in the narrow sense" as
opposed to "fuzzy logic in the wider sense," which originated in the
engineering fields of automated control and knowledge engineering, and which
encompasses many topics involving fuzzy sets and "approximated reasoning."[6]

Industrial applications of fuzzy sets in the context of "fuzzy logic in the
wider sense" can be found at fuzzy logic.

## [edit] Fuzzy number

A fuzzy number is a convex, normalized fuzzy set
\\tilde{\\mathit{A}}\\subseteq\\mathbb{R} whose membership function is at
least segmentally continuous and has the functional value Î¼A(x) = 1 at
precisely one element. This can be likened to the funfair game "guess your
weight," where someone guesses the contestant's weight, with closer guesses
being more correct, and where the guesser "wins" if he or she guesses near
enough to the contestant's weight, with the actual weight being completely
correct (mapping to 1 by the membership function).

## [edit] Fuzzy interval

A fuzzy interval is an uncertain set \\tilde{\\mathit{A}}\\subseteq\\mathbb{R}
with a mean interval whose elements possess the membership function value
Î¼A(x) = 1. As in fuzzy numbers, the membership function must be convex,
normalized, at least segmentally continuous.[7]

## [edit] See also

  * Alternative set theory
  * Defuzzification
  * Fuzzy measure theory
  * Fuzzy set operations
  * Fuzzy subalgebra
  * Linear partial information
  * Neuro-fuzzy
  * Rough fuzzy hybridization
  * Rough set
  * Type-2 Fuzzy Sets and Systems
  * Uncertainty

## [edit] External links

  * Uncertainty model Fuzziness

  * ScholarPedia [1]
  * The Algorithm of Fuzzy Analysis
  * Fuzzy Image Processing
  * Zadeh's 1965 paper on Fuzzy Sets

## [edit] References

  1. ^ L. A. Zadeh (1965) "Fuzzy sets". Information and Control 8 (3) 338â353.
  2. ^ D. Dubois and H. Prade (1988) Fuzzy Sets and Systems. Academic Press, New York.
  3. ^ AAAI http://www.aaai.org/aitopics/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/AITopics/FuzzyLogic
  4. ^ Goguen, Joseph A., 1967, "L-fuzzy sets". Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications 18: 145â174
  5. ^ Gottwald, Siegfried, 2001. A Treatise on Many-Valued Logics. Baldock, Hertfordshire, England: Research Studies Press Ltd., ISBN 978-0863802621
    * Zadeh, Lotfi A.
  6. ^ "The concept of a linguistic variable and its application to approximate reasoning," Information Sciences 8: 199â249, 301â357; 9: 43â80.
  7. ^ "Fuzzy sets as a basis for a theory of possibility," Fuzzy Sets and Systems 1: 3â28

## [edit] External links

  * Fuzzy Systems Journal http://www.elsevier.com/wps/find/journaldescription.cws_home/505545/description#description

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuzzy_set"

Categories: Fuzzy logic | Systems of set theory

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 14:09.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



