
# Coral Content Distribution Network

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (April 2009)  
Coral Content Distribution Network

<IMG>  
Developed by Link  
Operating system Cross-platform (web-based application)  
Type P2P Web cache  
Website www.coralcdn.org  
The Coral Content Distribution Network, sometimes called Coral Cache or Coral,
is a free peer-to-peer content distribution network. Coral uses the bandwidth
of volunteers to mirror web content, often to avoid the Slashdot Effect or to
reduce the load on websites in general.

## Contents

  * 1 Operation
  * 2 Usage
  * 3 History
  * 4 Problems
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Operation

One of Coral's key goals is to avoid ever creating 'hot spots' of very high
traffic, as these might dissuade volunteers from running the software out of a
fear that spikes in server load may occur. It achieves this through an
indexing abstraction called a distributed sloppy hash table (DSHT); DSHTs
create self-organizing clusters of nodes that fetch information from each
other to avoid communicating with more distant or heavily-loaded servers.

The sloppy hash table refers to the fact that coral is made up of concentric
rings of distributed hash tables (DHTs), each ring representing a wider and
wider geographic range (or rather, ping range). The DHTs are composed of nodes
all within some latency of each other (for example, a ring of nodes within 20
milliseconds of each other). It avoids hot spots (the 'sloppy' part) by only
continuing to query progressively larger sized rings if they are not
overburdened. In other words, if the two top-most rings rings are experiencing
too much traffic, a node will just ping closer ones: when a node that is
overloaded is reached, upward progression stops. This minimises the occurrence
of hot spots, with the disadvantage that knowledge of the system as a whole is
reduced.

Requests from users are directed to a relatively close node, which then finds
the file on the coral DSHT and forwards it to the user.

## [edit] Usage

A website can be accessed through the Coral Cache by adding `.nyud.net` to the
hostname in the site's URL, resulting in what is known as a 'coralized link'.
So, for example, `http://example.com` becomes http://example.com.nyud.net.

## [edit] History

The project has been in an open beta testing phase since March 2004, during
which it has been hosted on PlanetLab, a large scale distributed research
network of 400 servers but not, as ultimately intended, third party volunteer
systems. Of those 400 servers, about 275 are currently running Coral. The
source code is freely available under the terms of the GNU GPL.

Coral Cache gained notoriety in the aftermath of the 2004 Indian Ocean
earthquake, when it was used to allow access to otherwise inaccessible videos
of the resulting tsunami.

## [edit] Problems

Some web filtering software packages, such as Websense and OpenDNS, block
access to the Coral Cache as it is seen as a form of proxy avoidance.

## [edit] See also

  * Dijjer
  * Codeen Cache system
  * Content Delivery Network

## [edit] External links

  * CoralCDN Project
  * Academic paper (NSDI 04) describing CoralCDN

Retrieved from
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coral_Content_Distribution_Network"

Categories: Distributed data sharing

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 04:34 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



