
# Hand to hand combat

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

U.S. Army Combatives program Creator Matt Larsen uses a chokehold on an
opponent in hand-to-hand combat training.

Hand-to-hand combat (sometimes abbreviated as HTH or H2H) is a generic term
often referring to weaponless fighting conducted from a military based point
of view. This distinguishes it from combat sport. The phrase "hand-to-hand"
indicates unarmed combat but often allows for the consideration of weapons
usage and implementation.

Close combat is the common term for combat within close range. It may include
lethal and nonlethal methods across a "spectrum of violence" or within a
"continuum of force" as established by rules of engagement. Unarmed close
combat is sometimes called combatives. Close combat with weapons may be called
close quarter battle at the squad level. Current NATO terminology is to use
MOUT for higher-level strategic and tactical considerations of urban warfare
or MOOTW for "military operations other than war" such as peacekeeping or
disaster relief.

Combatives is a term used to describe various hybrid martial arts, which
incorporate techniques from several different martial arts and combat sports.

## Contents

  * 1 Definitions
  * 2 History
  * 3 Military instructors
  * 4 Former military instructors and Civilian instructors
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
    * 6.1 Further reading
  * 7 External links
    * 7.1 Articles

  
## [edit] Definitions

As defined by U.S. Army FM 3-25.150 Combatives:

>     1-1. Hand-to-hand combat- Hand-to-hand combat is an engagement between
two or more persons with or without hand-held weapons such as knives, sticks,
or projectile weapons within the range of physical contact.

>     1-2. Combatives- Combatives are the techniques and tactics useful to
Soldiers involved in Hand-to-hand combat. Proficiency in Combatives is one of
the fundamental building blocks for training the modern Soldier.

## [edit] History

War(fare)

<IMG><IMG><IMG>

Military history  
Eras

Prehistoric  
Ancient  
Medieval  
Gunpowder  
Industrial  
Modern  
Battlespace

Air  
Information  
Land  
Sea  
Space  
Weapons

Armor  
Artillery  
Biological  
Cavalry  
Chemical  
Electronic  
Infantry  
Nuclear  
Psychological  
  
Tactics

Attrition warfare  
Guerrilla warfare  
Maneuver warfare  
Siege  
Total war  
Trench warfare  
Conventional warfare  
Unconventional warfare  
Asymmetric warfare  
Counter-insurgency  
Network-centric warfare  
Strategy

Economic  
Grand  
Operational  
Organization

Ranks  
Command and control  
Staff  
Intelligence  
Education and training  
Logistics

Technology and equipment  
Materiel  
Supply chain management  
Lists

Battles  
Commanders  
Operations  
Sieges  
Writers  
Wars  
War crimes  
Weapons  
Portal v â¢ d â¢ e  
Close combat is the most ancient form of fighting known to man. A majority of
cultures have their own particular histories related to close combat, and
their own methods of practice. There are many varieties within the martial
arts, including boxing and wrestling. Other variations include the gladiator
spectacles of ancient Rome and medieval tournament events such as jousting.

Military organizations have always taught some sort of unarmed combat for
conditioning and as a supplement to armed combat. Soldiers in China were
trained in unarmed combat as early as the Zhou Dynasty (1022 BC to 256 BC).[1]

Despite major technological changes such as the use of gunpowder in the
Napoleonic wars, the machine gun in the Russo-Japanese War and the trench
warfare of World War I, hand-to-hand fighting methods such as bayonet remained
common in modern military training, though the importance of formal training
declined after 1918. During the Second World War, bayonet fighting was often
not taught at all among the major combatants;[citation needed] German rifles
by 1944 were even being produced without bayonet lugs.

Sometimes called close combat, Close Quarters Combat, or CQC, World War II era
American combatives were largely codified by William Ewart Fairbairn and Eric
Anthony Sykes. Also known for their eponymous Fairbairn-Sykes fighting knife,
Fairbairn and Sykes had worked in the Shanghai Municipal Police (SMP) and
helped teach the British armed forces [3] a quick and effective and simple
technique for fighting with or without weapons in melee situations. Similar
training was provided to British Commandos, the Devil's Brigade, OSS, U.S.
Army Rangers and Marine Raiders. Fairbairn at one point called this system
Defendu and published on it, as did his American colleague Rex Applegate.
Fairbairn often referred to the technique as "gutter fighting," a term which
Applegate used, along with "the Fairbairn system." In practice, such military
systems are the fruit of dozens and even hundreds of dedicated instructors and
personnel, known and unknown.

Other combatives systems having their origins in the modern military include
Chinese Sanshou, Soviet sambo and Systema, Israeli Kapap and Krav Maga.

The prevalence and style of combatives training often changes based on
perceived need, and even in times of peace, special forces and commando units
tend to place higher emphasis on close combat than most personnel, as will
paramilitary units such as police SWAT teams.

De-emphasized in major militaries after World War II, insurgency conflicts
such as the Vietnam War, low intensity conflict and urban warfare tend to
encourage more attention to combatives. The general discipline of close-
proximity fighting with weapons is often called Close Quarters Battle (CQB) at
the platoon or squad level, or Military Operations on Urban Terrain (MOUT) at
higher tactical levels.

The current Marine Corps Martial Arts Program (MCMAP) replaced the Marine
Corps LINE combat system in 2002. Every Marine keeps a record book that
records their training, There is a colored belt system similar to many Asian
martial arts and advancement in MCMAP is not a requirement for promotions.
Also in 2002, the U.S. Army adopted the Modern Army Combatives (MAC) program
developed by Matt Larsen who was a member of the 75th Ranger Regiment, with
the publishing of US Army field manual (FM 3-25.150) and the establishment of
the US Army Combatives School at Ft Benning, Georgia. MAC draws from systems
such as Brazilian Jiujitsu, Muay Thai and Kali which could be trained "live"
and can be fully integrated into current Close Quarters Battle tactics and
training methods. As of April 2008, for the first time in US Army history,
soldiers who graduate from an official Army course can earn an MOS identifier,
H3B and H4B for level III and IV MACP certification respectively.[2]

The US Air Force adopted MAC as its hand-to-hand combat system in early
2008.[3]

## [edit] Military instructors

At the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston, Ontario officer cadets in
first year take an introduction to Unarmed Combat course. In third year,
courses are offered in Unarmed Combat (Grappling), Unarmed Combat (Kicking)
and Unarmed Combat (Hands). Unarmed Combat (Grappling) covers the response to
various attacks and situations and ground fighting. The Unarmed Combat
(Kicking) course covers kicking distance, kicking targets, the use of front
and rear kicks and mobility. The Unarmed Combat (Hands) course covers hand
distance and targets, and the use of single and multiple strikes with the
hands. [4]

## [edit] Former military instructors and Civilian instructors

FRANK CUCCI LOCATION USA Close Combat instructor USA Virginia (Former special
Unit Navy Seal) Official website [4]

MONI AIZIK LOCATION North America Canada Close Combat Instructor Commando Krav
Maga Canada (Former special Unit Yamam) YOUTUBE [5] Official website [6]

RAFFAELLI SNACKERS LOCATION USA AND EUROPE Close Combat instructor Florida and
Europe (Former special Unit french foreign legion) YOUTUBE [7] Official
website [8]

AVI NARDIA LOCATION North America USA Close Combat Instructor Krav Maga and
Kapap USA (Former special Unit Yamam) YOUTUBE [9] Official website [10]

DANY STRUYVEN LOCATION BELGIUM Close Combat instructor Belgium (Close Combat)
YOUTUBE [11] Official website [12]

JAVIER RUIZ LOCATION SPAIN Close Combat Instructor Spain - Europe (Former
Military) YOUTUBE [13]

LEONARD C. HOLIFIELD LOCATION North America USA GEORGIA Close Combat
Instructor USA (Former us special Unit) Official website [14]

  

Most civilian instructors in hand-to-hand combat train police, martial artists
or combat sport athletes, but some may train civilians for private self-
defense.

The very things which make combatives well-adapted for military training
(simplicity, ease of use, modest physical demands) also make it suitable in
many ways for civilian self-defense. The world's military forces train
thousands of combatives instructors every year. Frequently emphasizing their
law-enforcement, corrections or military background, many combatives
instructors also offer training to law enforcement agencies, the military,
private individuals, security guards or companies. Regulated in the United
States much as private tutors, health clubs, private gun shops or private
security agencies, some combatives systems are expanding into other markets
and niches worldwide.

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2007)  
## [edit] See also

  * Close quarters battle (CQB)
  * List of modern infantry-related terms and acronyms
  * RBSD (Reality Based Self Defense)
  * Knife fight
  * Krav Maga

## [edit] References

  1. ^ See Jiao li.
  2. ^ Army Times Article[1].
  3. ^ Air Force Times article [2].
  4. ^ Athletics Department - Royal Military College of Canada

### [edit] Further reading

  * Close Combat (MCRP 3-02B), USMC, February 1999. Commercial ISBN 1-58160-073-9
  * Get Tough! by William E. Fairbairn, 1942. Details basic commando techniques. Reprint ISBN 0-87364-002-0
  * Kill or Get Killed by Rex Applegate, 1943. Widely redistributed within the USMC from 1991 as FMFRP 12-80. ISBN 0-87364-084-5
  * In Search of the Warrior Spirit: Teaching Awareness Disciplines to the Green Berets by Richard Strozzi-Heckler. 3rd edition ISBN 1-55643-425-1
  * Fleet Marine Force Manual (FMFM) 0-7, Close Combat, USMC, July 1993.
  * Combatives : FM 3-25.150 Commercial reprint of 2002 U.S. Army manual incorporates Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu. ISBN 1-58160-448-3

## [edit] External links

  * Excerpts from 1942 War Department FM 21-150
  * WCCI Hand to Hand Combat - Close Combat Instructors
  * United States Combative Arts Association
  * ANNAM DRAGON FFL, INC/ Legionnary Close Combat Institute

### [edit] Articles

  * TRADOC Public Affairs
  * Association of the U. S. Army
  * Army Times
  * Army Times
  * Army Times
  * NCO Journal
  * USASOC
  * Ft. Benning Bayonet
  * Ft. Leonard Wood Guidon
  * Modern Army Combative in Ultimate Grappling Magazine
  * Program for cadetsat Kansas State University
  * On The Guard, Newspaper of the National Guard (Page 8-9)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hand_to_hand_combat"

Categories: Hybrid martial arts | Hand to hand tactics

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles needing additional
references from August 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 17:15 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



