
# Joanna Rutkowska

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification.
Please help improve this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using
inline citations). Unsourced or poorly sourced contentious material must be
removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (February
2008)  
Joanna Rutkowska is a Polish security specialist, primarily known for her
research on stealth malware and contributions to Windows Vista backdoor
installation and hiding techniques.

In August 2006 at the Black Hat Briefings conference in Las Vegas, Rutkowska
presented system compromise techniques that could be used on Windows Vista
systems - and subsequently, has been named one of Five Hackers who Put a Mark
on 2006 by eWeek Magazine for her research on the topic [1].

In the first part of the presentation, Rutkowska discussed how to bypass Vista
kernel protection, demonstrating how to load unsigned code into the Vista
kernel. The second part of the presentation introduced a technique dubbed Blue
Pill. It could be described as a rootkit technology, allowing potentially
malicious code to covertly take control over the system through the use of CPU
virtualization. This method, although presented and implemented on Vista
system is OS-independent and does not exploit any weakness in the Vista system
itself. The effectiveness of the latter approach, dubbed Blue Pill, is a
subject of a debate among some researchers.

At Black Hat Federal, in March 2007, Rutkowska demonstrated that certain types
of hardware-based memory acquisition (e.g. Firewire based) are unreliable and
can be defeated.

At the next Black Hat in Las Vegas, Rutkowska and Alexander Tereshkin
presented research that:

  * Disclosed specific Vista driver vulnerabilities (and patterns of vulnerabilities) that again allowed the bypass of Vista kernel protection.

  * Released the source code to the New Blue Pill project, a ground-up rewrite of Blue Pill and the first published virtualized rootkit.

  * Discussed ways to avoid the detection of virtualization-based rootkits.

  * Critiqued detection approaches presented by other researchers, noting that "blue pill detection" methods to be generic VMM detectors, incapable of distinguishing between malicious and non-malicious hypervisors.

  * Presented the first working proof of concept of "nested virtualization", allowing other hardware-based hypervisors as guests of the Blue Pill's hypervisor. The published code only allowed the running of simple hypervisors as a guest, e.g. the Blue Pill hypervisor itself as a guest of another Blue Pill hypervisor.

In April 2007 Rutkowska founded Invisible Things Lab in Warsaw, Poland. The
company focuses on OS and VMM security research and provides various
consulting services.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Five Hackers Who Left a Mark on 2006, Ryan Naraine, eWeek.com

## [edit] External links

  * InvisibleThings - personal website
  * InvisibleThings blog
  * Invisible Things Lab - corporate website
  * CNET news - Vista Hacked at Black Hat
  * Computerworld Security article

  

<IMG> This article on a computer specialist of Europe is a stub. You can help
Wikipedia by expanding it.  
<IMG> This Polish biographical article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by
expanding it.  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joanna_Rutkowska"

Categories: People associated with computer security | Living people | Year of
birth missing (living people) | Polish people | Polish bloggers | European
computer specialist stubs | Polish people stubs

Hidden categories: BLP articles lacking sources | Articles lacking reliable
references from February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * SlovenÄina

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 10:36 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



