
# Buildering

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A climber ascends a bridge using aid climbing techniques

<IMG>

<IMG>

"Struck with a rash impulse", a 31-year old shoe salesman climbed the 88 story
Jin Mao Building barehanded.

Buildering (also known as urban climbing, structuring, or stegophily) is the
act of climbing on (usually) the outside of buildings and other artificial
structures. The word "buildering" is a portmanteau combining the word
"building" with the climbing term "bouldering".

If done without ropes or protection far off the ground, buildering may be
dangerous and is often practiced outside legal bounds, and is thus mostly
undertaken at night-time. Adepts of buildering who are seen climbing on
buildings without authorization are regularly met by police forces upon
completing their exploit. Spectacular acts of buildering, such as free soloing
skyscrapers, are usually accomplished by lone, experienced climbers, sometimes
attracting large crowds of passers-by and media attention. These remain
relatively rare.

Buildering can also take a form more akin to bouldering, which tends towards
ascending or traversing shorter sections of buildings and structures. While
still generally frowned upon by property owners, some, such as the University
of Colorado at Boulder, and Tufts University turn a blind eye towards the
practice in many locations.[original research?]

Although often done as a solo sport, buildering has also become a popular
group activity. As in more traditional rock climbing, routes are established
and graded for difficulty.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Famous urban climbers
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links
  * 6 Locations

  
## [edit] History

Although students had been scrambling up the architecture of Cambridge
University for years,[1] the great alpinist, Geoffrey Winthrop Young, while a
student there in the 1890s, engaged in "roof climbing" and wrote and published
a buildering guide to one of the colleges,[2] which may be the first
documentation of the activity restricted to a particular environment. Later,
Young produced another small volume on buildering, spoofing mountaineering.[3]
In the 1930s a somewhat more serious, though still light-hearted, account of
Cambridge undergraduate buildering appeared in popular print.[4] As to
identifying the first recreational or professional builderer - that remains an
open question, for even at Cambridge, "...the lack of written records makes a
history of past roof-climbing impossible".[4] Night climbing remained popular
after the war, as documented in a book by "Hederatus" published in 1970[5],
and features prominently in the detective story The Bad Quarto by Jill Paton
Walsh[6].

## [edit] Famous urban climbers

  * Alain Robert, popularly known as "the real-life Spider-Man", has climbed the Empire State Building in New York, the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, the Sears Tower in Chicago, Taipei 101 in Taiwan (the world's tallest completed skyscraper), and each of the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, among others. Alaine is arrested at the top of many of the major buildings he has climbed.
  * Dan Goodwin, aka Spider Dan, climbed the Sears Tower in Chicago in 1981.
  * George Willig climbed the World Trade Center.
  * Harry Gardiner, known as the Human Fly, began urban climbing in 1905.
  * George Polley, also known as the Human Fly, who took up buildering ca 1910.
  * Whipplesnaith

## [edit] See also

  * Parkour
  * BASE jumping
  * Craning
  * Doorways in the Sand
  * Safety Last
  * The Night Climbers of Cambridge

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Geoffrey Winthrop Young: Poet, educator, mountaineer by Alan Hankinson, (1995), Hodder & Stoughton, London
  2. ^ The Roof Climber's Guide to Trinity(1900)
  3. ^ Wall and Roof Climbing (1905)
  4. ^ a b The Night Climbers of Cambridge by Whipplesnaith (1937), Chatto & Windus Ltd, London
  5. ^ Cambridge nightclimbing, by "Hederatus" (1970), Chatto & Windus Ltd, London
  6. ^ Book review by Harriet Devine, accessed 1 April 2009

## [edit] External links

  * Buildering.net
  * Alain Robert Official website
  * BBC announces Ascent of the Arche de la Defence
  * FreakClimbing Buildering Gallery

## [edit] Locations

  * Denmark
  * Germany
  * Rotterdam, Netherlands videos
  * Milan, Italy Street Boulder Contest
  * Vancouver, Canada 5th Annual UBC Buildering Contest
  * University of California, Berkeley

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buildering"

Categories: Types of climbing

Hidden categories: All articles that may contain original research | Articles
that may contain original research since June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 08:49.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



