
# Portable Game Notation

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Portable Game Notation Filename extension `.pgn`  
Internet media type `application/x-chess-pgn (unregistered)`  
<IMG>

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss
these issues on the talk page.

  * It does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve it by citing reliable sources. Tagged since January 2008.  

  * It contains instructions, advice, or how-to content. Tagged since November 2008.  

  
Portable Game Notation (PGN) is a computer-processible format for recording
chess games (both the moves and related data); many chess programs recognize
this extremely popular format due to its accessibility by ordinary ASCII
editors, including word processors capable of importing and exporting plain
ASCII.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Usage
    * 2.1 Tag pairs
    * 2.2 Movetext
    * 2.3 Comments
    * 2.4 Example
    * 2.5 Handling chess variants
  * 3 References
  * 4 See also
  * 5 External links
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] History

PGN was devised in around 1993, by Steven J. Edwards, and was first
popularized via the Usenet newsgroup rec.games.chess.[1]

## [edit] Usage

PGN is structured "for easy reading and writing by human users and for easy
parsing and generation by computer programs." The chess moves themselves are
given in algebraic chess notation. The usual filename extension is ".pgn".

There are two formats in the PGN specification, the "import" format and the
"export" format. The import format describes data that may have been prepared
by hand, and is intentionally lax; a program that can read PGN data should be
able to handle the somewhat lax import format. The export format is rather
strict and describes data prepared under program control, similar to a pretty
printed source program reformatted by a compiler. The export format
representations generated by different programs on the same computer should be
exactly equivalent, byte for byte.

PGN code begins with a set of "tag pairs" (a tag name and its value), followed
by the "movetext" (chess moves with optional commentary).

### [edit] Tag pairs

Tag pairs begin with an initial left bracket "[", followed by the name of the
tag in plain text (ASCII). The tag value is enclosed in double-quotes, and the
tag is then terminated with a closing right bracket "]". There are no special
control codes involving escape characters, or carriage returns and linefeeds
to separate the fields, and superfluous embedded spaces (or SPC characters)
are usually skipped when parsing.

PGN data for archival storage is required to provide seven bracketed fields,
referred to as "tags" and together known as the STR (Seven Tag Roster). In
export format, the STR tag pairs must appear before any other tag pairs that
may appear, and in this order:

  1. Event: the name of the tournament or match event.
  2. Site: the location of the event. This is in "City, Region COUNTRY" format, where COUNTRY is the 3-letter International Olympic Committee code for the country. An example is "New York City, NY USA".
  3. Date: the starting date of the game, in YYYY.MM.DD form. "??" are used for unknown values.
  4. Round: the playing round ordinal of the game within the event.
  5. White: the player of the white pieces, in "last name, first name" format.
  6. Black: the player of the black pieces, same format as White.
  7. Result: the result of the game. This can only have four possible values: "1-0" (White won), "0-1" (Black won), "1/2-1/2" (Draw), or "*" (other, e.g., the game is ongoing).

The standard allows for supplementation in the form of other, optional, tag
pairs. The more common tag pairs include:

  * Time: Time the game started, in "HH:MM:SS" format, in local clock time.
  * Termination: Gives more details about the termination of the game. It may be "abandoned", "adjudication" (result determined by third-party adjudication), "death", "emergency", "normal", "rules infraction", "time forfeit", or "unterminated".
  * FEN: The initial position of the chess board, in Forsyth-Edwards Notation. This is used to record partial games (starting at some initial position). It is also necessary for chess variants such as Fischer random chess, where the initial position is not always the same as traditional chess. If a FEN tag is used, a separate tag pair "SetUp" must also appear and have its value set to "1".

### [edit] Movetext

<IMG>

Chessboard notation

The movetext describes the actual moves of the game. This includes move number
indicators (numbers followed by either one or three periods; one if preceding
a move by White, three if preceding a move by Black) and movetext Standard
Algebraic Notation (SAN).

For most moves the SAN consists of the letter abbreviation for the piece, an
"x" if there is a capture, and the 2-character algebraic name of the final
square the piece moved to. The letter abbreviations are K (King), Q (Queen), R
(Rook), B (Bishop), and N (Knight). The pawn is given an empty abbreviation in
SAN movetext, but in other contexts the abbreviation "P" is used. The
algebraic name of any square is as per usual Algebraic chess notation; from
white's perspective, the leftmost square closest to white is a1, the rightmost
square closest to white is h1, and the rightmost square closest to black is
h8.

In a few cases a more detailed representation is needed to resolve ambiguity;
if so, the piece's file letter, numerical rank, or the exact square is
inserted after the moving piece's name (in that order of preference). Thus,
"Nge2" specifies that the knight originally on the g-file moves to e2.

SAN kingside castling is indicated by the sequence "O-O"; queenside castling
is indicated by the sequence "O-O-O" (note that these are capital letter O's,
not numeral 0's). Pawn promotions are notated by appending an "=" followed by
the piece the pawn is promoted to. If the move is a checking move, the plus
sign "+" is appended; if the move is a checkmating move, the number sign "#"
is appended instead.

An annotator who wishes to suggest alternative moves to those actually played
in the game may insert variations enclosed in parentheses. He may also comment
on the game by inserting Numerical Annotation Glyphs (NAGs) into the movetext.
Each NAG reflects a subjective impression of the move preceding the NAG or of
the resultant position.

If the game result is anything other than "*", the result is repeated at the
end of the movetext.

### [edit] Comments

Comments may be added by either a ";" (a comment that continues to the end of
the line) or a "{" (which continues until a matching "}"). Comments do not
nest.

### [edit] Example

Here is a sample game in PGN format:

    
    [Event "F/S Return Match"]
    [Site "Belgrade, Serbia JUG"]
    [Date "1992.11.04"]
    [Round "29"]
    [White "Fischer, Robert J."]
    [Black "Spassky, Boris V."]
    [Result "1/2-1/2"]
     
    1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 {This opening is called the Ruy Lopez.} 3... a6
    4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Nb8  10. d4 Nbd7
    11. c4 c6 12. cxb5 axb5 13. Nc3 Bb7 14. Bg5 b4 15. Nb1 h6 16. Bh4 c5 17. dxe5
    Nxe4 18. Bxe7 Qxe7 19. exd6 Qf6 20. Nbd2 Nxd6 21. Nc4 Nxc4 22. Bxc4 Nb6
    23. Ne5 Rae8 24. Bxf7+ Rxf7 25. Nxf7 Rxe1+ 26. Qxe1 Kxf7 27. Qe3 Qg5 28. Qxg5
    hxg5 29. b3 Ke6 30. a3 Kd6 31. axb4 cxb4 32. Ra5 Nd5 33. f3 Bc8 34. Kf2 Bf5
    35. Ra7 g6 36. Ra6+ Kc5 37. Ke1 Nf4 38. g3 Nxh3 39. Kd2 Kb5 40. Rd6 Kc5 41. Ra6
    Nf2 42. g4 Bd3 43. Re6 1/2-1/2
    
### [edit] Handling chess variants

Many chess variants can be recorded using PGN, provided the names of the
pieces can be limited to one character, usually a letter and not a number.
They are typically noted with a tag named "Variant" giving the name of the
rules. The term "Variation" must be avoided, as that refers to the name of an
opening variation. Note that traditional chess programs can only handle, at
most, a few variants. Forsyth-Edwards Notation (FEN) is used to record the
starting position for variants (such as Chess960) which have initial positions
other than the orthodox chess initial position.

Plycount is a chess term for the total number of moves in a game, counting
each player's move as 1. It is an optional part of the standard PGN
description of a chess game.

## [edit] References

  * PGN specification by Steven J. Edwards (HTML by Thomas Stahl)
  * Portable Game Notation Specification and Implementation Guide, Steven J. Edwards

## [edit] See also

  * X-FEN
  * Smart Game Format
  * Portable Draughts Notation

## [edit] External links

  * PGN Standards
  * PGN viewer
  * Online PGN viewer at ICC
  * PGN Utilities
  * An improved PGN scanner and parser with Jflex and Cup (Italian)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The Rise of Internet Chess, Mark Weeks' chess pages

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portable_Game_Notation"

Categories: Chess notation | Computer file formats

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from January 2008 | All articles
lacking sources | Articles containing how-to sections

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 February 2009, at 09:35.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



