
# Arecibo message

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

This is the message with color added to highlight its separate parts. The
actual binary transmission carried no color information.

The Arecibo message was beamed into space a single time (not repeated) via
frequency modulated radio waves at a ceremony to mark the remodeling of the
Arecibo radio telescope on 16 November 1974.[1] It was aimed at the globular
star cluster M13 some 25,000 light years away because M13 was a large and
close collection of stars that was available in the sky at the time and place
of the ceremony.[2] The message consisted of 1679 binary digits, approximately
210 bytes, transmitted at a frequency of 2380 MHz and modulated by shifting
the frequency by 10 Hz, with a power of 1000kW. The transmission rate of the
message was one bit per second, thus the entire transmission lasted 1679
seconds.[3][1]

The cardinality of 1679 was chosen because it is a semiprime (the product of
two prime numbers), to be arranged rectangularly as 73 rows by 23 columns. The
alternate arrangement, 23 rows by 73 columns, produces jumbled nonsense. The
message forms the image shown on the right, or its inverse, when translated
into graphics characters and spaces.[4]

Dr. Frank Drake, then at Cornell University and creator of the famous Drake
equation, wrote the message, with help from Carl Sagan, among others.[1] The
message consists of seven parts that encode the following:[4]

  1. The numbers one (1) through ten (10)
  2. The atomic numbers of the elements hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and phosphorus, which make up deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
  3. The formulas for the sugars and bases in the nucleotides of DNA
  4. The number of nucleotides in DNA, and a graphic of the double helix structure of DNA
  5. A graphic figure of a human, the dimension (physical height) of an average man, and the human population of Earth
  6. A graphic of Earth's Solar System
  7. A graphic of the Arecibo radio telescope and the dimension (the physical diameter) of the transmitting antenna dish

Because it will take 25,000 years for the message to reach its intended
destination of stars (and an additional 25,000 years for any reply), the
Arecibo message was more a demonstration of human technological achievement
than a real attempt to enter into a conversation with extraterrestrials. In
fact, the stars that the message was aimed at will no longer be there when it
arrives.[1] According to the Cornell News press release of November 12, 1999,
the real purpose of the message was not to make contact, but to demonstrate
the capabilities of newly installed equipment.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Explanation
    * 1.1 Numbers
    * 1.2 DNA elements
    * 1.3 Nucleotides
    * 1.4 Double helix
    * 1.5 Humanity
    * 1.6 Planets
    * 1.7 Telescope
  * 2 Message as binary string[4]
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Explanation

### [edit] Numbers

Part 1 â The numbers from 1 to 10

    
    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  9  10
    ----------------------
    0 0 0 1 1 1 1 00 00 00
    0 1 1 0 0 1 1 00 00 10
    1 0 1 0 1 0 1 01 11 01
    X X X X X X X X  X  X <-least-significant-digit marker
    
  

The numbers from 1 to 10 appear in binary format (the bottom row marks the
beginning of each number).

Even assuming that recipients know the purpose of this section is to write
decimal in binary, the encoding of the numbers may not be immediately obvious
due to the way they have been written. To read the first seven digits, ignore
the bottom row, and read them as three binary digits from top to bottom, with
the top digit being the most significant.

The readings for 8, 9 and 10 are a little different, as they have been given
an additional column next to the first (to the right in the image). This is
probably intended to show that numbers too large to fit in a column can be
written in several contiguous ones, where the contiguous columns do not have
the base marker.

### [edit] DNA elements

Part 2 â The elements constituting DNA

    
    H C N O P
    1 6 7 8 15
    ----------
    0 0 0 1 1
    0 1 1 0 1
    0 1 1 0 1
    1 0 1 0 1
    X X X X X
    
  

The numbers 1, 6, 7, 8 and 15 appear. These are the atomic numbers of hydrogen
(H), carbon (C), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), and phosphorus (P), the components
of DNA.

The numbers 8 and 15 are written in a logical extension of binary encoding,
rather than with the contiguous-columns method shown in the message's number
figures at the top:

### [edit] Nucleotides

Part 3 â The nucleotides of DNA

    
    Deoxyribose Adenine Thymine Deoxyribose
    (C5OH7) (C5H4N5) (C5H5N2O2) (C5OH7)
    
    
    Phosphate Phosphate
    (PO4) (PO4)
    
    
    Deoxyribose Cytosine Guanine Deoxyribose
    (C5OH7) (C4H4N3O) (C5H4N5O) (C5OH7)
    
    
    Phosphate Phosphate
    (PO4) (PO4)
    
  

The nucleotides are described as sequences of the five atoms that appear on
the preceding line. Each sequence represents the molecular formula of the
nucleotide as incorporated into DNA (as opposed to the free form of the
nucleotide).

For example, deoxyribose (C5OH7 in DNA, C5O4H10 when free), the nucleotide in
the top left in the image, is read as:

    
    11000
    10000
    11010
    XXXXX
    -----
    75010
    
i.e. 7 atoms of hydrogen, 5 atoms of carbon, 0 atoms of nitrogen, 1 atom of
oxygen, and 0 atoms of phosphorus.

### [edit] Double helix

Part 4 â The DNA double helix structure

    
    11
    11
    11
    11
    11
    01
    11
    11
    01
    11
    01
    11
    10
    11
    11
    01
    X
    
    
    1111111111110111 1111101101011110 (binary)
    = 4,294,441,822 (decimal)
    
  

DNA double helix (the vertical bar represents the number of nucleotides, but
the value depicted is around 4.3 billion when in fact there are about 3.2
billion base pairs in the human genome).

### [edit] Humanity

Part 5 â Human form, the height and population of humans

    
            X011011
             111111
    X0111    110111
             111011
             111111
             110000
    
    
    1110 (binary) = 14 (decimal)
    
    
    000011 111111 110111 111011 111111 110110 (binary)
    = 4,292,853,750 (decimal)
    
  

The element in the center represents a human. The element on the left (in the
image) indicates the average height of a person: 1764 mm. This corresponds to
the horizontally written binary 14 multiplied by the wavelength of the message
(126 mm). The element on the right depicts the size of human population in
1974, around 4.3 billion. In this case, the number is oriented horizontally
rather than vertically, with the least-significant-digit marker to the upper
left in the image.

### [edit] Planets

Part 6 â The Sun and the planets

    
                      Earth
    Sun Mercury Venus       Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto
    
  

The solar system, showing the Sun and the planets in the order of their
position from the Sun: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune, and Pluto. (Pluto has since been reclassified as a dwarf planet by
the International Astronomical Union, but it was still considered a planet at
the time the message was transmitted.)

The Earth is the third planet from the Sun \- its graphic is shifted up to
identify it as the planet from which the signal was sent. The human figure is
shown "standing on" the Earth graphic.

In addition to showing position, the graphic provides a general, not-to-scale
size reference of each planet and the Sun.

### [edit] Telescope

Part 7 â The Arecibo radio telescope

    
    bottom two rows:
         100101
    <--- 111110X --->
    
    
    100101 111110 (binary) = 2,430 (decimal)
    
  

The last part represents the Arecibo radio telescope with its diameter (2430
multiplied by the wavelength gives 306.18 m). In this case, the number is
oriented horizontally, with the least-significant-digit marker to the lower
right in the image.

## [edit] Message as binary string[4]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Arecibo message as decoded into 23 rows and 73 columns.

    
    0000001010101000000000000101000001010000000100100010001000100101100101010
    1010101010100100100000000000000000000000000000000000001100000000000000000
    0011010000000000000000000110100000000000000000010101000000000000000000111
    1100000000000000000000000000000000110000111000110000110001000000000000011
    0010000110100011000110000110101111101111101111101111100000000000000000000
    0000001000000000000000001000000000000000000000000000010000000000000000011
    1111000000000000011111000000000000000000000001100001100001110001100010000
    0001000000000100001101000011000111001101011111011111011111011111000000000
    0000000000000000010000001100000000010000000000011000000000000000100000110
    0000000001111110000011000000111110000000000110000000000000100000000100000
    0001000001000000110000000100000001100001100000010000000000110001000011000
    0000000000001100110000000000000110001000011000000000110000110000001000000
    0100000010000000010000010000000110000000010001000000001100000000100010000
    0000010000000100000100000001000000010000000100000000000011000000000110000
    0000110000000001000111010110000000000010000000100000000000000100000111110
    0000000000010000101110100101101100000010011100100111111101110000111000001
    1011100000000010100000111011001000000101000001111110010000001010000011000
    0001000001101100000000000000000000000000000000000111000001000000000000001
    1101010001010101010100111000000000101010100000000000000001010000000000000
    0111110000000000000000111111111000000000000111000000011100000000011000000
    0000011000000011010000000001011000001100110000000110011000010001010000010
    1000100001000100100010010001000000001000101000100000000000010000100001000
    0000000001000000000100000000000000100101000000000001111001111101001111000
    
or

    
    00000010101010000000000
    00101000001010000000100
    10001000100010010110010
    10101010101010100100100
    00000000000000000000000
    00000000000011000000000
    00000000001101000000000
    00000000001101000000000
    00000000010101000000000
    00000000011111000000000
    00000000000000000000000
    11000011100011000011000
    10000000000000110010000
    11010001100011000011010
    11111011111011111011111
    00000000000000000000000
    00010000000000000000010
    00000000000000000000000
    00001000000000000000001
    11111000000000000011111
    00000000000000000000000
    11000011000011100011000
    10000000100000000010000
    11010000110001110011010
    11111011111011111011111
    00000000000000000000000
    00010000001100000000010
    00000000001100000000000
    00001000001100000000001
    11111000001100000011111
    00000000001100000000000
    00100000000100000000100
    00010000001100000001000
    00001100001100000010000
    00000011000100001100000
    00000000001100110000000
    00000011000100001100000
    00001100001100000010000
    00010000001000000001000
    00100000001100000000100
    01000000001100000000100
    01000000000100000001000
    00100000001000000010000
    00010000000000001100000
    00001100000000110000000
    00100011101011000000000
    00100000001000000000000
    00100000111110000000000
    00100001011101001011011
    00000010011100100111111
    10111000011100000110111
    00000000010100000111011
    00100000010100000111111
    00100000010100000110000
    00100000110110000000000
    00000000000000000000000
    00111000001000000000000
    00111010100010101010101
    00111000000000101010100
    00000000000000101000000
    00000000111110000000000
    00000011111111100000000
    00001110000000111000000
    00011000000000001100000
    00110100000000010110000
    01100110000000110011000
    01000101000001010001000
    01000100100010010001000
    00000100010100010000000
    00000100001000010000000
    00000100000000010000000
    00000001001010000000000
    01111001111101001111000
    
## [edit] See also

  * Active SETI
  * Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d e "Cornell News: It's the 25th anniversary of Earth's first (and only) attempt to phone E.T., FOR RELEASE: Nov. 12, 1999". http://www.news.cornell.edu/releases/Nov99/Arecibo.message.ws.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-29.
  2. ^ "Larry Klaes. Ithaca Times - Making Contact". http://www.zwire.com/site/news.cfm?newsid=15663534. Retrieved on 2007-07-27.
  3. ^ Jay M. Pasachoff. "Chapter 20: Life in the Universe". Astronomy: From the Earth to the Universe, Updates by Chapter, 5th Ed.. http://www.williams.edu/Astronomy/jay/ETU5/chapter20_5th.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-05.
  4. ^ a b c Cassiday, George. "The Arecibo Message". http://www.physics.utah.edu/~cassiday/p1080/lec06.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-27.

## [edit] External links

  * SETI homepage on the message
  * Interstellar Radio Messages
  * Arecibo Observatory message on Alien Research
  * Cornell news: Arecibo message anniversary
  * Ithaca Times article on 31st anniversary of Arecibo Message broadcast.
  * The Arecibo Message explained

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arecibo_message"

Categories: Interstellar messages | SETI | Time capsules

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Asturianu
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 03:16.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



