
# Dieter Rams

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Professor Dieter Rams at the 50th Anniversary of Braun Innovation exhibition,
Boston 2005

Dieter Rams (born May 20, 1932 in Wiesbaden) is a German industrial designer
closely associated with the consumer products company Braun and the
Functionalist school[clarification needed] of industrial design.

Rams studied architecture at the Werkkunstschule Wiesbaden as well as learning
carpentry from 1943 to 1957. After working for the architect Otto Apel between
1953 and 1955 he joined the electronic devices manufacturer Braun where he
became chief of design in 1961, a position he kept until 1995.

Rams once explained his design approach in the phrase "Weniger, aber besser"
which freely translates as "Less, but better." Rams and his staff designed
many memorable products for Braun including the famous SK-4 record player and
the high-quality 'D'-series (D45, D46) of 35 mm film slide projectors. He is
also known for designing the 606 Universal Shelving System by VitsÅ in 1960.

Many of his designs â coffee makers, calculators, radios, audio/visual
equipment, consumer appliances and office products â have found a permanent
home at many museums over the world, including MoMA in New York. For nearly 30
years Dieter Rams served as head of design for Braun A.G. until his retirement
in 1998. He continues to be a legend in design circles and most recently
designed a cover for Wallpaper magazine.

It is speculated that Rams' designs have been influential on Jonathan Ive of
Apple, Inc., designer of such products as the iMac, iPod, and iPhone[1], as
can be witnessed particularly in the iPhone's calculator application, whose
design is based on the Braun ET66 calculator designed by Rams.[2]

## [edit] Examples of Rams' works

<IMG>

Dieter Rams' design principles

<IMG>

Designed by Dieter Rams + Hans Gugelot

<IMG>

Braun Diskus Penlight Torch

<IMG>

The TS 45, TG 60 and L 450 designed by Dieter Rams for Braun (Germany,
1964/1965)  
<IMG>

Limited Edition cover for Wallpaper Magazine by Dieter Rams  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ The Future Of Apple Is In 1960s Braun: 1960s Braun Products Hold the Secrets to Apple's Future
  2. ^ iPhone Calculator and BRAUN ET66 Similarities

## [edit] External links

  * VitsÅ page on Dieter Rams
  * London's Design Museum page on Dieter Rams
  * Designboom page on Dieter Rams
  * Icon magazine interview with Dieter Rams
  * Flickr group on Dieter Rams

  

<IMG> GermanyThis German engineer, inventor or industrial designer
biographical article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dieter_Rams"

Categories: 1932 births | Living people | People from Hesse | German
industrial designers | German engineer stubs

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing
clarification from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 02:49 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



