
# Guide number

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unverifiable material may be
challenged and removed. (December 2007)  
The guide number for an electronic flash measures its ability to illuminate
the subject to be photographed at a specific film or sensor speed and angle of
view. A higher guide number indicates a more powerful flash.

For example, doubling the guide number means the flash can illuminate an
object at twice the distance, or for an object at the same distance can be
used at one quarter the film speed. Doubling the guide number requires a
quadrupling of the flash's power, as the area to be illuminated increases as
the square of the distance. (cf. inverse-square law)

## Contents

  * 1 Value
    * 1.1 Distance
    * 1.2 Examples
  * 2 Applications
  * 3 References

  
## [edit] Value

The guide number is the product of the maximum flash-to-subject distance and
the f-number of the aperture that will correctly expose a specified speed of
film.

    
    GN = distance Ã f-number
    
The guide number represents an exposure constant for a flash unit. For
example, a guide number of 80 feet at ISO 100 means that a target 20 feet away
can be fully illuminated with an aperture of f/4 (80 = 20 Ã 4) using a
sensitivity of ISO 100. For the same guide number and an aperture of f/8, the
light source should be 10 feet from the subject (80 = 10 Ã 8). [1]

Guide numbers can be given in feet or metres, and are usually given for ISO
100 sensitivity. The guide number of 80 feet in the previous example
corresponds to a guide number of approximately 24 metres. The calculations
remain the same: a target 6 metres (20 feet) away requires an aperture of f/4
(24 = 6 Ã 4).

Guide numbers do not depend on the focal length of the lens, but if the flash
unit can be adjusted to match the focal length, this adjustment will influence
the guide number: the wider the angle of the flash, the lower the guide
number.

When comparing flash units, make sure to compare the guide numbers for the
same ISO rating and the same focal length.

### [edit] Distance

The distance in the guide number calculation is the distance from the flash to
the subject. The position of the camera is not relevant.

The flash-to-subject distance is longer when bounced flash is used, and the
illumination is less when a diffuser is attached to the flash unit. In the
former case it is possible to calculate the flash to subject distance that the
light travels along the bounce path instead, but this still does not take into
account the loss of light due to incomplete reflection. Most photographers
apply a rule of thumb such as opening up by one to two stops.

### [edit] Examples

Typical built-in flash devices on cameras may have a guide numbers of 15 feet
(5 m) or less, while high-powered flashes can have guide numbers of over 250
ft or 75 m. [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8]

## [edit] Applications

Guide numbers are especially useful in dealing with manual flash units when
calculating the aperture for a particular exposure or the maximum flash range
for a given aperture. In practice, it's normal to know the guide number and
the distance and need the aperture, so the equation is rearranged to:

    
    f-number = GN / Distance
    
Some flash units have a dial on the back (in fact, a simple form of slide
rule) or a chart to help in calculating the desired settings.

More recently, guide numbers are being used to market the power of a flash
unit. However, guide numbers are not measurements of the amount of light
output of a flash device, which is normally measured in terms of luminous
intensity (candlepower) or energy capacity (watt seconds). Some modern flash
units come with zoom attachments that can diffuse or concentrate the light
output according to the angle of view of the lens, making it difficult to
compare different flash units based on the guide number alone.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Strobist page on Guide Numbers.". http://strobist.blogspot.com/2007/12/guide-number-your-free-flash-meter.html.
  2. ^ "a Metz potato-masher flash with a GN of 54, @ 50mm, or 76 @ 105mm zoom, ISO 100.". http://www.metz.de/en/foto-elektronik/metz-mecablitz-modelle/sca-blitzgeraete/mecablitz-76-mz-5-digital/datenblatt.html.
  3. ^ "a Canon flash with a GN of 58 @ 105mm, ISO 100.". http://www.usa.canon.com/consumer/controller?act=ModelInfoAct&tabact=ModelTechSpecsTabAct&fcategoryid=141&modelid=14998.
  4. ^ "a Nikon flash with a GN of 38 @ 35mm, and 56 @ 105mm, ISO 100.". http://nikonusa.com/Find-Your-Nikon/Product/Flashes/4801/SB-800-AF-Speedlight-.html#Tech%20Specs.
  5. ^ "a Sunpak flash for pocket cameras, with a GN of 20, but no information about what angle of coverage that is measured at, ISO 100.". http://sunpak.jp/english/products/pf20xd/index.html.
  6. ^ "a Nikon flash for smaller cameras with a GN of 30m, "18mm zoom head position", ISO 200.". http://nikonusa.com/Find-Your-Nikon/Product/Flashes/4806/SB-400-Speedlight-Unit.html#Tech%20Specs.
  7. ^ "Canon flash with a GN of 190 feet (58m) at 105mm zoom, ISO 100.". http://www.usa.canon.com/consumer/controller?act=ModelInfoAct&fcategoryid=141&modelid=10514#ModelTechSpecsAct.
  8. ^ "Mecablitz 76 MZ-5 digital with guide number 249ft (76 m) at ISO 100 and 105 mm.". http://www.metz.de/en/photo-electronics/mecablitz-models/sca-flash-units/mecablitz-76-mz-5-digital.html.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guide_number"

Categories: Flash photography | Metrics

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from December 2007 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Boarisch
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 01:58.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



