
# Value (personal and cultural)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Value.

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008)  
A personal and cultural value is a relative ethic value, an assumption upon
which implementation can be extrapolated. A value system is a set of
consistent values and measures that are not true. A principle value is a
foundation upon which other values and measures of integrity are based. Values
are considered subjective, vary across people and cultures and are in many
ways aligned with belief and belief systems. Types of values include
ethical/moral values, doctrinal/ideological (political, religious) values,
social values, and aesthetic values. It is debated whether some values are
intrinsic.

## Contents

  * 1 Personal values
  * 2 Cultural values
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Personal values

Personal values evolve from situations with the external world and can change
over time. This integrity in the application of values refers to its
continuity; persons have integrity if they apply their values appropriately
regardless of arguments or negative reinforcement from others. Values are
applied appropriately when they are applied in the right area. For example, it
would be appropriate to apply religious values in times of happiness as well
as in times of despair.

Personal values developed early in life may be resistant to change. They may
be derived from those of particular groups or systems, such as culture,
religion, and political party. However, personal values are not universal;
one's family, nation, generation and historical environment help determine
one's personal values. This is not to say that the value concepts themselves
are not universal, merely that each individual possess a unique conception of
them i.e. a personal knowledge of the appropriate values for their own genes,
feelings and experience.

## [edit] Cultural values

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Inglehart-Welzer Cultural Map of the World, created by political
scientists Ronald Inglehart and Christian Welzel based on the World Values
Survey.

Groups, societies, or cultures have values that are largely shared by their
members. The values identify those objects, conditions or characteristics that
members of the society consider important; that is, valuable. In the United
States, for example, values might include material comfort, wealth,
competition, individualism or religiosity and sex, drugs and rock and roll.
The values of a society can often be identified by noting which people receive
honor or respect. In the US, for example, professional athletes are honored
(in the form of monetary payment) more than college professors, in part
because the society respects personal values such as physical activity,
fitness, and competitiveness more than mental activity and education. This may
also be the case because the society takes its education for granted and
repays its teachers with non-tangible honors of relatively equal value with
that of the athlete. Surveys show that voters in the United States would be
reluctant to elect an atheist as a president, suggesting that belief in God is
a value.

Values are related to the norms of a culture, but they are more general and
abstract than norms. Norms are rules for behavior in specific situations,
while values identify what should be judged as good or evil. Flying the
national flag on a holiday is a norm, but it reflects the value of patriotism.
Wearing dark clothing and appearing solemn are normative behaviors at a
funeral. They reflect the values of respect and support of friends and family.

Members take part in a culture even if each member's personal values do not
entirely agree with some of the normative values sanctioned in the culture.
This reflects an individual's ability to synthesize and extract aspects
valuable to them from the multiple subcultures they belong to.

If a group member expresses a value that is in serious conflict with the
group's norms, the group's authority may carry out various ways of encouraging
conformity or stigmatizing the non-conforming behavior of its members. For
example, imprisonment can result from conflict with social norms that have
been established as law.

## [edit] See also

  * Guiding Principles
  * Norm (sociology)
  * Paideia
  * Value theory
  * Virtue
  * The Cock and the Jewel

## [edit] References

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up value in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * Quotations on value
  * Union of International Association: Human Values Online - A comprehensive database and analysis of values
  * Humanity Quest: a community and portal for the exploration of human spirits, values, attitudes, principles and emotions; thematically exploring a growing list of over 500 human values
  * RespectResearchGroup: Multidisciplinary research project on the value of interpersonal respect, with additional quotes, gallery, literature
  * Integration of Human Values with Education
  * Research on the Values, Counter Values, Education and Value Education

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_(personal_and_cultural)"

Categories: Value | Social philosophy | Sociology

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 23 March 2009, at 08:45.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



