
# Market maker

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008)  
Financial markets  
Bond market  
Fixed income  
Corporate bond  
Government bond  
Municipal bond  
Bond valuation  
High-yield debt  
  
Stock market  
Stock  
Preferred stock  
Common stock  
Registered share  
Voting share  
Stock exchange  
  
Foreign exchange market  
  
Derivatives market  
Credit derivative  
Hybrid security  
Options  
Futures  
Forwards  
Swaps  
  
Other Markets  
Commodity market  
Money market  
OTC market  
Real estate market  
Spot market  

* * *  
Finance series  
Financial market  
Financial market participants  
Corporate finance  
Personal finance  
Public finance  
Banks and Banking  
Financial regulation  
  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
A market maker is a firm that quotes both a buy and a sell price in a
financial instrument or commodity, hoping to make a profit on the bid/offer
spread, or turn.

In foreign exchange trading, where most deals are conducted over-the-counter
and are, therefore, completely virtual, the market maker sells to and buys
from its clients. Hence, the client's loss and the spread is the market-maker
firm's profit, which gets thus compensated for the effort of providing
liquidity in a competitive market. This extra liquidity reduces transaction
costs and therefore facilitates trades for the clients, who would otherwise
have to accept a worse price or even not be able to trade at all. Most foreign
exchange trading firms are market makers and so are many banks, although not
in all currency markets.

Most stock exchanges operate on a matched bargain or order driven basis. In
such a system there are no designated or official market makers, but market
makers nevertheless exist. When a buyer's bid meets a seller's offer or vice
versa, the stock exchange's matching system will decide that a deal has been
executed.

In the United States, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and American Stock
Exchange (AMEX), among others, have a single exchange member, formerly known
as specialists, and now as Designated Market Makers, who acts as the official
market maker for a given security. In return for a) providing a required
amount of liquidity to the security's market, b) taking the other side of
trades when there are short-term buy-and-sell-side imbalances in customer
orders, and c) attempting to prevent excess volatility, the specialist is
granted various informational and trade execution advantages.

Other U.S. exchanges, most prominently the NASDAQ Stock Exchange, employ
several competing official market makers in a security. These market makers
are required to maintain two-sided markets during exchange hours and are
obligated to buy and sell at their displayed bids and offers. They typically
do not receive the trading advantages a specialist does, but they do get some,
such as the ability to naked short a stock, i.e., selling it without borrowing
it. In most situations, only official market makers are permitted to engage in
naked shorting.

There are over two thousand market makers in the USA[1] and over a hundred in
Canada.[2]

On the London Stock Exchange (LSE) there are official market makers for many
securities (but not for shares in the largest and most heavily traded
companies, which instead use an automated system called TradElect). Some of
the LSE's member firms take on the obligation of always making a two way price
in each of the stocks in which they make markets. It is their prices which are
displayed on the Stock Exchange Automated Quotation system, and it is with
them that ordinary stockbrokers generally have to deal when buying or selling
stock on behalf of their clients.

Proponents of the official market making system claim market makers add to the
liquidity and depth of the market by taking a short or long position for a
time, thus assuming some risk, in return for hopefully making a small profit.
On the LSE one can always buy and sell stock: each stock always has at least
two market makers and they are obliged to deal.

This contrasts with some of the smaller order driven markets. On the JSE
Securities Exchange, for example, it can be very difficult to determine at
what price one would be able to buy or sell even a small block of any of the
many illiquid stocks because there are often no buyers or sellers on the order
board. However, there is no doubting the liquidity of the big order driven
markets in the U.S.

Unofficial market makers are free to operate on order driven markets or,
indeed, on the LSE. They do not have the obligation to always be making a two
way price but they do not have the advantage that everyone must deal with them
either.

## [edit] See also

  * Day trading
  * List of finance topics
  * Divide and choose, analogous to a two-way price

## [edit] External links

  * Market maker definition and examples in plain language

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "List of U.S. market makers". http://www.alphatrade.com/techSupport/marketMakers.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-31.
  2. ^ "List of market makers in Canada". http://www.alphatrade.com/techSupport/canadianIDs.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-31.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Stock market  
Types of stocks

Stock Â· Common stock Â· Preferred stock Â· Outstanding stock Â· Treasury
stock Â· Authorised stock Â· Restricted stock Â· Concentrated stock Â· Golden
share  
Participants

Investor Â· Stock trader/investor Â· Market maker Â· Floor trader Â· Floor
broker Â· Broker-dealer  
Exchanges

Stock exchange Â· List of stock exchanges Â· Over-the-counter Â· Electronic
Communication Network  
Stock valuation

Gordon model Â· Dividend yield Â· Earnings per share Â· Book value Â· Earnings
yield Â· Beta Â· Alpha Â· CAPM Â· Arbitrage pricing theory  
Financial ratios

P/CF ratio Â· P/E Â· PEG Â· Price/sales ratio Â· P/B ratio Â· D/E ratio Â·
Dividend payout ratio Â· Dividend cover Â· SGR Â· ROIC Â· ROCE Â· ROE Â· ROA
Â· EV/EBITDA Â· RSI Â· Sharpe ratio Â· Treynor ratio Â· Cap rate  
Trading theories

Efficient market hypothesis Â· Fundamental analysis Â· Technical analysis Â·
Modern portfolio theory Â· Post-modern portfolio theory Â· Mosaic theory  
Related terms

Dividend Â· Stock split Â· Reverse stock split Â· Growth stock Â· Speculation
Â· Trade Â· IPO Â· Market trends Â· Short Selling Â· Momentum Â· Day trading
Â· Swing trading Â· DuPont Model Â· Dark liquidity Â· Market depth  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_maker"

Categories: Financial markets

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 February 2009, at 12:20.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



