
# Ero guro

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2007)  
<IMG>

This article may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help clarify the
article; suggestions may be found on the talk page. (December 2007)  
Erotic Grotesque Nonsense, frequently shorted to Ero guro, (ã¨ã­ã°ã­ ,ero-
guro?) is a wasei-eigo term that describes a literary and artistic movement
from 1920s and '30s Japan.[1] Ero guro puts its focus on eroticism, sexual
corruption and decadence.[1] This movement is often used incorrectly by
western audiences to mean "gore" - depictions of horror, blood, and guts. In
actuality the "grotesque" term implies malformed, unnatural or horrific. [1]
While ero guro is a specific movement, many of its components can be found
throughout Japanese history and culture. Items that are pornographic and
bloody are not necessarily ero guro.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Later influences
  * 3 In music
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] History

Ero guro nansensu, characterized as a "prewar, bourgeois cultural phenomenon
that devoted itself to explorations of the deviant, the bizarre, and the
ridiculous,"[2] manifested in the popular culture of TaishÅ Tokyo during the
1920s.[3] Writer Ian Buruma describes the social atmosphere of the time as "a
skittish, sometimes nihilistic hedonism that brings Weimar Berlin to mind."[3]
Its roots go back to erotic shunga artists like Yoshitoshi, whose mid-1860s
woodblock printings showed decapitations and acts of violence from Japanese
history. Ukiyo-e artists such as Utagawa Kuniyoshi presented similar themes
with bondage, rape, and erotic crucifixion.

Ero guro's first distinct appearance began in 1920s and 1930s Japanese
literature. The Sada Abe Incident of 1936, where a woman choked and castrated
her lover, struck a chord with the ero guro movement, and came to represent
that genre for years to come.[4] This and other activities and movements were
generally suppressed in Japan during World War II, but re-emerged in the
postwar period, especially in manga and music.[5]

Over time, the ero guro movement's influence expanded into parts of Japanese
theatre, art, manga, and eventually film and music.

## [edit] Later influences

Ero guro is also an element of many Japanese horror films and pinku eiga,
particularly of the 1960s and 1970s. Examples include Teruo Ishii's Shogun's
Joys of Torture (1968) and Horrors of Malformed Men (1969) and Yasuzo
Masumura's Blind Beast (ç²ç£, 1969), the latter two based on the works of
Edogawa Rampo. A more recent example of ero guro in cinema is Sion Sono's
Strange Circus (å¥å¦ãªãµã¼ã«ã¹, 2005).

There are modern guro artists, some of who cite Erotic Grotesque Nonsense as
an influence on their work. These artists explore the macabre intermingled
with sexual overtones. Often the erotic element, even when not explicit, is
merged with grotesque themes and features similar to the works of H. R. Giger.
Others produce ero guro as a genre of Japanese pornography and hentai
involving blood, gore, disfiguration, violence, mutilation, urine, enemas, or
feces.

Examples of well-known guro mangaka include Suehiro Maruo, Shintaro Kago, Jun
Hayami, Toshio Maeda, Henmaru Machino, Horihone SaizÅ, and Waita Uziga.

The modern genre of tentacle rape began within the category of ero guro
(although it has much older roots in Japanese art; see The Dream of the
Fisherman's Wife), but was so popular that it is now usually considered
separately.

## [edit] In music

Visual Kei bands frequently have a concept or theme relating to ero guro, some
calling it a subgenre of visual kei. The band Cali Gari was heavily influenced
by Erotic Grotesque Nonsense and Angura.[6] Western Visual Kei fans mistook
this theme as a description of their "genre" and linked it with other Visual
Kei bands. The Czech goregrind band Jig-Ai often uses guro as central theme
for their album covers and lyrics.

## [edit] See also

  * Tokyo Red Hood
  * Mnemosyne

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c Erotic Grotesque Nonsense: Japanese Mass Culture in the 20s and 30s by Miriam Silverberg
  2. ^ Reichert, Jim (2001). "Deviance and Social Darwinism in Edogawa Ranpo's Erotic-Grotesque Thriller Koto no Åni". Journal of Japanese Studies 27 (1): pp. 113â114. doi:10.2307/3591938.
  3. ^ a b Buruma, Ian (2003). Inventing Japan, 1853-1964. New York: The Modern Library. pp. 67â68. ISBN 0-679-64085-1.
  4. ^ Johnston, William (2005) (in English). Geisha, Harlot, Strangler, Star: A Woman, Sex, and Morality in Modern Japan. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 11, 114, 160. ISBN 0-231-13052-X.
  5. ^ http://wwwsshe.murdoch.edu.au/intersections/issue12/mclelland.html
  6. ^ Bounce Di(s)ctionary Number 13 - Visual Kei Retrieved Nov 19 2008

## [edit] References

  * Paper by Mark McLelland of the University of Queensland (pdf version)
  * Paper from UCLA website by Professor Miriam Silverberg
  * Erotic Grotesque Nonsense: The Mass Culture of Japanese Modern Times by Professor Miriam Silverberg
  * Aguilar, Carlos (editor). Bizarre Sinema! Japanese Ero Gro & Pinku Eiga 1956-1979. Firenze, Italy: Glittering Images, 2005. ISBN 88-8275-065-5

## [edit] External links

  * Suehiro Maruo's website
  * Shintaro Kago's website
  * Waita Uziga's website
  * An English-language image board dedicated to guro

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ero_guro"

Categories: Art genres | Arts in Japan | Horror | Violence | Hentai | Japanese
pornography | Japanese rock | Guro Art

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2007 |
Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2007 | Articles
containing Japanese language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Asturianu
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 March 2009, at 04:27.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



