
# Matrioshka brain

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)  
A matrioshka brain is a hypothetical megastructure, based on the Dyson sphere,
of immense computational capacity. It is an example of a Class B stellar
engine, employing the entire energy output of a star to drive computer
systems. This structure has clear structural analogies to Russian Matrioshka
dolls, from which the concept derives its name.

Such a structure would be composed of a collection of one or more (typically
more) Dyson spheres built around a star, and nested one inside another. A
significant percentage of the shells would be composed of nanoscale computers
(see molecular-scale computronium). These computers would be at least partly
powered by the energy exchange between the star and interstellar space. A
shell (or component, should a Dyson swarm be the design model used) would
absorb energy radiated onto its inner surface, utilize that energy to power
its computer systems, and re-radiate the energy outwards. The nanoscale
computers of each shell would be designed to run at different temperatures;
shells or components at the core could be nearly as hot as the central star,
while the outer layer of the matrioshka brain could be almost as cool as
interstellar space.

The ideal mechanism for extracting usable energy as it passes "through" a
shell or component, the number of shells (or orbital levels) that could be
supported in such a manner, the ideal size of the shells to be constructed,
and other details, are all issues of speculation.

The idea of the matrioshka brain violates none of the currently known laws of
physics, although the engineering details of building such a structure would
be staggering, as such a project would require the "disassembly" of
significant portions (if not all) of the planetary system of the star for
construction materials.

The term matrioshka brain was invented by Robert Bradbury as an alternative to
the Jupiter Brain \- a concept similar to the matrioshka brain, but on a
smaller planetary scale and optimized for minimum signal propagation delay. A
matrioshka brain design is concentrated on sheer capacity and the maximum
amount of energy extracted from its source the star, while a Jupiter Brain
more on computational speed.

The possible uses of such an immense computational resource tax the
imagination. One idea suggested by Charles Stross, in his novel Accelerando,
would be to use it to run perfect simulations or "uploads" of human minds into
virtual reality spaces supported by the Matrioshka brain. Stross even went so
far as to suggest that a sufficiently godlike species utilizing enough raw
processing power could launch attacks upon, and manipulate, the structure of
the universe itself. In Godplayers (2005), Damien Broderick surmises that a
matrioshka brain would allow simulating entire alternate universes.

## [edit] See also

  * Astroengineering
  * Computronium
  * Jupiter Brain
  * Megascale engineering
  * Technological Singularity

## [edit] References

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2007)  
## [edit] External links

  * Robert Bradbury's matrioshka brain site
  * Short story by Charles Stross mentioning the matrioshka brain concept
  * A debate between David Coutts, designer of the futuristic board game 6 Billion, and Robert Bradbury.
  * A fictional type of Matrioshka Brain from the collaborative Orion's Arm website, with associated image.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matrioshka_brain"

Categories: Fictional computers | Megastructures | Exploratory engineering

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from January 2008 | All articles
lacking sources | Articles needing additional references from October 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * Italiano
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 February 2009, at 02:48.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



