
# Convention over configuration

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008)  
Convention over Configuration (aka Coding by convention) is a software design
paradigm which seeks to decrease the number of decisions that developers need
to make, gaining simplicity, but not necessarily losing flexibility.

The phrase essentially means a developer only needs to specify unconventional
aspects of the application. For example, if there's a class Sale in the model,
the corresponding table in the database is called sales by default. It is only
if one deviates from this convention, such as calling the table
"products_sold", that one needs to write code regarding these names.

When the convention implemented by the tool you are using matches your desired
behavior, you enjoy the benefits without having to write configuration files.
When your desired behavior deviates from the implemented convention, then you
configure your desired behavior.

This more configuration free approach to programming allows the programmer to
work at a higher level of abstraction without actually having to create a
layer of abstraction.

## [edit] Motivation

Traditionally, frameworks have needed multiple configuration files, each with
many settings. These provide information specific to each project, ranging
from URLs to mappings between classes and database tables. With the complexity
of an application the size and number of those files grows as well.

For example, early versions of the well-known Java persistence mapper
Hibernate mapped entities and their fields to the database by describing these
relationships in XML files. Most of this information could have been revealed
by conventionally mapping class names to the identically named database table
and the fields to its columns, respectively. Later versions did away with the
XML configuration file and instead employed these very conventions, deviations
of which may be overriden through the use of Java annotations.

## [edit] Usages

Most modern frameworks use a convention over configuration approach. This
includes Ruby on Rails, Zend Framework, Grails, Spring, Castle MonoRail,
JUnit, JBoss Seam, CakePHP, symfony, or Kohana.

## [edit] External links

  * Detailed information to CoC

<IMG> This computer software article is a stub. You can help by expanding it.  
  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convention_over_configuration"

Categories: Ruby programming language | Object-oriented programming | Software
design | Software stubs

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from April 2008 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Galego
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 11:16.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



