
# Bluejacking

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

This Siemens M75 is Bluejacking the Sony Ericsson K600i pictured below

Bluejacking is the sending of unsolicited messages over Bluetooth to
Bluetooth-enabled devices such as mobile phones, PDAs or laptop computers,
sending a vCard which typically contains a message in the name field (i.e. for
bluedating or bluechat) to another bluetooth enabled device via the OBEX
protocol.

Bluetooth has a very limited range, usually around 10 metres (32.8 ft) on
mobile phones, but laptops can reach up to 100 metres (328 ft) with powerful
(Class 1) transmitters.

## [edit] Origins

'Bluejacking' was reportedly first carried out by a Malaysian IT consultant
who used his phone to advertise Sony Ericsson. He also invented the name,
which purports to be an amalgam of Bluetooth and 'ajack', his username on
Esato, a Sony Ericsson fan online forum. "Jacking" is however an extremely
common shortening of hijack, the act of taking over something. [1][2]

<IMG>

<IMG>

This Sony Ericsson K600i is getting Bluejacked by the Siemens M75 pictured
above. The text at the bottom of the screen reads "Add to contacts?" in
Norwegian.

## [edit] Usage

Bluejacking is usually harmless, but because bluejacked people generally don't
know what has happened, they may think that their phone is malfunctioning.
Usually, a bluejacker will only send a text message, but with modern phones
it's possible to send images or sounds as well. Bluejacking has been used in
guerrilla marketing campaigns to promote advergames.

With the increase in the availability of Bluetooth enabled devices, these
devices have become vulnerable to virus attacks and even complete take over of
devices through a trojan horse program.

Bluejacking is also confused with Bluesnarfing which is the way in which
mobile phones are illegally hacked via Bluetooth.

## [edit] Bluejacking Tools and Software

Many tools have been developed for bluejacking. Most of the development
happened in the 2000 to 2004, where multiple new bluetooth vulnerabilities
were developed. Most of these tools are developed by individual developers and
have very specific functions. Example is bluesniff [3], which seeks out hidden
bluetooth devices. One of the most commonly used bluetooth software is bloover
[4], which is in version 2 now. It allows users to seek then send unsolicited
messages to unwary bluetooth devices. While there are so many tools to assist
someone in bluetoothing, only a few hidden tools are available for the more
sinister bluesnarfing or bluebugging. These are usually internal trade secrets
which the expert guard earnestly.

## [edit] See also

  * Bluesnarfing
  * Bluecasting
  * Snarfing

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Do You Speak American . Words That Shouldn't Be? . Sez Who? . Cyberspace | PBS
  2. ^ Bluejacking âa harmless prank'
  3. ^ Blue Sniff, the tools that seeks out hidden devices
  4. ^ âBlover II - A common Bluejacking software'

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluejacking"

Categories: Bluetooth | Spamming

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 11:24 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



