
# WiTricity

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect
recent events or newly available information, and remove this template when
finished. Please see the talk page for more information.  
WiTricity, a portmanteau for wireless electricity, is a term which describes
wireless energy transfer, the ability to provide electrical energy to remote
objects without wires. Though the concept has been discussed for some time
(and was first demonstrated by Nikola Tesla in 1893), the term WiTricity was
coined in 2005 by Dave Gerding and later used for a project led by Prof. Marin
SoljaÄiÄ in 2007.[1][2]

## Contents

  * 1 Technical background
    * 1.1 Overview
    * 1.2 Experimental demonstration
    * 1.3 Applications
  * 2 See also
  * 3 Notes
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Technical background

### [edit] Overview

WiTricity is based on strong coupling between electromagnetic resonant objects
to transfer energy wirelessly between them. The system consists of
transmitters and receivers that contain magnetic loop antennas critically
tuned to the same frequency. Due to operating in the electromagnetic near-
field, the receiving devices must be no more than about a quarter wavelength
from the transmitter (which is a few meters at the frequency used by the
example system). In their first paper, the group also simulated GHz dielectric
resonators.

Unlike the far field wireless power transmission systems based on traveling EM
waves, WiTricity employs near field inductive coupling through magnetic
fields,[clarification needed] which interact far more weakly with surrounding
objects, including biological tissue. In particular, it is based on using
'strongly-coupled' resonances to achieve a high power-transmission efficiency.
Aristeidis Karalis, referring to the team's experimental demonstration, says
that "the usual non-resonant magnetic induction would be almost 1 million
times less efficient in this particular system".[2] The researchers suggest
that the exposure levels will be below the threshold for FCC safety
regulations, and the radiated-power levels will also comply with the FCC radio
interference regulations.

It is not known exactly why this technology had not been developed.
Researchers attribute it to various reasons ranging from the limitations of
well-known physical laws, to simply a lack of need. Only recently have modern
consumers obtained a high number of portable electronic devices which
currently require batteries and plug-in chargers.[2]

### [edit] Experimental demonstration

The MIT researchers successfully demonstrated the ability to power a 60-watt
light bulb wirelessly, using two copper coils of 60 cm (24in) diameter that
were 2m (7ft) away, at roughly 45% efficiency.[3] The coils were designed to
resonate together at 10MHz and were oriented along the same axis. One was
connected inductively to a power source, and the other one to a bulb. The
setup powered the bulb on, even when the direct line of sight was blocked
using a wooden panel.

### [edit] Applications

This technology can potentially be used in a large variety of applications,
including consumer, industrial, medical and military. Its aim is to reduce our
dependence on batteries.

Further applications for this technology include transmission of information
â it would not interfere with radio waves and thus could be used as a cheap
and efficient communication device without requiring a license or a government
permit.

## [edit] See also

  * List of emerging technologies
  * Nikola Tesla
  * Wireless energy transfer
  * Evanescent wave coupling
  * WREL technology

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ "Wireless electricity could power consumer, industrial electronics". MIT News. 2006-11-14. http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2006/wireless.html.
  2. ^ a b c "Goodbye wiresâ¦". MIT News. 2007-06-07. http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2007/wireless-0607.html.
  3. ^ "Wireless Power Demonstrated". http://thefutureofthings.com/pod/250/wireless-power-demonstrated.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-09.

## [edit] References

  * Aristeidis Karalis; J.D. Joannopoulos, Marin SoljaÄiÄ (January 2008). "Efficient wireless non-radiative mid-range energy transfer". Annals of Physics 323: 34-48. doi:10.1016/j.aop.2007.04.017. "Published online: April 2007".
  * Andre Kurs; Aristeidis Karalis, Robert Moffatt, J.D. Joannopoulos, Peter Fisher, Marin SoljaÄiÄ (July 2007). "Wireless power transfer via strongly coupled magnetic resonances". Science 317: 83-86. doi:10.1126/science.1143254. PMID 17556549. "Published online: June 2007".

## [edit] External links

  * Jim Smithies. "Witricity News". Electricity Bid News. http://www.electricitybid.com/electricity/index.php/category/witricity/.
  * Keith Davis. "WiTricity (Wireless Electricity)". Plooms. http://plooms.com/?p=50.
  * "Marin SoljaÄiÄ (researcher team leader) home page on MIT". http://www.mit.edu/%7Esoljacic/wireless_power.html.
  * Jonathan Fildes (2007-06-07). "Wireless energy promise powers up". BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/6725955.stm.
  * JR Minkel (2007-06-07). "Wireless Energy Lights Bulb from Seven Feet Away". Scientific American. http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?articleid=07511C52-E7F2-99DF-3FA6ED2D7DC9AA20&chanId=sa025.
  * "Breakthrough to a wireless (electricity) future (WiTricity)". The Press Association. 2007-06-07. http://www.breitbart.com/article.php?id=paWirelessThur19Wirelesspower&show_article=1&catnum=0.
  * Katherine Noyes (2007-06-08). "MIT Wizards Zap Electricity Through the Air". TechNewsWorld. http://www.technewsworld.com/story/57757.html.
  * Chris Peredun, Kristopher Kubichi (2007-06-11). "MIT Engineers Unveil Wireless Power System". DailyTech. http://www.dailytech.com/MIT+Engineers+Unveil+Wireless+Power+System/article7632.htm.
  * "Supporting Online Material for Wireless Power Transfer via Strongly Coupled Magnetic Resonances". Science Magazine. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/data/1143254/DC1/1.
  * William C. Brown biography on the IEEE MTT-S website
  * Anuradha Menon (2008-11-14). "Intelâs Wireless Power Technology Demonstrated". The Future of Things e-magazine. http://thefutureofthings.com/news/5763/intel-s-wireless-power-technology-demonstrated.html.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WiTricity"

Categories: Electric power transmission systems

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles in need of updating | All pages needing
cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Polski
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 March 2009, at 06:41.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



