
# CE mark

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The constructional details of the CE mark

For other uses, see CE.

The CE marking (also known as CE mark) is a mandatory conformity mark on many
products placed on the single market in the European Economic Area (EEA). The
CE marking certifies that a product has met EU consumer safety, health or
environmental requirements.

## Contents

  * 1 Significance
  * 2 Declaration of conformity
  * 3 Origin of mark
  * 4 Mutual recognition of conformity assessment
  * 5 The e mark
  * 6 Fake CE marks
  * 7 References
  * 8 Further reading

  
## [edit] Significance

By affixing the CE marking, the manufacturer or person placing the product on
the market or putting it into service asserts that the item meets all the
essential requirements of the relevant European Directive(s). Examples of
European Directives requiring CE marking include toy safety, machinery, low-
voltage equipment, terminal equipment and electromagnetic compatibility. There
are about 25 directives requiring CE marking.[1]

Officially, CE has no meaning as an abbreviation, but may have originally
stood for European accordance (European Community) or ConformitÃ© EuropÃ©enne
("European Conformity").

## [edit] Declaration of conformity

The CE marking is a mandatory European marking for certain product groups to
indicate conformity with the essential health and safety requirements set out
in European Directives. To permit the use of a CE mark on a product, proof
that the item meets the relevant requirements must be documented. Sometimes
this is achieved using an external test house which evaluates the product and
its documentation. Often it is achieved by a company-internal self-
certification process. In any case the responsible organization (manufacturer,
representative, importer) has to issue a EC-Declaration of Conformity (EC-DoC)
indicating his identity (location, etc.), the list of European Directives he
declares compliance with, a list of standards the product complies with, and a
legally binding signature on behalf of the organization. The EC-DoC underlines
the sole responsibility of the manufacturer. When parts of the certification
process for the CE marking are performed by 3rd party test houses or
certification bodies then it is mandatory that the CE symbol also includes a
number identifying the 'Notified Body'.

To be strictly accurate, there are two forms of Declaration, either a
"Declaration of Conformity" or a "Declaration of Incorporation". Generally
speaking this is only the case under the Machinery Directive. For example, a
stand-alone machine that requires only a power source to operate would be
issued with a Declaration of Conformity; whereas a machine that requires
additional systems, attachments, feed conveyors etc, before it can provide its
intended function must be issued with a Declaration of Incorporation. In this
latter case it is illegal to CE Mark such a machine. This can only be achieved
once the machine has been finally installed and all other elements
incorporated into the system. A final risk assessment is performed to verify
compliance of the system and a final Declaration of Conformity is then issued.

Furthermore, these directives are based upon what the European Commission
calls a New Approach, whereby if any of the Article 100A Directives apply to a
product, then they must be followed. There are multiple classes of CE marking.
A CE mark of 1 is easily attainable and does not require toxicology studies,
while a class 3 CE mark is the most difficult to obtain and which comes with
well documented toxicology studies

Directives providing the requirements for the CE marking are created by the
European Union (EU), but the markings are required throughout the European
Economic Area (EEA). According to information provided by the Swiss Government
for Swiss Exporters the CE Mark is not compulsory in Switzerland except for
products for export to the European Union.)

## [edit] Origin of mark

According to an article in The Guardian on 2001-12-23, the mark was designed
by Arthur Eisenmenger. The various components of the CE marking must have
substantially the same vertical dimension, which may not be less than 5 mm.[2]

## [edit] Mutual recognition of conformity assessment

There are numerous 'Agreements on Mutual Recognition of Conformity Assessment'
between the European Union and other countries such as the USA, Japan, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand and Israel. Consequently the CE mark is now found on
many products from these countries.

Turkey (which is not a member of the EEA) also requires products to show CE
marking as affirmations of conformity.

## [edit] The e mark

The similar "e mark", rather than the CE logo, is used on motor vehicles and
components for motor vehicles.[3] (The "e mark" for motor vehicles is not to
be confused with the estimated sign on food labels[4]).

## [edit] Fake CE marks

Some products have a fake CE mark that stands for China Export. The two
letters are close together, not spaced as in the original mark. Products
carrying the China Export CE mark are not confirming conformance to European
specifications. It is probable that the Chinese CE mark has been intentionally
designed to be confused with the European CE mark. [5]

<IMG>

Real CE mark

<IMG>

Fake CE mark  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ "New Approach Standardisation in the Internal Market - Directives & Standards". CEN, CENELEC, ETSI, European Commission and EFTA.. http://www.newapproach.org/Directives/DirectiveList.asp. Retrieved on 2007-06-05.
  2. ^ Connolly, Kate (2001-12-23). "Inventor who coined euro sign fights for recognition". The Observer. http://observer.guardian.co.uk/euro/story/0,10818,624284,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-05. "Arthur Eisenmenger, now 86, created the euro symbol - which is being presented as a 'brand new' sign - more than a quarter of a century ago. It was one of his last assignments before retiring as chief graphic designer for the European Economic Community [...] Eisenmenger was also responsible for creating the European Union flag and for designing the 'CE' European consumer goods quality control symbol."
  3. ^ Jarvis, Tim. ""e" is for Automobile Electronics". Compliance Engineering. http://www.ce-mag.com/archive/03/ARG/jarvis.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-28.
  4. ^ [1]
  5. ^ [2]

## [edit] Further reading

  * Learn how to get CE marking
  * Forum on CE marking
  * The United Kingdom official CE site

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CE_mark"

Categories: European Economic Area | Consumer organizations | Certification
marks

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Basa Sunda
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 08:39.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



