
# Company of Heroes

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article
or discuss these issues on the talk page.

  * It needs to be updated. Tagged since August 2008.  

  * It is written like a game guide and may require cleanup to meet video game article guidelines. Tagged since May 2008.  

  * It may need copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone or spelling. Tagged since August 2008.  

  
Company of Heroes  
Company of Heroes Windows Box cover

  
  
Developer(s) Relic Entertainment  
Publisher(s) THQ  
Designer(s) Josh Mosqueira  
Engine Essence Engine  
Havok (Physics Engine)  
Version 2.400  
Platform(s) Microsoft Windows  
Release date(s) NA September 12, 2006  
PAL September 29, 2006  
  
Genre(s) Real-time strategy  
Mode(s) Single player, Multiplayer  
Rating(s) BBFC: 15  
ESRB: M  
OFLC: MA15+  
PEGI: 18+  
  
Media DVD, Steam  
System requirements * CD-ROM: 8X CD-ROM

  * CPU: 2.0 GHz Intel Pentium IV or AMD Athlon XP or equivalent
  * Hard Drive Space: 6.5 GB
  * DVD-ROM: 8X DVD-ROM
  * RAM: 512 MB RAM
  * Video Card: DirectX 9.0c 64 MB VRAM with Pixel Shader 1.1

  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Gameplay screenshot

Company of Heroes is a real-time strategy computer game developed by Relic
Entertainment. It was released on September 12, 2006, and was the first title
to make use of the Games for Windows label. A standalone expansion, Opposing
Fronts, was released on September 25, 2007. A second standalone expansion,
Tales of Valor is set to be released in April 2009.

Company of Heroes is set during World War II where the player commands two
U.S. military units during the Battle of Normandy and the Allied capture of
France. Depending on the mission, the player controls either the Able Company
or Fox Company, the latter being from the 101st Airborne, and the former being
part of the 29th Infantry Division.

## Contents

  * 1 Gameplay
    * 1.1 Resources
    * 1.2 Buildings
    * 1.3 Factions
      * 1.3.1 Allies
      * 1.3.2 Axis
    * 1.4 Multiplayer
    * 1.5 Game modes
      * 1.5.1 Victory Point Control
      * 1.5.2 Annihilation
  * 2 Story
    * 2.1 Single player campaign
      * 2.1.1 D-Day
      * 2.1.2 Battle of Carentan
      * 2.1.3 Battle of Cherbourg
      * 2.1.4 Operation Cobra
      * 2.1.5 Operation LÃ¼ttich
      * 2.1.6 Falaise Pocket
    * 2.2 Distinguished characters
  * 3 Development
    * 3.1 Game engine
  * 4 Reception
    * 4.1 Reviews
    * 4.2 Awards
  * 5 Expansions
    * 5.1 Company of Heroes: Opposing Fronts
    * 5.2 Company of Heroes: Tales of Valor
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Gameplay

### [edit] Resources

The resource management in Company of Heroes retains micromanagement details
such as reinforcing troops, which has the effect of creating a more tactical
RTS experience.

Players must take control of certain points on the map. The more of these
points a player controls, the more resources they acquire. This concept
demands constant expansion of a player's territory. These points are connected
like supply lines, and so, during the course of a battle a player can capture
one point in the supply line, isolating the rest which had been connected to
the base through it, therefore severely reducing the enemy's resource intake.

Players collect three resources: manpower, munitions, and fuel. Manpower is
necessary to produce all units. Munitions allows players to upgrade individual
squads or vehicles and use special abilities. Fuel allows players to purchase
tanks and other vehicles, as well as global upgrades. The player can decide,
at a manpower cost, to place observation posts on his resource points in order
to increase his production and make them more durable against enemy takeovers,
which means sacrificing resources in the short-term for a greater long-term
intake. Resource points must also be connected as any unconnected captured
points can not produce resources.

Game units generally require a sizable amount of resources to produce. This
separates Company of Heroes from other games in the RTS genre, where large
amounts of massed units are a common sight.

### [edit] Buildings

Units can occupy a building and convert it into field barracks, allowing
certain units or squads to be created by that building.

Medic stations can also be built on the field that house medics, who can
recover fallen soldiers from the battlefield and return them to the medic
station. When enough soldiers are recovered by medics (4 for Germans and 6 for
American), the medic station will provide a free squad at no expense of
manpower.

Infantry units can also occupy buildings and use them as cover or a garrison
to protect against attack, but this limits their firing range because the
infantry are a stationary, immobile target, rendering them vulnerable to
sniper fire and easy to surround. Also, while garrisoned, infantry units can
only shoot out of windows or holes blown into a building. Certain weapons are
immensely effective against units holed up in a building; satchel charges or
infantry-carried rocket launchers can demolish a building, tank fire can blast
the building, and infantry or tanks armed with flamethrowers can literally set
the building on fire and burn out the occupants. However, there are
advantages; infantry are well protected from small arms and most buildings are
sturdy enough to stand up to limited tank fire before collapsing. Also, mildly
related to the subject of buildings collapsing, Company of Heroes was one of
the first WWII strategy games which introduced dynamic building destruction
which took advantage of the physics engine used to make the game, for example,
if a tank was concentrating it's fire on one position of a building near the
bottom, then the whole building (once its "health" was completely depleted)
would collapse in that specific area first and then the rest of the building
would follow.

Occupied buildings can be destroyed after taking fire from enemy units or any
other attack, like artillery fire or demolition charges. Civilian buildings
cannot be repaired or rebuilt. However, both the Allied and German forces can
construct garrisonable buildings (the Allies can build a .30 caliber machine
gun nest, while the Germans can construct bunkers).

The Americans can build a barracks and weapons support center to deploy
infantry (foot soldiers), a motor pool and tank depot for tanks, vehicles and
anti-tank guns. The triage center can heal nearby units that have been wounded
from enemy fire. A supply yard is also required to be built before building a
motor pool or tank depot which enables upgrades to reduce costs of infantry
and tanks.

The Germans can build a variety of structures. The Wehrmacht quarters, Krieg
barracks and Sturm armory lets players create infantry. Krieg Barracks and
Sturm Armory can build light vehicles and other infantry, while the Sturm
Armory and the Panzer Command deploys German tanks at the player's disposal.

The Germans can also build Kampkraft Centre(s) in order to increase veterancy
levels.

### [edit] Factions

#### [edit] Allies

Represented by the Americans, this faction boasts cheap, versatile units.
Veterancy is earned through the act of combat; units gain veterancy as they
kill more and more enemy units and buildings. American infantry units are more
numerous than their Wehrmacht counterparts, but are generally less effective
in a straight fight, and rely on upgrades and abilities to gain the edge in a
fight. American vehicles and tanks, while lacking in raw power, are generally
faster and capable of various support tasks, such as clearing mines or
providing a smoke screen.

Doctrines:

  * Infantry Company: Centered around defence and infantry support, this doctrine allows players to train infantry and build defences faster, employ heavy artillery, and call in reinforcements such as the powerful US Army Rangers.
  * Airborne Company: Centered around paratroopers and air support, this doctrine allows players to deploy paratroopers, call in recon planes, and enjoy the destructive capabilities of the P47 Thunderbolt fighter-bomber.
  * Armor Company: Centered around vehicles and armour support, this doctrine is slow to gain, but boast powerful abilities, such as improved vehicle production, and the mighty M26 Pershing heavy tank.

#### [edit] Axis

Represented by the German Wehrmacht, this faction employs a wider range of
units than the Americans. Wehrmacht units are generally more expensive and
powerful, but also more rigid and ill-equipped beyond their intended roles.
For the Wehrmacht, veterancy is not earned, but "bought" at their Kampfkraft
Centre. Wehrmacht infantry range from simple Volksgrenadier militia to elite
Knight's Cross Holders. Their armour, likewise, also gives players the choice
between inexpensive Panzer IVs or powerful Panthers. Their force is rounded
out by a few more specialised tanks and powerful support units such as
Officers and Nebelwerfer rocket batteries.

Doctrines:

  * Defensive Doctrine: Centered around artillery and defence, this doctrine allows base structures to defend themselves, offers bonuses for defending infantry, and allows players to call in rocket barrages and deploy powerful Flak 88 cannons.
  * Blitzkrieg Doctrine: Centered around speed and offensive operations, this doctrine allows players to speed up their military and economy, and allows players to deploy powerful assault units such as rugged Stormtroopers and the famous Tiger I.
  * Terror Doctrine: Centered around psychological warfare and destructive power, this unusual doctrine provides players with die-hard infantry and the ability to rout the enemy, be it with propaganda, devastating V1 rockets, or a single, powerful Tiger II.

### [edit] Multiplayer

For Company of Heroes, Relic began using a new online gaming system called
Relic Online. Previous Relic games used GameSpy Arcade or World Opponent
Network services. This new system includes many features that the previous
systems did not have, including a built in automatch and ranking system.

This game allows multiplayer matches of 2-8 players via LAN or the Internet.

Company of Heroes allows players to fight as both the Allied and Axis forces
in multiplayer matches.

### [edit] Game modes

#### [edit] Victory Point Control

Victory Point Control games have several victory points around the middle of
the map. These victory points can be captured similarly to strategic points.
When one side has more victory points under their control than another, the
other side's "points" start to decrease. When one side runs out of points,
they lose. Alternatively, the player can simply destroy all enemy structures
to win the game. Before the start of the game, the host can choose between
250, 500, or 1000 points. The point function in Company of Heroes works much
like the ticket feature in the Battlefield (series).

#### [edit] Annihilation

Annihilation games lack the victory points of the Victory Point Control game
mode. To win, the player needs to destroy all enemy buildings excluding
Observation Posts.

Also, infantry and vehicles do not need to be destroyed in order to win
Annihilation.

## [edit] Story

### [edit] Single player campaign

The single player campaign puts the player directly in some of the major
American operations during the Battle of Normandy.

#### [edit] D-Day

The game begins with Able Company's assault at Omaha Beach during the D-Day of
Operation Overlord. Able must first breach the seawall, then take out German
bunkers overlooking the beach, and finally disable the four 88 mm Flak 36
anti-air guns. The game also introduces two of the gameâs major characters:
Captain Mackay and Sergeant Conti. This mission seems to very closely relate
to the way Steven Spielberg directed his interpretation of the D-Day landings
in Saving Private Ryan,[original research?] for example, the over-the-shoulder
shots of the MG42 gunners on top of the cliffs near the bunkers and the scenes
where they use the Bangalore torpedoes to great effect, and additionally some
scenes of Sergeant Conti and Captain McKay clearing the bunkers.

#### [edit] Battle of Carentan

The next three missions are about Fox Company and their actions during the
capture and defense of Carentan. On the night before D-Day, Fox Company must
first regroup after the chaotic airdrops at Vierville, then disrupt enemy
operations in rear areas by opening new drop zones and preventing the Germans
from reinforcing the beaches.

After D-Day, Fox Company is then tasked to capture the city of Carentan to
secure a link between Utah Beach and Omaha beach and to defend it against
ferocious German counterattack. Though constantly bombarded by artillery, Fox
Company is eventually relieved when 2nd Armored arrives at the city and the
link between Utah and Omaha beach is finally secure.

#### [edit] Battle of Cherbourg

Able and Dog Company form the spearhead of the Allied advance to secure
Cherbourg and its deep water port. En route to Cherbourg, Allied supply route
is threatened by elements of the Panzer Lehr division commanded by Hauptmann
Schultz, and Dog Company is ambushed in the process. Able Company manages to
drive the Germans back and defend the supply route for the "Red Ball Express"
to pass through, but by doing so Able Company also becomes the nemesis of the
Panzer Lehr division and Captain Schultz for the rest of the campaign.

With the flank secure, the Allies continue to advance onto Cherbourg. Able and
Dog Company, supported by the 4th Cavalry and the USS Texas, are tasked with
capture of the port facilities. Although Able Company successfully subdues the
German defenders and captures thousands of prisoners, the port has been badly
damaged and is unusable to the Allies.

However, after the battle, Able Company found documents from an Axis bunker
which shows a V-2 Rocket launch site near Sottevast. Fox Company has been
called in to conduct an airborne assault on the V2 facility, while elements of
Able Company rush to the site with armor support.

#### [edit] Operation Cobra

American forces begin to approach the city of St. Lo and Able Company is
arriving from the north. German defenders at St. Fromond hope to stop Able
Companyâs advance by blowing up the only bridge leading into the town. Able
Company repaired the bridge under fire from across the river, and drove the
Germans out of the town. German defenders regroup and organized several
counterattacks with rocket battery support, but all assaults against Able
Company are thrown back with heavy casualties.

Charlie Company is destroyed by the defending Panzer Lehr division under the
command of Captain Shultz, while attempting to secure Hill 192 at the outskirt
of St. Lo. Able Company is assigned to take the hill. Hedgerows around the
hill and hidden flak 88 batteries provided formidable defensive position
against the Allies, but Able Company managed to break through by employing
bulldozer equipped Sherman tanks to plow through the hedgerows and flank the
Germans.

German defenders at St. Lo decide to hold out against American forces by
heavily fortifying the city center, but Able Company planned to surround and
trap the German defenders at the city center rather than a head-on assault.
Although the operation is successful, some German units, including the Panzer
Lehr division, manage to escape destruction. Able Company call in the 8th Air
Force in response and the escaping Germans units suffered heavily due to
carpet bombing.

Badly reduced and under constant air attack, the shattered Panzer Lehr
division is being chased by American forces, and Able Company managed to
intercept what is left of the division at HÃ©bÃ©crevon. A raid is conducted
with fast moving M10 tank destroyers against the Panzer Lehr division's
positions, and almost all of Panzer Lehr division's armor strength, including
the last 7 surviving Panther tanks, are completely wiped out. However, during
the course of the mission, Captain MacKay is killed by the Tiger I under the
personal command of Captain Schultz.

#### [edit] Operation LÃ¼ttich

After losing their commander, newly promoted Lieutenant Conti is taking
command of Able Company. Able Company is taking a break from the war, and has
been reassigned to Mortain to relieve Dog Company at Hill 317. Unfortunately,
on that night, Mortain becomes the focal point of a German counterattack
against recent American successes. Surprised and outnumbered, Able Company is
forced to hold the hill until reinforcements can arrive in the morning.

Dog Company arrives the following morning with armor support and Able Company
begin to dig in and consolidate their positions. German forces renew the
counterattack in force after their surprise night attack has failed to take
the hill, but all attempts are beaten back. Able Company successfully force
the Germans to retreat after inflicting heavy losses, including the
destruction of a Flak 88 battery.

#### [edit] Falaise Pocket

The last section of the single player campaign deals with the destruction of
German forces in France. After suffering a string of defeats, the German army
is forced to retreat in order to avoid encirclement. Allied forces are racing
to trap the German army before it can escape. Baker Company is assigned to
shut down one of the escape routes at Autry, but Captain Schultz's
Panzergruppe, which escaped the destruction of the Panzer Lehr division,
annihilates them. Able Company rushes to the scene with M26 Pershing support
and destroys Captain Schultz's Panzer Gruppe in return. Captain Schultz's
Tiger is among those tanks destroyed in the battle, and Captain MacKay's death
has been avenged.

Chambois becomes the German Seventh Army's last hope for escaping the Falaise
Pocket. With heavy air cover, Canadian, Polish and American forces, led by
Able Company, secure all bridges around Chambois and close the Falaise Pocket.
The German Seventh Army attempts to break free, but they are met with heavy
aerial bombardment and are forced to surrender.

The campaign ends with the caption that Able Company had suffered 80%
casualties at the end of World War II.

### [edit] Distinguished characters

  * Captain Sam MacKay

    The commander of Able Company. He appears to be an Army Ranger by his character model, although he commands a regular infantry company. He is killed by Hauptmann Schultz as revenge, when Able Company successfully obliterated his unit after the battle of St. Lo. He seems to be based on the Tom Hanks character in the film Saving Private Ryan, Captain Miller.
  * Lieutenant Joe Conti

    Served as the of Able Company under Captain MacKay, and is a close friend to MacKay ever since boot camp. He is revealed to be the game's narrator. He is almost killed alongside Captain MacKay. Lieutenant Conti commands Able Company for the rest of the game. Joe Conti lives through the war.
  * Joseph Gunter "Ace" Schultz

    A German tank captain commanding the Tiger Ace from the Panzer Lehr division. He serves as the personal antagonist of Able company. He commands the Panzer-Gruppen (tank groups) that attack the Red Ball Express, where his unit first met Able Company and are badly beaten. Suffering from heavy losses, he watches Captain MacKay from afar while his unit is busy retreating. He later crosses path with Able Company while commanding the forces defending St. Lo, but managed to escape encirclement by Able Company. He kills Captain MacKay when his unit is destroyed while retreating from HÃ¨bÃ¨crevon, and Able Company later conducts their revenge on Schultz while his 152nd Tigergruppe (a group of German Tiger tanks) is being destroyed at Autry.
## [edit] Development

### [edit] Game engine

<IMG>

<IMG>

An M10 Wolverine and American troops in the Essence Engine.

Company of Heroes is Relic's first title to make use of the "Essence Engine".
This engine was designed and coded from scratch by Relic in order to make use
of special graphical effects, including high dynamic range lighting, dynamic
lighting & shadows, advanced shader effects and normal mapping.

COH is rendered in 3D with intricate detailing on the infantry, vehicles and
structures while still retaining a solid frame-rate, without, Relic claims,
the need for a high-end gaming system. It claims that there are nearly 2,000
different animations for a basic infantry unit alone.

Company of Heroes also utilizes the Havok physics engine, giving it a more
realistic physics system than previous RTS games. Parts of buildings can be
destroyed by grenades, satchels or mortars, and tanks can drive through
sections of walls or other barriers. Smoke created from explosions is
programmed to behave as realistically as possible and can even be influenced
by wind. Debris is also influenced by explosions; a blast can send barrels
flying and shower troops in dirt, whilst leaving behind a large crater. When
infantry are bombarded by artillery, body parts sometimes detach and are
dispersed over, and some units are thrown about in the immediate area. Bridges
and buildings can be destroyed by engineers using demolitions.

On May 29, 2007 Relic released a patch for Company of Heroes that included a
new DirectX 10 rendering mode with enhanced terrain, additional world objects,
and improved shadows and lighting. This patch made Company of Heroes the first
commercial video game to support Direct3D 10.

## [edit] Reception

Reception  
Aggregate scores  
Aggregator Score  
GameRankings 94%[2]  
Metacritic 93%[1]  
Review scores  
Publication Score  
1UP.com A+[3]  
ActionTrip 9.3/10[4]  
Eurogamer 10/10[5]  
GameSpot 9.0/10[6]  
GameSpy 5/5 stars<IMG><IMG><IMG><IMG>[7]  
GamesRadar 10/10[8]  
IGN 9.4/10[9]  
Awards  
Entity Award  
IGN (2006)PC Game of the Year[10]  
GameSpy (2006)PC Game of the Year[11]  
### [edit] Reviews

The game received highly positive reviews from critics. On the review
aggregator Game Rankings, the game had an average score of 94% based on 61
reviews[12] â making it the third highest rated game of 2006 and highest
rated PC game of 2006. On Metacritic, the game had an average score of 93 out
of 100, based on 55 reviews â considered "universal acclaim" by the
site.[13] Currently, it is one of the highest-rated real-time strategy games.

### [edit] Awards

  * PC Gamer: Game of the Year 2006
  * Computer Games Magazine: Game of the Year 2006
  * GameSpy: PC Game of 2006, Best Sound, Best PC Strategy Game, Best PC Multiplayer
  * GameSpot: Best PC Game 2006[14], Best Strategy Game[15]
  * IGN: PC Game of 2006[16], Best PC Strategy Game[17], Best Use of Sound on PC[18], Best Online PC game[19]
  * Game Critics Awards: Best Strategy Game
  * GameSpot: 2005 Best PC Game of Show; Best Strategy Game of Show; Best Overall Game of Show[20]
  * IGN: Runner-up, Best Strategy Game (PC), Runner-up, Technological Excellence (PC)
  * GameSpy: Best of E3
  * Interactive Achievement Awards: Strategy Game of the Year

## [edit] Expansions

### [edit] Company of Heroes: Opposing Fronts

Main article: Company of Heroes: Opposing Fronts

Company of Heroes: Opposing Fronts is a standalone expansion pack. It contains
two factions; the British and the German Panzer Elite. Owners of Opposing
Fronts will be able to play against owners of Company of Heroes and vice
versa, although only using the armies from the game they own. Owners of both
games will be able to play all four armies in multiplayer. Opposing Fronts was
officially announced on April 5, 2007[21][22] and was released on September
24, 2007[23].

### [edit] Company of Heroes: Tales of Valor

Main article: Company of Heroes: Tales of Valor

Company of Heroes: Tales of Valor is a standalone expansion pack. Company of
Heroes: Tales of Valor was officially announced on November 3, 2008 and is
scheduled to be released April 8, 2009. Steam release date is set for April 9,
2009.[24][25]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Company of Heroes Review - MetaCritic". Metacritic. http://www.metacritic.com/games/platforms/pc/companyofheroes. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  2. ^ "Company of Heroes Review - GameRankings". http://www.gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/927618.asp. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  3. ^ Peckham, Matt (September 19, 2006). "Company of Heroes Review - 1UP" (in English). 1UP. 1. http://www.1up.com/do/reviewPage?cId=3153681&did=1. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  4. ^ Jojic, Uros (September 19, 2006). "Company of Heroes Review" (in English). ActionTrip. 1. http://www.actiontrip.com/reviews/companyofheroes.phtml. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  5. ^ Gillen, Kieron (September 25, 2006). "Company of Heroes Review - EuroGamer" (in English). EuroGamer. 2. http://www.eurogamer.net/article.php?article_id=67931. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  6. ^ Kasavin, Greg (September 11, 2006). "Company of Heroes Review - GameSpot" (in English). GameSpot. 2. http://www.gamespot.com/pc/strategy/companyofheroes/review.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  7. ^ Raush, Allen (September 14, 2006). "Company of Heroes Review - GameSpy" (in English). GameSpy. 3. http://pc.gamespy.com/pc/company-of-heroes/732881p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  8. ^ Stapleton, Dan. "Company of Heroes Review - GamesRadar" (in English). GamesRadar. 3. http://www.gamesradar.com/pc/review/company-of-heroes/a-20060919154059812037. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  9. ^ Adams, Dan (September 11, 2006). "Company of Heroes Review - IGN" (in English). IGN. 3. http://pc.ign.com/articles/732/732059p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  10. ^ "Company of Heroes - Game of the Year (2006)" (in English). IGN. http://bestof.ign.com/2006/pc/39.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-15.
  11. ^ "Company of Heroes - Game of the Year (2006)" (in English). GameSpy. http://goty.gamespy.com/2006/pc/index11.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-15.
  12. ^ "Company of Heroes Reviews". Game Rankings. http://www.gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/927618.asp. Retrieved on 2008-03-19.
  13. ^ "Company of Heroes (pc: 2006): Reviews". Metacritic. http://www.metacritic.com/games/platforms/pc/companyofheroes. Retrieved on 2008-03-19.
  14. ^ "Best PC Game 2006". Gamespot. http://www.gamespot.com/special_features/bestof2006/platform/index.html?page=11.
  15. ^ "Best Strategy Game 2006". GameSpot. http://www.gamespot.com/special_features/bestof2006/genre/index.html?page=11.
  16. ^ "PC Game of 2006". IGN. http://bestof.ign.com/2006/pc/39.html.
  17. ^ "Best PC Strategy Game". IGN. http://bestof.ign.com/2006/pc/17.html.
  18. ^ "Best Use of Sound on PC". IGN. http://bestof.ign.com/2006/pc/25.html.
  19. ^ "Best Online PC Game". IGN. http://bestof.ign.com/2006/pc/28.html.
  20. ^ "2005 Winners". GameSpot. http://www.gamespot.com/pc/strategy/companyofheroes/news.html?sid=6127234.
  21. ^ Adams, Dan (April 5, 2007). "Company of Heroes: Opposing Fronts Announced" (in English). IGN. http://pc.ign.com/articles/778/778892p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-15.
  22. ^ "THQ Announces Company of Heroes: Opposing Fronts" (in English). GameSpot. April 5, 2007. http://www.gamespot.com/pc/strategy/companyofheroesopposingfronts/news.html?sid=6168639&mode=all. Retrieved on 2008-09-15.
  23. ^ "Shipping Out September 24-28: Halo 3, Opposing Fronts" (in English). GameSpot. September 24, 2007. http://www.gamespot.com/pc/strategy/companyofheroesopposingfronts/news.html?sid=6179816&mode=all. Retrieved on 2008-09-15.
  24. ^ "THQ Announces Company of HeroesÂ®: Tales of Valorâ¢ for Windows PC" (in English). Business Wire. November 3, 2008. http://www.businesswire.com/portal/site/home/permalink/?ndmViewId=news_view&newsId=20081103005317&newsLang=en. Retrieved on 2008-11-03.
  25. ^ Faylor, Chris (November 3, 2008). "Company of Heroes: Tales of Valor Announced" (in English). ShackNews. http://www.shacknews.com/onearticle.x/55695. Retrieved on 2008-11-03.

## [edit] External links

<IMG> Video games portal  
  * Company of Heroes Official Site

v â¢ d â¢ e

Video games developed by Relic Entertainment  
Company of Heroes series

Company of Heroes â¢ Opposing Fronts â¢ Tales of Valor â¢ Online  
Homeworld series

Homeworld â¢ Cataclysm â¢ Homeworld 2  
Warhammer 40,000 series

Dawn of War (Winter Assault â¢ Dark Crusade â¢ Soulstorm)  â¢ Dawn of War
II  
Other titles

The Outfit â¢ Impossible Creatures  
Miscellaneous

Relic Online â¢ Essence Engine  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Company_of_Heroes"

Categories: Company of Heroes | Real-time strategy video games | World War II
video games | 2006 video games | Windows games | Games for Windows certified
games | Mobile phone games | THQ games | Video games developed in Canada |
Lua-scripted games

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles in need of updating | Cleanup from May
2008 | Video games game guide cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing copy edit
from August 2008 | All articles needing copy edit | All articles that may
contain original research | Articles that may contain original research since
April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 15:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



