
# Betel nut beauty

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A highly decorated betel nut kiosk alongside the main street nearby freeway
intersection.

The term Betel nut beauty (also betel nut girl \- æª³æ¦è¥¿æ½, pinyin:
bÄ«nlÃ¡ng xÄ«shÄ«) refers to a common sight along roadsides in Taiwan: a young
woman selling betel nuts and cigarettes from a brightly lit glass enclosure
while wearing revealing clothing.(Openshaw) The Mandarin term names the women
after Xi Shi, the legendary beauty of imperial China's Spring and Autumn
Period. Though betel nuts are chewed in many regions of the Asia-Pacific, the
betel nut beauty phenomenon is distinctly Taiwanese.

The original betel nut beauties were the "Shuangdong Girls" who, in the 1960s,
brought glamour to the opening of the Shuangdong Betel Nut Stand in Guoxing
Township (åå§é), Nantou County (Huang Wan-tran, Taipei Times, 2007
March). The success of the marketing strategy led competitors to follow suit,
and by the end of the century betel nut beauties and their neon-topped kiosks
were a trademark feature of Taiwan's cities and countryside. The kiosks appear
in urban, suburban and rural settings alike. They are most characteristically
encountered along major highways where truck drivers--famously enthusiastic
consumers of betel nuts--can easily find them.

As icons of Taiwanese culture, betel nut beauties appear frequently in art and
film. Betelnut Beauty is the English title of the 2000 film Ai ni ai wo (æä½
ææ, literally "Love you, love me"), and betel nut beauties figure
prominently in the 2007 art film Bangbang wo aishen (English title: Help Me,
Eros).

## Contents

  * 1 Debate
  * 2 Notes
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References and Exterior Links

  
## [edit] Debate

<IMG>

<IMG>

Betel nut beauty on the road between Taipei and Hsinchu.

Controversy surrounding betel nut beauties generally centers on two questions:
(1) the propriety of their revealing dress in public places and (2) whether
their dress marks them as victims of exploitation.

Betel nut beauties often hail from agricultural and working-class sectors of
Taiwanese society. This has led some critics to regard their revealing dress
as a sign of exploitation. Other observers take a more benign view. If most
betel nut beauties come from agricultural and working-class backgrounds, so do
their customers and employers. Betel nuts are, after all, an agricultural
product. These observers are more inclined to see these betel nut vendors as
self-empowering: young women with few resources who better their economic
situation by employing a marketing technique that requires confidence. The
same approach is evident, they say, wherever trade show and fashion models do
their work. Ordinances that target betel nut beauties exclusively, say these
observers, smack of hypocrisy and class discrimination.  
The Center for the Study of Sexualities in National Central University has
been promoting the self-empowerment of betel nut beauties. Citing other
occupations that also involve female nudity, for example, show girls, female
liquor promoters, nude models for artistic purposes, pole dancers, or even
popular Taiwanese singer Jolin Tsai. The underlying notion is that is there
are differences in degrees of female nudity?[1]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ "Betel Nut Beauties"by Eva Tang, December 9,2008. Taiwan Culture Portal http://www.culture.tw/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1032&Itemid=157

## [edit] See also

  * Betel nut
  * Areca catechu

## [edit] References and Exterior Links

  * Tobie Openshaw. Betelnut Beauties. An extensive Flickr photo set and discussion by Tobie Openshaw, who has been researching and documenting the girls for many years.
  * Taiwan's 'betel nut beauties' drum up business, and debate LA Times Jan 22, 2009. Story by Mark Magnier, Photos by Tobie Openshaw
  * Taiwan Culture Portal : Betel Nut Beauties-Beautiful Objects in a Shiny Box
  * "Photographer Tobie Openshawâs Betelnut Beauty exhibition." â Taipei Times, March 2007
  * Video Promo video for a proposed documentary by Tobie Openshaw on the Betelnut girl culture
  * Betel nut beauty æª³æ¦è¥¿æ½. Links to the betel-nut beauty phenomenon in Taiwan.
  * Film: Bangbang wo aishen (2007). Internet Movie Database (IMDb).
  * Film: Ai ni ai wo (2001). Internet Movie Database (IMDb).
  * Huang Wan-tran. "Why Pick on Betel-nut Beauties?" Taipei Times, 2007-03-12.
  * Venkatesan Vembu. "The Betel-nut Beauties of Taiwan." Daily News & Analysis, India, 2007-01-30.
  * "Betel nut brouhaha exposes disagreement". Asia Times, 9 October 2002
  * "Taiwan's Betel Nut Beauties: Under Pressure from All Sides". 'Taiwan Church News, 25 October 2002
  * "Taiwan's 60,000 Betel-Nut Beauties Thwart Effort to Curb Cancer." Bloomberg News'
  * Audrey Wang. "Betelnut Culture Turns Over a New Leaf." Taiwan Review, 2008-02-01.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betel_nut_beauty"

Categories: Taiwanese culture | Beauty

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 15:27 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



