
# Soft systems methodology

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Soft systems methodology (SSM) is an approach to organisational process
modeling (business process modeling) and it can be used both for general
problem solving and in the management of change. It was developed in England
by academics at the University of Lancaster Systems Department through a ten
year Action Research programme.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 The 7-stage description
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 Further reading
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

The methodology was developed from earlier systems engineering approaches,
primarily by Peter Checkland and colleagues such as Brian Wilson. The primary
use of SSM is in the analysis of complex situations where there are divergent
views about the definition of the problem â "soft problems" (e.g. How to
improve health services delivery; How to manage disaster planning; When should
mentally disordered offenders be diverted from custody? What to do about
homelessness amongst young people?).

In such situations even the actual problem to be addressed may not be easy to
agree upon. To intervene in such situations the soft systems approach uses the
notion of a "system" as an interrogative device that will enable debate
amongst concerned parties. In its 'classic' form the methodology consists of
seven steps, with initial appreciation of the problem situation leading to the
modelling of several human activity systems that might be thought relevant to
the problem situation. By discussions and exploration of these the decision
makers will arrive at accommodations (or, exceptionally, at consensus) over
what changes may be systemically desirable and situationally feasible. Later
explanations of the ideas give a more sophisticated view of this systemic
method, and do give more attention to locating the methodology in respect to
its philosophical underpinnings. It is though the earlier classical view which
is most widely used in practice.

There are several hundred documented examples of the successful use of SSM in
many different fields, ranging from ecology, to business and military
logistics. It has been adopted by many organisations and incorporated into
other approaches: in the 1990s for example it was the recommended planning
tool for the UK government's SSADM system development methodology.

The general applicability of the approach has led to some criticisms that it
is functionalist, non-emancipatory or supports the status quo and existing
power structures; this is a claim that users would deny, arguing that the
methodology itself can be none of these, it is the user of the methodology
that may choose to employ it in such a way.

The methodology has been described in several books and many academic
articles.

SSM remains the most widely used and practical application of systems
thinking, and other systems approaches such as Critical systems thinking have
incorporated many of its ideas

## [edit] The 7-stage description

7-stage representation of SSM:

  1. Enter situation considered problematical
  2. Express the problem situation
  3. Formulate root definitions of relevant systems of purposeful activity
  4. Build conceptual models of the systems named in the root definitions
  5. Comparing models with real world situations
  6. Define possible changes which are both possible and feasible
  7. Take action to improve the problem situation

## [edit] See also

  * Enterprise modelling
  * Hard systems
  * Holism
  * List of thought processes
  * Portal:thinking
  * Structured Systems Analysis and Design Method
  * Systems theory
  * Systems thinking
  * Systems philosophy

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Checkland, P.B. (2001) Soft Systems Methodology, in J. Rosenhead and J. Mingers (eds), Rational Analysis for a Problematic World Revisited. Chichester: Wiley

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2008)  
## [edit] Further reading

Books

  * Checkland, P.B. and J. Scholes (2001) Soft Systems Methodology in Action, in J. Rosenhead and J. Mingers (eds), Rational Analysis for a Problematic World Revisited. Chichester: Wiley
  * Checkland, P.B. & Poulter, J. (2006) Learning for Action: A short definitive account of Soft Systems Methodology and its use for Practitioners, teachers and Students, Wiley, Chichester. ISBN 10 0-470-02554-9
  * Checkland, P.B. Systems Thinking, Systems Practice, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1981, 1998. ISBN 0-471-98606-2
  * Checkland, P.B. and S. Holwell Information, Systems and Information Systems, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1998. ISBN 0-471-95820-4
  * Wilson, B. Systems: Concepts, Methodologies and Applications, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1984, 1990. ISBN 0-471-92716-3
  * Wilson, B. Soft Systems Methodology, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 2001. ISBN 0-471-89489-3

Articles

  * Dale Couprie et al. (2007) Soft Systems Methodology Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary.
  * Mark P. Mobach, Jos J. van der Werf & F.J. Tromp (2000). The art of modelling in SSM, in papers ISSS meeting 2000.
  * Ian Bailey (2008) MODAF and Soft Systems. white paper.

## [edit] External links

  * Peter Checkland homepage.
  * Models for Change Soft Systems Methodology . Business Process Transformation, 1996.
  * Soft systems methodology Action research and evaluation on line, 2007.
  * Checkland and Smyth's CATWOE and Soft Systems Methodology, Business Open Learning Archive 2007.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soft_systems_methodology"

Categories: Thought | Systems theory | Methodology | Enterprise modelling

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Nederlands

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 20 April 2009, at 04:04 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



