
# Ingenue (stock character)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(December 2007)  
<IMG>

Mary Pickford, a perpetual ingenue

"Ingenuousness" redirects here. For the business concept, see ingenuity.

The IngÃ©nue (pronounced /ËÃ¦nÊÉnuË/) is a stock character in literature,
film, and a role type in the theatre; generally a girl or a young woman who is
endearingly innocent and wholesome.

Typically, the ingenue is beautiful, gentle, sweet, virginal, and often
naÃ¯ve, in mental or emotional danger, or even physical danger, usually a
target of The Cad; whom she may have mistaken for The Hero. Due to lack of
independence, the ingenue usually lives with her father or a father figure
(although in some rare cases she lives with a mother figure). The vamp is
often a foil for the ingenue (or the damsel in distress, for that matter).

In opera and musical theatre, the ingenue is usually sung by a lyric soprano.
The ingenue stereotypically has the fawn-eyed innocence of a child.

The ingenue is often accompanied with a romantic side plot. This romance is
usually considered pure and harmless to both participants. In many cases, but
not all, the male participant is just as innocent as the ingenue is. The
ingenue is also similar to the girl next door archetype.

Ingenue may also refer to a new young actress or one typecast in such roles.

## [edit] References

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2006)  
## [edit] See also

  * Feminist film theory
  * Femme Fatale
  * Damsel in distress

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ingenue_(stock_character)"

Categories: French words and phrases | Stock characters

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since December
2007 | All articles that may contain original research | Articles lacking
sources from November 2006 | All articles lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 October 2008, at 04:02 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



