
# Ephemeralization

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Ephemeralization is a term coined by R. Buckminster Fuller. It refers to the
ability of technological advancement to do "more and more with less and less
until eventually you can do everything with nothing." Fullerâs vision was
that ephemeralization will result in ever-increasing standards of living for
an ever-growing population despite finite resources.

Fuller refers to Henry Fordâs assembly line as an example of how
ephemeralization can continuously lead to better products at lower cost with
no upper bounds on productivity.

Fuller saw ephemeralization as an inevitable trend in human development. The
progression was from âcompressionâ to âtensionâ to âvisualâ to
âabstract electricalâ (i.e., nonsensorial radiation, such as radio waves,
x rays, etc.). Length measurement technologies in human development, for
example, started with a compressive measure, such as a ruler. The compressive
technique reached an upper limit with a rod. For longer measures, a tensive
measure such as a string or rope was used. This reached an upper limit with
sagging of the string. Next was a surveyorâs telescope (visual). This
reached an upper limit with curvature of the earth. Next was radio
triangulation (abstract electrical). The technological progression was
constantly greater length-measuring ability per pound of instrument, with no
apparent upper limit. [1]

### [edit] Consequences to society

Heyligen[2] , Alvin Toffler, and others have written about how
ephemeralization, though it may increase our power to solve physical problems,
can make non-physical problems much worse. Increasing system complexity and
information overload make it difficult and stressful for the people who must
control the ephemeralized systems. This can negate the advantages of
ephemeralization.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ R Buckminster Fuller, Nine Chains to the Moon, Anchor Books 1938, 1971 pp 252- 259
  2. ^ Heyligen, Complexity and Information Overload in Society: why increasing efficiency leads to decreasing control http://web.archive.org/web/20070103091059/http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/papers/Info-overload.pdf

<IMG> This article about an engineering topic is a stub. You can help
Wikipedia by expanding it.

## [edit] External links

  * Essay on ephemeralization (worldtrans.org)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ephemeralization"

Categories: Engineering stubs | Technological change

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 March 2009, at 02:11 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



