
# Macrocosm and microcosm

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For use of Macrocosm in literature, see Macrocosm in Mundane

Macrocosm and microcosm is an ancient Greek schema of seeing the same patterns
reproduced in all levels of the cosmos, from the largest scale (macrocosm or
universe-level) all the way down to the smallest scale (microcosm or sub-sub-
atomic or even metaphysical-level).

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 See also
  * 3 References
  * 4 Bibliography
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] History

It may have begun with Democritus in the 5th century BCE or with Pythagoras
and is a philosophical conception that runs through Socrates, and Plato all
the way to the Renaissance. With Pythagoras, the discovery of the golden ratio
and its philosophical conception called the Golden mean, the Greeks observed
the golden ratio in many parts of the ordered universe both large and small.
Philosophically, the Greeks were concerned with a rational explanation of
everything and saw the repetition of the golden mean throughout the world and
all levels of reality as a step towards this unifying theory. In short, it is
the recognition that the same traits appear in entities of many different
sizes, from one man to the entire human population.

Macrocosm/microcosm is a Greek compound of Î¼Î±ÎºÏÎ¿- "Macro-" and
Î¼Î¹ÎºÏÎ¿- "Micro-", which are Greek respectively for "large" and "small",
and the word Îºá½¹ÏÎ¼Î¿Ï kÃ³smos which means "order" as well as "world" or
"ordered world".

The English physician and alchemist Robert Fludd (1574-1637) expicitly based
his work Utriusque Cosmi Historia (The history of the two worlds) upon the
macro/micro correspondence; as did Sir Thomas Browne in his binary Discourses
of 1658: Hydriotaphia, Urn Burial depicts the small, temporal world of man,
whilst The Garden of Cyrus represents the macrocosm, in which the ubiquitous
and eternal quincunx pattern is discerned in art, nature and the Cosmos.

The great enigma of alchemy is the mystery between the macrocosm and
microcosm. Equally an unsolved enigma of English literature is the
relationship between Browne's diptych Discourses: the microcosm world of
Hydriotaphia, Urn Burial and the macrocosm world of The Garden of Cyrus.
Today, the concept of microcosm has been taken over by sociology to mean a
small group of individuals whose behavior is typical of a larger social body
encompassing it. A microcosm can be seen as a special kind of epitome.

Conversely, a macrocosm is a social body made of smaller compounds.

## [edit] See also

  * Family as a model for the state
  * Golden Mean
  * Surat Shabda Yoga
  * Rose Cross and Alchemy
  * Emerald Tablet
  * Arcology

## [edit] References

  1. Republic, Plato, trans. By B. Jowett M.A., Vintage Books, NY. Â§ 435, pg 151

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Theories of Macrocosms and Microcosms in the History of Philosophy, G. P. Conger, NY, 1922, which includes a survey of critical discussions up to 1922.

## [edit] External links

  * Cosmos - an Illustrated Dimensional Journey from microcosmos to macrocosmos \- from Digital Nature Agency
  * Macrocosm and Microcosm, in Dictionary of the History of Ideas

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macrocosm_and_microcosm"

Categories: Classical studies | Classical Greek philosophy | Esoteric
cosmology | Shabd paths

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Shqip
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 05:01.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



