
# Online magazine

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2008)  
<IMG>

It has been suggested that Ezine be merged into this article or section.
(Discuss)  
An online magazine shares some features with a blog, but can usually be
distinguished by its approach to editorial control. Magazines typically have
editors or editorial boards who review submissions and perform a quality
control function to ensure that all material meets the expectations of the
publishers (those investing time or money in its production) and the
readership.

Online magazines that are part of the World Wide Web, that is, all or part of
a web site, are also called webzines. Ezine (also spelled e-zine and usually
pronounced "e-zeen") is a more generic term commonly applied to magazines and
newsletters distributed by any electronic method, for example, by electronic
mail (e-mail/email). Some social groups may use the terms cyberzine and
hyperzine when referring to electronically distributed resources. Similarly,
some online magazines may refer to themselves as "electronic magazines" to
reflect their readership demographics, and more importantly to capture
alternative terms and spellings in online searches.

Many large print-publishers now provide digital reproduction of their print
magazine titles through various online services for a fee. These service
providers also refer to their collections of these digital format products as
online magazines.

Online magazines representing matters of interest to specialists in or
societies for academic subjects, science, trade or industry are typically
referred to as online journals.

## Contents

  * 1 Business model
  * 2 Growth
  * 3 Conferences
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References

  
## [edit] Business model

Many general interest online magazines provide free access to all aspects of
their online content although some publishers have opted to require a
subscription fee to access premium online article and/or multi-media content.
Online magazines generate revenue based on targeted search ads to web-site
visitors, banner ads (online display advertising), affiliations to retail web
sites, classified advertisements, product-purchase capabilities, advertiser
directory links, or alternative informational/commercial purpose.

The original online magazines, ezines and disk magazines, due to their low
cost and initial non-mainstream targets, may be seen as a disruptive
technology to traditional publishing houses. The high cost of print
publication and large web readership has encouraged these publishers to
embrace the World Wide Web as a marketing and content delivery system and
another medium for delivering their advertiser's messages.

## [edit] Growth

In the late 1990s ezine publishers began adapting to the interactive qualities
of the Internet instead of duplicating magazines on the web. Publishers of
traditional print titles and entrepreneurs with an eye to a potential
readership in the millions started publishing online titles. Salon ([1])
founded in July 1995 by David Talbot was launched with considerable media
exposure and today reports 5.8 million monthly unique visitors.

In the 2000s, some webzines began appearing in a printed format to complement
their online versions. These included Movie Insider, Slate, Synthesis and
Lucire magazines.

## [edit] Conferences

Between 1998 and 2005, in San Francisco and New York, a series of webzine-
focused conferences brought together independent personal online publishers to
share their experiences. Started by Srini Kumar, the "Webzine" conferences
were continued primarily by filmmaker Ryan Junell and Eddie Codel. Junell has
worked to track the history of the early webzine movement through these
festivals; his research is linked below. After a hiatus, Codel and Junell
organized the return of the Webzine conference to the Bay Area in 2005.
Webzine 2005 took place over two days at the Swedish-American Hall in San
Francisco. It consisted of three main areas: speakers and panel discussions,
workshops and a self-organizing area called the Master's Lounge modeled after
BAR Camp. Webzine 2005 was emceed by veteran Webzine emcee Justin Hall,
Annalee Newitz and Charlie Anders.

## [edit] See also

  * List of online magazine archives
  * Digital edition
  * Diskmag
  * Electronic journal
  * Ezine
  * History of the Internet
  * News site
  * Online journal
  * Panache Magazine
  * Pitchfork
  * RSQ (magazine)
  * ScribbleSheet
  * Sole Proprietor Magazine
  * Underground ezine
  * Zine

## [edit] References

ISSN International Centre, ISSN Manual Cataloguing Part, January 2009. [2]

International Organization for Standardization, ISO 3297:2007 â Information
and documentation â International standard serial number (ISSN) [3]

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_magazine"

Categories: Online magazines | Zines | Publications by format | Electronic
publishing

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2008 |
Articles to be merged since March 2008 | All articles to be merged

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 23 March 2009, at 15:09.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



