
# Dictionary attack

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

In cryptanalysis and computer security, a dictionary attack is a technique for
defeating a cipher or authentication mechanism by trying to determine its
decryption key or passphrase by searching likely possibilities.

A dictionary attack uses a brute-force technique of successively trying all
the words in an exhaustive list (from a pre-arranged list of values). In
contrast with a normal brute force attack, where a large proportion key space
is searched systematically, a dictionary attack tries only those possibilities
which are most likely to succeed, typically derived from a list of words in a
dictionary. Generally, dictionary attacks succeed because many people have a
tendency to choose passwords which are short (7 characters or fewer), single
words found in dictionaries or simple, easily-predicted variations on words,
such as appending a digit.

## Contents

  * 1 Use
  * 2 Pre-computed dictionary attack
  * 3 See also
  * 4 Examples
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Use

Dictionary attacks may be applied in two main situations:

  * in cryptanalysis, in trying to determine the decryption key for a given piece of ciphertext;
  * in computer security, in trying to circumvent an authentication mechanism for accessing a computer system by guessing passwords.

In the latter case, the effect of a dictionary attack can be greatly reduced
by limiting the number of authentication attempts that can be performed each
minute, and even blocking further attempts after a threshold of failed
authentication attempts is reached. Generally, six attempts is considered
sufficient to cope with mistakes made by legitimate users; beyond that, one
can safely assume that the user is a malicious attacker.

However many systems store a hashed version of the password and make it
available under certain circumstances, such as a challenge-response
authentication exchange between two parties. If an attacker can obtain the
hashed password, they can test guessed passwords rapidly, often at a rate of
tens or hundreds of millions of guesses per second. [1] The rate of guessing
can be sharply reduced by using a key derivation function that is
computationally intensive, such as PBKDF2. Since users often choose easily
guessed passwords, this has historically succeeded more than two times out of
ten when a reasonably large list is used. Lists of commonly selected passwords
are widely available on the Internet as are dictionaries for most human
languages (even those no longer used), meaning even the use of foreign words
has limited value in preventing dictionary attacks.

Spammers often use a form of dictionary attack, sometimes known as a Directory
Harvest Attack, for e-mail address harvesting. For example, a spammer may try
sending messages to adam@example.com, barbara@example.com, carl@example.com,
etc. Any addresses to which messages are delivered, as opposed to being
bounced back, can be added to the spammer's list of known-valid addresses.

Clifford Stoll's book, The Cuckoo's Egg, contains an account of a dictionary
attack against the encrypted passwords kept in the passwd file on Unix
systems, and of the reaction to the successful attack by the man (Robert
Morris) who invented the one-way encryption system used for login
passwords.[clarification needed]

## [edit] Pre-computed dictionary attack

It is possible to achieve a time-space tradeoff through precomputation by
encrypting and storing a list of encrypted dictionary words, sorted by the
encrypted value. This requires a considerable amount of preparation time, but
makes the actual attack almost instantaneous. The storage requirements for the
pre-computed tables were once a major cost, but are less of an issue today due
to the rapid improvements in hard drive technology. Pre-computed dictionary
attacks are particularly effective when a large number of passwords are to be
cracked at once. A more refined approach involves the use of rainbow tables.
Salting is a technique that forces the encrypted dictionary to be recomputed
for each password sought, potentially making precomputation infeasable,
provided the salt value is large enough.

## [edit] See also

  * Brute force attack
  * Password cracking
  * Password strength
  * Rainbow table
  * Key derivation function
  * Key strengthening
  * E-mail address harvesting

## [edit] Examples

Well known examples of dictionary attack software tools:

  * Crack by Alec Muffett
  * John the Ripper
  * L0phtCrack
  * Cain
  * Brutus
  * TCH Hydra

## [edit] External links

  * RFC 2828 \- Internet Security Glossary
  * RFC 4949 \- Internet Security Glossary, Version 2
  * RSA BSAFE Crypto-C Glossary
  * US Secret Service use a distributed dictionary attack on suspect's password protecting encryption keys
  * Library with several Dictionaries
  * Testing for Brute Force (OWASP-AT-004)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dictionary_attack"

Categories: Cryptographic attacks

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing
clarification from January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 19:41.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



