
# DIN 1451

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>  
Category Sans-serif  
Foundry Linotype GmbH, Font Shop International  
DIN 1451 is a realist sans-serif typeface widely used standard typeface for
traffic, administration and business applications.

It has been defined by the German standards body Deutsches Institut fÃ¼r
Normung since 1936.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Linotype version
    * 2.1 DIN 1451 Pro W1G MittelSchrift
  * 3 DIN Next
    * 3.1 DIN Next Rounded
  * 4 Usage examples
    * 4.1 Corporate branding
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 Further reading
  * 8 Links

  
## [edit] Overview

The DIN 1451 typeface is very legible and easy to reproduce. Both a medium and
a narrow version are defined today; an older broad version is no longer used
but may still be encountered on some very old road signs in Germany. The
typeface has gained popularity due to its wide exposure and has been also used
by non-governmental organisations and businesses. For graphic design and
desktop publishing, FontShop offers an extended version of this typeface
called FF DIN.

The origins of this typeface go back to the "IV 44" type sheet defined by the
Prussian rail network in 1906 for use on its trains. A number of glyphs have
changed since then, in particular "t", "6" and "9".

The article series "The history of the design of a contemporary typeface"
provides more information about the origins of the typeface.

It is a widely used standard typeface for traffic, administration and business
applications. In particular, DIN 1451 is the typeface commonly used on road
and railway signage in Germany and a number of other countries. It was also
used for many years on German car number plates, until it was replaced there
in November 2000 by FE-Schrift, a font especially designed for number plates
that is optimized for better tamper resistance and easier automatic character
recognition.

## [edit] Linotype version

It consists of DIN 1451 MittelSchrift and the consensed DIN 1451 EngSchrift
fonts.

OpenType version supports ISO Adobe 2, Adobe CE, Latin Extended character
sets. OpenType features include alternates.

### [edit] DIN 1451 Pro W1G MittelSchrift

It is a version of DIN 1451 MittelSchrift supporting ISO Adobe 2, Adobe CE,
Latin Extended, Greek, Cyrillic character sets.

## [edit] DIN Next

It is a variant based on DIN 1451 Engschrift and Mittelschrift, designed by
Akira Kobayashi of Linotype. Changes include fixing inconsistencies in the old
fonts, rounded corners at terminals to emulate the machine cuts of the
original fonts, altered terminal angles to reproduce the machine cuts of DIN
1451.

The family includes 21 fonts in 7 weights and 2 widths, with complementary
italics for the widest width fonts. It supports ISO-Adobe, Adobe CE, Latin
Extended character sets. OpenType features include small caps (lightest 4
weights roman fonts only), old style figures, subscript/superscript,
alternates.

Alternates include:

  * Uppercase C and G with flat stroke or diagonal endings.
  * Serif and sans-serif forms of uppercase I.
  * Single-storey lowercase a.
  * Lowercase q with an upstroke at the descender end.
  * Ã ligature composed by long-s and long-z.
  * 1 with base serif.
  * Rounded 6 and 9.
  * Slashed 0.
  * 7 and capital Z with horizontal strokes through their diagonals.

### [edit] DIN Next Rounded

It is a rounded variant of the font family.

The family includes 4 fonts in 4 weights and 1 width, with no italics.
OpenType features include old style figures, subscript/superscript,
alternates.

## [edit] Usage examples

<IMG>

<IMG>

The pre-1994 German number plate format (DIN-style), no longer issued but
sometimes still in use.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Road sign with DIN 1451 Mittelschrift and Engschrift typefaces

### [edit] Corporate branding

  * Logotype and corporate typeface of Sapient corporation
  * Logo of the video game Half-Life, with the "A" supplanted by the lower case lambda symbol
  * Early 2000s on-screen branding of Channel 4 (British television station)
  * An adapted version, Habitat DIN, is used by Habitat (retailer)
  * Corporate branding of The New West End Company (the Business Improvement District company for London's West End)
  * Belgian VRT news service (De Redactie) for logo and news broadcasts.
  * Plone logo
  * Dutch website DigitaalMedia.nl for logo and the news broadcasts.
  * Primary font used in Simon Fraser University documents
  * Font for Nine News for their title
  * Primary font used in York Region Transit
  * Corporate font used by Birmingham City University

## [edit] See also

  * Typography
  * Public signage typefaces

## [edit] References

The series of articles "The history of the design of a contemporary typeface"
in which Albert-Jan Pool published many of his findings on the history of the
typefaces of DIN 1451 is a vault of references on this subject. The series was
published in the e-magazine 'Encore', issues 13-15, 17-18. These are direct
links to the articles.

  * Industrial Archeology â DIN, the first German Corporate Typeface?
  * The Constructivist Connection â DIN, Bauhaus and the New Typography
  * Siemens sets a Standard â DIN 1451 on its way up
  * DIN for All: From the Economic Miracle to Art and Vernacular Typography â FF DIN: New at the Start
  * How German is the DIN typeface? â Fahren, fahren, fahren at the Autobahn

## [edit] Further reading

  * DIN 1451-2: Schriften â Serifenlose Linear-Antiqua â Verkehrsschrift. Deutsches Institut fÃ¼r Normung, 1986-02.
  * Made with FontFont: FF DIN â The history of a contemporary typeface, article by Albert-Jan Pool in collaboration with Jan Middendorp, BIS Publishers, 2006.

This is an updated version of the series of articles in Encore Magazine that
were published in 2004â2005.

## [edit] Links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: DIN 1451  
  * Download of public domain fonts used on roadsigns
  * DIN 1451 Font Family - by Linotype Design Studio
  * Font Collections - DIN Next
  * DIN Next Font Family - by Akira Kobayashi, Linotype Design Studio

v â¢ d â¢ e

Traffic signs  
Signs

Warning sign Â· Regulatory sign Â· Priority to the right Â· Yield sign Â· Stop
sign Â· Prohibitory traffic sign Â· One-way traffic Â· Speed limit (by
country) Â· Advisory speed limit Â· Mandatory sign Â· Special regulation sign
Â· Information sign Â· Facility sign Â· Direction, position, or indication
sign Â· Variable-message sign Â· Additional panels Â· Bilingual sign Â·
Comparison of European traffic signs  
By country

United States Â· Iceland Â· Ireland Â· Italy Â· Malaysia Â· Norway Â·
Singapore Â· Sweden Â· Thailand Â· United Kingdom (Scotland) Â· Brazil Â·
India  
Lights

Traffic light  
Typefaces

Clearview Â· DIN 1451 Â· FHWA Standard Alphabets for Traffic Control Devices
Â· Frutiger Â· CaractÃ¨res (typeface) Â· NPS Rawlinson Roadway Â·
Trafikkalfabetet Â· Transport Â· Tratex  
Conventions

Geneva Convention on Road Traffic Â· Vienna Convention on Road Traffic Â·
Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals Â· Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DIN_1451"

Categories: Government typefaces | Grotesque sans-serif typefaces | DIN
standards

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Nederlands

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 23 March 2009, at 23:46 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



