
# Maillard reaction

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG> Food portal  
The Maillard reaction is a chemical reaction between an amino acid and a
reducing sugar, usually requiring heat. It is vitally important in the
preparation or presentation of many types of food, and, like caramelization,
it is a form of non-enzymatic browning. The reaction is named after the
chemist Louis-Camille Maillard who investigated it in the 1910s, although it
has been used in practical cooking since prehistoric times.

The reactive carbonyl group of the sugar reacts with the nucleophilic amino
group of the amino acid, and forms a variety of interesting but poorly
characterized molecules responsible for a range of odors and flavors. This
process is accelerated in an alkaline environment as the amino groups are
deprotonated and hence have an increased nucleophilicity. This reaction is the
basis of the flavoring industry, since the type of amino acid determines the
resulting flavor.

In the process, hundreds of different flavor compounds are created. These
compounds in turn break down to form yet more new flavor compounds, and so on.
Each type of food has a very distinctive set of flavor compounds that are
formed during the Maillard reaction. It is these same compounds that flavor
scientists have used over the years to create artificial flavors.

## Contents

  * 1 Foods and products with Maillard reactions
  * 2 The process
  * 3 Factors
  * 4 Physiology
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links
  * 7 References

  
## [edit] Foods and products with Maillard reactions

<IMG>

<IMG>

6-Acetyl-2,3,4,5-  
tetrahydropyridine

<IMG>

<IMG>

2-Acetylpyrroline

The Maillard reaction is responsible for many colors and flavors in foods:

  * Toasted bread
  * Biscuit
  * Malted barley as in malt whiskey or beer
  * Roasted or seared meat
  * Dried or condensed milk
  * Roasted coffee
  * Dulce de leche

6-Acetyl-2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine is responsible for the biscuit or cracker-
like flavor present in baked goods like bread, popcorn, tortilla products. The
structurally related compound 2-acetylpyrroline has a similar smell and occurs
also naturally without heating and gives varieties of cooked rice and the
spice pandan (Pandanus amaryllifolius) their typical smell. Both compounds
have odor thresholds below 0.06 ng/l.[1]

The browning reactions which occur when meat is roasted or seared have often
been referred to as Maillard reaction browning. However, lean meat contains
very few, if any, reducing sugars. Furthermore, red meat undergoes more
extensive browning than does white meat. The browning reactions in lean meat
are most likely due to the breakdown of the tetrapyrrole rings of the muscle
protein, myoglobin. Thus, the browning of meat is technically not a Maillard
browning since it does not involve the reaction with a reducing sugar.

Caramelization is an entirely different process from Maillard browning, though
the results of the two processes are sometimes similar to the naked eye (and
tastebuds). Caramelization may sometimes cause browning in the same foods in
which the Maillard reaction occurs, but the two processes are distinct. They
both are promoted by heating, but the Maillard reaction involves amino acids,
as discussed above, while caramelization is simply the pyrolysis of certain
sugars. The following things are a result of the Maillard browning reaction:

  * Caramel made from milk and sugar, especially in candies; NB: milk is high in protein (amino acids) and browning of food involving this complex ingredient would most likely include Maillard reactions. See references below.
  * Chocolate and maple syrup
  * lightly roasted peanuts

In making silage, excess heat causes the Maillard reaction to occur, which
reduces the amount of energy and protein available to the animals that feed on
it.

## [edit] The process

  1. The carbonyl group of the sugar reacts with the amino group of the amino acid, producing N-substituted glycosylamine and water
  2. The unstable glycosylamine undergoes Amadori rearrangement, forming ketosamines
  3. There are several ways for the ketosamines to react further: 
    * Produce 2 water and reductones
    * Diacetyl, aspirin, pyruvaldehyde and other short-chain hydrolytic fission products can be formed
    * Produce brown nitrogenous polymers and melanoidins

## [edit] Factors

High temperature, low moisture levels (low moisture levels are mainly
necessary because water boils into steam at 212 Fahrenheit (100 Celsius),
whereas the Maillard reaction happens noticeably around 310 Fahrenheit (155
Celsius): by the time something is in fact browning, all the water is
vaporized), and alkaline conditions all promote the Maillard reaction.[2]

The rate of Maillard reactions increases as the water activity increases,
reaching a maximum at water activities in the range of 0.6 to 0.7. However, as
the Maillard reaction produces water, further increases in water activity may
inhibit Maillard reactions.[3]

Pentose sugars react more than hexoses, which react more than disaccharides.
Different amino acids produce different amounts of browning.

## [edit] Physiology

The Maillard reaction also occurs in the human body. It is a step in the
formation of advanced glycation endproducts.[4] It is tracked by measuring
pentosidine.

## [edit] See also

  * Advanced glycation endproduct
  * Baking
  * Beer
  * Wok hei

## [edit] External links

  * Course website on Maillard reaction (archived copy)
  * Diagram of the Maillard Reaction
  * Food-Info.net
  * The Thermochemical Joy of Cooking
  * The secret of fresh beer: the Maillard reaction.[5]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ T. J. Harrison, G. R. Dake (2005). "An expeditious, high-yielding construction of the food aroma compounds 6-acetyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyridine and 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline". J. Org. Chem. 70 (26): 10872â10874. doi:10.1021/jo051940a. PMID 16356012.
  2. ^ "Albumen Photography". Stanford. http://albumen.stanford.edu/library/c20/reilly1982a.html.
  3. ^ "A beginner's course in water activity". Decagon Devices. http://www.decagon.com/food_science/info/safety.php.
  4. ^ SK Grandhee and VM Monnier (1991). "Mechanism of formation of the Maillard protein cross-link pentosidine. Glucose, fructose, and ascorbate as pentosidine precursors". J. Biol. Chem 266 (18): 11649â11653. PMID 1904866. http://www.jbc.org/cgi/content/abstract/266/18/11649. Retrieved on 2007-12-14.
  5. ^ Bravo, Adriana; Julio C. Herrera, Erika Scherer, Yon Ju-Nam, Heinrich RÃ¼bsam, Jorge Madrid, Carsten Zufall, Rafael Rangel-Aldao (2008-06-11). "Formation of Î±-dicarbonyl compounds in beer during storage of Pilsner". Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 56 (11): 4134â4144. doi:10.1021/jf703696p. ISSN 0021-8561. http://pubs3.acs.org/acs/journals/doilookup?in_doi=10.1021/jf703696p. Retrieved on 2008-06-16.

  * Peter J. Van Soest, 1982. Nutritional Ecology of the Ruminant published by Cornell University Press

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maillard_reaction"

Categories: Food science | Chemical reactions | Name reactions

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 18 March 2009, at 07:22.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



