
# David Allen (author)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

David Allen  
<IMG>  
  
Born December 28, 1945 (1945-12-28) (age 63)  
  
Occupation Author, Consultant, Management expert  
Spouse(s) Kathryn[1]  
David Allen (born December 28, 1945) is a productivity consultant who is best
known as the creator of the Getting Things Done time management method.

He grew up in Shreveport, Louisiana where he acted and won a state
championship in debate. He went to college at New College, now New College of
Florida, in Sarasota, Florida. His career path has included jobs as a
magician, waiter, karate teacher, landscaper, vitamin distributor, glass-
blowing lathe operator, travel agent, gas station manager, U-Haul dealer,
moped salesman, restaurant cook,[1] personal growth trainer, manager of a lawn
service company, and manager of a travel agency. He is also an ordained
minister with the Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness.[2][3] He claims to
have had 35 professions before age 35.[4] He began applying his perspective on
productivity with businesses in the 1980s when he got a contract to design a
program for executives and managers at Lockheed.

He is the founder of the David Allen Company, which is focused on productivity
and executive coaching. The Getting Things Done method is part of his coaching
efforts. He was also one of the founders of Actioneer, Inc., a company
specializing in productivity tools for the Palm Pilot.

Allen has written three books, Getting Things Done: The Art of Stress-Free
Productivity, which describes his productivity program and Ready for Anything:
52 Productivity Principles for Work and Life, a collection of newsletter
articles he has written. His third book is Making It All Work: Winning at the
Game of Work and Business of Life which is a follow-up to his first book. He
lives in Ojai, California with his fourth wife, Kathryn.[1]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c Paul Keegan, June 21, 2007 How David Allen mastered getting things doneBusiness 2.0
  2. ^ Jack Coats, 2000. "David Allen - Ministering to the Business Community" The New Day Herald online retrieved Jan. 18, 2008
  3. ^ Jack Coats, 2000. "Getting Things Done: David Allen's Keys to Completion" The New Day Herald online retrieved Oct. 24, 2007
  4. ^ David E. Williams, Feb. 9, 2007 Cutting through the clutter to get things done CNN

## [edit] Further reading

  * Allen, David (2003). Ready for Anything: 52 Productivity Principles for Work and Life. New York: Viking Books. ISBN 0-670-03250-6.
  * Allen, David (2001). Getting Things Done: The Art of Stress-Free Productivity. New York: Penguin Putnam. ISBN 0-670-89924-0.
  * Beardsley, David. (April 1998) "Don't Manage Time, Manage Yourself." Fast Company. Issue 14, p. 64.
  * Fallows, James. (July/August 2004) "Organize Your Life!." Atlantic Monthly. Vol. 294, No. 1, pp. 171-2.
  * Wolf, Gary. Sept. 25, 2007 Getting Things Done Guru David Allen and His Cult of Hyperefficiency WIRED Magazine: 15.10

## [edit] External links

  * The David Allen Company website
  * David Allen's Blog in the "Living Now" section of The Huffington Post

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Allen_(author)"

Categories: 1945 births | Living people | American bloggers | American
business writers | American self-help writers | New College of Florida alumni
| People from Shreveport, Louisiana

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 03:22 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



