
# Time Bandits

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This introduction is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add
inline citations to guard against copyright violations and factual
inaccuracies. (January 2008)  
This article is about the 1981 motion picture. For the Dutch band from the
1980s, see Time Bandits (band).

Time Bandits  
<IMG>  
Time Bandits film poster  
Directed by Terry Gilliam  
Produced by Terry Gilliam  
George Harrison  
Denis O'Brien  
Written by Terry Gilliam  
Michael Palin  
Starring John Cleese  
Sean Connery  
Shelley Duvall  
Ralph Richardson  
Katherine Helmond  
Ian Holm  
Michael Palin  
David Rappaport  
Craig Warnock  
Music by Mike Moran  
Songs by George Harrison  
Cinematography Peter Biziou  
Editing by Julian Doyle  
Distributed by Handmade Films  
Janus Films  
Embassy Pictures  
Release date(s) United Kingdom:  
13 July 1981  
United States:  
6 November 1981  
Running time 116 min. / USA:110 min.  
Country United Kingdom  
Language English  
Budget $5,000,000  
Gross revenue $42,365,581  
Time Bandits is a 1981 fantasy film, produced and directed by Terry Gilliam.

Gilliam wrote the screenplay with fellow Monty Python alumnus Michael Palin,
who appears with Shelley Duvall in the small, recurring roles of Vincent and
Pansy. The film is one of the most famous of more than 30 theatrical features
produced by Handmade Films, the London-based independent company backed in
part by former Beatle George Harrison.

Gilliam would work with many of this film's cast again in 1985's Brazil,
including Jim Broadbent, Ian Holm, Peter Vaughan, Katherine Helmond, Michael
Palin and Jack Purvis.

## Contents

  * 1 Plot summary
  * 2 Themes
  * 3 Production
  * 4 Reception
  * 5 Sequel
  * 6 Legacy
  * 7 Cast
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Plot summary

Kevin is an 11-year-old son of two parents who constantly ignore him in favour
of keeping up with the neighbours by purchasing all the latest gadgets.
Without their attention, Kevin has become a history buff, particularly of the
Ancient Greek period. One night, Kevin is awakened from his sleep by a knight
on horseback bursting through his wardrobe and riding off into a forest
setting that has appeared in place of his bedroom wall, but when Kevin
investigates, he finds nothing amiss in his room, the forest setting being
just one of the pictures that adorns his wall. He prepares for the next night
by packing a satchel with a torch and a Polaroid camera, before going to bed.
Again, he is woken by sounds from the wardrobe, but this time six dwarves
stumble out. They are initially scared by Kevin's flashlight, thinking him to
be the "Supreme Being," but when they discover he is a kid, they ignore him
and try to find an exit from the room using a large worn map. The dwarves
discover the bedroom wall can be physically moved, and as the dwarves push it
along down a long hallway, the disembodied head of the Supreme Being shows up
behind them and chases them down. Kevin is caught up with the dwarves in their
mad dash to escape, as the hallway ends and they fall into the blackness of
space.

When Kevin regains his senses, he learns that the dwarves are employees of the
Supreme Being, and were supposed to be using the map, which shows the
locations of holes in time and space, to repair the space-time continuum.
Instead, they have ended up in a labour dispute with the Supreme Being and are
using the map to travel through time and steal treasures from across history.
However, at the same time, they are being watched by the Evil Genius (and his
rather dimwitted minions), who, while brooding in his fortress prison, is
seeking to get the map himself to recreate the universe to his liking. The
dwarves, along with Kevin, travel through several time periods, meeting
Napoleon Bonaparte and Robin Hood. Kevin becomes separated from the group
while travelling through one hole and ends up in ancient Greece, where he
meets Agamemnon, who treats Kevin like his son. However, the dwarves manage to
catch up with Kevin and drag him away through another time hole, causing Kevin
to become angry with them for ruining his happy respite.

After the group lands on the Titanic and survives its sinking, Evil brings
Kevin and the dwarves into his realm, the "Time of Legends." The dwarves make
their way to Evil's Fortress of Ultimate Darkness, believing there to be an
epic treasure, "The Most Fabulous Object in the World," inside. However, the
treasure turns out to be a trap set by Evil, and the dwarves are forced to
hand over the map. Trapped in a cage hanging over a bottomless void, the group
discovers that one of the photographs Kevin has taken over the course of their
travels includes a shot of the map, and they are able to identify holes they
can use to recruit help and recover the map. The dwarves make a daring escape
and put their plan into action, bringing soldiers and equipment from across
time to face down Evil, but Evil is able to conquer them all. As Evil is about
to unleash his ultimate power, he is suddenly turned to stone by The Supreme
Being, now appearing as an elderly gentleman. The dwarves apologize to the
Supreme Being, but he acknowledges that it was part of his plan, and thanks
the dwarves for returning the map while instructing them to remove all the
rubble of "concentrated Evil" from the area, as it would be hazardous to
anyone left. The Supreme Being thanks Kevin for his help, and then leaves him
behind as he disappears with the dwarves. Kevin quickly discovers a piece of
Evil has been missed, and his vision goes dim as the smoke emanating from the
chunk of black rock overwhelms him.

Kevin suddenly wakes up in his own bed, his room filled with smoke and the
house on fire. A firefighter breaks into the room and rescues him. As the fire
is extinguished, the firefighters find that a microwave was the source of the
fire, and hand the unit over to Kevin's parents. Seeing a firefighter that
resembles Agamemnon, Kevin realises he is still carrying his satchel. Inside
it, he discovers the photographs he took during his journey. When his parents
open the microwave to reveal a piece of concentrated Evil, Kevin tries to warn
them not to touch it, but they do, and promptly explode. Kevin is left alone.

## [edit] Themes

<IMG>

This article is written like a personal reflection or essay and may require
cleanup. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style.
(December 2007)  
<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2007)  
As might be expected, given the participation of half of the Monty Python
troupe, the film's sense of humour is irreverent and dark. It also was the
first film in which Gilliam's unique visual style was fully extant: he would
go on to develop the style further in his subsequent fantasy films Brazil and
The Adventures of Baron Munchhausen.

Students of Gilliam's films have dubbed these three movies the "Trilogy of the
Imagination" and Gilliam himself refers to it as a "trilogy about the ages of
Man and the subordination of magic to realism."[1] The connecting link shared
by each film is the fact that each celebrates the spirit of imagination, and
is anchored by a quixotic central character whose imagination is suppressed by
forces not of his own choosing or design (in this case, Kevin). In each film,
the character must undergo a fantastic journey that will allow his imagination
to be given its freedom as God (here called the Supreme Being) had originally
intended. What binds these three together is that in Time Bandits the dreamer
is a boy, in Brazil a man, and in Baron Munchausen an old man.

The film once more uses Gilliam's motif of bureaucracy and technology hurting
imagination and creativity. This was further expanded upon in Brazil.

## [edit] Production

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
See talk page for details. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
(December 2007)  
The film's script was broken down into two tasks, with Gilliam mostly devising
the story and Palin mostly writing the dialogue. Gilliam has said of writing
dialogue that it "doesn't come as easily as it should."

Time Bandits was filmed at Lee International Studios, Shepperton, Middlesex,
England, and on location in England, Wales and Morocco.

Originally Craig Warnock's brother auditioned for the lead in the film, but
Gilliam thought his performance was too cute and artificial, and was instead
drawn to the more sedate Craig, who had only tagged along and hadn't planned
to audition at all. Sean Connery appears in the film as Agamemnon; this
casting choice derives from a joke Michael Palin included in the script, in
which he describes the character as being "Sean Connery (or someone of equal,
but cheaper, stature)"[2]. The film is unusual in featuring large roles for
dwarf actors; Gilliam has commented that it offered a rare chance for these
actors to create detailed characters, instead of doing stunt work or playing
one-dimensional costumed monsters.

According to the commentary on the Criterion Collection DVD, Gilliam kept the
camera angle rather low throughout the film, in order to give audiences a
child's or dwarf's point of view.

The Supreme Being was originally intended to manifest in Kevin's bedroom at
the beginning of the film in the form of a sinister, shadowy figure with long,
scraggly, wind-blown hair and glowing eyes. Thinking this was ineffective,
Gilliam redid the scene with the Supreme Being as an enormous, floating head.
A photo of the character's original appearance is shown in the published
screenplay.

Gilliam and Palin were nervous about the long sequence in Greece, because they
had never written a scene that long without any jokes.

Katherine Helmond's character, the ogre's wife, was originally planned as a
comic crone, but Gilliam was delighted when Helmond gave an unexpectedly sexy
spin to lines like, "Leer at them... you know, the way you used to..?" Helmond
also came up with the idea of her character appearing as a normal human, and
not a female version of her ogre husband.

In an interview with Empire Magazine, Terry Jones pointed out that a Brian
Froud book published before this film was released featured an image of a
giant with a boat on his head; Jones jokingly accused Gilliam of "pinching"
(stealing) the image for his film. For the scene with the giant, Gilliam
originally planned to use an enormously tall actor, but later realized that a
short, extremely stout person produced a more effective impression of
gigantism. The actor chosen was a British wrestler, Ian Muir.

The shot of the Titanic sinking was actually re-used footage from A Night to
Remember.

The scene with the hanging cages in Evil's castle was quickly thrown together
when another, more expensive scene fell through. Shot for little money and
with the simplest of sets (some cages against a black backdrop), the scene was
widely considered one of the most impressive in the film.[citation needed]

The musical underscoring and orchestrations are credited to Mike Moran, with
Ray Cooper, Elton John's longtime percussionist, serving as producer of the
musical material, but executive producer George Harrison is also credited with
"songs and additional material": Harrison did in fact write songs for the film
at the request of co-executive producer Denis O'Brien, but the song score was
apparently developed without the participation of Terry Gilliam. As a result,
the only song attributed to Harrison is "Dream Away", which the former Beatle
performs over the credits. Sometime following the release of Time Bandits,
"Dream Away" was included on Harrison's album Gone Troppo, on his own Dark
Horse record label. The recording of "Dream Away" was produced by George
Harrison and Ray Cooper in collaboration with Phil MacDonald; Mike Moran
appeared on keyboards and synthesizers; and Billy Preston, Syreeta and Sarah
Ricor joined Harrison as backing vocalists.

## [edit] Reception

As discussed in a DVD interview with Palin and Gilliam, the film came out in
the fall season (after the blockbuster summer films, but before the hit
Christmas season) and became extremely successful at the U.S. box office,
making over $40 million.[3] Critical reception since it came out in theatres
has been positive overall,[4] and it still enjoys a good reputation on DVD,
having gained a 94%[5] at Rotten Tomatoes.

## [edit] Sequel

A sequel to Time Bandits has long been rumoured, and in Gilliam on Gilliam,
Terry Gilliam once expressed his intention of making one. It was intended to
be released before or in 2000. The catalyst was the Supreme Being using the
milestone of year 2000 as a time to reflect, and discovering that he was so
disappointed with the way the universe turned out that he was going to end it.
The time bandits were the only ones that could save the universe, if they
could be bothered to.

## [edit] Legacy

Robert Hewison, in his book Monty Python: The Case Against, describes the
dwarfs as a comment on the Monty Python troupe, with Fidget (the nice one) as
Palin, Randall (the self-appointed leader) as John Cleese, Strutter (the
acerbic one) as Eric Idle, Og (the quiet one) as Graham Chapman, Wally (the
noisy rebel) as Terry Jones and Vermin (the nasty, filth-loving one) as
Gilliam himself.

## [edit] Cast

  * Craig Warnock as Kevin
  * David Rappaport as Randall
  * Kenny Baker as Fidgit
  * Malcom Dixon as Strutter
  * Mike Edmonds as Og
  * Jack Purvis as Wally
  * Tiny Ross as Vermin
  * David Warner as Evil
  * Derek Deadman as Robert
  * Jerold Wells as Benson
  * Michael Palin as Vincent
  * Shelley Duvall as Pansy
  * John Cleese as Robin Hood
  * Sean Connery as King Agamemnon/Fireman
  * Katherine Helmond as Mrs. Ogre
  * Ian Holm as Napoleon
  * Ralph Richardson as Supreme Being
  * Peter Vaughan as Winston the Ogre
  * David Daker as Kevin's Father
  * Sheila Fearn as Kevin's Mother
  * Jim Broadbent as Compere
  * Tony Jay as Voice of the Supreme Being
  * Terence Bayler as Lucien
  * Preston Lockwood as Neguy
  * Derrick O'Connor as Redgrave
  * Neil McCarthy as Marion

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Filmreference.com: Terry Gilliam - Films as Director
  2. ^ Q & A with Terry Gilliam on Time Bandits, October 2006
  3. ^ Time Bandits at boxofficemojo.com
  4. ^ External reviews listed at Internet Movie Database
  5. ^ Time Bandits at Rotten Tomatoes

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Time
Bandits  
  * Time Bandits at the Internet Movie Database
  * Time Bandits at the Internet Movie Database
  * Time Bandits at Allmovie
  * Time Bandits at the British Film Institute's Screenonline
  * Criterion Collection essay by Bruce Eder
  * Time Bandits II Script Review

v â¢ d â¢ e

Films directed by Terry Gilliam  
1970s

Monty Python and the Holy Grail (1975) â¢ Jabberwocky (1977)  
1980s

Time Bandits (1981) â¢ Brazil (1985) â¢ The Adventures of Baron Munchausen
(1988)  
1990s

The Fisher King (1991) â¢ 12 Monkeys (1995) â¢ Fear and Loathing in Las
Vegas (1998)  
2000s

The Brothers Grimm (2005) â¢ Tideland (2005) â¢ The Imaginarium of Doctor
Parnassus (2009)  
Shorts

The Crimson Permanent Assurance (1983) â¢ Storytime â¢ The Miracle of Flight  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_Bandits"

Categories: English-language films | Films directed by Terry Gilliam | 1981
films | Fantasy-comedy films | Fantasy adventure films | British films | 1980s
adventure films | Independent films | Time travel films | Handmade Films |
Robin Hood films | Depictions of Napoleon on film | Films based on Greco-Roman
mythology | RMS Titanic | Films shot in the United Kingdom | Films set in the
United Kingdom

Hidden categories: Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Wikipedia articles needing style editing
from December 2007 | All articles needing style editing | Articles needing
additional references from December 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 19:24.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



