
# Chris Landreth

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Chris Landreth  
<IMG>  
  
Born 1961  
Hartford, CT  
Occupation director, animator, writer  
Chris Landreth (born 1961) is an American animator working in Canada, best
known for his work on the 2004 film, Ryan. He has made many CGI animated films
since the mid-90s, including The End, Bingo, The Listener, Caustic Sky: A
Portrait of Regional Acid Deposition, and Data Driven The Story Of Franz K.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
  * 2 "Psychorealism"
  * 3 Sources
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

After being an engineer for years, Chris quit and began a second career as an
animator. He received a BS(1984) in General Engineering and a MS(1986) degree
in Theoritical and Applied Mechanics at the University of Illinois. Three
years following, he experimented in fluid mechanics research, until he made
baby steps into the world of computer animation. Afterwards in 1994, he was
hired to define, test, and sometimes even abuse computer graphics software
products. Such products include "movie Grade" software, not limited to but
including programs from the Toronto-based animation firm, Alias (formerly
Alias|wavefront, now owned by Autodesk).

This resulted in the productions of The End and Bingo. The End was nominated
in 1996 for an Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film. Afterward, he met
Ryan Larkin, a renowned animator in the 60s and 70s, who had recently fallen
in a spiral of excessive drinking, cocaine abuse, and homelessness. This
resulted in the 2004 production of Ryan, which won an Oscar the same year.

## [edit] "Psychorealism"

Chris Landreth uses standard CGI animation in his work, with the added element
of what Chris calls Psychorealism. This often puts a surrealist styling into
his work, notably The End, Bingo, and Ryan. For instance, in Ryan, Chris uses
emotional disraughts in people's lives to appear on their face.

Psychorealism is a style first put to words by Chris Landreth to refer to what
Karan Singh described as, "the glorious complexity of the human psyche
depicted through the visual medium of art and animation." [1]

## [edit] Sources

  * Studio Daily
  * Who's Who entry on Landreth
  * Ohio State University

## [edit] External links

  * Watch Ryan at NFB.ca
  * Psychorealism (Computer Graphics World, July 2004)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Landreth"

Categories: Canadian animators | 1961 births | Living people | Genie Award
winners for Best Animated Short

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 18 February 2009, at 15:29 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



