
# Jonathan Swift

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Jonathan Swift  
<IMG>  
  
Born 30 November 1667(1667-11-30)  
Dublin, Ireland1  
Died 19 October 1745 (aged 77)  
Ireland  
Occupation satirist, essayist, political pamphleteer, poet, priest  
Notable work(s) Gulliver's Travels  
A Modest Proposal  
A Tale of a Tub  
Drapier's Letters  
Influenced

    
    
    George Orwell, H. G. Wells  
Jonathan Swift (30 November 1667 â 19 October 1745) was an Anglo-Irish[1]
satirist, essayist, political pamphleteer (first for Whigs then for the
Tories), poet and cleric who became Dean of St. Patrick's, Dublin.

He is remembered for works such as Gulliver's Travels, A Modest Proposal, A
Journal to Stella, Drapier's Letters, The Battle of the Books, An Argument
Against Abolishing Christianity, and A Tale of a Tub. Swift is probably the
foremost prose satirist in the English language, and is less well known for
his poetry. Swift originally published all of his works under
pseudonymsâsuch as Lemuel Gulliver, Isaac Bickerstaff, M.B. Drapierâor
anonymously. He is also known for being a master of two styles of satire: the
Horatian and Juvenalian styles.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Youth
    * 1.2 Writer
    * 1.3 Maturity
    * 1.4 Epitaph
  * 2 Works
    * 2.1 Major prose works
    * 2.2 Essays, tracts, pamphlets, periodicals
    * 2.3 Poems
    * 2.4 Correspondence, personal writings
    * 2.5 Sermons, prayers
    * 2.6 Miscellany
  * 3 Legacy
  * 4 Notes
  * 5 Biographical sources
  * 6 External links
    * 6.1 E-texts of Swift's works

  
## [edit] Biography

### [edit] Youth

Jonathan Swift was born at No. 7, Hoey's Court, Dublin, and was the second
child and only son of Jonathan Swift (a second cousin of John Dryden) and wife
Abigail Erick (or Herrick), paternal grandson of Thomas Swift and wife
Elizabeth Dryden, daughter of Nicholas Dryden (brother of Sir Erasmus Dryden,
1st Baronet Dryden) and wife Mary Emyley. His father was Irish born and his
mother was born in England. Swift arrived seven months after his father's
untimely death. Most of the facts of Swift's early life are obscure, confused
and sometimes contradictory. It is widely believed that his mother returned to
England when Jonathan was still very young, then leaving him to be raised by
his father's family. His uncle Godwin took primary responsibility for the
young Jonathan, sending him with one of his cousins to Kilkenny College (also
attended by the philosopher George Berkeley).

<IMG>

Jonathan Swift at Trinity, Dublin

In 1682 he attended Dublin University (Trinity College, Dublin), receiving his
B.A. in 1686. Swift was studying for his Master's degree when political
troubles in Ireland surrounding the Glorious Revolution forced him to leave
for England in 1688, where his mother helped him get a position as secretary
and personal assistant of Sir William Temple at Moor Park, Farnham. Temple was
an English diplomat who, having arranged the Triple Alliance of 1668, retired
from public service to his country estate to tend his gardens and write his
memoirs. Growing into confidence with his employer, Swift "was often trusted
with matters of great importance." Within three years of their acquaintance,
Temple had introduced his secretary to William III, and sent him to London to
urge the King to consent to a bill for triennial Parliaments.

When Swift took up his residence at Moor Park, he met Esther Johnson, then 8
years old, the fatherless daughter of one of the household servants. Swift
acted as her tutor and mentor, giving her the nickname "Stella" and the two
maintained a close, but ambiguous relationship for the rest of Esther's life.

Swift left Temple in 1690 for Ireland because of his health, but returned to
Moor Park the following year. The illness, fits of vertigo or giddinessânow
known to be MÃ©niÃ¨re's diseaseâwould continue to plague Swift throughout
his life. During this second stay with Temple, Swift received his M.A. from
Hertford College, Oxford in 1692. Then, apparently despairing of gaining a
better position through Temple's patronage, Swift left Moor Park to become an
ordained priest in the Established Church of Ireland and in 1694 he was
appointed to the prebend of Kilroot in the Diocese of Connor, with his parish
located at Kilroot, near Carrickfergus in County Antrim.

Swift appears to have been miserable in his new position, being isolated in a
small, remote community far from the centres of power and influence. While at
Kilroot, however, Swift may well have become romantically involved with Jane
Waring. A letter from him survives, offering to remain if she would marry him
and promising to leave and never return to Ireland if she refused. She
presumably refused, because Swift left his post and returned to England and
Temple's service at Moor Park in 1696, and he remained there until Temple's
death. There he was employed in helping to prepare Temple's memoirs and
correspondence for publication. During this time Swift wrote The Battle of the
Books, a satire responding to critics of Temple's Essay upon Ancient and
Modern Learning (1690). Battle was however not published until 1704.

On January 27 1699 Temple died. Swift stayed on briefly in England to complete
the editing of Temple's memoirs, and perhaps in the hope that recognition of
his work might earn him a suitable position in England. However, Swift's work
made enemies of some of Temple's family and friends who objected to
indiscretions included in the memoirs. His next move was to approach King
William directly, based on his imagined connection through Temple and a belief
that he had been promised a position. This failed so miserably that he
accepted the lesser post of secretary and chaplain to the Earl of Berkeley,
one of the Lords Justices of Ireland. However, when he reached Ireland he
found that the secretaryship had already been given to another. But he soon
obtained the living of Laracor, Agher, and Rathbeggan, and the prebend of
Dunlavin in St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin.

At Laracor, a mile or two from Trim, County Meath, and twenty miles (32 km)
from Dublin, Swift ministered to a congregation of about fifteen people, and
had abundant leisure for cultivating his garden, making a canal (after the
Dutch fashion of Moor Park), planting willows, and rebuilding the vicarage. As
chaplain to Lord Berkeley, he spent much of his time in Dublin and traveled to
London frequently over the next ten years. In 1701, Swift published,
anonymously, a political pamphlet, A Discourse on the Contests and Dissentions
in Athens and Rome.

### [edit] Writer

<IMG>

<IMG>

The title page to Swift's 1735 Works, depicting the author in the Dean's
chair, receiving the thanks of Ireland. The motto reads, "I have made a
monument greater than brass." The 'brass' is a double entendre, for Wood's
half-pence (alloyed with brass) is scattered at his feet. Cherubim award Swift
a poet's laurel.

In February 1702, Swift received his Doctor of Divinity degree from Trinity
College, Dublin. That spring he traveled to England and returned to Ireland in
October, accompanied by Esther Johnsonânow twenty years oldâand his friend
Rebecca Dingley, another member of William Temple's household. There is a
great mystery and controversy over Swift's relationship with Esther Johnson
nicknamed "Stella". Many hold that they were secretly married in 1716.

During his visits to England in these years Swift published A Tale of a Tub
and The Battle of the Books (1704) and began to gain a reputation as a writer.
This led to close, lifelong friendships with Alexander Pope, John Gay, and
John Arbuthnot, forming the core of the Martinus Scriblerus Club (founded in
1713).

Swift became increasingly active politically in these years. From 1707 to 1709
and again in 1710, Swift was in London, unsuccessfully urging upon the Whig
administration of Lord Godolphin the claims of the Irish clergy to the First-
Fruits and Twentieths ("Queen Anne's Bounty"), which brought in about Â£2500 a
year, already granted to their brethren in England. He found the opposition
Tory leadership more sympathetic to his cause and Swift was recruited to
support their cause as editor of the Examiner when they came to power in 1710.
In 1711, Swift published the political pamphlet "The Conduct of the Allies,"
attacking the Whig government for its inability to end the prolonged war with
France. The incoming Tory government conducted secret (and illegal)
negotiations with France, resulting in the Treaty of Utrecht (1713) ending the
War of the Spanish Succession.

Swift was part of the inner circle of the Tory government, and often acted as
mediator between Henry St. John (Viscount Bolingbroke) the secretary of state
for foreign affairs (1710â15) and Robert Harley (Earl of Oxford) lord
treasurer and prime minister (1711â1714). Swift recorded his experiences and
thoughts during this difficult time in a long series of letters to Esther
Johnson, later collected and published as The Journal to Stella. The animosity
between the two Tory leaders eventually led to the dismissal of Harley in
1714. With the death of Queen Anne and ascension of George I that year, the
Whigs returned to power and the Tory leaders were tried for treason for
conducting secret negotiations with France.

Also during these years in London, Swift became acquainted with the Vanhomrigh
family and became involved with one of the daughters, Esther, yet another
fatherless young woman and an ambiguous relationship to confuse Swift's
biographers. Swift furnished Esther with the nickname "Vanessa" and she
features as one of the main characters in his poem Cadenus and Vanessa. The
poem and their correspondence suggests that Esther was infatuated with Swift,
that he may have reciprocated her affections, only to regret it and then try
to break it off. Esther followed Swift to Ireland in 1714, where there appears
to have been a confrontation, possibly involving Esther Johnson. Esther
Vanhomrigh died in 1728 at the age of 35. Another lady with whom he had a
close but less intense relationship, was Anne Long, a toast of the Kit-Cat
Club.

### [edit] Maturity

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bust in St. Patrick's Cathedral.

Before the fall of the Tory government, Swift hoped that his services would be
rewarded with a church appointment in England. However, Queen Anne appeared to
have taken a dislike to Swift and thwarted these efforts. The best position
his friends could secure for him was the Deanery of St. Patrick's, Dublin.
With the return of the Whigs, Swift's best move was to leave England and he
returned to Ireland in disappointment, a virtual exile, to live "like a rat in
a hole".

Once in Ireland, however, Swift began to turn his pamphleteering skills in
support of Irish causes, producing some of his most memorable works: Proposal
for Universal Use of Irish Manufacture (1720), Drapier's Letters (1724), and A
Modest Proposal (1729), earning him the status of an Irish patriot.

Also during these years, he began writing his masterpiece, Travels into
Several Remote Nations of the World, in Four Parts, by Lemuel Gulliver, first
a surgeon, and then a captain of several ships, better known as Gulliver's
Travels. Much of the material reflects his political experiences of the
preceding decade. For instance, the episode when the giant Gulliver puts out
the Lilliputian palace fire by urinating on it can be seen as a metaphor for
the Tories' illegal peace treaty; having done a good thing in an unfortunate
manner. In 1726 he paid a long-deferred visit to London, taking with him the
manuscript of Gulliver's Travels. During his visit he stayed with his old
friends, Alexander Pope, John Arbuthnot, and John Gay, who helped him arrange
for the anonymous publication of his book. First published in November 1726,
it was an immediate hit, with a total of three printings that year and another
in early 1727. French, German, and Dutch translations appeared in 1727 and
pirated copies were printed in Ireland.

Swift returned to England one more time in 1727 and stayed with Alexander Pope
once again. The visit was cut short when he received word that Esther Johnson
was dying and Swift rushed back home to be with her. On 28 January 1728,
Esther Johnson died, though he prayed at her bedside, even composing prayers
for her comfort. Swift could not bear to be present at the end, but on the
night of her death he began to write his The Death of Mrs. Johnson. He was too
ill to attend the funeral at St. Patrick's. Many years later, a lock of hair,
assumed to be Esther Johnson's, was found in his desk, wrapped in a paper
bearing the words, "Only a woman's hair."

Death became a frequent feature in Swift's life from this point. In 1731 he
wrote Verses on the Death of Dr. Swift, his own obituary published in 1739. In
1732, his good friend and collaborator John Gay died. In 1735, John Arbuthnot,
another friend from his days in London, died. In 1738 Swift began to show
signs of illness and in 1742 he appears to have suffered a stroke, losing the
ability to speak and realizing his worst fears of becoming mentally disabled.
("I shall be like that tree," he once said, "I shall die at the top.") In
order to protect him from unscrupulous hangers on, who had begun to prey on
the great man, his closest companions had him declared of "unsound mind and
memory." However, it was long believed by many that Swift was really insane at
this point. In his book Literature and Western Man, author J.B. Priestley even
cites the final chapters of Gulliver's Travels as proof of Swift's approaching
"insanity".

In part VIII of his series, The Story of Civilization, Will Durant describes
the final years of Swift's life as such:

> "Definite symptoms of madness appeared in 1738. In 1741 guardians were
appointed to take care of his affairs and watch lest in his outbursts of
violence he should do himself harm. In 1742 he suffered great pain from the
inflammation of his left eye, which swelled to the size of an egg; five
attendants had to restrain him from tearing out his eye. He went a whole year
without uttering a word."[2]

In 1744, Alexander Pope died. Then, on October 19, 1745, Swift died. After
being laid out in public view for the people of Dublin to pay their last
respects, he was buried in his own cathedral by Esther Johnson's side, in
accordance with his wishes. The bulk of his fortune (twelve thousand pounds)
was left to found a hospital for the mentally ill, originally known as St.
Patrickâs Hospital for Imbeciles, which opened in 1757, and which still
exists as a psychiatric hospital.

### [edit] Epitaph

<IMG>

<IMG>

Epitaph in St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin near his burial site.

    Text extracted from the introduction to The Journal to Stella by George A. Aitken and from other sources)
Jonathan Swift wrote his own epitaph:

    Hic depositum est Corpus
    IONATHAN SWIFT S.T.D.
    Hujus EcclesiÃ¦ Cathedralis
    Decani,
    Ubi sÃ¦va Indignatio
    Ulterius
    Cor lacerare nequit,
    Abi Viator
    Et imitare, si poteris,
    Strenuum pro virili
    Libertatis Vindicatorem.
    Obiit 19Âº Die Mensis Octobris
    A.D. 1745 Anno Ãtatis 78Âº.
The literal translation of which is: "Here is laid the Body of Jonathan Swift,
Doctor of Sacred Theology, Dean of this Cathedral Church, where fierce
Indignation can no longer injure the Heart. Go forth, Voyager, and copy, if
you can, this vigorous (to the best of his ability) Champion of Liberty. He
died on the 19th Day of the Month of October, A.D. 1745, in the 78th Year of
his Age."

William Butler Yeats poetically translated it from the Latin as:

    Swift has sailed into his rest.
    Savage indignation there
    cannot lacerate his breast.
    Imitate him if you dare,
    world-besotted traveller.
    He served human liberty.
## [edit] Works

<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Jonathan Swift

Swift was a prolific writer, notable for his satires. The most recent
collection of his prose works (Herbert Davis, ed. Basil Blackwell, 1965-)
comprises fourteen volumes. A recent edition of his complete poetry (Pat
Rodges, ed. Penguin, 1983) is 953 pages long. One edition of his
correspondence (David Woolley, ed. P. Lang, 1999) fills three volumes.

### [edit] Major prose works

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jonathan Swift at the Deanery of St. Patrick's, illus. from 1905 Temple Scott
edition of Works

Swift's first major prose play, A Tale of a Tub, demonstrates many of the
themes and stylistic techniques he would employ in his later work. It is at
once wildly playful and funny while being pointed and harshly critical of its
targets. In its main thread, the Tale recounts the exploits of three sons,
representing the main threads of Christianity, who receive a bequest from
their father of a coat each, with the added instructions to make no
alterations whatsoever. However, the sons soon find that their coats have
fallen out of current fashion and begin to look for loopholes in their
father's will which will allow them to make the needed alterations. As each
finds his own means of getting around their father's admonition, they struggle
with each other for power and dominance. Inserted into this story, in
alternating chapters, Swift includes a series of whimsical "digressions" on
various subjects.

In 1690, Sir William Temple, Swift's patron, published An Essay upon Ancient
and Modern Learning a defense of classical writing (see Quarrel of the
Ancients and the Moderns) holding up the Epistles of Phalaris as an example.
William Wotton responded to Temple with Reflections upon Ancient and Modern
Learning (1694) showing that the Epistles were a later forgery. A response by
the supporters of the Ancients was then made by Charles Boyle (later the 4th
Earl of Orrery and father of Swift's first biographer). A further retort on
the Modern side came from Richard Bentley, one of the pre-eminent scholars of
the day, in his essay Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris (1699).
However, the final words on the topic belong to Swift in his Battle of the
Books (1697, published 1704) in which he makes a humorous defense on behalf of
Temple and the cause of the Ancients.

In 1708, a cobbler named John Partridge published a popular almanac of
astrological predictions. Because Partridge falsely determined the deaths of
several church officials, Swift attacked Partridge in Predictions For The
Ensuing Year by Isaac Bickerstaff, a parody predicting that Partridge would
die on March 29th. Swift followed up with a pamphlet issued on March 30th
claiming that Partridge had in fact died, which was widely believed despite
Partridge's statements to the contrary.

Drapier's Letters (1724) was a series of pamphlets against the monopoly
granted by the English government to William Wood to provide the Irish with
copper coinage. It was widely believed that Wood would need to flood Ireland
with debased coinage in order make a profit. In these "letters" Swift posed as
a shop-keeper--a draper--in order to criticize the plan. Swift's writing was
so effective in undermining opinion in the project that a reward was offered
by the government to anyone disclosing the true identity of the author. Though
hardly a secret (on returning to Dublin after one of his trips to England,
Swift was greeted with a banner, "Welcome Home, Drapier") no one turned Swift
in. The government eventually resorted to hiring none other than Sir Isaac
Newton to certify the soundness of Wood's coinage to counter Swift's
accusations. In "Verses on the Death of Dr. Swift" (1739) Swift recalled this
as one of his best achievements.

Gulliver's Travels, which Swift wrote a large portion of in Woodbrook House,
County Laois was first published in 1726, and is regarded as his masterpiece.
As with his other writings, the Travels was published under a pseudonym, the
fictional Lemuel Gulliver, a ship's surgeon and later a sea captain. Some of
the correspondence between printer Benj. Motte and Gulliver's also-fictional
cousin negotiating the book's publication has survived. Though it has often
been mistakenly thought of and published in bowdlerized form as a children's
book, it is a great and sophisticated satire of human nature based on Swift's
experience of his times. Gulliver's Travels is an anatomy of human nature, a
sardonic looking-glass, often criticized for its apparent misanthropy. It asks
its readers to refute it, to deny that it has not adequately characterized
human nature and society. Each of the four books--recounting four voyages to
mostly-fictional exotic lands--has a different theme, but all are attempts to
deflate human pride. Critics hail the work as a satiric reflection on the
failings of Enlightenment modernism.

In 1729, he published A Modest Proposal for Preventing the Children of Poor
People in Ireland Being a Burden to Their Parents or Country, and for Making
Them Beneficial to the Public, a satire in which the narrator, with
intentionally grotesque logic, recommends that Ireland's poor escape their
poverty by selling their children as food to the rich: âI have been assured
by a very knowing American of my acquaintance in London, that a young healthy
child well nursed is at a year old a most delicious, nourishing, and wholesome
food...â Following the satirical form, he introduces the reforms he is
actually suggesting by deriding them:

> Therefore let no man talk to me of other expedients...taxing our
absentees...using [nothing] except what is of our own growth and
manufacture...rejecting...foreign luxury...introducing a vein of parsimony,
prudence and temperance...learning to love our country...quitting our
animosities and factions...teaching landlords to have at least one degree of
mercy towards their tenants....Therefore I repeat, let no man talk to me of
these and the like expedients, 'till he hath at least some glympse of hope,
that there will ever be some hearty and sincere attempt to put them into
practice.

According to other sources,[citation needed] Richard Steele uses the personae
of Isaac Bickerstaff and was the one who wrote about the "death" of John
Partridge and published it in The Spectator, not Jonathan Swift.*

### [edit] Essays, tracts, pamphlets, periodicals

<IMG>

Swift as depicted on the Irish Â£10 banknote, issued 1976â1993.

  * "A Meditation upon a Broomstick" (1703â1710): Full text: munseys.com
  * "A Critical Essay upon the Faculties of the Mind" (1707â1711)
  * The Bickerstaff-Partridge Papers (1708â1709): Full text: U of Adelaide
  * "An Argument Against Abolishing Christianity" (1708â1711): Full text: U of Adelaide
  * The Intelligencer (with Thomas Sheridan) (1710-????): Text: Project Gutenberg
  * The Examiner (1710): Texts: Ourcivilisation.com, Project Gutenberg
  * "A Proposal for Correcting, Improving and Ascertaining the English Tongue" (1712): Full texts: Jack Lynch, U of Virginia
  * "On the Conduct of the Allies" (1713)
  * "Hints Toward an Essay on Conversation" (1713): Full text: Bartleby.com
  * "A Letter to a Young Gentleman, Lately Entered into Holy Orders" (1720)
  * "A Letter of Advice to a Young Poet" (1721): Full text: Bartleby.com
  * Drapier's Letters (1724, 1725): Full text: Project Gutenberg
  * "Bon Mots de Stella" (1726): a curiously irrelevant appendix to "Gulliver's Travels"
  * "A Modest Proposal", perhaps the most notable satire in English, suggesting that the Irish should engage in cannibalism. (Written in 1729)
  * "An Essay on the Fates of Clergymen": Full text: JaffeBros
  * "A Treatise on Good Manners and Good Breeding": Full text: Bartleby.com

### [edit] Poems

<IMG>

<IMG>

An 1850 illustration of Swift.

  * "Ode to the Athenian Society" 1692 (first published work)
  * Poems of Jonathan Swift, D.D. Texts at Project Gutenberg: Volume One, Volume Two
  * "Baucis and Philemon" (1706â1709): Full text: Blackmask
  * "A Description of the Morning" (1709): Full annotated text: U of Toronto; Another text: U of Virginia
  * "A Description of a City Shower" (1710): Full text: U of Virginia
  * "Cadenus and Vanessa" (1713): Full text: Blackmask
  * "Phillis, or, the Progress of Love" (1719): Full text: theotherpages.org
  * Stella's birthday poems: 
    * 1719\. Full annotated text: U of Toronto
    * 1720\. Full text: U of Virginia
    * 1727\. Full text: U of Toronto
  * "The Progress of Beauty" (1719â1720): Full text: OurCivilisation.com
  * "The Progress of Poetry" (1720): Full text: theotherpages.org
  * "A Satirical Elegy on the Death of a Late Famous General" (1722): Full text: U of Toronto
  * "To Quilca, a Country House not in Good Repair" (1725): Full text: U of Toronto
  * "Advice to the Grub Street Verse-writers" (1726): Full text: U of Toronto
  * "The Furniture of a Woman's Mind" (1727)
  * "On a Very Old Glass" (1728): Full text: Gosford.co.uk
  * "A Pastoral Dialogue" (1729): Full text: Gosford.co.uk
  * "The Grand Question debated Whether Hamilton's Bawn should be turned into a Barrack or a Malt House" (1729): Full text: Gosford.co.uk
  * "On Stephen Duck, the Thresher and Favourite Poet" (1730): Full text: U of Toronto
  * "Death and Daphne" (1730): Full text: OurCivilisation.com
  * "The Place of the Damn'd" (1731): Full text
  * "A Beautiful Young Nymph Going to Bed" (1731): Full annotated text: Jack Lynch; Another text: U of Virginia
  * "Strephon and Chloe" (1731): Full annotated text: Jack Lynch; Another text: U of Virginia
  * "Helter Skelter" (1731): Full text: OurCivilisation.com
  * "Cassinus and Peter: A Tragical Elegy" (1731): Full annotated text: Jack Lynch
  * "The Day of Judgment" (1731): Full text
  * "Verses on the Death of Dr. Swift, D.S.P.D." (1731â1732): Full annotated texts: Jack Lynch, U of Toronto; Non-annotated text:: U of Virginia
  * "An Epistle To A Lady" (1732): Full text: OurCivilisation.com
  * "The Beasts' Confession to the Priest" (1732): Full annotated text: U of Toronto
  * "The Lady's Dressing Room" (1732): Full annotated text: Jack Lynch
  * "On Poetry: A Rhapsody" (1733)
  * "The Puppet Show" Full text: Worldwideschool.org
  * "The Logicians Refuted" Full text: Worldwideschool.org

### [edit] Correspondence, personal writings

  * "When I Come to Be Old" â Swift's resolutions. (1699): Full text: JaffeBros
  * The Journal to Stella (1710â1713): Full text (presented as daily entries): [2]; Extracts: OurCivilisation.com;
  * Letters: 
    * Selected Letters: JaffeBros
    * To Oxford and Pope: OurCivilisation.com
  * 'The Correspondence of Jonathan Swift, D.D'. Edited by David Woolley. In four volumes, plus index volume. Frankfurt am Main ; New York : P. Lang, c1999-c2007.

### [edit] Sermons, prayers

  * Three Sermons and Three Prayers. Full text: U of Adelaide, Project Gutenberg
  * Three Sermons: I. on mutual subjection. II. on conscience. III. on the trinity. Text: Project Gutenberg
  * Writings on Religion and the Church. Text at Project Gutenberg: Volume One, Volume Two
  * "The First He Wrote Oct. 17, 1727." Full text: Worldwideschool.org
  * "The Second Prayer Was Written Nov. 6, 1727." Full text: Worldwideschool.org

### [edit] Miscellany

  * Directions to Servants (1731):: Extracts: OurCivilisation.com
  * A Complete Collection of Genteel and Ingenious Conversation (1738)
  * "Thoughts on Various Subjects." Full text: U of Adelaide
  * Historical Writings: Project Gutenberg
  * Swift Quotations: JaffeBros â many choice, well-documented Swift quotations here
  * Swift quotes at Bartleby: Bartleby.com â 59 quotations, with notes

## [edit] Legacy

John Ruskin named him as one of the three people in history who were the most
influential for him.[3]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Encyclopaedia Britannica: "Anglo-Irish author, who was the foremost prose satirist in the English language".
  2. ^ "The Story of Civilization", V.8., 362.
  3. ^ John Ruskin: Sesame and Lillies, [1]

## [edit] Biographical sources

  * Samuel Johnson's "Life of Swift": JaffeBros. From his Lives of the Poets.
  * William Makepeace Thackeray's influential vitriolic biography: JaffeBros. From his English Humourists of The Eighteenth Century.
  * Bullitt, John M. Jonathan Swift and the Anatomy of Satire: A Study of Satiric Technique, 1953, Cambridge: Harvard U P,
  * Jae Num Lee "Swift and Scatological Satire", 1971, University of New Mexico Press, ISBN 0826301967 jstor review
  * Lee, Jae Num. "Scatology in Continental Satirical Writings from Aristophanes to Rabelais" and "English Scatological Writings from Skelton to Pope." Swift and Scatological Satire. Albuquerque: U of New Mexico P, 1971. 7â22; 23â53.
  * Susan Gubar "The Female Monster in Augustan Satire" Signs, Vol. 3, No. 2 (Winter, 1977), pp. 380â394
  * Many other sources are listed here.

## [edit] External links

Find more about Jonathan Swift on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG>
Definitions from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Free audiobook of A Modest Proposal from LibriVox

### [edit] E-texts of Swift's works

  * at The Online Books Page
  * Works by Jonathan Swift at Project Gutenberg
  * at Gulliver's Travels

  

Persondata  
NAME Swift, Jonathan  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Anglo-Irish writer  
DATE OF BIRTH 30 November 1667  
PLACE OF BIRTH No. 7, Hoey's Court, Dublin, Ireland  
DATE OF DEATH 19 October 1745  
PLACE OF DEATH Dublin, Ireland  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonathan_Swift"

Categories: Alumni of Kilkenny College | Anglo-Irish artists | Irish political
writers | Irish poets | Irish satirists | Irish novelists | Irish fantasy
writers | English poets | English satirists | English novelists | English
fantasy writers | People associated with Trinity College, Dublin | Alumni of
Hertford College, Oxford | Neoclassical writers | 18th-century Anglican clergy
| Irish Anglicans | People from County Dublin | Anglo-Irish people | 1667
births | 1745 deaths | Christian writers | Burials at St Patrick's Cathedral,
Dublin

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 02:43.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



