
# Francis Bacon

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article's introduction section may not adequately summarize its contents.
To comply with Wikipedia's lead section guidelines, please consider expanding
the lead to provide an accessible overview of the article's key points.
(December 2008)  
For other persons named Francis Bacon, see Francis Bacon (disambiguation).

Francis Bacon Western philosophy  
Renaissance philosophy  
<IMG>  
Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount St Alban  
Full name Francis Bacon  
Born 22 January 1561(1561-01-22)  
London, England  
Died 9 April 1626 (aged 65)  
Highgate, England  
  
School/tradition Empiricism, materialism.  
Influenced by

Machiavelli  
Francis Bacon, 1st Viscount St Alban KC (22 January 1561 â 9 April 1626),
son of Nicholas Bacon by his second wife Anne (Cooke) Bacon, was an English
philosopher, statesman, scientist, lawyer, jurist, and author. He served both
as Attorney General and Lord Chancellor of England. Although his political
career ended in disgrace, he remained extremely influential through his works,
especially as philosophical advocate and practitioner of the scientific
revolution. Indeed, his dedication may have brought him into a rare historical
group of scientists who were killed by their own experiments.

His works established and popularized an inductive methodology for scientific
inquiry, often called the Baconian method or simply, the scientific method.
His demand for a planned procedure of investigating all things natural marked
a new turn in the rhetorical and theoretical framework for science, much of
which still surrounds conceptions of proper methodology today.

Bacon was knighted in 1603, created Baron Verulam in 1618, and Viscount St
Alban in 1621; without heirs, both peerages became extinct upon his death.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Early life
    * 1.2 Parliamentarian
    * 1.3 Attorney General
    * 1.4 Lord Chancellor and public disgrace
    * 1.5 Personal relationships
    * 1.6 Death
  * 2 Philosophy and works
    * 2.1 Bacon's Utopia
    * 2.2 The New Instrument
    * 2.3 List of published works
  * 3 Influence
    * 3.1 North America
    * 3.2 Religious influence
    * 3.3 Modern portrayals
  * 4 Historical debates and fringe theories
    * 4.1 Bacon and Shakespeare
    * 4.2 Secret societies
    * 4.3 Parentage theories
  * 5 Timeline
  * 6 See also
  * 7 Notes
  * 8 Sources
  * 9 Studies
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

### [edit] Early life

<IMG>

<IMG>

Trinity College, Great Court with fountain

Biographers believe that Bacon was educated at home in his early years owing
to poor health (which plagued him throughout his life), receiving tuition from
John Walsall, a graduate of Oxford with a strong leaning towards Puritanism.
He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 5 April 1573 at the age of twelve,
living for three years there together with his older brother Anthony under the
personal tutelage of Dr John Whitgift, future Archbishop of Canterbury.
Bacon's education was conducted largely in Latin and followed the medieval
curriculum. He was also educated at the University of Poitiers. It was at
Cambridge that he first met the Queen, who was impressed by his precocious
intellect, and was accustomed to calling him "the young Lord Keeper" [1].

His studies brought him to the belief that the methods and results of science
as then practiced were erroneous. His reverence for Aristotle conflicted with
his loathing of Aristotelian philosophy, which seemed to him barren,
disputatious, and wrong in its objectives.

On June 27, 1576 he and Anthony entered de societate magistrorum at Gray's
Inn. A few months later, Francis went abroad with Sir Amias Paulet, the
English ambassador at Paris, while Anthony continued his studies at home. The
state of government and society in France under Henry III afforded him
valuable political instruction. For the next three years he visited Blois,
Poitiers, Tours, Italy, and Spain. During his travels, Bacon studied language,
statecraft, and civil law while performing routine diplomatic tasks. On at
least one occasion he delivered diplomatic letters to England for Walsingham,
Burghley, and Leicester, as well as for the queen.

The sudden death of his father in February 1579 prompted Bacon to return to
England. Sir Nicholas had laid up a considerable sum of money to purchase an
estate for his youngest son, but he died before doing so, and Francis was left
with only a fifth of that money. Having borrowed money, Bacon got into debt.
To support himself, he took up his residence in law at Gray's Inn in 1579. He
made rapid progress. He was admitted to the bar in 1582, he became Bencher in
1586, and he was elected a reader in 1587, delivering his first set of
lectures in Lent the following year.

### [edit] Parliamentarian

Bacon's threefold goals were to discover truth, to serve his country, and to
serve his church. Seeking a prestigious post would aid him toward these ends.
In 1580, through his uncle, Lord Burghley, he applied for a post at court,
which might enable him to pursue a life of learning. His application failed.
For two years he worked quietly at Gray's Inn studying law, until admitted as
an outer barrister in 1582.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Hall, Grayâs Inn, 1892, by Herbert Railton

In 1584, he took his seat in parliament for Melcombe in Dorset, and
subsequently for Taunton (1586). At this time, he began to write on the
condition of parties in the church, as well as philosophical reform in the
lost tract, Temporis Partus Maximus. Yet, he failed to gain a position he
thought would lead him to success. He showed signs of sympathy to Puritanism,
attending the sermons of the Puritan chaplain of Gray's Inn and accompanying
his mother to the Temple chapel to hear Walter Travers. This led to the
publication of his earliest surviving tract, which criticised the English
church's suppression of the Puritan clergy. In the Parliament of 1586, openly,
he urged execution for Mary Queen of Scots.

About this time, he again approached his powerful uncle for help, the result
of which may be traced in his rapid progress at the bar. In 1589, he received
the valuable appointment of reversion to the Clerkship of the Star Chamber,
although he did not formally take office until 1608 - a post which was worth
Â£16,000 per annum.[2]

In 1592, he was commissioned to write a response to the Jesuit Robert Parson's
anti-government tract entitled 'Certain observations made upon a libel'
identifying England with the ideals of Republican Athens against the
belligerence of Spain.

### [edit] Attorney General

Bacon soon became acquainted with Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex
(1567â1601), Queen Elizabeth's favourite. By 1591, he acted as the earl's
confidential adviser. Bacon took his seat for Middlesex when in February 1593
Elizabeth called a Parliament to investigate a Roman Catholic plot against
her. Bacon's opposition to a bill that would levy triple subsidies in half the
usual time offended many people. Opponents accused him of seeking popularity.
For a time, the royal court excluded him.

When the Attorney-Generalship fell vacant in 1594, Lord Essex's influence was
not enough still to secure Bacon's candidacy into the office. Likewise, Bacon
failed to become a solicitor in 1595. To console him for these
disappointments, Essex presented him with a property at Twickenham, which he
sold subsequently for Â£1,800, the equivalent of around Â£240,000 in 2006.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Memorial to Francis Bacon, in the chapel of Trinity College, Cambridge

In 1596, Bacon became Queen's Counsel, but missed the appointment of Master of
the Rolls. During the next few years, his financial situation remained bad.
His friends could find no public office for him, and a scheme for retrieving
his position by a marriage with the wealthy and young widow Lady Elizabeth
Hatton failed after she broke off their relationship upon accepting marriage
to a wealthier man. Years later, Bacon still wrote of his regret that the
marriage to Elizabeth had never taken place. In 1598 Bacon was arrested
because of his debts. Afterwards however, his standing in the queen's eyes
improved. Gradually, Bacon earned the standing of one of the learned counsels,
though he had no commission or warrant and received no salary. His
relationship with the queen further improved when he severed ties with Essex,
a shrewd move because Essex was executed for treason in 1601.

With others, Bacon was appointed to investigate the charges against Essex, his
former friend and benefactor. Bacon pressed the case hard against Essex. To
justify himself, Bacon wrote A Declaration of the Practices and Treasons,
etc., of ... the Earl of Essex. He received a gift of a fine of Â£1200 on one
of Essex's accomplices.

The accession of James I brought Bacon into greater favour. He was knighted in
1603. In another shrewd move, Bacon wrote Apologie (defence) about his
proceedings in the case of Essex, as Essex had favoured James to ascend to
throne. The following year, during the course of the uneventful first
parliament session, Bacon married Alice Barnham. In 1608, Bacon began working
as the Clerkship of the Star Chamber. In spite of a generous income, old debts
and spendthrift ways kept him indebted. He sought further promotion and wealth
by supporting King James and his arbitrary policy.

Bacon gained reward with the office of Solicitor in June 1607. In 1610 the
famous fourth parliament of James met. Despite Bacon's advice to him, James
and the Commons found themselves at odds over royal prerogatives and the
king's embarrassing extravagance. The House dissolved in February 1611.
Through this, Bacon managed to stay in the favour of the king while retaining
the confidence of the Commons.

In 1613, Bacon became attorney general, after advising the king to shuffle
judicial appointments. As attorney general, Bacon prosecuted Somerset in 1616.
The parliament of April 1614 objected to Bacon's presence in the seat for
Cambridge and to the various royal plans which Bacon had supported. Although
he was allowed to stay, parliament passed a law that forbade the attorney-
general to sit in parliament. His influence over the king inspired resentment
or apprehension in many of his peers. Bacon continued to receive the King's
favour. In 1618, King James appointed Bacon to the position of Lord
Chancellor.

### [edit] Lord Chancellor and public disgrace

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Tower of London

Bacon's public career ended in disgrace in 1621. After having fallen into
debt, a Parliamentary Committee on the administration of the law charged him
with twenty-three separate counts of corruption. To the lords, who sent a
committee to inquire whether a confession was really his, he replied, "My
lords, it is my act, my hand, and my heart; I beseech your lordships to be
merciful to a broken reed." He was sentenced to a fine of Â£40,000, remitted
by King James, to be committed to the Tower of London during the king's
pleasure (his imprisonment lasted only a few days). More seriously, parliament
declared Bacon incapable of holding future office or sitting in parliament.
Narrowly, he escaped being deprived of his titles. Thenceforth the disgraced
viscount devoted himself to study and writing.

Historians such as Nieves Mathews believe Bacon may have been innocent of the
bribery charges; Bacon himself said that he pleaded guilty by force
deliberately[citation needed] so to save the king from a worse political
scandal, stating:

> "I was the justest judge that was in England these last fifty years. When
the book of all hearts is opened, I trust I shall not be found to have the
troubled fountain of a corrupt heart. I know I have clean hands and a clean
heart. I am as innocent of bribes as any born on St Innocents Day."

### [edit] Personal relationships

<IMG>

<IMG>

Francis Bacon

Though the well-connected antiquary John Aubrey (1626-1697) noted among his
private memoranda concerning Bacon, "He was a Pederast. His Ganimeds and
Favourites tooke Bribes",[3] biographers continue to debate about Bacon's
sexual inclinations and the precise nature of his personal relationships.[4]

When he was 36, Francis engaged in the courtship of Elizabeth Hatton, a young
widow of 20. Reportedly, she broke off their relationship upon accepting
marriage to a wealthier man-Edward Coke. Years later, Bacon still wrote of his
regret that the marriage to Elizabeth had never taken place.[5]

At the age of forty five, Bacon married Alice Barnham (1592â1650), the
fourteen year old daughter of a well-connected London alderman and M.P. Bacon
wrote three sonnets proclaiming his love for Alice. The first sonnet was
written during his courtship and the second sonnet on his wedding day, 10 May
1606. The third sonnet was written years later "when by special Warrant of the
King, Lady Bacon was given precedence over all other Court ladies" when Bacon
was appointed "Regent of the Kingdom": Let not my Love be call'd Idolatry.[6]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Engraving of Alice Barnham

Reports of increasing friction in his marriage to Alice appeared, with
speculation that some of this may have been due to financial resources not
being as readily available to her as she was accustomed to having in the past.
Alice was reportedly interested in fame and fortune, and when reserves of
money were no longer available, there were complaints about where all the
money was going. Alice Chambers Bunten wrote in her Life of Alice Barnham[7]
that, upon their descent into debt, she actually went on trips to ask for
financial favours and assistance from their circle of friends. Bacon
disinherited her upon discovering her secret romantic relationship with John
Underhill. He rewrote his will, which had previously been very generous to her
(leaving her lands, goods, and income), revoking it all.

Several authors, such as A .L. Rowse and Lisa Jardine,[8][9] believe that
despite his marriage Bacon was either homosexual or at the very least
bisexual. Professor Charles R. Forker[10] for example has explored the
"historically documentable sexual preferences" of both King James and Bacon in
addition to those of dramatist Christopher Marlowe and of Bacon's brother
Anthony - and concluded they were oriented to "masculine love", a term that
"seems to have been used exclusively to refer to the sexual preference of men
for members of their own gender."[11]This conclusion has been disputed by
other authors, such as Nieves Mathews,[12][13] who consider the sources to be
questionable and the conclusions more open to interpretation.

### [edit] Death

<IMG>

<IMG>

Monument to Bacon at his burial place, St Michael's Church in St Albans

In April 1626, Sir Francis Bacon came to Highgate near London, and died at the
empty (except for the caretaker) Arundel mansion. A famous and influential
account of the circumstances of his death was given by John Aubrey in his
Brief Lives. Aubrey has been criticized for his evident credulousness in this
and other works; on the other hand, he knew Thomas Hobbes, the philosopher and
friend of Bacon. Aubrey's vivid account, which portrays Bacon as a martyr to
experimental scientific method, has him journeying to Highgate through the
snow with the King's physician when he is suddenly inspired by the possibility
of using the snow to preserve meat. "They were resolved they would try the
experiment presently. They alighted out of the coach and went into a poor
woman's house at the bottom of Highgate hill, and bought a fowl, and made the
woman exenterate it". After stuffing the fowl with snow, he happened to
contract a fatal case of pneumonia. Some people, including Aubrey, consider
these two contiguous, possibly coincidental events as related and causative of
his death: "The Snow so chilled him that he immediately fell so extremely ill,
that he could not return to his Lodging ... but went to the Earle of Arundel's
house at Highgate, where they put him into ... a damp bed that had not been
layn-in ... which gave him such a cold that in 2 or 3 days as I remember Mr
Hobbes told me, he died of Suffocation."

Being unwittingly on his deathbed, the philosopher wrote his last letter to
his absent host and friend Lord Arundel:

> "My very good Lord,âI was likely to have had the fortune of Caius Plinius
the elder, who lost his life by trying an experiment about the burning of
Mount Vesuvius; for I was also desirous to try an experiment or two touching
the conservation and induration of bodies. As for the experiment itself, it
succeeded excellently well; but in the journey between London and Highgate, I
was taken with such a fit of casting as I know not whether it were the Stone,
or some surfeit or cold, or indeed a touch of them all three. But when I came
to your Lordship's House, I was not able to go back, and therefore was forced
to take up my lodging here, where your housekeeper is very careful and
diligent about me, which I assure myself your Lordship will not only pardon
towards him, but think the better of him for it. For indeed your Lordship's
House was happy to me, and I kiss your noble hands for the welcome which I am
sure you give me to it. I know how unfit it is for me to write with any other
hand than mine own, but by my troth my fingers are so disjointed with sickness
that I cannot steadily hold a pen."[14]

He died at Lord Arundel's home[15] on 9 April 1626, leaving assets of about
Â£7,000 and debts to the amount of Â£22,000.

This account appears in a biography by William Rawley, Bacon's personal
secretary and chaplain:

> "He died on the ninth day of April in the year 1626, in the early morning of
the day then celebrated for our Saviour's resurrection, in the sixty-sixth
year of his age, at the Earl of Arundel's house in Highgate, near London, to
which place he casually repaired about a week before; God so ordaining that he
should die there of a gentle fever, accidentally accompanied with a great
cold, whereby the defluxion of rheum fell so plentifully upon his breast, that
he died by suffocation."[16]

At his April 1626 funeral, over thirty great minds collected together their
eulogies of him. It appears from these that he was not only loved deeply, but
that there was something about his character which led men even of the stature
of Ben Jonson to hold him in reverence and awe. A volume of the 32 eulogies
was published in Latin in 1730.[17]

## [edit] Philosophy and works

Bacon did not propose an actual philosophy, but rather a method of developing
philosophy. He wrote that, although philosophy at the time used the deductive
syllogism to interpret nature, the philosopher should instead proceed through
inductive reasoning from fact to axiom to law. Before beginning this
induction, the inquirer is to free his or her mind from certain false notions
or tendencies which distort the truth. These are called "Idols"[18] (idola),
and are of four kinds: "Idols of the Tribe" (idola tribus), which are common
to the race; "Idols of the Den" (idola specus), which are peculiar to the
individual; "Idols of the Marketplace" (idola fori), coming from the misuse of
language; and "Idols of the Theatre" (idola theatri), which result from an
abuse of authority. The end of induction is the discovery of forms, the ways
in which natural phenomena occur, the causes from which they proceed.

Derived through use of his methods, Bacon explicates his somewhat fragmentary
ethical system in the seventh and eighth books of his De augmentis scientiarum
(1623). He distinguishes between duty to the community, an ethical matter, and
duty to God, a religious matter. Bacon claimed that [1] any moral action is
the action of the human will, which is governed by belief and spurred on by
the passions; [2] good habit is what aids men in directing their will toward
the good; [3] no universal rules can be made, as both situations and men's
characters differ.

Regarding faith, in De augmentis, he writes that "the more discordant,
therefore, and incredible, the divine mystery is, the more honour is shown to
God in believing it, and the nobler is the victory of faith." He writes in
"The Essays: Of Atheism" that "a little philosophy inclineth manâs mind to
atheism; but depth in philosophy bringeth menâs minds about to religion."

Bacon contrasted the new approach of the development of science with that of
the Middle Ages. He said:

> "Men have sought to make a world from their own conception and to draw from
their own minds all the material which they employed, but if, instead of doing
so, they had consulted experience and observation, they would have the facts
and not opinions to reason about, and might have ultimately arrived at the
knowledge of the laws which govern the material world."

Bacon's works include his Essays, as well as the Colours of Good and Evil and
the Meditationes Sacrae, all published in 1597. His famous aphorism,
"knowledge is power", is found in the Meditations. He published The
Proficience and Advancement of Learning in 1605. Bacon also wrote In felicem
memoriam Elizabethae, a eulogy for the queen written in 1609; and various
philosophical works which constitute the fragmentary and incomplete
Instauratio magna (Great Renewal), the most important part of which is the
Novum Organum (New Instrument, published 1620); in this work he cites three
world-changing inventions:

> "Printing, gunpowder and the compass: These three have changed the whole
face and state of things throughout the world; the first in literature, the
second in warfare, the third in navigation; whence have followed innumerable
changes, in so much that no empire, no sect, no star seems to have exerted
greater power and influence in human affairs than these mechanical
discoveries."[19]

Peter Linebaugh and Marcus Rediker have argued that Bacon was not as
idealistic as his utopian works suggest, rather that he was what might today
be considered an advocate of genocidal eugenics. A year prior to the release
of New Atlantis, Bacon published an essay that reveals a version of himself
not often seen in history. This essay, a lesser-known work entitled, "An
Advertisement Touching an Holy War," advocated the elimination of detrimental
societal elements by the English and compared this to the endeavors of
Hercules while establishing civilized society in ancient Greece. He saw the
"extirpation and debellating of giants, monsters, and foreign tyrants, not
only as lawful, but as meritorious, even divine honour..."[20] Laurence
Lampert has interpreted Bacon's treatise An Advertisement Touching a Holy War
as advocating "spiritual warfare against the spiritual rulers of European
civilization."[21]

### [edit] Bacon's Utopia

Main article: The New Atlantis

In 1623 Bacon expressed his aspirations and ideals in The New Atlantis.
Released in 1627, this was his creation of an ideal land where "generosity and
enlightenment, dignity and splendor, piety and public spirit" were the
commonly held qualities of the inhabitants of Bensalem. In this work, he
portrayed a vision of the future of human discovery and knowledge. The plan
and organization of his ideal college, "Solomon's House", envisioned the
modern research university in both applied and pure science.

### [edit] The New Instrument

Main article: Baconian method

The Novum Organum is a philosophical work by Francis Bacon published in 1620.
This is a reference to Aristotle's work Organon, which was his treatise on
logic and syllogism. In Novum Organum, Bacon details a new system of logic he
believes to be superior to the old ways of syllogism. In this work, we see the
development of the Baconian method consists of procedures for isolating the
form nature, or cause, of a phenomenon, including the method of agreement,
method of difference, and method of concomitant variation.

### [edit] List of published works

  * Essays (1597)
  * The Elements of the Common Law of England (1597)
  * A Declaration of the Practises & Treasons Attempted and Committed by Robert, late Earl of Essex and his Complices (1601)
  * Francis Bacon His Apology, in Certain Imputations Concerning the late Earl of Essex (1604)
  * Certain Considerations Touching the Better Pacification and Edification of the Church of England (1604)
  * Valerius Terminus of the Interpretation of Nature (1604)
  * The Proficience and Advancement of Learning (1605)
  * De sapientia veterum liber (1609)
  * The Charge of Sir Francs Bacon, Knight, the King's Attorney-General, Touching Duels (1614)
  * The Wisdom of the Ancients (1619)
  * Novum Organum (1620)
  * The History of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh (1622)
  * Apophthegms, New and Old (1625)
  * The Translation of Certain Psalms (1625)
  * The New Atlantis (1626)
  * Sylva Sylvarum (1627)
  * Scripta in naturali et universli philisophia (pub. 1653)

## [edit] Influence

Bacon's ideas about the improvement of the human lot were influential in the
1630s and 1650s among a number of Parliamentarian scholars. During the
Restoration, Bacon was commonly invoked as a guiding spirit of the Royal
Society founded under Charles II in 1660.[22][23] In the nineteenth century
his emphasis on induction was revived and developed by William Whewell, among
others.[24]

### [edit] North America

There are some scholars who believe that Bacon's vision for a Utopian New
World in North America was laid out in his novel The New Atlantis. He
envisioned a land where there would be greater rights for women, the
abolishing of slavery, elimination of debtors' prisons, separation of church
and state, and freedom of religious and political expression.[25][26][27][28]
Francis Bacon played a leading role in creating the British colonies,
especially in Virginia, the Carolinas, and Newfoundland. His government report
on âThe Virginia Colonyâ was made in 1609. Francis Bacon and his
associates formed the Newfoundland Colonization Company and in 1610 sent John
Guy to found a colony in Newfoundland. In 1910 Newfoundland issued a postage
stamp to commemorate Francis Bacon's role in establishing Newfoundland. The
stamp states about Bacon, "the guiding spirit in Colonization Schemes in
1610."[5]

### [edit] Religious influence

Main article: Occult theories about Francis Bacon

Francis Bacon's influence can also be seen on a variety of religious and
spiritual authors, and on groups that have utilized his writings in their own
belief systems.[29][30][31][32][33]

### [edit] Modern portrayals

In cinema, Bacon has been most memorably portrayed by Donald Crisp in The
Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex (1939) starring Bette Davis and Errol
Flynn. He was also played in the 2005 Golden Globe winning mini-series
Elizabeth I by Will Keen. On television, John Nettleton played Bacon in the
1970s BBC production of Elizabeth R starring Glenda Jackson.

## [edit] Historical debates and fringe theories

### [edit] Bacon and Shakespeare

Main articles: Baconian theory and Bacon's cipher

The Baconian theory of Shakespearean authorship holds that Sir Francis Bacon
wrote the plays conventionally attributed to William Shakespeare.

The mainstream view is that William Shakespeare of Stratford, an actor in the
Lord Chamberlain's Men (later the King's Men), wrote the poems and plays that
bear his name. The Baconians, however, hold that scholars are so focused on
the details of Shakespeare's life that they neglect to investigate the many
facts that they see as connecting Bacon to the Shakespearean work.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sir Francis Bacon's letter to John Davies "so desiring you to be good to
concealed poets".

The main Baconian evidence is founded on the presentation of a motive for
concealment, the circumstances surrounding the first known performance of The
Comedy of Errors, the close proximity of Bacon to the William Strachey letter
upon which many scholars think The Tempest was based, perceived allusions in
the plays to Bacon's legal acquaintances, the many supposed parallels with the
plays of Bacon's published work and entries in the Promus (his private
wastebook), Bacon's interest in civil histories, and ostensible
autobiographical allusions in the plays. Because Bacon had first-hand
knowledge of government cipher methods, most Baconians see it as feasible that
he left his signature somewhere in the Shakespearean work.

Supporters of the standard view, often referred to as "Stratfordian" or
"Mainstream", dispute all contentions in favour of Bacon, and criticize
Bacon's poetry as not being comparable in quality with that of Shakespeare.

### [edit] Secret societies

Main article: Occult theories about Francis Bacon

Francis Bacon often gathered with the men at Gray's Inn to discuss politics
and philosophy, and to try out various theatrical scenes that he admitted
writing.[34] Bacon's alleged connection to the Rosicrucians and the Freemasons
has been widely discussed by authors and scholars in many books.[35]. However
others, including Daphne du Maurier (in her biography of Bacon), have argued
there is no substantive evidence to support claims of involvement with the
Rosicrucians.[36] Frances Yates[37] does not make the claim that Bacon was a
Rosicrucian, but presents evidence that he was nevertheless involved in some
of the more closed intellectual movements of his day. She argues that Bacon's
movement for the advancement of learning was closely connected with the German
Rosicrucian movement, while Bacon's The New Atlantis portrays a land ruled by
Rosicrucians. He apparently saw his own movement for the advancement of
learning to be in conformity with Rosicrucian ideals.[38]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Italianate York Water Gate, built about 1626 (2004)

### [edit] Parentage theories

A small number of authors have theorized that Francis Bacon could have been
the unacknowledged son of Queen Elizabeth and Robert Dudley, Earl of
Leicester[39][40][41] and that Elizabeth's other secret biological son was
Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex (whom the Queen forced Bacon to prosecute for
treason). There is documented evidence that Elizabeth visited Nicholas Bacon's
house at Gorhambury at least twice and was entertained by the eight or nine
year old Francis.[42][43]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Alfred Dodd (writing in the first half of the c.20th) claimed that by the age
of fifteen Bacon was frequently present at the Elizabethan Court. Robert Cecil
allegedly would whisper the secret to the ladies of the Court. The Queen,
overhearing Lady Scales, repeating the story, is said to have seized the girl
and beat her furiously. Bacon intervened. Enraged that he should take the
girl's part, Elizabeth added: "Though you are my own child, I bar you from the
Succession for withstanding your mother." Anne Bacon is said to have confirmed
the story, adding the Queen was married in a secret ceremony on 21 January
1561 in the house of Lord Pembroke, and that Nicholas Bacon had been one of
the witnesses.[6] No other modern-day historians or biographers have produced
any evidence whatsoever to support Dodd's claim.

## [edit] Timeline

<IMG>

## [edit] See also

  * Baconian method
  * Francis Bacon School
  * Cestui que (Defense and Comment on Chudleigh's Case)

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Collins, Arthur (1741). The English Baronetage: Containing a Genealogical and Historical Account of All the English Baronets, Now Existing: Their Descents, Marriages, and Issues; Memorable Actions, Both in War, and Peace; Religious and Charitable Donations; Deaths, Places of Burial and Monumental Iiscriptions [sic]. Printed for Tho. Wotton at the Three Daggers and Queen's Head. p. 5.
  2. ^ Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, volume 2, p.126
  3. ^ Oliver Lawson Dick, ed. Aubrey's Brief Lives. Edited from the Original Manuscripts, 1949, s.v. "Francis Bacon, Viscount of St. Albans" p. 11.
  4. ^ See opposing opinions of: A. L. Rowse, Homosexuals in History, New York: Carroll & Garf, 1977. page 44; Jardine, Lisa; Stewart, Alan Hostage To Fortune: The Troubled Life of Francis Bacon Hill & Wang, 1999. page 148; Nieves Mathews, Francis Bacon: The History of a Character Assassination, Yale University Press, 1996; Ross Jackson, The Companion to Shaker of the Speare: The Francis Bacon Story, England: Book Guild Publishing, 2005. pages 45 - 46
  5. ^ a b Alfred Dodd, Francis Bacon's Personal Life Story', Volume 2 - The Age of James, England: Rider & Co., 1949, 1986. pages 157 - 158, 425, 502 - 503, 518 - 532
  6. ^ a b Alfred Dodd, Secret History of Francis Bacon, London: The C. W. Daniel Company Ltd. 1941. pages 16 - 17, 97 - 102
  7. ^ Alice Chambers Bunten, Life of Alice Barnham, Wife of Sir Francis Bacon, London: Oliphants Ltd. 1928.
  8. ^ A. L. Rowse, Homosexuals in History, New York: Carroll & Garf, 1977. page 44
  9. ^ Jardine, Lisa; Stewart, Alan Hostage To Fortune: The Troubled Life of Francis Bacon Hill & Wang, 1999. page 148
  10. ^ Forker, Masculine Love, Renaissance Writing, and the New Invention of Homosexuality: An Addendum in the Journal of Homosexuality (1996), Indiana University
  11. ^ Journal of Homosexuality, Volume: 31 Issue: 3, 1996, pages 85-93, ISSN: 0091-8369
  12. ^ Nieves Mathews, Francis Bacon: The History of a Character Assassination, Yale University Press, 1996
  13. ^ Ross Jackson, The Companion to Shaker of the Speare: The Francis Bacon Story, England: Book Guild Publishing, 2005. pages 45 - 46
  14. ^ Bacon, The Works of Francis Bacon, Lord Chancellor of England. A new Edition, ed.Basil Montagu, London: 1825-1834
  15. ^ Bryant, Mark: Private Lives, 2001, p.22.
  16. ^ William Rawley (Bacon's personal secretary and chaplain) Resuscitatio, or, Bringing into Publick Light Several Pieces of the Works, Civil, Historical, Philosophical, & Theological, Hitherto Sleeping; of the Right Honourable Francis Bacon....Together with his Lordship's Life 1657\. "Francis Bacon, the glory of his age and nation, the adorner and ornament of learning, was born in York House, or York Place, in the Strand, on the two and twentieth day of January, in the year of our Lord 1560."
  17. ^ W.G.C. Gundry, ed. Manes Verulamani. This important volume consists of 32 eulogies originally published in Latin shortly after Bacon's funeral in 1626. Bacon's peers refer to him as "a supreme poet" and "a concealed poet," and also link him with the theatre.
  18. ^ "Idols" is the usual translation of idola, but 'illusion' is perhaps a more accurate translation to modern English. See footnote, The New Organon, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 2000), p.18.
  19. ^ Novum Organum, Liber I, CXXIX \- Adapted from the 1863 translation
  20. ^ Linebaugh, Peter, and Marcus Rediker. The Many Headed Hydra. Boston: Beacon P, 2000. 36-70. Argues for an alternative point of view towards Bacon
  21. ^ An Advertisement Touching a Holy War by Francis Bacon, Laurence Lampert (Editor). Waveland Press 2000 ISBN 978-1577661283
  22. ^ Julian Martin, Francis Bacon: The State and the Reform of Natural Philosophy, 1992
  23. ^ Byron Steel, Sir Francis Bacon: The First Modern Mind, Garden City, NY: Doubleday, Doran and Co., Inc., 1930
  24. ^ Peter Urbach, Francis Bacon's Philosophy of Science, Open Court Publishing Co., 1987. A study which argues from a close consideration of Bacon's actual words in context, that he was immensely more sophisticated and modern than is generally allowed. Bacon's reputation as a philosopher of science has sunk since the 17th and early 18th centuries, when he was accorded the title "Father of Experimental Philosophy".
  25. ^ Harvey Wheeler, Francis Baconâs Case of the Post-Nati:(1608); Foundations of Anglo-American Constitutionalism; An Application of Critical Constitutional Theory, Ward, 1998
  26. ^ Howard B. White, Peace Among the Willows: The Political Philosophy of Francis Bacon, The Hague Martinus Nijhoff, 1968
  27. ^ Harvey Wheeler, Francis Baconâs "Verulamium": the Common Law Template of The Modern in English Science and Culture, 1999
  28. ^ Frances Yates, (essay) Bacon's Magic, in Frances Yates, Ideas and Ideals in the North European Renaissance, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1984
  29. ^ Saint Germain Foundation. The History of the "I AM" Activity and Saint Germain Foundation. Schaumburg, Illinois: Saint Germain Press 2003
  30. ^ Luk, A.D.K.. Law of Life â Book II. Pueblo, Colorado: A.D.K. Luk Publications 1989, pages 254 - 267
  31. ^ White Paper - Wesak World Congress 2002. Acropolis Sophia Books & Works 2003.
  32. ^ Partridge, Christopher ed. New Religions: A Guide: New Religious Movements, Sects and Alternative Spiritualities Oxford University Press, USA 2004.
  33. ^ Schroeder, Werner Ascended Masters and Their Retreats Ascended Master Teaching Foundation 2004, pages 250 - 255
  34. ^ Frances Yates, Theatre of the World, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969
  35. ^ Bryan Bevan, The Real Francis Bacon, England: Centaur Press, 1960
  36. ^ Daphne du Maurier, The Winding Stair, Biography of Bacon 1976.
  37. ^ Frances Yates, The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age, pages 61 - 68, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979
  38. ^ Frances Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment, London and Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972
  39. ^ Richardson, Jerusha D. The Lover Of Queen Elizabeth: Being The Life And Character Of Robert Dudley Earl Of Leicester 1533-1588 T. W. Laurie 1907 (Reprint: Kessinger 2006 ISBN-1428612491)
  40. ^ Comyns Beaumont, The Private Life of the Virgin Queen, London England, 1947
  41. ^ Alfred Dodd, The Marriage of Elizabeth Tudor, Rider, 1940. Still maintained as a State secret the author presents allegedly detailed historical evidence that the "virgin queen" not only married Robert Dudley but had two offspring with him.
  42. ^ Jean Overton Fuller, Sir Francis Bacon: A Biography, East-West Publications, 1981.
  43. ^ Arthur Cornwall, Francis the First Unacknowledged King of Great Britain and Ireland, 1936

## [edit] Sources

  * Material originally from the 1911 Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion.
  * Material originally from the 1912 Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion.
  * This article incorporates text from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.
  * This article incorporates public domain text from: Cousin, John William (1910). A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature. London, J. M. Dent & sons; New York, E. P. Dutton.
  * John Farrell, "The Science of Suspicion." Paranoia and Modernity: Cervantes to Rousseau (Cornell UP, 2006), chapter six.
  * "Our Western Heritage" Roselle / Young: Chapter five "The 'Scientific Revolution' and the 'Intellectual Revolution'".

## [edit] Studies

  * Bronwen Price (ed), Francis Bacon's New Atlantis: New Interdisciplinary Essays (Manchester, Manchester University Press, 2003), 244 pp.
  * Julie Robin Solomon and Catherine Gimelli Martin (eds), Francis Bacon and the Refiguring of Early Modern Thought: Essays to Commemorate The Advancement of Learning (1605-2005) (Aldershot, Ashgate, 2004), 272 p. (Literary and Scientific Cultures of Early Modernity).
  * Marta Fattori, "Sir Francis Bacon and the Holy Office," British Journal for the History of Philosophy, 13,1 (2005), 21-49.
  * Claus Zittel, Gisela Engel, Romano Nanni, and Nicole C. Karafyllis (eds), Philosophies of Technology: Francis Bacon and his Contemporaries, Vol. 1-2 (Leiden, Brill, 2008) (Intersections, 11), xxx, 250 pp.; iv, 582 pp.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Francis Bacon  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Francis
Bacon  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Francis Bacon

  * Works by Francis Bacon at Project Gutenberg
  * Works by/about Francis Bacon, from Internet Archive. Scanned, illustrated original editions.
  * Francis Bacon Books
  * Online editions of Bacon's works
  * Essays by Francis Bacon at Quotidiana.org
  * The Essays: Francis Bacon
  * Novum Organum Online
  * Sir Francis Bacon's New Advancement of Learning
  * Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Baconianism
  * Rictor Norton, "Sir Francis Bacon" quotes excised passages of Sir Simonds D'Ewes
  * Quotations Book - Francis Bacon
  * Francis Bacon entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy by Juergen Klein
  * The Twickenham Museum - Sir Francis Bacon
  * Henry Wotton employed by Bacon's intelligence system
  * Francis Bacon Research Trust - Studies of Bacon's connections to the Rosicrucians, Freemasonry, Shakespeare
  * A more easily readable version of the New Organon
  * Francis Bacon at Thoemmes Continuum
  * Cryptographic Shakespeare
  * The Works of Sir Francis Bacon
  * Famous quotes by Francis Bacon
  * Archival material relating to Francis Bacon listed at the UK National Register of Archives

Political offices  
Preceded by  
Sir Thomas Egerton Lord High Chancellor  
1617â1621 Succeeded by  
In Commission  
Preceded by  
Henry Hobart Attorney General of England and Wales  
1613â1617 Succeeded by  
Henry Yelverton  
Parliament of England  
Preceded by  
Miles Sandys  
Member of Parliament for Taunton  
  
1586â1588 Succeeded by  
William Aubrey  
  
Preceded by  
Arthur Atye  
Member of Parliament for Liverpool  
  
1588â1594 Succeeded by  
Thomas Gerard  
  
Peerage of England  
Preceded by  
New Creation Viscount St Alban  
1621â1626 Succeeded by  
Extinct  
Baron Verulam  
1618â1626  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Part of a series on the Shakespeare Authorship Question  
Theories

Oxfordian theory Â· Baconian theory Â· Marlovian theory  
Chronology of Shakespeare's plays â Oxfordian  
Candidates

Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford Â· Francis Bacon Â· Christopher Marlowe Â·
William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby Â· Edward Dyer Â· Henry Neville Â· Roger
Manners, 5th Earl of Rutland Â· Mary Sidney  
Theorists and supporters

J. Thomas Looney Â· Charlton Ogburn Â· Mark Anderson Â· Irvin Leigh Matus Â·
James Wilmot Â· Calvin Hoffman Â· James Wilde, 1st Baron Penzance Â· George
Greenwood Â· Mark Twain Â· Walt Whitman Â· Robin P. Williams  
Persondata  
NAME Bacon, Francis  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Bacon, 1st Viscount St Alban, Francis (full name and title);
Verulam, Baron (title); St Alban, Viscount (title)  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Philosopher and statesman  
DATE OF BIRTH 22 January 1561(1561-01-22)  
PLACE OF BIRTH Strand, London, England  
DATE OF DEATH 9 April 1626  
PLACE OF DEATH Highgate, London, England  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Bacon"

Categories: Early modern philosophers | Empiricists | English philosophers |
English essayists | English rhetoricians | History of scientific method |
Philosophers of science | New Latin writers | Lord Chancellors of England |
Attorneys General for England and Wales | Members of the pre-1707 English
Parliament | English spies | Tudor people | Alumni of Trinity College,
Cambridge | People from St Albans | English Anglicans | Baconian theory |
People from Westminster | Viscounts in the Peerage of England | 1561 births |
1626 deaths | Deaths from pneumonia | Utopists | Queen's Counsel 1597-1800 |
Infectious disease deaths in England | Hermeticists

Hidden categories: Cleanup from December 2008 | All pages needing cleanup |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since September 2008 | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911
EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from A Short
Biographical Dictionary of English Literature

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Novial
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 22:48.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



