
# Nazi UFOs

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Nazi UFOs (German: Rundflugzeug, Diskus, Haunebu, Hauneburg-GerÃ¤te, VRIL,
Andromeda-GerÃ¤te, Flugkreisel or ironically Reichsflugscheiben) refers to
claims about advanced aircraft or spacecraft Nazi Germany supposedly developed
during World War II and which Nazi scientists continued to develop afterwards.
References to such craft appear mostly in fiction and conspiracy theory
sources.

These stories are often associated with esoteric Nazism, an ideology that
supposes the possibility of Nazi restoration by supernatural or paranormal
means.[1]

These myths were likely inspired by historical German development of jet
aircraft such as the Me 262, the Horten Ho 229, the guided missile V1 and the
ballistic missile V2, the latter forming the basis for the early missile and
space programs of both the Soviet Union and the United States.

## Contents

  * 1 Context
  * 2 Early claims
  * 3 Later claims
    * 3.1 Morning of the Magicians
    * 3.2 Ernst ZÃ¼ndel's marketing ploy
    * 3.3 Miguel Serrano's book
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 Books
    * 6.1 DVD
    * 6.2 Analysts
    * 6.3 Proponents

  
## [edit] Context

Nazi UFO tales and myths conform largely to documented history on the
following points:

  * Nazi Germany claimed the territory of New Swabia in Antarctica, sent an expedition there in 1938, and planned others.[citation needed]
  * Nazi Germany conducted research into advanced propulsion technology, including rocketry, Viktor Schauberger's turbine research[citation needed], and the Arthur Sack A.S.6 experimental "flying disc".
  * Some UFO sightings during World War II, particularly those known as foo fighters, were thought to be enemy aircraft.

## [edit] Early claims

The earliest non-fiction assertions of Nazi flying saucers appears to have
been an article which appeared in the Italian newspaper Il Giornale d'Italia
in early 1950. Written by Professor Giuseppe Belluzzo, an Italian scientist
and a former Italian Minister of National Economy under the Mussolini regime,
it claimed that "types of flying discs were designed and studied in Germany
and Italy as early as 1942". Belluzzo also expressed the opinion that "some
great power is launching discs to study them".[2]

The same month, German engineer Rudolf Schriever gave an interview to German
news magazine Der Spiegel in which he claimed that he had designed a craft
powered by a circular plane of rotating turbine blades, 49 ft (15 m) in
diameter. He said that the project had been developed by him and his team at
BMW's Prague works until April 1945, when he fled Czechoslovakia. His designs
for the disk and a model were stolen from his workshop in Bremerhaven-Lehe in
1948 and he was convinced that Czech agents had built his craft for "a foreign
power".[3]

In 1953, when Avro Canada announced that it was developing the VZ-9-AV
Avrocar, a circular jet aircraft with an estimated speed of 1,500 mph (2,400
km/h), German engineer Georg Klein claimed that such designs had been
developed during the Third Reich. Klein identified two types of supposed
German flying disks:

  * A non-rotating disk developed at Breslau by V-2 rocket engineer Richard Miethe, which was captured by the Soviets, while Miethe fled to the US via France, and ended up working for Avro.
  * A disk developed by Rudolf Schriever and Klaus Habermohl at Prague, which consisted of a ring of moving turbine blades around a fixed cockpit. Klein claimed that he had witnessed this craft's first manned flight on 14 February 1945, when it managed to climb to 12,400 m (41,000 ft) in 3 minutes and attained a speed of 2,200 km/h (1,400 mph) in level flight.

Aeronautical engineer Roy Fedden remarked that the only craft that could
approach the capabilities attributed to flying saucers were those being
designed by the Germans towards the end of the war. Fedden (who was also chief
of the technical mission to Germany for the Ministry of Aircraft Production)
stated in 1945:

â I have seen enough of their designs and production plans to realise that
if they (the Germans) had managed to prolong the war some months longer, we
would have been confronted with a set of entirely new and deadly developments
in air warfare.[4] â  
Fedden also added that the Germans were working on a number of very unusual
aeronautical projects, though he did not elaborate upon his statement.[5]

In 1959, Captain Edward J. Ruppelt, editor of the U.S.A.F.'s Project Blue Book
wrote:

â When WWII ended, the Germans had several radical types of aircraft and
guided missiles under development. The majority were in the most preliminary
stages, but they were the only known craft that could even approach the
performance of objects reported to UFO observers.[6] â  
## [edit] Later claims

### [edit] Morning of the Magicians

Main article: Le Matin des Magiciens

Le Matin des Magiciens, a 1967 book by Louis Pauwels and Jacques Bergier, made
many spectacular claims about the Vril Society of Berlin.[7] Several later
writers, including Jan van Helsing,[8][9] Norbert-JÃ¼rgen Ratthofer,[10] and
Vladimir Terziski, have built on their work, connecting the Vril Society with
UFOs. Among their claims, they write that the society had made contact with an
alien race and dedicated itself to creating spacecraft to reach the aliens. In
partnership with the Thule Society and the Nazi Party, it developed a series
of flying disc prototypes. With the Nazi defeat, the society allegedly
retreated to a base in Antarctica and vanished.

Terziski, a Bulgarian engineer who bills himself as president of the American
Academy of Dissident Sciences, claims that the Germans collaborated in their
advanced craft research with Axis powers Italy and Japan, and continued their
space effort after the war from New Swabia. He writes that Germans landed on
the Moon as early as 1942 and established an underground base there. When
Russians and Americans secretly landed on the moon in the 1950s, says
Terziski, they stayed at this still-operating base. According to Terziski,
"there is atmosphere, water and vegetation on the Moon," which NASA conceals
to exclude the third world from moon exploration. Terziski has been accused of
fabricating his video and photographic evidence.[11]

### [edit] Ernst ZÃ¼ndel's marketing ploy

Main article: ZÃ¼ndel: Nazi UFOs-Antarctica

When German Holocaust denier Ernst ZÃ¼ndel started Samisdat Publishers in the
1970s, he initially catered to the UFOlogy community, which was then at its
peak of public acceptance. His main offerings were his own books claiming that
flying saucers were Nazi secret weapons launched from an underground base in
Antarctica, from which the Nazis hoped to conquer the world.[12] ZÃ¼ndel also
sold (for $9999) seats on an exploration team to locate the polar entrance to
the hollow earth.[13] Some who interviewed ZÃ¼ndel claim that he privately
admitted it was a deliberate hoax to build publicity for Samisdat, although he
still defended it as late as 2002.[14][15]

### [edit] Miguel Serrano's book

In 1978 Miguel Serrano, a Chilean diplomat and Nazi sympathizer, published The
Golden Band, in which he claimed that Adolf Hitler was an avatar of Vishnu and
was then communing with Hyperborean gods in an underground Antarctic base.
Serrano predicted that Hitler would lead a fleet of UFOs from the base to
establish the Fourth Reich.[16]

## [edit] See also

  * Ahnenerbe
  * Ghost rockets
  * Hollow Earth
  * Nazi occultism
  * Vril
  * Urda (anime)
  * Iron Sky
  * Vaimanika Shastra
  * The Bell
  * Space Nazis
  * Die Glocke

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Goodrick-Clarke, Nicholas (2002). Black Sun: Aryan Cults, Esoteric Nazism and the Politics of Identity. New York University Press. ISBN 0-8147-3124-4.
  2. ^ "Flying Discs 'Old Story', Says Italian", Daily Mirror, 24 March 1950
  3. ^ Staff writer (1950-03-31). "Luftfahrt". Der Spiegel. http://www.naziufos.com/NEWSCL/SCHRIEV.HTM. Retrieved on 2006-12-01.
  4. ^ Hitler's UFO Burlington UFO and Paranormal Research and Educational Center
  5. ^ Gunston, Bill. By Jupiter! The Life of Sir Roy Fedden.
  6. ^ Hatcher Childress, David; and Shaver Richard S.. Lost Continents & the Hollow Earth.
  7. ^ Pauwels, Louis; and Jacques Bergier (1967). Aufbruch ins dritte Jahrtausend: Von der Zukunft der phantastischen Vernunft. ISBN 3-442-11711-9.
  8. ^ Van Helsing, Jan (1993). Geheimgesellschaften und ihre Macht im 20. Jahrhundert. Rhede, Emsland: Ewert. ISBN 3-894-78069-X.
  9. ^ Van Helsing, Jan (1997). Unternehmen Aldebaran. Kontakte mit Menschen aus einem anderen Sonnensystem. Lathen: Ewertlag. ISBN 3-894-78220-X.
  10. ^ JÃ¼rgen-Ratthofer, Norbert; and Ralf Ettl (1992). Das Vril-Projekt. Der Endkampf um die Erde. (self-published)
  11. ^ Kevin McClure. "The Nazi UFO Mythos." Abduction Watch, accessed 2006-08-27.
  12. ^ Friedrich, Christof (1974). UFO's â Nazi Secret Weapon?. Samisdat Publishers.
  13. ^ Friedrich, Christof (1979). "Samisdat Hollow Earth Expedition". The Nizkor Project. http://www.nizkor.org/hweb/people/z/zundel-ernst/flying-saucers/expedition.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-27.
  14. ^ "Ernst ZÃ¼ndel's Flying Saucers". The Nizkor Project. http://www.nizkor.org/hweb/people/z/zundel-ernst/flying-saucers/. Retrieved on 2006-08-27.
  15. ^ ZÃ¼ndel, Ernst (2002-12-01). "ZÃ¼ndelgram". The Nizkor Project. http://www.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi/people/z/zundel.ernst/zundelgrams/ftp.py?people/z/zundel.ernst/zundelgrams//2002/zgram.021201. Retrieved on 2006-08-27.
  16. ^ Serrano, Miguel (1978). Das goldene Band: esoterischer Hitlerismus. ISBN 3-926179-20-1.

## [edit] Books

### [edit] DVD

  * 1988/1990: UFO - Das Dritte Reich schlÃ¤gt zurÃ¼ck? (UFO - The Third Reich Strikes Back?) (viewable here in German) by Norbert JÃ¼rgen Ratthofer and Ralf Ettl
  * 1992: UFO - Geheimnisse des Dritten Reichs (UFO - Secrets of the Third Reich) (viewable here in German and here in English)
  * 2008, 'Mythos Neuschwabenland: Das letzte Geheimnis des Dritte Reiches' (The Myth of Neuschwabenland - The Last Secret of the Third Reich) by Polar Film + Medien GmbH

### [edit] Analysts

  * Joscelyn Godwin. Arktos: The Polar Myth in Science, Symbolism, and Nazi Survival. Adventures Unlimited Press, 1996. ISBN 0-932813-35-6.
  * Christopher Partridge. UFO Religions. Routledge, 2002. ISBN 0-415-26324-7.

### [edit] Proponents

  * Branton (Bruce Alan Walton) The Omega Files: Secret Nazi UFO Bases Revealed (April 15, 2000 ISBN 1-892062-09-7)
  * Renato Vesco & David Hatcher Childress. Man-Made UFOs 1944-1994: 50 Years of Suppression (September, 1994 ISBN 0-932813-23-2)
  * Henry Stevens. Hitler's Flying Saucers: A Guide to German Flying Discs of the Second World War (February 1, 2003 ISBN 1-931882-13-4)
  * Nick Cook. The Hunt for Zero Point. New York: Broadway Books (2003)

v â¢ d â¢ e

Ufology  
Main areas of study

Contactee Â· Crashes Â· Extraterrestrials Â· Sightings Â· Topics

<IMG>  
Involvement

Culture Â· Government personnel Â· Government responses Â· Organizations Â·
Religions Â· Ufologists  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nazi_UFOs"

Categories: Moon myths | Mysticism | Nazi mysticism | Pseudohistory | Alleged
UFOs | UFO-related phenomena

Hidden categories: Articles containing German language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January
2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 17:15 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



