
# B. Traven

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

'Traven Torsvan', believed to be the writer known as B. Traven, 1926.

B. Traven (dates unknown, possibly 1890-1969) was the nom de plume of an
enigmatic twentieth century novelist whose most famous work is the novel The
Treasure of the Sierra Madre, filmed by John Huston in 1948. The name B.
Traven appeared as author of many other novels, including The Death Ship and
the epic Jungle Novel series, which is a description of government corruption
and an Indian uprising set at the birth of the Mexican Revolution. His writing
portrays a bleak and violent world and is notable for anti-capitalist and pro-
anarchist sympathies.

While his identity has been the subject of much speculation, the current
consensus is that the writer who used the name B. Traven was a man known for
different periods of his life as Ret Marut (1907-1924), Traven Torsvan
(1925-1951) and Hal Croves (1952-1969). No one theory of his origins has,
however, received general acceptance; one theory is that he was born in
Chicago in 1890, name unknown, while another is that he was born in 1882 as a
member of the German working-class called Otto Feige.

## Contents

  * 1 Literary output
    * 1.1 General
    * 1.2 The Cotton Pickers
    * 1.3 The Death Ship
    * 1.4 The Treasure of the Sierra Madre
    * 1.5 The Jungle Novels
  * 2 Identity
    * 2.1 Identity and life â 1907-1969
      * 2.1.1 Hal Croves
      * 2.1.2 Traven Torsvan
      * 2.1.3 Ret Marut
      * 2.1.4 Summary
    * 2.2 Origins
      * 2.2.1 Chicago theory
      * 2.2.2 Otto Feige theory
    * 2.3 Concerns and other theories
      * 2.3.1 Unanswered questions
      * 2.3.2 Shared authorship
      * 2.3.3 Other pseudonyms
      * 2.3.4 Other proposed identities
  * 3 References
  * 4 Bibliography
    * 4.1 Primary material
      * 4.1.1 B. Traven â Stand alone works
      * 4.1.2 B. Traven â The Jungle Novels
      * 4.1.3 Works by Ret Marut
    * 4.2 Secondary material
  * 5 External links
    * 5.1 Primary material
    * 5.2 Secondary material

  
## [edit] Literary output

### [edit] General

Work published under the name B. Traven started to appear in print in February
1925[1] when the first part of The Cotton Pickers appeared in serial form in
the German newspaper VorwÃ¤rts. Later that year he produced the manuscripts of
two more major works, The Death Ship and The Treasure of the Sierra Madre as
well as several short stories, all of which were to appear in print later in
the decade. In the 1930âs the six Jungle novels appeared, establishing B.
Travenâs reputation as a champion of Indian rights in the face of
capitalistic exploitation in Southern Mexico.[1] By 1939, B. Travenâs output
had all but stopped. While new editions on the existing oeuvre continued to
appear, new works were limited to a few short stories and one novel (Aslan
Norval, 1960), which was turned down by several publishers because they felt
it did not read like B. Traven.[1]

Originally, all of these works appeared in German, albeit a form of German
that includes a great many usages seemingly of American-English origin. In
1933 English manuscripts of three novels (The Death Ship, The Treasure of the
Sierra Madre and Bridge in the Jungle) were sent to the American publishing
house Alfred A Knopf; an accompanying letter from B. Traven said that these
were the original versions of the works in question and that the already-
published German versions were translations. This conflicts with recollections
of Bernard Smith, the editor of these books at Knopf, who has stated that the
texts appeared to be literal translations from the German that required a lot
of work to render into acceptable English.[2] To add to the problematic nature
of these texts, there were major differences between the content of the
English and German versions, a difficulty later compounded by revisions made
to later editions.

### [edit] The Cotton Pickers

A collection of stories set in poverty-stricken Mexico in the 1920s. The
central character and narrator Gales, is an itinerant worker who leaves behind
him a trail of opposition to oppression. Gales was later to appear as narrator
of The Death Ship, Night Visitor and Bridge in the Jungle.

The text is organized into two books, originally published separately; the
first book, also called The Cotton Pickers, was published in 1925. The
complete book was published in 1926, initially called The Wobbly, the title
refers to a member of the Industrial Workers of the World, a US-based
revolutionary industrial union that had a presence in Mexico and elsewhere.

### [edit] The Death Ship

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cover of Traven's The Treasure of the Sierra Madre, arguably his most well-
known book.

Main article: The Death Ship

Set immediately after World War I, The Death Ship describes the predicament of
a merchant seaman who cannot find legal residence or employment in any nation
because he lacks the proper documentation.

### [edit] The Treasure of the Sierra Madre

Main article: The Treasure of the Sierra Madre

Two down-and-out Americans in 1920s Mexico join with an aged prospector and
discover a rich source of gold; the novel describes the effects of greed on
the men's relationship.

The book was successfully adapted into a film by John Huston in 1948.

### [edit] The Jungle Novels

The Jungle Novels appeared in the 1930s and consist of Government, The
Carreta, March to the Monteria, Trozas, The Rebellion of the Hanged, and The
General from the Jungle. These texts deal with the development of the social
forces that eventually lead to the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution in 1910
and are therefore historical novels. They reflect on the two decades years
after the Revolution commenting also on the Mexico of Traven's time and the
failures of the Revolution to alter the poverty of its peasants and workers.

## [edit] Identity

### [edit] Identity and life â 1907-1969

Much of the writing and examination of B. Travenâs life and works has
concentrated on establishing his identity. The central problem is that no
individual has ever come forward and publicly claimed to be B. Traven.
Investigation into the background of Traven has led to the discovery of a
number of figures, now generally believed to be the same person using
different identities.

#### [edit] Hal Croves

The person most associated with Traven is his supposed agent, Hal Croves,
whose story seemingly begins with the filming of Treasure of Sierra Madre in
1947 which he attended, ostensibly, as B. Travenâs representative. Director
John Huston showed particular interest in this individual and believed that he
may have been B. Traven himself. Croves disappeared after the filming, making
it impossible to obtain further information.[1]

In the early 1950âs Hal Croves reappeared living in Mexico City and even
giving occasional interviews. He had traveled widely in Mexico. His archive
contains records of numerous trips. People who knew Croves say that he had a
German accent, which is substantiated by a recording of his voice.[3][1]

Croves married his secretary, Rosa Elena Lujan, in 1957 and continued to deny
that he was Traven, claiming to merely be his translator. Nevertheless, he did
claim to be a writer and produced many film scripts, though none ever reached
the screen.[1] His wife believed him to be Traven, though she has never been
able to produce definitive evidence. Croves died on 26 March 1969 and was
cremated. His death was registered by his widow under the name of Traven
Torsvan Croves, born Chicago 3 May 1890. No record of the birth of such an
individual has ever been traced.[1]

Amongst his legacies to his widow was the copyright of Travenâs works. Rosa
Lujan gave an interview to The New York Times in 1990,[4] in which she
reiterated her conviction, based on many conversations, that her late husband
was B. Traven.

#### [edit] Traven Torsvan

Crovesâ previous identity is universally accepted to be Traven Torsvan. This
persona was uncovered by the investigations of Mexican journalist Luis Spota,
who discovered a bank account in Acapulco in the name of B. Traven, operated
by an innkeeper locally known as Traven Torsvan, nicknamed El Gringo. His
history was traced to 1925 when he first emerges in Mexico; like Croves, he
was a member of a number of archaeological expeditions and he had shown great
concern with the welfare of the Indian population. Furthermore, photos of the
two individuals corresponded closely, so it seems very likely they were the
same person.[2]

Spota was convinced that Torsvan and B. Traven were one and the same and
published his findings in 1948. Torsvan was angered by this invasion of his
privacy and disappeared for good, presumably to re-emerge as Croves.[2]

Meanwhile, B. Traven communicated through correspondence with his literary
managers, who themselves published newsletters, essentially designed to
generate interest in the books. Traven insisted that all his written
correspondence be returned to him. However, his editor, Bernard Smith, kept
ten letters that he offered for sale after Traven's death. Via these
newsletters an official biography emerged which stated that Traven was a mid-
West American, born around 1900 who had moved to Mexico at an early age. It
was said that the books were initially written in English and translated into
German as that was the only way to achieve publication.

#### [edit] Ret Marut

Shortly after Crovesâ death, his widow made a further announcement,
confirming rumours that earlier in his life Croves/Traven had lived in Germany
and had been a political figure going by the name of Ret Marut.[5] This
identification had been first suggested in the 1920s by Erich MÃ¼hsam, a
revolutionary leader in Munich.[1] Ret Marut too was involved in leftist
politics and was a colleague of MÃ¼hsam, who recognised similarities in the
work of Traven and the ideas of his former associate. Marut was a publicist
and his main activity was editor of the underground magazine, Der
Ziegelbrenner (The Brickburner). Copies of this publication were found in
Crovesâs archive.

Research into Marutâs life has revealed that he was an actor from 1907 to
1915 before becoming a political activist. He was taken prisoner and sentenced
to death in 1922 for his involvement in the Bavarian Soviet Republic but
escaped to London, sending a postcard to his old comrades stating that he had
left Germany for good.[5]. He spent time in prison at Brixton on issues
connected with his papers. He eventually left England in 1924 working as
fireman on a ship, like the hero of The Death Ship, and then disappears from
history.

#### [edit] Summary

A broad consensus has developed identifying Croves,Torsvan and Marut as one
and the same person who is also B. Traven (see e.g. Pateman, The Man Nobody
Knows, a recent full length study). The timeline of his life as follows:

  * 1907 â Appears as Ret Marut in Germany.
  * 1922 â Left Germany for England, arrested in 1923.
  * 1924 â Arrived Mexico, lived as Traven Torsvan in Acapulco.
  * 1947 - Appeared as Hal Croves on the set of The Treasure of the Sierra Madre.
  * 1948 â Traven Torsvan disappears following publicity.
  * 1952 â Hal Croves emerges in Mexico City.
  * 1957 â Married.
  * 1969 â Died.

Nevertheless, the matter is not free from doubt due to a scarcity of evidence
about the actual writing of the books and several unanswered questions which
remain.

### [edit] Origins

#### [edit] Chicago theory

Hal Croves' will stated that he was born Traven Torsvan Croves in Chicago in
1890. Although no record of his birth has ever been traced, this account is
considered to be possible by many scholars as they consider that an American
upbringing would explain the Americanisms that appear in the German texts.
According to this theory he would have travelled to Germany as a teenager for
reasons unknown.[1]

#### [edit] Otto Feige theory

In the late 1970s, Will Wyatt and Robert Robinson of BBC TV made a documentary
about B. Traven and wrote a book based on their research.[6] They traced Marut
to London in the period 1923-4 where he was arrested as an illegal alien. Otto
Feige was one of several names Marut had offered to police while being
questioned in London in 1923, prior to leaving for Mexico. Wyatt had searched
files and records for these names and traced an Otto Feige to the small town
of Schwiebus. The town was originally in Germany but as a result of WWII
became part of Poland, renamed Åwiebodzin.The evidence Marut had provided to
the UK authorities â names, occupations etc. - tallied exactly with the
facts of the family background of Otto Feige.[3]

Wyatt found the elderly brother and sister of Otto, who confirmed from family
knowledge and photographs that Marut/Croves was their brother, born 23
February 1882 and disappeared around 1905; he was well known locally for his
involvement in radical politics.[3] It was also confirmed that Otto Feigeâs
father had worked in a factory that made coal briquettes for use as fuel â a
possible source for the name of Ret Marutâs anarchist paper, Der
Ziegelbrenner.[3]

A key item of supporting evidence was a line-up of four photographs of Croves
in all his supposed identities.[7] This theory had the appeal of providing a
mostly continuous narrative for the life of B. Traven without overlapping
periods between the various identities.

The Feige theory is not popular amongst B. Traven scholars, mostly because it
undermines any possibility that Americanisms in the texts could have been
introduced by Marut, having been picked up during an American childhood. For
instance, one biographer, K. S. Guthke pointed out that Wyatt has not
definitely proved his case and that it is possible that Marut could simply
have borrowed Feigeâs identity.[8]

### [edit] Concerns and other theories

#### [edit] Unanswered questions

The mainstream theory involving Croves, Torsvan, Marut and possibly Feige
leaves many unanswered questions about Travenâs biography. These include the
following

  * The Cotton Pickers was sent to the publishers in 1925. Given that Marut would only have arrived in Mexico early that year, is it possible that he could have absorbed the degree of knowledge of Mexican culture displayed in that book?
  * Another concern is that B. Traven work all but dried up by 1940, whereas Croves continued to live for a further 29 years. Why was he not capable of further work?
  * Many readers have noted the use of Americanisms in the text; how can this be reconciled with evidence that the books were originally written in German?
  * Who translated the books between German and English and how is the uneven quality of both languages explained?
  * Why was the identity of B. Traven concealed so carefully?
  * Who was the author of Aslan Norval and why does it not read like B. Traven?

#### [edit] Shared authorship

Some critics have proposed that the authorship was shared and indeed, this is
what Croves himself stated. Marut/Croves may himself have been one of the
contributors with input from another figure providing background material and
possibly plots. The complex nature of the texts lends credence to the joint
authorship hypothesis. Many of the texts exist in several forms which are
irreconcilably different; manuscripts and published version, German and
English editions and first and revised editions have all been observed to
contain up to 25% different material.[1]

This theory, often referred to as the ErlebnistrÃ¤ger (experience-carrier)
theory, was first proposed in 1964 by Max Schmid, who speculated that the
character Gerard Gales who narrates four of the early novels, is based on a
real person who provided much of the material for those texts[1].

Michael L. Baumann has presented a variation on the ErlebnistrÃ¤ger theory in
Mr. Traven, I Presume? (1997). Baumann contrasts the bitter and anti-Semitic
tones in Marut's texts with Traven's humanism and sense of humour and suggests
that Crove / Torsvan / Marut was not the creator of the original manuscripts.
Baumann is not able to identify any individual as author, but some candidates
emerge from his work, among them, the person behind Mr. Sleight, a central
character from The Bridge in the Jungle (1938).[1]

#### [edit] Other pseudonyms

In addition to the names recorded above, researchers have come across numerous
other pseudonyms used. These include Arnolds, Barker, Traves Torsvan, Richard
Maurhut, Albert Otto Max Wienecke, Kraus, Martinez, Fred Gaudet, Goetz Ohly,
Lainger, Anton RÃ¤derscheidt, Robert Bek-Gran, Hugo Kronthal, Wilhelm
Scheider, and Heinrich Otto Becker.[9]

K. S. Guthke (see his two German sources under secondary sources below)
located a variety of placenames in Schleswig-Holstein, northern Germany, such
as TravemÃ¼nde, Traventhal and the estate of Marutenhof (near Achterwehr),
around the city of LÃ¼beck and all situated by or near the river Trave, which
all shared similarities to Traven's aka Marut's various pseudonyms.

#### [edit] Other proposed identities

Various possible identities have been suggested,[9] largely without evidence.
These include:

  * Jack London, writer[10]
  * Arthur Cravan, boxer
  * Illegitimate son of Kaiser Wilhelm II
  * Adolfo Lopez Mateos, former President of Mexico[10]
  * Plutarco ElÃ­as Calles, former President of Mexico
  * Ambrose Bierce, writer, disappeared 1914.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "B. Traven's Identity Revisited". Tapio Helen. http://www.helsinki.fi/hum/hist/yhd/julk/traven01/traven.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-20.
  2. ^ a b c Robert Robinson, Skip All That, ISBN 0712675396, pp199-207.
  3. ^ a b c d "B. Traven: A Mystery Solved". Wyatt and Robinson. http://www.brightcove.tv/title.jsp?title=1119131104&channel=219646953. Retrieved on 2008-01-20.
  4. ^ New York Times article
  5. ^ a b "International B. Traven Society". http://www.btraven.com/english/frameenglish.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-20.
  6. ^ Will Wyatt, The Man Who Was B. Traven, ISBN 2024017209
  7. ^ Photographs of Feige/Marut/Torsvan/Croves â from Wyatt, Will. The Man Who Was B. Traven ISBN 978-0224017206
  8. ^ Guthke, Karl S. B. Traven: the Life Behind the Legends ISBN 1556521316
  9. ^ a b "B. Traven's page from The Anarchist Encyclopedia". http://recollectionbooks.com/bleed/Encyclopedia/TravenPage1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-20.
  10. ^ a b Nelson, Randy F. The Almanac of American Letters. Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann, Inc., 1981: 237. ISBN 086576008X

## [edit] Bibliography

### [edit] Primary material

#### [edit] B. Traven â Stand alone works

  * The Cotton Pickers (1927; retitled from The Wobbly) ISBN 1-56663-075-4
  * Treasure of the Sierra Madre (1927; first English pub. 1935) ISBN 0-8090-0160-8
  * The Death Ship: the Story of an American Sailor (1926; first English pub. 1934) ISBN 1-55652-110-3
  * The White Rose (1929; first full English publication 1979) ISBN 0-85031-370-8
  * The Night Visitor and Other Stories ISBN 1-56663-039-8
  * The Bridge in the Jungle (1929; first English pub. 1938) ISBN 1-56663-063-0
  * Land of Springtime (1928) â travel book - untranslated
  * Aslan Norval (1960) ISBN 978-3257050165 \- untranslated

#### [edit] B. Traven â The Jungle Novels

  * Government (1931) ISBN 1-56663-038-X
  * The Carreta (1931) ISBN 1-56663-045-2
  * March to the Monteria (1933) ISBN 1-56663-046-0
  * Trozas (1936) ISBN 1-56663-219-6
  * The Rebellion of the Hanged (1936; first English pub. 1952) ISBN 1-56663-064-9
  * A General from the Jungle (1940) ISBN 1-56663-076-2

#### [edit] Works by Ret Marut

  * To the Honorable Miss S... and other stories (1915-19; English publication 1981) ISBN 0-88208-131-4
  * Die Fackel des FÃ¼rsten \- Novel (Nottingham: Edition Refugium 2009) ISBN 0-9506476-2-4;ISBN 978-0-9506476-2-3
  * Der Mann Site und die grÃ¼nglitzernde Frau \- Novel (Nottingham: Edition Refugium 2009) ISBN 0-9506476-3-2; ISBN 978-0-9506476-3-0

### [edit] Secondary material

  * Baumann, Michael L. B. Traven: An introduction ISBN 978-0826304094
  * Baumann, Michael L. Mr. Traven, I Presume? ISBN 978-1585001415
  * Chankin, Donald O. Anonymity and Death: The Fiction of B.Traven ISBN 978-0271011905
  * Goldwasser, James. âRet Marut: the early B. Travenâ in The Germanic Review June 1993
  * Guthke, Karl S. B.Traven: The Life Behind the Legends ISBN 978-1556521324
  * Guthke, Karl S. B. Traven. Biografie eines RÃ¤tsels. BÃ¼chergilde Gutenberg, Frankfurt am Main 1987, ISBN 3-7632-3268-0; 2nd edition: Diogenes Verlag, ZÃ¼rich 1998, ISBN 3-257-21922-9
  * Guthke, Karl S. âDas Geheimnis um B. Traven entdecktâ â und rÃ¤tselvoller denn je. BÃ¼chergilde Gutenberg, Frankfurt am Main 1984, ISBN 3-7632-2877-2
  * Mezo, Richard E. A Study of B. Traven's Fiction: The Journey to Solipaz ISBN 0773498389
  * Pateman, Roy. The Man Nobody Knows: The Life and Legacy of B. Traven ISBN 978-0761829737
  * Raskin, Jonah. My Search for B. Traven ISBN 978-0416007411
  * SchÃ¼rer, Ernst, & P. Jenkins. B. Traven: Life and Work ISBN 978-0271003825
  * Stone, Judy. The Mystery of B. Traven ISBN 978-0595197293
  * Wyatt, Will. The Man Who Was B. Traven ISBN 978-0224017206
  * Thunecke, JÃ¶rg (ed.): B. Traven the Writer / Der Schriftsteller B. Traven, Edition Refugium: Nottingham 2003, ISBN 0-9542612-0-8, ISBN 0-9506476-5-9, ISBN 978-0-9506476-5-4
  * Thorsten Czechanowsky: 'Ich bin ein freier Amerikaner, ich werde mich beschweren'. Zur Destruktion des American Dream in B. Travens Roman 'Das Totenschiff' ' , in: Jochen Vogt/Alexander Stephan (Hg.): Das Amerika der Autoren, MÃ¼nchen: Fink 2006.
  * Thorsten Czechanowsky: Die Irrfahrt als Grenzerfahrung. Ãberlegungen zur Metaphorik der Grenze in B. Travens Roman 'Das Totenschiff' in: mauerschau 1/2008, pp.47-58 (ignores all recent Traven scholarship).
  * Thunecke, JÃ¶rg (ed.) Der Schriftsteller Ret Marut, Nottingham: Edition Refugium 2009, ISBN 0-9506476-4-0, ISBN 978-0-9506476-4-7

## [edit] External links

### [edit] Primary material

  * Works by B. Traven at Internet Archive
  * Translations from Traven's "Macario"

### [edit] Secondary material

  * B. Traven, from Books and Writers
  * B. Traven, from the Anarchist Encyclopedia
  * B. Traven, biography with pictures from libcom.org
  * His Widow Reveals Much Of Who B. Traven Really Was The New York Times, June 25, 1990, p. C13
  * B Who? Paper by Barry Kritzberg October 8, 2007
  * B. Traven's Identity Revisited Detailed article by Tapio Helen
  * The B. Traven website
  * The University of California Riverside Libraries are home to extensive collections (over 500 cataloged titles) of works by and about B. Traven Search the libraries' catalog, as well as the world's largest publicly accessible B. Traven archives. The archives contain unique unpublished materials, correspondence, and documents pertaining to both Ret Marut and B. Traven. An online exhibition The B. Traven Collections at UC Riverside Libraries was created in 2007 to highlight some of these collections.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B._Traven"

Categories: German anarchists | German novelists

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 March 2009, at 22:23.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



