
# Chanakya

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the Indian television series based on his life, see Chanakya (TV series).

<IMG>

<IMG>

The court of Chandragupta Maurya, especially Chanakya, played an important
part in the foundation and governance of the Maurya dynasty.

Chanakya (Sanskrit: à¤à¤¾à¤£à¤à¥à¤¯ CÄá¹akya) (c. 350-283 BCE) was an
adviser and a prime minister[1] to the first Maurya Emperor Chandragupta (c.
340-293 BCE), and architect of his rise to power. Kautilya and Vishnugupta,
the names by which the ancient Indian political treatise called the
ArthaÅÄstra identifies its author, are traditionally identified with
Chanakya.[2] Chanakya has been considered as the pioneer of the field of
economics, preceding Ibn Khaldun in writing about it by about a millennium and
a half.[3][4][5][6] He is known as "The Indian Machiavelli" in the Western
world.[7] Chanakya was a professor at Takshashila University and is widely
believed to be responsible for the creation of Mauryan empire, the first of
its kind on the Indian subcontinent.

## Contents

  * 1 Identity
  * 2 Works
  * 3 Legend
    * 3.1 Jain version
      * 3.1.1 Death of Chanakya
    * 3.2 Pali version
    * 3.3 Other versions
  * 4 Media
  * 5 In modern India
  * 6 References
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Identity

He is generally called Chanakya[8] but, in his capacity as author of the
ArthaÅhÄstra, is generally referred to as Kautilya which means kautil
neeti.He was the master of shrewd act of diplomacy. He believed in four ways
Enticement , Sowing dession , Punishment or war .[9] The ArthaÅhÄstra
identifies its author by the name Kautilya,[2] except for one verse which
refers to him by the name Vishnugupta.[10] One of the earliest Sanskrit
literature to explicitly identify Chanakya with Vishnugupta was Vishnu Sarma's
Panchatantra in the 3rd century BC.[11]

K.C. Ojha puts forward the view that the traditional identification of
Vishnugupta with Kautilya was caused by a confusion of editor and originator
and suggests that Vishnugupta was a redactor of the original work of
Kautilya.[2] Thomas Burrow goes even further and suggests that Chanakya and
Kautilya may have been two different people.[12]

## [edit] Works

Two books are attributed to Chanakya: Arthashastra and Nitishastra which is
also known as Chanakya Niti. The Arthashastra discusses monetary and fiscal
policies, welfare, international relations, and war strategies in detail.
Nitishastra is a treatise on the ideal way of life, and shows Chanakya's in
depth study of the Indian way of life.

## [edit] Legend

<IMG>

<IMG>

Silver punch mark coin of the Mauryan empire, with symbols of wheel and
elephant. 3rd century BCE.

Thomas R. Trautmann lists the following elements as common to different forms
of the Chanakya legend[13]:

  * Chanakya was born with a complete set of teeth, a sign that he would become king, which is inappropriate for a Brahmin like Chanakya. ChÄá¹akya's teeth were therefore broken and it was prophesied that he will rule through another.
  * The Nanda King throws ChÄnakya out of his court, prompting ChÄnakya to swear revenge.
  * ChÄnakya searches for one worthy for him to rule through. ChÄnakya encounters a young Chandragupta Maurya who is a born leader even as a child.
  * ChÄnakya's initial attempt to overthrow Nanda fails, whereupon he comes across a mother scolding her child for burning himself by eating from the middle of a bun or bowl of porridge rather than the cooler edge. ChÄá¹akya realizes his initial strategic error and, instead of attacking the heart of Nanda territory, slowly chips away at its edges.
  * ChÄnakya changed his alliance with the mountain king Parvata due to his obstinacy and non-adherence to the principles of the treaty as agreed.
  * ChÄnakya enlists the services of a fanatical weaver to rid the kingdom of rebels.
  * ChÄnakya adds poison to the food eaten by Chandragupta Maurya, now king, in order to make him immune. Unaware, Chandragupta feeds some of his food to his queen, who is in her ninth month of pregnancy. In order to save the heir to the throne, ChÄnakya cuts the queen open and extracts the fetus, who is named BindusÄra because he was touched by a drop (bindu) of blood of poison.
  * ChÄnakya's political rivalry with Subandhu leads to his death.

Chanakya was an intelligent saint. Once, it is said that Mauryan forces had to
hide in a cave. There was no food. Soldiers were starving.They could not come
out of the cave either, as there was a threat to their lives. Chanakya saw an
ant taking a grain of rice, Whereas, there was no sign of food or grain
anywhere. Moreover, the rice grain was cooked. He ordered the soldiers to
search and they found that their enemies had been dining under the cave.
Somewhat like, at the ground floor. As soon as they saw this, they escaped and
thus were saved.

### [edit] Jain version

According to Jaina accounts[14] ChÄnakya was born in the village of Caá¹aka
in the Golla district to Caá¹in and Caá¹eÅvarÄ«, a Maga Brahmin couple[13].

#### [edit] Death of Chanakya

Chanakya lived to a ripe old age and died around 283 BC and was cremated by
his grandson/disciple Radhagupta who succeeded Rakshasa Katyayan (great-grand
son of Prabuddha Katyayan, who attained Nirvana during the same period as
Gautam Budhha) as Prime Minister of the Maurya Empire and was instrumental in
backing Ashoka to the throne. There were three non-traditional belief paths in
society those days, Jaina, Buddhist and Ajivaka. Ajivaka practising Chanakya
brought about the downfall of the Jaina Nandas and their coterie of Jaina
ministers. (Chanakya 's uncle was Jain, too, and a group of Jains backed
Chanakya in his political machinations). Later on, Chandragupta Maurya took
Jainism on abdicating his throne which passed to his Son Bindusara who was an
Ajivaka. Even Ashoka was practising Ajivaka who before accession to throne
became Buddhist. Bindusara was born before his father ever became Emperor so
the below legend is definitely not true. Ashoka's daughter was married in 265
BC and his son Kunala was 18 years of age in 269 BC which means that even the
princes married early, Ashoka was born 310 BC and Bindusara around 330 BC.
Bindusara means one who encompasses all that is need to be known.

Later on, Ajivikism which was the official religion of the empire since the
Kalinga War (261 BC) and for 14 years afterwards, declined and merged into
traditional Hinduism. What has been left are a mish mash of contradictory
Buddhist and Jaina legends which are even rejected by Sinhalese chronicles.

According to a legend which is a later jaina invention, while Chanakya served
as the Prime Minister of Chandragupta Maurya, he started adding small amounts
of poison in Chandragupta's food so that he would get used to it. The aim of
this was to prevent the Emperor from being poisoned by enemies. One day the
queen, Durdha, shared the food with the Emperor while she was pregnant. Since
she was not used to eating poisoned food, she died. Chanakya decided that the
baby should not die; hence he cut open the belly of the queen and took out the
baby. A drop (bindu in Sanskrit) of poison had passed to the baby's head, and
hence Chanakya named him Bindusara. Bindusara would go on to become a great
king and to father the greatest Mauryan Emperor since Chandragupta - Asoka.

When Bindusara became a youth, Chandragupta gave up the throne and followed
the Jain saint Bhadrabahu to present day Karnataka and settled in a place
known as Shravana Belagola. He lived as an ascetic for some years and died of
voluntary starvation according to Jain tradition.

Chanakya meanwhile stayed as the Prime Minister of Bindusara. Bindusara also
had a minister named Subandhu who did not like Chanakya. One day he told
Bindusara that Chanakya was responsible for the murder of his mother.
Bindusara asked the nurses who confirmed this story and he became very angry
with Chanakya.

It is said that Chanakya, on hearing that the Emperor was angry with him,
thought that anyway he was at the end of his life. He donated all his wealth
to the poor, widows and orphans and sat on a dung heap, prepared to die by
total abstinence from food and drink. Bindusara meanwhile heard the full story
of his birth from the nurses and rushed to beg forgiveness of Chanakya. But
Chanakya would not relent. Bindusara went back and vent his fury on Subandhu,
who asked for time to beg for forgiveness from Chanakya.

Subandhu, who still hated Chanakya, wanted to make sure that Chanakya did not
return to the city. So he arranged for a ceremony of respect, but unnoticed by
anyone, slipped a smoldering charcoal ember inside the dung heap. Aided by the
wind, the dung heap swiftly caught fire, and the man behind the Mauryan Empire
and the author of Arthashastra was burned to death.

His main philosophy was "A debt should be paid off till the last penny; An
enemy should be destroyed without a trace". Ironically, Subandhu followed his
main philosophy and destroyed him without a trace.

### [edit] Pali version

Template:Chanakya is a Brahmin from Takshila[13].

### [edit] Other versions

The classical Sanskrit play by Vishakhadatta, Mudrarakshasa, is one popular
source of Chankaya lore. (The play has been dated between 4th and 9th century
CE).

A South Indian group of Brahmins in Tamil Nadu called Sholiyar or Chozhiyar,
claim that Chanakya was one of them. Though this may sound very improbable,
considering the vast distance between present day Tamilnadu in the south and
Magadha in Bihar, it finds curious echos in the AbhidhÄnchintÄmani, where
Hemachandra claims that Chankya was a Dramila[15]("Dramila" is believed to be
the root of the word "Dravida" by some scholars).

There is also a claim that Chanakya belonged to the Brahmin group from the
present day Kerala. In true Hindu tradition he is said to have persuaded King
Chandragupta Maurya to forsake his throne and to join him in moving to the
last phase of one's life viz. Sanyasa. Accordingly, he took the King along
with him to South India where both of them carried prolonged meditation and
finally achieved Moksha.

Kautilya was educated at Taxila or Takshashila,[16] in present day Pakistan.
The new states (in present-day Bihar and Uttar Pradesh) by the northern high
road of commerce along the base of the Himalayas maintained contact with
TakshasilÃ¢ and at the eastern end of the northern high road (uttarapatha) was
the kingdom of Magadha with its capital city, Pataliputra, now known as Patna.
Chanakya's life was connected to these two cities, Pataliputra and Taxila.

In his early years he was tutored extensively in the Vedas \- Chanakya
memorized them completely at a very early age.[verification needed] He was
also taught mathematics, geography and science along with
religion.[verification needed] Later he travelled to Taxila, where he became a
teacher of politics.[verification needed] Chanakya taught subjects using the
best of practical knowledge acquired by the teachers. The age of entering the
University was sixteen. The branches of study most sought after around India
at that time ranged from law, medicine, warfare and other disciplines. Two of
his more famous students were Bhadrabhatta and Purushdutta.[verification
needed]

Political turmoil in Western India at that time caused by Greek invasion
forced Chanakya to leave the University environment for the city of
Pataliputra (presently known as Patna, in the state of Bihar, India), which
was ruled by the Nanda king Dhanananda. Although Chanakya initially prospered
in his relations with the ruler, being a blunt person he was soon disliked by
Dhanananda. This ended with Chanakya being removed from an official position
he enjoyed.

According to the Kashmiri version of his legend, ChÄá¹akya a thorn had
pricked his foot, he uprooted the tree and poured buttermilk in the roots .
[17]

## [edit] Media

  1. Television series Chanakya portrayed the biography of Chanakya.

## [edit] In modern India

The diplomatic enclave in New Delhi is named Chanakyapuri in honour of
Chanakya.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Boesche, Roger (January 2003). "Kautilya's ArthaÅÄstra on War and Diplomacy in Ancient India". The Journal of Military History 67 (1): 9â37. doi:10.1353/jmh.2003.0006. ISSN 0899-3718. "Kautilya [is] sometimes called a chancellor or prime minister to Chandragupta, something like a Bismarckâ¦"
  2. ^ a b c Mabbett, I. W. (April 1964). "The Date of the ArthaÅhÄstra". Journal of the American Oriental Society 84 (2): 162â169. doi:10.2307/597102. ISSN 0003-0279.
  3. ^ L. K. Jha, K. N. Jha (1998). "Chanakya: the pioneer economist of the world", International Journal of Social Economics 25 (2-4), p. 267-282.
  4. ^ Waldauer, C., Zahka, W.J. and Pal, S. 1996. Kautilya's Arthashastra: A neglected precursor to classical economics. Indian Economic Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 1, pp. 101-108.
  5. ^ Tisdell, C. 2003. A Western perspective of Kautilya's Arthasastra: does it provide a basis for economic science? Economic Theory, Applications and Issues Working Paper No. 18. Brisbane: School of Economics, The University of Queensland.
  6. ^ Sihag, B.S. 2007. Kautilya on institutions, governance, knowledge, ethics and prosperity. Humanomics 23 (1): 5-28.
  7. ^ Herbert H. Gowen (1929). "The Indian Machiavelli" or Political Theory in India Two Thousand Years Ago, Political Science Quarterly 44 (2), p. 173-192.
  8. ^ Trautmann, Thomas R. (1971). Kautilya and the ArthaÅhÄstra: A Statistical Investigation of the Authorship and Evolution of the Text. Leiden: E.J. Brill. pp. 10.
  9. ^ Trautmann 1971:10 "while in his character as author of an arthaÅhÄstra he is generally referred to by his gotra name, Kautilya."
  10. ^ Mabbett 1964  
Trautmann 1971:5 "the very last verse of the work...is the unique instance of
the personal name Vishnugupta rather than the gotra name Kautilya in the
ArthaÅhÄstra.

  11. ^ Mabbett 1964: "References to the work in other Sanskrit literature attribute it variously to Vishnugupta, Chanakya and Kautilya. The same individual is meant in each case. The PaÅcatantra explicitly identifies Chanakya with Vishnugupta."
  12. ^ Trautmann 1971:67 'T. Burrow ("CÄá¹akya and Kauá¹­alya", Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 48â49 1968, p. 17 ff.) has now shown that CÄá¹akya is also a gotra name, which in conjunction with other evidence makes it clear that we are dealing with two distinct persons, the minister CÄá¹akya of legend and Kauá¹­ilya the compiler of the ArthaÅÄstra. Furthermore, this throws the balance of evidence in favor of the view that the second name was originally spelt Kauá¹­alya and that after the compiler of the Arth. came to be identified with the Mauryan minister it was altered to Kautilya (as it appears in ÄryaÅÅ«ra, ViÅÄkhadatta and BÄna) for the sake of the pun. We must then assume that the later spelling subsequently replaced the earlier in the gotra lists and elsewhere.'
  13. ^ a b c Trautmann 1971:"The ChÄá¹akya-Chandragupta-KathÄ"
  14. ^ the PariÅiá¹£á¹­a Parvan by Hemacandra
  15. ^ R.C. Majumdar, A. D. Pusalker, A. K. Majumdar et al,The History and Culture of the Indian People \- The age of imperial unity, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Mumbai, 1962
  16. ^ Chanakya-Niti
  17. ^ Trautmann 1971:31

## [edit] See also

  * Magadha Empire
  * Mauryan dynasty
  * Chandragupta Maurya
  * Asoka Maurya
  * Bindusara Maurya
  * Dasaratha Maurya
  * Arthashastra

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Chanakya  
  * Philosophy of Chanakya
  * Kautilya's Arthashastra (full 1915 Shamasastry text, divided into 15 books)
  * Kautilya: the Arthshastra - Chanakya's revered work
  * Philosophy and Biography
  * Chanakya TV Serial Online

v â¢ d â¢ e

Schools of economic thought  
Pre-modern

Ancient schools Â· Medieval Islamic Â· Scholasticism  
Early modern

Mercantilism Â· Physiocrats  
Modern

Classical Â· French liberal Â· German historical Â· English historical Â·
French historical Â· Utopian Â· Marxian Â· State socialism Â· Ricardian
socialism Â· Christian socialism Â· Distributism Â· Anarchist Â· Institutional
Â· Neoclassical Â· Lausanne  
20th century

Stockholm Â· Keynesian Â· Austrian Â· Chicago Â· Neo-Ricardian Â· New
institutional Â· Post-Keynesian Â· Islamic Â· New classical  
Related

Economics Â· History of economic thought  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chanakya"

Categories: Ancient Indians | Jainism | Vaishnavism | Hindu philosophers |
Indian military writers

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing
factual verification since June 2007 | All pages needing factual verification

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * FranÃ§ais
  * àªà«àªàª°àª¾àª¤à«
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Italiano
  * Basa Jawa
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Nederlands
  * à¤¨à¥à¤ªà¤¾à¤² à¤­à¤¾à¤·à¤¾
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 12:09.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



