
# Patrick Nagel

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Patrick Nagel (November 25, 1945 \- February 4, 1984) was an American artist.
He created popular illustrations on board, paper, and canvas, most of which
emphasize the simple grace of and beauty of the female form, in a distinctive
style descended from Art Deco. He is best known for his illustrations for
Playboy magazine, and the pop group Duran Duran, for whom he designed the
cover of the best selling album Rio.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
  * 2 Style
  * 3 Notes
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

Nagel was born in Dayton, Ohio in 1945, but was raised and spent most of his
life in the Los Angeles area. After serving as a Ranger in Vietnam[1], Nagel
attended the Chouinard Art Institute in Los Angeles in 1969, and in that same
year he received his Bachelor of Fine Arts degree from California State
University, Fullerton.

In 1971, Nagel worked as a graphic designer for ABC Television, producing
graphics for promotions and news broadcasts. The following year, he began work
as a freelance artist for major corporations and magazines, including
Architectural Digest, Harper's Magazine, IBM, ITT Corporation, MGM, Oui,
Rolling Stone, United Artists, and Universal Studios.

In 1976, Nagel began to regularly contribute images to Playboy magazine, which
improved his exposure and the popularity of "the Nagel Woman" image to a huge
audience. In 1978, he made his first poster image for Mirage Editions, with
whom he would print many Nagel women images.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Album cover from Rio.

Nagel's 1982 painting for the album cover of rock group Duran Duran's hit
album Rio would become one of his best known images.

He also worked for many commercial clients, including Intel, Lucky Strike
cigarettes, and Budweiser. As his popularity grew he began offering limited
edition prints of his work.

In 1984, at the age of 38, the artist participated in a 15-minute celebrity
"Aerobathon" to raise funds for the American Heart Association. Afterwards, he
was found dead in his car, and doctors determined by autopsy that he had
suffered a heart attack.[2]

At the time of his death, over 80,000 people owned one of Nagel's limited-
edition prints or best-selling lithographs.

## [edit] Style

Nagel would start with a photograph and work down, always simplifying and
removing elements which he felt were unnecessary. The resulting image would
look flat, but emphasized those elements which he felt were most important.

According to Elena G. Millie, curator of the poster collection at the Library
of Congress:

> Like some of the old print masters (Toulouse-Lautrec and Bonnard, for
example), Nagel was influenced by the Japanese woodblock print, with figures
silhouetted against a neutral background, with strong areas of black and
white, and with bold line and unusual angles of view. He handled colors with
rare originality and freedom; he forced perspective from flat, two-dimensional
images; and he kept simplifying, working to get more across with fewer
elements. His simple and precise imagery is also reminiscent of the art-deco
style of the 1920s and 1930s- its sharp linear treatment, geometric
simplicity, and stylization of form yield images that are formal yet
decorative.[3]

Nagel's figures generally have black hair, bright white skin, full-lipped
mouths, and the distinctive Nagel eyes, which are often squared off in the
later works. Because of the intense stylization and reduction of facial
features into clean lines, generally the figures resemble each other, though
Nagel worked with many models, including Playboy Playmates Cathy St. George,
Tracy Vaccaro and Shannon Tweed. Nagel also painted several celebrity
portraits including those of Joan Collins (whose portrait was subsequently
released as a limited edition print) and Joanna Cassidy.

While Nagel's work is mostly represented by aloof, if also seductive women,
they are rarely, if ever, presented in a submissive relationship with
men.[citation needed] These are highly sexual, but empowered and intelligent
women. Nagel also painted men, though only one was ever released as a fine art
print while Nagel was alive. He had and continues to have a devoted following
of collectors.[citation needed]

Nagel's artwork strongly influenced the illustration and clip art of the late
1980s and illustrations of women strongly resembling those seen in Nagel's art
were widely used in hair and nail salons and other beauty-oriented
businesses.[4]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ "The Art of Patrick Nagel"ISBN 0-912383-36-4
  2. ^ Obituary at the New York Times
  3. ^ The Life and Art of Patrick Nagel from ArtHistoryArchive.com
  4. ^ "Beauty Shop Nagel" at Urban Dictionary

## [edit] External links

  * Official site, with biography and selected works

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_Nagel"

Categories: 1945 births | 1984 deaths | American artists | People from Dayton,
Ohio | American illustrators | Playboy

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Italiano

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 04:00 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
WikipediaÂ® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



