
# Alfred the Great

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other meanings, see Alfred the Great (disambiguation).

Alfred the Great  
King of the Anglo-Saxons  
Statue of Alfred the Great, Winchester  
Statue of Alfred the Great, Winchester  
Reign 23 April 871 â 26 October 899  
Predecessor Ãthelred of Wessex  
Successor Edward the Elder  
Spouse Ealhswith  
Issue  
Ãlfthryth  
Ethelfleda  
Ethelgiva  
Edward the Elder  
ÃthelwÃ¦rd  
Full name  
ÃlfrÄd of Wessex  
Father Ãthelwulf of Wessex  
Mother Osburga  
Born c. 849  
Wantage, Berkshire  
Died 26 October 901 (around 50)  
  
Burial c. 1100  
Winchester, Hampshire, now lost.  
Alfred the Great (Old English: ÃlfrÄd; 849 â October 26, 899), also
spelled Ãlfred, was king of the southern Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex from
871 to 899. Alfred is noted for his defence of the kingdom against the Danish
Vikings, becoming the only English king to be awarded the epithet "the
Great".[1] Alfred was the first King of the West Saxons to style himself "King
of the Anglo-Saxons". Details of his life are described in a work by the Welsh
scholar Asser. Alfred was a learned man, and encouraged education and improved
his kingdom's law system as well as its military structure.

## Contents

  * 1 Childhood
  * 2 Under Ethelred
  * 3 King at war
    * 3.1 Early struggles, defeat and flight
    * 3.2 Counterattack and victory
    * 3.3 Restoration of London, King of the English
    * 3.4 Further Viking attacks repelled
  * 4 Military reorganization
    * 4.1 Reconstituted fyrd
    * 4.2 The burghal system; defence in depth
    * 4.3 Administration and taxation
    * 4.4 An English navy
    * 4.5 Legal reform
  * 5 Foreign relations
  * 6 Religion and culture
    * 6.1 Veneration
  * 7 Family
  * 8 Ancestry
  * 9 Death, burial and legacy
  * 10 Wantage statue
  * 11 See also
  * 12 References
  * 13 Further reading
  * 14 External links

  
## [edit] Childhood

Further information: House of Wessex family tree

Alfred was born in 849 at Wantage, Oxfordshire (in the historic county of
Berkshire). He was the youngest son of King Ãthelwulf of Wessex, by his first
wife, Osburga.[2] In 868 Alfred married Ealhswith, daughter of Ethelred
Mucil.[3]

At five years old, Alfred is said to have been sent to Rome where, according
to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, he was confirmed by Pope Leo IV who "anointed
him as king." Victorian writers interpreted this as an anticipatory coronation
in preparation for his ultimate succession to the throne of Wessex. However,
this coronation could not have been foreseen at the time, since Alfred had
three living elder brothers. A letter of Leo IV shows that Alfred was made a
"consul" and a misinterpretation of this investiture, deliberate or
accidental, could explain later confusion.[4] It may also be based on Alfred
later having accompanied his father on a pilgrimage to Rome and spending some
time at the court of Charles the Bald, King of the Franks, around 854â855.
On their return from Rome in 856, Ãthelwulf was deposed by his son
Ãthelbald. With civil war looming, the magnates of the realm met in council
to hammer out a compromise. Ãthelbald would retain the western shires,
traditional Wessex, and Ãthelwulf would rule in the east. King Ãthelwulf
died in 858, and Wessex was ruled by three of Alfred's brothers in succession.

Asser tells the story about how as a child Alfred won a prize of a volume of
poetry in English, offered by his mother to the first of her children able to
memorise it. This story may be true, or it may be a myth intended to
illustrate the young Alfred's love of learning.

## [edit] Under Ethelred

During the short reigns of his two eldest brothers, Ãthelbald of Wessex and
Ãthelbert of Wessex, Alfred is not mentioned. However with the accession of
the third brother, Ãthelred of Wessex, in 866, the public life of Alfred
began. It is during this period that Asser applies to him the unique title of
"secundarius", which may indicate a position akin to that of the Celtic
tanist, a recognized successor closely associated with the reigning monarch.
It is possible that this arrangement was sanctioned by the Witenagemot, to
guard against the danger of a disputed succession should Ãthelred fall in
battle. The arrangement of crowning a successor as Royal prince and military
commander is well-known among other Germanic tribes, such as the Swedes, with
whom the Anglo-Saxons were closely related.

In 868, Alfred is recorded fighting beside his brother Ãthelred, in an
unsuccessful attempt to keep the invading Danes out of the adjoining Kingdom
of Mercia. For nearly two years, Wessex was spared attacks because Alfred paid
the Vikings to leave him alone. However, at the end of 870, the Danes arrived
in his homeland. The year that followed has been called "Alfred's year of
battles". Nine martial engagements were fought with varying fortunes, though
the place and date of two of the battles have not been recorded. In Berkshire,
a successful skirmish at the Battle of Englefield, on 31 December 870, was
followed by a severe defeat at the Siege and Battle of Reading, on 5 January
871, and then, four days later, a brilliant victory at the Battle of Ashdown
on the Berkshire Downs, possibly near Compton or Aldworth. Alfred is
particularly credited with the success of this latter conflict. However, later
that month, on 22 January, the English were again defeated at Basing and, on
the following 22 March at the Battle of Merton (perhaps Marden in Wiltshire or
Martin in Dorset) in which Ethelred was killed. The two unidentified battles
may also have occurred in between.

## [edit] King at war

### [edit] Early struggles, defeat and flight

<IMG>

<IMG>

Coin of Alfred, king of Wessex, London, 880.  
Obv: King with royal band in profile, with legend: ÃLFRED REX "King Ãlfred".

In April 871, King Ãthelred died, and Alfred succeeded to the throne of
Wessex and the burden of its defence, despite the fact that Ãthelred left two
young sons, Ãthelhelm and Ãthelwold. This was in accordance with an
agreement that King Ãthelred and Alfred had made earlier that year in an
assembly at Swinbeorg. The brothers agreed that whichever of them lived
longest would inherit the personal property that King Ãthelwulf in his will
had left jointly to his sons. The deceased's sons would receive only whatever
property and riches their father had settled upon them and whatever additional
lands their uncle had acquired. The unstated premise was that the surviving
brother would be king. Given the ongoing Danish invasion and the youth of his
nephews, Alfred's succession probably went uncontested. Tensions between
Alfred and his nephews, however, would arise later in his reign.

While he was busy with the burial ceremonies for his brother, the Danes
defeated the English in his absence at an unnamed spot, and then again in his
presence at Wilton in May. Alfredâs defeat at Wilton smashed any remaining
hope that he could drive the invaders from his kingdom. He was forced,
instead, to âmake peaceâ with them. The sources do not tell us what the
terms of the peace were. Asser, spinning gold out of straw, trumpets that the
'pagans' agreed to vacate the realm and made good their promise, and, indeed,
the Viking army did withdraw from Reading in the fall of 871 to take up winter
quarters in Mercian London. Although not mentioned by Asser or the Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle, Alfred probably also paid the vikings cash to leave, much as the
Mercians were to do in the following year.[5] Hoards dating to the Viking
occupation of London in 871/2 have been excavated at Croydon, Gravesend, and
Waterloo Bridge; these finds hint at the costs involved in making peace with
the Vikings. For the next five years, the Danes occupied other parts of
England.[6] However, in 876, under their new leader, Guthrum, the Danes
slipped past the English army and attacked and occupied Wareham in Dorset.
Alfred blockaded them but was unable to take Wareham by assault. Accordingly,
he negotiated a peace with involved an exchange of hostages and oaths, which
the Danes swore on a "holy ring" associated with the worship of Thor (Anglo-
Saxon Chronicle). The Danes, however, broke their word and, after killing all
the hostages, slipped away under cover of night to Exeter in Devon. There,
Alfred blockaded them, and with a relief fleet having been scattered by a
storm, the Danes were forced to submit. They withdrew to Mercia but, in
January 878, made a sudden attack on Chippenham, a royal stronghold in which
Alfred had been staying over Christmas, "and most of the people they reduced,
except the King Alfred, and he with a little band made his way by wood and
swamp, and after Easter he made a fort at Athelney in the marshes of Somerset,
and from that fort kept fighting against the foe." (Anglo-Saxon Chronicle).
From his fort at Athelney, a marshy island near North Petherton, Alfred was
able to mount an effective resistance movement while rallying the local
militia from Somerset, Wiltshire and Hampshire.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Statue of Alfred the Great at Wantage

A popular legend originating from early 12th century chronicles,[7] tells how
when he first fled to the Somerset Levels, Alfred was given shelter by a
peasant woman who, unaware of his identity, left him to watch some cakes she
had left cooking on the fire. Preoccupied with the problems of his kingdom,
Alfred accidentally let the cakes burn and was taken to task by the woman upon
her return. Upon realizing the king's identity, the woman apologized
profusely, but Alfred insisted that he was the one who needed to apologize.
Another story relates how Alfred disguised himself as a minstrel in order to
gain entry to Guthrum's camp and discover his plans. These stories emphasize
not only the piety and Christian humility of Alfred but the desperate straits
to which he had been reduced.

### [edit] Counterattack and victory

In the seventh week after Easter [4-10 May 878], around Whitsuntide, Alfred
rode to âEgbertâs Stoneâ east of Selwood, where he was met by "all the
people of Somerset and of Wiltshire and of that part of Hampshire which is on
this side of the sea [that is, west of Southampton Water], and they rejoiced
to see him" (Anglo-Saxon Chronicle). Alfredâs emergence from his marshland
stronghold was part of a carefully planned offensive that entailed the raising
the fyrds of three shires. This meant not only that the king had retained the
loyalty of ealdormen, royal reeves and kingâs thegns, those charged with
levying and leading these forces, but that they had maintained their positions
of authority in these localities well enough to answer Alfredâs summons to
war. Alfredâs actions also suggest a finely-honed system of scouts and
messengers. Alfred won a decisive victory in the ensuing Battle of Ethandun
which may have been fought near Westbury, Wiltshire. He pursued the Danes to
their stronghold at Chippenham and starved them into submission. One of the
terms of the surrender was that Guthrum convert to Christianity, and three
weeks later the Danish king and 29 of his chief men were baptized at Alfred's
court at Aller, near Athelney, with Alfred receiving Guthrum as his spiritual
son. The "unbinding of the chrism" took place with great ceremony eight days
later at the royal estate at Wedmore in Somerset, after which Guthrum
fulfilled his promise to leave Wessex. There is no contemporary evidence that
Alfred and Guthrum agreed upon a formal treaty at this time; the so-called
Treaty of Wedmore is an invention of modern historians. The Treaty of Alfred
and Guthrum preserved in Old English in Corpus Christi College Cambridge
Manuscript 383, and in a Latin compilation known as Quadripartitus, was
negotiated later, perhaps in 879 or 880 when King Ceolwulf II of Mercia was
deposed.[8] The treaty divided up the kingdom of Mercia. By its terms the
boundary between Alfredâs and Guthrumâs kingdoms was to run up the Thames,
to the Lea River; follow the Lea to its source (near Luton); from there extend
in a straight line to Bedford, and from Bedford follow the Ouse River to
Watling Street. In other words, Alfred succeeded to Ceolwulfâs kingdom,
consisting of western Mercia, and Guthrum incorporated the eastern part of
Mercia into an enlarged kingdom of East Anglia. By terms of the treaty,
moreover, Alfred was to have control over London and its mints--at least for
the time being.[9] The disposition of Essex, held by West Saxon kings since
the days of Egbert, is unclear from the treaty, though, given Alfredâs
political and military superiority, it would have been surprising if he had
conceded any disputed territory to his godson.

### [edit] Restoration of London, King of the English

For the next few years there was peace, with the Danes being kept busy in
Francia. A raid on Kent in 884 or 885 close to Plucks Gutter, though
successfully repelled, encouraged the East Anglian Danes to rise up. The
measures taken by Alfred to repress this uprising culminated in the taking (or
more probably, retaking) of London 886. Alfred apparently regarded this as a
turning point in his reign. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says that "all of the
English people (all Angelcyn) not subject to the Danes submitted themselves to
King Alfred." Asser added that "Alfred, king of the Anglo-Saxons, restored the
city of London splendidly ... and made it habitable once more."[10] Alfred
"restoration" entailed reoccupying and refurbishing the nearly deserted Roman
walled city, building quays along the Thames, and laying a new city street
plan.[11] It is probably at this point that Alfred assumed the new royal style
'King of the Anglo-Saxons.'

  

### [edit] Further Viking attacks repelled

After another lull, in the autumn of 892 or 893, the Danes attacked again.
Finding their position in Europe precarious, they crossed to England in 330
ships in two divisions. They entrenched themselves, the larger body at
Appledore, Kent, and the lesser, under Haesten, at Milton also in Kent. The
invaders brought their wives and children with them, indicating a meaningful
attempt at conquest and colonization. Alfred, in 893 or 894, took up a
position from whence he could observe both forces. While he was in talks with
Haesten, the Danes at Appledore broke out and struck northwestwards. They were
overtaken by Alfred's oldest son, Edward, and were defeated in a general
engagement at Farnham in Surrey. They were obliged to take refuge on an island
in the Hertfordshire Colne, where they were blockaded and were ultimately
compelled to submit. The force fell back on Essex and, after suffering another
defeat at Benfleet, coalesced with Haesten's force at Shoebury.

Alfred had been on his way to relieve his son at Thorney when he heard that
the Northumbrian and East Anglian Danes were besieging Exeter and an unnamed
stronghold on the North Devon shore. Alfred at once hurried westward and
raised the Siege of Exeter. The fate of the other place is not recorded.
Meanwhile the force under Haesten set out to march up the Thames Valley,
possibly with the idea of assisting their friends in the west. But they were
met by a large force under the three great ealdormen of Mercia, Wiltshire and
Somerset, and made to head off to the northwest, being finally overtaken and
blockaded at Buttington. Some identify this with Buttington Tump at the mouth
of the River Wye, others with Buttington near Welshpool. An attempt to break
through the English lines was defeated. Those who escaped retreated to
Shoebury. Then after collecting reinforcements they made a sudden dash across
England and occupied the ruined Roman walls of Chester. The English did not
attempt a winter blockade but contented themselves with destroying all the
supplies in the neighborhood. Early in 894 (or 895), want of food obliged the
Danes to retire once more to Essex. At the end of this year and early in 895
(or 896), the Danes drew their ships up the Thames and Lea and fortified
themselves twenty miles (32 km) north of London. A direct attack on the Danish
lines failed, but later in the year, Alfred saw a means of obstructing the
river so as to prevent the egress of the Danish ships. The Danes realised that
they were outmaneuvered. They struck off northwestwards and wintered at
Cwatbridge near Bridgnorth. The next year, 896 (or 897), they gave up the
struggle. Some retired to Northumbria, some to East Anglia. Those who had no
connections in England withdrew back to Europe.

## [edit] Military reorganization

<IMG>

<IMG>

Alfred the great silver offering penny, 871-899. Legend: AELFRED REX SAXONUM
"Ãlfred King of the Saxon".

### [edit] Reconstituted fyrd

The near disaster of the winter of 878 even more than the victory in the
spring left its mark on the king and shaped his subsequent policies. Over the
last two decades of his reign, Alfred undertook a radical reorganization of
the military institutions of his kingdom, strengthened the West Saxon economy
through a policy of monetary reform and urban planning and strove to win
divine favor by resurrecting the literary glories of earlier generations of
Anglo-Saxons. Alfred pursued these ambitious programes to fulfill, as he saw
it, his responsibility as king. This justified the heavy demands he made upon
his subjects' labor and finances. It even excused the expropriation of
strategically located Church lands. Recreating the fyrd into a standing army,
ringing Wessex with some thirty garrisoned fortified towns, and constructing
new and larger ships for the royal fleet were costly endeavors that provoked
resistance from noble and peasant alike. But they paid off. When the vikings
returned in force in 892 they found a kingdom defended by a standing, mobile
field army and a network of garrisoned fortresses that commanded its navigable
rivers and Roman roads.

Alfred analyzed the defects of the military system that he had inherited and
implemented changes to remedy them. Alfred's military reorganization of Wessex
consisted of three elements: the building of thirty fortified and garrisoned
towns (burhs) along the rivers and Roman roads of Wessex; the creation of a
mobile (horsed) field force, consisting of his nobles and their warrior
retainers, which was divided into two contingents, one of which was always in
the field; and the enhancement of Wessex's seapower through the addition of
larger ships to the existing royal fleet. Each element of the system was meant
to remedy defects in the West Saxon military establishment exposed by the
viking invasions. If under the existing system he could not assemble forces
quickly enough to intercept mobile viking raiders, the obvious answer was to
have a standing field force. If this entailed transforming the West Saxon fyrd
from a sporadic levy of king's men and their retinues into a mounted standing
army, so be it. If his kingdom lacked strongpoints to impede the progress of
an enemy army, he would build them. If the enemy struck from the sea, he would
counter them with his own naval power. Characteristically, all of Alfred's
innovations were firmly rooted in traditional West Saxon practice, drawing as
they did upon the three so-called âcommon burdens' of bridge work, fortress
repair and service on the king's campaigns that all holders of bookland and
royal loanland owed the Crown. Where Alfred revealed his genius was in
designing the field force and âburhs' (as these fortified sites were called)
to be parts of a coherent military system. Neither Alfred's reformed fyrd nor
his burhs alone would have afforded a sufficient defence against the vikings;
together, however, they robbed the vikings of their major strategic
advantages: surprise and mobility.

### [edit] The burghal system; defence in depth

Alfred, in effect, had created what modern strategists call a defense-in-depth
system, and one that worked.[12] Alfred's boroughs were not grand affairs like
the massive stone late Roman shore forts that still dot the southern coast of
England (e.g. Pevensey and Richborough 'Castle'). Rather, the borough defenses
consisted mainly of massive earthworks, large earthen walls surrounded by wide
ditches. The earthen wall probably were surmounted with wooden palisades,
which, by the tenth century were giving way to stone walls. (The Alfredian
defences are well preserved at Wareham, a town on the southern coast of
England.) The size of the boroughs varied greatly, from tiny fortifications
such as Pilton to large towns like Winchester. Many of the boroughs were, in
fact, twin towns built on either side of a river and connected by a fortified
bridge--much like Charles the Bald's fortifications a generation before. Such
a double-borough would block passage on the river; the vikings would have to
row under a garrisoned bridge, risking being pelted with stones, spears, or
shot with arrows, in order to go upstream. Alfred's thirty boroughs were
distributed widely throughout the West Saxon kingdom and situated in such a
manner that no part of the kingdom was more than twenty miles, a day's march,
from a fortified center. They were also sited near fortified royal villas, to
permit the king better control over his strongholds. What has not been
recognized sufficiently, is how these boroughs dominated the kingdom's lines
of communication, the navigable rivers, Roman roads, and major trackways.
Alfred seems to have had "highways" (hereweges\--"army roads") linking the
boroughs to one another. An extensive beacon system to warn of approaching
viking fleets and armies was probably also instituted at this time. In short,
the thirty boroughs formed an integrated system of fortification.

The presence of well-garrisoned boroughs along the major travel routes of
Wessex presented an obstacle for viking invaders, especially those laden with
booty. They also served as places of refuge for the populations of the
surrounding countryside. But these fortresses were not mere static points of
defense. They were designed to operate in conjunction with Alfred's mobile
standing army. The army and the boroughs together deprived the vikings of
their major strategic advantages: surprise and mobility. It was dangerous for
the vikings to leave a borough intact astride their lines of communication,
but it was equally dangerous to attempt to take one. Lacking siege equipment
or a developed doctrine of siegecraft, the vikings could not take these
fortresses by storm. Rather, they reduced to the expedient of starving them
into submission, which gave the king time to come to their relief with his
mobile field army, or for the garrisons of neighboring boroughs to come to the
aid of the besieged town. In a number of instances, the hunter became the
hunted, as borough garrison and field force joined together to pursue the
would-be raiders. In fact, the only recorded success viking forces had against
boroughs in the ninth century occurred in 892, when a viking stormed a half-
made, poorly garrisoned fortress up the Lympne estuary in Kent.

Alfred's burghal system was revolutionary in its strategic conception and
extraordinarily expensive in its execution. As Alfredâs biographer Asser
makes clear, many nobles were reluctant to comply with what must have seemed
to them outrageous and unheard of demands--even if they were for âthe common
needs of the kingdomâ, as Asser reminded them. The cost of building the
burhs was great in itself, but this paled before the cost of upkeep for these
fortresses and the maintaining of their standing garrisons, which together
amounted to 27,071 troops. (We know this because a remarkable early tenth-
century document known as the Burghal Hidage provides a formula for
determining how many men are needed to garrison a town based on the basis of
one man for every 5.5 yards of wall.) Even if we assume that the mobile forces
of Alfred were small--perhaps 3,000 or so horsemen--the manpower costs of his
military establishment were considerable. Given that the population of Wessex
in 890 could hardly have been greater than 550,000, the approximate population
of this region in 1086 according to Domesday Book, the borough garrisons alone
must have constituted 5% of the kingdom's total population. To put this in
historical perspective, the Prussian military at the height of the Napoleonic
Wars only absorbed 4% of that state's population. (An American military
comprising 5% of the present population of the United States would be in
excess of 15,000,000 troops.)

### [edit] Administration and taxation

To obtain the needed garrison troops and workers to build and maintain the
burhs' defenses, Alfred regularized and vastly expanded the existing (and, one
might add, quite recent) obligation of landowners to provide âfortress
workâ on the basis of the hidage assessed upon their lands.[13] The
allotments of the Burghal Hidage represent the creation of administrative
districts for the support of the burhs. The landowners attached to
Wallingford, for example, were responsible for producing and feeding 2,400
men, the number sufficient for maintaining 9,900 feet of wall. Each of the
larger burhs became the centre of a territorial district of considerable size,
carved out of the neighbouring countryside in order to support the town. In
one sense, Alfred conceived nothing truly new here. The shires of Wessex went
back at least to the reign of King Ine, who probably also imposed a hidage
assessment upon each for food rents and other services owed the Crown. But, it
is equally clear that Alfred did not allow the past to bind him. With the
advice of his witan, he freely reorganized and modified what he had inherited.
The result was nothing short of an administrative revolution, a reorganization
of the West Saxon shire system to accommodate Alfredâs military needs. Even
if one rejects the thesis crediting the "Burghal Hidage" to Alfred, what is
undeniable is that, in the parts of Mercia acquired by Alfred from the
Vikings, the shire system seems now to have been introduced for the first
time. This is probably what prompted the legend that Alfred was the inventor
of shires, hundreds and tithings.

### [edit] An English navy

Alfred also tried his hand at naval design. In 896 he ordered the construction
of a small fleet, perhaps a dozen or so longships, that, at 60 oars, were
twice the size of viking warships. This was not, as the Victorians were wont
to believe, the birth of the English Navy. Wessex possessed a royal fleet
before this. Alfred's brother King Athelstan of Kent and Ealdorman Eahlhere
had defeated a viking fleet in 851, capturing nine ships, and Alfred himself
had conducted naval actions in 882 and 884. But clearly the author of the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and probably Alfred himself regarded 896 as marking an
important development in the naval power of Wessex. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicler
flattered his royal patron by boasting that Alfred's ships were not only
larger, but swifter, steadier, and rode higher in the water than either Danish
or Frisian ships. Alfred had seapower in mind: if he could intercept raiding
fleets before they landed, he could spare his kingdom from ravaging. In
conception Alfred's ships may have been superior, but in practice they left a
bit to be desired.[14] His ships proved to be too large to maneuver well in
the close waters of estuaries and rivers, the only places in which a 'naval'
battle could occur. (The warships of the time were not designed to be ship
killers but troop carriers. A naval battle entailed a ship coming alongside an
enemy vessel, at which point the crew would lash the two ships together and
board the enemy. The result was a land battle at sea.) In the one recorded
naval engagement, Alfred's new fleet intercepted six viking ships in the mouth
of an unidentified river along the south of England. The Danes had beached
half their ships, either to rest their rowers or to forage for food. Alfred's
ships immediately moved to block their escape to the sea. The three viking
ships afloat attempted to break through the English lines. Only one made it.
Alfred's ships intercepted the other two. Lashing the viking boats to their
own, the English crew boarded the enemy's vessels and proceeded to kill
everyone on board. The one ship that escaped managed to do so only because all
of Alfred's heavy ships became mired when the tide went out. What ensued was a
land battle between the crews of the grounded ships. The Danes, heavily
outnumbered, would have been wiped out if the tide had not risen. When that
occurred, the Danes rushed back to their boats, which being lighter, with
shallower drafts, were freed before Alfred's ships. Helplessly, the English
watched as the vikings rowed past them. But the pirates had suffered so many
casualties (120 dead according to the Chronicle), that they difficulties
putting out to sea. Two of the three ships were driven against the Sussex
coast. The shipwrecked sailors were brought before Alfred at Winchester and
hanged.

  

### [edit] Legal reform

Main article: Doom book

In the late 880s or early 890s Alfred issued a long domboc or law code
consisting of his "own" laws followed by a code issued by his late seventh-
century predecessor King Ine of Wessex. Together these laws are arranged into
120 chapters. In his introduction Alfred explains that he gathered together
the laws the laws he found in many 'synod-books' and "ordered to be written
many of the ones that our forefathers observed--those that pleased me; and
many of the ones that did not please me I rejected with the advice of my
councillors, and commanded them to be observed in a different way."[15] Alfred
singled out in particular the laws that he "found in the days of Ine, my
kinsman, or Offa, king of the Mercians, or Ãthelbert [[[King Ãthelbert of
Kent]]], who first among the English people received baptism." It is difficult
to know exactly what Alfred meant by this. He appended rather than integrated
the laws of Ine into his code, and although he included, as had Ãthelbert, a
scale of payments in compensation for injuries to various body parts, the two
injury tariffs are not aligned. And Offa is not known to have issued a law
code,leading historian Patrick Wormald to speculate that Alfred had in mind
the legatine capitulary of 786 that was presented to Offa by two papal
legates.[16]

About a fifth of the law code is taken up by Alfred's introduction, which
includes translations into English of the Decalogue, a few chapters from the
book of Exodus, and the so-called 'Apostolic Letter' from Acts of the Apostles
(15:23-29). The Introduction may best be understood as Alfred's meditation
upon the meaning of Christian law. It traces the continuity between God's gift
of Law to Moses to Alfred's own issuance of law to the West Saxon people. By
doing so it links the holy past to the historical present and represents
Alfred's law-giving as a type of divine legislation.[17] This is the reason
that Alfred divided his code into precisely 120 chapters: 120 was the age at
which Moses died and in the number-symbolism of early medieval biblical
exegetes 120 stood for law.[18] The link between the Mosaic Law and Alfred's
code is the 'Apostolic Letter,' which explained that Christ "had come not to
shatter or annul the Commandments but to fulfill them; and he taught mercy and
meekness" (Intro, 49.1). The mercy that Christ infused into Mosaic Law
underlies the injury tariffs that figure so prominently in barbarian law
codes, since Christian synods "established, through that mercy which Christ
taught, that for almost every misdeed at the first offense secular lords might
with their permission receive without sin the monetary compensation, which
they then fixed."[19]. The only crime that could not be compensated with a
payment of money is treachery to a lord, "since Almighty God adjudged none for
those who despised Him, nor did Christ, the Son of God, adjudge any for the
one who betrayed Him to death; and He commanded everyone to love his lord as
Himself."[20] Alfred's transformation of Christ's commandment from "Love your
neighbor as yourself" (Matt. 22:39-40) to love your secular lord as you would
love the Lord Christ himself underscores the importance that Alfred placed
upon lordship, which he understood as a sacred bond instituted by God for the
governance of man.[21]

When one turns from the domboc's introduction to the laws themselves, it is
difficult to uncover any logical arrangement. The impression one receives is
of a hodgepodge of miscellaneous laws. The law code as it has been preserved
is singularly unsuitable for use in law suits. In fact, several of Alfred's
laws contradict the laws of Ine that form an integral part of the code.
Patrick Wormald's explanation is that Alfred's law code should be understood
not as a legal manual but as an ideological manifesto of kingship, "designed
more for symbolic impact than for practical direction."[22] In practical
terms, the most important law in the code may well be the very first: "We
enjoin, what is most necessary, that each man keep carefully his oath and his
pledge," which expresses a fundamental tenet of Anglo-Saxon law.[23]

Alfred devoted considerable attention and thought to judicial matters. Asser
underscores his concern for judicial fairness. Alfred, according to Asser,
insisted upon reviewing contested judgments made by his ealdormen and reeves,
and "would carefully look into nearly all the judgements which were passed in
his absence anywhere in the realm, to see whether they were just or
unjust."[24] A charter from the reign of his son Edward the Elder depicts
Alfred as hearing one such appeal in his chamber, while washing his hands.[25]
Asser represents Alfred as a Solomonic judge, painstaking in his own judicial
investigations and critical of royal officials who rendered unjust or unwise
judgments. Although Asser never mentions Alfred's law code, he does say that
Alfred insisted that his judges be literate, so that they could apply
themselves "to the pursuit of wisdom." The failure to comply with this royal
order was to be punished by loss of office.[26]. It is uncertain how seriously
we should take this; Asser was more concerned to represent Alfred as a wise
ruler than to report actual royal policy.

  

## [edit] Foreign relations

Asser speaks grandiosely of Alfred's relations with foreign powers, but little
definite information is available. His interest in foreign countries is shown
by the insertions which he made in his translation of Orosius. He certainly
corresponded with Elias III, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and possibly sent a
mission to India. Contact was also made with the Caliph in Baghdad. Embassies
to Rome conveying the English alms to the Pope were fairly frequent. Around
890, Wulfstan of Haithabu undertook a journey from Haithabu on Jutland along
the Baltic Sea to the Prussian trading town of Truso. Alfred ensured he
reported to him details of his trip.

Alfred's relations with the Celtic princes in the western half of Britain are
clearer. Comparatively early in his reign, according to Asser, the southern
Welsh princes, owing to the pressure on them from North Wales and Mercia,
commended themselves to Alfred. Later in the reign the North Welsh followed
their example, and the latter cooperated with the English in the campaign of
893 (or 894). That Alfred sent alms to Irish as well as to European
monasteries may be taken on Asser's authority. The visit of the three pilgrim
"Scots" (i.e. Irish) to Alfred in 891 is undoubtedly authentic. The story that
he himself in his childhood was sent to Ireland to be healed by Saint
Modwenna, though mythical, may show Alfred's interest in that island.

## [edit] Religion and culture

In the 880s, at the same time that he was 'cajoling and threatening' his
nobles to build and man the burhs, Alfred, perhaps inspired by the example of
Charlemagne a century before, undertook an equally ambitious effort to revive
learning. It entailed the recruitment of clerical scholars from Mercia, Wales
and abroad to enhance the tenor of the court and of the episcopacy; the
establishment of a court school to educate his own children, the sons of his
nobles, and intellectually promising boys of lesser birth; an attempt to
require literacy in those who held offices of authority; a series of
translations into the vernacular of Latin works the king deemed 'most
necessary for all men to know'; the compilation of a chronicle detailing the
rise of Alfred's kingdom and house; and the issuance of a law code that
presented the West Saxons as a new people of Israel and their king as a just
and divinely-inspired law-giver.

Very little is known of the church under Alfred. The Danish attacks had been
particularly damaging to the monasteries, and though Alfred founded
monasteries at Athelney and Shaftesbury, the first new monastic houses in
Wessex since the beginning of the eighth century,[27] and enticed foreign
monks to England, monasticism did not revive significantly during his
reign.[citation needed] Alfred undertook no systematic reform of
ecclesiastical institutions or religious practices in Wessex. For him the key
to the kingdom's spiritual revival was to appoint pious, learned, and
trustworthy bishops and abbots. As king he saw himself as responsible for both
the temporal and spiritual welfare of his subjects. Secular and spiritual
authority were not distinct categories for Alfred. He was equally comfortable
distributing his translation of Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care to his
bishops so that they might better train and supervise priests, and using those
same bishops as royal officials and judges. Nor did his piety prevent him from
expropriating strategically sited church lands, especially estates along the
border with the Danelaw, and transferring them to royal thegns and officials
who could better defend them against viking attacks.[28]

The Danish raids had also a devastating impact on learning in England. Alfred
lamented in the preface to his translation of Pope Gregory I's Pastoral Care
that "learning had declined so thoroughly in England that there were very few
men on this side of the Humber who could understand their divine services in
English, or even translate a single letter from Latin into English: and I
suppose that there were not many beyond the Humber either."[29] Alfred
undoubtedly exaggerated for dramatic effect the abysmal state of learning in
England during his youth. That Latin learning had not been obliterated is
evidenced by the presence in his court of learned Mercian and West Saxon
clerics such as Plegmund, WÃ¦ferth, and Wulfsige. But one should not discount
entirely Alfred's account. Manuscript production in England dropped off
precipitously around the 860s when the viking invasions began in earnest, not
to be revived until the end of the century.[30] Numerous Anglo-Saxon
manuscripts burnt up along with the churches that housed them. And a solemn
diploma from Christ Church, Canterbury dated 873 is so poorly constructed and
written that historian Nicholas Brooks posited a scribe who was either so
blind he could not read what he wrote or who knew little or no Latin. "It is
clear," Brooks concludes, "that the metropolitan church [of Canterbury] must
have been quite unable to provide any effective training in the scriptures or
in Christian worship."[31]

Following the example of Charlemagne, Alfred established a court school for
the education of his own children, those of the nobility. and "a good many of
lesser birth." There they studied books in both English and Latin and "devoted
themselves to writing, to such an extent .... they were seen to be devoted and
intelligent students of the liberal arts."[32] He recruited scholars from the
Continent and from Britain to aid in the revival of Christian learning in
Wessex and to provide the king personal instruction. Grimbald and John the
Saxon came from Francia; Plegmund (whom Alfred appointed archbishop of
Canterbury in 890), Bishop Werferth of Worcester, Ãthelstan, and the royal
chaplains Werwulf, from Mercia; and Asser, from St. David's in southwestern
Wales.

Alfred's educational ambitions seem to have extended beyond the establishment
of a court school. Believing that without Christian wisdom there can be
neither prosperity nor success in war, Alfred aimed "to set to learning (as
long as they are not useful for some other employment) all the free-born young
men now in England who have the means to apply themselves to it."[33]
Conscious of the decay of Latin literacy in his realm, Alfred proposed that
primary education be taught in English, with those wishing to advance to holy
orders to continue their studies in Latin. The problem, however, was that
there were few "books of wisdom" written in English. Alfred sought to remedy
this through an ambitious court-centered program of translating into English
the books he deemed "most necessary for all men to know."[34] It is unknown
when Alfred launched this program, but it may have been during the 880s when
Wessex was enjoying a respite from viking attacks.

Apart from the lost Handboc or Encheiridion, which seems to have been a
commonplace book kept by the king, the earliest work to be translated was the
Dialogues of Gregory the Great, a book greatly popular in the Middle Ages. The
translation was undertaken at Alfred's command by Werferth, Bishop of
Worcester, with the king merely furnishing a preface. Remarkably, Alfred,
undoubtedly with the advise and aid of his court scholars, translated four
works himself: Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care, Boethius's Consolation of
Philosophy, St. Augustine's Soliloquies, and the first fifty psalms of the
Psalter. One might add to this list Alfred's translation in his law code of
excerpts from the Vulgate Book of Exodus. The Old English versions of
Orosius's Histories against the Pagans and Bede's Ecclesiastical History of
the English People are no longer accepted by scholars as Alfred's own
translations because of lexical and stylistic differences.[35] Nonetheless,
the consensus remains that they were part of the Alfredian program of
translation. Simon Keynes and Michael Lapidge suggest this also for Bald's
Leechbook and the anonymous Old English Martyrology.[36]

Alfred's first translation was of Pope Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care,
which he prefaced with an introduction explaining why he thought it necessary
to translate works such as this one from Latin into English. Although he
described his method as translating "sometimes word for word, sometimes sense
for sense," Alfred's translation actually keeps very close to his original,
although through his choice of language he blurred throughout the distinction
between spiritual and secular authority. Alfred meant his translation to be
used and circulated it to all his bishops. The Consolation of Philosophy of
Boethius was the most popular philosophical handbook of the Middle Ages.
Unlike his translation of the Pastoral Care, Alfred here deals very freely
with his original and though the late Dr. G. Schepss[37] showed that many of
the additions to the text are to be traced not to Alfred himself, but to the
glosses and commentaries which he used, still there is much in the work which
is solely Alfred's and highly characteristic of his genius. It is in the
Boethius that the oft-quoted sentence occurs: "My will was to live worthily as
long as I lived, and after my life to leave to them that should come after, my
memory in good works." The book has come down to us in two manuscripts only.
In one of these[38] the writing is prose, in the other[39] a combination of
prose and alliterating verse. The latter manuscript was severely damaged in
the 18th and 19th centuries,[40] and the authorship of the verse has been much
disputed; but likely it also is by Alfred. In fact, he writes in the prelude
that he first created a prose work and then used it as the basis for his poem,
the Lays of Boethius, his crowning literary achievement. He spent a great deal
of time working on these books, which he tells us he gradually wrote through
the many stressful times of his reign to refresh his mind. Of the authenticity
of the work as a whole there has never been any doubt.

The last of Alfred's works is one to which he gave the name Blostman, i.e.,
"Blooms" or Anthology. The first half is based mainly on the Soliloquies of St
Augustine of Hippo, the remainder is drawn from various sources, and contains
much that is Alfred's own and highly characteristic of him. The last words of
it may be quoted; they form a fitting epitaph for the noblest of English
kings. "Therefore he seems to me a very foolish man, and truly wretched, who
will not increase his understanding while he is in the world, and ever wish
and long to reach that endless life where all shall be made clear."

Alfred appears as a character in twelfth- or thirteenth-century poem The Owl
and the Nightingale, where his wisdom and skill with proverbs is praised. The
Proverbs of Alfred, a thirteenth century work, contains sayings that are not
likely to have originated with Alfred but attest to his posthumous medieval
reputation for wisdom.

The Alfred jewel, discovered in Somerset in 1693, has long been associated
with King Alfred because of its Old English inscription "AELFRED MEC HEHT
GEWYRCAN" (Alfred Ordered Me To Be Made). The Jewel is about 2Â½ inches (6.1
cm) long, made of filigreed gold, enclosing a highly polished piece of quartz
crystal beneath which is set a cloisonnÃ© enamel plaque, with an ennamelled
image of a man holding floriate scepters, perhaps personifying Sight or the
Wisdom of God.[41] It was at one time attached to a thin rod or stick based on
the hollow socket at its base. The Jewel certainly dates from Alfred's reign.
Although its function is unknown, it has been often suggested that the Jewel
was one of the Ã¦stels\--pointers for reading--that Alfred ordered sent to
every bishopric accompanying a copy of his translation of the Pastoral Care.
Each Ã¦stel was worth the princely sum of 50 mancuses, which fits in well with
the quality workmanship and expensive materials of the Alfred Jewel.

Historian Richard Abels sees Alfred's educational and military reforms as
complementary. Restoring religion and learning in Wessex, Abels contends, was
to Alfred's mind as essential to the defense of his realm as the building of
the burhs.[42] As Alfred observed in the preface to his English translation of
Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care, kings who fail to obey their divine duty to
promote learning can expect earthly punishments to befall their people.[43]
The pursuit of wisdom, he assured his readers of the Boethius, was the surest
path to power: "Study Wisdom, then, and, when you have learned it, condemn it
not, for I tell you that by its means you may without fail attain to power,
yea, even though not desiring it".[44] The portrayal of the West Saxon
resistance to the vikings by Asser and the Chronicler as a Christian holy war
was more than mere rhetoric or 'propaganda'. It reflected Alfred's own belief
in a doctrine of divine rewards and punishments rooted in a vision of a
hierarchical Christian world-order in which God is the Lord to whom kings owe
obedience and through whom they derive their authority over their followers.
The need to persuade his nobles to undertake work for the 'common good' led
Alfred and his court scholars to strengthen and deepen the conception of
Christian kingship that he had inherited by building upon the legacy of
earlier kings such as Offa as well as clerical writers such as Bede, Alcuin
and the other luminaries of the Carolingian renaissance. This was not a
cynical use of religion to manipulate his subjects into obedience, but an
intrinsic element in Alfred's world-view. He believed, as did other kings in
ninth-century England and Francia, that God had entrusted him with the
spiritual as well as physical welfare of his people. If the Christian faith
fell into ruin in his kingdom, if the clergy were too ignorant to understand
the Latin words they butchered in their offices and liturgies, if the ancient
monasteries and collegiate churches lay deserted out of indifference, he was
answerable before God, as Josiah had been. Alfred's ultimate responsibility
was the pastoral care of his people.

### [edit] Veneration

Alfred is venerated as a saint by the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox
Church and is regarded as a hero of the Christian Church in the Anglican
Communion, with a feast day of 26 October,[45] and may often be found depicted
in stained glass in Church of England parish churches. Also, Alfred
University, in New York State, was named after him; a large statue of his
likeness is in the center of campus.

## [edit] Family

In 868, Alfred married Ealhswith, daughter of Ealdorman of the Gaini (who is
also known as Aethelred Mucill), who was from the Gainsborough region of
Lincolnshire. She appears to have been the maternal granddaughter of a King of
Mercia. They had five or six children together, including Edward the Elder,
who succeeded his father as king, Ethelfleda, who would become Queen of Mercia
in her own right, and Ãlfthryth who married Baldwin II the Count of Flanders.
His mother was Osburga daughter of Oslac of the Isle of Wight, Chief Butler of
England. Asser, in his Vita Alfredi asserts that this shows his lineage from
the Jutes of the Isle of Wight. This is unlikely as Bede tells us that they
were all slaughtered by the Saxons under Caedwalla. However, ironically Alfred
could trace his line via the House of Wessex itself, from King Wihtred of
Kent, whose mother was the sister of the last island king, Arwald.

Name Birth Death Notes  
ÃthelflÃ¦d 918 Married 889, Ealdorman Ethelred of Mercia d 910; had issue.  
Edward 870 17 July 924 Married (1) Ecgwynn, (2) ÃlfflÃ¦d, (3) 919 Edgiva  
Ãthelgiva Abbess of Shaftesbury  
Ãlfthryth 929 Married Baldwin, Count of Flanders; had issue  
ÃthelwÃ¦rd 16 October 922 Married and had issue  
## [edit] Ancestry

Ancestors of Alfred the Great  
16\. Eafa  
8\. Ealhmund of Kent  
4\. Egbert of Wessex  
2\. Ãthelwulf of Wessex  
5\. Redburga  
1\. Alfred the Great  
6\. Oslac  
3\. Osburga  
## [edit] Death, burial and legacy

Alfred died on 26 October. The actual year is not certain, but it was not
necessarily 901 as stated in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. How he died is
unknown, although he suffered throughout his life with a painful and
unpleasant illness - probably Crohn's disease, which seems to have been
inherited by his grandson King Edred. He was originally buried temporarily in
the Old Minster in Winchester, then moved to the New Minster (perhaps built
especially to receive his body). When the New Minster moved to Hyde, a little
north of the city, in 1110, the monks transferred to Hyde Abbey along with
Alfred's body. During the reign of Henry VIII his crypt was looted by the new,
Anglican owners of the old church in which he had been laid to rest. His
coffin was melted down for its lead and his bones were unceremoniously
reburied in the churchyard. This grave was apparently excavated during the
building of a new prison in 1788 and the bones scattered. However, bones found
on a similar site in the 1860s were also declared to be Alfred's and later
buried in Hyde churchyard. Extensive excavations in 1999 revealed what is
believed to be his grave-cut, that of his wife Eahlswith, and that of their
son Edward the Elder but barely any human remains.[46]

A number of educational establishments are named in Alfred's honour. These
are:

  * The University of Winchester was named 'King Alfred's College, Winchester' between 1840 and 2004, whereupon it was re-named "University College Winchester".
  * Alfred University, as well as Alfred State College located in Alfred, NY, are both named after the king.
  * In honour of Alfred, the University of Liverpool created a King Alfred Chair of English Literature.
  * University College, Oxford is erroneously said to have been founded by King Alfred.
  * King Alfred's College, a secondary school in Wantage, Oxfordshire. The Birthplace of Alfred.
  * King's Lodge School, in Chippenham, Wiltshire is so named because King Alfred's hunting lodge is reputed to have stood on or near the site of the school.
  * The King Alfred School & Specialist Sports Academy, Burnham Road, Highbridge is so named due to its rough proximity to Brent Knoll (a Beacon Site) and Athelney.
  * The King Alfred School in Barnet, North London, UK.
  * King Alfred's Middle School, Shaftesbury, Dorset [Now defunct after reorganisation]

## [edit] Wantage statue

A statue of Alfred the Great, situated in the Wantage market place, was
sculpted by Count Gleichen, a relative of Queen Victoria's, and unveiled on 14
July, 1877 by the Prince and Princess of Wales.[47]

The statue was vandalised on New Year's Eve 2007, losing part of its right arm
and axe. After the arm and axe were replaced the statue was again vandalised
on Christmas Eve 2008, once more losing its axe.[47]

## [edit] See also

  * British military history
  * Kingdom of England
  * Lays of Boethius
  * Alfred Jewel

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Canute the Great, who ruled England from 1016 to 1035, was Danish.
  2. ^ Alfred was the youngest of either four (Weir, Alison, Britain's Royal Families: The Complete Genealogy (1989), p. 5.) or five brothers,[1] the primary record conflicting regarding whether Ãthelstan of Wessex was a brother or uncle.
  3. ^ The Life of King Alfred
  4. ^ Wormald, Patrick, 'Alfred (848/9-899)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (Oxford University Press, 2004).
  5. ^ Abels, Richard, Alfred the Great: War, Kingship and Culture in Anglo-Saxon England (1998), pp. 140-1.
  6. ^ Brooks, N.P. and J.A. Graham-Campbell, "Reflections on the Viking-age silver hoard from Croydon, Surrey," in Anglo-Saxon Monetary History: Essays in Memory of Michael Dolley (1986), pp. 91-110.
  7. ^ History of the Monarchy - The Anglo-Saxon Kings - Alfred 'The Great'
  8. ^ Abels, Alfred the Great, pp. 163.
  9. ^ Blackburn, M.A.S. Blackburn, "The London mint in the reign of Alfred," in Kings, currency, and alliances : history and coinage of southern England in the ninth century, ed. M.A.S. Blackburn and D.N. Dumville (1998), pp. 105-24.
  10. ^ Asser's Life of King Alfred, ch. 83, trans. Simon Keynes and Michael Lapidge, Alfred the Great: Asser's Life of King Alfred & Other Contemporary Sources (Penguin Classics) (1984), pp. 97-8.
  11. ^ Vince, Alan, Saxon London: An Archaeological Investigation, The Archaeology of London series (1990).
  12. ^ Abels, Richard, Lordship and Military Obligation in Anglo-Saxon England (1988), pp. 58-78.
  13. ^ Abels, Alfred the Great, pp. 199-207.
  14. ^ Abels, Alfred the Great, pp. 305-7. Cf. the much more positive view of the capabilities of these ships in Gifford, Edwin; Gifford, Joyce, "Alfred's new longships," in Alfred the Great (Studies in early medieval Britain), ed. Timothy Reuter (2003), 281-89.
  15. ^ Alfred, Int. 49.9, trans. Keynes and Lapidge, Alfred the Great, p. 164.
  16. ^ Wormald, Patrick, The Making of English Law: King Alfred to the Twelfth Century (1999), pp. 280-1.
  17. ^ Abels, Alfred the Great, p. 248.
  18. ^ Wormald, Making of English Law, p. 417.
  19. ^ Alfred, Intro, 49.7, trans. Keynes and Lapidge, p. 164.
  20. ^ Ibid., pp. 164-5.
  21. ^ Alfred's Pastoral Care, ch. 28, cited by Abels, Alfred the Great, p. 250.
  22. ^ Wormald, Making of English Law, p. 427.
  23. ^ Alfred, 2, in Keynes and Lapidge, Alfred the Great, p. 164.
  24. ^ Asser, chap. 106, in Keynes and Lapidge, Alfred the Great, 109
  25. ^ The charter is Sawyer 1445, and is printed in English Historical Documents, vol. 1, ed. Dorothy Whitelock, 2nd edn (1979), pp. 544-6.
  26. ^ Asser, chap. 106, in Keynes and Lapidge, Alfred the Great, 109-10.
  27. ^ Yorke, Barbara, Wessex in the Early Middle Ages(1995), p. 201
  28. ^ Fleming, Robin, "Monastic lands and England's defence in the Viking Age," English Historical Review 100 (1985): 247-65.
  29. ^ Keynes and Lapidge, Alfred the Great, p. 125.
  30. ^ Dumville, David, Wessex and England from Alfred to Edgar: Six Essays on Political, Cultural, and Ecclesiastical Revival (1992), p. 190.
  31. ^ Brooks, Nicholas, The Early History of the Church of Canterbury: Christ Church from 597 to 1066 (1984), pp. 172-3.
  32. ^ Asser, chap. 75, in Keynes and Lapidge, Alfred the Great, pp. 99-1. Cf. Codicology of the court school of Charlemagne: Gospel book production, illumination, and emphasised script (European university studies. Series 28, History of art)
  33. ^ Preface to Alfred's translation of Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care, in Keynes and Lapidge, p. 126.
  34. ^ Ibid.
  35. ^ Bately, Janet, "King Alfred and the Old English Translation of Orosius," Anglia 88 (1970): 433-60; idem, "'Those books that are most necessary for all men to know'. The Classics and late ninth-century England: a reappraisal," in The Classics in the Middle Ages, ed. Aldo S. Bernardo and Saul Levin (1990), pp. 45-78,
  36. ^ Keynes and Lapide, Alfred the Great, pp. 33-4.
  37. ^ Dr. G. Schepss, "Zu KÃ¶nig Alfreds Boethius" in Archiv fÃ¼r das Studium der neueren Sprachen, xciv (1895), pp. 149-160
  38. ^ Oxford Bodleian Library MS Bodley 180
  39. ^ British Library Cotton MS Otho A. vi
  40. ^ Kiernan, Kevin S., "Alfred the Great's Burnt Boethius". In Bornstein, George and Theresa Tinkle, eds., The Iconic Page in Manuscript, Print, and Digital Culture (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998).
  41. ^ Pratt, David, The Political Thought of Alfred the Great (2007), pp. 189-91.
  42. ^ Abels, Alfred the Great, pp. 219-57.
  43. ^ Keynes and Lapidge, Alfred the Great, pp. 124-5.
  44. ^ Sedgefield, W.J., King Alfred's Version of the Consolations of Boethius. Done into Modern English (1900), p. 35.
  45. ^ Gross, Ernie (1990). This Day In Religion. New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers, Inc..
  46. ^ Dodson, Aidan (2004). The Royal Tombs of Great Britain. London: Duckworth.
  47. ^ a b ""Wantage Herald Article"". http://www.heraldseries.net/search/display.var.1936676.0.statue_damage_quiz_man_bailed.php.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Keynes, Simon, and Lapidge, Michael, Alfred the Great: Asser's Life of King Alfred & Other Contemporary Sources (Penguin Classics), 1984, ISBN 9780140444094
  * Abels, Richard, Alfred the Great: War, Kingship and Culture in Anglo-Saxon England, 1998, ISBN 9780582040472
  * Reuter, Timothy (ed.), Alfred the Great (Studies in early medieval Britain), 2003, ISBN 9780754609575
  * Pratt, David: The political thought of King Alfred the Great (Cambridge Studies in Medieval Life and Thought: Fourth Series, 2007) ISBN 9780521803502
  * Wormald, Patrick, The Making of English Law: King Alfred to the Twelfth Century, 1999, ISBN 9780631227403
  * Frantzen, Allen J., King Alfred the Great (Twayne's English Authors Series), 9780805769180
  * Parker, Joanne: England's Darling The Victorian Cult of Alfred the Great, 2007, ISBN 9780719073564
  * Pollard, Justin: Alfred the Great : the man who made England, 2006, ISBN 0719566665
  * Fry, Fred: Patterns of Power: The Military Campaigns of Alfred the Great, 2006, ISBN 9781905226931
  * Giles, J. A. (ed.): The Whole Works of King Alfred the Great (Jubilee Edition, 3 vols, Oxford and Cambridge, 1858)
  * The whole works of King Alfred the Great, with preliminary essays, illustrative of the history, arts, and manners, of the ninth century, 1969, OCLC 28387
  * For a novelization of King Alfred's exploits, there is Bernard Cornwell's series, beginning with The Last Kingdom.
  * This article incorporates text from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Alfred the
Great  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Alfred the Great

  * The Life of King Alfred translated by Dr. J.A. Giles (London, 1847).
  * Britannia History Bishop Asser's Life of King Alfred
  * Documentary - The Making of England: King Alfred
  * An Illustrated Biography of Alfred the Great
  * Alfred the Great
  * official website of the British Monarchy
  * King Alfred the Great
  * Alfred Jewel
  * Lays of Boethius
  * Royal Berkshire History: King Alfred the Great
  * Alfred's Palace
  * Orosius (c. 417), Alfred the Great; Barrington, Daines, eds., The Anglo-Saxon Version, from the Historian Orosius, London, 1773, http://books.google.com/books?id=aT0JAAAAQAAJ, retrieved on 2008-08-17

Alfred the Great

House of Wessex

Born: 849 Died: 26 October 899  
Regnal titles  
Preceded by  
Ethelred King of Wessex  
871 â 899 Succeeded by  
Edward the Elder  
Preceded by  
New title King of England  
878 â 899 Succeeded by  
Edward the Elder  
Preceded by  
Ethelred Bretwalda  
871 â 899 Last holder  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Monarchs of Wessex  
Cerdic Â· Cynric Â· Ceawlin Â· Ceol Â· Ceolwulf Â· Cynegils Â· Cwichelm Â·
Cenwalh Â· Penda of Mercia Â· Cenwalh restored Â· Seaxburh Â· Ãscwine Â·
Centwine Â· CÃ¦dwalla Â· Ine Â· Ãthelheard Â· Cuthred Â· Sigeberht Â·
Cynewulf Â· Beorhtric Â· Egbert Â· Ãthelwulf Â· Ãthelbald Â· Ãthelberht Â·
Ãthelred Â· Alfred Â· The Kingdom of England  
v â¢ d â¢ e

English Monarchs  
Monarchs Pre-Conquest

<IMG>

Alfred the Great Â· Edward the Elder Â· Ãlfweard Â· Athelstan the GloriousÂ¶
Â· Edmund the MagnificentÂ¶ Â· EadredÂ¶ Â· Eadwig the FairÂ¶ Â· Edgar the
PeaceableÂ¶ Â· Edward the Martyr Â· Ethelred the Unready Â· Sweyn Forkbeard Â·
Edmund Ironside Â· Cnut the GreatÂ¶ Â· Harold Harefoot Â· Harthacnut Â· Edward
the Confessor Â· Harold Godwinson Â· Edgar the Ãtheling  
Monarchs Post-Conquest

<IMG>

William I Â· William II Â· Henry I Â· Stephen Â· Matilda (disputed) Â· Henry
II Â· Richard I Â· Johnâ  Â· Henry IIIâ  Â· Edward Iâ  Â· Edward IIâ  Â·
Edward IIIâ  Â· Richard IIâ  Â· Henry IVâ  Â· Henry Vâ  Â· Henry VIâ  Â·
Edward IVâ  Â· Edward Vâ  Â· Richard IIIâ  Â· Henry VIIâ  Â· Henry VIIIâ
Â· Edward VIâ  Â· Jane (disputed)â  Â· Mary Iâ  Â· Elizabeth Iâ  Â· James
Iâ¡ Â· Charles Iâ¡ Â· Commonwealth Â· Charles IIâ¡ Â· James IIâ¡ Â·
William IIIâ¡ with Mary IIâ¡ Â· William IIIâ¡ Â· Anneâ¡  
Â¶Also Overlord of Britain. â Also Lord/Monarch of Ireland. â¡Also Monarch
of Scotland and Ireland.  
This article incorporates public domain text from: Cousin, John William
(1910). A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature. London, J. M.
Dent & sons; New York, E. P. Dutton.

Persondata  
NAME Alfred the Great  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Ãlfred  
SHORT DESCRIPTION King of Wessex  
DATE OF BIRTH 849  
PLACE OF BIRTH Wantage, England  
DATE OF DEATH 26 October 899  
PLACE OF DEATH ?  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_the_Great"

Categories: English monarchs | Patrons of literature | People from Wantage |
West Saxon monarchs | 849 births | 899 deaths | 9th-century Christian saints |
9th-century rulers

Hidden categories: Articles containing Old English language text | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
February 2008 | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911
EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from A Short
Biographical Dictionary of English Literature

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * á áá­á
  * Anglo-Saxon
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 02:27.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



