
# Sacco and Vanzetti

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article
or discuss these issues on the talk page.

  * It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since February 2009.  

  * It may contain original research or unverifiable claims. Tagged since February 2009.  

  * It reads like a personal reflection or essay. Tagged since February 2009.  

  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Bartolomeo Vanzetti (left) and Nicola Sacco in handcuffs.

Ferdinando Nicola Sacco (April 22, 1891 â August 23, 1927) and Bartolomeo
Vanzetti (June 11, 1888 â August 23, 1927) were two Italian-born laborers
and anarchists who were tried, convicted and executed via electrocution on
August 23, 1927 in Massachusetts for the 1920 armed robbery and murder of a
pay-clerk and a security guard in Braintree, Massachusetts.[1][2]

Today, the case continues to incite controversy based on questions regarding
culpability, the question of the innocence or guilt of Sacco and Vanzetti, and
conformance, the question of whether the trials were fair to Sacco and
Vanzetti.[3][4]

On August 23, 1977, Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis signed a
proclamation declaring, "Any stigma and disgrace should be forever removed
from the names of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti. We are not here to say
whether these men are guilty or innocent. We are here to say that the high
standards of justice, which we in Massachusetts take such pride in, failed
Sacco and Vanzetti."[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Background
  * 3 The Arrests
  * 4 Second trial
  * 5 Motions, appeals, and clemency investigation
  * 6 Execution and aftermath
  * 7 Historical viewpoints
  * 8 Later investigations
  * 9 The involvement of Upton Sinclair
  * 10 Sacco and Vanzetti in popular culture
    * 10.1 Opera, plays, movies
    * 10.2 Music
    * 10.3 Written works, paintings
      * 10.3.1 Poetry
    * 10.4 Mentioned
  * 11 Further reading
  * 12 Notes
  * 13 References
  * 14 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

Sacco and Vanzetti were accused of the murders of Frederick Parmenter, a
paymaster, and Alessandro Berardelli, a security guard, during a payroll
robbery of US$15,776.51 from the Slater-Morrill Shoe Company, on Pearl Street
in South Braintree, Massachusetts, during the afternoon of April 15, 1920.[1]

The two men were arrested in Brockton, Massachusetts on May 5, 1920, after
appearing at a garage to pick up a car that police believed was used in the
robberies.[3]

Vanzetti was initially tried and convicted on a lesser charge, stemming from
another armed robbery that occurred in nearby Massachusetts the previous
year.[4] Both men were then tried for the Braintree robbery-murders and
convicted. After several unsuccessful appeals Sacco and Vanzetti were executed
in the electric chair on August 23, 1927 along with a third man, Celestino
Madeiros, who had confessed to the murder.[2]

Many aspects of both trials were challenged at the time (and since) for being
highly prejudicial against the two men.[6] In particular, the presiding judge
in both cases, Webster Thayer, (and several appeals) was seen by professors,
the press,[who?] and pundits like Felix Frankfurter as forcing the trial
towards conviction and execution.

The case was also highly politically chargedâSacco and Vanzetti were members
of the Galleanists, a militant Italian-American anarchist group suspected of a
string of bomb attacks in the United States including the September 1920 Wall
Street bombing that claimed over 30 lives, and which may have been a reprisal
against Sacco and Vanzetti's arrest and indictment. Both men claimed to be
victims of social and political prejudice and both claimed to be unjustly
convicted of the crime for which they were accused. However, they did not
attempt to distance themselves from their fellow anarchists nor their belief
in violence as a legitimate weapon against the government.[7]

Their controversial trial attracted enormous international attention, with
critics accusing the prosecution and Judge Webster Thayer of improper conduct,
and of allowing anti-Italian, anti-immigrant, and anti-anarchist sentiment to
prejudice the jury.[citation needed] Prominent Americans such as Felix
Frankfurter[citation needed] and Upton Sinclair[citation needed] publicly
sided with citizen-led Sacco and Vanzetti Committees in an ultimately
unsuccessful opposition to the verdict.

The executions elicited mass protests in New York, London, Amsterdam and
Tokyo, worker walk-outs across South America, and riots in Paris, Geneva,
Germany and Johannesburg. The American Embassy in Paris was besieged by
protesters and the facade of the Moulin Rouge was wrecked.[citation needed]

## [edit] Background

Sacco was a shoe-maker born in Torremaggiore, Foggia, who immigrated to the
United States at the age of seventeen.[8] Vanzetti was a fishmonger born in
Villafalletto, Cuneo, who arrived in the United States at age twenty. Both men
arrived in the US in 1908, although they did not meet until mid-1917.[9]

<IMG>

Sacco and Vanzetti

The men were followers of Luigi Galleani, an Italian anarchist who advocated
revolutionary violence, including bombing and assassination. Galleani
published both Cronaca Sovversiva (Subversive Chronicle), a periodical that
advocated violent revolution, and an explicit bomb-making manual (La Salute Ã¨
in voi!). At the time, Italian anarchists ranked at the top of the
government's list of dangerous enemies, and had been identified as suspects in
several violent bombings and assassination attempts (even an attempted mass
poisoning), going back to 1914. Cronaca Sovversiva was suppressed in July
1918, and Galleani along with eight of his closest associates were deported on
June 24, 1919.[10]

Most of the remaining Galleanists sought to avoid arrest by becoming inactive
or going underground. However, some sixty militants considered themselves
still engaged in a class war that required retaliation. For three years, they
waged an intermittent campaign of terrorism directed at politicians, judges,
and other federal and local officials, especially those who had supported
deportation of alien radicals. Chief among the dozen or more terrorist acts
the Galleanists committed or are suspected of committing was the bombing of
Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer's home on 2 June 1919. In that incident,
one Galleanist, Carlo Valdinoci (a former editor of Cronaca Sovversiva and an
associate of Sacco and Vanzetti), was killed when the bomb intended for
Attorney General Palmer exploded in his hands as he was placing it. Incendiary
pamphlets found at the scene of this and several other midnight bombings on
the same evening were signed "The Anarchist Fighters."[10]

Several Galleanist associates had been suspected and/or interrogated about
their roles in the bombing incidents. Two days before Sacco and Vanzetti were
arrested, a Galleanist named Andrea Salsedo jumped to his death from the
Bureau of Investigation offices on Park Row in New York. There was speculation
that Salsedo may have been pushed out the window or possibly dropped as he was
held out the window by his ankles, a well known "third-degree"
technique,[citation needed] as he was interrogated.

Roberto Elia, another Galleanist under arrest, was later deposed in the
inquiry and testified that Salsedo was distraught over his capture and killed
himself to avoid betraying the others. In his 1965 book Protest: Sacco-
Vanzetti and the Intellectuals, pp. 75-76, 80, David Felix supported this
idea.

He had interviewed many of the participants in the Sacco-Vanzetti trial, but
the truth about Salsedo, whose death may have spurred his comrades to further
violent action, may never be known. Salsedo worked in a Brooklyn print shop,
where federal agents had traced the "Anarchist Fighters" leaflet.

The Galleanists knew that Salsedo had been held, and reportedly beaten, for
several weeks which led to rumors that Salsedo and his comrade Roberto Elia
had made important disclosures concerning the bomb plot of 2 June 1919. The
rumors about the confessions were later confirmed by Attorney General Palmer.

The Galleanist plotters realized that they would have to go underground and
dispose of any incriminating evidence. Sacco and Vanzetti were found to be in
receipt of correspondence with several Galleanists, and one letter to Sacco
specifically warned him to destroy all mail after reading.

## [edit] The Arrests

<IMG>

<IMG>

This cartoon, published in the Memphis Commercial Appeal in 1919 depicts a
monstrous "European Anarchist" seeking to blow up the Statue of Liberty.

On April 16, one day after the robbery-murders, local police chief Michael E.
Stewart was called by the Federal Immigration Service about Galleanist
anarchist Ferruccio Coacci, whom he had arrested on their behalf two years
earlier. Coacci was to be deported for advocating the violent overthrow of the
government but he had succeeded in postponing his deportation until April 15,
1920, the day of the fateful holdup in Braintree. When Coacci failed to report
to the FIS, he telephoned them claiming that his wife had fallen ill. Stewart
was asked to investigate and he sent two policemen to Coacci's house on April
16.

They found Coacci's wife in good health and were surprised that Coacci was
willing to be arrested for immediate deportation, and that he indeed insisted
on it. He was cleared of any involvement in the robbery thanks to his alibi
â his timecard showed he was at work on April 15 â and was deported on
April 18. He was detained by Italian police on arrival in Italy and his bags
were searched, but nothing was found. Stewart became suspicious, and on April
20, he visited the Coacci residence, where he found a man calling himself
"Mike Boda" (an alias of Mario Buda, the chief bombmaker of the Galleanists)
who rented the house. Claiming not to like Coacci, Buda volunteered that
Coacci's wife had left in a hurry as well.

When questioned about whether he or Coacci owned a gun, Buda freely admitted
to owning a .32 calibre Spanish automatic pistol and having a diagram of a
Savage automatic, like the one used in the robbery-murder. A Buick and smaller
car were apparently used during the holdup, so the empty garage at the Coacci
house became a focus of interest, since police deduced from tire tracks that
two cars had been kept there. Buda stated that he owned a 1914 Oakland, which
was being repaired.

Stewart had no jurisdiction or probable cause to arrest Buda at the time, and
left, but when he discovered that Coacci had worked for both the plants that
were robbed, Stewart came back in force with the Bridgewater police, only to
find that Buda had disappeared with his possessions and furniture.

The police then instructed the proprietors of the Johnson garage (where the
cars were held) to call them when the owners came to collect the 1914 Oakland.
On May 5, 1920 Buda arrived at the garage with three other men, later
identified as Sacco, Vanzetti and Riccardo Orciani. Police were alerted but
the men fled, sensing a trap â Buda escaped on a motorcycle with Orciani and
subsequently resurfaced in Italy in 1928, but Sacco and Vanzetti were tracked
onto a streetcar and soon arrested.

Vanzetti was found to be carrying a revolver, which he claimed he had for
protection but at the trial the prosecution alleged that it had been taken
from the murdered guard. In apparent attempts to avoid deportation as
anarchists, they lied to the police, and this would weigh heavily against them
at their trial.

It has been speculated that Coacci was involved in the holdup, and was thus
eager to be deported to escape prosecution. Buda and the unidentified man
disappeared, abandoning their colleagues to the police. Vanzetti was tried for
the South Bridgewater robbery, though not Sacco, who was able to prove by a
time-card that he had been at work all day. The presiding judge was Webster
Thayer, who had criticized the jury for acquitting an anarchist named Sergei
Zabraff in a trial he presided at just two months before.

Vanzetti's lawyer was James Vahey, a distinguished Boston trial lawyer and
former two-time candidate for governor in Massachusetts. Vahey and Vanzetti
produced sixteen witnesses â Italians from Plymouth who claimed they had
bought eels for the Christmas holiday from him, but as a fishmonger he had no
time-card.

The jury was swayed by several witnesses who identified Vanzetti as being at
the scene of the attempted robbery and by shotgun shells found on Vanzetti
when he was arrested five months after the Bridgewater crime. Vanzetti was
furious with his lawyer who, he claimed, "sold me for thirty golden money like
Judas sold Jesus Christ."[citation needed]

Vanzetti also claimed his lawyer convinced him not to testify on his own
behalf, fearing that his anarchist politics might sway the jury against him.
Vanzetti's failure to take the witness stand is thought to have convinced the
jury of his guilt. Vanzetti was found guilty (although few historians now
think he committed it) and Judge Thayer sentenced him to 12-15 years
imprisonment, the maximum sentence allowable.

Sacco and Vanzetti are believed to have been involved at some level in the
Galleanist bombing campaign, although their precise roles have not been
determined.[11] In particular, the Galleanist's chief bombmaker, Mario Buda,
reportedly told a friend in 1955, "Sacco c'era" (Sacco was there).[12] This
fact could account for their suspicious activities and behavior on the night
of their arrest, May 5, 1920.[original research?]

The judge in the case, Webster Thayer, allegedly stated to the jury "This man,
(Vanzetti) although he may not have actually committed the crime attributed to
him, is nevertheless culpable, because he is the enemy of our existing
institutions."[13] There is no record of this statement in the full trial
transcript.

## [edit] Second trial

Later Sacco and Vanzetti both stood trial for murder in Dedham, Massachusetts
for the South Braintree killings, with Webster Thayer again presiding. (Thayer
had asked to be assigned the trial.) Well aware of the Galleanists' reputation
for constructing dynamite bombs of extraordinary power, Massachusetts
authorities took great pains to defend against a possible bombing attack.
Workers outfitted the Dedham courtroom where the trial was to be held with
cast-iron bomb shutters (painted to match the wooden ones fitted elsewhere in
the building) and heavy, sliding steel doors that could protect that section
of the courthouse from blast effect in the event of a bomb attack. Each day
during the trial, Sacco and Vanzetti were escorted in and out of the courtroom
under a heavy armed guard.

Vanzetti again claimed that he had been selling fish at the time of the
Braintree robbery. Sacco claimed that he had been in Boston in order to gain a
passport from the Italian consulate. He had claimed to have had lunch in
Boston's North end with several friends, each of whom testified on his behalf.
Prior to the trial, Sacco's lawyer, Fred Moore, went to great lengths to
contact the consulate employee Sacco said he had talked with on the afternoon
of the crime. Moore's friend found the man back in Italy. The clerk said he
remembered Sacco because of the unusually large passport photo he presented.
The clerk also remembered the date â April 15, 1920. Moore's friend tried to
get the clerk to return to America to testify but the clerk, in ill health,
refused. What could have been key alibi testimony by a reputable clerk was
reduced to a sworn deposition read aloud in court and quickly questioned by
the prosecution, which claimed Sacco's visit to the consulate could not be
established with certainty. The prosecution also pointed out that Sacco's
dinner companions were fellow anarchists.

Much of the trial focused on material evidence, notably bullets, guns, and a
cap. Prosecution witnesses testified that the .32-caliber bullet that had
killed Berardelli was of a brand so obsolete that the only bullets similar to
it that anyone could locate to make comparisons were those in Sacco's
pockets.[citation needed] Yet ballistics evidence, which was presented in
exhaustive detail, was equivocal. Prosecutor Frederick Katzmann, after
initially promising he would not try to link any fatal bullet with Sacco's
gun, changed his mind after the defense arranged test firings of the gun.
Sacco, claiming he had nothing to hide, had allowed his gun to be test-fired,
with experts for both sides present, during the trial's second week. The
prosecution then matched bullets fired through the gun to those taken from one
of the slain guards. In court, two prosecution experts swore that one of the
fatal bullets, quickly labeled Bullet III, matched one of those test-fired.
Two defense experts said the bullet did not match.[citation needed] Years
later, defense lawyers would suggest that the fatal bullet had been
substituted by the prosecution. Noting that witnesses swore to seeing one
gunman pump bullets into Berardelli, they asked how only one of four bullets
found in the deceased could have come from Sacco's gun.

Even more doubt surrounded Vanzetti's gun. Since all of the bullets found at
the scene were .32 caliber and Vanzetti's gun was .38 caliber, there was no
direct evidence tying Vanzetti's gun to the crime scene.[14] The prosecution
claimed it had originally belonged to the slain guard and that it had been
stolen during the robbery. No one testified to seeing anyone take the gun, but
the guard, while carrying $15,776.51 in cash through the street, had no gun on
him when found dead. The prosecution traced the gun to a Boston repair shop
where the guard had dropped it off a few weeks before the murder. The defense,
however, was able to raise doubts, noting that the repair shop had no record
of the gun ever being picked up and that the guard's widow had told a friend
that he might not have been killed had he claimed his gun. Still, the jury
believed this link as well.

The prosecution's final piece of material evidence was a flop-eared cap
claimed to have been Sacco's. Sacco tried the cap on in court and, according
to two newspaper sketch artists who ran cartoons the next day, it was too
small, sitting high on his head. But Katzmann insisted the cap fitted Sacco
and continued to refer to it as his.

Further controversy clouded the prosecution witnesses who identified Sacco at
the scene of the crime. One, a bookkeeper named Mary Splaine, precisely
described Sacco as the man she saw firing from the getaway car. Yet cross
examination revealed that Splaine had refused to identify Sacco at the inquest
and had seen the getaway car for only a second and from nearly a half-block
away. While a few others singled out Sacco or Vanzetti as the men they had
seen at the scene of the crime, far more witnesses, both prosecution and
defense, refused to identify them.

After deliberating for only three hours, then breaking for dinner, the jury
returned with a guilty verdict. Supporters later insisted Sacco and Vanzetti
had been convicted for their anarchist views, yet every juror insisted
anarchism had played no part in their decision. First degree murder in
Massachusetts was a capital crime. Sacco and Vanzetti were therefore bound for
the electric chair unless the defense could find new evidence.

## [edit] Motions, appeals, and clemency investigation

Appeals, protests, and denials continued for the next six years. While the
prosecution staunchly defended the verdict, the defense, led by radical
attorney Fred Moore, dug up many possible reasons for doubt. Three key
prosecution witnesses stated that they had been coerced into identifying Sacco
at the scene of the crime. But when confronted by DA Katzmann, each changed
their stories again, denying any coercion. One of these was a nurse, Lola
Andrews, who told authorities that she was forced, against her will, to sign
an affidavit stating that she wrongfully identified Sacco and Vanzetti; she
signed a counter-affidavit the following day. Another was a man, Lewis Pelser,
who had given his statement about the alleged prosecutorial coercion when he
was drunk, and also signed a counter-affidavit shortly thereafter, upholding
his original trial testimony. In 1924, controversy continued when it was
discovered that someone had switched the barrel of Sacco's gun with that of
another Colt automatic used for comparison.[15] Other appeals focused on the
jury foreman and a prosecution ballistics expert. In 1923, the defense filed
an affidavit from a friend of the jury foreman who swore that prior to the
trial, the man had said of Sacco and Vanzetti, "Damn them, they ought to hang
them anyway!" That same year, a state police captain retracted his trial
testimony linking Sacco's gun to the fatal bullet. Captain William Proctor
claimed that he never meant to imply the connection and that he had repeatedly
told DA Katzmann there was no such connection but that the prosecution had
crafted its trial questioning to hide this opinion.

Adding to the growing conviction that Sacco and Vanzetti deserved a new trial
was the conduct of trial judge Webster Thayer. During the trial, many had
noted how Thayer seemed to loathe defense attorney Fred Moore. Thayer
frequently denied Moore's motions, lecturing the California-based lawyer on
how law was conducted in Massachusetts. On at least two occasions out of
court, Thayer burst into tirade.

Once he told astonished reporters that "No long-haired anarchist from
California can run this court!" According to onlookers who later swore
affidavits, Thayer also lectured members of his exclusive clubs, calling Sacco
and Vanzetti "Bolsheviki!" and saying he would "get them good and proper".
Following the verdict, Boston Globe reporter Frank Sibley, who had covered the
trial, wrote a scathing protest to the Massachusetts attorney general
condemning Thayer's blatant bias.

Then in 1924, after denying all five motions for a new trial, Thayer
confronted a Massachusetts lawyer at his alma mater, Dartmouth. âDid you see
what I did with those anarchistic bastards the other day?" the judge said. "I
guess that will hold them for a while! Let them go to the Supreme Court now
and see what they can get out of them!â The outburst remained a secret until
1927 when its release heightened the suspicion that Sacco and Vanzetti had not
received a fair trial.

Jurors in the trial, however, were almost unanimous in praising Thayer for the
way he conducted proceedings. When interviewed, they also stated that they
were unaware that he had also been the judge in the earlier trial. The
transcript of the Sacco-Vanzetti trial does not reveal major instances of
obvious bias.

For their part, Sacco and Vanzetti seemed to alternate between moods of
defiance, vengeance, resignation, and despair. The June 1926 issue of Protesta
Umana published by their Defense Committee, carried an article signed by Sacco
and Vanzetti that appealed for retaliation by their colleagues.

In the article, Vanzetti stated "I will try to see Thayer death [sic] before
his pronunciation of our sentence" and asked fellow anarchists for "revenge,
revenge in our names and the names of our living and dead."[16] In a reference
to Luigi Galleani's bomb-making manual (covertly titled La Salute Ã¨ in voi!),
the article concluded "Remember, La Salute Ã¨ in voi!". Both Sacco and
Vanzetti wrote dozens of letters sincerely expressing their innocence. Sacco,
in his awkward prose, and Vanzetti in his eloquent but flawed English,
insisted they had been framed because they were anarchists.

Supporters, historians, and others who remain convinced of their innocence,
point to these letters as proof. When the letters were published after the
executions, journalist Walter Lippmann wrote, âIf Sacco and Vanzetti were
professional bandits, then historians and biographers who attempt to deduce
character from personal documents might as well shut up shop. By every test
that I know of for judging character, these are the letters of innocent
men.â

Vanzetti said in his last speech to Judge Webster Thayer:

    "I would not wish to a dog or a snake, to the most low and misfortunate creature of the earth â I would not wish to any of them what I have had to suffer for things that I am not guilty of. But my conviction is that I have suffered for things that I am guilty of. I am suffering because I am a radical, and indeed I am a radical; I have suffered because I am an Italian, and indeed I am an Italian... If you could execute me two times, and if I could be reborn two other times, I would live again to do what I have done already". (Vanzetti spoke on April 19, 1927, in Dedham, Massachusetts, where their case was heard in the Norfolk County courthouse.)
Many famous socialist intellectuals, including Dorothy Parker, Edna St.
Vincent Millay, Bertrand Russell, John Dos Passos, Upton Sinclair, George
Bernard Shaw and H. G. Wells, campaigned for a retrial, but were unsuccessful.
Famed lawyer and future Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter also argued
for a retrial for the two men, writing a scathing criticism of Thayer's ruling
which, when published in the Atlantic Monthly in 1927, was widely read.

While in Dedham prison, Sacco met a Portuguese convict named Celestino
Madeiros. Late in 1925, Madeiros claimed to have committed the crime of which
Sacco was accused. Medeiros, whose vague confession contained many anomalies,
steered defense lawyers to a gang many still think committed the Braintree
murders.

Prior to April 1920, gang leader Joe Morelli and his men had been robbing
shoes from factories in Massachusetts, including the two in Braintree where
the murders occurred. Morelli, investigators discovered, bore a striking
resemblance to Sacco, so striking that several witnesses for both prosecution
and defense mistook his mug shot for Sacco's.

When questioned in 1925, while in prison, Morelli denied any involvement but
six years later he allegedly confessed to a New York lawyer. And in 1973,
further evidence against the Morelli gang emerged when a mobster's memoirs
quoted Joe's brother Frank as confessing to the Braintree murders. However,
the appeal for a new trial based on the Madeiros confession was denied by
Judge Thayer. Further appeals to the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court were
also denied.

On April 8, 1927, their appeals exhausted, Sacco and Vanzetti were finally
sentenced to death in the electric chair. A worldwide outcry arose and
Governor Alvin T. Fuller finally agreed to postpone the executions and set up
a committee to reconsider the case. By this time, firearms examination had
improved considerably, and it was now known that an automatic pistol could be
traced by several different methods if both bullet and casing were recovered
from the scene (as in Saccoâs case).

Automatic pistols could now be traced by unique markings of the rifling on the
bullet, by firing pin indentations on the fired primer, or by unique ejector
and extractor marks on the casing. The committee appointed to review the case
used the services of Calvin Goddard in 1927, who had worked with Charles Waite
at the Bureau of Forensic Ballistics in New York. Goddard was a genuine
firearms expert trained in ballistics and forensic science.

Goddard used Philip Gravelle's newly-invented comparison microscope and
helixometer, a hollow, lighted magnifier probe used to inspect gun barrels, to
make an examination of Saccoâs 0.32 Colt, the bullet that killed Berardelli,
and the spent casings recovered from the scene of the crime. In the presence
of one of the defense experts, he fired a bullet from Sacco's gun into a wad
of cotton and then put the ejected casing on the comparison microscope next to
casings found at the scene.

Then he looked at them carefully. The first two casings from the robbery did
not match Saccoâs gun, but the third one did. Even the defense expert agreed
that the two cartridges had been fired from the same gun. The second original
defense expert also concurred. Other witnesses to the tests, including Sacco's
assistant laywer Herbert Ehrmann and a Boston Herald reporter had not been
convinced.

Nor was new head lawyer William Thompson who considered Saccoâs gun barrel
"so altered by rust and age as to render such experiments wholly
valueless."[citation needed] After the tests, Thompson had invited Major
Goddard to his office where the expert admitted he had considered Sacco guilty
even before coming to Dedham, and had entered the case chiefly to attract more
ballistics work. Goddard offered no opinion on whether Bullet III had been
substituted but agreed with Thompson that its markings were different than
those on other bullets.

Many modern critics charging that Sacco, at least, was guilty, cite Goddard's
examination. It may have been Sacco who killed the men in the robbery,
assuming his comrades and he committed it. However, this would not have
protected any of them, because it still would have been felony-murder if they
were involved in the robbery previously. Others insisting on innocence note
the doubts Thompson raised.

## [edit] Execution and aftermath

<IMG>

<IMG>

Protest for Sacco and Vanzetti in London, 1921

On December 24, 1927, the headquarters of the Citibank and of the Bank of
Boston in Buenos Aires were blown up by the Italian anarchist Severino Di
Giovanni, in apparent protest of the execution.[17] Di Giovanni, one of the
most vocal supporters of Sacco and Vanzetti in Argentina, had already bombed
the US embassy in Buenos Aires a few hours after Sacco and Vanzetti were
condemned.[17] Later, Di Giovanni and his comrades would unsuccessfully
attempt to bomb the train in which president Herbert Hoover travelled during
his stay in Argentina, in December 1928.[17]

A few days after the executions, Di Giovanni received a letter from Sacco's
widow thanking him for his actions and informing him that the director of the
tobacco firm Combinados had proposed her a contract to produce a cigarette
brand named "Sacco & Vanzetti".[17] On 26 November, 1927, Di Giovanni and his
comrades duly bombed a Combinados tobacco shop.[17]

Both Sacco and Vanzetti famously refused a priest but both men went peacefully
and proudly to their deaths. Sacco's final words were "Viva l'anarchia!" and
"Farewell, mia madre."[citation needed] Vanzetti, in his final moments, gently
shook hands with guards and thanked them for their kind treatment, read a
statement proclaiming his innocence, and finally said, "I wish to forgive some
people for what they are now doing to me."[citation needed]

Fellow Galleanists did not take news of the executions with equanimity. One or
more followers of Galleani, especially Mario Buda, were suspected as the
perpetrators of the infamous and deadly Wall Street bombing of 1920 after the
two men were initially indicted. At the funeral parlor in Hanover Street, a
wreath announced Aspettando l'ora di vendetta (Awaiting the hour of
vengeance). Anarchists in other countries had been conducting a campaign of
violent retaliation ever since the mens' indictment. In 1921, a booby trap
bomb mailed to the American ambassador in Paris exploded, wounding his
valet.[18] Other bombs sent to American embassies were defused. In 1926,
Samuel Johnson, the brother of the man who had called police the night of
Sacco and Vanzetti's arrest (Simon Johnson), had his house destroyed by a
bomb.

Following the sentencing of Sacco and Vanzetti in 1927, a package bomb
addressed to Governor Fuller was intercepted in the Boston post office. Three
months later, bombs exploded in the New York subway, in a Philadelphia church,
and at the home of the mayor of Baltimore. One of the jurors in the Dedham
trial had his house bombed, throwing him and his family from their beds. Less
than a year after the executions, a bomb destroyed the front porch of the home
of executioner Robert Elliott. As late as 1932, Judge Thayer himself was the
victim of an attempted assassination when his home was wrecked in a bomb
blast. Afterwards, Thayer lived permanently at his club in Boston, guarded 24
hours a day until his death.

## [edit] Historical viewpoints

Many historians, especially legal historians, have concluded the Sacco and
Vanzetti prosecution, trial, and aftermath constituted a blatant disregard for
political civil liberties, especially Thayer's decision to deny a retrial.
Judge Webster Thayer, who heard the case, allegedly described the two as
"anarchist bastards."[citation needed]

Both men had previously fled to Mexico, changing their names in order to evade
draft registration required for citizenship application, a fact used against
them by the prosecutor in their trial for murder. This implication of guilt by
the commission of unrelated acts is one of the most persistent criticisms
leveled against the trial. Sacco and Vanzetti's supporters would later argue
that the men merely fled the country to avoid persecution and conscription,
their critics, to escape detection and arrest for militant and seditious
activities in the United States. But other anarchists who fled with them
revealed the probable reason in a 1953 Book:

> Several score Italian anarchists left the United States for Mexico. Some
have suggested they did so because of cowardice. Nothing could be more false.
The idea to go to Mexico arose in the minds of several comrades who were
alarmed by the idea that, remaining in the United States, they would be
forcibly restrained from leaving for Europe, where the revolution that had
burst out in Russia that February promised to spread all over the
continent.[19]

Some critics felt that the authorities and jurors were influenced by strong
anti-Italian prejudice and prejudice against immigrants widely held at the
time, especially in New England. Fred Moore compared the chances of an Italian
getting a fair trial in Boston to a black person getting one in the American
South. Against charges of racism and racial prejudice, others pointed out that
both men were known anarchist members of a militant organization, members of
which had been conducting a violent campaign of bombing and attempted
assassinations, acts condemned by the Italian-American community and Americans
of all backgrounds. Though in general anarchist groups did not finance their
militant activities through bank robberies, a fact noted by the investigators
of the Bureau of Investigation, this was not true of the Galleanist group, as
Mario Buda readily admitted to an interviewer: "Andavamo a prenderli dove
c'erano" ("We used to go and get it [money] where it was") â meaning
factories and banks.[20]

Others believe that the government was really prosecuting Sacco and Vanzetti
for the robbery-murders as a convenient excuse to put a stop to their militant
activities as Galleanists, whose bombing campaign at the time posed a lethal
threat, both to the government and to many Americans. Faced with a secretive
underground group whose members resisted interrogation and believed in their
cause, Federal and local officials using conventional law enforcement tactics
had been repeatedly stymied in their efforts to identify all members of the
group or to collect enough evidence for a prosecution.

Today, their case is seen as one of the earliest examples of using widespread
protests and mass movements to try to win the release of convicted persons.
The Sacco-Vanzetti case also exposed the inadequacies of both the legal and
law enforcement system in investigating and prosecuting members and alleged
members of secret societies and terrorist groups, and contributed to calls for
the organization of national data collection and counterintelligence services.

## [edit] Later investigations

One additional piece of evidence supporting the possibility of Sacco's guilt
arose in 1941 when anarchist leader Carlo Tresca, a member of the Sacco and
Vanzetti Defense Committee, told Max Eastman, "Sacco was guilty but Vanzetti
was innocent." Eastman published an article recounting his conversation with
Tresca in National Review in 1961. Later, others would confirm being told the
same information by Tresca. Others pointed to an ongoing feud between Tresca
and the Galleanisti, claiming the famous anarchist was just trying to get
even.

In 1952, labor organizer Anthony Ramuglia admitted that a Boston anarchist
group had asked him to be a false alibi for Sacco. Though he had agreed, he
had then remembered that he had been in jail at that time, and his perjury
could therefore be proven, so he was removed from the alibi list.

In addition, in October 1961, ballistics tests were run with improved
technology using Sacco's Colt automatic. The results confirmed that the bullet
that killed Berardelli in 1920 was fired from Sacco's pistol.[21] Subsequent
investigations in 1983 also supported this finding[citation needed]. This
resulted in some scholars of the case to conclude that Sacco may in fact be
guilty[who?].

The relevance of this evidence was challenged in 1988, when Charlie Whipple, a
former Globe editorial page editor, revealed a conversation he had with
Sergeant Edward J. Seibolt when he worked as a reporter in 1937. According to
Whipple, Seibolt admitted that the police ballistics experts had switched the
murder weapon, but Seibolt indicated that he would deny this if Whipple ever
printed it. At the time, Whipple was unfamiliar with the specific facts of the
case, and it is not known if Seibolt was actually recalling Albert Hamilton's
testimony and behavior on the stand when Hamilton apparently switched Sacco's
gun barrel with that of another Colt automatic.

Sacco's .32 Colt pistol is also claimed to have passed in and out of police
custody, and to have been dismantled several times, both in 1924 prior to the
gun barrel switch, and again between 1927 and 1961. The central problem with
these charges is that the match to Sacco's gun was based not only on the 0.32
Colt pistol but also on the same-caliber bullet that killed Berardelli as well
as spent casings found at the scene.

In addition to tampering with the pistol, the gun switcher/dismantler would
have had also to access police evidence lockers and exchange the bullet from
Berardelli's body and all spent casings retrieved by police, or else locate
the actual murder weapon, then switch barrel, firing pin, ejector, and
extractor, all before Goddard's examination in 1927 when the first match was
made to Sacco's gun. However, doubters of Sacco's guilt have repeatedly
pointed to a single anomaly â that several witnesses to the crime insisted
the gunman, alleged to be Sacco, fired four bullets into Berardelli. "He shot
at Berardelli probably four or five times," one witness said. "He stood guard
over him."[citation needed] If this was true, many ask,[who?] how could only
one of the fatal bullets be linked to Sacco's gun? In 1927, the defense raised
the suggestion that the fatal bullet had been planted, calling attention to
the awkward scratches on the base of the bullet that differed from those on
other bullets. The Lowell Commission dismissed this claim as desperate but in
1985, historians William Kaiser and David Young made a compelling case for a
switch in their book Post-Mortem: New Evidence in the Case of Sacco and
Vanzetti.

Further evidence concerning the Morelli gang came to light in 1973 when a
former mobster published a confession by Frank "Butsy" Morelli, Joe's brother.
"We whacked them out, we killed those guys in the robbery," Butsy Morelli told
Vincent Teresa. "These two greaseballs Sacco and Vanzetti took it on the
chin."[citation needed]

Yet there are others who revealed different opinions, further muddling the
case. In November, 1982 Francis Russell author of a book on the case, received
a letter from Ideale Gambera. Gambera revealed that his father, Giovanni
Gambera, who had died in June 1982, was a member of the four-person team of
anarchist leaders that met shortly after the arrest of Sacco and Vanzetti to
plan for their defense. In his letter to Russell, Gambera claimed, "everyone
[in the anarchist inner circle] knew that Sacco was guilty and that Vanzetti
was innocent as far as the actual participation in killing."

Russell had originally written about the case, arguing that Sacco and Vanzetti
were innocent, but further research led him to write a 1975 book, asserting
that Sacco was, in fact, guilty. Russell used the Gambera revelation as the
basis of a new book in 1986, in which he claims that the case is "solved," and
presents his view that Sacco was one of the shooters, while Vanzetti was an
accessory after the fact. While Russell's 1975 book was praised, even by those
who disagreed with his conclusion, for being balanced and well-reasoned, his
1986 book was much more negatively received.[citation needed]

Months before he passed away, the distinguished jurist Charles E. Wyzanski
Jr., who had presided for 45 years on the U.S. District Court in
Massachusetts, wrote to Russell stating "I myself am persuaded by your
writings that Sacco was guilty." The judge's assessment was significant,
because he was one of Felix Frankfurter's "Hot Dogs," and Justice Frankfurter
had advocated his appointment to the federal bench.[22]

On August 23, 1977, exactly fifty years after their execution, Governor of
Massachusetts Michael Dukakis issued a proclamation stating that Sacco and
Vanzetti had been treated unjustly and that "any disgrace should be forever
removed from their names." Controversy arose, as a result of his action, and
Dukakis later expressed regret, not for the proclamation itself, but for not
also reaching out to the families of the victims of the crime. "It was a
terrible gap in my judgment; we didn't seem to focus on that," said the former
Governor, in a 2005 newspaper article.[23]

On August 23, 1997, on the 70th anniversary of their execution, Thomas Menino,
the first Italian-American mayor of Boston, presided over an official ceremony
at the Boston Public Library to formally "accept" a bas-relief memorializing
Sacco and Vanzetti, designed by the same sculptor who created Mount Rushmore.
This move also generated some controversy, and like Governor Dukakis, Mayor
Menino purposefully avoided addressing the issue of whether the pair were
guilty or innocent. Also speaking at the artwork acceptance ceremony was the
Italian-American Acting Governor of Massachusetts, Paul Cellucci. A memorial
committee had attempted to present the relief to Massachusetts governors and
Boston mayors in 1937, 1947, and 1957, but it had been refused each time.

Sacco was quoted as saying before his death, "It is true, indeed, that they
can execute the body, but they cannot execute the idea which is bound to
live."[citation needed]

## [edit] The involvement of Upton Sinclair

In 2005, a 1929 letter from Upton Sinclair to his attorney John Beardsley,
Esq., was publicized (having been found in an auction warehouse ten years
earlier) in which Sinclair revealed that he was told at the time he wrote his
book Boston, that both men were guilty. Some years after the trial Sinclair
met with Sacco and Vanzetti's attorney Fred Moore.

Sinclair revealed that after the executions, he had talked to Moore in a
Denver hotel. "Alone in a hotel room with Fred, I begged him to tell me the
full truth, ...He then told me that the men were guilty, and he told me in
every detail how he had framed a set of alibis for them. ...I faced the most
difficult ethical problem of my life at that point, I had come to Boston with
the announcement that I was going to write the truth about the case". Sinclair
furthermore said that he was "completely naÃ¯ve about the case, having
accepted the defence propaganda completely."[24] A trove of additional papers
in Sinclair's archives at Indiana University show the ethical quandary that
confronted him.[25]

In January 2006, more of the text of the Beardsley letter became public
casting some doubt on the conclusion that Sinclair believed Moore's statement:
"I realized certain facts about Fred Moore. I had heard that he was using
drugs. I knew that he had parted from the defense committee after the
bitterest of quarrels. ...Moore admitted to me that the men themselves, had
never admitted their guilt to him; and I began to wonder whether his present
attitude and conclusions might not be the result of his brooding on his
wrongs.[citation needed] Sinclair had also spoken with Moore's ex-wife who
assured him that her husband had never expressed doubts about his client's
innocence during either the trial or the aftermath.

Sinclair's public position was consistent in asserting the innocence of Sacco
and Vanzetti. Both Moore's statement and Sinclair's skepticism of it were
mentioned in a 1975 biography of Upton Sinclair, despite claims that the
contents of the letter were a new or "original" development. In contrast to
Moore's equivocal stance, William Thompson, the corporate lawyer who defended
Sacco and Vanzetti from 1924 until their deaths, never expressed any doubt in
their innocence.

## [edit] Sacco and Vanzetti in popular culture

### [edit] Opera, plays, movies

  * The fictional scenario of Maxwell Anderson's 1935 play Winterset bears some resemblance to the case, by which it was inspired.
  * Vanzetti's jailhouse letter is a major plot point and dramatic high point in the comedy The Male Animal by James Thurber and Elliot Nugent (1940) and later filmed with Henry Fonda reading the letter.
  * In 1963 a fictionalized play about the case, The Advocate, was televised on national television at the same time it premiered on Broadway. It received strong reviews as a television drama but weak reviews as a play on stage.
  * The third novel in John Dos Passos' U.S.A. trilogy (1930-6), The Big Money, features the character of Mary French working on the Sacco-Vanzetti trial.
  * At the time of his murder in 1964, American composer Marc Blitzstein was working on an opera on Sacco and Vanzetti.
  * Sacco e Vanzetti, a 1971 film by Italian director Giuliano Montaldo covers the case. The soundtrack was written by composer Ennio Morricone and sung by folk singer Joan Baez. The notable song Here's to You was a hit for Joan Baez. Morricone won the Nastro d'Argento trophy for it as well. "Here's to You", with the lyrics "Nicola and Bart" still intact, in turn is featured on the Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots soundtrack as the ending theme. It is a re-recording by Harry Gregson-Williams with vocals by Lisbeth Scott. The same song is also featured briefly in The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou as Bill Murray and Cate Blanchett sit in Steve's balloon, over a small radio.
  * In 2000 the play "Voices on the Wind" opened in Los Angeles. The play, written by Eric Paul Erickson and directed by Michael Najjar, centered around the final hours of the lives of the two men. Former Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis recorded an audio clip of his pardon, made specifically for the production.
  * Sacco and Vanzetti (2007) is an award-winning documentary film featuring interviews with Howard Zinn, Anton Coppola, and Studs Terkel, and the voices of Tony Shalhoub and John Turturro. Music composed and arranged by John T. La Barbera. The film has won the John E. O'Connor award for best historical film by the American Historical Association.
  * Anton Coppola, uncle of Francis Ford Coppola, premiered his opera Sacco and Vanzetti in 2001; Maestro Coppola recently conducted and directed his opera on February 17, 2007, at the Tampa Bay Performing Arts Center
  * The trial of Sacco and Vanzetti is the subject of the eponymous play by Argentine playwriter Mauricio KartÃºn.

### [edit] Music

  * In 1960, Folkways Records released an LP titled The Ballads of Sacco & Vanzetti. This record included eleven songs composed and sung by folksinger Woody Guthrie in 1946-1947, and one song sung by folksinger Pete Seeger (words by Nicola Sacco).
  * In 1977, folksinger Charlie King wrote a protest song called Two Good Arms that was based on Vanzetti's final speech.
  * Folk Singer David Rovics wrote a song "Sacco and Vanzetti" in 1998 telling their stories.
  * Irish folk Singer/Songwriter Christy Moore performs the Guthrie song 'Sacco & Vanzetti' on his 1983 album "The Time Has Come" and again on the 2006 "Live at the Point" album.
  * The ska punk band Against All Authority wrote a song titled Sacco and Vanzetti, which appears on their album Nothing New for Trash Like You.
  * Georges Moustaki, Francophone singer and songwriter translated Joan Baez's "Here's To You" in French. The result is a song entitled "Marche de Sacco et Vanzetti".
  * Folk artist Joel Rafael's song "Two Good Men" portrays Sacco and Vanzetti's story.
  * Joan Baez's "Here's to You", which appeared on the soundtrack of The Life Aquatic
  * Folk group Patrick Street's song, "Facing the Chair," which features on their album, No. 2 Patrick Street.

### [edit] Written works, paintings

  * In 1927, editorial cartoonist Fred Ellis published The case of Sacco and Vanzetti in cartoons from the Daily Worker which collected radical cartoonists' work relating to the case that had been published in the American Communist periodical Daily Worker
  * Upton Sinclair's 1928 book, Boston, is a fictional interpretation of the affair.
  * The 1969 book The Case That Will Not Die: Commonwealth vs. Sacco and Venzetti, by Herbert B. Ehrmann, junior counsel for the defense, describes the author's experiences working on the case.
  * Author Mark Binelli presented the two as a Laurel-and-Hardy-like comedy team in the 2006 novel Sacco And Vanzetti Must Die!

  * The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti, by Ben Shahn, a famous painting depicting the funeral of the two men, is housed at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York City. A similar three-panel marble and enamel mosaic is located on the east wall of Huntington Beard Crouse Hall, at Syracuse University.

#### [edit] Poetry

  * In his poem America, Allen Ginsberg includes the line, Sacco and Vanzetti must not die.
  * Carl Sandburg described the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti in his poem Legal Midnight Hour.
  * Edna St. Vincent Millay wrote a poem after the executions entitled Justice Denied In Massachusetts.
  * William Carlos Williams wrote a poem entitled "Impromptu: The Suckers" in response to the Sacco and Vanzetti trial.
  * Turkish poet NazÄ±m Hikmet has a poem titled "Sacco ile Vanzetti" (Sacco and Vanzetti) hailing the two as revolutionaries.

### [edit] Mentioned

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sacco & Vanzetti mosaic by Ben Shahn at Syracuse University.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Close up of mosaic.

  * There are lot of objects in the former USSR named after Sacco and Vanzetti: a factory producing pencils in Moscow; a kolkhoz in Donetsk region, Ukraine, and a street in Yekaterinburg; there are also numerous towns all over the country that have streets named after Sacco and Vanzetti.
  * In Clifford Odets's 1935 play Awake and Sing!, stage directions indicate that Jacob (the grandfather) has a picture of Sacco and Vanzetti on his bedroom wall.
  * The Sacco and Vanzetti Century was an American anarchist military unit in the Durruti Column that fought in the Spanish Civil War.
  * In the 1974 film The Front Page, the political radical in police custody (played by Austin Pendleton) says that he got fired from a baking job for putting the message "Free Sacco and Vanzetti!" in fortune cookies.
  * Kurt Vonnegut's Jailbird and Irwin Shaw's Voices of a Summer Day mention the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti.
  * Two men with covered faces (labeled Sacco and Vanzetti) are shown in Rage Against the Machine's music video, No Shelter.
  * One of the characters in Marge Piercy's utopian novel Woman on the Edge of Time is called Sacco-Vanzetti.
  * The trial of Sacco and Vanzetti is mentioned in an episode of The Practice Mr Shore Goes to Town in which it is described as Dedham's great legal mistake.
  * The clashes between Judge Webster Sayer and attorney Fred Moore were also used (in reverse) in two episodes of The Practice (New Evidence and Hammerhead Sharks from Season Four). When Bobby Donnell and his associates are called to defend a client in a Los Angeles Court, Judge Wallace Cooper's recurring outburst is "No lawyer from Masssa'tchussetts will tell me how to run this court".
  * Sacco and Vanzetti are mentioned in Philip Roth's novel The Human Stain.
  * Sacco and Vanzetti are mentioned in the song "Marathon" by composer Jacques Brel.
  * On the Family Guy Stewie Griffin movie, as Phineaus & Barnaby, the two vaudeville weightlifters, are being hauled in a police truck whilst being arrested for suspicions of an illegal steroid usage (which brings us back to the radical & prejudice situation), Barnaby says to one of the officers, "Stop pushing! Save your roughneck tactics for Sacco and Vanzetti."
  * On the first season of The Partridge Family [episode 11 "This Is My Song"] after Keith and Danny inadvertently write a song together, Danny suggests that he and Keith could be the next, "Lennon-McCartney, Rogers and Hammerstein, or Sacco and Vanzetti!"

## [edit] Further reading

  * Howard Fast wrote The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti, A New England Legend. ISBN 0837155843
  * Massachusetts Supreme Court ruling denying new trial at Case citation 255 Mass. 369, decided May 12, 1926.
  * Avrich, Paul, Sacco and Vanzetti: The Anarchist Background, Princeton University Press, 1991 ISBN 0691026041
  * Avrich, Paul, Anarchist Voices: An Oral History of Anarchism in America, Princeton: Princeton University Press (1996)
  * Bortman, Eli, Sacco & Vanzetti (New England Remembers), Commonwealth Editions, 2005 ISBN 1889833762
  * Brian MacArthur (editor), The Penguin Book of Twentieth Century Speeches, second edition (1999), pp. 100â103.
  * Galleani, Luigi, La Salute Ã¨ in voi! (Health is in You!) date unknown
  * Kadane, Joseph B. and Schum, David A. A Probabilistic Analysis of the Sacco and Vanzetti Evidence (Wiley Series in Probability & Mathematical Statistics: Applied Probability & Statistics), 1996.
  * Montgomery, Robert H. Sacco-Vanzetti: The Murder and the Myth, New York: Devin-Adair, 1960.
  * Grossman, James, The Sacco-Vanzetti Case Reconsidered: Commentary, January 1962.
  * Russell, Francis, Tragedy in Dedham: The Story of the Sacco-Vanzetti Case, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962.
  * Felix, David, Protest: Sacco-Vanzetti and the Intellectuals, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1965.
  * Russell, Francis, Sacco and Vanzetti: The Case Resolved, New York: Harper & Row, 1986.
  * Starrs, James E., Once More Unto the Breech: The Firearms Evidence in the Sacco and Vanzetti Case Revisited, in Journal of Forensic Sciences, April 1986, pp. 630â54; July 1986, pp. 1050â78.
  * Newby, Richard, Kill Now, Talk Forever: Debating Sacco and Vanzetti, (2002) ISBN 0759607923
  * Feuerlicht, Roberta Strauss, Justice Crucified, The Story of Sacco and Vanzetti, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1977.
  * Vonnegut, Kurt, Jailbird, Dell Publishing, 1979.
  * The Sacco-Vanzetti Case, Transcript of the Record, 1920-27 (Six Volumes), New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1928. KF224.S2D6.
  * Avrich, Paul, Sacco and Vanzetti: The Anarchist Background, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton !) date unknown
  * Jackson, Brian, The Black Flag: A Look Back at the Strange Case of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981. KF224.S2 J3.
  * Massachusetts, Governor, Report to the Governor in the matter of Sacco and Vanzetti, Boston: Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 1977. KF224.S2 M36x.
  * Montgomery, Robert H., Sacco-Vanzetti; The Murder and the Myth, New York: Devin-Adair Company, 1960. HV6533.M4 A6.
  * Newby, Richard (Editor). Kill Now, Talk Forever: Debating Sacco and Vanzetti. Author House (revised 2007). KF224.S2 K55.
  * Porter, Katherine Anne, The Never-Ending Wrong, Boston: Little, Brown, 1977. HX86 .P66.
  * Rappaport, Doreen, The Sacco-Vanzetti Trial, New York: HarperTrophy, 1994, c1993. KF224.R36 1994x. (Juvenile and Young Adult)
  * Russell, Francis, Sacco & Vanzetti: The Case Resolved ISBN 0060155248. New York: Harper & Row, 1986. Book based on the Ideale Gambera statement.
  * Sacco, Nicola, The Letters of Sacco and Vanzetti, New York: Octagon Books, 1971, c1928. HV6248.S3 A4 1971.
  * Sacco, Nicola, The Sacco-Vanzetti Case, New York: Russell & Russell, 1969, c1931. KF224.S2 F7 1969.
  * Sinclair, Upton, Boston: A Documentary Novel of the Sacco-Vanzetti Case, Cambridge, Mass.: R. Bentley, 1978. PZ3.S616 Bo 1978.
  * Tibaldo, Lorenzo. Sotto un cielo stellato. Vita e morte di Nicola Sacco e Bartolomeo Vanzetti, Turin: Claudiana, 2008.
  * Watson, Bruce, Sacco and Vanzetti: The Men, The Murders, and the Judgment of Mankind, New York, Viking, 2007. The most recent and up-to-date account, including new revelations about the gun barrel switch, Sacco's insanity hearings, and the prison lives of the men based on their letters in English and Italian.
  * Weeks, Robert P., Commonwealth vs. Sacco and Vanzetti, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1958. KF224.S2 W4.
  * Young, William, Postmortem: New Evidence in the Case of Sacco and Vanzetti, Amherst, Massachusetts: University of Massachusetts Press, 1985. KF224.S2 Y68 1985.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b D'Attilio.
  2. ^ a b New York Times, 1927-08-23
  3. ^ a b Montgomery 1960 p. v.
  4. ^ a b Young & Kaiser 1985 preface.
  5. ^ Young et al 1960 p 4.
  6. ^ Russell 1962, p.1.
  7. ^ Watson 2007, p.264
  8. ^ The New York Times, March 5, 1922
  9. ^ http://saccoevanzetti/english.html
  10. ^ a b http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/88/sacvan.html
  11. ^ Avrich, Paul. Anarchist Voices: An Oral History of Anarchism in America. Princeton: Princeton University Press (1996)
  12. ^ Avrich, Paul. Anarchist Voices: An Oral History of Anarchism in America. Princeton: Princeton University Press (1996), pp. 132-133 ("Interview of Charles Poggi")
  13. ^ Boyer, Richards. Labor's Untold Story. United Front: San Francisco, 1955
  14. ^ Russell, Francis (June 1962). "Sacco Guilty, Vanzetti Innocent?". American Heritage 13 (4): 111. "About the gun found on Vanzetti there is too much uncertainty to come to any conclusion. Being of .38 caliber, it was obviously not used at South Braintree, where all the bullets fired were .32's".
  15. ^ Russell, Francis (June 1962). "Sacco Guilty, Vanzetti Innocent?". American Heritage 13 (4): 107. "At the conclusion of the investigation Thayer passed no judgment as to who had switched the barrels but merely noted that the rusty barrel in the new pistol had come from Sacco's Colt.".
  16. ^ Watson, Bruce. Sacco and Vanzetti: The Men, the Murders, and the Judgment of Mankind. Viking Press (2007), ISBN 0670063533, 9780670063536, p. 264
  17. ^ a b c d e Felipe Pigna, Los Mitos de la historia argentina, ed. Planeta, 2006, chapter IV "Expropriando al Capital", in particular p.105-114
  18. ^ New York Times. "Bomb For Herrick Wounds His Valet In His Paris Home." October 19, 1921: "The infernal machine [bomb] is believed by the Paris police to have been the work of French Communists, who for the last two weeks have been conducting a campaign against the execution of two Italians, Sacco and Vanzetti." Years later, the sender of the bomb was revealed to be May Picqueray (1893-1983), a militant anarchist and editor of Le RÃ©fractaire.
  19. ^ Un Trentennio di Attivita Anarchica (1914-1945) (Thirty Years of Anarchist Activities) Cesena, Italy, 1953
  20. ^ Avrich, Paul. Anarchist Voices: An Oral History of Anarchism in America. Princeton: Princeton University Press (1996), Interview of Charles Poggi, pp. 132-133
  21. ^ Russell, Francis (June 1962). "Sacco Guilty, Vanzetti Innocent?". American Heritage 13 (4): 110. "Making independent examinations, Jury and Weller both concluded that 'the bullet marked III was fired in Sacco's pistol and in no other.'".
  22. ^ Newby, Richard. "Judge Wyzanski Makes History: Sacco and Vanzetti Reconvicted." August 29, 1999. Accessed July 31, 2008.
  23. ^ Collins, Rick. "Forgotten victims: Descendants say both were hard-working family men." The Patriot Ledger. July 27, 2005. Accessed July 31, 2008.
  24. ^ Upton Sinclair at Boston, CBC 2006-01-28.
  25. ^ Pasco, Jean (2005-12-24). "Sinclair Letter Turns Out to Be Another ExposÃ©: Note found by an O.C. man says The Jungle author got the lowdown on Sacco and Vanzetti". Los Angeles Times. http://articles.latimes.com/2005/dec/24/local/me-sinclair24.

## [edit] References

  * Avrich, Paul (1996). Anarchist Voices: An Oral History of Anarchism in America. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp. 132â133. ISBN 9780691034126.
  * D'Attilio, Robert. "The Sacco-Vanzetti Case (overview)". University of Pennsylvania. http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/88/sacvan.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-20.
  * Montgomery, Robert (1960). Sacco-Vanzetti: The Murder and the Myth. New York: Devin-Adair.
  * Staff Correspondent (1927-08-23). "Sacco and Vanzetti Put to Death Early This Morning" (in English). New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/big/0823.html#article. Retrieved on 2008-09-20.
  * Russell, Francis (1962). Tragedy in Dedham: The Story of the Sacco-Vanzetti Case. New York: McGraw Hill.
  * Young, William; David E. Kaiser (1985). Post-Mortem: New Evidence in the Case of Sacco and Vanzetti. Amherst, MA: University of Massachussets Press.
  * Watson, Bruce (2007). Sacco and Vanzetti: The Ment, The Murders, and the Judgment of Mankind. New York, NY: Viking Press. ISBN 0670063533.
  * Neville, John (2004). Twentieth-Century Cause Celebre: Sacco, Vanzetti, and the Press, 1920-1927. Westport, CN: Praeger. ISBN 0275977838. http://www.questia.com/read/113134430.

## [edit] External links

  * Sacco and Vanzetti Documentary
  * Composer of Musical Score for Documentary

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Sacco and Vanzetti  
  * Nicola Sacco at Findagrave.com
  * Bartolomeo Vanzetti at Findagrave.com
  * saccoandvanzetti.org
  * The New York Times March 5, 1922
  * The Sacco-Vanzetti Case: An Account, "Famous American Trials." - Overview of case by Professor Douglas O. Linder, UMKC School of Law

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sacco_and_Vanzetti"

Categories: Duos | Dedham, Massachusetts | Braintree, Massachusetts | Executed
anarchists | Italian anarchists | History of anti-communism in the United
States | Trials in the United States | People convicted of murder by
Massachusetts | People executed by electric chair | People executed by
Massachusetts | Italian people executed abroad | People executed for murder |
20th-century executions by the United States

Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from February 2009 |
Articles that may contain original research since February 2009 | Wikipedia
articles needing style editing from February 2009 | All articles needing style
editing | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked
weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008 |
Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | All articles that may
contain original research | Articles with unsourced statements since August
2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles with
specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since January 2009 | Articles with
specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 13:56.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



