
# Garry Kasparov

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Kasparov" redirects here. For other uses, see Kasparov (disambiguation).

Garry Kasparov  
<IMG>  
Garry Kasparov, 2007  
Full name Garry Kimovich Kasparov  
(ÐÐ°ÑÑÐ¸ ÐÐ¸Ð¼Ð¾Ð²Ð¸Ñ ÐÐ°ÑÐ¿Ð°ÑÐ¾Ð²)  
Country <IMG> Russia  
Born

April 13, 1963 (1963-04-13) (age 45)  
Baku, Azerbaijan SSR, Soviet Union  
Title Grandmaster  
World Champion 1985â1993 (undisputed)  
1993â2000 (Classical)  
FIDE rating 2812  
  
Peak rating 2851 (July 1999)  
Garry Kasparov (Armenian: Ô³Õ¡ÖÖÕ« Ô¿Õ¡Õ½ÕºÕ¡ÖÕ¸Õ¾; Russian: ÐÐ°ÌÑÑÐ¸
ÐÐ¸ÌÐ¼Ð¾Ð²Ð¸Ñ ÐÐ°ÑÐ¿Ð°ÌÑÐ¾Ð²; Russian pronunciation: [ËgarÊ²Éª
ËkÊ²imÉvÊ²ÉªtÉ kÉËsparÉf]) (born as Garry Kimovich Weinstein on April
13, 1963, in Baku[1], Azerbaijan SSR, Soviet Union; now Azerbaijan) is a
Soviet former World Chess Champion, regarded by many as the greatest chess
player of all time.[2] He is also a writer and political activist.

Kasparov became the youngest ever undisputed World Chess Champion in 1985.[3]
He held the official FIDE world title until 1993, when a dispute with FIDE led
him to set up a rival organization, the Professional Chess Association. He
continued to hold the "Classical" World Chess Championship until his defeat by
Vladimir Kramnik in 2000. He is also widely known for being the first world
chess champion to lose a match to a computer, when he lost to Deep Blue in
1997.

Kasparov's ratings achievements include being rated world #1 according to Elo
rating almost continuously from 1986 until his retirement in 2005 and holding
the all-time highest rating of 2851.[4] He also holds records for consecutive
tournament victories and Chess Oscars.

Since 1984 Kasparov was member of Central Committee of Komsomol and CPSU
member.

Kasparov announced his retirement from professional chess on March 10, 2005,
to devote his time to politics and writing. He formed the United Civil Front
movement, and joined as a member of The Other Russia, a coalition opposing the
administration of Vladimir Putin. He was a candidate for the 2008 Russian
presidential race, but later withdrew. Widely regarded in the West as a symbol
of opposition to Putin, Kasparov's support in Russia is low.[5][6]

## Contents

  * 1 Early career
  * 2 Toward the top
  * 3 1984 World Championship
  * 4 World Champion
  * 5 Break with and ejection from FIDE
  * 6 Losing the title, and aftermath
  * 7 Retirement from chess
    * 7.1 Post-retirement chess
  * 8 Politics
  * 9 Chess ratings achievements
  * 10 Olympiads and other major team events
  * 11 Other records
  * 12 Books and other writings
    * 12.1 Early writings
    * 12.2 My Great Predecessors series
    * 12.3 Modern Chess series
    * 12.4 Other post-retirement writing
  * 13 Chess against computers
    * 13.1 Deep Thought, 1989
    * 13.2 Deep Blue, 1996
    * 13.3 Deep Blue, 1997
    * 13.4 Deep Junior, 2003
    * 13.5 X3D Fritz, 2003
  * 14 Other
  * 15 Books
  * 16 See also
  * 17 Notes
  * 18 References
  * 19 Further reading
  * 20 External links

  
## [edit] Early career

<IMG>

<IMG>

Weinstein at age 11, Vilnius, 1974.

Garry Kasparov was born Garry Weinstein (Russian: ÐÐ°ÑÑÐ¸
ÐÐ°Ð¹Ð½ÑÑÐµÐ¹Ð½) in Baku, Azerbaijan SSR to an Armenian mother and Jewish
father.[7] He first began the serious study of chess after he came across a
chess problem set up by his parents and proposed a solution.[8] His father
died of leukemia when he was seven years old.[9] At the age of twelve, he
adopted his mother's Armenian surname, Kasparyan, modifying it to a more
Russified version, Kasparov. [10]

From age 7, Kasparov attended the Young Pioneer Palace and, at 10 began
training at Mikhail Botvinnik's chess school under noted coach Vladimir
Makogonov. Makogonov helped develop Kasparov's positional skills and taught
him to play the Caro-Kann Defence and the Tartakower System of the Queen's
Gambit Declined.[11] Kasparov won the Soviet Junior Championship in Tbilisi in
1976, scoring 7 points of 9, at age 13. He repeated the feat the following
year, winning with a score of 8Â½ of 9. He was being trained by Alexander
Shakarov during this time.

In 1978, Kasparov participated in the Sokolsky Memorial tournament in Minsk.
He had been invited as an exception but took first place and became a chess
master. Kasparov has repeatedly said that this event was a turning point in
his life, and that it convinced him to choose chess as his career. "I will
remember the Sokolsky Memorial as long as I live," he wrote. He has also said
that after the victory, he thought he had a very good shot at the World
Championship.[12]

He first qualified for the Soviet Chess Championship at age 15 in 1978, the
youngest ever player at that level. He won the 64-player Swiss system
tournament at Daugavpils over tiebreak from Igor V. Ivanov, to capture the
sole qualifying place.

Kasparov rose quickly through the FIDE (World Chess Federation) rankings.
Starting with an oversight by the Russian Chess Federation, he participated in
a Grandmaster tournament in Banja Luka, Yugoslavia, in 1979 while still
unrated (the federation thought it was a junior tournament). He won this high-
class tournament, emerging with a provisional rating of 2595, enough to
catapult him to the top group of chess players (at the time, number 3 in the
World, ex-champion Boris Spassky had 2630, while World Champion Anatoly Karpov
was at 2690â2700). The next year, 1980, he won the World Junior Chess
Championship in Dortmund, West Germany. Later that year, he made his debut as
second reserve for the Soviet Union at the Chess Olympiad at La Valletta,
Malta, and became a Grandmaster.

## [edit] Toward the top

As a teenager, Kasparov twice tied for first place in the USSR Chess
Championship, in 1980â81 and 1981â82. His first win in a superclass-level
international tournament was scored at Bugojno 1982\. He earned a place in the
1982 Moscow Interzonal tournament, which he won, to qualify for the Candidates
Tournament.[13] At age 19, he was the youngest Candidate since Bobby Fischer,
who was 15 when he qualified in 1958. At this stage, he was already the
#2-rated player in the world, trailing only World Chess Champion Anatoly
Karpov on the January 1983 list.

Kasparov's first (quarter-final) Candidates match was against Alexander
Beliavsky, whom Kasparov defeated 6â3 (four wins, one loss).[14] Politics
threatened Kasparov's semi-final against Viktor Korchnoi, which was scheduled
to be played in Pasadena, California. Korchnoi had defected from the Soviet
Union in 1976, and was at that time the strongest active non-Soviet player.
Various political maneuvers prevented Kasparov from playing Korchnoi, and
Kasparov forfeited the match. This was resolved by Korchnoi allowing the match
to be replayed in London, along with the previously scheduled match between
Vasily Smyslov and Zoltan Ribli. The Kasparov-Korchnoi match was put together
on short notice by Raymond Keene. Kasparov lost the first game but won the
match 7â4 (four wins, one loss).

In 1984, he won the Candidates' final 8Â½â4Â½ (four wins, no losses) against
the resurgent former world champion Vasily Smyslov, at Vilnius, thus
qualifying to play Anatoly Karpov for the World Championship. That year he
joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), as a member of which he
was elected to the Central Committee of Komsomol in 1987.

## [edit] 1984 World Championship

The World Chess Championship 1984 match between Anatoly Karpov and Garry
Kasparov had many ups and downs, and a very controversial finish. Karpov
started in very good form, and after nine games Kasparov was down 4â0 in a
"first to six wins" match. Fellow players predicted he would be whitewashed
6â0 within 18 games.[15]

But Kasparov dug in and battled Karpov to 17 successive draws. He lost game
27, then fought back with another series of draws until game 32, his first-
ever win against the World Champion. Another 15 successive draws followed,
through game 46; the previous record length for a world title match had been
34 games, the match of Jose Capablanca vs. Alexander Alekhine in 1927.

At this point Karpov, 12 years older than Kasparov, was close to exhaustion,
and did not look like the player who started the match. Kasparov won games 47
and 48 to bring the scores to 5â3 in Karpov's favour. Then the match was
ended without result by Florencio Campomanes, the President of FÃ©dÃ©ration
Internationale des Ãchecs (FIDE), and a new match was announced to start a
few months later.

The termination was controversial, as both players stated that they preferred
the match to continue. Announcing his decision at a press conference,
Campomanes cited the health of the players, which had been strained by the
length of the match, with Karpov having lost 10 kg (22 lb) during the
match.[16] But Kasparov was in excellent health and extremely resentful of
Campomanes' decision, asking him why he was abandoning the match if both
players wanted to continue. Kasparov had won the last two games before the
suspension, and some observers believed that he would go on to win despite his
5â3 deficit. He appeared to be physically stronger than his opponent, and in
the later games seemed to have been playing the better chess.

The match became the first, and so far only, world championship match to be
abandoned without result. Kasparov's relations with Campomanes and FIDE were
greatly strained, and the feud between them eventually came to a head in 1993
with Kasparov's complete break-away from FIDE.

## [edit] World Champion

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kasparov after winning the FIDE World Championship title in 1985.

The second Karpov-Kasparov match in 1985 was organized in Moscow as the best
of 24 games where the first player to win 12.5 points would claim the title.
The scores from the terminated match would not carry over. But in the event of
a 12â12 draw, the title would remain with Karpov. Kasparov secured the title
at age 22 by a score of 13â11, winning the 24th game with Black, a Sicilian
defence, on 9 November 1985. This broke the existing record of youngest World
Champion, held for over 20 years by Mikhail Tal, who was 23 when he defeated
Mikhail Botvinnik in 1960. Kasparov's win as Black in the 16th game has been
recognized as one of the all-time masterpieces in chess history.

As part of the arrangements following the aborted 1984 match, Karpov had been
granted (in the event of his defeat) a right to rematch. Another match took
place in 1986, hosted jointly in London and Leningrad, with each city hosting
12 games. At one point in the match, Kasparov opened a three-point lead and
looked well on his way to a decisive match victory. But Karpov fought back by
winning three consecutive games to level the score late in the match. At this
point, Kasparov dismissed one of his seconds, Grandmaster Evgeny Vladimirov,
accusing him of selling his opening preparation to the Karpov team (as
described in Kasparov's autobiography Unlimited Challenge, chapter Stab in the
Back). Kasparov scored one more win and kept his title by a final score of
12.5â11.5.

A fourth match for the world title took place in 1987 in Seville, as Karpov
had qualified through the Candidates' Matches to again become the official
challenger. This match was very close, with neither player holding more than a
one-point lead at any point. Kasparov was down one point in the final game,
needing a win to hold his title. A long tense game ensued in which Karpov
blundered away a pawn just before the first time-control, and Kasparov
eventually won a long ending. Kasparov retained his title as the match was
drawn by a score of 12â12. (All this meant that Kasparov had played Karpov
four times in the period 1984â1987, a statistic unprecedented in chess.
Matches organised by FIDE had taken place every three years since 1948, and
only Botvinnik had a right to a rematch before Karpov.)

A fifth match between Kasparov and Karpov was held in New York and Lyon in
1990, with each city hosting 12 games. Again, the result was a close one with
Kasparov winning by a margin of 12.5â11.5. In their five world championship
matches, Kasparov had 21 wins, 19 losses, and 104 draws in 144 games.

## [edit] Break with and ejection from FIDE

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kasparov and Viswanathan Anand in a publicity photo on top of the World Trade
Center in New York, on September 11, 1995.[17]

With the World Champion title in hand, Kasparov began fighting against FIDE
â as Bobby Fischer had done 20 years earlier but this time from within FIDE.
Beginning in 1986, he created the Grandmasters Association (GMA), an
organization to represent professional chess players and give them more say in
FIDE's activities. Kasparov assumed a leadership role. GMA's major achievement
was in organizing a series of six World Cup tournaments for the world's top
players. A somewhat uneasy relationship developed with FIDE, and a sort of
truce was brokered by Bessel Kok, a Dutch businessman.

This stand-off lasted until 1993, by which time a new challenger had qualified
through the Candidates cycle for Kasparov's next World Championship defense:
Nigel Short, a British Grandmaster who had defeated Karpov in a qualifying
match, and then Jan Timman in the finals held in early 1993. After a confusing
and compressed bidding process produced lower financial estimates than
expected,[18] the world champion and his challenger decided to play outside
FIDE's jurisdiction, under another organization created by Kasparov called the
Professional Chess Association (PCA). This is where a great fracture in the
lineage of World Champions began.

In an interview in 2007, Kasparov would call the break with FIDE the worst
mistake of his career, as it hurt the game in the long run.[19]

Kasparov and Short were ejected from FIDE, and played their well-sponsored
match in London. Kasparov won convincingly by a score of 12.5â7.5. The match
considerably raised the profile of chess in the UK, with an unprecedented
level of coverage on Channel 4. Meanwhile, FIDE organized a World Championship
match between Jan Timman (the defeated Candidates finalist) and former World
Champion Karpov (a defeated Candidates semifinalist), which Karpov won.

There were now two World Champions: PCA champion Kasparov, and FIDE champion
Karpov. The title would remain split for 13 years.

Kasparov defended his title in a 1995 match against Viswanathan Anand at the
World Trade Center in New York City. Kasparov won the match by four wins to
one, with thirteen draws. It was the last World Championship to be held under
the auspices of the PCA, which collapsed when Intel, one of its major backers,
withdrew its sponsorship.

Kasparov tried to organize another World Championship match, under another
organization, the World Chess Association (WCA) with Linares organizer Luis
Rentero. Alexei Shirov and Vladimir Kramnik played a candidates match to
decide the challenger, which Shirov won in a surprising upset. But when
Rentero admitted that the funds required and promised had never materialized,
the WCA collapsed.

This left Kasparov stranded, and yet another organization stepped in â
BrainGames.com, headed by Raymond Keene. No match against Shirov was arranged,
and talks with Anand collapsed, so a match was instead arranged against
Kramnik.

## [edit] Losing the title, and aftermath

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kasparov playing against Vladimir Kramnik in the Botvinnik Memorial match in
Moscow, 2001.

The Kasparov-Kramnik match took place in London during the latter half of
2000. Kramnik had been a student of Kasparov's at the legendary
Botvinnik/Kasparov chess school in Russia, and had served on Kasparov's team
for the 1995 match against Viswanathan Anand.

The better-prepared Kramnik won Game 2 against Kasparov's GrÃ¼nfeld Defence
and achieved winning positions in Games 4 and 6. Kasparov made a critical
error in Game 10 with the Nimzo-Indian Defence, which Kramnik exploited to win
in 25 moves. As white, Kasparov could not crack the passive but solid Berlin
Defence in the Ruy Lopez, and Kramnik successfully drew all his games as
black. Kramnik won the match 8.5â6.5, and for the first time in 15 years
Kasparov had no world championship title. He became the first player to lose a
world championship match without winning a game since Emanuel Lasker lost to
Capablanca in 1921.

After losing the title, Kasparov strung together a number of major tournament
victories, and remained the top rated player in the world, ahead of both
Kramnik and the FIDE World Champions. In 2001 he refused an invitation to the
2002 Dortmund Candidates Tournament for the Classical title, claiming his
results had earned him a rematch with Kramnik.[20]

Kasparov and Karpov played a four game match with rapid time controls over two
days in December 2002 in New York City. Karpov surprised the experts and
emerged victoriously, winning two games and drawing one.[21]

Due to Kasparov's continuing strong results, and status as world #1 in much of
the public eye, he was included in the so-called "Prague Agreement",
masterminded by Yasser Seirawan and intended to reunite the two World
Championships. Kasparov was to play a match against the FIDE World Champion
Ruslan Ponomariov in September 2003. But this match was called off after
Ponomariov refused to sign his contract for it without reservation. In its
place, there were plans for a match against Rustam Kasimdzhanov, winner of the
FIDE World Chess Championship 2004, to be held in January 2005 in the United
Arab Emirates. These also fell through due to lack of funding. Plans to hold
the match in Turkey instead came too late. Kasparov announced in January 2005
that he was tired of waiting for FIDE to organize a match and so had decided
to stop all efforts to regain the World Championship title.

## [edit] Retirement from chess

After winning the prestigious Linares tournament for the ninth time, Kasparov
announced on March 10, 2005 that he would retire from serious competitive
chess. He cited as the reason a lack of personal goals in the chess world (he
commented when winning the Russian championship in 2004 that it had been the
last major title he had never won outright) and expressed frustration at the
failure to reunify the world championship.

Kasparov said he may play in some rapid chess events for fun, but intends to
spend more time on his books, including both the My Great Predecessors series
(see below) and a work on the links between decision-making in chess and in
other areas of life, and will continue to involve himself in Russian politics,
which he views as "headed down the wrong path."

Kasparov has been married three times: to Masha, with whom he had a daughter
before divorcing; to Yulia, with whom he had a son before their 2005 divorce;
and to Daria, with whom he also has a child.[22][23]

### [edit] Post-retirement chess

On August 22, 2006, in his first public chess games since his retirement,
Kasparov played in the Lichthof Chess Champions Tournament, a blitz event
played at the time control of 5 minutes per side and 3 second increments per
move. Kasparov tied for first with Anatoly Karpov, scoring 4.5/6.[24]

## [edit] Politics

Kasparov joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) in 1984, and in
1987 was elected to the Central Committee of Komsomol. But in 1990 he left the
party, and in May took part in the creation of the Democratic Party of Russia.
In 1991, Kasparov received the Keeper of the Flame award from the Center for
Security Policy (a US think tank) for his contributions "to the defence of the
United States and American values around the world"[25] [26] [27][28] [29].
Kasparov was in June 1993 involved with the creation of the "Choice of Russia"
bloc of parties, and in 1996 took part in the election campaign of Boris
Yeltsin. In 2001 he voiced his support for the Russian television channel
NTV.[30]

After his retirement from chess in 2005, Kasparov turned to politics and
created the United Civil Front, a social movement whose main goal is to "work
to preserve electoral democracy in Russia."[31] He has vowed to "restore
democracy" to Russia by toppling the Russian president Vladimir Putin, of whom
he is an outspoken critic.[32][33][34]

Kasparov was instrumental in setting up The Other Russia, a coalition which
oppose Putin's government. The Other Russia has been boycotted by the leaders
of Russia's mainstream opposition parties, Yabloko and Union of Right Forces
as they are concerned about its inclusion of radical nationalist and left-wing
groups such as the National Bolshevik Party and former members of the Rodina
party including Viktor Gerashchenko, a potential presidential candidate. But
regional branches of Yabloko and the Union of Right Forces have opted to take
part in the coalition. Kasparov says that leaders of these parties are
controlled by the Kremlin,[35] despite the fact they are both strongly opposed
to the president's policies.

On April 10, 2005, Kasparov was in Moscow at a promotional event when he was
struck over the head with a chessboard he had just signed. The assailant was
reported to have said "I admired you as a chess player, but you gave that up
for politics" immediately before the attack.[36] Kasparov has been the subject
of a number of other episodes since.[37][38]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kasparov at the third Dissenters March in Saint Petersburg on 9 June 2007.

Kasparov helped organize the Saint Petersburg Dissenters' March on March 3,
2007 and The March of the Dissenters on March 24, 2007, both involving several
thousand people rallying against Putin and Saint Petersburg Governor Valentina
Matviyenko's policies.[39][40] On April 14, he was briefly arrested by the
Moscow police while heading for a demonstration, following warnings by the
prosecution office on the eve of the march, stating that anyone participating
risked being detained. He was held for some 10 hours, and then fined and
released.[41]

Due to his connection to ultranationalists and hard-left groups, he was
summoned by FSB for questioning as a suspect in violations of Russian anti-
extremism laws.[42] This law was previously applied for the conviction of
Boris Stomakhin[43][44]

Speaking about Kasparov, former KGB general Oleg Kalugin has remarked: "I do
not talk in detailsâpeople who knew them are all dead now because they were
vocal, they were open. I am quiet. There is only one man who is vocal, and he
may be in trouble: [former] world chess champion [Garry] Kasparov. He has been
very outspoken in his attacks on Putin, and I believe that he is probably next
on the list."[45]

On September 30, 2007, Kasparov entered the Russian Presidential race,
receiving 379 of 498 votes at a congress held in Moscow by The Other
Russia.[46]

In October 2007, Kasparov announced his intention of standing for the Russian
presidency as the candidate of the "Other Russia" coalition, and vowed to
fight for a "democratic and just Russia". Later that month he traveled to the
United States, where he appeared on several popular television programs, which
were hosted by Stephen Colbert, Wolf Blitzer, Bill Maher, and Chris Matthews.

On November 24, 2007, Kasparov and other protesters were detained by police at
an Other Russia rally in Moscow. This followed an attempt by about 100
protesters to break through police lines and march on the electoral
commission, which had barred Other Russia candidates from parliamentary
elections.[47] He was subsequently charged with resisting arrest and
organising an unauthorized protest, and given a jail sentence of five days. He
was released from jail on November 29.[48]

On December 12, 2007, Kasparov announced that he had to withdraw his
presidential candidacy due to inability to rent a meeting hall where at least
500 of his supporters could assemble to endorse his candidacy, as is legally
required. With the deadline expiring on that date, he claimed it was
impossible for him to run. Kasparov's spokeswoman accused the government of
using pressure to deter anyone from renting a hall for the gathering and said
that the electoral commission had rejected a proposal that separate smaller
gatherings be held at the same time instead of one large gathering at a
meeting hall.[49]

## [edit] Chess ratings achievements

  * Kasparov holds the record for the longest time as the #1 rated player.
  * Kasparov had the highest Elo rating in the world continuously from 1986 to 2005. However, Vladimir Kramnik did equal him in the January 1996 FIDE ratings list.[50] He was also briefly ejected from the list following his split from FIDE in 1993, but during that time he headed the rating list of the rival PCA. At the time of his retirement, he was still ranked #1 in the world, with a rating of 2812. His rating has fallen inactive since the January 2006 rating list.[51]
  * In January 1990 Kasparov achieved the (then) highest FIDE rating ever, passing 2800 and breaking Bobby Fischer's old record of 2785. He has held the record for the highest rating ever achieved, ever since (as of 2008). On the July 1999 and January 2000 FIDE rating lists Kasparov reached a 2851 Elo rating, the highest rating ever achieved.[52]

  * According to the unofficial Chessmetrics calculations, Kasparov was the highest rated player in the world continuously from February 1985 until October 2004.[53] He also holds the highest all-time average rating over a 2 (2877) to 20 (2856) year period and is second to only Bobby Fischer's (2881 vs 2879) over a one-year period.

## [edit] Olympiads and other major team events

Kasparov played in a total of eight Chess Olympiads. He represented the Soviet
Union four times, and Russia four times, following the breakup of the Soviet
Union in 1991. In his 1980 Olympiad debut, he became, at age 17, the youngest
player to represent the Soviet Union or Russia at that level, a record which
was broken by Vladimir Kramnik in 1992. In 82 games, he has scored (+50 =29
-3), for 78.7%, and won a total of 19 medals, including team gold medals all
eight times he competed. For the 1994 Moscow Olympiad, he had a significant
organizational role, in helping to put together the event on short notice,
after Thessaloniki canceled its offer to host, a few weeks before the
scheduled dates. Kasparov's detailed Olympiad record, from,[54] follows.

  * Valletta 1980, USSR 2nd reserve, 9.5/12 (+8 =3 -1), team gold, board bronze;
  * Lucerne 1982, USSR 2nd board, 8.5/11 (+6 =5 -0), team gold, board bronze;
  * Dubai 1986, USSR 1st board, 8.5/11 (+7 =3 -1), team gold, board gold, performance gold;
  * Thessaloniki 1988, USSR 1st board, 8.5/10 (+7 =3 -0), team gold, board gold, performance gold;
  * Manila 1992, Russia board 1, 8.5/10 (+7 =3 -0), team gold, board gold, performance silver;
  * Moscow 1994, Russia board 1, 6.5/10 (+4 =5 -1), team gold;
  * Yerevan 1996, Russia board 1, 7/9 (+5 =4 -0), team gold, board gold, performance silver;
  * Bled 2002, Russia board 1, 7.5/9 (+6 =3 -0), team gold, board gold.

Kasparov made his international teams debut for the USSR at age 16 in the 1980
European Team Championship, and played for Russia in the 1992 edition of that
championship. He won a total of five medals. His detailed Euroteams record,
from,[55] follows.

  * Skara 1980, USSR 2nd reserve, 5.5/6 (+5 =1 -0), team gold, board gold;
  * Debrecen 1992, Russia board 1, 6/8 (+4 =4 -0), team gold, board gold, performance silver.

Kasparov also represented the USSR once in Youth Olympiad competition, but the
detailed data is incomplete at http://www.olimpbase.org/1981k/1981in.html; the
site http://www.chessmetrics.com, the Garry Kasparov player file, has his
individual score from that event.

  * Graz 1981, USSR board 1, 9/10 (+8 =2 -0), team gold.

## [edit] Other records

Kasparov holds the record for most consecutive professional tournament
victories, placing first or equal first in 15 individual tournaments from 1981
to 1990.[citation needed] The streak was broken by Vasily Ivanchuk at Linares
1991, where Kasparov placed 2nd, half a point behind him. The details of this
record winning streak follow (from http://www.chessmetrics.com, the Garry
Kasparov player file).

  * Frunze 1981, USSR Championship, 12.5/17, 1st=;
  * Bugojno 1982, 9.5/13, 1st;
  * Moscow 1982, Interzonal, 10/13, 1st;
  * Niksic 1983, 11/14, 1st;
  * Brussels OHRA 1986, 7.5/10, 1st;
  * Brussels 1987, 8.5/11, 1st=;
  * Amsterdam Optiebeurs 1988, 9/12, 1st;
  * Belfort (World Cup) 1988, 11.5/15, 1st;
  * Moscow 1988, USSR Championship, 11.5/17, 1st=;
  * Reykjavik (World Cup) 1988, 11/17, 1st;
  * Barcelona (World Cup) 1989, 11/16, 1st=;
  * Skelleftea (World Cup) 1989, 9.5/15, 1st=;
  * Tilburg 1989, 12/14, 1st;
  * Belgrade (Investbank) 1989, 9.5/11, 1st;
  * Linares 1990, 8/11, 1st.

Kasparov won the Chess Oscar a record eleven times.

## [edit] Books and other writings

### [edit] Early writings

Kasparov has written a number of books on chess. He published a somewhat
controversial autobiography when still in his early 20s, originally titled
Child of Change, which was later retitled Unlimited Challenge. This book was
subsequently updated several times after he became World Champion. Its content
is mainly literary, with a small chess component of key unannotated games. He
published an annotated games collection in the 1980s: Fighting Chess: My Games
and Career, and this book has also been updated several times in further
editions. He wrote a book annotating the games from his World Chess
Championship 1985 victory.

He has annotated his own games extensively for the Yugoslav Chess Informant
series and for other chess publications. In 1982, he co-authored Batsford
Chess Openings with British Grandmaster Raymond Keene, and this book was an
enormous seller. It was updated into a second edition in 1989. He also co-
authored two opening books with his trainer Alexander Nikitin in the 1980s for
British publisher Batsford â on the Classical Variation of the Caro-Kann
Defence and on the Scheveningen Variation of the Sicilian Defence. Kasparov
has also contributed extensively to the five-volume openings series
Encyclopedia of Chess Openings.

### [edit] My Great Predecessors series

<IMG>

<IMG>

My Great Predecessors, part I

Main article: My Great Predecessors

In 2003, the first volume of his five-volume work Garry Kasparov on My Great
Predecessors was published. This volume, which deals with the world chess
champions Wilhelm Steinitz, Emanuel Lasker, JosÃ© RaÃºl Capablanca and
Alexander Alekhine, and some of their strong contemporaries, has received
lavish praise from some reviewers (including Nigel Short), while attracting
criticism from others for historical inaccuracies and analysis of games
directly copied from unattributed sources. Through suggestions on the book's
website, most of these shortcomings were corrected in following editions and
translations. Despite this, the first volume won the British Chess
Federation's Book of the Year award in 2003. Volume two, covering Max Euwe,
Mikhail Botvinnik, Vassily Smyslov and Mikhail Tal appeared later in 2003.
Volume three, covering Tigran Petrosian and Boris Spassky appeared in early
2004. In December 2004, Kasparov released volume four, which covers Samuel
Reshevsky, Miguel Najdorf, and Bent Larsen (none of these three were World
Champions), but focuses primarily on Bobby Fischer. The fifth volume, devoted
to the chess careers of World Champion Anatoly Karpov and challenger Viktor
Korchnoi, was published in March 2006.

### [edit] Modern Chess series

<IMG>

<IMG>

Modern Chess, part I

Main article: My Great Predecessors

His book Revolution in the 70s (published in March 2007) covers "the openings
revolution of the 1970sâ1980s" and is the first book in a new series called
"Modern Chess Series", which intends to cover his matches with Karpov and
selected games.

### [edit] Other post-retirement writing

In 2007 he wrote How Life Imitates Chess, an examination of the parallels
between decision-making in chess and in the business world.

In 2008 Kasparov published a sympathetic obituary for Bobby Fischer, writing
"I am often asked if I ever met or played Bobby Fischer. The answer is no, I
never had that opportunity. But even though he saw me as a member of the evil
chess establishment that he felt had robbed and cheated him, I am sorry I
never had a chance to thank him personally for what he did for our sport."[56]

He is the chief advisor for the book publisher Everyman Chess.

Kasparov works closely with Mig Greengard, and his comments can often be found
on Greengard's blog.

## [edit] Chess against computers

### [edit] Deep Thought, 1989

Kasparov easily defeated the chess computer Deep Thought in both games of a
two-game match in 1989 (Hsu 2002:105â16).

### [edit] Deep Blue, 1996

In February 1996, IBM's chess computer Deep Blue defeated Kasparov in one game
using normal time controls, in Deep Blue - Kasparov, 1996, Game 1. But
Kasparov recovered well, gaining three wins and two draws and easily winning
the match.

### [edit] Deep Blue, 1997

Main article: IBM Deep Blue

In May 1997, an updated version of Deep Blue defeated Kasparov 3Â½â2Â½ in a
highly publicised six-game match. The match was even after five games but
Kasparov was crushed in Game 6. This was the first time a computer had ever
defeated a world champion in match play. A documentary film was made about
this famous match-up entitled Game Over: Kasparov and the Machine.

Kasparov claimed that several factors weighed against him in this match. In
particular, he was denied access to Deep Blue's recent games, in contrast to
the computer's team that could study hundreds of Kasparov's.

After the loss Kasparov said that he sometimes saw deep intelligence and
creativity in the machine's moves, suggesting that during the second game,
human chess players, in contravention of the rules, intervened. IBM denied
that it cheated, saying the only human intervention occurred between games.
The rules provided for the developers to modify the program between games, an
opportunity they said they used to shore up weaknesses in the computer's play
revealed during the course of the match. Kasparov requested printouts of the
machine's log files but IBM refused, although the company later published the
logs on the Internet.[57] Kasparov demanded a rematch, but IBM declined and
retired Deep Blue.

### [edit] Deep Junior, 2003

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kasparov played with 3D glasses in his match against the program X3D Fritz.

In January 2003, he engaged in a six game classical time control match with a
$1 million prize fund which was billed as the FIDE "Man vs. Machine" World
Championship, against Deep Junior.[58] The engine evaluated three million
positions per second.[59] After one win each and three draws, it was all up to
the final game. After reaching a decent position Kasparov offered a draw,
which was soon accepted by the Deep Junior team. Asked why he offered the
draw, Kasparov said he feared making a blunder.[60] Originally planned as an
annual event, the match was not repeated.

### [edit] X3D Fritz, 2003

In November 2003, he engaged in a four-game match against the computer program
X3D Fritz, using a virtual board, 3D glasses and a speech recognition system.
After two draws and one win apiece, the X3D Man-Machine match ended in a draw.
Kasparov received $175,000 for the result and took home the golden trophy.
Kasparov continued to criticize the blunder in the second game that cost him a
crucial point. He felt that he had outplayed the machine overall and played
well. "I only made one mistake but unfortunately that one mistake lost the
game."[citation needed]

## [edit] Other

<IMG>

Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any
relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (August 2008)  
  * Kasparov has been credited with the invention of Advanced Chess in 1998, a new form of chess in which a human and a computer play together.
  * Kasparov has two European patent applications: EP1112765A4: METHOD FOR PLAYING A LOTTERY GAME AND SYSTEM FOR REALISING THE SAME from 1998, and EP0871132A1: METHOD OF PLAYING A LOTTERY GAME AND SUITABLE SYSTEM from 1995.
  * Kasparov is reported to be a supporter of Anatoly Fomenko's New Chronology.[61][62]
  * Kasparov gets co-credit for game design of Kasparov Chessmate, a computer chess program.
  * Kasparov is a member of the International Council of the New York-based Human Rights Foundation.
  * Kasparov won Marca Leyenda trophy in 1997.

## [edit] Books

  * Garry Kasparov on Modern Chess, Part 2: Kasparov vs Karpov 1975-1985, (2008, Everyman Chess)
  * Garry Kasparov on Modern Chess, Part 1: Revolution in the 70s, (2007, Everyman Chess)
  * How Life Imitates Chess, (2007, William Heinemann Ltd)
  * My Great Predecessors Part V (2006, Everyman Chess)
  * My Great Predecessors Part IV (2004, Everyman Chess)
  * My Great Predecessors Part III (2004, Everyman Chess)
  * Checkmate!: My First Chess Book (2004, Everyman Mindsports)
  * My Great Predecessors Part II (2003, Everyman Chess)
  * My Great Predecessors Part I (2003, Everyman Chess)
  * Lessons in Chess (1997, Everyman Chess)
  * Garry Kasparov's Chess Challenge (1996, Everyman Chess)
  * Kasparov on the King's Indian (1993, B.T. Batsford Ltd)
  * Kasparov Versus Karpov, 1990 (1991, Everyman Chess)
  * The Queen's Indian Defence: Kasparov System (1991, B.T. Batsford Ltd)
  * The Sicilian Scheveningen (1991, B.T. Batsford Ltd)
  * Unlimited Challenge (1990, Grove Pr)
  * London-Leningrad Championship Games (1987, Everyman Chess)
  * Child of Change: An Autobiography (1987, Hutchinson)
  * World Chess Championship Match: Moscow, 1985 (1986, Everyman Chess)
  * The Test of Time (Russian Chess), (1986, Pergamon Pr)

## [edit] See also

  * Kasparov versus the World
  * List of people who have beaten Garry Kasparov in chess
  * List of chess games between Kasparov and Kramnik
  * Committee 2008

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Biography on Kasparov.ru site (Russian)
  2. ^ See Methods for comparing top chess players throughout history article
  3. ^ Ruslan Ponomariov won the disputed FIDE title, at the age of 19, when the world title was split
  4. ^ "Who is the Strongest Chess Player?". Bill Wall. Chess.com. 2008-10-27. http://www.chess.com/article/view/who-is-the-strongest-chess-player. Retrieved on 2009-03-02.
  5. ^ Conor Sweeney, Chris Baldwin, Putin "heir" on course to win Russia election: poll \- "Widely regarded in the West as a symbol of opposition to Putin, Kasparov's support at home is slim and pollsters say he had no chance of winning."
  6. ^ Michael Stott, Reuters Russia votes for parliament, Putin triumph expected Calgary Herald - "But polls show few Russians support Kasparov or the marginal pro-Western parties under his banner."
  7. ^ White King and Red Queen by Daniel Johnson, ISBN 1-84-3546094
  8. ^ Unlimited Challenge, an autobiography by Garry Kasparov with Donald Trelford, ISBN 0-00-637358-5
  9. ^ Kasparov: The World's Chess Champion, by Anne Kressler, From Azerbaijan International (3.3) Autumn 1995. (Accessed March 31, 2008)
  10. ^ Hooper, David & Whyld, Kenneth (1996). Oxford Companion To Chess. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0192800493. OCLC 34618196.
  11. ^ Ham, Stephen (2005). "The Young King" (PDF). Chesscafe. http://www.chesscafe.com/text/review506.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  12. ^ "ICC Help: interview". Internet Chess Club. http://www.chessclub.com/help/interview. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  13. ^ http://www.chessmetrics.com, the Garry Kasparov player file
  14. ^ "World Chess Championship 1982â84 Candidates Matches". Mark Weeks' Chess Pages. http://www.mark-weeks.com/chess/8284$cix.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  15. ^ [1], Mark Weeks' Chess Pages
  16. ^ 1984 Karpov - Kasparov Title Match Highlights Mark Weeks' Chess Pages
  17. ^ "On top of the WTC, 1995". http://www.kasparovagent.com/images/image-10.jpg.
  18. ^ Nigel Short: Quest for the Crown, by Cathy Forbes
  19. ^ 'My decision to break away from fide was a mistake', DNA, 10 September 2007. Accessed 11 September 2007.
  20. ^ This Week in Chess (2001-09-06). BGN/Dortmund Event. Press release. http://www.chesscenter.com/twic/owenbrain.html. Retrieved on 2001-08-11.
  21. ^ Anatoly Karpov wins X3D Rapid Match, ChessBase News, 21 December 2002
  22. ^ Emma Cowing, "Kasparov makes his first political move on Putin", The Scotsman, July 13, 2006.
  23. ^ David Remnick, "The Tsarâs Opponent", The New Yorker, October 1, 2007.
  24. ^ "The Credit Suisse Blitz â in pictures". Chessbase. 2006-08-27. http://www.chessbase.com/newsdetail.asp?newsid=3310. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  25. ^ "Center for Security Policy Annual Report 2006" (PDF). 23. http://216.105.98.164/modules/newsmanager/inside%20the%20ctr%20images%20pdfs/AnnualReport2006.pdf#page=23. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  26. ^ "The Center's Role in National Security Policy". http://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/Home.aspx?SID=75. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  27. ^ "1991: Keeper of the Flame Award". Center for Security Policy. 2007-04-18. http://www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org/Modules/NewsManager/ShowSectionNews.aspx?CategoryID=62&SubCategoryID=63&NewsID=3445. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  28. ^ "ÐÐµÑÐ´Ð¾Ð±Ð½ÑÐµ Ð²Ð¾Ð¿ÑÐ¾ÑÑ" (in Russian). 2007-04-18. http://www.kasparov.ru/material.php?id=462668EB23D6F. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  29. ^ "Garry Kasparov takes aim at the power of Vladimir Putin.". New Yorker. 2007-10-01. http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2007/10/01/071001fa_fact_remnick?printable=true. Retrieved on 2007-10-22.
  30. ^ "ÐÐ°ÑÑÐ¸ ÐÐ°ÑÐ¿Ð°ÑÐ¾Ð²" (in Russian). http://www.kasparov.ru/note.php?id=44993207033D9. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  31. ^ "Russian Chess Legend Kasparov to Establish United Civil Front". MOSNEWS.com. 2005-05-18. http://www.mosnews.com/news/2005/05/18/kasparovfront.shtml.
  32. ^ "Kasparov leads St Petersburg dissenters' demonstration against". The Independent Sunday. 2007-06-10. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4159/is_20070610/ai_n19293367. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  33. ^ "Chess champ Kasparov's new gambit: politics". Chicago Sun-Times. 2005-03-12. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4155/is_20050312/ai_n13466947. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  34. ^ "Why Putin will stop at nothing to smash the new Russian revolution". The Spectator. 2007-04-21. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3724/is_20070421/ai_n19047082. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  35. ^ ""Non-partying system"". http://www.kasparov.ru/material.php?id=46B73D00E4AC1.
  36. ^ "Pictures of the Moscow assault". The Federal Post. Chessbase. 2005-04-22. http://www.chessbase.com/newsdetail.asp?newsid=2344. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  37. ^ "Kasparov manhandled by police at Moscow protest". The Moscow Times. Chessbase. 2005-05-16. http://www.chessbase.com/newsdetail.asp?newsid=2393. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  38. ^ "Breaking news: Kasparov assaulted again". Mosnewsm.com. Chessbase. 2005-06-30. http://www.chessbase.com/newsdetail.asp?newsid=2486. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  39. ^ "Anti-Kremlin protesters beaten by police". CNN. 2007-03-03. Archived from the original on 2007-08-11. http://web.archive.org/web/20070314235206/http://edition.cnn.com/2007/WORLD/europe/03/03/russia.protest.ap/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  40. ^ "Russian opposition demo quashed". BBC News. 2005-03-25. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/6492447.stm. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  41. ^ "Kasparov arrested at Moscow rally". BBC News. 2007-04-17. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/6554989.stm. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  42. ^ Buckley, neil (2007-04-18). "Russian intelligence to quiz Kasparov over "inciting extremism"". Financial Times. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/27e706a8-ed4a-11db-9520-000b5df10621.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  43. ^ UCSJ (2006-11-20). Jewish Activist Convicted in Russia. Press release. http://www.fsumonitor.com/stories/112006PR.shtml. Retrieved on 2001-08-11.
  44. ^ Chelysheva, Oksana (2007-04-18). "Statement from the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society following its forced closure". Front Line. http://www.frontlinedefenders.org/node/144. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  45. ^ Rivkin, Amanda (July 2007). "Seven Questions: A Little KGB Training Goes a Long Way". Foreign Policy. http://www.foreignpolicy.com/story/cms.php?story_id=3911. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  46. ^ "Kasparov Joins Russian Presidential Race". Associated Press. 2007-09-30. http://www.breitbart.com/article.php?id=D8RVTN2O0&show_article=1. Retrieved on 2007-09-30.
  47. ^ "Kasparov seized by Russian Police". BBC News. 2007-11-24. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7110910.stm. Retrieved on 2007-11-24.
  48. ^ Misha Japaridze (2007-11-28). "Kasparov released from Moscow jail". Associated Press. http://www.usatoday.com/news/world/2007-11-29-kasparov-released_N.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-28.
  49. ^ Andrew E. Kramer, "Kasparov Says He Was Forced to End Bid for Presidency", The New York Times, December 13, 2007.
  50. ^ "All Time rankings". http://chess.eusa.ed.ac.uk/Chess/Trivia/AlltimeList.html.
  51. ^ "FIDE Archive: Top 100 Players July 2005". World Chess Federation. 2007-04-18. http://www.fide.com/ratings/toparc.phtml?cod=81. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  52. ^ The Week in Chess 270, The Week in Chess, January 10, 2000.
  53. ^ "Summary 1985â2005". Chessmetrics. http://db.chessmetrics.com/CM2/Summary.asp?Params=198520SSSSS3S000000000000111000000000000010100. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  54. ^ "Kasparov, Garry". http://www.olimpbase.org/players/ssimw2af.html.
  55. ^ "Kasparov, Garry". http://www.olimpbase.org/playerse/ssimw2af.html.
  56. ^ The Chessman, TIME, 26 January 2008
  57. ^ Kasparov versus Deep Blue - Replay the Games, IBM Research Website
  58. ^ "Kasparov vs Deep Junior in January 2003". ChessBase. http://www.chessbase.com/newsdetail.asp?newsid=599. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  59. ^ "Kasparov: "Intuition versus the brute force of calculation"". CNN. 2003-02-10. http://www.cnn.com/2003/TECH/fun.games/02/08/cnna.kasparov/. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  60. ^ Shabazz, Damian. "Kasparov & Deep Junior fight 3-3 to draw!". The Chess Drum. http://www.thechessdrum.net/tournaments/Kasparov-DeepJr/. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  61. ^ "From Marcus Warren in Moscow". Daily Telegraph. June 14, 2001. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2001/04/24/wmar24.xml.
  62. ^ "Mathematics of the Past". http://www.new-tradition.org/view-garry-kasparov.htm.

## [edit] References

  * Hsu, Feng-hsiung (2002), Behind Deep Blue: Building the Computer that Defeated the World Chess Champion, Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-09065-3

## [edit] Further reading

  * Stohl, Igor (2005). Garry Kasparov's Greatest Chess Games, Volume 1. Gambit Publications. ISBN 1904600328.
  * Stohl, Igor (2006). Garry Kasparov's Greatest Chess Games, Volume 2. Gambit Publications. ISBN 1904600433.
  * Karolyi, Tibor; Aplin, Nick (2007). Kasparov's Fighting Chess 1993-1998. Batsford. ISBN 0713489944.
  * Karolyi, Tibor; Aplin, Nick (2007). Kasparov's Fighting Chess 1999-2005. Batsford. ISBN 9780-7134-8984-2.
  * Karolyi, Tibor; Aplin, Nick (2009). Kasparov: How His Predecessors Misled Him About Chess. Batsford. ISBN 9781906388263.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikinews has related news: Chess grand master Kasparov arrested
after protest  
  * FIDE rating card for Garry Kasparov
  * Garry Kasparov at ChessGames.com
  * The Other Russia, Civic Coalition for Democracy - Official site
  * (Russian) ÐÑÑÐ³Ð°Ñ Ð Ð¾ÑÑÐ¸Ñ - Official site
  * (Russian) Ð¡Ð°Ð¹Ñ Â«ÐÐ°ÑÑ Ð½ÐµÑÐ¾Ð³Ð»Ð°ÑÐ½ÑÑ Â» \- March of the Discontented
  * (Russian) ÐÑÐ¾Ð³Ð¾Ð²Ð¾Ðµ Ð·Ð°ÑÐ²Ð»ÐµÐ½Ð¸Ðµ ÑÑÐ°ÑÑÐ½Ð¸ÐºÐ¾Ð² ÐºÐ¾Ð½ÑÐµÑÐµÐ½ÑÐ¸Ð¸ Â«ÐÑÑÐ³Ð°Ñ Ð Ð¾ÑÑÐ¸ÑÂ» Concluding statement by the participants, www.kasparov.ru
  * United Civil Front, a civic political movement to ensure Democracy in the Russian Federation, initiated by Garry Kasparov
  * Garry Kasparov, "Man of the Year?", OpinionJournal, December 23, 2007
  * Edward Winter, List of Books About Fischer and Kasparov

Preceded by  
Anatoly Karpov FIDE World Chess Champion  
1985â1993 Succeeded by  
Anatoly Karpov  
Classical World Chess Champion  
1985â2000 Succeeded by  
Vladimir Kramnik  
Preceded by  
Peter Svidler Russian Chess Champion  
2004 Succeeded by  
Sergei Rublevsky  
v â¢ d â¢ e

World Chess Championships  
pre-FIDE

1886, 1889, 1891, 1892 (Steinitz) Â· 1894, 1897, 1907, 1908, 1910 (Jan-Feb),
1910 (Nov-Dec) (Lasker) Â· 1921 (Capablanca) Â· 1927, 1929, 1934 (Alekhine) Â·
1935 (Euwe) Â· 1937 (Alekhine)  
FIDE

1948, 1951, 1954 (Botvinnik) Â· 1957 (Smyslov) Â· 1958 (Botvinnik) Â· 1960
(Tal) Â· 1961 (Botvinnik)  Â· 1963, 1966 (Petrosian) Â· 1969 (Spassky) Â· 1972
(Fischer) Â· ~~1975~~ , 1978, 1981 (Karpov) Â· 1984-1985, 1986, 1987, 1990
(Kasparov)  
Split title

Classical

1993, 1995 (Kasparov) Â· 2000, 2004 (Kramnik)  
FIDE

1993, 1996, 1998 (Karpov) Â· 1999 (Khalifman) Â· 2000 (Anand) Â· 2002
(Ponomariov) Â· 2004 (Kasimdzhanov) Â· 2005 (Topalov)  
FIDE

2006 (Kramnik) Â· 2007, 2008 (Anand) Â· Future: 2009, 2011  
  

Persondata  
NAME Kasparov, Garry Kimovich  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES ÐÐ°ÑÐ¿Ð°ÑÐ¾Ð², ÐÐ°ÑÑÐ¸ ÐÐ¸Ð¼Ð¾Ð²Ð¸Ñ (Russian)  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Russian chess grandmaster and World Chess Champion.  
DATE OF BIRTH April 13, 1963  
PLACE OF BIRTH Baku, Azerbaijan SSR, Soviet Union  
DATE OF DEATH living  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garry_Kasparov"

Categories: 1963 births | Living people | World chess champions | World Junior
Chess Champions | Chess grandmasters | Armenian chess players | Azerbaijani
chess players | Russian chess players | Soviet chess players | Russian
Armenians | Ashkenazi Jews | Russian politicians | Soviet writers | Russian
writers | Russian chess writers | People from Baku | Communist Party of the
Soviet Union members

Hidden categories: Articles containing Armenian language text | Articles
containing Russian language text | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since August 2007 | Articles with unsourced
statements since August 2008 | Articles with trivia sections from August 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 16:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



