
# Edwin Hubble

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the politician, see Edwin N. Hubbell.

For the trombonist, see Eddie Hubble.

Edwin Hubble  
<IMG>  
  
Born November 20, 1889(1889-11-20)  
Marshfield, Missouri, U.S.  
Died September 28, 1953 (aged 63)  
San Marino, California  
  
Residence U.S.  
Nationality American  
Fields Astronomy  
Institutions University of Chicago  
Mount Wilson Observatory  
Alma mater University of Chicago  
Oxford University  
Known for Big Bang  
Hubble's law  
Redshift  
Hubble sequence  
Edwin Powell Hubble (November 20, 1889 â September 28, 1953) was an American
astronomer. He profoundly changed astronomers' understanding of the nature of
the universe by demonstrating the existence of other galaxies besides the
Milky Way. He also discovered that the degree of redshift observed in light
coming from a galaxy increased in proportion to the distance of that galaxy
from the Milky Way. This became known as Hubble's law, and would help
establish that the universe is expanding.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
  * 2 Discoveries
    * 2.1 The Universe goes beyond the Milky Way galaxy
    * 2.2 Redshift increases with distance
    * 2.3 Other discoveries
  * 3 Nobel Prize
  * 4 Honors
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

Edwin Hubble was born to an insurance executive in Marshfield, Missouri, and
moved to Wheaton, Illinois, in 1889. In his younger days he was noted more for
his athletic prowess than his intellectual abilities, although he did earn
good grades in every subject except for spelling. He won seven first places
and a third place in a single high school track & field meet in 1906. That
year he also set the state high school record for the high jump in Illinois.
Another of his personal interests was dry-fly fishing, and he practiced
amateur boxing as well[1].

His studies at the University of Chicago concentrated on mathematics,
astronomy, and philosophy, which led to a bachelor of science in 1910. Hubble
also became a member of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity, and in 1948 was named the
Kappa Sigma "Man of the Year". He spent the next three years as one of Oxford
University's first Rhodes Scholars, where he originally studied jurisprudence,
before switching his major to Spanish and earning his master's degree, after
which he returned to the United States. Some of his acquired British
mannerisms and dress stayed with him all his life, occasionally irritating his
American colleagues.

Upon returning to the United States, Hubble taught Spanish, physics, and
mathematics at the New Albany High School in New Albany, Indiana. He also
coached the boy's basketball team there. Hubble earned admission as a member
of the Kentucky bar association, although he reportedly never actually
practiced law in Kentucky.[2] Hubble served in the U.S. Army in World War I,
and he quickly advanced to the rank of major. He returned to astronomy at the
Yerkes Observatory of the University of Chicago, where he earned his Doctor of
Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree in 1917. His dissertation was titled Photographic
Investigations of Faint Nebulae.

In 1919, Hubble was offered a staff position in California by George Ellery
Hale, the founder and director of the Carnegie Institution's Mount Wilson
Observatory, near Pasadena, California, where he remained on the staff until
his death. Hubble also served in the U.S. Army at the Aberdeen Proving Ground
during World War II. For his work there he received the Legion of Merit award.
Shortly before his death, Mount Palomar's giant200-inch (5.1 m) reflector Hale
Telescope was completed, and Hubble was the first astronomer to use it. Hubble
continued his research at the Mount Wilson and Mount Palomar Observatories,
where he remained active until his death.

Hubble died of a cerebral thrombosis (a spontaneous blod clot in his brain) on
September 28, 1953, in San Marino, California. No funeral was held for him,
and his wife, Grace Hubble, did not reveal what happened to his body.[3]

## [edit] Discoveries

### [edit] The Universe goes beyond the Milky Way galaxy

Hubble's arrival at Mount Wilson in 1919 coincided roughly with the completion
of the 100-inch (2.5 m) Hooker Telescope, then the world's largest telescope.
At that time, the prevailing view of the cosmos was that the universe
consisted entirely of the Milky Way Galaxy. Using the Hooker Telescope at Mt.
Wilson, Hubble identified Cepheid variables (a kind of star; see also standard
candle) in several spiral nebulae, including the Andromeda Nebula. His
observations, made in 1922â1923, proved conclusively that these nebulae were
much too distant to be part of the Milky Way and were, in fact, entire
galaxies outside our own. This idea had been opposed by many in the astronomy
establishment of the time, in particular by the Harvard University-based
Harlow Shapley. Hubble's discovery, announced on January 1, 1925,
fundamentally changed the view of the universe.

Hubble also devised the most commonly used system for classifying galaxies,
grouping them according to their appearance in photographic images. He
arranged the different groups of galaxies in what became known as the Hubble
sequence.

### [edit] Redshift increases with distance

<IMG>

<IMG>

The 100-inch (2.5 m) Hooker telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory that Hubble
used to measure galaxy redshifts and a value for the rate of expansion of the
universe.

Hubble was generally incorrectly credited with discovering[4] the redshift of
galaxies. These measurements and their significance were understood before
1918 by James Edward Keeler (Lick & Allegheny), Vesto Melvin Slipher (Lowell),
and Professor William Wallace Campbell (Lick) at other observatories.
Combining his own measurements of galaxy distances with Vesto Slipher's
measurements of the redshifts associated with the galaxies, Hubble and Milton
L. Humason discovered a rough proportionality of the objects' distances with
their redshifts. Though there was considerable scatter (now known to be due to
peculiar velocities), Hubble and Humason were able to plot a trend line from
the 46 galaxies they studied and obtained a value for the Hubble-Humason
constant of 500 km/s/Mpc, which is much higher than the currently accepted
value due to errors in their distance calibrations.[5] In 1929 Hubble and
Humason formulated the empirical Redshift Distance Law of galaxies, nowadays
termed simply Hubble's law, which, if the redshift is interpreted as a measure
of recession speed, is consistent with the solutions of Einsteinâs equations
of general relativity for a homogeneous, isotropic expanding space. Although
concepts underlying an expanding universe were well understood earlier, this
statement by Hubble and Humason led to wider scale acceptance for this view.
The law states that the greater the distance between any two galaxies, the
greater their relative speed of separation.

This discovery was the first observational support for the Big Bang theory
which had been proposed by Alexander Friedmann in 1922. The observed
velocities of distant galaxies, taken together with the cosmological principle
appeared to show that the Universe was expanding in a manner consistent with
the Friedmann-LemaÃ®tre model of general relativity. In 1931 Hubble wrote a
letter to the Dutch cosmologist Willem De Sitter expressing his opinion on the
theoretical interpretation of the redshift-distance relation:[6]

    "... we use the term 'apparent velocities' in order to emphasize the empirical feature of the correlation. The interpretation, we feel, should be left to you and the very few others who are competent to discuss the matter with authority."
Today, the 'apparent velocities' in question are understood as an increase in
proper distance that occurs due to the expansion of space. Light traveling
through stretching space will experience a Hubble-type redshift, a mechanism
different from the Doppler effect (although the two mechanisms become
equivalent descriptions related by a coordinate transformation for nearby
galaxies).

In the 1930s Hubble was involved in determining the distribution of galaxies
and spatial curvature. These data seemed to indicate that the universe was
flat and homogeneous, but there was a deviation from flatness at large
redshifts. According to Allan Sandage,

    "Hubble believed that his count data gave a more reasonable result concerning spatial curvature if the redshift correction was made assuming no recession. To the very end of his writings he maintained this position, favouring (or at the very least keeping open) the model where no true expansion exists, and therefore that the redshift "represents a hitherto unrecognized principle of nature."[7]
There were methodological problems with Hubble's survey technique that showed
a deviation from flatness at large redshifts. In particular the technique did
not account for changes in luminosity of galaxies due to galaxy evolution.

Earlier, in 1917, Albert Einstein had found that his newly developed theory of
general relativity indicated that the universe must be either expanding or
contracting. Unable to believe what his own equations were telling him,
Einstein introduced a cosmological constant (a "fudge factor") to the
equations to avoid this "problem". When Einstein heard of Hubble's discovery,
he said that changing his equations was "the biggest blunder of [his]
life".[8]

### [edit] Other discoveries

Hubble discovered the asteroid 1373 Cincinnati on August 30, 1935. He also
wrote The Observational Approach to Cosmology and The Realm of the Nebulae
around this time.

## [edit] Nobel Prize

Hubble spent much of the later part of his career attempting to have astronomy
considered an area of physics, instead of being its own science. He did this
largely so that astronomers - including himself - could be recognized by the
Nobel Prize Committee for their valuable contributions to astrophysics. This
campaign was unsuccessful in Hubble's lifetime, but shortly after his death
the Nobel Prize Committee decided that astronomical work would be eligible for
the physics prize.[9]

On March 6, 2008, the United States Postal Service released a 41 cent stamp
honoring Hubble on a sheet titled "American Scientists." His citation reads:
'Often called a "pioneer of the distant stars," astronomer Edwin Hubble
(1889-1953) played a pivotal role in deciphering the vast and complex nature
of the universe. His meticulous studies of spiral nebulae proved the existence
of galaxies other than our own Milky Way. Had he not died suddenly in 1953,
Hubble would have won that year's Nobel Prize in Physics.' The other
scientists on the "American Scientists" sheet include Gerty Cori, biochemist;
Linus Pauling, chemist; and John Bardeen, physicist.

## [edit] Honors

Awards

  * Bruce Medal in 1938.
  * Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1940.
  * Medal of Merit for outstanding contribution to ballistics research in 1946.

Named after him

  * Asteroid 2069 Hubble.
  * The crater Hubble on the Moon.
  * Orbiting Hubble Space Telescope.
  * Edwin P. Hubble Planetarium, located in the Edward R. Murrow High School, Brooklyn, NY.
  * Edwin Hubble Highway, the stretch of Interstate 44 passing through his birthplace of Marshfield, Missouri
  * The Edwin P. Hubble Medal of Initiative is awarded annually by the city of Marshfield, Missouri \- Hubble's birthplace
  * Hubble Middle School in Wheaton, Illinoisârenamed for Edwin Hubble when Wheaton Central High School was converted to a middle school in the fall of 1992.
  * 2008 "American Scientists" US stamp series, $0.41

## [edit] See also

  * Galaxies
    * Hubble sequence
    * Galaxy morphological classification
    * Gerard de Vaucouleurs
    * William Wilson Morgan
  * Expansion of the universe
    * Big bang
    * Albert Einstein
    * General relativity
    * Hubble's law
    * Hubble constant
  * Hubble Space Telescope
  * Cosmic distance ladder
  * Edwin Hubble House, residence and [National Historic Landmark] in [San Marino, California]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ World of Physics and The Cloudy Night Book
  2. ^ Who Was Edwin Hubble?
  3. ^ A Short History of Nearly Everything, Bill Bryson
  4. ^ This had actually been observed by Vesto Slipher in the 1910s, but the world was largely unaware. Ref: Slipher (1917): Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc., 56, 403.
  5. ^ Distance determination in astronomy continues to be an active area of research, see the article on cosmic distance ladder for more details.
  6. ^ Galaxy redshifts reconsidered - The Astronomy Cafe, Dr. Sten Odenwald
  7. ^ EDWIN HUBBLE 1889-1953 By Allan Sandage (1989, JRASC Vol. 83, No.6)
  8. ^ Cosmological Constant from Stephen Hawking's Universe on PBS
  9. ^ Astroprof's article on Hubble

## [edit] References

  * Christianson, Gale; Edwin Hubble: Mariner of the Nebulae Farrar Straus & Giroux (T) (New York, August 1995.)
  * Hubble E.P., The Observational Approach to Cosmology (Oxford, 1937.)
  * Hubble E.P., The Realm of the Nebulae (New Haven, 1936.)
  * Hubble, Edwin (1929). "A relation between distance and radial velocity among extra-galactic nebulae". PNAS 15 (3): 168â173. doi:10.1073/pnas.15.3.168. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/reprint/15/3/168.
  * BIOGRAPHICAL MEMOIRS NAS 41 by N.U. Mayall
  * Osterbrock, Donald E.; Joel A. Gwinn and Ronald S. Brashear (July 1993). "Edwin Hubble and the Expanding Universe". Scientific American 269 (1): 84â89.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Edwin Powell Hubble  
  * Time 100 Profile
  * Astronomy at the University of Louisville \- Photographs of Edwin Hubble at New Albany High School.
  * Edwin Hubble bio \- Written by Allan Sandage
  * O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Edwin Hubble", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive
  * American Physical Society's Hubble Bio
  * Edwin Powell Hubble - The man who discovered the cosmos
  * Astroprof's article on Hubble

Persondata  
NAME Hubble, Edwin Powell  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION American astronomer  
DATE OF BIRTH 20 November 1889(1889-11-20)  
PLACE OF BIRTH Marshfield, Missouri  
DATE OF DEATH 28 September 1953  
PLACE OF DEATH San Marino, California  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edwin_Hubble"

Categories: 1889 births | 1953 deaths | American astronomers | 20th-century
astronomers | Asteroid discoverers | Cosmologists | People from Louisville,
Kentucky | American Rhodes scholars | University of Chicago alumni | People
from Wheaton, Illinois | People from Missouri | Deaths from stroke

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 06:41.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



