
# Thomas More

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the Elizabethan play, see Sir Thomas More (play).

For educational institutions, see Thomas More College and St. Thomas More
School.

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2007)  
Saint Thomas More  
<IMG>

  
Portrait by Hans Holbein the Younger (1527).  
Martyr  
Born 7 February 1478, London, England  
Died 6 July 1535 (aged 57), London, England  
Venerated in Roman Catholic Church, Anglican Communion  
Beatified 1886, Rome by Pope Leo XIII  
Canonized 1935, Rome by Pope Pius XI  
Feast 22 June (Roman Catholic Church)  
6 July (on some local calendars and among Traditional Roman Catholics and the
Anglican Communion)  
Attributes Axe; dressed in a Chancellor's robe with a neck chain of office  
Patronage Adopted children, Arlington, Virginia, civil servants, court clerks,
difficult marriages, large families, Pensacola-Tallahassee, Florida, lawyers,
politicians and statesmen, stepparents, widowers, Ateneo de Manila Law School,
University of Malta, University of Santo Tomas Faculty of Arts and Letters  
Sir Thomas More also known as Saint Thomas More (in Latin, Sanctus Thomas
Morus; 7 February 1478 â 6 July 1535) was an English lawyer, author, and
statesman who in his lifetime gained a reputation as a leading Renaissance
humanist scholar, and occupied many public offices, including Lord Chancellor
(1529â1532). More coined the word "utopia", a name he gave to an ideal,
imaginary island nation whose political system he described in the eponymous
book published in 1516. He was beheaded in 1535 when he refused to sign the
Act of Supremacy that declared King Henry VIII Supreme Head of the Church of
England.

In 1935, four hundred years after his death, Pope Pius XI canonized More in
the Roman Catholic Church; More was declared Patron Saint of politicians and
statesmen by Pope John Paul II in 1980. In 1969, More's name was included in
the General Roman Calendar, with a Memorial in which he is venerated with
Saint John Fisher on 22 June, the day of the latter's death. In 1980, More was
added to the Church of England's calendar of saints, again jointly with John
Fisher, but on July 6, the day of More's death.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Early political career
  * 3 Scholarly and literary work
    * 3.1 History of King Richard III
    * 3.2 Utopia
    * 3.3 Religious polemics
  * 4 Chancellorship
    * 4.1 Campaign against Protestantism
    * 4.2 Resignation
  * 5 Trial and execution
  * 6 Canonization
  * 7 Influence and reputation
  * 8 Literary echoes and evaluations
  * 9 Institutions named after Thomas More
  * 10 Historic sites
  * 11 See also
  * 12 Notes
  * 13 Biographies
  * 14 External links

  
## [edit] Early life

<IMG>

<IMG>

Study for a portrait of Thomas More's family, c. 1527 by Hans Holbein the
Younger. {IDs of Thomas More family can be found here at [[2]]}.

Born in Milk Street, London, Thomas More was the eldest son of Sir John More,
a successful lawyer who served as a judge in the King's Bench court. The
younger More was educated at St Anthony's School and was later (1491) a page
in the household service of John Morton, the Archbishop of Canterbury, who
declared that young Thomas would become a "marvellous man". Morton sent More
to attend the University of Oxford for two years as a member of Canterbury
Hall (subsequently absorbed by Christ Church), where he was a friend of
Erasmus, John Colet, and William Lilye. A pupil of Thomas Linacre and William
Grocyn, More studied Latin and logic. He then returned to London, where he
studied law with his father and was called to the bar. Admitted to Lincoln's
Inn in 1496, in 1501 More became a barrister, where he was eminently
successful.

To his father's great displeasure, More seriously contemplated abandoning his
legal career in order to become a monk. From 1499 to 1503 he lodged at the
London Charterhouse, subjected himself to the discipline of a Carthusian monk,
and also considered joining the Franciscan order. He abandoned the order,
however, perhaps because he judged himself incapable of celibacy. More finally
decided to marry in 1505, but for the rest of his life he continued to observe
many ascetical practices, including self-punishment: he wore a hair shirt
every day and occasionally engaged in flagellation.

After becoming a Member of Parliament in 1504, More successfully opposed Henry
VII's demand for monetary aid upon the marriage of then-Princess Margaret
Tudor.

More had four children by his first wife, Jane Colt, who died in 1511. He
remarried almost immediately, to a rich widow named Alice Middleton who was
several years his senior. More and Alice Middleton did not have children
together, though More raised Alice's daughter, from her previous marriage, as
his own. More provided his daughters with an excellent classical education, at
a time when such learning was usually reserved for men.

He wrote poetry in Latin and English.

## [edit] Early political career

From 1510 to 1518, More served as one of the two undersheriffs of the city of
London, a position of considerable responsibility in which he earned a
reputation as an honest and effective public servant, impressing the king by
his arguments in a noted Star Chamber case. More became Master of Requests in
1514; in 1517, entered the king's service as counsellor and "personal
servant"; and became privy councilor in 1518. At the Field of Cloth of Gold,
he met Greek scholar Guillaume BudÃ© (Budaeus). After undertaking a diplomatic
mission to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, accompanying Thomas Wolsey to Calais
and Bruges, More was knighted and made undertreasurer in 1521. As secretary
and personal advisor to King Henry VIII, More became increasingly influential
in the government, welcoming foreign diplomats, drafting official documents,
and serving as a liaison between the king and his Lord Chancellor: Thomas
Cardinal Wolsey, the Archbishop of York.

Recommended by Wolsey, in 1523 More was elected the Speaker of the House of
Commons. He later served as high steward for the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge. In 1525 he became chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, a position
that entailed administrative and judicial control of much of northern England.

## [edit] Scholarly and literary work

<IMG>

<IMG>

Woodcut by Ambrosius Holbein for a 1518 edition of Utopia. The traveler
Raphael Hythloday is depicted in the lower left-hand corner describing to a
listener the island of Utopia, whose layout is schematically shown above him.

More was a prolific scholar, literary man, critic, and patron of the arts. His
writing and scholarship earned him great reputation as a Christian Renaissance
humanist in continental Europe, and his friend Erasmus of Rotterdam dedicated
to him the masterpiece, In Praise of Folly or "Moriae Encomium" (the book's
title puns More's name; "moria" is folly in Greek). In his communications with
other humanists, Erasmus described More as a model Man of Letters. The
humanistic project embraced by Erasmus and More sought reexamination and
revitalization of Christian theology by studying the Bible and the writings of
the Church Fathers in light of classical Greek literary and philosophic
tradition. More and Erasmus collaborated on a Latin translation of the works
of Lucian, published in Paris in 1506. More was also the author of Life of
John Picus, Earl of Mirandula (1510), showing his humanistic ideals.

### [edit] History of King Richard III

Between 1513 and 1518, More worked on a History of King Richard III, an
unfinished work, based on Sir Robert Honorr's Tragic Deunfall of Richard III,
Suvereign of Britain (1485),[citation needed] which also greatly influenced
William Shakespeare's play Richard III. Both More's and Shakespeare's works
are controversial to contemporary historians for their unflattering portrait
of King Richard III, a bias partly due to both authors' allegiance to the
reigning Tudor dynasty that wrested the throne from Richard III with the Wars
of the Roses. More's work, however, little mentions King Henry VII, the first
Tudor king, perhaps for having persecuted his father, Sir John More. Some
historians see an attack on royal tyranny, rather than on Richard III,
himself, or on the House of York.

The History of King Richard III is a Renaissance history, remarkable more for
its literary skill and adherence to classical precepts than for its historical
accuracy. More's work, and that of contemporary historian Polydore Vergil,
reflects a move from mundane medieval chronicles to a dramatic writing style;
for example, the shadowy King Richard is an outstanding, archetypal tyrant
drawn from the pages of Sallust, and should be read as a meditation on power
and corruption as well as a history of the reign of Richard III. The 'History
of King Richard III was written and published in both English and Latin, each
written separately, and with information deleted from the Latin edition to
suit a European readership.

### [edit] Utopia

Main article: Utopia (book)

More sketched out his most well-known and controversial work, Utopia
(completed and published in 1516), a novel in Latin. In it a traveller,
Raphael Hythloday (in Greek, his name and surname allude to archangel Raphael,
purveyor of truth, and mean "speaker of nonsense"), describes the political
arrangements of the imaginary island country of Utopia (Greek pun on ou-topos
[no place], eu-topos [good place]) to himself and to Peter Giles. This novel
describes the city of Amaurote by saying, "Of them all this is the worthiest
and of most dignity".

Utopia contrasts the contentious social life of European states with the
perfectly orderly, reasonable social arrangements of Utopia and its environs
(Tallstoria, Nolandia, and Aircastle). In Utopia, with communal ownership of
land, private property does not exist, men and women are educated alike, and
there is almost complete religious toleration. Some take the novel's principal
message to be the social need for order and discipline, rather than liberty.
The country of Utopia tolerates different religious practices, but does not
tolerate atheists. Hythloday theorizes that if a man did not believe in a god
or in an afterlife he could never be trusted, because, logically, he would not
acknowledge any authority or principle outside himself.

Others read the novel as ultimately a critique of those who, while dreaming of
perfect commonwealths in some imagined future or present (like Hythloday),
exempt themselves from responsibility to serve and seek to better their own
less perfect societies (also like Hythloday). More's life choices show his
ultimate rejection of this Utopian attitude of his fictional interlocutor, who
may personify More's reservations about engaging in the morally complex,
dangerous, and flawed world of the Court.

More used the novel describing an imaginary nation as a means of freely
discussing contemporary controversial matters; speculatively, More based
Utopia on monastic communalism, based upon the Biblical communalism in the
Acts of the Apostles.

Utopia is a forerunner of the utopian literary genre, wherein ideal societies
and perfect cities are detailed. Although Utopianism is typically a
Renaissance movement, combining the classical concepts of perfect societies of
Plato and Aristotle with Roman rhetorical finesse (cf. Cicero, Quintilian,
epideictic oratory), it continued into the Enlightenment. Utopia's original
edition included the symmetrical "Utopian alphabet" that was omitted from
later editions; it is a notable, early attempt at cryptography that might have
influenced the development of shorthand.

### [edit] Religious polemics

More greatly valued harmony and a strict hierarchy. The greatest danger to the
health of the society as he saw it was the challenge that heretics posed to
the established faith. For More the unity of Christendom was not only the
instrument for the eternal salvation of souls, but also the basis of a common
understanding of human nature necessary for just law and earthly happiness. To
his mind, the fragmentation and discord of the Lutheran Reformation were
dreadful.

His personal counter-attack began in the manner expected from a writer. He
assisted Henry VIII with writing the Defence of the Seven Sacraments
(1521)[citation needed], a polemic response to Martin Luther's On the
Babylonian Captivity of the Church. When Luther replied with measures of
reform in Contra Henricum Regem Anglie (Against Henry, King of the English),
More appeared as a champion of the king, tasked with writing a counter-
response, Responsio ad Lutherum (Reply to Luther). This violent exchange had
many intemperate personal insults on either side. At times More's language and
techniques could become very down-to-earth, even scatalogical; C. S. Lewis
describes More as "almost obsessed with harping on about Luther's 'abominal
bichery' to the point where he loses himself in a wilderness of opprobrious
adjectives".[1] However, "More did not rely solely on ridicule and satire ....
He also appealed to the common sense of his hearty fellow Englishmen. As the
title of his book indicates his attempt was not simply to ridicule Luther's
absurd and presumptuous railings; it was more basically to confront and refute
Luther's accusations."[2]

It should be kept in mind, moreover, that Luther was himself a master of
"opprobrious adjectives" and that neither he nor More were averse to using
strong and even shocking scatological language in their polemics â when they
deemed it suited their purposes. More, for example, who had been commissioned
by Henry VIII to respond in kind to insults that it did not befit a monarch to
engage in, near the beginning of chapter 21 in the first book of the
Responsio, quotes from Luther's book Against Henry:

â [The king] would have to be forgiven if humanly he erred. Now, since he
knowingly and conscientiously fabricates lies against the majesty of my king
in heaven [Christ], this damnable rottenness and worm, I will have the right,
on behalf of my king, to bespatter his English majesty with muck and shit and
to trample underfoot that crown of his which blasphemes against Christ.[3] â  
More responded thus:

â Come, do not rage so violently, good father; but if you have raved wildly
enough, listen now, you pimp. You recall that you falsely complained above
that the king has shown no passage in your whole book, even as an example, in
which he said that you contradict yourself. You told this lie shortly before,
although the king has demonstrated to you many examples of your inconsistency
....

But meanwhile, for as long as your reverend paternity will be determined to
tell these shameless lies, others will be permitted, on behalf of his English
majesty, to throw back into your paternity's shitty mouth, truly the shit-pool
of all shit, all the muck and shit which your damnable rottenness has vomited
up, and to empty out all the sewers and privies onto your crown divested of
the dignity of the priestly crown, against which no less than against the
kingly crown you have determined to play the buffoon.

In your sense of fairness, honest reader, you will forgive me that the utterly
filthy words of this scoundrel have forced me to answer such things, for which
I should have begged your leave. Now I consider truer than truth that saying:
'He who touches pitch will be wholly defiled by it' (Sirach 13:1). For I am
ashamed even of this necessity, that while I clean out the fellow's shit-
filled mouth I see my own fingers covered with shit.

But who can endure such a scoundrel who shows himself possessed by a thousand
vices and tormented by a legion of demons, and yet stupidly boasts thus: 'The
holy fathers have all erred. The whole church has often erred. My teaching
cannot err, because I am most certain that my teaching is not my own but
Christ's,' alluding of course to those words of Christ, 'My words are not my
own but His who sent me, the Father's' (John 12:49)?[4]

â  
It is evident that, beyond his overwhelming invective, More seeks to
demonstrate the audacity of Luther's claim that his own teaching is more
authoritative than hundreds of years of thoughtful dialogue, such authority as
among Christians is generally given only to the words of Christ himself.
Later, in the second book of the Responsio (ch. 27, last chapter), More again
feels compelled to respond to Luther in language most unseemly:

â [Luther is a] person in whose pen there is nothing but calumnies, lies and
deceptions; in whose spirit there is nothing but venom, bombast and ill will;
who conceives nothing in his mind but folly, madness, and insanity; who has
nothing in his mouth but privies, filth and dung .... But if he proceeds to
play the buffoon in the manner in which he has begun, and to rave madly, if he
proceeds to rage with calumny, to mouth trifling nonsense, to act like a
raging madman, to make sport with buffoonery, and to carry nothing in his
mouth but bilge-water, sewers, privies, filth and dung, then let others do
what they will; we will take timely counsel, whether we wish to deal with the
fellow thus ranting according to his virtue and to paint with his colors, or
to leave this mad friarlet and privy-minded rascal with is ragings and
ravings, with his filth and dung, shitting and beshitted.[5] â  
(Numerous examples of Luther's own use of scatological language, particularly
against the Pope and the bishops, may be found in The Table-Talk and the First
Notes of the Same.)[6]

In 1528, More directed his first book of English controversy (Dialogue)
against the writings of Tyndale.

## [edit] Chancellorship

After Wolsey fell, he was succeeded as lord chancellor by More in 1529.
Against his own will, More became the first layman to hold the office. He
dispatched cases with unprecedented rapidity. At that point fully devoted to
Henry and to the cause of royal prerogative, More initially cooperated with
the king's new policy, denouncing Wolsey in Parliament and proclaiming the
opinion of the theologians at Oxford and Cambridge that the marriage of Henry
to Catherine had been unlawful. But as Henry began to deny the authority of
the Pope, More's qualms grew.

### [edit] Campaign against Protestantism

More supported the Catholic Church and saw heresy as a threat to the unity of
both church and society. "He agreed with established English law, and with the
lessons taught by the thousand-year experience of Christendom, that in order
for peace to reign, heresy must be controlled. At the time, heresies were
identified as seditious attempts to undermine existing authority .... More
heard Luther's call to destroy the heart of Christendom, the Catholic Church,
as a call to war. He therefore followed traditional procedures to insure the
safety of this legitimate and time-honored institution."[7] However, More also
sought radical clergy reform and more rational theology.

His early actions against the Protestants included aiding Wolsey in preventing
Lutheran books from being imported into England. He also assisted in the
production of a Star Chamber edict against heretical preaching, treating
heretics mercilessly. During this time most of his literary polemics appeared.
After becoming Lord Chancellor of England, More set himself the following
task:

â Now seeing that the king's gracious purpose in this point, I reckon that
being his unworthy chancellor, it appertaineth ... to help as much as in me
is, that his people, abandoning the contagion of all such pestilent writing,
may be far from infection. â  
<IMG>

<IMG>

More is commemorated with a sculpture at the late 19th-century Sir Thomas More
Chambers, opposite the Royal Courts of Justice, Carey Street, London.

In June 1530 it was decreed that offenders were to be brought before the
King's Council, rather than being examined by their bishops, the practice
hitherto. Actions taken by the Council became ever more severe. In 1531,
Richard Bayfield, a graduate of the University of Cambridge and former
Benedictine monk, was burned at Smithfield for distributing copies of the New
Testament.[8]

Further burnings followed at More's instigation, including that of the priest
and writer John Frith in 1533. In The Confutation of Tyndale's Answer, yet
another polemic, More took particular interest[citation needed] in the
execution of Sir Thomas Hitton, describing him as "the devil's stinking
martyr".[9]

Rumors circulated during and after More's lifetime concerning his treatment of
heretics; John Foxe (who "placed Protestant sufferings against the background
of ... the Antichrist")[10] in his Book of Martyrs claimed that More had often
used violence or torture while interrogating them. A more recent Evangelical
author, Michael Farris[who?], also used Foxe's book as a reference in writing
that in April 1529 a heretic, John Tewkesbury, was taken by More to his house
in Chelsea and so badly tortured on the rack that he was almost unable to
walk. Tewkesbury was subsequently burned at the stake.[11] More himself
refuted these charges throughout his life, swearing 'as helpe me God' that he
had never used torture as a method of interrogation. He was not a man falsely
to invoke the deity and it can be believed that the heretics he detained in
his household suffered 'neuer ... so much as a fyllyppe on the forehead'."
[12]

### [edit] Resignation

In 1530 More refused to sign a letter by the leading English churchmen and
aristocrats asking the Pope to annul Henry's marriage to Catherine; he also
quarrelled with Henry VIII over the heresy laws. In 1531 he attempted to
resign after being forced to take an oath declaring the king the Supreme Head
of the English Church "as far as the law of Christ allows"; he refused to take
the oath in the form in which it would renounce all claims of jurisdiction
over the church except the sovereign's. In 1532 he asked the king again to
relieve him of his office, claiming that he was ill and suffering from sharp
chest pains. This time Henry granted his request.[citation needed]

## [edit] Trial and execution

The last straw for Henry came in 1533, when More refused to attend the
coronation of Anne Boleyn as the Queen of England. Technically, this was not
an act of treason as More had written to Henry acknowledging Anne's queenship
and expressing his desire for the king's happiness and the new queen's
health.[13] His refusal to attend was widely interpreted as a snub against
Anne. There is no documented record of her reaction to this, but it would have
been out of character for her to accept it passively.

Shortly thereafter More was charged with accepting bribes, but the patently
false charges had to be dismissed for lack of any evidence. In 1534, More was
charged with high treason, accused of conspiring with "holy maid of Kent"
Elizabeth Barton, a nun who had prophesied against the king's divorce, but he
was able to produce a letter in which he had instructed Barton not to
interfere with state matters.

On April 13, 1534, More was asked to appear before a commission and swear his
allegiance to the parliamentary Act of Succession. More accepted Parliament's
right to declare Anne the legitimate queen of England, but he steadfastly
refused to take the oath because of an anti-papal preface to the Act asserting
Parliament's authority to legislate in matters of religion by impugning the
authority of the Pope, which More would not accept; he also would not swear to
uphold Henry's divorce from Catherine. John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester,
refused the oath along with More. The oath reads:

> .... by reason whereof the Bishop of Rome and See Apostolic, contrary to the
great and inviolable grants of jurisdictions given by God immediately to
emperors, kings and princes, in succession to their heirs, has presumed, in
times past, to invest who should please them, to inherit in other men's
kingdoms and dominions, which thing we, your most humble subjects, both
spiritual and temporal, do utterly abhor and detest;[citation needed]

Four days later More was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he prepared
a devotional, Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation.

On July 1 1535, More was tried before a panel of judges that included the new
Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Audley, as well as Anne Boleyn's father, brother,
and uncle. He was charged with high treason for denying the validity of the
Act of Succession. More believed he could not be convicted as long as he did
not explicitly deny that the king was the head of the church, and he therefore
refused to answer all questions regarding his opinions on the subject. Thomas
Cromwell, at the time the most powerful of the king's advisors, brought forth
the Solicitor General, Richard Rich, to testify that More had, in his
presence, denied that the king was the legitimate head of the church. This
testimony was almost certainly perjured (witnesses Richard Southwell and Mr.
Palmer both denied having heard the details of the reported conversation), but
on the strength of it the jury voted for More's conviction.

More was tried, and found guilty, under the following section of the Treason
Act 1534.

> If any person or persons, after the first day of February next coming, do
maliciously wish, will or desire, by words or writing, or by craft imagine,
invent, practise, or attempt any bodily harm to be done or committed to the
king's most royal person, the queen's, or their heirs apparent, or to deprive
them or any of them of their dignity, title, or name of their royal estates
...

> That then every such person and persons so offending ... shall have and
suffer such pains of death and other penalties, as is limited and accustomed
in cases of high treason.

> âTreason Act 1495[14][15]

Before his sentencing, More spoke freely of his belief that "no temporal man
may be the head of the spirituality". He was sentenced to be hanged, drawn,
and quartered (the usual punishment for traitors) but the king commuted this
to execution by decapitation. The execution took place on July 6, 1535. When
he came to mount the steps to the scaffold, he is widely quoted as saying (to
the officials): "I pray you, I pray you, Mr Lieutenant, see me safe up and for
my coming down, I can shift for myself"; while on the scaffold he declared
that he died "the king's good servant, and God's first."[16] Another comment
he is believed to have made to the executioner is that his beard was
completely innocent of any crime, and did not deserve the axe; he then
positioned his beard so that it would not be harmed.[17] More asked that his
foster daughter Margaret Giggs should be given his headless corpse to
bury.[18] He was buried at the Tower of London, in the chapel of St Peter ad
Vincula in an unmarked grave. His head was fixed upon a pike over London
Bridge for a month, according to the normal custom for traitors. His daughter
Margaret Roper then rescued it, possibly by bribery, before it could be thrown
in the River Thames.

The skull is believed to rest in the Roper Vault of St. Dunstan's, Canterbury,
though some researchers have claimed it might be within the tomb he erected
for himself in Chelsea Old Church (see below). The evidence, however, seems to
be in favor of its placement in St. Dunstan's, with the remains of his
daughter, Margaret Roper, and her husband's family, whose vault it was.
Margaret would have treasured this relic of her adored father, and legend is
that she wished to be buried herself with his head in her arms.[citation
needed]

## [edit] Canonization

<IMG>

<IMG>

Statue of Thomas More by Leslie Cubitt Bevis in front of Chelsea Old Church,
Cheyne Walk, London.

More was beatified by Pope Leo XIII in 1886 and canonized with John Fisher
after a mass petition of English Catholics in 1935, as in some sense a 'patron
saint of politics' in protest against the rise of secular, anti-religious
Communism.[citation needed] His joint feast day with Fisher is 22 June. Fisher
was the only remaining loyal Bishop (owing to the apparent and coincident
natural deaths of eight aged bishops) [19] during the English Reformation to
maintain, at the King's mercy, allegiance to the Pope. In 2000 this trend
continued, with Saint Thomas More declared the "heavenly Patron of Statesmen
and Politicians" by Pope John Paul II.[20] He even has a feast day, 6 July, in
the Anglican calendar of saints.

## [edit] Influence and reputation

The steadfastness and courage with which More held on to his religious
convictions in the face of ruin and death and the dignity with which he
conducted himself during his imprisonment, trial, and execution, contributed
much to More's posthumous reputation, particularly among Catholics.

More's conviction for treason was widely seen as unfair, even among
Protestants. His friend Erasmus, himself no Protestant, but broadly
sympathetic to reform movements within the Catholic Church, declared after his
execution that More had been "more pure than any snow" and that his genius was
"such as England never had and never again will have."

Roman Catholic writer G. K. Chesterton said that More was the "greatest
historical character in English history."

## [edit] Literary echoes and evaluations

More was portrayed as a wise and honest statesman in the 1592 play Sir Thomas
More, which was probably written in collaboration by Henry Chettle, Anthony
Munday, William Shakespeare, and others, and which survives only in
fragmentary form after being censored by Edmund Tylney, Master of the Revels
in the government of Queen Elizabeth I (any direct reference to the Act of
Supremacy was censored out).

As the author of Utopia, More has also attracted the admiration of modern
socialists. While Roman Catholic scholars maintain that More's attitude in
composing Utopia was largely ironic and that he was at every point an orthodox
Christian, Marxist theoretician Karl Kautsky argued in the book Thomas More
and his Utopia (1888) that Utopia was a shrewd critique of economic and social
exploitation in pre-modern Europe and that More was one of the key
intellectual figures in the early development of socialist ideas.

The 20th-century agnostic playwright Robert Bolt portrayed More as the
ultimate man of conscience in his play A Man for All Seasons. Robert
Whittington in 1520 wrote of him:

    "More is a man of an angel's wit and singular learning. I know not his fellow. For where is the man of that gentleness, lowliness and affability? And, as time requireth, a man of marvelous mirth and pastimes, and sometime of as sad gravity. A man for all seasons." [21]
In 1966, the play was made into the successful film A Man for All Seasons
directed by Fred Zinnemann, adapted for the screen by the playwright himself,
and starring Paul Scofield in an Oscar-winning performance. The film won the
Academy Award for Best Picture for that year. In 1988, Charlton Heston starred
and directed in a made-for-television remake of the film.

Catholic science fiction writer R. A. Lafferty wrote his novel Past Master as
a modern equivalent to More's Utopia, which he saw as a satire. In this novel,
Thomas More is brought through time to the year 2535, where he is made king of
the future world of "Astrobe", only to be beheaded after ruling for a mere
nine days. One of the characters in the novel compares More favorably to
almost every other major historical figure: "He had one completely honest
moment right at the end. I cannot think of anyone else who ever had one." He
was also greatly admired by the Anglican clergyman, Jonathan Swift.

Karl Zuchardt wrote a novel, Stirb Du Narr! ("Die you fool!"), about More's
struggle with King Henry, portraying More as an idealist bound to fail in the
power struggle with a ruthless ruler and an unjust world.

A number of modern writers, such as Richard Marius, have attacked More for
alleged religious fanaticism and intolerance (manifested, for instance, in his
persecution of heretics). James Wood calls him, "cruel in punishment, evasive
in argument, lusty for power, and repressive in politics".[22] The historian
Jasper Ridley, author of several historical biographies including one on Henry
VIII and the other on Mary Tudor, goes much further in his dual biography of
More and Cardinal Wolsey, The Statesman and the Fanatic, describing More as "a
particularly nasty sadomasochistic pervert," a line of thinking also followed
by the late Joanna Denny in her 2004 biography of Anne Boleyn. Brian Moynahan
in his book "God's Messenger: William Tyndale, Thomas More and the Writing of
the English Bible", takes a similarly critical view of More, as does the
American writer, Michael Farris.

Aaron Zelman, in his nonfiction book "The State Versus the People" describes
genocide and the history of governments which have acted in a totalitarian
manner. In the first chapters "Utopia" is reviewed along with Plato's "The
Republic". Zelman noted facts about "Utopia" which were ridiculous in the real
world, such as agriculture, and could not draw a conclusion whether More was
being humorous towards his work or seriously advocating a nation-state. It is
pointed out, as a serious point for consideration, that "More is the only
Christian saint to be honored with a statue at the Kremlin", which implies
that his work had serious influence on the Soviet Union, despite its general
antipathy towards organized religion.

Other biographers, such as Peter Ackroyd, have offered a more sympathetic
picture of More as both a sophisticated humanist and man of letters, as well
as a zealous Roman Catholic who believed in the necessity of religious and
political authority.

The protagonist of Walker Percy's novels, Love in the Ruins and The Thanatos
Syndrome, is Dr. Thomas More, a reluctant Catholic and descendant of Sir
Thomas More.

He is also the focus of the Al Stewart song A Man For All Seasons from the
1978 album Time Passages, and of the Far song Sir, featured on the limited
editions and 2008 re-release of their 1994 album Quick.

Jeremy Northam portrays More in the television series, The Tudors, where he is
shown as a peaceful man â a sometime-advisor to Henry VIII, a devout
Catholic, and family head. However, Season 1, Episode 7 hints at a different
side of More, as he unabashedly expresses his loathing for Lutheranism. Yet
throughout the season, it shows a conflicted side of More: He orders that
Martin Luther's books be destroyed, yet when the books are actually burned, he
expresses a sense of unease and regret. In episode 10 of the same series, More
is shown exercising his new power as chancellor by burning convicted heretics.
It also depicts him engaging in the conversation which Richard Rich testified
as having taken place, regarding the King's status as Head of the Church in
England, despite it being widely believed that this testimony was perjured.

## [edit] Institutions named after Thomas More

As a saint in the Roman Catholic church, there are many parish churches
dedicated to More around the world.[citation needed] In addition a number of
legal institutions and colleges are named in his honour - see the
disambiguation pages Thomas More College and St. Thomas More School for
details.

The Thomas More Law Center is a legal aid organization that provides law
services for those arguing conservative-aligned issues, especially those
dealing with religious liberty and expression.

Magdalen College School, Oxford's politics society is named the St Thomas More
society.

The Cathedral of St. Thomas More is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of
Arlington, Virginia.

The Co-Cathedral of St. Thomas More in Tallahassee, Florida, serves the Roman
Catholic Diocese of Pensacola-Tallahassee and the Florida State University
Catholic community.

The Thomas More Building at the Royal Courts of Justice in the Strand, London,
is an 11 storey office block built in January 1990 containing the courts of
the Chancery Division of the High Court. These are known as the Thomas More
Courts.

There are various St Thomas More Societies for Roman Catholic lawyers,
"inspired by his example".

## [edit] Historic sites

Visitors to the Houses of Parliament at the Palace of Westminster in London
will notice a plaque in the middle of the floor of Westminster Hall
commemorating More's trial for treason and condemnation to execution in that
original part of the Palace. This building would have been well known to More,
who served as Speaker of the House of Commons prior to becoming Lord
Chancellor of England.

More's home and estate along the Thames in Chelsea was confiscated by the
Crown from his wife Alice after his execution, but in later times Crosby Hall,
which formed part of More's London residence, was relocated to the site in his
commemoration, and stands out as a white stone building amid modern brick
structures that apparently aim to recapture the style of More's manor that
formerly occupied the site. Crosby Hall is privately owned and closed to the
public. The modern structures face the Thames and include an entry way that
displays More's arms, heraldic beasts, and a Latin maxim. Apartment buildings
and a park are built over the former locations of his gardens and orchard, and
some are named after their former functions: Roper's Garden is the park
occupying one of More's gardens, sunken as his was believed to be. Other than
these, there are no remnants of the More estate.

This small park sits between Crosby Hall and Chelsea Old Church, an Anglican
church on Old Church Street whose southern chapel was commissioned by More and
in which he sang with his parish choir. The medieval arch connecting the
chapel to the main sanctuary was commissioned by More and displays on its
capitals symbols associated with his person and office. On the southern wall
of the sanctuary is the tomb and epitaph he erected for himself and his wives,
detailing in a lengthy Latin inscription his ancestry and accomplishments,
including his role as peacemaker between the Christian nations of Europe and a
curiously alterred portion detailing his curbing of heresy. This tomb was
probably located here because it was his custom to assist the priest at Mass
and he would exit via the door just to the left of it. He is not, however,
buried here, nor is it entirely certain which of his family may be. Except for
his chapel, the church was largely destroyed in the Second World War and was
rebuilt in 1958. It is open to the public only at specific times. Outside the
church is a statue commemorating him as "saint", "scholar", and "statesman",
the back of which displays his shield. In the same neighborhood, on Upper
Cheyne Row, is the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Saviour and St. Thomas
More, which honours him according to the Church he defended with his life.

More was executed on a scaffold erected on Tower Hill, London, just outside
the Tower of London. A plaque and small garden commemorate the famed execution
site and all those who were executed there, many as religious martyrs or as
prisoners of conscience. His body, minus his head, was unceremoniously buried
in an unmarked grave in the Royal Chapel of St. Peter Ad Vincula, within the
walls of the Tower of London. It was the custom for traitors executed at Tower
Hill to be buried in the mass grave beneath this chapel, which is accessible
to visitors to the Tower.

St. Dunstan's Church, an Anglican parish church in Canterbury, possesses
More's head, rescued by his beloved daughter Margaret Roper. This is sealed in
the Roper family vault which lies beneath the altar of the Nicholas Chapel,
which is to the right of the church's sanctuary or main altar. The stone
marking the sealed vault is to the immediate left of the altar below which it
lies. St. Dunstan's Church has carefully investigated, preserved, and sealed
this burial vault of the Roper family which lived in Canterbury. The last
archaeological search of the Roper Vault demonstrated that the believed head
of the martyr rests in a niche separate from the other bodies there, possibly
due to later interference.[citation needed] A few displays in the chapel
record the archaeological findings in written accounts and pictures. The walls
of the chapel are host to impressive stained glass donated by Roman Catholics
to commemorate the events in More's life. Down and across the street from the
parish the facade of the former home of Margaret Roper and her husband William
Roper survives and is demarcated by a small plaque.

Our Lady Queen of Martyrs and St. Ignatius Catholic Church in Chideock, Dorset
is said to have the relic of his hairskin shirt, frequently worn by him as a
form of penance and a reminder of humility underneath his robes of
state[citation needed]. Other small relics of the Saint are known in Catholic
churches, such as St. Thomas of Canterbury Catholic Church in Canterbury,
Tyburn Convent in London, and (in the United States) the Cathedral of St.
Thomas More, in Arlington, Virginia.

## [edit] See also

  * English Reformation

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Quoted by Michael Farris in his book, From Tyndale to Madison, 2007
  2. ^ Gerard B. Wegemer, "Thomas More: A Portrait of Courage"
  3. ^ Responsio ad Lutherum in The Complete Works of St. Thomas More, John Headley, ed., Sister Scholastica Mandevilled, tr., Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1969, ISBN 0300011237 ISBN 978-0300011234, vol. 5, pt. I, p. 311.
  4. ^ Ibid. p. 311.
  5. ^ Ibid. p. 683.
  6. ^ In Luther by Hartmann Grisar, vol. 3, pp. 217-241.
  7. ^ Gerard B. Wegemer, "Portrait of Courage", p. 136.
  8. ^ Moynahan, "God's Bestseller".
  9. ^ Article published by European Institute of Protestant Studies, 27 May 2002.
  10. ^ Diarmaid MacCulloch, 277.
  11. ^ Michael Farris, From Tyndale to Madison, 2007.
  12. ^ Peter Ackroyd, "The Life of Thomas More", page 298.
  13. ^ Eric W. Ives, The Life and Death of Anne Boleyn (2004), p. 47. More wrote on the subject of the Boleyn marriage that "[I] neither murmur at it nor dispute upon it, nor never did nor will .... I faithfully pray to God for his Grace and hers both long to live and well, and their noble issue too ...."
  14. ^ The Act (technically referred to as 11 Hen. 7, c. 1) has no official short title but is often informally called the Treason Act 1495. (Official text of The Act 11 Hen. 7 (c.1) as amended and in force today within the United Kingdom, from the UK Statute Law Database)
  15. ^ "Annotated original text". http://home.freeuk.net/don-aitken/ast/h8a.html#149.
  16. ^ "Account of trial". http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/more/moreaccount.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-27.
  17. ^ Henry Hyde, US Congressman (9 September 1988). United States Congressional Record Conference Report on H.R. 4783, Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriation Act, 1989. House of Representatives, Proceedings and Debates of the 100th Congress, Second Session, Volume 134, Page H7332-03 (H7333) (noting that when Thomas More was beheaded by Henry VIII, More gave notoriety to his beard with his famous line, saying to the axeman, "Be careful of my beard, it hath committed no treason").
  18. ^ Guy, John, A Daughter's Love: Thomas & Margaret More, London: Fourth Estate, 2008, ISBN 9780007192311, p. 266.
  19. ^ Diarmaid MacCulloch, The Reformation, (New York: Viking, 2004), 194
  20. ^ Apostolic letter issued moto proprio proclaiming Saint Thomas More Patron of Statesmen and Politicians[1]
  21. ^ A Man for all Seasons: an Historian's Demur
  22. ^ Wood, James, The Broken Estate, Essays on Literature and Belief, Pimlico, 2000, ISBN 0-7126-6557-9, 16.

## [edit] Biographies

  * William Roper, "The Life of Sir Thomas More" (written by More's son-in-law ca. 1555, but first printed in 1626)
  * Cresacre More, The life and death of Sir Thomas More, Lord High Chancellour of England (written by his great-grandson), 1630
  * Princesse de Craon, Thomas Morus, Lord Chancelier du Royaume d'Angleterre au XVIe siÃ¨cle (First edition in French, 1832/1833 - First edition in Dutch 1839/1840)
  * E.E. Reynolds, The Trialet of St Thomas More, (1964)
  * E.E. Reynolds, Thomas More and Erasmus, (1965)
  * Richard Marius, Thomas More: A Biography (1984)
  * Gerard Wegemer, Thomas More: A Portrait of Courage (1995)
  * Peter Ackroyd, The Life of Thomas More (1999)
  * John Foxe, Foxe's Book of Martyrs
  * Brian Moynahan "God's Messenger: William Tyndale, Thomas More and the Writing of the English Bible" (St Martin's Press, 2003).
  * John Guy, "A Daughter's Love: Thomas More and his daughter Meg," 2009

## [edit] External links

<IMG> Saints portal  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Thomas
More  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Thomas More

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Thomas More  
  * Thomas More Studies database: contains several of More's English works, including dialogues, early poetry and letters, as well as journal articles and biographical material
  * Works by Thomas More at Project Gutenberg
  * Sir Thomas More, or, Colloquies on the Progress and Prospects of Society at Project Gutenberg
  * Sir Thomas More by William Shakespeare (spurious and doubtful works) at Project Gutenberg
  * Sir Thomas More: A Man for One Season, essay by James Wood. Presents a critical view of More's religious intolerance
  * More and The History of Richard III
  * Thomas More and his Utopia by Karl Kautsky
  * Utopia by Thomas More
  * Thomas More and Utopias \- a learning resource from the British Library
  * Utopia HTML-formatted text on Marxists.org
  * Integrity and Conscience in the Life and Thought of Thomas More by Professor Gerald Wegemer
  * <IMG> "St. Thomas More". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Catholic_Encyclopedia_(1913)/St._Thomas_More.
  * Works by or about Thomas More in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
  * Saint Thomas More Academy in Buckeystown, Maryland
  * St. Thomas More Collegiate in Burnaby, British Columbia
  * Stirnet: 'Temp07' (More family is first on page)
  * St. Thomas More School in Oakdale, Connecticut
  * St. Thomas More Church in Oceanside, California
  * Memorial pages on the body and head of Thomas More at Find A Grave
  * Patron Saints Index entry \- Saint Thomas Moore biography, prayers, quotes, Catholc devotions to him.

Political offices  
Preceded by  
Sir Thomas Neville Speaker of the House of Commons  
1523 Succeeded by  
Sir Thomas Audley  
Preceded by  
Sir Richard Wingfield Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster  
1525 â 1529 Succeeded by  
Sir William Fitzwilliam  
Preceded by  
Thomas Cardinal Wolsey Lord Chancellor  
1529 â 1532 Succeeded by  
Sir Thomas Audley  
(Keeper of the Great Seal)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Speaker of the House of Commons  
Thomas Hungerford Â· Peter de la Mare Â· Sir James Pickering Â· John
Guildesborough Â· Richard Waldegrave Â· John Bussy Â· John Cheney Â· John
Doreward Â· Arnold Savage Â· Henry Redford Â· William Esturmy Â· John Tiptoft
Â· Thomas Chaucer Â· William Stourton Â· Walter Hungerford Â· Richard Redman
Â· Walter Beauchamp Â· Roger Flower Â· Roger Hunt Â· Thomas Chaucer  Â·
Richard Baynard Â· John Russell Â· John Tyrell Â· William Alington Â· John
Bowes Â· William Burley Â· William Tresham Â· John Say Â· John Popham Â·
William Oldhall Â· Thomas Thorpe Â· Sir Thomas Charlton Â· Sir John Wenlock Â·
Thomas Tresham Â· John Green Â· James Strangeways Â· John Wood Â· William
Catesby Â· Thomas Lovell Â· John Mordaunt Â· Thomas Fitzwilliam Â· Richard
Empson Â· Robert Drury Â· Thomas Englefield Â· Edmund Dudley Â· Robert
Sheffield Â· Thomas Nevill Â· Thomas More Â· Thomas Audley Â· Humphrey
Wingfield Â· Richard Rich Â· Nicholas Hare Â· Thomas Moyle Â· John Baker Â·
James Dyer Â· John Pollard Â· Robert Broke Â· Clement Higham Â· William
Cordell Â· Thomas Gargrave Â· Thomas Williams Â· Richard Onslow Â· Christopher
Wray Â· Robert Bell Â· John Popham Â· John Puckering Â· Thomas Snagge Â·
Edward Coke Â· Christopher Yelverton Â· Edward Phelips Â· Randolph Crewe Â·
Thomas Richardson Â· Thomas Crewe Â· Heneage Finch Â· John Finch Â· John
Glanville Â· William Lenthall Â· Henry Pelham Â· Francis Rous (Barebones
Parliament) Â· Thomas Widdrington (2nd Protectorate Parliament) Â· Chaloner
Chute (3rd Protectorate Parliament)  Â· Lislebone Long (3rd Protectorate
Parliament)  Â· Thomas Bampfylde (3rd Protectorate Parliament)  Â· Harbottle
Grimston Â· Edward Turnour Â· Job Charlton Â· Edward Seymour Â· Robert Sawyer
Â· William Gregory Â· William Williams Â· John Trevor Â· Henry Powle Â· Paul
Foley Â· Thomas Littleton Â· Robert Harley Â· John Smith Â· Richard Onslow Â·
William Bromley Â· Thomas Hanmer Â· Spencer Compton Â· Arthur Onslow Â· John
Cust Â· Fletcher Norton Â· Charles Wolfran Cornwall Â· William Grenville Â·
Henry Addington Â· John Freeman-Mitford Â· Charles Abbot Â· Charles Manners-
Sutton Â· John Abercromby Â· Charles Shaw-Lefevre Â· John Evelyn Denison Â·
Henry Brand Â· Arthur Wellesley Peel Â· William Gully Â· James Lowther Â· John
Henry Whitley Â· Edward FitzRoy Â· Douglas Clifton Brown Â· William Morrison
Â· Harry Hylton-Foster Â· Horace King Â· Selwyn Lloyd Â· George Thomas Â·
Bernard Weatherill Â· Betty Boothroyd Â· Michael Martin

<IMG>  
  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Catholic Church  
Organizations, Papacy, Teachings and Liturgical Traditions  
History

Jesus Â· Twelve Apostles Â· Early Christianity Â· History of the Papacy Â·
Councils Â· Crusades Â· Missions Â· Great Schism of East Â· Great Schism of
West Â· Reformation Â· Counter-Reformation Â· Roman Catholicism by country

<IMG>  
Hierarchy

Pope Â· Cardinals Â· Patriarchs Â· Major Archbishops Â· Primates Â·
Metropolitans Â· Archbishops Â· Diocesan Bishops  
Theology

Trinity Â· Original sin Â· One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church Â· Worship
Â· Divine Grace Â· Salvation Â· Sermon on the Mount Â· The Ten Commandments Â·
Dogma Â· Body and Soul  
Sacraments

Baptism Â· Confirmation Â· Eucharist Â· Penance Â· Anointing of the Sick Â·
Holy Orders Â· Matrimony  
Mariology

Mariology Â· Veneration Â· History of Mariology Â· Mariology of the saints Â·
Mariology of the popes Â· Marian Doctrines Â· Mother of God Â· Perpetual
Virginity Â· Immaculate Conception Â· Assumption  
Doctors of  
the Church

Albertus Magnus Â· Ambrose Â· Anselm of Canterbury Â· Anthony of Padua Â·
Thomas Aquinas Â· Athanasius of Alexandria Â· Augustine of Hippo Â· Basil of
Caesarea Â· Bede Â· Robert Bellarmine Â· Bernard of Clairvaux Â· Bonaventure
Â· Petrus Canisius Â· Catherine of Siena Â· Peter Chrysologus Â· John
Chrysostom Â· Cyril of Alexandria Â· Cyril of Jerusalem Â· Peter Damian Â·
Ephrem the Syrian Â· Francis de Sales Â· Gregory the Great Â· Gregory of
Nazianzus Â· Hilary of Poitiers Â· Isidore of Seville Â· Jerome Â· John of
Damascus Â· John of the Cross Â· Lawrence of Brindisi Â· Leo the Great Â·
Alphonsus Liguori Â· ThÃ©rÃ¨se de Lisieux Â· Teresa of Ãvila  
Pope Benedict XVI

Conclave Â· Theology Â· Works Â· Deus Caritas Est Â· Sacramentum Caritatis Â·
Summorum Pontificum Â· Spe Salvi  
Preceding Popes

Pope John Paul II Â· Pope Paul VI Â· Pope John XXIII Â· Pope Pius XII Â· Pope
Pius XI Â· Pope Benedict XV Â· Pope Pius X Â· Pope Leo XIII Â· Pope Pius IX  
Orders & Societies

Assumptionist Â· Augustinian Order Â· Benedictines Â· Capuchin Order Â·
Carmelites Â· Carthusians Â· Congregations of Holy Cross Â· Dominican Order Â·
Franciscan orders Â· Jesuits Â· Oratory of Saint Philip Neri  
Vatican II

Definition of the Church Â· Gaudium et Spes Â· Lumen Gentium Â· Nostra Aetate  
Particular Churches  
sorted by  
Liturgical Traditions

Alexandrian Â· Coptic Â· Ethiopic Â· Antiochian Â· Maronite Â· Syriac Â· Syro-
Malankara Â· Armenian Â· Armenian Â· Byzantine Â· Albanian Â· Belarusian Â·
Bulgarian Â· Croatian Â· Greek Â· Hungarian Â· Italo-Greek Â· Macedonian Â·
Melkite Â· Romanian Â· Russian Â· Ruthenian Â· Slovak Â· Ukrainian Â· East
Syrian Â· Chaldean Â· Syro-Malabar Â· Roman Â· Ambrosian Â· Sarum Â· Mozarabic
Â· Anglican Use Â· Latin Â· Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter  
<IMG> Pope Portal <IMG> Catholicism Portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

History of the Roman Catholic Church  
General

History of the Roman Catholic Church Â· History of the Papacy Â· Ecumenical
Councils Â· Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church Â· History of Christianity
Â· Role of the Roman Catholic Church in civilization Â· Art in Roman
Catholicism Â· Roman Catholic religious order Â· Christian monasticism Â·
Papal States

<IMG>  
Church beginnings

Jesus Â· Twelve Apostles Â· Saint Peter Â· Paul the Apostle Â· Council of
Jerusalem Â· Saint Stephen Â· John the Apostle Â· Ignatius of Antioch Â·
Irenaeus Â· Pope Victor I Â· Tertullian Â· Apostolic Fathers  
Constantine to  
Pope Gregory I

Constantine I and Christianity Â· Arianism Â· Basilica of St. John Lateran Â·
First Council of Nicaea Â· Pope Sylvester I Â· First Council of Constantinople
Â· Canon Â· Jerome Â· Vulgate Â· Council of Ephesus Â· Council of Chalcedon Â·
Benedict of Nursia Â· Second Council of Constantinople Â· Pope Gregory I Â·
Gregorian Chant  
Early Middle Ages

Third Council of Constantinople Â· Saint Boniface Â· Iconclasm Â· Second
Council of Nicaea Â· Charlemagne Â· Pope Leo III Â· Fourth Council of
Constantinople Â· East-West Schism  
High Middle Ages

Pope Urban II Â· Investiture Controversy Â· Crusades Â· First Council of the
Lateran Â· Second Council of the Lateran Â· Third Council of the Lateran Â·
Pope Innocent III Â· Latin Empire of Constantinople Â· Saint Francis of Assisi
Â· Fourth Council of the Lateran Â· Inquisition Â· First Council of Lyon Â·
Second Council of Lyon Â· Bernard of Clairvaux Â· Thomas Aquinas  
Late Middle Ages

Pope Boniface VIII Â· Avignon Papacy Â· Pope Clement V Â· Council of Vienne Â·
Knights Templar Â· Catherine of Siena Â· Pope Alexander VI  
Protestant Reformation &  
Counter-Reformation

Protestant Reformation Â· Counter-Reformation Â· Thomas More Â· Pope Leo X Â·
Society of Jesus Â· Francis Xavier Â· Dissolution of the Monasteries Â·
Council of Trent Â· Pope Pius V Â· Tridentine Mass Â· Robert Bellarmine  
Baroque Period to  
French Revolution

Pope Innocent XI Â· Pope Benedict XIV Â· Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Â· Anti-clericalism Â· Pope Pius VI Â· Shimabara Rebellion Â· Edict of Nantes
Â· Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution  
19th century

Pope Pius VII Â· Pope Pius IX Â· Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the
Virgin Mary Â· Our Lady of Lourdes Â· First Vatican Council Â· Papal
infallibility Â· Pope Leo XIII Â· Rerum Novarum  
20th century

Pope Pius X Â· Our Lady of FÃ¡tima Â· Persecutions of the Catholic Church and
Pius XII Â· Pope Pius XII Â· Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Â·
Pope John XXIII Â· Second Vatican Council Â· Pope Paul VI Â· Pope John Paul I
Â· Pope John Paul II  
21st century

Pope Benedict XVI Â· World Youth Day 2008  
<IMG> Pope Portal <IMG> Catholicism Portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

History of Roman Catholic theology  
Theologians Â· Teachings Â· Heresies  
General History

History of the Roman Catholic Church Â· Early Christianity Â· History of the
Papacy Â· Ecumenical Councils Â· Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church Â·
History of Christianity Â· History of Christian theology

<IMG>  
Church beginnings

Epistles of Clement Â· Didache Â· Ignatius of Antioch Â· Epistle of Barnabas
Â· Justin Martyr Â· Irenaeus Â· Tertullian Â· Origen Â· Antipope Novatian Â·
Cyprian  
Constantine to  
Pope Gregory I

Arianism Â· Pelagianism Â· Nestorianism Â· Monophysitism Â· Monothelitism Â·
Pope Leo I Â· Ambrose Â· Augustine of Hippo  
Early Middle Ages

Iconoclasm Â· Transubstantiation Dispute Â· Predestination Disputes  
High Middle Ages

Thomas Aquinas Â· Thomism Â· Anselm of Canterbury Â· Peter Abelard Â· Decretum
Gratiani Â· Bernard of Clairvaux Â· Peter Lombard Â· Hildegard of Bingen Â·
Saint Dominic Â· Saint Francis of Assisi Â· Bonaventure Â· Albertus Magnus  
Mysticism & Reforms

Duns Scotus Â· Dante Alighieri Â· William of Ockham Â· Catherine of Siena Â·
Brigit of Sweden Â· Johannes Tauler Â· Heinrich Seuse Â· Nicholas of Kues Â·
Thomas Ã Kempis  
Protestant Reformation and  
Counter-Reformation

Thomas More Â· John Fisher Â· Thomas Cajetan Â· Johann Eck Â· Ignatius of
Loyola Â· Francis Xavier Â· Teresa of Ãvila Â· John of the Cross Â· Petrus
Canisius Â· Robert Bellarmine Â· Francis de Sales  
Baroque Period to  
French Revolution

Jacques-BÃ©nigne Bossuet Â· Francisco SuÃ¡rez Â· FranÃ§ois FÃ©nelon Â·
Jansenism Â· Blaise Pascal Â· Saint Alphonsus Liguori Â· Saint Louis de
Montfort Â· Alfonso Muzzarelli Â· Louis Thomassin Â· Jean de La Fontaine  
19th century

John Henry Newman Â· Gaetano Sanseverino Â· Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Â· Clemens
Maria Hofbauer Â· Johann Michael Sailer Â· Johann Joseph von GÃ¶rres Â·
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Â· Giuseppe Pecci Â· Joseph
HergenrÃ¶ther Â· Tommaso Maria Zigliara  
20th-21st century

Romano Guardini Â· Sebastiaan Tromp Â· Raimondo Spiazzi Â· Gabriel Roschini Â·
Hugo Rahner Â· Henri de Lubac Â· Pope Pius XII Â· Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Â· Hans Urs von Balthasar Â· Yves Congar Â· Karl Rahner Â· Edward
Schillebeeckx Â· Marie-Dominique Chenu Â· Louis Bouyer Â· Ãtienne Gilson Â·
Hans KÃ¼ng Â· Jean DaniÃ©lou Â· Pope John Paul II Â· Pope Benedict XVI  
<IMG> Pope Portal <IMG> Catholicism Portal  
Persondata  
NAME More, Thomas  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION English lawyer, writer  
DATE OF BIRTH 7 February 1478  
PLACE OF BIRTH London, England  
DATE OF DEATH 6 July 1535  
PLACE OF DEATH London, England  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_More"

Categories: 1478 births | 1535 deaths | Chancellors of the Duchy of Lancaster
| Early modern philosophers | English Renaissance humanists | English non-
fiction writers | English Roman Catholics | Anti-Protestantism | English
saints | English humanists | English spiritual writers | Executed writers |
Executions at the Tower of London | Inventors of writing systems | Lord
Chancellors of England | Members of Lincoln's Inn | Members of the pre-1707
English Parliament | Members of the Privy Council of England | New Latin
writers | Old Waynfletes | People executed by decapitation | People executed
for treason against England | People executed under the Tudors | People from
the City of London | Pope Pius XI | Roman Catholic philosophers | Speakers of
the House of Commons of England | Tudor people | Utopists | Executed English
people | 16th-century Roman Catholic martyrs | 16th-century Christian saints

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2007 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Articles
with unsourced statements since December 2007 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 |
Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles with unsourced
statements since June 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February
2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Alemannisch
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 01:28 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



