
# Jacques-Louis David

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Jacques-Louis David  
<IMG>  
Self portrait of Jacques-Louis David, 1794, MusÃ©e du Louvre  
Birth name Jacques-Louis David  
Born 30 August 1748(1748-08-30)  
Paris, France  
Died 29 December 1825 (aged 77)  
Brussels, Belgium  
Nationality <IMG> France  
Field Painting, Drawing  
Movement Neoclassicism  
Works Oath of the Horatii (1784), The Death of Marat (1793)  
Awards Prix de Rome  
Jacques-Louis David (30 August 1748 â 29 December 1825) was a highly
influential French painter in the Neoclassical style, considered to be the
preeminent painter of the era. In the 1780s his cerebral brand of history
painting marked a change in taste away from Rococo frivolity toward a
classical austerity and severity, heightened feeling[1] chiming with the moral
climate of the final years of the ancien rÃ©gime.

David later became an active supporter of the French Revolution and friend of
Maximilien Robespierre, and was effectively a dictator of the arts under the
French Republic. Imprisoned after Robespierre's fall from power, he aligned
himself with yet another political regime upon his release, that of Napoleon
I. It was at this time that he developed his 'Empire style', notable for its
use of warm Venetian colours. David had a huge number of pupils, making him
the strongest influence in French art of the 19th century, especially academic
Salon painting.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Early work
  * 3 The French Revolution
  * 4 Post-revolution
  * 5 Napoleon
  * 6 Exile and death
  * 7 Medical analysis of his face
  * 8 Gallery
  * 9 References
  * 10 Bibliography
  * 11 Filmography
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Early life

Jacques-Louis David was born into a prosperous family in Paris on 30 August
1748. When he was about nine his father was killed in a duel and his mother
left him with his prosperous architect uncles. They saw to it that he received
an excellent education at the CollÃ¨ge des Quatre-Nations, but he was never a
good student: he had a facial tumor that impeded his speech, and he was always
preoccupied with drawing. He covered his notebooks with drawings, and he once
said, "I was always hiding behind the instructorâs chair, drawing for the
duration of the class". Soon, he desired to be a painter, but his uncles and
mother wanted him to be an architect. He overcame the opposition, and went to
learn from FranÃ§ois Boucher, the leading painter of the time, who was also a
distant relative. Boucher was a Rococo painter, but tastes were changing, and
the fashion for Rococo was giving way to a more classical style. Boucher
decided that instead of taking over Davidâs tutelage, he would send David to
his friend Joseph-Marie Vien, painter who embraced the classical reaction to
Rococo. There David attended the Royal Academy, based in what is now the
Louvre.

David attempted to win the Prix de Rome, an art scholarship to the French
Academy in Rome, four times between 1770 and 1774; once, he lost according to
legend because he had not consulted Vien, one of the judges. Another time, he
lost because a few other students had been competing for years, and Vien felt
David's education could wait for these other mediocre painters. In protest, he
attempted to starve himself to death. Finally, in 1774, David won the Prix de
Rome. Normally, he would have had to attend another school before attending
the Academy in Rome, but Vien's influence kept him out of it. He went to Italy
with Vien in 1775, as Vien had been appointed director of the French Academy
at Rome. While in Italy, David observed the Italian masterpieces and the ruins
of ancient Rome. David filled twelve sketchbooks with material that he would
derive from for the rest of his life. He met the influential early
neoclassical painter Raphael Mengs and through Mengs was introduced to the
pathbreaking theories of art historian Johann Joachim Winckelmann. While in
Rome, he studied great masters, and came to favor above all others Raphael. In
1779, David was able to see the ruins of Pompeii, and was filled with wonder.
After this, he sought to revolutionize the art world with the "eternal"
concepts of classicism.

## [edit] Early work

<IMG>

<IMG>

Equestrian portrait of StanisÅaw Kostka Potocki (1781)

David's fellow students at the academy found him difficult to get along with,
but they recognized his genius. David was allowed to stay at the French
Academy in Rome for an extra year, but after 5 years in Rome, he returned to
Paris. There, he found people ready to use their influence for him, and he was
made a member of the Royal Academy. He sent the Academy two paintings, and
both were included in the Salon of 1781, a high honor. He was praised by his
famous contemporary painters, but the administration of the Royal Academy was
very hostile to this young upstart. After the Salon, the King granted David
lodging in the Louvre, an ancient and much desired privilege of great artists.
When the contractor of the King's buildings, M. Pecol, was arranging with
David, he asked the artist to marry his daughter, Marguerite Charlotte. This
marriage brought him money and eventually four children. David had his own
pupils, about 40 to 50, and was commissioned by the government to paint
"Horace defended by his Father", but Jacques soon decided, "Only in Rome can I
paint Romans." His father in law provided the money he needed for the trip,
and David headed for Rome with his wife and three of his students, one of
whom, Jean-Germain Drouais, was the Prix de Rome winner of that year.

In Rome, David painted his famous Oath of the Horatii, 1784. In this piece,
the artist references Enlightenment values while alluding to Rousseauâs
social contract. The republican ideal of the general will becomes the focus of
the painting with all three sons positioned in compliance with the father. The
Oath between the characters can be read as an act of unification of men to the
binding of the state.[2] The issue of gender roles also becomes apparent in
this piece, as the women in Horatii greatly contrast the group of brothers.
David depicts the father with his back to the women, shutting them out of the
oath making ritual; they also appear to be smaller in scale than the male
figures.[3] The masculine virility and discipline displayed by the menâs
rigid and confident stances is also severely contrasted to the slouching,
swooning female softness created in the other half of the composition.[4] Here
we see the clear division of male-female attributes which confined the sexes
to specific roles, under Rousseauâs popular doctrines.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Oath of the Horatii (1784)

These revolutionary ideals are also apparent in the Distribution of Eagles.
While Oath of the Horatii and Oath of the Tennis Court stress the importance
of masculine self-sacrifice for one's country and patriotism, the Distribution
of Eagles would ask for self-sacrifice for one's Emperor (Napoleon) and the
importance of battlefield glory.

In 1787, David did not become the Director of the French Academy in Rome,
which was a position he wanted dearly. The Count in charge of the appointments
said David was too young, but said he would support him in 6 to 12 years. This
situation would be one of many that would cause him to lash out at the Academy
in years to come.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Death of Socrates (1787)

For the salon of 1787, David exhibited his famous Death of Socrates.
"Condemned to death, Socrates, strong, calm and at peace, discusses the
immortality of the soul. Surrounded by Crito, his grieving friends and
students, he is teaching, philosophizing, and in fact, thanking the God of
Health, Asclepius, for the hemlock brew which will ensure a peaceful death...
The wife of Socrates can be seen grieving alone outside the chamber, dismissed
for her weakness. Plato is depicted as an old man seated at the end of the
bed." Critics compared the Socrates with Michelangeloâs Sistine Ceiling and
Raphael's Stanze, and one, after ten visits to the Salon, described it as "in
every sense perfect". Denis Diderot said it looked like he copied it from some
ancient bas-relief. The painting was very much in tune with the political
climate at the time. For this painting, David was not honored by a royal
"works of encouragement".

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Lictors Bring to Brutus the Bodies of His Sons (1789)

For his next painting, David created The Lictors Bring to Brutus the Bodies of
His Sons. The work had tremendous appeal for the time. Before the opening of
the Salon, the French Revolution had begun. The National Assembly had been
established, and the Bastille had fallen. The royal court did not want
propaganda agitating the people, so all paintings had to be checked before
being hung. Davidâs portrait of Lavoisier, who was a chemist and physicist
as well as an active member of the Jacobin party, was banned by the
authorities for such reasons.[5] When the newspapers reported that the
government had not allowed the showing of The Lictors Bring to Brutus the
Bodies of His Sons, the people were outraged, and the royals were forced to
give in. The painting was hung in the exhibition, protected by art students.
The painting depicts Lucius Junius Brutus, the Roman leader, grieving for his
sons. Brutus's sons had attempted to overthrow the government and restore the
monarchy, so the father ordered their death to maintain the republic. Thus,
Brutus was the heroic defender of the republic, at the cost of his own family.
On the right, the Mother holds her two daughters, and the grandmother is seen
on the far right, in anguish. Brutus sits on the left, alone, brooding, but
knowing what he did was best for his country. The whole painting was a
Republican symbol, and obviously had immense meaning during these times in
France.

## [edit] The French Revolution

History of France  
series  
Celtic Gaul  
Roman Gaul  
Franks  
Middle Ages  
Early Modern France  
Revolution to WWI  
French Revolution  
Causes  
Estates-General  
National Assembly  
Storming of the Bastille  
National Constituent  
Assembly (1, 2, 3)  
Legislative Assembly  
and fall of the monarchy  
National Convention  
and Reign of Terror  
Directory  
Consulate  
War in the VendÃ©e  
Chouannerie  
Related: Glossary,  
Timeline, Wars,  
List of people,  
Historiography  
First Empire  
Restoration  
July Monarchy  
Second Republic  
Second Empire  
Third Republic  
Fourth Republic  
Modern France  
In the beginning, David was a supporter of the Revolution, a friend of
Robespierre and a member of the Jacobin Club. While others were leaving the
country for new and greater opportunities, David stayed to help destroy the
old order; he was a regicide who voted in the National Convention for the
Execution of Louis XVI. It is uncertain why he did this, as there were many
more opportunities for him under the King than the new order; some people
suggest David's love for the classical made him embrace everything about that
period, including a republican government.

Others believed that they found the key to the artist's revolutionary career
in his personality. Undoubtedly, David's artistic sensibility, mercurial
temperament, volatile emotions, ardent enthusiasm, and fierce independence
might have been expected to help turn him against the established order but
they did not fully explain his devotion to the republican regime. Nor did the
vague statements of those who insisted upon his "powerful ambition... and
unusual energy of willâ actually account for his revolutionary connections.
Those who knew him maintained that "generous ardor", high-minded idealism and
well meaning, though sometimes fanatical, enthusiasm rather than selfishness
and jealousy, motivated his activities during this period.

Soon, David turned his critical sights on Royal Academy of Painting and
Sculpture. This attack was probably caused primarily by the hypocrisy of the
organization and their personal opposition against his work, as seen in
previous episodes in Davidâs life. The Royal Academy was chock full of
royalists, and Davidâs attempt to reform it did not go over well with the
members. However, the deck was stacked against this symbol of the old regime,
and the National Assembly ordered it to make changes to conform to the new
constitution.

David then began work on something that would later hound him: propaganda for
the new republic. Davidâs painting of Brutus was shown during the play
Brutus, by the famous Frenchman, Voltaire. The people responded in an uproar
of approval.

In 1789, Jacques Louis David attempted to leave his artistic mark on the
historical beginnings of the French Revolution with his painting of The Oath
of the Tennis Court. David undertook this task not out of personal political
conviction but rather because he was commissioned to do so. The painting was
meant to commemorate the event of the same name but was never completed. A
meeting of the Estates General was convened in May to address reforms of the
monarchy. Dissent arose over whether the numerous members of the Third Estate
would be counted by head or â following tradition â as one body. On June
17 the members of the Third Estate renamed themselves the National Assembly.
The new assembly decided that each individual would be counted by head and the
members alone would levy taxes. Shortly thereafter, on June 20, the National
Assembly attempted to meet but the chamber doors were locked and guarded by
soldiers of the monarchy. Members of the new National Assembly convened at a
nearby tennis court and vowed they would not be disbanded until they had
created a constitution. In 1789 this event was seen as a symbol of the
national unity against the ancien regime. David was enlisted by the Society of
Friends of the Constitution, the body that would eventually form the Jacobins,
to enshrine this symbolic event.[6]

This instance is notable in more ways than one because it eventually led David
to finally become involved in politics as he joined the Jacobins. The picture
was meant to be massive in scale; the figures in the foreground were meant to
be life-sized portraits of the counterparts, including Jean-Sylvain Bailly,
the President of the Constituent Assembly. Seeking additional funding, David
turned to the Society of Friends of the Constitution. The funding for the
project was to come from over three thousand subscribers hoping to receive a
print of the image. However, when the funding was insufficient, the state
ended up financing the project.[7]

David set out in 1790, to transform the contemporary event into a major
historical picture, which would appear at the Salon of 1791 as a large pen and
ink drawing. As in the Oath of the Horatii, David represents the unity of men
in the service of a patriotic ideal. In what was essentially an act of
intellect and reason, David creates an air of drama in this work. The very
power of the people appears to be âblowingâ through the scene with the
stormy weather, in a sense alluding to the storm that would be the revolution.

Symbolism in this work of art closely represents the revolutionary events
taking place at the time. The figure in the middle is raising his right arm
making the oath that they will never disband until they have reached their
goal of creating a âconstitution of the realm fixed upon solid
foundations.â[8] The importance of this symbol is highlighted by the fact
that the crowdâs arms are angled to his hand forming a triangular shape.
Additionally, the open space in the top half contrasted to the commotion in
the lower half serves to emphasize the magnitude of the Tennis Court Oath.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sketch by Jacques-Louis David of the Tennis Court Oath. David later became a
deputy in the National Convention in 1792

In his attempt to depict political events of the Revolution in âreal
time,â David was venturing down a new and untrodden path in the art world.
However, Thomas Crow argues that this path âproved to be less a way forward
than a cul-de-sac for history painting.â[9] Essentially, the history of the
demise of Davidâs The Tennis Court Oath illustrates the difficulty of
creating works of art that portray current and controversial political
occurrences. Political circumstances in France proved too volatile to allow
the completion of the painting. The unity that was to be symbolized in The
Tennis Court Oath no longer existed in radicalized 1792. The National Assembly
had split between conservatives and radical Jacobins, both vying for political
power. By 1792 there was no longer consensus that all the revolutionaries at
the tennis court were âheroes.â A sizeable number of the heroes of 1789
had become the villains of 1792. In this unstable political climate Davidâs
work remained unfinished. With only a few nude figures sketched onto the
massive canvas, David abandoned The Oath of the Tennis Court. To have
completed it would have been politically unsound. After this incident, when
David attempted to make a political statement in his paintings, he returned to
the less politically charged use of metaphor to convey his message.

When Voltaire died in 1778, the church denied him a church burial, and his
body was interred near a monastery. A year later, Voltaireâs old friends
began a campaign to have his body buried in the PanthÃ©on, as church property
had been confiscated by the French Government. In 1791 David was appointed to
head the organizing committee for the ceremony, a parade through the streets
of Paris to the PanthÃ©on. Despite rain, and opposition from conservatives
based on the amount of money that was being spent, the procession went ahead.
Up to 100,000 people watched the "Father of the Revolution" be carried to his
resting place. This was the first of many large festivals organized by David
for the republic. He went on to organize festivals for martyrs that died
fighting royalists. These funerals echoed the religious festivals of the pagan
Greeks and Romans and are seen by many as Saturnalian.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Republican costume designed by David. Engraving by Denon.

David incorporated many revolutionary symbols into these theatrical
performances and orchestrated ceremonial rituals; in effect radicalizing the
applied arts, themselves. The most popular symbol David was responsible for as
propaganda minister, was drawn from classical Greek images; changing and
transforming them with contemporary politics. In an elaborate festival held on
the anniversary of the revolt that brought the monarchy to its knees,
Davidâs Hercules figure was revealed in a procession following the lady
Liberty (Marianne). Liberty, the symbol of Enlightenment ideals was here being
overturned by the Hercules symbol; that of strength and passion for the
protection of the Republic against disunity and factionalism.[10] In his
speech during the procession, David âexplicitly emphasized the opposition
between people and monarchy; Hercules was chosen, after all, to make this
opposition more evidentâ.[11] It was the ideals that David linked to his
Hercules that single-handedly transformed the figure from a sign of the old
regime into a powerful new symbol of revolution. âDavid turned him into the
representation of a collective, popular power. He took one of the favorite
signs of monarchy and reproduced, elevated, and monumentalized it into the
sign of its opposite.â[12] Hercules, the image, became to the
revolutionaries, something to rally around.

In 1791, the King attempted to flee the country and was within 30 miles (48
km) of the Swiss border when he had a hunger attack that led to his arrest and
eventual execution. Louis XVI had made secret requests to Emperor Joseph II of
Austria, Marie-Antoinette's brother, to restore him to his throne. This was
granted and Austria threatened France if the royal couple were hurt. In
reaction, the people arrested the King. This lead to an Invasion after the
trials and execution of Louis and Marie-Antoinette. The Bourbon monarchy was
destroyed by the French people in 1792âit would be restored after Napoleon,
then destroyed again with the Restoration of the House of Bonaparte. When the
new National Convention held its first meeting, David was sitting with his
friends Jean-Paul Marat and Robespierre. In the Convention, David soon earned
a nickname "ferocious terrorist". Soon, Robespierreâs agents discovered a
secret vault of the kingâs proving he was trying to overthrow the
government, and demanded his execution. The National Convention held the trial
of Louis XVI and David voted for the death of the King, which caused his wife,
a royalist, to divorce him.

When Louis XVI was executed on 21 January 1793, another man had already died
as well â Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau. Le Peletier was killed
on the preceding day by a royal bodyguard, in revenge for having voted the
death of the King. David was called upon to organize a funeral, and he painted
Le Peletier Assassinated. In it the assassinâs sword was seen hanging by a
single strand of horsehair above Le Peletier's body, a concept inspired by the
proverbial ancient tale of the sword of Damocles, which illustrated the
insecurity of power and position. This underscored the courage displayed by Le
Peletier and his companions in routing an oppressive king. The sword pierces a
piece of paper on which is written âI vote the death of the tyrantâ, and
as a tribute at the bottom right of the picture David placed the inscription
âDavid to Le Peletier. 20 January 1793â. The painting was later destroyed
by Le Peletier's royalist daughter, and is known only by a drawing, an
engraving, and contemporary accounts. Nevertheless, this work was important in
David's career, because it was the first completed painting of the French
Revolution, made in less than three months, and a work through which he
initiated the regeneration process that would continue with The Death of
Marat, David's masterpiece.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Death of Marat (1793)

On 13 July 1793, David's friend Marat was assassinated by Charlotte Corday
with a knife she had hidden in her clothing. She gained entrance to Marat's
house on the pretense of presenting him a list of people who should be
executed as enemies of France. Marat thanked her and said that they would be
guillotined next week upon which Corday immediately fatally stabbed him. She
was guillotined shortly thereafter. Corday was of an opposing political party,
whose name can be seen in the note Marat holds in David's subsequent painting,
The Death of Marat. Marat, a member of the National Assembly and a journalist,
had a skin disease that caused him to itch horribly. The only relief he could
get was in his bath over which he improvised a desk to write his list of
suspect counter-revolutionaries who were to be quickly tried and, if
convicted, guillotined. David once again organized a spectacular funeral, and
Marat was buried in the PanthÃ©on. Because Marat died in the bathtub, writing,
David wanted to have his body submerged in the bathtub during the funeral
procession. This did not play out because the body had begun to putrefy.
Instead, Maratâs body was periodically sprinkled with water as the people
came to see his corpse, complete with gaping wound. The Death of Marat,
perhaps David's most famous painting, has been called the PietÃ  of the
revolution. Upon presenting the painting to the convention, he said "Citizens,
the people were again calling for their friend; their desolate voice was
heard: David, take up your brushes.., avenge Marat... I heard the voice of the
people. I obeyed." David had to work quickly, but the result was a simple and
powerful image.

The Death of Marat, 1793, became the leading image of the Terror and
immortalized both Marat, and David in the world of the revolution. This piece
stands today as âa moving testimony to what can be achieved when an
artistâs political convictions are directly manifested in his work".[13] A
political martyr was instantly created as David portrayed Marat with all the
marks of the real murder, in a fashion which greatly resembles that of Christ
or his disciples.[14] The subject although realistically depicted remains
lifeless in a rather supernatural composition. With the surrogate tombstone
placed in front of him and the almost holy light cast upon the whole scene;
alluding to an out of this world existence. âAtheists though they were,
David and Marat, like so many other fervent social reformers of the modern
world, seem to have created a new kind of religion.â[15] At the very center
of these beliefs, there stood the republic.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Marie Antoinette on the Way to the Guillotine, 16 October 1793

After executing the King, war broke out between the new Republic and virtually
every major power in Europe. David, as a member of the Committee of Public
Safety, which was headed by Robespierre, contributed directly to the reign of
Terror.[16] The committee was severe. Marie Antoinette went to the guillotine;
an event recorded in a famous sketch by David. Portable guillotines killed
failed generals, aristocrats, priests and perceived enemies. David organized
his last festival: the festival of the Supreme Being. Robespierre had realized
what a tremendous propaganda tool these festivals were, and he decided to
create a new religion, mixing moral ideas with the republic, based on the
ideas of Rousseau, with Robespierre as the new high priest. This process had
already begun by confiscating church lands and requiring priests to take an
oath to the state. The festivals, called fÃªtes, would be the method of
indoctrination. On the appointed day, 20 Prairial by the revolutionary
calendar, Robespierre spoke, descended steps, and with a torch presented to
him by David, incinerated a cardboard image symbolizing atheism, revealing an
image of wisdom underneath. The festival hastened the "Incorruptible's"
downfall. Later, some see Davidâs methods as being taken up by Vladimir
Lenin, Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler. These massive propaganda events
brought the people together.

Soon, the war began to go well; French troops marched across the southern half
of the Netherlands (which would later become Belgium), and the emergency that
had placed the Committee of Public Safety in control was no more. Then
plotters seized Robespierre at the National Convention and he was later
guillotined, in effect ending the reign of terror. As Robespierre was
arrested, David yelled to his friend "if you drink hemlock, I shall drink it
with you." After this, he supposedly fell ill, and did not attend the evening
session because of "stomach pain", which saved him from being guillotined
along with Robespierre. David was arrested and placed in prison. There he
painted his own portrait, showing him much younger than he actually was, as
well as that of his jailer.

## [edit] Post-revolution

After Davidâs wife visited him in jail, he conceived the idea of telling the
story of the Sabine Women. The Sabine Women Enforcing Peace by Running between
the Combatants, also called The Intervention of the Sabine Women is said to
have been painted to honor his wife, with the theme being love prevailing over
conflict. The painting was also seen as a plea for the people to reunite after
the bloodshed of the revolution.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Intervention of the Sabine Women (1799)

This work also brought him to the attention of Napoleon. The story for the
painting is as follows: "The Romans have abducted the daughters of their
neighbors, the Sabines. To avenge this abduction, the Sabines attacked Rome,
although not immediatelyâsince Hersilia, the daughter of Tatius, the leader
of the Sabines, had been married to Romulus, the Roman leader, and then had
two children by him in the interim. Here we see Hersilia between her father
and husband as she adjures the warriors on both sides not to take wives away
from their husbands or mothers away from their children. The other Sabine
Women join in her exhortations." During this time, the martyrs of the
revolution were taken from the Pantheon and buried in common ground, and
revolutionary statues were destroyed. When he was finally released to the
country, France had changed. His wife managed to get David released from
prison, and he wrote letters to his former wife, and told her he never ceased
loving her. He remarried her in 1796. Finally, wholly restored to his
position, he retreated to his studio, took pupils and retired from politics.

## [edit] Napoleon

Main article: Napoleon I of France

<IMG>

<IMG>

Napoleon at the Saint-Bernard Pass (1801)

In one of history's great coincidences, David's close association with the
Committee of Public Safety during the Terror resulted in his signing of the
death warrant for one Alexandre de Beauharnais, a minor noble. De
Beauharnais's widow, Rose-Marie JosÃ¨phe de Tascher de Beauharnais would later
be known to the world as JosÃ©phine Bonaparte, Empress of the French. It was
her coronation by her husband, Napoleon I, that David depicted so memorably in
the Coronation of Napoleon and Josephine, 2 December 1804.

David had been an admirer of Napoleon from their first meeting, struck by the
then-General Bonaparte's classical features. Requesting a sitting from the
busy and impatient general, David was able to sketch Napoleon in 1797. David
recorded the conqueror of Italy's face, but the full composition of General
Bonaparte holding the peace treaty with Austria remains unfinished. Napoleon
had high esteem for David, and asked him to accompany him to Egypt in 1798,
but David refused, claiming he was too old for adventuring and sending instead
his student, Antoine-Jean Gros.

After Napoleon's successful coup d'etat in 1799, as First Consul he
commissioned David to commemorate his daring crossing of the Alps. The
crossing of the St. Bernard Pass had allowed the French to surprise the
Austrian army and win victory at the Battle of Marengo on 14 June 1800.
Although Napoleon had crossed the Alps on a mule, he requested that he be
portrayed "calm upon a fiery steed". David complied with Napoleon Crossing the
Saint-Bernard. After the proclamation of the Empire in 1804, David became the
official court painter of the regime.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Coronation of Napoleon, (1806).

One of the works David was commissioned for was The Coronation of Napoleon in
Notre Dame. David was permitted to watch the event. He had plans of Notre Dame
delivered and participants in the coronation came to his studio to pose
individually, though never the Emperor (the only time David obtained a sitting
from Napoleon had been in 1797). David did manage to get a private sitting
with the Empress Josephine and Napoleon's sister, Caroline Murat, through the
intervention of erstwhile art patron, Marshal Joachim Murat, the Emperor's
brother-in-law. For his background, David had the choir of Notre Dame act as
his fill-in characters. The Pope came to sit for the painting, and actually
blessed David. Napoleon came to see the painter, stared at the canvas for an
hour and said "David, I salute you". David had to redo several parts of the
painting because of Napoleon's various whims, and for this painting, David
received only 24,000 Francs.

## [edit] Exile and death

On the Bourbons returning to power, David figured in the list of proscribed
former revolutionaries and Bonapartists â for having voted execution for the
deposed King Louis XVI; and for participating in the death of Louis XVII.
Mistreated and starved, the imprisoned Louis XVII was forced to confess to
incest with his mother, Queen Marie-Antoinette, (untrue; separated early, son
and mother were disallowed communication, nevertheless, the allegation helped
earn her the guillotine). The new Bourbon King, Louis XVIII, however, granted
amnesty to David and even offered him the position of court painter. David
refused, preferring self-exile in Brussels. There, he trained and influenced
Brussels artists like FranÃ§ois-Joseph Navez and Ignace Brice, painted Cupid
and Psyche and quietly lived the remainder of his life with his wife (to whom
he had remarried). In that time, he painted smaller-scale mythological scenes,
and portraits of citizens of Brussels and Napoleonic Ã©migrÃ©s, such as the
Baron Gerard.

His last, great work, Mars Disarmed by Venus and the Three Graces, he began in
1822 and completed the year before his death. In December 1823, he wrote:
"This is the last picture I want to paint, but I want to surpass myself in it.
I will put the date of my seventy-five years on it and afterwards I will never
again pick up my brush." The finished painting â evoking painted porcelain
because of its limpid coloration â was exhibited first in Brussels, then in
Paris â where his former students flocked to view it. The exhibition was
profitable â 13,000 francs, after deducting operating costs, thus, more than
10,000 people visited and viewed the painting. Even after his stroke, however,
which in the spring of 1825 disfigured his face and slurred his speech, he
remained in full command of his artistic faculties. In June 1825 resolved to
embark on an improved version of his Anger of Achilles (otherwise known as the
Sacrifice of Iphigenie), the earlier version of which, painted in 1819, is now
in the collection of the Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth, Texas. David remarked
to his friends who visited his studio "this [painting] is what is killing me"
such was his determination to complete the work, but by October it must have
already been well advanced as his former pupil Gros wrote to congratulate him,
having heard reports of the painting's merits. By the time David died the
painting had been completed and Ambroise Firmin-Didot, who had commissioned
it, brought it back to Paris to include it in the exhibition "Pour les grecs"
that he had organised and which opened in Paris in April 1826.

When David was leaving a theatre, a carriage struck him, and he later died, on
29 December 1825. At his death, some portraits were auctioned in Paris, they
sold for little; the famous Death of Marat was exhibited in a secluded room,
to avoid outraging public sensibilities. Disallowed return to France for
burial, for having been a regicide of King Louis XVI, the body of the painter
Jacques-Louis David was buried at Evere Cemetery, Brussels, while his heart
was buried at PÃ¨re Lachaise, Paris.

## [edit] Medical analysis of his face

Jacques-Louis Davidâs facial abnormalities were traditionally reported to be
a consequence of a deep facial sword wound after a fencing incident. These
left him with a noticeable asymmetry during facial expression and resulted in
his difficulty in eating or speaking (he could not pronounce some consonants
such as the letter r). A sword scar wound on the left side of his face is
present in his self-portrait and sculptures and corresponds to some of the
buccal branches of the facial nerve. An injury to this nerve and its branches
are likely to have resulted in the difficulties with his left facial movement.

Furthermore, as a result of this injury, he suffered from a growth on his face
that biographers and art historians have defined as a âbenign tumourâ or
âexostosisâ. These however may have been a granuloma, or even a post-
traumatic neuroma.[17]

## [edit] Gallery

<IMG>

Belisarius (1781), MusÃ©e de Beaux Arts, Lille

<IMG>

Andromache mourns Hector (1783), MusÃ©e du Louvre, Paris

<IMG>

The Death of Socrates (1787), Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City

<IMG>

Portrait of Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier and his wife (1788), Metropolitan Museum
of Art, New York City  
<IMG>

Paris and Helen (1788), MusÃ©e du Louvre, Paris

<IMG>

The Lictors Bring to Brutus the Bodies of His Sons (1789), MusÃ©e du Louvre,
Paris

<IMG>

Portrait of Anne-Marie-Louise ThÃ©lusson, Comtesse de Sorcy (1790), Neue
Pinakothek, Munich

<IMG>

Madame RÃ©camier (1800), MusÃ©e du Louvre, Paris  
<IMG>

Portrait of Pope Pius VII (1805), MusÃ©e du Louvre, Paris

<IMG>

The Coronation of Napoleon, (1806), MusÃ©e du Louvre, Paris

<IMG>

Napoleon in His Study (1812), National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.

<IMG>

Marguerite-Charlotte David (1813), National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.  
<IMG>

Leonidas at Thermopylae (1814), MusÃ©e du Louvre, Paris

<IMG>

Ãtienne-Maurice GÃ©rard (1816), Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City

<IMG>

The Comtesse Vilain XIIII and Her Daughter (1816), National Gallery, London

<IMG>

The Anger of Achilles (1825) Stair Sainty Gallery  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ Matthew Collings. "Feelings". This Is Civilisation. 2007. No. 2, season 1.
  2. ^ Boime 1987, p. 394.
  3. ^ Boime 1987, p. 399.
  4. ^ Boime 1987, p. 398.
  5. ^ Honour 1977, p. 72.
  6. ^ Crow 2007.
  7. ^ Simon Lee. "David, Jacques-Louis." Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. 24 Feb. 2009 <http://www.oxfordartonline.com/subscriber/article/grove/art/T021541>.
  8. ^ Bordes 2005, p. ??.
  9. ^ Crow 2007.
  10. ^ Hunt 2004, p. 97.
  11. ^ Hunt 2004, p. 99.
  12. ^ Hunt 2004, p. 103.
  13. ^ Boime 1987, p. 454.
  14. ^ Rosenblum 1969, p. 83.
  15. ^ Janson & Rosenblum 1984, p. 30.
  16. ^ Boime 1987, p. 442.
  17. ^ Ashrafian, H. Jacques-Louis David and his post-traumatic facial pathology. J R Soc Med 2007;100:341-342.

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Boime, Albert (1987). Social History of Modern Art: Art in the Age of Revolution, 1750-1800 volume 1. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226063321.
  * Bordes, Philippe (1988). David. Paris, FRA: Hazan. ISBN 2850251739.
  * Bordes, Philippe (2005). Jacques-Louis David: From Empire to Exile. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 0300104472.
  * Brookner, Anita, Jacques-Louis David, Chatto & Windus (1980)
  * Chodorow, Stanley, et al. The Mainstream of Civilization. New York: The Harcourt Press (1994) pg. 594
  * Crow, Thomas E. (1995). Emulation: Making Artists for Revolutionary France (1st ed.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 0300060939.
  * Crow, Thomas E. (2007), "Patriotism and Virtue: David to the Young Ingres", in Eisenman, Stephen F., Nineteenth Century Art: A Critical History (3rd ed.), New York City, NY: Thames & Hudson, pp. 18-54, ISBN 0500286833
  * DelÃ©cluze, E., Louis David, son Ã©cole et son temps, Paris, (1855) re-edition Macula (1983)
  * Dowd, David, Pageant-Master of the Republic, Lincoln, University of Nebraska Press, (1948)
  * Honour, Hugh (1977). Neo-Classicism. New York City, NY: Penguin Books. ISBN 0140137602.
  * Hunt, Lynn (2004). Politics, Culture, and Class in the French Revolution. Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 0520241568.
  * Janson, Horst Waldemar; Rosenblum, Robert (1984). 19th-Century Art. New York City, NY: Harry Abrams. ISBN 0136226213.
  * Johnson, Dorothy,Jacques-Louis David. New Perspectives, Newark (2006)
  * Lajer-Burcharth, Ewa, Necklines. The art of Jacques-Louis David after the Terror, ed. Yale University Press, New Haven London (1999)
  * Lee, Simon, David, ed. Phaidon, London (1999)
  * LÃ©vÃªque, Jean-Jacques, Jacques-Louis David Ã©dition Acr Paris (1989)
  * Leymarie, Jean, French Painting, the 19th century, Cleveland (1962)
  * Lindsay, Jack, Death of the Hero, London, Studio Books (1960)
  * Malvone, Laura, L'ÃvÃ¨nement politique en peinture. A propos du Marat de David in MÃ©langes de l'Ecole franÃ§aise de Rome. Italie et MÃ©diterranÃ©e 106, 1 (1994)
  * Michel, R. (ed), David contre David, actes du colloque au Louvre du 6-10 dÃ©cembre 1989, Paris (1993)
  * Monneret, Sophie Monneret, David et le nÃ©oclassicisme, ed. Terrail, Paris (1998)
  * NoÃ«l, Bernard, David, Ã©d. Flammarion, Paris (1989)
  * Rosenblum, Robert (1969). Transformations in Late Eighteenth Century Art (1st paperback ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691003025.
  * Rosenberg, Pierre, Prat, Louis-Antoine, Jacques-Louis David 1748-1825. Catalogue raisonnÃ© des dessins, 2 volumes, Ã©d. Leonardo Arte, Milan (2002)
  * Rosenberg, Pierre, Peronnet, Benjamin, Un album inÃ©dit de David in Revue de l'art, nÂ°142 (2003-4), pp.45-83 (complete the previous reference)
  * Sahut, Marie-Catherine & RÃ©gis Michel, David, l'art et le politique Ã©ditions Gallimard-DÃ©couvertes et RMN Paris (1988)
  * Sainte-Fare Garnot, N., Jacques-Louis David 1748-1825, Paris, Ed. Chaudun (2005)
  * Schnapper, Antoine, David tÃ©moin de son temps, Office du Livre, Fribourg, (1980)
  * ThÃ©voz, Michel, Le thÃ©Ã¢tre du crime. Essai sur la peinture de David, Ã©d. de Minuit, Paris (1989)
  * Vanden Berghe, Marc, Plesca, Ioana, Nouvelles perspectives sur la Mort de Marat: entre modÃ¨le jÃ©suite et rÃ©fÃ©rences mythologiques, Bruxelles (2004) / New Perspectives on David's Death of Marat, Brussels (2004) - online on www.art-chitecture.net/publications.php[1]
  * Vanden Berghe, Marc, Plesca, Ioana, Lepelletier de Saint-Fargeau sur son lit de mort par Jacques Louis-David: saint SÃ©bastien rÃ©volutionnaire, miroir multirÃ©fÃ©rencÃ© de Rome, Brussels (2005) - online on www.art-chitecture.net/publications.php[2]
  * Vaughan, William and Weston, Helen (eds),Jacques-Louis Davidâs Marat, Cambridge (2000)
  * The Death of Socrates, accessed 29 June 2005. New York Med.
  * Jacques-Louis David, on An Abridged History of Europe, accessed 29 June 2005
  * J.L. David on CGFA, accessed 29 June 2005

## [edit] Filmography

Danton (A. Wajda, France, 1982) - Historical drama (many scenes including
David as a silent character watching and drawing. Focuses on the period of the
Terror).

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Jacques-Louis David  
  * A Closer Look at David's Consecration of Napoleon (Louvre museum) | multimedia feature
  * The Intervention of the Sabines (Louvre museum)
  * Web Gallery of Art
  * www.jacqueslouisdavid.org 101 paintings by Jacques-Louis David
  * Jacques-Louis David paintings at PaintingDb
  * Jacques-Louis David at Olga's Gallery
  * Jacques-Louis David in the "History of Art"
  * smARThistory: Death of Socrates

Persondata  
NAME David, Jacques-Louis  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES David, Jacques-Louis  
SHORT DESCRIPTION French painter in the Neoclassical style  
DATE OF BIRTH 30 August 1748(1748-08-30)  
PLACE OF BIRTH Paris, France  
DATE OF DEATH 29 December 1825  
PLACE OF DEATH Brussels, Belgium  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacques-Louis_David"

Categories: French neoclassical painters | History artists | Propagandists |
Prix de Rome for painting | Deputies to the French National Convention |
Regicides of Louis XVI | First French Empire | People from Paris | Burials at
PÃ¨re Lachaise Cemetery | 1748 births | 1825 deaths

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Latina
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 00:54.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



