
# Dave Brubeck

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

David Warren Brubeck  
Dave Brubeck in March 2008.  

Dave Brubeck in March 2008.  
Background information  
Birth name David Warren Brubeck  
Born December 6, 1920 (1920-12-06) (age 88)  
Origin Concord, California, United States  
Genre(s) Jazz  
Cool jazz  
West Coast jazz  
Third stream  
Occupation(s) Pianist  
Composer  
Bandleader  
Instrument(s) Piano  
Associated acts Dave Brubeck Quartet  
David Warren Brubeck (born December 6, 1920 in Concord, California[1]), better
known as Dave Brubeck, is an American jazz pianist. Regarded as a jazz icon,
he has written a number of jazz standards, including "In Your Own Sweet Way"
and "The Duke". Brubeck's style ranges from refined to bombastic, reflecting
his mother's attempts at classical training and his improvisational skills.
His music is known for employing unusual time signatures, and superimposing
contrasting rhythms, meters, and tonalities.

His long-time musical partner, alto saxophonist Paul Desmond, wrote the Dave
Brubeck Quartet's most famous piece, "Take Five", which is in 5/4 time and has
endured as a jazz classic. Brubeck experimented with time signatures through
much of his career, recording "Pick Up Sticks" in 6/4, "Unsquare Dance" in
7/4, and "Blue Rondo Ã la Turk" in 9/8. He is also a respected composer of
orchestral and sacred music, and wrote soundtracks for television such as Mr.
Broadway and the animated miniseries "This Is America, Charlie Brown".

## Contents

  * 1 Early life and career
  * 2 The Dave Brubeck Quartet era
  * 3 Later career
  * 4 Personal life
  * 5 Awards
  * 6 Primary Sources
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Early life and career

Brubeck's father was a cattle rancher, and his mother, who had studied piano
in England and intended to become a concert pianist, taught piano for extra
money. Brubeck did not originally intend to become a musician (his two older
brothers, Henry and Howard, were already on that track), but took lessons from
his mother. He could not read sheet music during these early lessons,
attributing this difficulty to poor eyesight, but "faked" his way through,
well enough that this deficiency went mostly unnoticed.[2]

Intending to work with his father on their ranch, Brubeck entered the College
of the Pacific (now the University of the Pacific) intending to be a
veterinarian, but transferred thanks to the urging of the head of zoology, Dr.
Arnold, who told him "Brubeck, your mind's not here. It's across the lawn in
the conservatory. Please go there. Stop wasting my time and yours."[3] Later,
Brubeck was nearly expelled when one of his professors discovered that he
could not read music. Several of his professors came forward, arguing that his
ability with counterpoint and harmony more than compensated. The college was
still afraid that it would cause a scandal, and only agreed to let Brubeck
graduate once he promised never to teach piano.[4]

After graduating in 1942, Brubeck was drafted into the army and served
overseas in George Patton's Third Army during the Battle of the Bulge. While
serving as a rifleman, Brubeck met Paul Desmond in early 1944.[5]He played in
a band, quickly integrating it and gaining both popularity and deference. He
returned to college after serving nearly four years in the army, this time
attending Mills College and studying under Darius Milhaud, who encouraged him
to study fugue and orchestration but not classical piano.

After completing his studies under Milhaud, Brubeck helped found Berkeley,
California's Fantasy Records. He worked with an octet (the recording bears his
name only because Brubeck was the most well-known member at the time), and
later a trio which included Cal Tjader and Ron Crotty. Highly experimental,
the group made few recordings and got even fewer paying jobs. The trio was
often joined by Paul Desmond on the bandstand, at Desmond's prodding.[6]

## [edit] The Dave Brubeck Quartet era

Following a near-fatal swimming accident which incapacitated him for several
months, Brubeck organized The Dave Brubeck Quartet in 1951, with Desmond on
saxophone. They took up a long residency at San Francisco's Black Hawk
nightclub and gained great popularity touring college campuses, recording a
series of albums with such titles as Jazz at Oberlin (1953), Jazz at College
of the Pacific (1953), and Brubeck's debut on Columbia Records, Jazz Goes to
College (1954). In that same year, he was featured on the cover of Time
Magazine, the second jazz musician to be so honored (the first was Louis
Armstrong on February 21, 1949[7]).

Early bassists for the group included Ron Crotty, Bob Bates, and Bob's brother
Norman Bates; Lloyd Davis and Joe Dodge held the drum chair. In 1956, Brubeck
hired Joe Morello, who had been working with Marian McPartland; Morello's
presence made possible the rhythmic experiments that were to come. In 1958
Eugene Wright joined for the group's U.S. State Department tour of Europe and
Asia; Wright would become a permanent member in 1959, making the "classic"
Quartet's personnel complete.

Wright is African-American; in the late 1950s and early 1960s Brubeck canceled
several concerts because the club owners or hall managers resisted the idea of
an integrated band on their stages. He also canceled a television appearance
when he found out that the producers intended to keep Wright off-camera.

In 1959, the Dave Brubeck Quartet recorded Time Out, an album their label was
enthusiastic about but nonetheless hesitant to release. Featuring the album
art of Neil Fujita, the album contained all original compositions, almost none
of which were in common time. Nonetheless, on the strength of these unusual
time signatures (the album included "Take Five", "Blue Rondo Ã la Turk", and
"Three To Get Ready"), it quickly went platinum.

During this time, Dave Brubeck and his wife Iola were developing a jazz
musical, The Real Ambassadors, which was based in part on experiences they and
their colleagues had during foreign tours on behalf of the U.S. State
Department. The soundtrack album, which featured Louis Armstrong, Lambert,
Hendricks & Ross, and Carmen McRae was recorded in 1961, and the musical
itself was performed at the 1962 Monterey Jazz Festival.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dave Brubeck Quartet 1967. From left to right: Joe Morello, Eugene Wright,
Brubeck and Paul Desmond.

The quartet followed up the success of Time Out with several more albums in
the same vein, including Time Further Out: Miro Reflections (1961), Countdown:
Time in Outer Space (dedicated to John Glenn) (1962), Time Changes (1963), and
Time In (1965). These albums were also known for using contemporary paintings
as cover art, featuring the work of Joan MirÃ³ on Time Further Out, Franz
Kline on Time in Outer Space, and Sam Francis on Time Changes, though the
fifth album, Time In, did not feature an artist's work.

A high point for the group was their classic 1963 live album At Carnegie Hall,
described by critic Richard Palmer as "arguably Dave Brubeck's greatest
concert".

Apart from the Jazz Goes to College and the 'Time' series, Brubeck recorded
several records featuring his compositions based on the group's travels, and
the local music they encountered. Jazz Impressions of the USA (1956, Morello's
debut with the group), Jazz Impressions of Eurasia (1958), Jazz Impressions of
Japan (1964), and Jazz Impressions of New York (1964) are less well-known
albums, but all are brilliant examples of the quartet's studio work, and they
produced Brubeck standards such as "Summer Song," "Brandenburg Gate," "Koto
Song," and "Theme From Mr. Broadway." (Brubeck wrote, and the Quartet
performed, the theme song for the Craig Stevens CBS drama series; the music
from the series became material for the "New York" album.)

In 1961 Dave Brubeck appeared briefly in the British Jazz/Beat film All Night
Long starring Patrick McGoohan and Richard Attenborough. Brubeck is credited
in the film as playing himself, and is seen playing piano in one or more
scenes which include closeups of his playing style. One of these scenes is a
performance of Brubeck's "It's a Raggy Waltz" from the Time Further Out album.

In the early 1960s Dave Brubeck was the program director of WJZZ-FM radio (now
WEZN). He achieved his vision of an all jazz format radio station along with
his friend and neighbor John E. Metts, one of the first African Americans in
senior radio management.

The final studio album for Columbia by the Desmond/Wright/Morello quartet was
Anything Goes (1966) featuring Cole Porter songs. A few concert recordings
followed, and The Last Time We Saw Paris (1967) was the "Classic" Quartet's
swansong.

## [edit] Later career

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dave Brubeck (1990)

Brubeck's disbanding of the Quartet at the end of 1967 allowed him more time
to compose the longer, extended orchestral and choral works that were
occupying his attention. February 1968 saw the premiere of The Light in the
Wilderness for baritone solo, choir, organ, the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra
conducted by Erich Kunzel, and Brubeck improvising on certain themes within.
The piece is an oratorio on Christ's teachings. The next year, Brubeck
produced The Gates of Justice, a cantata mixing Biblical scripture with the
words of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr..

Further works followed, including the 1971 cantata Truth Is Fallen, dedicated
to the memory of the Kent State shootings and Jackson State killings of May
1970. The work was premiered in Midland, Michigan on May 1, 1971 and released
on LP in 1972.[8]

Of course, Brubeck's jazz playing did not cease. He was quickly prevailed upon
by Newport Jazz Festival producer George Wein to tour with Gerry Mulligan. A
Brubeck "Trio" was soon formed: Jack Six on bass, and Alan Dawson on drums.
From 1968 until 1973, The Dave Brubeck Trio featuring Gerry Mulligan performed
extensively, releasing several concert albums (including one with guest
Desmond) and one studio album.

In 1973 Brubeck formed another group with three of his sons, Darius on
keyboards, Dan on drums, and Chris on electric bass or bass trombone. This
group often included Perry Robinson, clarinet, and Jerry Bergonzi, saxophone.
Brubeck would record and tour with this "Two Generations of Brubeck" group
until 1978.

Brubeck and Desmond recorded an album of duets in 1975, then the Classic
Quartet reassembled for a 25th anniversary reunion in 1976. Desmond died in
1977.

Brubeck's Quartet has remained vital, a primary creative outlet for the
pianist. Bergonzi became a member and remained with the band until 1982. This
version featured Chris Brubeck, and Randy Jones on drums. Jones joined in 1979
and is still with the band after almost 30 years. Replacing Bergonzi was
Brubeck's old friend Bill Smith, who knew Brubeck at Mills College and was a
member of Brubeck's Octet in the late 1940s; he remained in the group through
the '80s and recorded with it off and on until 1995. The best recording of
this Smith/Brubeck/Jones Quartet is probably their remarkable Moscow Night
concert of 1987, released on Concord Records.

The Quartet currently includes alto saxophonist and flautist Bobby Militello,
bassist Michael Moore (who replaced Alec Dankworth), and Randy Jones.

In 1994, Brubeck was inducted into the Down Beat Jazz Hall of Fame.

Today, Brubeck continues to write new works, including orchestral and ballet
scores, has recently worked extensively with the London Symphony Orchestra,
and tours about 80 cities each year.

At the 49th Monterey Jazz Festival in September 2006, Brubeck debuted his
commissioned work, Cannery Row Suite, a jazz opera drawn from the characters
in John Steinbeck's American classic writing about Monterey's roots as a
sardine fishing and packing town. Iola (nÃ©e Whitlock), Brubeck's wife since
1942, is his personal secretary, manager and lyricist, and co-authored the
Cannery Row Suite with Dave. His performance of this as well as a number of
jazz standards with his current quartet was the buzz of the Festival (an event
Brubeck helped launch in 1958).

On April 3, 2009, Brubeck was scheduled to play the album Time Out in its
entirety to commemorate its 50th anniversary at the annual Brubeck Festival,
but was not able to due to being hospitalized with a viral infection. His son
Darius filled in on piano in place of his father.[9]

## [edit] Personal life

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dave Brubeck in 2005

Four of Brubeck's six children are professional musicians. Darius, the eldest,
is an accomplished pianist, producer, educator and performer. Dan is a
renowned percussionist, Chris is a multi-instrumentalist and composer.
Matthew, the youngest, is a versatile cellist with an impressive list of
composing and performance credits. Brubeck's children often join with him in
concerts and in the recording studio.

Brubeck believed the casualties of World War II contradicted the Ten
Commandments, and the war evoked a spiritual awakening. He became a Catholic
in 1980, shortly after completing the Mass To Hope which had been commissioned
by Ed Murray, editor of the national Catholic weekly Our Sunday Visitor.
Although he had spiritual interests before then he said, "I didn't convert to
Catholicism, because I wasn't anything to convert from. I just joined the
Catholic Church."[10] In 1996, he received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement
Award. In 2006, Brubeck was awarded the University of Notre Dame's Laetare
Medal, the oldest and most prestigious honor given to American Catholics,
during the University's Commencement. He performed "Travellin' Blues" for the
graduating class of 2006.

Brubeck founded the Brubeck Institute with his wife at their alma mater, the
University of the Pacific in 2000. What began as a special archive, consisting
of the personal document collection of the Brubecks has since expanded to
provide fellowships and educational opportunities in jazz for students.[11]

On April 8, 2008 US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice presented Brubeck with
a "Benjamin Franklin Award for Public Diplomacy" for offering an American
"vision of hope, opportunity and freedom" through his music.[12] "As a little
girl I grew up on the sounds of Dave Brubeck because my dad was your biggest
fan," said Rice.[13] The State Department said in a statement that "as a
pianist, composer, cultural emissary and educator, Dave Brubeck's life's work
exemplifies the best of America's cultural diplomacy."[12] At the ceremony
Brubeck played a brief recital for the audience at the State Department.[12]
"I want to thank all of you because this honor is something that I never
expected. Now I am going to play a cold piano with cold hands," Brubeck
stated.[12]

California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver
announced on May 28, 2008 that Brubeck will be inducted into the California
Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the
Arts. The induction ceremony took place December 10th and he was inducted
alongside 11 other legendary Californians.[citation needed]

## [edit] Awards

  * 1987 - Connecticut Arts Award
  * 1994 - National Medal of Arts, National Endowment for the Arts
  * 1994 - DownBeat Hall of Fame
  * 1996 - Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award
  * 2004 - Doctorate honoris causa University of Fribourg, Switzerland
  * 2006 - Laetare Medal (University of Notre Dame)
  * 2007 - BBC Jazz "Lifetime Achievement Award"
  * 2008 - Benjamin Franklin Award for Public Diplomacy[12]
  * 2008 - Introduced into California Hall of Fame

## [edit] Primary Sources

  * Photographs, documents, and video clips of oral history interviews from the Brubeck Collection are available at the University of the Pacific Library's Digital Collections.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Reception honors Concord native son, jazz great Dave Brubeck, ci.concord.ca.us, retrieved on 2007-01-15
  2. ^ WNYC - Music - An Hour With Dave Brubeck
  3. ^ It's About Time: The Dave Brubeck Story, by Fred M. Hall.
  4. ^ PBS - Rediscovering Dave Brubeck
  5. ^ Liner notes to the album "25th Anniversary Reunion", by "The Dave Brubeck Quartet".
  6. ^ Down Beat Artists Profile
  7. ^ TIME Magazine Cover: Louis Armstrong - Feb. 21, 1949
  8. ^ Composers Datebook: 5/01/02-5/04/02
  9. ^ http://www.contactmusic.com/news.nsf/article/ailing%20jazz%20icon%20brubeck%20cancels%20festival%20appearance_1099655
  10. ^ PBS - Rediscovering Dave Brubeck
  11. ^ Brubeck Summer Jazz Colony - University of the Pacific
  12. ^ a b c d e AFP. "Jazz great Brubeck wins US public diplomacy award" April 8, 2008.
  13. ^ All About Jazz. "Whatever Happened to Cultural Diplomacy?" April 19, 2008.

## [edit] External links

  * Dave Brubeck.com
  * 2004 WNYC Interview with Brubeck
  * Dave Brubeck Collection at the University of the Pacific Library's Holt-Atherton Special Collections
  * PBS - Rediscovering Dave Brubeck December 16, 2001 documentary
  * Dave Brubeck Discography Project
  * The Brubeck Institute
  * Biography, photos, CDs and concert review of Dave Brubeck by cosmopolis.ch
  * Discography at SonyBMG Masterworks
  * Dave Brubeck Quartet Discography at SonyBMG Masterworks

v â¢ d â¢ e

Dave Brubeck Quartet  
Members

Dave Brubeck (Piano)  â¢ Paul Desmond (Alto Saxophone)  â¢ Bob Bates (Double
Bass)  â¢ Joe Dodge (Drums)  â¢ Ron Crotty (Double Bass)  â¢ Lloyd Davis
(Drums)  â¢ Norman Bates (Double Bass)  â¢ Joe Morello (Drums)  â¢ Eugene
Wright (Double Bass)  â¢ Gerry Mulligan (Baritone Saxophone)  â¢ Jack Six
(Double Bass)  â¢ Alan Dawson (Drums)  â¢ Darius Brubeck (Piano/Electric
Piano)  â¢ Chris Brubeck (Bass Trombone/Bass)  â¢ Dan Brubeck (Drums)  â¢
Bill Smith (Clarinet)  â¢ Bobby Militello (Alto Saxophone/Tenor
Saxophone/Flute)  â¢ Matthew Brubeck (Cello)  â¢ Randy Jones (Drums)  
Selected Discography

Dave Brubeck Octet (1950)  â¢ Jazz at Oberlin (1953)  â¢ Jazz at the College
of the Pacific (1953)  â¢ Jazz Goes to College (1954)  â¢ Jazz: Red Hot and
Cool (1955)  â¢ Brubeck Plays Brubeck (1956)  â¢ Jazz Impressions of the USA
(1956)  â¢ Dave Digs Disney (1957)  â¢ Jazz Impressions of Eurasia (1958)
â¢ Newport 1958 â¢ Gone With the Wind (1959)  â¢ Time Out (1959)  â¢
Bernstein Plays Brubeck Plays Bernstein (1960)  â¢ Brubeck and Rushing (1960)
â¢ Time Further Out (1961)  â¢ The Real Ambassadors (1962)  â¢ Countdown-
Time in Outer Space (1962)  â¢ At Carnegie Hall (1963)  â¢ Time Changes
(1963)  â¢ Jazz Impressions of Japan (1964)  â¢ Jazz Impressions of New York
(1964)  â¢ Angel Eyes (1965)  â¢ My Favorite Things (1965)  â¢ Dave
Brubeck's Greatest Hits (1966)  â¢ Time In (1966)  â¢ Anything Goes (1966)
â¢ Bravo! Brubeck! (1967)  â¢ The Last Time We Saw Paris (1967)  â¢
Compadres (1968)  â¢ Blues Roots (1969)  â¢ Live at the Berlin Philharmonie
(1970)  â¢ The Last Set at Newport (1971)  â¢ We're All Together Again for
the First Time (1973)  â¢ Two Generations of Brubeck (1973)  â¢ Brubeck &
Desmond 1975: the Duets â¢ DBQ 25th Anniversary Reunion (1976)  â¢ The New
Brubeck Quartet Live at Montreux (1978)  â¢ Back Home (1979)  â¢ Paper Moon
(1982)  â¢ Concord on a Summer Night (1982)  â¢ For Iola (1984)  â¢ Blue
Rondo (1987)  â¢ Moscow Night (1987)  â¢ Quiet As the Moon (1991)  â¢ Late
Night Brubeck (1994)  â¢ Just You, Just Me (1994)  â¢ The 40th Anniversary
Tour of the U.K. (1999)  â¢ One Alone (2000)  â¢ Park Avenue South (2003)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dave_Brubeck"

Categories: 1920 births | Living people | American jazz composers | American
jazz pianists | American jazz songwriters | American military personnel of
World War II | American Roman Catholics | Classical pianists | Converts to
Roman Catholicism | Cool jazz pianists | Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award
winners | Musicians from California | People from Concord, California | United
States Army soldiers | United States National Medal of Arts recipients |
University of the Pacific alumni | West Coast jazz pianists

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 21:52.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



