
# Mitch Kapor

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Mitch Kapor  
<IMG>  
  
Born November 1, 1950 (1950-11-01) (age 58)  
Brooklyn, New York, USA  
Known for Lotus 1-2-3 and co-founder of The Electronic Frontier Foundation  
Mitchell David Kapor (born November 1, 1950) is the founder of Lotus
Development Corporation and the designer of Lotus 1-2-3.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Early life and education
    * 1.2 Lotus
    * 1.3 Electronic Frontier Foundation
    * 1.4 Mozilla Foundation
    * 1.5 Other startups
  * 2 Personal life
  * 3 Articles
  * 4 Bibliography
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

### [edit] Early life and education

Kapor was born in Brooklyn, New York, and attended public schools on Long
Island in Freeport, New York,[1] where he graduated from high school in 1967.
He received a BA from Yale College in 1971 and studied psychology, linguistics
and computer science as part of an interdisciplinary major in Cybernetics.
Kapor served as Music Director and Program Director at Yale's radio station
WYBC-FM

During the 1970s, Kapor was employed as a radio disc jockey at WHCN-FM, a
commercial progressive rock station based in Hartford, Connecticut. It was
also in this period that he became interested in Transcendental Meditation,
going on to teach the philosophy in Cambridge, Massachusetts (where he also
worked as a low-level computer programmer) and Fairfield, Iowa. In 1978, he
graduated with a Master's degree in counseling psychology from Campus-Free
College (later renamed Beacon College) in Boston. Kapor subsequently began a
career as a mental health counselor at New England Memorial Hospital in
Stoneham, Massachusetts.[2]

In 1980, Kapor left his counseling career to attend the Master's of Science in
Management program at the MIT Sloan School of Management, but did not
graduate.

### [edit] Lotus

Kapor founded Lotus Development Corporation in 1982 with Jonathan Sachs, who
was responsible for technical architecture and implementation, and created
Lotus 1-2-3. Kapor served as the President (later Chairman) and Chief
Executive Officer of Lotus from 1982 to 1986 and as a Director until 1987. In
1983, Lotus' first year of operations, the company achieved revenues of
$53,000,000 and had a successful public offering. In 1984 the company tripled
in revenue to $156,000,000. The number of employees grew to over a thousand by
1985.

Lotus' first product was presentation software for the Apple II known as Lotus
Executive Briefing System. Kapor founded Lotus after working as head of
development at VisiCorp (the marketers of VisiCalc) and selling the rights to
his products; VisiPlot and VisiTrend to VisiCorp.

Shortly after Kapor left VisiCorp, he and Sachs produced an integrated
spreadsheet and graphing program. Even though IBM and VisiCorp collaborated on
VisiCalc for the PC and VisiCalc shipped simultaneously with the PC, Lotus had
a superior product. Lotus released Lotus 1-2-3 in January 1983. The name
referred to the three ways the product could be used, as a spreadsheet,
graphics package, and database manager. The latter two functions were less
often used; 1-2-3 was the most powerful spreadsheet available. Sales were
enormous, turning Lotus into the largest independent software vendor in the
world almost overnight. The business plan had called for $1 million in sales
in the first year, and the actual results were $54 million.

Kapor was also the fundamental architect of the "free-form" database
application, Lotus Agenda.

In October 1984 Jim Manzi was named President, and in April 1986 he was named
as CEO, succeeding Mitch Kapor who had become inactive in the company.

### [edit] Electronic Frontier Foundation

In 1990, with fellow digital rights activists John Perry Barlow and John
Gilmore, he co-founded the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and served as its
chairman until 1994. The EFF is a non-profit civil liberties organization
working in the public interest to protect privacy, free expression, and access
to public resources and information online, as well as to promote
responsibility in new media.

### [edit] Mozilla Foundation

Kapor has been the Chair of the Mozilla Foundation since its inception in
2003. He founded the Mitchell Kapor Foundation to support his philanthropic
interests in environmental health. He also co-founded, and is on the board of,
the Level Playing Field Institute, a 501c(3) dedicated to fairness in
education and workplaces. Kapor was the original Chair and is currently on the
Board of Directors of Linden Lab, a San Francisco-based company which created
the popular virtual world Second Life, and a member of the Advisory Board for
the Wikimedia Foundation.[3]

### [edit] Other startups

In 1990, Kapor's new company On Technology introduced their new product On
Location, an application designed for the Macintosh that contained an indexing
system that permit quick retrieval and display of text on the Mac's hard
disk.[4] "We think we're being cagey by bringing it out on the Mac first,"
Kapor said.[4] "It's a richer medium than MS-DOS, and if we have a hot product
in the Mac market, it will be easier to get into the PC market."[4]

In 2001, Kapor founded the Open Source Applications Foundation, where he
worked on Chandler Project. His involvement with the Foundation and Project
ended in 2008.

In 2006, Kapor founded his latest startup, Foxmarks, based in San Francisco.

## [edit] Personal life

He is married to Freada Kapor Klein and resides in San Francisco.

Kapor is an Adjunct Professor at the School of Information at University of
California, Berkeley.

## [edit] Articles

  * "Civil Liberties in Cyberspace" - Scientific American Special Issue on Communications, Computers, and Networks, September, 1991 [3]
  * Electronic Newsletter of The Electronic Frontier Foundation, Cambridge, MA \- scroll down to Current Legislative and Policy Efforts by Mitchell Kapor. \- September 1991
  * Articles in the EFF archive

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Rosenberg, Scott. Dreaming in Code: Two Dozen Programmers, Three Years, 4,732 Bugs, and One Quest for Transcendent Software (2007) Random House ISBN 978-1-4000-8246-9, about Mitch Kapor, collaboration and massive software endeavors, particularly the open source calendar application Chandler.

## [edit] See also

  * Massively distributed collaboration

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Mitchell Kapor's Biography [1]
  2. ^ Mitchell Kapor's Biography [2]
  3. ^ "Advisory Board". Wikimedia Foundation. January 22, 2007. http://wikimediafoundation.org/w/index.php?title=Advisory_Board&oldid=19240. Retrieved on 2007-01-28.
  4. ^ a b c New York Times. " New Retrieval Software By On Technology Inc." by John Markoff. January 22, 1990.

## [edit] External links

  * OSAF community weblog
  * Mitch Kapor's blog
  * Mitch Kapor's weblog archives
  * Inside Mitch Kapor's World
  * Level Playing Field Institute
  * Mitch Kapor's Why Wikipedia is the next big thing
  * Wikimania 2006 bio
  * Foxmarks
  * How to build a successful company, Mitch speaking at Stanford (podcast & video)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mitch_Kapor"

Categories: 1950 births | Living people | American businesspeople | American
bloggers | People from Brooklyn | People from Long Island | People from San
Francisco, California | Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni | Yale
University alumni | MIT Sloan School of Management alumni | Second Life |
Wikimedia Foundation Advisory Board members

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 March 2009, at 15:24.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



