
# Philip Roth

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Philip Roth  
<IMG>  
Philip Roth  
Born March 19, 1933 (1933-03-19) (age 76)  
Newark, New Jersey  
Occupation novelist  
Nationality American  
Genres Literary fiction  
Influences

    
    
    Henry James, Franz Kafka, Saul Bellow, Charlotte BrontÃ«, Emily BrontÃ«, Henry Miller, Anne Frank, Louis-Ferdinand CÃ©line, James Joyce, Joseph Conrad  
Philip Milton Roth (born March 19, 1933, Newark, New Jersey[1]) is an American
novelist. He gained early literary fame with the 1959 collection Goodbye,
Columbus (winner of 1960's National Book Award), cemented it with his 1969
bestseller Portnoy's Complaint, and has continued to write critically
acclaimed works, many of which feature his fictional alter ego, Nathan
Zuckerman. The Zuckerman novels began with The Ghost Writer in 1979, and
include the Pulitzer Prize-winning American Pastoral (1997).

## Contents

  * 1 Life and career
  * 2 Influences and themes
  * 3 Awards and honors
  * 4 Bibliography
    * 4.1 Zuckerman novels
    * 4.2 Roth novels
    * 4.3 Kepesh novels
    * 4.4 Other novels
    * 4.5 Memoirs
    * 4.6 Collections
    * 4.7 Library of America Editions
  * 5 Awards
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links
  * 8 Further reading and literary criticism

  
## [edit] Life and career

Roth grew up in the Weequahic neighborhood of Newark, New Jersey, as the
second child of first-generation American parents, Jews of Galician descent,
and graduated from Newark's Weequahic High School in 1950.[2] Roth went on to
attend Bucknell University, earning a degree in English. He then pursued
graduate studies at the University of Chicago, where he received an M.A. in
English literature and worked briefly as an instructor in the university's
writing program. Roth went on to teach creative writing at the University of
Iowa and Princeton University. He continued his academic career at the
University of Pennsylvania, where he taught comparative literature before
retiring from teaching in 1991.

While at Chicago, Roth met the novelist Saul Bellow, as well as Margaret
Martinson, who became his first wife. Their separation in 1963, along with
Martinson's death in a car crash in 1968, left a lasting mark on Roth's
literary output. Specifically, Martinson was the inspiration for female
characters in several of Roth's novels, including Lucy Nelson in When She Was
Good, and Maureen Tarnopol in My Life As a Man.[3]

Between the end of his studies and the publication of his first book in 1959,
Roth served two years in the United States Army and then wrote short fiction
and criticism for various magazines, including movie reviews for The New
Republic. His first book, Goodbye, Columbus, a novella and five short stories,
won the National Book Award in 1960, and afterward he published two novels,
Letting Go and When She Was Good. However, it was not until the publication of
his third novel, Portnoy's Complaint, in 1969 that Roth enjoyed widespread
commercial and critical success.

During the 1970s Roth experimented in various modes, from the political satire
Our Gang to the Kafkaesque The Breast. By the end of the decade Roth had
created his Nathan Zuckerman alter ego. In a series of highly self-referential
novels and novellas that followed between 1979-1986, Zuckerman appeared as
either the main character or as an interlocutor.

In Sabbath's Theater (1995), Roth presented his most lecherous protagonist yet
with Mickey Sabbath, a disgraced former puppeteer. In complete contrast, the
first volume of Roth's second Zuckerman trilogy, 1997's American Pastoral,
focuses on the life of virtuous Newark athletics star Swede Levov and the
tragedy that befalls him when his teenage daughter transforms into a domestic
terrorist during the late 1960s. I Married a Communist (1998) focuses on the
McCarthy era. The Human Stain examines identity politics in 1990s America. The
Dying Animal (2001) is a short novel about eros and death that revisits
literary professor David Kepesh, protagonist of two 1970s works, The Breast
and The Professor of Desire.

Events in Roth's personal life have occasionally been the subject of media
scrutiny. According to his pseudo-confessional novel Operation Shylock (1993),
Roth suffered a nervous breakdown in the late 1980s. In 1990, he married his
long-time companion, English actress Claire Bloom. In 1994 they separated, and
in 1996 Bloom published a memoir, Leaving a Doll's House, which described the
couple's marriage in detail, much of which was unflattering to Roth. Certain
aspects of I Married a Communist have been regarded by critics as veiled
rebuttals to accusations put forth in Bloom's memoir.

In one of his most audacious books to date, The Plot Against America (2004),
Roth imagines an alternative version of American history: What if Charles A.
Lindbergh, aviator hero and isolationist had been elected U.S. president in
1940? In the imagined history that follows, Roth gives an account of a U.S.
that negotiates an understanding with Hitler's Nazi Germany and embarks on its
own program of anti-Semitism. It has been hailed as Roth's masterpiece.
"[H]uge, inflammatory, painfully movingâ¦ It may well be his best, and it may
well arouse more controversy than all the rest combined.â¦ That Roth has
written The Plot Against America in some respects as a parable for our times
seems to me inescapably and rather regrettably true."[4]

Roth's 182-page novel Everyman, a meditation on illness, desire, and death,
was published in May 2006.

Exit Ghost, which features his alter ego Nathan Zuckerman, was released in
October 2007. According to the book's publisher, it is the last Zuckerman
novel[5].

Indignation, Roth's twenty-ninth book, was published on September 16, 2008.
Set in 1951 to the backdrop of the Korean War, it follows Marcus Messner's
departure from Newark to Ohio's Winesburg College, where he begins his
sophomore year.

Rothâs 30th and 31st books will be published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt,
the publisher announced on February 25, 2009. The Humbling, which is scheduled
for the fall, is a novel about an aging stage actor whose empty life is
altered by âa counterplot of unusual erotic desire,â the publisher said.
HMH will also release Nemesis, a work of fiction set in the summer of 1944
that tells of a polio epidemic and its effects on a closely knit Newark
community and its children. That book is scheduled for publication in 2010.

## [edit] Influences and themes

Much of Roth's fiction revolves around (semi-)autobiographical themes, while
self-consciously and playfully addressing the perils of establishing
connections between the author Philip Roth and his fictional lives and voices,
including narrators and protagonists such as David Kepesh and Nathan Zuckerman
or even the character "Philip Roth", of which there are two in Operation
Shylock.

In Roth's fiction, the question of authorship is intertwined with the theme of
the idealistic, secular Jewish-American son who attempts to distance himself
from Jewish customs and traditions, and from what he perceives as the time's
suffocating influence of parents, rabbis and other community leaders. Jewish
sons such as most infamously Alexander Portnoy and later Nathan Zuckerman
rebel by denouncing Judaism, while at the same time remaining attached to a
sense of Jewish identity. Roth's fiction has been described by critics as
pervaded by "a kind of alienation that is enlivened and exacerbated by what
binds it."[6]

Roth's first work, Goodbye, Columbus, had been severely criticized by rabbis
and readers as crude and infused with a sense of self-loathing.[citation
needed] In response, Roth, in his 1963 essay "Writing About Jews" (collected
in Reading Myself and Others), maintained that he wanted to explore the
conflict between the call to Jewish solidarity and his desire to be free to
question the values and morals of middle-class Jewish-Americans uncertain of
their identities in an era of cultural assimilation and upward social
mobility: "The cry 'Watch out for the goyim!' at times seems more the
expression of an unconscious wish than of a warning: Oh that they were out
there, so that we could be together here! A rumor of persecution, a taste of
exile, might even bring with it the old world of feelings and habits â
something to replace the new world of social accessibility and moral
indifference, the world which tempts all our promiscuous instincts, and where
one cannot always figure out what a Jew is that a Christian is not."[7] This
echoes a similar theme explored by Canadian-Jewish author Mordecai Richler in
his early works like Son of A Smaller Hero.[citation needed]

In Roth's fiction, the exploration of "promiscuous instincts" within the
context of Jewish-American lives, mainly from a male viewpoint plays an
important role. Such promiscuity entails not only sexual promiscuity but also
more generally a transgression of Jewish-American cultural values and norms,
such as observance of the Jewish dietary laws, respect for the conventions of
Judaism, and marrying a Jewish spouse. Through transgressions such as ignoring
dietary laws, ridiculing Judaism, dating "shiksas" and engaging in "immoral"
sexual activities, Roth's characters achieve a sense of liberation. But the
resulting sense of freedom in Roth's fiction also results in feelings of
alienation and emptiness, particularly in the context of the rapid cultural
changes in the US that have taken place during Roth's lifetime. In the words
of critic Hermione Lee: "Philip Roth's fiction strains to shed the burden of
Jewish traditions and proscriptions. â¦ The liberated Jewish consciousness,
let loose into the disintegration of the American Dream, finds itself
deracinated and homeless. American society and politics, by the late sixties,
are a grotesque travesty of what Jewish immigrants had travelled towards:
liberty, peace, security, a decent liberal democracy."[8]

While Roth's fiction has strong autobiographical influences, it has also
incorporated social commentary and political satire, most obviously in Our
Gang and Operation Shylock. Since the 1990s, Roth's fiction has often combined
autobiographical elements with retrospective dramatizations of postwar
American life.

Roth has described American Pastoral and the two following novels as a loosely
connected "American trilogy". All these novels deal with aspects of the
postwar era against the backdrop of the nostalgically remembered Jewish-
American childhood of Nathan Zuckerman, in which the experience of life on the
American home front during the Second World War features prominently.

In much of Roth's fiction, the 1940s, comprising Roth's and Zuckerman's
childhood, mark a high-point of American idealism and social cohesion. A more
satirical treatment of the patriotism and idealism of the war years is evident
in more comic novels such as Portnoy's Complaint and Sabbath's Theater. In The
Plot Against America, the alternate history of the war years dramatizes the
prevalence of anti-Semitism and racism in America during the war years,
despite the promotion of increasingly influential anti-racist ideals in
wartime. Nonetheless, the 1940s, and the New Deal era that preceded it, are
portrayed in much of Roth's recent fiction as a heroic phase in American
history. A sense of frustration with social and political developments in the
US since the 1940s is palpable in the American trilogy and Exit Ghost, but had
already been present on much earlier works which contained political and
social satire, such as Our Gang and The Great American Novel. Writing about
the latter novel, Hermione Lee points to the sense disillusionment with "the
American Dream" in Roth's fiction: "The mythic words on which Roth's
generation was brought up â winning, patriotism, gamesmanship â are
desanctified; greed, fear, racism and political ambition are disclosed as the
motive forces behind the 'all-American ideals'."[8]

## [edit] Awards and honors

Philip Roth is one of the most celebrated living American writers. Two of his
works of fiction have won the National Book Award; two others were finalists.
Two have won National Book Critics Circle awards; again, another two were
finalists. He has also won three PEN/Faulkner Awards (Operation Shylock, The
Human Stain, and Everyman) and a Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for his 1997
novel, American Pastoral. In 2001, The Human Stain was awarded the United
Kingdom's WH Smith Literary Award for the best book of the year. In 2002, he
was awarded the National Book Foundation's Award for Distinguished
Contribution to American Letters. Literary critic Harold Bloom has named him
as one of the four major American novelists still at work, along with Thomas
Pynchon, Don DeLillo, and Cormac McCarthy.[9] His 2004 novel The Plot Against
America won the Sidewise Award for Alternate History in 2005 as well as the
Society of American Historiansâ prize. Roth was also awarded the United
Kingdom's WH Smith Literary Award for the best book of the year, an award Roth
has received twice.[10] He was honored in his hometown in October 2005 when
then-mayor Sharpe James presided over the unveiling of a street sign in Roth's
name on the corner of Summit and Keer Avenues where Roth lived for much of his
childhood, a setting prominent in The Plot Against America. A plaque on the
house where the Roths lived was also unveiled. In May 2006, he was given the
PEN/Nabokov Award, and in 2007 he was awarded the PEN/Faulkner award for
Everyman, making him the award's only three-time winner. In April 2007, he was
chosen as the recipient of the first PEN/Saul Bellow Award for Achievement in
American Fiction[11].

The May 21, 2006 issue of The New York Times Book Review announced the results
of a letter that was sent to what the publication described as "a couple of
hundred prominent writers, critics, editors and other literary sages, asking
them to please identify 'the single best work of American fiction published in
the last 25 years.'" Of the 22 books cited, six of Roth's novels were
selected: American Pastoral, The Counterlife, Operation Shylock, Sabbath's
Theater, The Human Stain, and The Plot Against America.[12] The accompanying
essay, written by critic A.O. Scott, stated, "If we had asked for the single
best writer of fiction of the past 25 years, [Roth] would have won."[13]

## [edit] Bibliography

for a complete list of works see Bibliography of Philip Roth

### [edit] Zuckerman novels

  * The Ghost Writer (1979)
  * Zuckerman Unbound (1981)
  * The Anatomy Lesson (1983)
  * The Prague Orgy (1985)

(The above four books are collected as Zuckerman Bound)

  * The Counterlife (1986)
  * American Pastoral (1997)
  * I Married a Communist (1998)
  * The Human Stain (2000)
  * Exit Ghost (2007)

### [edit] Roth novels

  * Deception: A Novel (1990)
  * Operation Shylock: A Confession (1993)
  * The Plot Against America (2004)

### [edit] Kepesh novels

  * The Breast (1972)
  * The Professor of Desire (1977)
  * The Dying Animal (2001)

### [edit] Other novels

  * Goodbye, Columbus (1959)
  * Letting Go (1962)
  * When She Was Good (1967)
  * Portnoy's Complaint (1969)
  * Our Gang (1971)
  * The Great American Novel (1973)
  * My Life As a Man (1974)
  * Sabbath's Theater (1995)
  * Everyman (2006)
  * Indignation (2008)
  * The Humbling (2009)
  * Nemesis (2010)

### [edit] Memoirs

  * The Facts: A Novelist's Autobiography (1988)
  * Patrimony: A True Story (1991)

### [edit] Collections

  * Reading Myself and Others (1976)
  * A Philip Roth Reader (1980, revised edition 1993)
  * Shop Talk (2001)

### [edit] Library of America Editions

Edited by Ross Miller

  * Novels and Stories 1959-1962 (2005) ISBN 978-1-93108279-2.
  * Novels 1967-1972 (2005) ISBN 978-1-93108280-8.
  * Novels 1973-1977 (2006) ISBN 978-1-93108296-9.
  * Zuckerman Bound: A Trilogy and Epilogue 1979-1985 (2007) ISBN 978-1-59853-011-7.
  * Novels and Other Narratives 1986-1991 (2008) ISBN 978-1-59853-030-8.

## [edit] Awards

  * 1960 National Book Award for Goodbye, Columbus
  * 1986 National Book Critics Circle Award for The Counterlife
  * 1991 National Book Critics Circle Award for Patrimony
  * 1994 PEN/Faulkner Award for Operation Shylock
  * 1995 National Book Award for Sabbath's Theater
  * 1998 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for American Pastoral
  * 1998 Ambassador Book Award of the English-Speaking Union for I Married a Communist
  * 1998 National Medal of Arts [1]
  * 2000 Prix du Meilleur Livre Ãtranger (France) for American Pastoral
  * 2001 PEN/Faulkner Award for The Human Stain
  * 2001 Gold Medal In Fiction from The American Academy of Arts and Letters
  * 2001 WH Smith Literary Award for The Human Stain
  * 2002 National Book Foundation's Award for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters
  * 2002 Prix MÃ©dicis Ãtranger (France) for The Human Stain
  * 2003 Honorary Doctor of Letters degree from Harvard University
  * 2005 Sidewise Award for Alternate History for The Plot Against America
  * 2006 PEN/Nabokov Award for lifetime achievement
  * 2007 PEN/Faulkner Award for Everyman
  * 2007 PEN/Saul Bellow Award for Achievement in American Fiction

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of American Writers, 2001, p. 350
  2. ^ Lubasch, Arnold H. "Philip Roth Shakes Weequahic High", The New York Times, February 28, 1969. Accessed September 8, 2007. "It has provided the focus for the fiction of Philip Roth, the novelist who evokes his era at Weequahic High School in the highly acclaimed Portnoy's Complaint.â¦ Besides identifying Weequahic High School by name, the novel specifies such sites as the Empire Burlesque, the Weequahic Diner, the Newark Museum and Irvington Park, all local landmarks that helped shape the youth of the real Roth and the fictional Portnoy, both graduates of Weequahic class of '50."
  3. ^ Roth, Philip. The Facts: A Novelist's Autobiography. New York, 1988. Roth discusses Martinson's portrait in this memoir. He calls her "Josie" in When She Was Good on pp. 149 and 175. He discusses her as an inspiration for My Life As a Man throughout the book's second half, most completely in the chapter "Girl of My Dreams," which includes this on p. 110: "Why should I have tried to make up anything better? How could I?" Her influence upon Portnoy's Complaint is seen in The Facts as more diffuse, a kind of loosening-up for the author: "It took time and it took blood, and not, really, until I began Portnoy's Complaint would I be able to cut loose with anything approaching her gift for flabbergasting boldness." (p. 149)
  4. ^ Yardley, Jonathan (October 3, 2004). "Homeland Insecurity". The Washington Post: p. BW02. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A63751-2004Sep30.html.
  5. ^ "Zuckermanâs Last Hurrah". New York Times. November 30, 2006.
  6. ^ Greenberg, Robert (Winter 1997). "Trangression in the Fiction of Philip Roth". Twentieth Century Literature 43: 487. doi:10.2307/441747. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0403/is_n4_v43/ai_20614549.
  7. ^ Roth, Philip (December 1963). "Writing About Jews". Commentary.
  8. ^ a b Lee, Hermione. Philip Roth. New York: Methuen & Co. 1982
  9. ^ Bloom, Harold. "Dumbing down American readers". The Boston Globe. September 24, 2003.
  10. ^ WH Smith Award
  11. ^ PEN American Center. "Philip Roth Wins Inaugural PEN/Saul Bellow Award". April 2, 2007.
  12. ^ The New York Times Book Review. "What Is the Best Work of American Fiction of the Last 25 Years?". May 21, 2006.
  13. ^ Scott, A.O. "In Search of the Best". The New York Times. May 21, 2006.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Philip
Roth  
  * Literary Encyclopedia biography
  * Books and Writers biography
  * The New York Times Featured Author: Philip Roth
  * The Philip Roth Society
  * Roth interview \- from NPR's "Fresh Air", September 2005
  * Roth interview \- from The Guardian, December 2005
  * Roth interview \- from Open Source
  * Roth interview \- from Der Spiegel, February 2008
  * Roth video interview Part 1
  * Roth video interview Part 2
  * Philip Roth Discusses Everyman \- from NPR's "Fresh Air", May 2006
  * "Roth Returns with Life and Death of Everyman" \- from NPR, May 2006
  * Weequahic Alumni Assn.
  * "Philip Roth: Literary hit man with a 9/11 bullet in his gun". The Sunday Times. 2004-09-19. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/article484395.ece. Retrieved on 2007-09-23.
  * Amidon, Stephen (2007-09-23). "A guide to Philip Roth". The Sunday Times. http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/books/article2499856.ece. Retrieved on 2007-09-23.
  * Philip Roth looks back on a legendary career, and forward to his final act
  * Righteous anger: Philip Rothâs latest gives us a world caught between wars

## [edit] Further reading and literary criticism

  * Bloom, Harold and Welsch, Gabe, eds., Modern Critical Interpretations of Philip Roth's Portnoy's Complaint, Chelsea House, 2003.
  * Bloom, Harold, ed., Modern Critical Views of Philip Roth, Chelsea House, New York, 2003.
  * Cooper, Alan, Philip Roth and the Jews (SUNY Series in Modern Jewish Literature and Culture), SUNY Press, Albany, NY, 1996.
  * Kinzel, Till, Die TragÃ¶die und KomÃ¶die des amerikanischen Lebens. Eine Studie zu Zuckermans Amerika in Philip Roths Amerika-Trilogie (American Studies Monograph Series), Heidelberg: Winter, 2006.
  * Milowitz, Steven, Philip Roth Considered: The Concentrationary Universe of the American Writer, Routledge, New York, 2000.
  * Morley, Catherine, The Quest for Epic in Contemporary American Literature, Routledge, New York, 2008.
  * Parrish, Timothy, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Philip Roth, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2007.
  * Podhoretz, Norman, "The Adventures of Philip Roth," Commentary (October 1998), reprinted as "Philip Roth, Then and Now" in The Norman Podhoretz Reader, 2004.
  * Posnock, Ross, "Philip Roth's Rude Truth: The Art of Immaturity", Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2006.
  * Royal, Derek Parker, Philip Roth: New Perspectives on an American Author, Praeger Publishers, Santa Barbara, CA, 2005.
  * Safer, Elaine B., Mocking the Age: The Later Novels of Philip Roth (SUNY Series in Modern Jewish Literature and Culture), SUNY Press, Albany, NY, 2006.
  * Searles, George J., ed., Conversations With Philip Roth, University of Mississippi Press, Jackson, Mississippi, 1992.
  * Searles, George J., The Fiction of Philip Roth and John Updike, Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, Illinois, 1984.
  * Shostak, Debra B., Philip Roth: Countertexts, Counterlives, University of South Carolina Press, Columbia, SC, 2004.
  * WÃ¶ltje, Wiebke-Maria, My finger on the pulse of the nation. Intellektuelle Protagonisten im Romanwerk Philip Roths (Mosaic, 26), Trier: WVT, 2006.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Works by Philip Roth  
Fiction

Goodbye, Columbus Â· Letting Go Â· When She Was Good Â· Portnoy's Complaint Â·
Our Gang Â· The Great American Novel Â· My Life As a Man Â· Sabbath's Theater
Â· Everyman Â· Indignation Â· The Humbling Â· Nemesis  
Kepesh Novels

The Breast Â· The Professor of Desire Â· The Dying Animal  
Zuckerman Novels

The Ghost Writer Â· Zuckerman Unbound Â· The Anatomy Lesson Â· The Prague Orgy
Â· The Counterlife Â· American Pastoral Â· I Married a Communist Â· The Human
Stain Â· Exit Ghost  
Roth Novels

Deception Â· Operation Shylock Â· The Plot Against America  
Short Stories

"The Conversion of the Jews" Â· ""Defender of the Faith" Â· "The Kind of
Person I am" Â· ""Epstein" Â· "You Can't Tell a Man by the Song He Sings" Â·
""Eli, the Fanatic" Â· "Philosophy, or Something Like That" Â· "The Box of
Truths" Â· "The Fence" Â· "Armando and the Frauds" Â· "The Final Delivery of
Mr. Thorn" Â· "The Day It Snowed" Â· "The Contest for Aaron Gold" Â· "Heard
Melodies Are Sweeter" Â· "Expect the Vandals" Â· "The Love Vessel" Â· "The
Good Girl" Â· "The Mistaken" Â· "Novotny's Pain" Â· "Psychoanalytic Special"
Â· "An Actor's Life for Me" Â· "On the Air" Â· "His Mistress's Voice" Â·
"Smart Money" Â· "The Ultimatum" Â· "Drenka's Men" Â· "Communist"  
Non-fiction

Memoirs

The Facts Â· Patrimony  
On Writing

Shop Talk Â· Reading Myself and Others  
Collections

Zuckerman Bound Â· A Philip Roth Reader  
Library of America

Novels and Stories 1959â1962 Â· Novels 1967â1972 Â· Novels 1973â1977 Â·
Zuckerman Bound: A Trilogy & Epilogue 1979â1985 Â· Novels and Other
Narratives 1986â1991  
Bibliography of Philip Roth  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philip_Roth"

Categories: 1933 births | Living people | American novelists | American short
story writers | Bucknell University alumni | Jewish American writers | Jewish
Americans in the military | Ukrainian-American Jews | Jewish novelists |
Members of The American Academy of Arts and Letters | United States National
Medal of Arts recipients | People from Newark, New Jersey | National Book
Award winners | Pulitzer Prize for Fiction winners | Sidewise Award winning
authors | University of Chicago alumni | University of Iowa faculty |
Princeton University faculty | University of Pennsylvania faculty | Writers
from New Jersey | Iowa Writers' Workshop faculty

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since September 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 18:05.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



