
# Barry Goldwater

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Goldwater" redirects here. For other uses, see Goldwater (disambiguation).

Barry Morris Goldwater  
Barry Goldwater  
  
* * *
United States Senator  
from Arizona  
In office  
January 3, 1969 â January 3, 1987  
Preceded by Carl Hayden  
Succeeded by John McCain  
In office  
January 3, 1953 â January 3, 1965  
Preceded by Ernest McFarland  
Succeeded by Paul Fannin  
* * *  
Born January 1, 1909(1909-01-01)  
Phoenix, Arizona Territory, U.S.  
Died May 29, 1998 (aged 89)  
Paradise Valley, Arizona, U.S.  
Political party Republican  
Spouse Margaret Johnson (1934â1985)  
Susan Shaffer Wechsler (1992â1998)  
Children Joanne Goldwater  
Barry Goldwater, Jr.  
Michael Goldwater  
Peggy Goldwater  
Alma mater University of Arizona  
Profession Businessman, politician  
Military service  
Service/branch United States Army Air Forces  
United States Air Force  
Rank Lieutenant Colonel  
Major General  
Battles/wars World War II  
Korean War  
Barry Morris Goldwater (January 1, 1909 â May 29, 1998) was a five-term
United States Senator from Arizona (1953â1965, 1969â1987) and the
Republican Party's nominee for President in the 1964 election. He was also a
Major General in the U.S. Air Force Reserve. He was known as "Mr.
Conservative."

Goldwater is the politician most often credited for sparking the resurgence of
the American conservative political movement in the 1960s. He also had a
substantial impact on the libertarian movement.[1]

Goldwater rejected the legacy of the New Deal and fought inside the
conservative coalition to defeat the New Deal coalition. He lost the 1964
presidential election by a large margin to incumbent Democrat Lyndon B.
Johnson. The Johnson campaign and other critics painted him as a reactionary,
while supporters praised his crusades against the federal government, labor
unions, and the welfare state. His defeat allowed Lyndon Johnson and the
Democrats in Congress to pass the Great Society programs, but the defeat of so
many older Republicans in 1964 also cleared the way for a younger generation
of American conservatives to mobilize. Goldwater was much less active as a
national leader of conservatives after 1964; his supporters mostly rallied
behind Ronald Reagan, who became governor of California in 1967 and President
of the United States in 1981.

By the 1980s, the increasing influence of the Christian Right on the
Republican Party so conflicted with Goldwater's libertarian views that he
became a vocal opponent of the religious right on issues such as abortion, gay
rights, and the role of religion in public life.[2] Goldwater concentrated on
his Senate duties, especially passage of the Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986.

## Contents

  * 1 Personal life
  * 2 Political career
    * 2.1 Elections
      * 2.1.1 U.S. presidential campaign, 1964
        * 2.1.1.1 Daisy
        * 2.1.1.2 Results
    * 2.2 Goldwater and the revival of American conservatism
    * 2.3 Political views
  * 3 Controversy
  * 4 Hobbies and interests
    * 4.1 Amateur radio
    * 4.2 Kachina Dolls
    * 4.3 Photography
    * 4.4 UFOs
  * 5 Goldwater Scholarship
  * 6 Death
  * 7 Buildings and monuments
  * 8 Documentary
  * 9 See also
  * 10 Notes
  * 11 Primary sources
  * 12 Secondary sources
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] Personal life

Goldwater was born in 1909 in Phoenix, in what was then the Arizona Territory,
the son of Baron Goldwater and his wife Hattie Josephine ("JoJo") Williams.
His father's family had founded Goldwater's, a department store in Phoenix.
The family name had been changed from Goldwasser to Goldwater at least as
early as the 1860 census in Los Angeles, California. Goldwater's paternal
grandparents, Michel and Sarah (Nathan) Goldwasser, were Jewish and had been
married in the Great Synagogue of London.[3][4] Goldwater's mother came from
an old Yankee family--the co-founder of Rhode Island, Roger Williams was an
ancestor. Baron was alienated from the local Jewish community, so he and JoJo
were married in an Episcopal church in Phoenix. For his entire life Barry was
an Episcopalian; he was never part of the Jewish community in Phoenix, though
he sometimes referred to himself as "half-Jewish." "I'm a very religious man,"
he explained, "I don't go to church every Sunday."[5]

The family department store made the Goldwaters comfortably wealthy. Goldwater
graduated from Staunton Military Academy and attended the University of
Arizona for one year, where he joined the Sigma Chi fraternity. Although Barry
had never been close to his father, he took over the family business after
Baron's death in 1930. He became a Republican (in a heavily Democratic state),
promoted innovative business practices, and opposed the New Deal, especially
because it fostered labor unions. Goldwater came to know former president
Herbert Hoover. In 1934, he married Margaret "Peggy" Johnson, wealthy daughter
of a prominent Midwestern industrialist. They had four children: Joanne (born
January 1, 1936), Barry (born July 15, 1938), Michael (born March 15, 1940),
and Peggy (born July 27, 1944). Barry became a widower in 1985, and in 1992 he
married Susan Wechsler, a nurse 32 years his junior.[6]

With the American entry into World War II, Goldwater received a reserve
commission in the United States Army Air Forces. He became a pilot assigned to
the Ferry Command, a newly formed unit that delivered aircraft and supplies to
war zones worldwide. He spent most of the war flying between the USA and
India, via the Azores and North Africa or South America, Nigeria, and Central
Africa. He also flew "the hump" over the Himalayas to deliver supplies to the
Republic of China. Remaining in the Air Force Reserve after the war, he
eventually retired as a Command Pilot with the rank of Major General. By that
time, he had flown 165 different types of aircraft. Following World War II,
Goldwater was a leading proponent of creating the United States Air Force
Academy, and later served on the Academy's Board of Visitors. The Visitor
Center at the USAF Academy is now named in his honor.

In 1940, Goldwater became one of the first people to run the Colorado River
recreationally through Grand Canyon when he participated as an oarsman on
Norman Nevills' second commercial river trip. Goldwater joined the trip in
Green River, Utah and rowed his own boat down to Lake Mead.[7]

In 1970, the Arizona Historical Foundation published the day-by-day journal
that Goldwater kept on the trip, along with the photographs he took, in a 209
page volume titled "Delightful Journey" by Barry Goldwater.

Goldwater's son, Barry Goldwater, Jr., served as a United States House of
Representatives member from California from 1969 to 1983.

## [edit] Political career

Goldwater entered Phoenix politics in 1949 when he was elected as a
nonpartisan city councilman. As a Republican he won a seat in the US Senate in
1952, when he upset veteran Democrat and Senate majority leader Ernest
McFarland. He defeated McFarland again in 1958, but would step down from the
Senate in 1964 for his presidential campaign. Goldwater had a strong showing
in his first reelection in 1958, a year in which the Democrats picked up
thirteen seats in the Senate.

Goldwater soon became most associated with labor-union reform and anti-
communism; he was an active supporter of the conservative coalition in
Congress. However, he rejected the wilder fringes of the anti-communist
movement; in 1956 he sponsored the passage through the Senate of the final
version of the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act, despite vociferous
opposition from opponents who claimed that the Act was a communist plot to
establish concentration camps in Alaska. His work on labor issues led to
Congress passing major anti-corruption reforms in 1957, and an all-out
campaign by the AFL-CIO to defeat his 1958 reelection bid. He voted against
the censure of Senator Joseph McCarthy in 1954, but he was much more prudent
than McCarthy and never actually charged any individual with being a
communist/Soviet agent. Goldwater emphasized his strong opposition to the
worldwide spread of communism in his 1960 book The Conscience of a
Conservative. The book became an important reference text in conservative
political circles.

Goldwater supported the Arizona NAACP and was involved in desegregating the
Arizona National Guard. Nationally, he supported the Civil Rights Acts of 1957
and 1960 and the constitutional amendment banning the poll tax. However, he
opposed the much more comprehensive Civil Rights Act of 1964[8]. While he did
indeed support the civil rights cause in general, he believed that this act
unconstitutionally extended the federal government's commerce power to private
citizens in its drive to "legislate morality" and restrict the rights of
employers. Since Dixiecrats were the main opponents to the Civil Rights Act of
1964[8] and previous civil rights legislation, Goldwater's opposition to the
1964 Act, in which he was joined by only four other non-southern Republican
senators, strongly boosted Goldwater's standing among white southerners who
opposed such federal legislation.

Two self-published books advanced the Goldwater cause: A Choice, Not An Echo
by Phyllis Schlafly and A Texan Looks at Lyndon: A Study in Illegitimate Power
by the Texas historian J. Evetts Haley. Both were best-sellers but failed to
bolster Goldwater's electoral prospects.

In 1964, he fought and won a bitterly-contested, multi-candidate race for the
Republican Party's presidential nomination. His main rival was New York
Governor Nelson Rockefeller, whom he defeated in the California primary. His
nomination was opposed by liberal Republicans who thought Goldwater's hardline
foreign policy stances would bring about a deadly confrontation with the
Soviet Union. He would eventually lose to President Lyndon Johnson by one of
the largest margins in the history of U.S. Presidential elections.
Consequently, the Republican Party suffered a significant setback nationally,
losing many seats in both houses of Congress. Goldwater carried only his home
state and five (formerly Democratic) Southern states. Many Republicans at the
time angrily turned against Goldwater, claiming that his defeat had
significantly set back the party's chances of future national success.

He remained popular in Arizona, though, and in the 1968 Senate election he was
elected again (this time to the seat of Carl Hayden, who was retiring). He was
subsequently reelected in 1974 and 1980. The 1974 election saw Goldwater
easily reelected. This occurred in a year in which Republicans lost three
Senate seats because of the party's unpopularity over the Watergate scandal.

Goldwater seriously considered retirement in 1980 before deciding to run for
reelection. Peggy Goldwater reportedly hoped that her husband's Senate term,
due to end in January 1981, would be his last. Goldwater decided to run,
planning to make the term his last in the Senate. Goldwater faced a
surprisingly tough battle for reelection. He was viewed by some as out of
touch and vulnerable for several reasons - most importantly, because he had
planned to retire in 1981, Goldwater had not visited many areas of Arizona
outside of Phoenix and Tucson. He was also challenged by a formidible
opponent, Bill Schulz, who was a former Republican turned Democrat and a
wealthy real estate developer. Schulz was able to infuse massive amounts of
money into the campaign from his own fortune.

Arizona's changing population also hurt Goldwater. The state's population had
exploded, and a huge portion of the electorate had not lived in the state when
Goldwater was last elected. Because of this, many voters were not familiar
with the Senator. Goldwater was on the defensive for much of the campaign.
Early returns on election night seemed to indicate that Schulz would win. The
counting of votes continued through the night and into the next morning.
Around daybreak Goldwater learned that he had been reelected. Goldwater's
margin could be traced to his winning a high percentage of absentee votes,
which were among the last to be counted.[9] Goldwater's surprisingly close
victory in 1980 is interesting given that Ronald Reagan won the Presidency in
a large victory over Jimmy Carter, and that the Republicans regained control
of the Senate, electing twelve new Senators to the United States Senate who
rode Reagan's coattails. Reagan garnered 61% of the Presidential vote in
Arizona.

Goldwater retired in 1987, serving as chair of the Senate Intelligence and
Armed Services Committees in his final term. Despite his reputation as a
firebrand in the 1960s, by the end of his career he was considered a
stabilizing influence in the Senate, one of the most respected members of
either major party. Yet Goldwater remained staunchly anti-communist and
"hawkish" on military issues. He led the unsuccessful fight against
ratification of the Panama Canal Treaty in the 1970s, which would return
control of the canal zone to the Republic of Panama. His most important
legislative achievement may have been the Goldwater-Nichols Act, which
reorganized the U.S. military's senior-command structure.

Goldwater was an unwavering supporter of Wisconsin's Republican Senator Joseph
McCarthy to the end (one of only 22 Senators who voted against McCarthy's
censure). He was also friends with Senator John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts;
in fact, Goldwater anticipated that a contest for the presidency between John
F. Kennedy and himself would have been an enjoyable experience, with lively
debates between them.

Goldwater was grief-stricken by the assassination of Kennedy and was greatly
disappointed that his opponent in the race would not be JFK, but instead
Kennedy's Vice President, the former Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson
of Texas. Goldwater disliked Johnson (who he said "used every dirty trick in
the bag"), and Richard M. Nixon of California, whom he later called "the most
dishonest individual I have ever met in my life." Goldwater, by then again a
Senator, forced Nixon to resign at the height of Watergate, warning that fewer
than ten senators would vote against impeachment.[10] The term "Goldwater
moment" has been used to describe a moment when influential members of
Congress disagree with a President from their own party and take a stand.

His 1984 Cable Franchise Policy and Communications Act allowed local
governments to require the transmission of public access television, also
called PEG (Public, Education, and Government) access channels, barred cable
operators from exercising editorial control over content of programs carried
on PEG channels, and absolved them from liability for their content.

### [edit] Elections

1952 Arizona Republican primary for the U.S. Senate[11]

  * Barry Goldwater \- 33,460 (91.03%)
  * Lester L. Kahl \- 3,297 (8.97%)

1952 Arizona United States Senate election[12]

  * Barry Goldwater (R) - 132,063 (51.31%)
  * Ernest McFarland (D) (inc.) - 125,338 (48.69%)

1958 Arizona United States Senate election[13]

  * Barry Goldwater (R) (inc.) - 164,593 (56.06%)
  * Ernest McFarland (D) - 129,030 (43.94%)

1960 Republican presidential primaries[14]

  * Richard Nixon \- 4,975,938 (86.63%)
  * Unpledged - 314,234 (5.47%)
  * George H. Bender \- 211,090 (3.68%)
  * Cecil H. Underwood \- 123,756 (2.16%)
  * James L. Lloyd \- 48,461 (0.84%)
  * Nelson Rockefeller \- 30,639 (0.53%)
  * Frank R. Beckwith \- 19,677 (0.34%)
  * Barry Goldwater \- 3,146 (0.06%)
  * Paul C. Fisher \- 2,388 (0.04%)
  * Adlai Stevenson \- 694 (0.01%)
  * Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. \- 514 (0.01%)
  * Dwight D. Eisenhower (write-in) - 172 (0.00%)
  * Styles Bridges \- 108 (0.00%)

1960 Republican National Convention[15]

  * Richard Nixon \- 1,321 (99.25%)
  * Barry Goldwater \- 10 (0.75%)

United States presidential election, 1960

  * John F. Kennedy/Lyndon B. Johnson (D) - 34,220,984 (49.7%) and 303 electoral votes (22 states carried)
  * Richard Nixon/Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. (R) - 34,108,157 (49.5%) (26 states carried)
  * Harry F. Byrd/Strom Thurmond (I) - 14 electoral votes (2 states carried - unpledged electors from MS and AL)
  * Harry F. Byrd/Barry Goldwater (I) - 1 electoral vote (faithless elector from OK)
  * Unpledged electors (D) - 286,359 (0.4%)

1964 Republican presidential primaries[16]

  * Barry Goldwater \- 2,267,079 (38.33%)
  * Nelson Rockefeller \- 1,304,204 (22.05%)
  * James A. Rhodes \- 615,754 (10.41%)
  * Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. \- 386,661 (6.54%)
  * John W. Byrnes \- 299,612 (5.07%)
  * William Scranton \- 245,401 (4.15%)
  * Margaret Chase Smith \- 227,007 (3.84%)
  * Richard Nixon \- 197,212 (3.33%)
  * Unpledged - 173,652 (2.94%)
  * Harold Stassen \- 114,083 (1.93%)

1964 Republican National Convention[17]

  * Barry Goldwater \- 883 (67.51%)
  * William Scranton \- 214 (16.36%)
  * Nelson Rockefeller \- 114 (8.72%)
  * George Romney \- 41 (3.14%)
  * Margaret Chase Smith \- 27 (2.06%)
  * Walter Judd \- 22 (1.68%)
  * Hiram L. Fong \- 5 (0.38%)
  * Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. \- 2 (0.15%)

United States presidential election, 1964

  * Lyndon B. Johnson/Hubert Humphrey (D) - 43,127,041 (61.1%) and 486 electoral votes (44 states and D.C. carried)
  * Barry Goldwater/William E. Miller (R) - 27,175,754 (38.5%) and 54 electoral votes (6 states carried)
  * Unpledged electors (D) - 210,732 (0.3%) and 0 electoral votes

1968 Arizona United States Senate election[18]

  * Barry Goldwater (R) - 274,607 (57.22%)
  * Roy C. Elson (D) - 205,338 (42.78%)

1974 Arizona United States Senate election[19]

  * Barry Goldwater (R) (inc.) - 320,396 (58.26%)
  * Jonathan Marshall (D) - 229,523 (41.74%)

1980 Arizona United States Senate election[20]

  * Barry Goldwater (R) (inc.) - 432,371 (49.46%)
  * Bill Schulz (D) - 422,972 (48.38%)
  * Fred R. Esser (Libertarian) - 12,008 (1.37%)

#### [edit] U.S. presidential campaign, 1964

See also: United States presidential election, 1964

<IMG>

<IMG>

Republican primaries results

At the time of Goldwater's presidential candidacy, the Republican Party was
split between its conservatives (with their base in the West and Midwest) and
liberals (strongest in the Northeast). He alarmed even some of his fellow
partisans with his brand of staunch fiscal conservatism and militant anti-
communism. He was viewed by many traditional Republicans as being too far on
the right wing of the Republican spectrum to appeal to the mainstream majority
necessary to win a national election. As a result, more liberal Republicans
recruited a series of opponents, including New York Governor Nelson
Rockefeller, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., of Massachusetts and Pennsylvania
Governor William Scranton, to challenge Goldwater. Goldwater would defeat
Rockefeller in the winner-take-all California primary and secure the
nomination. He also had solid southern Republican backing. A bright young
Birmingham lawyer, John Grenier, secured commitments from 271 of 279 southern
convention delegates to back Goldwater. Grenier went on to serve as executive
director of the national GOP during the Goldwater campaign. This was the
Number 2 position to party chairman Dean Burch, Goldwater's fellow Arizonan.

Goldwater boldly (and famously) declared in his acceptance speech at the 1964
Republican Convention: "Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. And
let me remind you also that moderation in the pursuit of justice is no
virtue." This paraphrase of Cicero was included at the suggestion of Harry V.
Jaffa, though the speech was primarily written by Karl Hess. Due to President
Johnson's popularity, however, Goldwater held back from attacking the
president directly; he did not even mention Johnson by name in his convention
speech.

Past comments came back to haunt Goldwater throughout his campaign. Once he
called the Eisenhower administration "a dime-store New Deal," and the former
president never fully forgave him. Eisenhower did, however, film a TV
commercial with Goldwater.[21] Eisenhower qualified his voting for Goldwater
in November by remarking that he had voted not specifically for Goldwater, but
for the Republican Party. In December 1961, Goldwater told a news conference
that "sometimes I think this country would be better off if we could just saw
off the Eastern Seaboard and let it float out to sea". That comment
boomeranged on him during the campaign in the form of a Johnson television
commercial, as did remarks about making Social Security voluntary, and
statements in Tennessee about selling the Tennessee Valley Authority, a large
local New Deal employer.

The Goldwater campaign spotlighted Ronald Reagan, who gave a stirring,
nationally-televised speech, "A Time for Choosing," in support of
Goldwater.[22] The speech prompted Reagan to seek the California Governorship
in 1966 and jump-started his political career. Conservative activist Phyllis
Schlafly, later well-known for her fight against the Equal Rights Amendment,
first became known for writing a pro-Goldwater book, A Choice, Not an Echo,
attacking the liberal Republican establishment. Senator Prescott Bush
(1895â1972), a liberal Republican from Connecticut, was a friend of
Goldwater's and supported him in the general election campaign. Bush's son,
George H.W. Bush (then running for the Senate from Texas against Democrat
Ralph Yarborough), was also a strong Goldwater supporter in both the
nomination and general election campaigns. Goldwater was painted as a
dangerous figure by the Johnson campaign, which countered Goldwater's slogan
"In your heart, you know he's right" with the lines "In your guts, you know
he's nuts," and "In your heart, you know he might" (that is, might actually
use nuclear weapons, as opposed to merely subscribing to deterrence). Johnson
himself did not mention Goldwater in his own acceptance speech at the 1964
Democratic National Convention.

Goldwater's provocative advocacy of aggressive tactics to prevent the spread
of communism in Asia led to effective counterattacks from Lyndon B. Johnson
and his supporters, who claimed that Goldwater's militancy would have dire
consequences, possibly even nuclear war. Regarding Vietnam, Goldwater charged
that Johnson's policy was devoid of "goal, course, or purpose," leaving "only
sudden death in the jungles and the slow strangulation of freedom."[23]
Goldwater's own rhetoric on nuclear war was viewed by many as quite
uncompromising, a view buttressed by off-hand comments such as, "Let's lob one
into the men's room at the Kremlin."[24]

Goldwater did his best to counter the Johnson attacks, criticizing the Johnson
administration for its perceived ethical lapses, and stating in a commercial
that "â¦we, as a nation, are not far from the kind of moral decay that has
brought on the fall of other nations and peopleâ¦I say it is time to put
conscience back in government. And by good example, put it back in all walks
of American life." Goldwater campaign commercials included statements of
support by actor Raymond Massey and moderate Republican senator Margaret Chase
Smith.

Before the 1964 election, the muckraking magazine Fact, published by Ralph
Ginzburg, ran a special issue entitled âThe Unconscious of a Conservative: A
Special Issue on the Mind of Barry Goldwater.â The two main articles
contended that Goldwater was mentally unfit to be president. The magazine
attempted to support this claim with the results of an unscientific poll of
psychiatrists it had conducted. Fact had mailed questionnaires to 12,356
psychiatrists, and published a âsamplingâ of the comments made by the
2,417 psychiatrists who responded, of which 1,189 said Goldwater was unfit to
be president.[25] After the election, Goldwater sued the publisher, the editor
and the magazine for libel. "Although the jury awarded Goldwater only $1.00 in
compensatory damages against all three defendants, it went on to [396 U.S.
1049, 1050] award him punitive damages of $25,000 against Ginzburg and $50,000
against Fact magazine, Inc."[26] According to Warren Boroson, then-managing
editor of Fact and now a financial columnist, the main biography of Goldwater
in the magazine was written by David Bar-Illan, the Israeli pianist. He went
on to say "Goldwater sued me for $2 million. (He collected 33 cents.)"[27]

##### [edit] Daisy

A Democratic campaign advertisement known as Daisy showed a young girl
counting daisy petals, from one to ten. Immediately following this scene, a
voiceover counted down: ten, nine, eight,â¦three, two, one. The child's face
was shown as a still photograph followed by images of nuclear explosions and
mushroom clouds. The campaign advertisement ended with a plea to vote for
Johnson, implying that Goldwater (whose name was not mentioned) would provoke
a nuclear war if elected. The advertisement, which featured only a few spoken
words of narrative and relied on imagery for its emotional impact, was one of
the most provocative moments in American political campaign history, and many
analysts credit it as being the birth of the modern style of "negative
political ads" on television. The ad only aired once, and was immediately
pulled, but then was shown numerous times by television stations.[28]

##### [edit] Results

<IMG>

<IMG>

Goldwater only won his home state of Arizona and five states in the south,
depicted in red. Capturing 61.1% of the popular vote and 486 electors, Johnson
won in a landslide.

In the end, Goldwater received 38.4% of the popular vote, and carried six
states: the core states of the Deep South, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana,
Mississippi, and South Carolina; and his home state of Arizona. In all,
Johnson won an overwhelming 486 electoral votes, to Goldwater's 52. Goldwater,
with his customary bluntness, remarked: "We would have lost even if Abraham
Lincoln had come back and campaigned with us."

Goldwater's poor showing, plus the tendency at the time for most people to
vote a "straight ticket" (that is, loyally voting for every candidate from the
same party as their Presidential choice), was associated with the defeat of
many other long-time Republican officeholders from Congress through local
races.

Goldwater maintained later in life that he would have won the election if the
country had not been in a state of extended grief (referring to the
assassination of John F. Kennedy), and that it was simply not ready for a
third President in just fourteen months. It has frequently been argued that
Goldwater's strong performance in Southern states previously regarded as
Democratic strongholds foreshadowed a larger shift in electoral trends in the
coming decades that would make the south a Republican bastion (an end to the
"Solid South") â first in presidential politics and eventually at the
congressional and state levels, as well.[29]

### [edit] Goldwater and the revival of American conservatism

Although Goldwater was not as important in the American conservative movement
as Ronald Reagan after 1965, he shaped and redefined the movement from the
late 1950s to 1964. Arizona Senator John McCain summed up Goldwater's legacy
thus: "He transformed the Republican Party from an Eastern elitist
organization to the breeding ground for the election of Ronald Reagan.â[30]
The columnist George Will remarked after the 1980 Presidential election that
it took 16 years to count the votes 1964 and Goldwater won.[31]

â Think of Al Gore winning the Democratic nomination in the year 2000 whose
positions included halving the military budget, socializing the medical
system, re-regulating the communications and electrical industries,
establishing a guaranteed minimum income for all Americans, and equalizing
funding for all schools regardless of property valuations â and who promised
to fire Alan Greenspan, counseled withdrawal from the World Trade
Organization, and, for good measure, spoke warmly of adolescent sexual
experimentation. He would lose in a landslide. He would be relegated to the
ash heap of history. But if the precedent of 1964 were repeated, two years
later the country would begin electing dozens of men and women just like him.
And not many decades later, Republicans would have to proclaim softer versions
of those positions to get taken seriously for their party's nomination. â  
âHistorian Rick Perlstein in his book Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and
the Unmaking of the American Consensus[32]  
The Republican Party recovered from the 1964 election debacle, picking up 47
seats in the House of Representatives in the mid-term election of 1966.
Further Republican successes ensued, including Goldwater's return to the
Senate in 1968. Throughout the 1970s, as the conservative wing under Reagan
gained control of the party, Goldwater concentrated on his Senate duties,
especially in military affairs. He played little part in the election or
administration of Richard Nixon, but he helped force Nixon's resignation in
1974.[33] In 1976 he helped block Rockefeller's renomination as Vice
President. When Reagan challenged Ford for the presidential nomination in
1976, Goldwater endorsed Ford, looking for consensus rather than conservative
idealism. As one historian notes, "The Arizonan had lost much of his zest for
battle."[34]

In 1979, when President Jimmy Carter normalized relations with Communist
China, Goldwater and some other senators sued him in the Supreme Court,
arguing that the president could not terminate the Sino-American Mutual
Defense Treaty with Republic of China (Taiwan) without the approval of
Congress. The case was known as Goldwater v. Carter, which was dismissed by
the court as a political question. Presently, there is no official ruling on
whether the President has the power to break a treaty without the approval of
Congress, and the courts also declined to interfere when President George W.
Bush unilaterally withdrew the United States from the ABM Treaty in 2002, six
months after giving the required notice of intent.

### [edit] Political views

<IMG>

<IMG>

Signing autographs at the Fiesta Bowl parade in 1983.

By the 1980s, with Ronald Reagan as president and the growing involvement of
the religious right in conservative politics, Goldwater's political views on
personal issues were revealed; he believed that they were an integral part of
true conservatism. Goldwater viewed abortion as a matter of personal choice,
not intended for government intervention.[35]

As a passionate defender of personal liberty, he saw the religious right's
views as an encroachment on personal privacy and individual liberties.[36] In
his 1980 Senate reelection campaign, Goldwater won support from religious
conservatives but in his final term voted consistently to uphold legalized
abortion and, in 1981, gave a speech on how he was angry about the bullying of
American politicians by religious organizations, and would "fight them every
step of the way".[37] Goldwater also disagreed with the Reagan administration
on certain aspects of foreign policy (e.g. he opposed the decision to mine
Nicaraguan harbors). Notwithstanding his prior differences with Dwight D.
Eisenhower, Goldwater in a 1986 interview rated him the best of the seven
Presidents with whom he had worked.

After his retirement in 1987, Goldwater described the conservative Arizona
Governor Evan Mecham as "hardheaded" and called on him to resign, and two
years later stated that the Republican party had been taken over by a "bunch
of kooks".[38] In a 1994 interview with the Washington Post the retired
senator said,

â When you say "radical right" today, I think of these moneymaking ventures
by fellows like Pat Robertson and others who are trying to take the Republican
party and make a religious organization out of it. If that ever happens, kiss
politics goodbye.[39] â  
In response to Moral Majority founder Jerry Falwell's opposition to the
nomination of Sandra Day O'Connor to the Supreme Court, of which Falwell had
said, "Every good Christian should be concerned", Goldwater retorted: "Every
good Christian ought to kick Falwell right in the ass."[40] Goldwater also had
harsh words for his one-time political protege, President Reagan, particularly
after the Iran-Contra Affair became public in 1986. Journalist Robert MacNeil,
a friend of Goldwater's from the 1964 Presidential campaign, recalled
interviewing him in his office shortly afterward. "He was sitting in his
office with his hands on his cane...and he said to me, 'Well, aren't you going
to ask me about the Iran arms sales?' It had just been announced that the
Reagan administration had sold arms to Iran. And I said, 'Well, if I asked
you, what would you say?' He said, 'I'd say it's the god-damned stupidest
foreign policy blunder this country's ever made!'",[41] though aside from the
Iran-Contra scandal, Goldwater thought nonetheless that Reagan was a good
president.[42] Also, in 1988 during that year's presidential campaign, he
pointedly told vice-presidential nominee Dan Quayle at a campaign event in
Arizona "I want you to go back and tell George Bush to start talking about the
issues."[43]

Some of Goldwater's statements in the 1990s aggravated many social
conservatives. He endorsed Democrat Karan English in an Arizona congressional
race, urged Republicans to lay off Bill Clinton over the Whitewater scandal,
and criticized the military's ban on homosexuals: "Everyone knows that gays
have served honorably in the military since at least the time of Julius
Caesar."[44] He also said, "You don't have to be straight to be in the
military; you just have to be able to shoot straight."[45] A few years before
his death he went so far as to address the right wing, "Do not associate my
name with anything you do. You are extremists, and you've hurt the Republican
party much more than the Democrats have."[46]

In 1996, he told Bob Dole, whose own presidential campaign received lukewarm
support from conservative Republicans: "We're the new liberals of the
Republican party. Can you imagine that?"[47] In that same year, with Senator
Dennis DeConcini, Goldwater endorsed an Arizona initiative to legalize medical
marijuana against the will of social conservatives.[48]

## [edit] Controversy

Goldwater was known in Las Vegas as a âswingerâ.[49] He had personal and
financial relationships with two racketeers â Willie Bioff and Gus Greenbaum
â both of whom were later murdered in gangland executions. Bioff gained
control of Hollywood labor unions in the 1930s. In 1941, Bioff was indicted
for violating the federal anti-racketeering statutes, and was later convicted
of extortion in connection with his management of those unions. Bioff turned
stateâs witness and assisted in the prosecution of nine Chicago Mafia
partners. Greenbaum was a Las Vegas casino operator for various Mafia
interests.[50]

When Goldwater began his relationship with Bioff, Bioff was already a
convicted labor extortionist. Goldwater said of Bioff at various times that he
either did not know of Bioffâs criminal history, or that he was associating
with Bioff in order to learn more about labor racketeering. In 1952, Goldwater
convinced a local newspaper not to publish a story about Bioffâs criminal
history. Goldwater promptly received a $5,000 contribution from Bioff.[51]
Goldwater flew Bioff to parties all over the Southwest in his private
plane.[52]

On November 17, 1963, Goldwater held a press conference in Pittsburgh in which
he denounced news reports of his gangland associations.

## [edit] Hobbies and interests

### [edit] Amateur radio

Goldwater was an avid amateur radio operator, with the call signs K3UIG and
K7UGA.[53] The latter is now used by an Arizona club honoring him as a
commemorative call. During the Vietnam War, he spent many hours giving
servicemen overseas the ability to talk to their families at home over the
Military Affiliate Radio System (MARS).

Barry Goldwater was also a prominent spokesman for amateur radio and its
enthusiasts. Beginning in 1969 up to his death he appeared in numerous
educational and promotional films (and later videos) about the hobby that were
produced for the American Radio Relay League (the United States national
society representing the interests of radio amateurs) by such producers as
Dave Bell (W6AQ), ARRL Southwest Director John R. Griggs (W6KW), Alan Kaul
(W6RCL), Forrest Oden (N6ENV), Bill Pasternak (WA6ITF) and the late Roy Neal
(K6DUE). His first appearance was in Dave Bell's "The World of Amateur Radio"
where Goldwater discussed the history of the hobby and demonstrated a live
contact with Antarctica. His last on-screen appearance dealing with "ham
radio" was in 1994, explaining a then-upcoming, Earth-orbiting ham radio relay
satellite.

### [edit] Kachina Dolls

<IMG>

<IMG>

Over half of the kachina dolls at the Heard Museum were donated by Goldwater

In 1916, Goldwater visited the Hopi Reservation with Phoenix architect John
Rinker Kibby, and obtained his first kachina doll. Eventually his collection
of dolls included 437 items, presented in 1969 to the Heard Museum in
Phoenix.[54]

### [edit] Photography

Goldwater was an accomplished amateur photographer and in his estate left some
15,000 of his images to three Arizona institutions. He was very keen on candid
photography. He got started in photography after receiving a camera as a gift
from his wife on their first Christmas together. He was known to use a 4x5
Graflex, Rolleiflex camera, and Nikon 35 mm.

For decades, he contributed photographs of his home state to Arizona Highways
and was best known for his Western landscapes and pictures of native Americans
in the United States. Three books with his photographs are People and Places,
from 1967; Barry Goldwater and the Southwest, from 1976; and Delightful
Journey, first published in 1940 and reprinted in 1970. Ansel Adams wrote a
foreword to the 1976 book.[55]

Son Michael Prescott Goldwater formed the Goldwater Family Foundation with the
goal of making his father's photography available via the internet. (Barry
Goldwater Photographs) was launched in September 2006 to coincide with the HBO
documentary "Mr. Conservative", produced by granddaughter CC Goldwater.

### [edit] UFOs

Goldwater was one of the more prominent American politicians to openly show an
interest in UFOs.

On March 28, 1975, Goldwater wrote to Shlomo Arnon: "The subject of UFOs has
interested me for some long time. About ten or twelve years ago I made an
effort to find out what was in the building at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base
where the information has been stored that has been collected by the Air
Force, and I was understandably denied this request. It is still classified
above Top Secret."[56] Goldwater further wrote that there were rumors the
evidence would be released, and that he was "just as anxious to see this
material as you are, and I hope we will not have to wait much
longer."[56](Also Good, 405)

The April 25, 1988 issue of The New Yorker carried an interview where
Goldwater said he repeatedly asked his friend, Gen. Curtis LeMay, if there was
any truth to the rumors that UFO evidence was stored in a secret room at
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, and if he (Goldwater) might have access to
the room. According to Goldwater, an angry LeMay gave him "holy hell" and
said, "Not only can't you get into it but don't you ever mention it to me
again."[57]

In a 1988 interview on Larry King's radio show, Goldwater was asked if he
thought the U.S. Government was withholding UFO evidence; he replied "Yes, I
do." He added:

> I certainly believe in aliens in space. They may not look like us, but I
have very strong feelings that they have advanced beyond our mental
capabilities....I think some highly secret government UFO investigations are
going on that we don't know about â and probably never will unless the Air
Force discloses them.[58]

## [edit] Goldwater Scholarship

The Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship and Excellence in Education Program was
established by Congress in 1986. Its goal is to provide a continuing source of
highly qualified scientists, mathematicians, and engineers by awarding
scholarships to college students who intend to pursue careers in these fields.

The Scholarship is widely considered the most prestigious award in the U.S.
conferred upon undergraduates studying the sciences. It is awarded to about
300 students (college sophomores and juniors) nationwide in the amount of
$7500 per academic year (for their senior year, or junior and senior years).

## [edit] Death

Goldwater's public appearances stopped in late 1996 after he suffered a
massive stroke; family members then disclosed he was in the early stages of
Alzheimer's disease. He died on May 29, 1998, at the age of 89 in Paradise
Valley, Arizona, of complications from the stroke.[59] His remains were
cremated.

## [edit] Buildings and monuments

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bronze statue of Goldwater in Goldwater Memorial Park, Paradise Valley,
Arizona

<IMG>

<IMG>

Barry M. Goldwater Terminal 4 entrance at Phoenix Sky Harbor International
Airport

Among the buildings and monuments named after Barry Goldwater are: the Barry
M. Goldwater Terminal at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, Goldwater
Memorial Park[60] in Paradise Valley, AZ, and Barry Goldwater High School in
northern Phoenix.

## [edit] Documentary

Goldwater's granddaughter, CC Goldwater, has co-produced with long time friend
and indie-film producer Tani L. Cohen a documentary on Goldwater's life, "Mr.
Conservative: Goldwater on Goldwater", first shown on HBO on September 18,
2006.[61]

## [edit] See also

<IMG> World War II portal  
<IMG> Arizona portal  
  * Goldwater v. Carter, 444 U.S. 996 (1979).
  * Don Goldwater, a nephew
  * Goldwater Institute

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Robert Poole, In memoriam: Barry Goldwater - Obituary, Reason Magazine, August-Sept, 1998.
  2. ^ Goldstein, Dana (2006-09-21). "Progressives, Meet Goldwater". CampusProgress.org. http://www.campusprogress.org/soundvision/1176/progressives-meet-goldwater?type=printer. Retrieved on 2008-08-03.
  3. ^ Thoroughly modern grandmothers
  4. ^ http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/books/chap1/barrygoldwater.htm
  5. ^ Goldberg, Barry Goldwater pp. 22-27, quote p. 27. The Jewish essayist Harry Golden to famously remark of Goldwater, "I have always thought that if a Jew ever became President, he would turn out to be an Episcopalian."""The Taboo" Time Magazine. 22 November 1963.
  6. ^ Goldberg, Barry Goldwater pp. 41-42, 48-49, 326, 332
  7. ^ Lavender, David River Runners of the Grand Canyon ISBN 0-8165-0940-9
  8. ^ a b Civil Rights Act of 1964
  9. ^ Robert Alan Goldberg, "Barry Goldwater." Yale University Press. 1995. chapter 12.
  10. ^ Goldberg, Barry Goldwater p 282
  11. ^ Our Campaigns - AZ US Senate - R Primary Race - Sep 08, 1952
  12. ^ Our Campaigns - AZ US Senate Race - Nov 04, 1952
  13. ^ Our Campaigns - AZ US Senate Race - Nov 03, 1958
  14. ^ Our Campaigns - US President - R Primaries Race - Feb 01, 1960
  15. ^ Our Campaigns - US President - R Convention Race - Jul 25, 1960
  16. ^ Our Campaigns - US President - R Primaries Race - Feb 01, 1964
  17. ^ Our Campaigns - US President - R Convention Race - Jul 13, 1964
  18. ^ Our Campaigns - AZ US Senate Race - Nov 05, 1968
  19. ^ Our Campaigns - AZ US Senate Race - Nov 03, 1974
  20. ^ Our Campaigns - AZ US Senate Race - Nov 04, 1980
  21. ^ 1964 Campaign ads
  22. ^ Ronald Reagan, A Time for Choosing, Televised Address on Behalf of Barry Goldwater, Delivered October 27, 1964, Los Angeles, CA.
  23. ^ Matthews 2002
  24. ^ "Harper's Magazine". Tentacles of Rage. http://www.mindfully.org/Reform/2004/Republican-Propaganda1sep04.htm.
  25. ^ "Fact, Fiction, Doubt & Barry", Time. May 17, 1968. Online at [1]
  26. ^ Ginzburg v. Goldwater, 396 U.S. 1049 (1970)
  27. ^ "Daily Record". Wikipedia site filled with major mistakes. 2006-04-11. http://www.dailyrecord.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20060411/COLUMNISTS04/604110302/1103/COLUMNISTS.
  28. ^ "President Johnson Ad". George Mason University. ,. http://chnm.gmu.edu/acpstah/activities.php?actvID=7. Retrieved on 2007-01-07.
  29. ^ Rodriguez, Daniel; Weingast, Barry (July, 2006). "How the GOP Helped the Democrats Destroy the Solid South" (PDF). Stanford University. http://politicalscience.stanford.edu/faculty/documents/weingast-untold%20story%20of%201964%20civil%20rights%20act.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-01-07.
  30. ^ Grove, Lloyd (1994-07-28). "Barry Goldwater's Left Turn". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/daily/may98/goldwater072894.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-25.
  31. ^ Will, November 6, 2008
  32. ^ Rick Perlstein. Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and the Unmaking of the American Consensus. New York: Hill & Wang. ISBN 0-8090-2858-1.
  33. ^ "The Unmaking of the President, Time Aug. 19, 1974 online at [2]
  34. ^ Jonathan Martin Kolkey, The New Right, 1960â1968: With Epilogue, 1969â1980. University Press of America. 1983. quote p. 254; Mary C. Brennan, Turning Right in the Sixties: The Conservative Capture of the GOP. U. of North Carolina Press. 1995. ch. 6; 1976 details in David W. Reinhard, The Republican Right since 1945. U. Press of Kentucky. 1983, p. 230.
  35. ^ Goldberg, Barry Goldwater, p. 331
  36. ^ Goldberg, Barry Goldwater, p. 315
  37. ^ Goldwater on personal religious views The quotation comes from a piece Goldwater wrote for the Los Angeles Times on September 17, 1981, "The 'New Right' Has Nothing to Do with the 'Old Conservatism." It is also quoted on p. 39 of The God Delusion
  38. ^ Goldberg, Barry Goldwater, p. 329
  39. ^ Lloyd Grove, "Barry Goldwater's Left Turn", The Washington Post. July 28, 1994, Page C01.
  40. ^ Ed Magnuson, Time Magazine, The Brethren's First Sister, July 20, 1981. Retrieved 1/1/07; Goldberg, Barry Goldwater, p. 315
  41. ^ "Archive of American Television Interview with Robert MacNeil Part 5 of 14" (video)
  42. ^ YouTube - Charlie Rose - Goldwater tribute/
  43. ^ Dowd, Maureen (1988-06-13). "Campaign Trail; Outspoken Advice From a G.O.P. Hero". The New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=940DEEDF123AF931A1575AC0A96E948260&n=Top%2fReference%2fTimes%20Topics%2fPeople%2fG%2fGoldwater%2c%20Barry%20M%2e. Retrieved on 2008-06-13.
  44. ^ "Ban On Gays Is Senseless Attempt To Stall The Inevitable", Los Angeles Times, Washington Post. Online at [3]
  45. ^ Goldberg, Barry Goldwater, p. 332
  46. ^ The Betrayal of America by Vincent Bugliosi, 2001
  47. ^ http://www.azcentral.com/specials/special25/articles/0531goldwater2.html
  48. ^ Prescription: Drugs Reason Magazine
  49. ^ Reid, Ed, and Ovid Demaris. 1963. The Green Felt Jungle. Buccaneer Books, p. 40.
  50. ^ Reid, Ed, and Ovid Demaris. 1963. The Green Felt Jungle. Buccaneer Books.
  51. ^ Reid, Ed, and Ovid Demaris. 1963. The Green Felt Jungle. Buccaneer Books, pp. 201-206.
  52. ^ Reid, Ed, and Ovid Demaris. 1963. The Green Felt Jungle. Buccaneer Books, p. 42
  53. ^ FCC K7UGA record
  54. ^ Goldwater Kachinas a public treasure
  55. ^ Arizona Republic, May 31, 1998
  56. ^ a b FOIA documents
  57. ^ Burton Bernstein, Profiles, "AuH2O," The New Yorker, April 25, 1988, p. 43
  58. ^ UFO Quotations â The United States Congress
  59. ^ Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, Goldwater, Barry Morris, (1909â1998). Retrieved 1/1/07.
  60. ^ "Barry Goldwater Memorial in PV"
  61. ^ Deborah Solomon, New York Times, Goldwater Girl (interview with CC Goldwater), Published August 27, 2006. Retrieved January 1, 2007.

## [edit] Primary sources

  * Goldwater, Barry. The Conscience of a Conservative (1963) speeches. ISBN 0-89526-540-0
  * Goldwater, Barry. Why Not Victory? A fresh look at American policy (1963) OCLC 25326755
  * Conscience of a Majority (1971) ISBN 0-671-78096-4
  * Goldwater, Barry. Arizona (1977) ISBN 0-938379-04-6
  * Goldwater, Barry. With No Apologies: The Outspoken Political Memoirs of America's Conservative Conscience (1979) ISBN 0-425-04663-X
  * Goldwater, Barry. Goldwater (1988) ISBN 0-385-23947-5, autobiography
  * George H. Gallup, ed., The Gallup Poll: Public Opinion, 1935â1971, vol. 3. (1972)
  * Karl Hess, In A Cause That Will Triumph: The Goldwater Campaign and the Future of Conservatism (1967), memoir by BG's speechwriter

## [edit] Secondary sources

  * Mary C. Brennan, Turning Right in the Sixties: The Conservative Capture of the G.O.P. (University of North Carolina Press, 1995)
  * Edwards, Lee. Goldwater (1995). biography
  * Goldberg, Robert Alan. Barry Goldwater (1995), the standard scholarly biography
  * Godfrey Hodgson, The World Turned Right Side Up: A History of the Conservative Ascendancy in America (1996).
  * Jeffrey J. Matthews. "To Defeat a Maverick: The Goldwater Candidacy Revisited, 1963â1964." Presidential Studies Quarterly. 27#1 1997. pp 662+.
  * Perlstein, Rick. Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and the Unmaking of the American Consensus (2001) New York: Hill and Wang. ISBN 0-8090-2859-X. On the 1964 campaign.
  * White, Theodore, The Making of the President: 1964 (1965)
  * The New Yorker, April 25, 1988, p 70

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Barry
Goldwater  
  * Barry Goldwater at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Retrieved on 2009-03-03
  * The Goldwater Institute advances the principles of free enterprise, individual responsibility, and constitutionally-limited government, espoused by Senator Goldwater.
  * Goldwater's 1964 Republican National Convention Acceptance Address in Audio and Text
  * Goldwater's 1964 acceptance speech at the Republican Convention â the 'extremism in the defense of liberty' speech.
  * Extended "in memoriam" reporting from the Arizona Republic
  * Goldwater Scholarship Homepage
  * Barry Goldwater at Find A Grave Retrieved on 2009-03-03

United States Senate  
Preceded by  
Ernest McFarland (D) Senator from Arizona (Class 1)  
1953 â 1965  
Served alongside: Carl Hayden Succeeded by  
Paul Fannin (R)  
Preceded by  
Carl Hayden (D) Senator from Arizona (Class 3)  
1969 â 1987  
Served alongside: Paul Fannin, Dennis DeConcini Succeeded by  
John McCain (R)  
Political offices  
Preceded by  
Birch Bayh  
(D-Indiana) Chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee  
1981 â 1985 Succeeded by  
David Durenberger  
(R-Minnesota)  
Preceded by  
John Tower  
(R-Texas) Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee  
1985 â 1987 Succeeded by  
Sam Nunn  
(D-Georgia)  
Party political offices  
Preceded by  
Ward S. Powers Republican nominee for United States Senator from Arizona  
(Class 1)  
1953, 1958 Succeeded by  
Paul Fannin  
Preceded by  
Styles Bridges  
(New Hampshire) Chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee  
1955 â 1957 Succeeded by  
Everett Dirksen  
(Illinois)  
Preceded by  
Andrew F. Schoeppel  
(Kansas) Chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee  
1961 â 1963 Succeeded by  
Thruston B. Morton  
(Kentucky)  
Preceded by  
Richard Nixon Republican Party Presidential nominee  
1964 Succeeded by  
Richard Nixon  
Preceded by  
Evan Mecham Republican nominee for United States Senator from Arizona  
(Class 3)  
1968, 1974, 1980 Succeeded by  
John McCain  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States Senators from Arizona  
Class 1: Ashurst â¢ McFarland â¢ Goldwater â¢ Fannin â¢ DeConcini â¢ Kyl  
Class 3: Smith â¢ Cameron â¢ Hayden â¢ Goldwater â¢ McCain

United States Senate  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Republican Party (United States)  
Chairpersons of RNC

Morgan Â· Raymond Â· Ward Â· Claflin Â· Morgan Â· Chandler Â· Cameron Â·
Jewell Â· Sabin Â· Jones Â· Quay Â· Clarkson Â· Carter Â· Hanna Â· Payne Â·
Cortelyou Â· New Â· Hitchcock Â· Hill Â· Rosewater Â· Hilles Â· Hays Â· Adams
Â· Butler Â· Work Â· Huston Â· Fess Â· Sanders Â· Fletcher Â· Hamilton Â·
Martin Â· Walsh Â· Spangler Â· Brownell Â· Reece Â· Scott Â· Gabrielson Â·
Summerfield Â· Roberts Â· Hall Â· Alcorn Â· T. B. Morton Â· Miller Â· Burch Â·
Bliss Â· R. Morton Â· Dole Â· Bush Â· Smith Â· Brock Â· Richards Â· Fahrenkopf
Â· Atwater Â· Yeutter Â· Bond Â· Barbour Â· Nicholson Â· Gilmore Â· Racicot Â·
Gillespie Â· Mehlman Â· Duncan Â· Steele  
Presidential tickets

FrÃ©mont/Dayton Â· Lincoln/Hamlin Â· Lincoln/Johnson Â· Grant/Colfax Â·
Grant/Wilson Â· Hayes/Wheeler Â· Garfield/Arthur Â· Blaine/Logan Â·
Harrison/Morton Â· Harrison/Reid Â· McKinley/Hobart Â· McKinley/Roosevelt Â·
Roosevelt/Fairbanks Â· Taft/Sherman/Butler Â· Hughes/Fairbanks Â·
Harding/Coolidge Â· Coolidge/Dawes Â· Hoover/Curtis Â· Alf Landon/Knox Â·
Wendell Willkie/McNary Â· Dewey/Bricker Â· Dewey/Warren Â· Eisenhower/Nixon Â·
Nixon/Lodge Â· Goldwater/Miller Â· Nixon/Agnew Â· Ford/Dole Â· Reagan/Bush Â·
G.H.W. Bush/Quayle Â· Dole/Kemp Â· G.W. Bush/Cheney Â· McCain/Palin  
Parties by State and territory

State

Alabama Â· Alaska Â· Arizona Â· Arkansas Â· California Â· Colorado Â·
Connecticut Â· Delaware Â· Florida Â· Georgia Â· Hawaii Â· Idaho Â· Illinois
Â· Indiana Â· Iowa Â· Kansas Â· Kentucky Â· Louisiana Â· Maine Â· Maryland Â·
Massachusetts Â· Michigan Â· Minnesota Â· Mississippi Â· Missouri Â· Montana
Â· Nebraska Â· Nevada Â· New Hampshire Â· New Jersey Â· New Mexico Â· New York
Â· North Carolina Â· North Dakota Â· Ohio Â· Oklahoma Â· Oregon Â·
Pennsylvania Â· Rhode Island Â· South Carolina Â· South Dakota Â· Tennessee Â·
Texas Â· Utah Â· Vermont Â· Virginia Â· Washington Â· West Virginia Â·
Wisconsin Â· Wyoming  
Territory

District of Columbia Â· Guam Â· Northern Mariana Islands Â· Puerto Rico Â·
Virgin Islands  
Conventions

1856 (Philadelphia) Â· 1860 (Chicago) Â· 1864 (Baltimore) Â· 1868 (Chicago) Â·
1872 (Philadelphia) Â· 1876 (Cincinnati) Â· 1880 (Chicago) Â· 1884 (Chicago)
Â· 1888 (Chicago) Â· 1892 (Minneapolis) Â· 1896 (Saint Louis) Â· 1900
(Philadelphia) Â· 1904 (Chicago) Â· 1908 (Chicago) Â· 1912 (Chicago) Â· 1916
(Chicago) Â· 1920 (Chicago) Â· 1924 (Cleveland) Â· 1928 (Kansas City) Â· 1932
(Chicago) Â· 1936 (Cleveland) Â· 1940 (Philadelphia) Â· 1944 (Chicago) Â· 1948
(Philadelphia) Â· 1952 (Chicago) Â· 1956 (San Francisco) Â· 1960 (Chicago) Â·
1964 (San Francisco) Â· 1968 (Miami Beach) Â· 1972 (Miami Beach) Â· 1976
(Kansas City) Â· 1980 (Detroit) Â· 1984 (Dallas) Â· 1988 (New Orleans) Â· 1992
(Houston) Â· 1996 (San Diego) Â· 2000 (Philadelphia) Â· 2004 (New York) Â·
2008 (St. Paul)  
Affiliated organizations

Senate Republican Conference Â· House Republican Conference Â· National
Republican Senatorial Committee Â· National Republican Congressional Committee
Â· Republican Governors Association Â· College Republicans Â· Log Cabin
Republicans Â· Republicans Abroad Â· Republican Liberty Caucus Â· Republican
Main Street Partnership Â· Republican Study Committee Â· Young Republicans Â·
Republican Majority for Choice Â· The Wish List Â· Republicans for
Environmental Protection  
Related articles

History  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Chairmen of the National Republican Senatorial Committee  
Bridges â¢ Brewster â¢ Dirksen â¢ Goldwater â¢ Dirksen â¢ Schoeppel â¢
Goldwater â¢ Morton â¢ Murphy â¢ Tower â¢ Dominick â¢ Brock â¢ Stevens
â¢ Packwood â¢ Heinz â¢ Packwood â¢ Lugar â¢ Heinz â¢ Boschwitz â¢
Nickles â¢ Gramm â¢ D'Amato â¢ McConnell â¢ Frist â¢ Allen â¢ Dole â¢
Ensign â¢ Cornyn  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Chairmen of the United States Senate Committee on Armed Services  
Military Affairs Committee  
(1816â1947)

J. Williams â¢ Troup â¢ J. Williams â¢ Jackson â¢ Harrison â¢ Benton â¢
Preston â¢ Crittenden â¢ Benton â¢ Davis â¢ Shields â¢ Weller â¢ Davis
â¢ Wilson â¢ Logan â¢ Spencer â¢ Randolph â¢ Logan â¢ Hawley â¢
Walthall â¢ Hawley â¢ Warren â¢ du Pont â¢ Johnston â¢ Chamberlain â¢
Wadsworth â¢ Reed â¢ Sheppard â¢ Reynolds â¢ Thomas

<IMG>  
Naval Affairs Committee  
(1816â1947)

Tait â¢ Sanford â¢ Pleasants â¢ Lloyd â¢ Hayne â¢ Dallas â¢ Southard â¢
Rives â¢ R. Williams â¢ Mangum â¢ Bayard â¢ Fairfield â¢ Yulee â¢ Gwin
â¢ Mallory â¢ J. Hale â¢ Grimes â¢ Cragin â¢ Sargent â¢ McPherson â¢
Cameron â¢ McPherson â¢ Cameron â¢ E. Hale â¢ Perkins â¢ Tillman â¢
Swanson â¢ Page â¢ F. Hale â¢ Trammell â¢ Walsh  
Armed Services Committee  
(1947â)

Gurney â¢ Tydings â¢ Russell â¢ Saltonstall â¢ Russell â¢ Stennis â¢
Tower â¢ Goldwater â¢ Nunn â¢ Thurmond â¢ Warner â¢ Levin â¢ Warner â¢
Levin â¢ Warner â¢ Levin  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States presidential election, 1960  
Democratic Party

1960 Democratic National Convention  
Candidates

Barnett Â· Brown Â· DiSalle Â· Fisher Â· Humphrey Â· Johnson Â· Kennedy Â·
Meyner Â· Morse Â· Smathers Â· Stevenson Â· Symington  
VP Candidates

Jackson â¢ Johnson â¢ Symington  
Republican Party

1960 Republican National Convention  
Candidates

Goldwater Â· Nixon Â· Rockefeller  
VP Candidates

Halleck â¢ Lodge â¢ Rockefeller  
  

Persondata  
NAME Goldwater, Barry  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION United States Air Force general and politician  
DATE OF BIRTH  
PLACE OF BIRTH  
DATE OF DEATH  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barry_Goldwater"

Categories: 1909 births | 1998 deaths | Amateur radio people | American anti-
communists | American Episcopalians | American memoirists | American military
personnel of World War II | American photographers | American political
writers | Americans of Jewish descent | Arizona Republicans | American
libertarians | Conservatism in the United States | Deaths from stroke | Harmon
Trophy winners | People from Phoenix, Arizona | Presidential Medal of Freedom
recipients | Republican Party (United States) presidential nominees | United
States Air Force generals | United States presidential candidates, 1960 |
United States presidential candidates, 1964 | United States Senators from
Arizona | University of Arizona alumni

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 05:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



