
# Galileo Galilei

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Galileo" redirects here. For other uses, see Galileo (disambiguation).

Semi-protected

Galileo Galilei  
Portrait of Galileo Galilei by Giusto Sustermans  

Portrait of Galileo Galilei by Giusto Sustermans  
Born February 15, 1564(1564-02-15)[1]  
Pisa,[1] Duchy of Florence, Italy  
Died 8 January 1642 (aged 77)[1]  
Arcetri,[1] Grand Duchy of Tuscany, Italy  
  
Residence Grand Duchy of Tuscany, Italy  
Fields Astronomy, Physics and Mathematics  
Institutions University of Pisa  
University of Padua  
Alma mater University of Pisa  
Known for Kinematics  
Dynamics  
Telescopic observational astronomy  
Heliocentrism  
Religious stance Roman Catholic  
Notes  
  
Galileo Galilei (15 February 1564[2] â 8 January 1642)[1][3] was an Italian
physicist, mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher who played a major role
in the Scientific Revolution. His achievements include improvements to the
telescope and consequent astronomical observations, and support for
Copernicanism. Galileo has been called the "father of modern observational
astronomy",[4] the "father of modern physics",[5] the "father of science",[5]
and "the Father of Modern Science."[6] The motion of uniformly accelerated
objects, taught in nearly all high school and introductory college physics
courses, was studied by Galileo as the subject of kinematics. His
contributions to observational astronomy include the telescopic confirmation
of the phases of Venus, the discovery of the four largest satellites of
Jupiter, named the Galilean moons in his honour, and the observation and
analysis of sunspots. Galileo also worked in applied science and technology,
improving compass design.

Galileo's championing of Copernicanism was controversial within his lifetime.
The geocentric view had been dominant since the time of Aristotle, and the
controversy engendered by Galileo's presentation of heliocentrism as proven
fact resulted in the Catholic Church's prohibiting its advocacy as empirically
proven fact, because it was not empirically proven at the time and was
contrary to the literal meaning of Scripture.[7] Galileo was eventually forced
to recant his heliocentrism and spent the last years of his life under house
arrest on orders of the Roman Inquisition.

## Contents

  * 1 Life
  * 2 Scientific methods
  * 3 Astronomy
    * 3.1 Contributions
    * 3.2 Controversy over comets and The Assayer
    * 3.3 Galileo, Kepler and theories of tides
  * 4 Technology
  * 5 Physics
  * 6 Mathematics
  * 7 Church controversy
  * 8 His writings
  * 9 Legacy
  * 10 Notes
  * 11 References
  * 12 External links

  
## Life

Galileo was born in Pisa (then part of the Duchy of Florence), Italy, the
first of six children of Vincenzo Galilei, a famous lutenist and music
theorist, and Giulia Ammannati. Four of their six children survived infancy,
and the youngest Michelangelo (or Michelagnolo) became a noted lutenist and
composer.

Galileo's full name was Galileo di Vincenzo Bonaiuti de' Galilei. At the age
of 8, his family moved to Florence, but he was left with Jacopo Borghini for
two years.[1] He then was educated in the Camaldolese Monastery at
Vallombrosa, 35 km southeast of Florence.[1] Although he seriously considered
the priesthood as a young man, he enrolled for a medical degree at the
University of Pisa at his father's urging. He did not complete this degree,
but instead studied mathematics.[8] In 1589, he was appointed to the chair of
mathematics in Pisa. In 1591 his father died and he was entrusted with the
care of his younger brother Michelagnolo. In 1592, he moved to the University
of Padua, teaching geometry, mechanics, and astronomy until 1610.[9] During
this period Galileo made significant discoveries in both pure science (for
example, kinematics of motion, and astronomy) and applied science (for
example, strength of materials, improvement of the telescope). His multiple
interests included the study of astrology, which in pre-modern disciplinary
practice was seen as correlated to the studies of mathematics and
astronomy.[10]

Although a genuinely pious Roman Catholic[11], Galileo fathered three children
out of wedlock with Marina Gamba. They had two daughters, Virginia in 1600 and
Livia in 1601, and one son, Vincenzo, in 1606. Because of their illegitimate
birth, their father considered the girls unmarriageable. Their only worthy
alternative was the religious life. Both girls were sent to the convent of San
Matteo in Arcetri and remained there for the rest of their lives.[12] Virginia
took the name Maria Celeste upon entering the convent. She died on 2 April
1634, and is buried with Galileo at the Basilica di Santa Croce di Firenze.
Livia took the name Sister Arcangela and was ill for most of her life.
Vincenzo was later legitimized and married Sestilia Bocchineri.[13]

In 1610 Galileo published an account of his telescopic observations of the
moons of Jupiter, using this observation to argue in favor of the sun-
centered, Copernican theory of the universe against the dominant earth-
centered Ptolemaic and Aristotelian theories. The next year Galileo visited
Rome in order to demonstrate his telescope to the influential philosophers and
mathematicians of the Jesuit Collegio Romano, and to let them see with their
own eyes the reality of the four moons of Jupiter.[14] While in Rome he was
also made a member of the Accademia dei Lincei.[15]

In 1612, opposition arose to the Sun-centered theory of the universe which
Galileo supported. In 1614, from the pulpit of the Basilica of Santa Maria
Novella, Father Tommaso Caccini (1574â1648) denounced Galileo's opinions on
the motion of the Earth, judging them dangerous and close to heresy. Galileo
went to Rome to defend himself against these accusations, but, in 1616,
Cardinal Roberto Bellarmino personally handed Galileo an admonition enjoining
him neither to advocate nor teach Copernican astronomy.[16] During 1621 and
1622 Galileo wrote his first book, The Assayer (Il Saggiatore), which was
approved and published in 1623. In 1630, he returned to Rome to apply for a
license to print the Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems,
published in Florence in 1632. In October of that year, however, he was
ordered to appear before the Holy Office in Rome.

Following a papal trial in which he was found vehemently suspect of heresy,
Galileo was placed under house arrest and his movements restricted by the
Pope. From 1634 onward he stayed at his country house at Arcetri, outside of
Florence. He went completely blind in 1638 and was suffering from a painful
hernia and insomnia, so he was permitted to travel to Florence for medical
advice. He continued to receive visitors until 1642, when, after suffering
fever and heart palpitations, he died.[17][18]

## Scientific methods

Galileo made original contributions to the science of motion through an
innovative combination of experiment and mathematics.[19] More typical of
science at the time were the qualitative studies of William Gilbert, on
magnetism and electricity. Galileo's father, Vincenzo Galilei, a lutenist and
music theorist, had performed experiments establishing perhaps the oldest
known non-linear relation in physics: for a stretched string, the pitch varies
as the square root of the tension.[20] These observations lay within the
framework of the Pythagorean tradition of music, well-known to instrument
makers, which included the fact that subdividing a string by a whole number
produces a harmonious scale. Thus, a limited amount of mathematics had long
related music and physical science, and young Galileo could see his own
father's observations expand on that tradition.[21]

Galileo is perhaps the first to clearly state that the laws of nature are
mathematical. In The Assayer he wrote "Philosophy is written in this grand
book, the universe ... It is written in the language of mathematics, and its
characters are triangles, circles, and other geometric figures; ...".[22] His
mathematical analyses are a further development of a tradition employed by
late scholastic natural philosophers, which Galileo learned when he studied
philosophy.[23] Although he tried to remain loyal to the Catholic Church, his
adherence to experimental results, and their most honest interpretation, led
to a rejection of blind allegiance to authority, both philosophical and
religious, in matters of science. In broader terms, this aided to separate
science from both philosophy and religion; a major development in human
thought.

By the standards of his time, Galileo was often willing to change his views in
accordance with observation. Modern philosopher of science Paul Feyerabend
also noted the supposedly improper aspects of Galileo's methodology, but he
argued that Galileo's methods could be justified retroactively by their
results. The bulk of Feyerabend's major work, Against Method (1975), was
devoted to an analysis of Galileo, using his astronomical research as a case
study to support Feyerabend's own anarchistic theory of scientific method. As
he put it: 'Aristotelians ... demanded strong empirical support while the
Galileans were content with far-reaching, unsupported and partially refuted
theories. I do not criticize them for that; on the contrary, I favour Niels
Bohr's "this is not crazy enough."'[24] In order to perform his experiments,
Galileo had to set up standards of length and time, so that measurements made
on different days and in different laboratories could be compared in a
reproducible fashion.

Galileo showed a remarkably modern appreciation for the proper relationship
between mathematics, theoretical physics, and experimental physics. He
understood the parabola, both in terms of conic sections and in terms of the
ordinate (y) varying as the square of the abscissa (x). Galilei further
asserted that the parabola was the theoretically ideal trajectory of a
uniformly accelerated projectile in the absence of friction and other
disturbances. He conceded that there are limits to the validity of this
theory, noting on theoretical grounds that a projectile trajectory of a size
comparable to that of the Earth could not possibly be a parabola,[25] but he
nevertheless maintained that for distances up to the range of the artillery of
his day, the deviation of a projectile's trajectory from a parabola would only
be very slight.[26] Thirdly, he recognized that his experimental data would
never agree exactly with any theoretical or mathematical form, because of the
imprecision of measurement, irreducible friction, and other factors.

According to Stephen Hawking, Galileo probably bears more of the
responsibility for the birth of modern science than anybody else,[27] and
Albert Einstein called him the father of modern science.[28]

## Astronomy

### Contributions

<IMG>

<IMG>

It was on this page that Galileo first noted an observation of the moons of
Jupiter. This observation upset the notion that all celestial bodies must
revolve around the Earth. Galileo published a full description in Sidereus
Nuncius in March 1610

<IMG>

<IMG>

The phases of Venus, observed by Galileo in 1610

Based only on uncertain descriptions of the first practical telescope,
invented by Hans Lippershey in the Netherlands in 1608, Galileo, in the
following year, made a telescope with about 3x magnification, and later made
others with up to about 30x magnification.[29] With this improved device he
could see magnified, upright images on the earth â it was what is now known
as a terrestrial telescope, or spyglass. He could also use it to observe the
sky; for a time he was one of those who could construct telescopes good enough
for that purpose. On 25 August 1609, he demonstrated his first telescope to
Venetian lawmakers. His work on the device made for a profitable sideline with
merchants who found it useful for their shipping businesses and trading
issues. He published his initial telescopic astronomical observations in March
1610 in a short treatise entitled Sidereus Nuncius (Starry Messenger).

On 7 January 1610 Galileo observed with his telescope what he described at the
time as "three fixed stars, totally invisible[30] by their smallness", all
within a short distance of Jupiter, and lying on a straight line through
it.[31] Observations on subsequent nights showed that the positions of these
"stars" relative to Jupiter were changing in a way that would have been
inexplicable if they had really been fixed stars. On 10 January Galileo noted
that one of them had disappeared, an observation which he attributed to its
being hidden behind Jupiter. Within a few days he concluded that they were
orbiting Jupiter:[32] He had discovered three of Jupiter's four largest
satellites (moons): Io, Europa, and Callisto. He discovered the fourth,
Ganymede, on 13 January. Galileo named the four satellites he had discovered
Medicean stars, in honour of his future patron, Cosimo II de' Medici, Grand
Duke of Tuscany, and Cosimo's three brothers.[33] Later astronomers, however,
renamed them the Galilean satellites in honour of Galileo himself.

A planet with smaller planets orbiting it did not conform to the principles of
Aristotelian Cosmology, which held that all heavenly bodies should circle the
Earth,[34] and many astronomers and philosophers initially refused to believe
that Galileo could have discovered such a thing.[35]

Galileo continued to observe the satellites over the next eighteen months, and
by mid 1611 he had obtained remarkably accurate estimates for their
periodsâa feat which Kepler had believed impossible.[36]

From September 1610, Galileo observed that Venus exhibited a full set of
phases similar to that of the Moon. The heliocentric model of the solar system
developed by Nicolaus Copernicus predicted that all phases would be visible
since the orbit of Venus around the Sun would cause its illuminated hemisphere
to face the Earth when it was on the opposite side of the Sun and to face away
from the Earth when it was on the Earth-side of the Sun. In contrast, the
geocentric model of Ptolemy predicted that only crescent and new phases would
be seen, since Venus was thought to remain between the Sun and Earth during
its orbit around the Earth. Galileo's observations of the phases of Venus
proved that it orbited the Sun and lent support to (but did not prove) the
heliocentric model. However, since it refuted the Ptolemaic pure geocentric
planetary model, it seems it was the crucial observation that caused the 17th
century majority conversion of the scientific community to geoheliocentric and
geocentric models such as the Tychonic and Capellan models, and was thereby
arguably Galileoâs historically most important astronomical observation.

Galileo also observed the planet Saturn, and at first mistook its rings for
planets, thinking it was a three-bodied system. When he observed the planet
later, Saturn's rings were directly oriented at Earth, causing him to think
that two of the bodies had disappeared. The rings reappeared when he observed
the planet in 1616, further confusing him.[37]

Galileo was one of the first Europeans to observe sunspots, although Kepler
had unwittingly observed one in 1607, but mistook it for a transit of Mercury.
He also reinterpreted a sunspot observation from the time of Charlemagne,
which formerly had been attributed (impossibly) to a transit of Mercury. The
very existence of sunspots showed another difficulty with the unchanging
perfection of the heavens posited by orthodox Aristotelian celestial physics,
but their regular periodic transits also confirmed the dramatic novel
prediction of Kepler's Aristotelian celestial dynamics in his 1609 Astronomia
Nova that the sun rotates, which was the first successful novel prediction of
post-spherist celestial physics.[38] And the annual variations in sunspots'
motions, discovered by Francesco Sizzi and others in 1612â1613,[39] provided
a powerful argument against both the Ptolemaic system and the geoheliocentric
system of Tycho Brahe.[40] For the seasonal variation refuted all non-geo-
rotational geostatic planetary models such as the Ptolemaic pure geocentric
model and the Tychonic geoheliocentric model in which the Sun orbits the Earth
daily, whereby the variation should appear daily but does not. But it was
explicable by all geo-rotational systems such as Longomontanus's semi-Tychonic
geo-heliocentric model, Capellan and extended Capellan geo-heliocentric models
with a daily rotating Earth, and the pure heliocentric model. A dispute over
priority in the discovery of sunspots, and in their interpretation, led
Galileo to a long and bitter feud with the Jesuit Christoph Scheiner; in fact,
there is little doubt that both of them were beaten by David Fabricius and his
son Johannes, looking for confirmation of Kepler's prediction of the sun's
rotation. Scheiner quickly adopted Kepler's 1615 proposal of the modern
telescope design, which gave larger magnification at the cost of inverted
images; Galileo apparently never changed to Kepler's design.

Galileo was the first to report lunar mountains and craters, whose existence
he deduced from the patterns of light and shadow on the Moon's surface. He
even estimated the mountains' heights from these observations. This led him to
the conclusion that the Moon was "rough and uneven, and just like the surface
of the Earth itself," rather than a perfect sphere as Aristotle had claimed.
Galileo observed the Milky Way, previously believed to be nebulous, and found
it to be a multitude of stars packed so densely that they appeared to be
clouds from Earth. He located many other stars too distant to be visible with
the naked eye. Galileo also observed the planet Neptune in 1612, but did not
realize that it was a planet and took no particular notice of it. It appears
in his notebooks as one of many unremarkable dim stars.

### Controversy over comets and The Assayer

Main article: The Assayer

In 1619, Galileo became embroiled in a controversy with Father Orazio Grassi,
professor of mathematics at the Jesuit Collegio Romano. It began as a dispute
over the nature of comets, but by the time Galileo had published The Assayer
(Il Saggiatore) in 1623, his last salvo in the dispute, it had become a much
wider argument over the very nature of Science itself. Because The Assayer
contains such a wealth of Galileo's ideas on how Science should be practised,
it has been referred to as his scientific manifesto.[41]

Early in 1619, Father Grassi had anonymously published a pamphlet, An
Astronomical Disputation on the Three Comets of the Year 1618 ,[42] which
discussed the nature of a comet that had appeared late in November of the
previous year. Grassi concluded that the comet was a fiery body which had
moved along a segment of a great circle at a constant distance from the
earth,[43] and that it had been located well beyond the moon.

Grassi's arguments and conclusions were criticized in a subsequent article,
Discourse on the Comets ,[44] published under the name of one of Galileo's
disciples, a Florentine lawyer named Mario Guiducci, although it had been
largely written by Galileo himself.[45] Galileo and Guiducci offered no
definitive theory of their own on the nature of comets,[46] although they did
present some tentative conjectures which we now know to be mistaken.

In its opening passage, Galileo and Guiducci's Discourse gratuitously insulted
the Jesuit Christopher Scheiner,[47] and various uncomplimentary remarks about
the professors of the Collegio Romano were scattered throughout the work.[48]
The Jesuits were offended,[49] and Grassi soon replied with a polemical tract
of his own, The Astronomical and Philosophical Balance ,[50] under the
pseudonym Lothario Sarsio Sigensano,[51] purporting to be one of his own
pupils.

The Assayer was Galileo's devastating reply to the Astronomical Balance.[52]
It has been widely regarded as a masterpiece of polemical literature,[53] in
which "Sarsi's" arguments are subjected to withering scorn.[54] It was greeted
with wide acclaim, and particularly pleased the new pope, Urban VIII, to whom
it had been dedicated.[55]

Galileo's dispute with Grassi permanently alienated many of the Jesuits who
had previously been sympathetic to his ideas,[56] and Galileo and his friends
were convinced that these Jesuits were responsible for bringing about his
later condemnation.[57] The evidence for this is at best equivocal,
however.[58]

### Galileo, Kepler and theories of tides

Cardinal Bellarmine had written in 1615 that the Copernican system could not
be defended without "a true physical demonstration that the sun does not
circle the earth but the earth circles the sun".[59] Galileo considered his
theory of the tides to provide the required physical proof of the motion of
the earth. This theory was so important to Galileo that he originally intended
to entitle his Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems the Dialogue on the Ebb
and Flow of the Sea.[60] For Galileo, the tides were caused by the sloshing
back and forth of water in the seas as a point on the Earth's surface speeded
up and slowed down because of the Earth's rotation on its axis and revolution
around the Sun. Galileo circulated his first account of the tides in 1616,
addressed to Cardinal Orsini.[61]

If this theory were correct, there would be only one high tide per day.
Galileo and his contemporaries were aware of this inadequacy because there are
two daily high tides at Venice instead of one, about twelve hours apart.
Galileo dismissed this anomaly as the result of several secondary causes,
including the shape of the sea, its depth, and other factors.[62] Against the
assertion that Galileo was deceptive in making these arguments, Albert
Einstein expressed the opinion that Galileo developed his "fascinating
arguments" and accepted them uncritically out of a desire for physical proof
of the motion of the Earth.[63]

Galileo dismissed as a "useless fiction" the idea, held by his contemporary
Johannes Kepler, that the moon caused the tides.[64] Galileo also refused to
accept Kepler's elliptical orbits of the planets,[65] considering the circle
the "perfect" shape for planetary orbits.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Galileo Galilei. Portrait in crayon by Leoni.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A replica of the earliest surviving telescope attributed to Galileo Galilei,
on display at the Griffith Observatory.

## Technology

Galileo made a number of contributions to what is now known as technology, as
distinct from pure physics, and suggested others. This is not the same
distinction as made by Aristotle, who would have considered all Galileo's
physics as techne or useful knowledge, as opposed to episteme, or
philosophical investigation into the causes of things. Between 1595â1598,
Galileo devised and improved a Geometric and Military Compass suitable for use
by gunners and surveyors. This expanded on earlier instruments designed by
NiccolÃ² Tartaglia and Guidobaldo del Monte. For gunners, it offered, in
addition to a new and safer way of elevating cannons accurately, a way of
quickly computing the charge of gunpowder for cannonballs of different sizes
and materials. As a geometric instrument, it enabled the construction of any
regular polygon, computation of the area of any polygon or circular sector,
and a variety of other calculations. About 1593, Galileo constructed a
thermometer, using the expansion and contraction of air in a bulb to move
water in an attached tube.

In 1609, Galileo was, along with Englishman Thomas Harriot and others, among
the first to use a refracting telescope as an instrument to observe stars,
planets or moons. The name "telescope" was coined for Galileo's instrument by
a Greek mathematician, Giovanni Demisiani,[66] at a banquet held in 1611 by
Prince Federico Cesi to make Galileo a member of his Accademia dei Lincei.[67]
The name was derived from the Greek tele = 'far' and skopein = 'to look or
see'. In 1610, he used a telescope at close range to magnify the parts of
insects.[68] By 1624 he had perfected[69] a compound microscope. He gave one
of these instruments to Cardinal Zollern in May of that year for presentation
to the Duke of Bavaria,[70] and in September he sent another to Prince
Cesi.[71] The Linceans played a role again in naming the "microscope" a year
later when fellow academy member Giovanni Faber coined the word for Galileo's
invention from the Greek words Î¼Î¹ÎºÏÏÎ½ (micron) meaning "small", and
ÏÎºÎ¿ÏÎµá¿Î½ (skopein) meaning "to look at". The word was meant to be
analogous with "telescope".[72][73] Illustrations of insects made using one of
Galileo's microscopes, and published in 1625, appear to have been the first
clear documentation of the use of a compound microscope.[74]

In 1612, having determined the orbital periods of Jupiter's satellites,
Galileo proposed that with sufficiently accurate knowledge of their orbits one
could use their positions as a universal clock, and this would make possible
the determination of longitude. He worked on this problem from time to time
during the remainder of his life; but the practical problems were severe. The
method was first successfully applied by Giovanni Domenico Cassini in 1681 and
was later used extensively for large land surveys; this method, for example,
was used by Lewis and Clark. For sea navigation, where delicate telescopic
observations were more difficult, the longitude problem eventually required
development of a practical portable marine chronometer, such as that of John
Harrison.

In his last year, when totally blind, he designed an escapement mechanism for
a pendulum clock, a vectorial model of which may be seen here. The first fully
operational pendulum clock was made by Christiaan Huygens in the 1650s.
Galilei created sketches of various inventions, such as a candle and mirror
combination to reflect light throughout a building, an automatic tomato
picker, a pocket comb that doubled as an eating utensil, and what appears to
be a ballpoint pen.

## Physics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Galileo e Viviani, 1892, Tito Lessi

Galileo's theoretical and experimental work on the motions of bodies, along
with the largely independent work of Kepler and RenÃ© Descartes, was a
precursor of the classical mechanics developed by Sir Isaac Newton.

A biography by Galileo's pupil Vincenzo Viviani stated that Galileo had
dropped balls of the same material, but different masses, from the Leaning
Tower of Pisa to demonstrate that their time of descent was independent of
their mass.[75] This was contrary to what Aristotle had taught: that heavy
objects fall faster than lighter ones, in direct proportion to weight.[76]
While this story has been retold in popular accounts, there is no account by
Galileo himself of such an experiment, and it is generally accepted by
historians that it was at most a thought experiment which did not actually
take place.[77]

In his 1638 Discorsi Galileo's character Salviati, widely regarded as largely
Galileo's spokesman, held that all unequal weights would fall with the same
finite speed in a vacuum. But this had previously been proposed by
Lucretius[78] and Simon Stevin.[79] Salviati also held it could be
experimentally demonstrated by the comparison of pendulum motions in air with
bobs of lead and of cork which had different weight but which were otherwise
similar.

Galileo proposed that a falling body would fall with a uniform acceleration,
as long as the resistance of the medium through which it was falling remained
negligible, or in the limiting case of its falling through a vacuum.[80] He
also derived the correct kinematical law for the distance travelled during a
uniform acceleration starting from restânamely, that it is proportional to
the square of the elapsed time ( d â t 2 ).[81] However, in neither case
were these discoveries entirely original. The time-squared law for uniformly
accelerated change was already known to Nicole Oresme in the 14th century,[82]
and Domingo de Soto, in the 16th, had suggested that bodies falling through a
homogeneous medium would be uniformly accelerated[83] Galileo expressed the
time-squared law using geometrical constructions and mathematically precise
words, adhering to the standards of the day. (It remained for others to re-
express the law in algebraic terms). He also concluded that objects retain
their velocity unless a forceâoften frictionâacts upon them, refuting the
generally accepted Aristotelian hypothesis that objects "naturally" slow down
and stop unless a force acts upon them (philosophical ideas relating to
inertia had been proposed by Ibn al-Haytham centuries earlier, as had Jean
Buridan, and according to Joseph Needham, Mo Tzu had proposed it centuries
before either of them, but this was the first time that it had been
mathematically expressed, verified experimentally, and introduced the idea of
frictional force, the key breakthrough in validating inertia). Galileo's
Principle of Inertia stated: "A body moving on a level surface will continue
in the same direction at constant speed unless disturbed." This principle was
incorporated into Newton's laws of motion (first law).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dome of the cathedral of Pisa with the "lamp of Galileo"

Galileo also claimed (incorrectly) that a pendulum's swings always take the
same amount of time, independently of the amplitude. That is, that a simple
pendulum is isochronous. It is popularly believed that he came to this
conclusion by watching the swings of the bronze chandelier in the cathedral of
Pisa, using his pulse to time it. It appears however, that he conducted no
experiments because the claim is true only of infinitesimally small swings as
discovered by Christian Huygens. Galileo's son, Vincenzo, sketched a clock
based on his father's theories in 1642. The clock was never built and, because
of the large swings required by its verge escapement, would have been a poor
timekeeper. (See Technology above.)

In 1638 Galileo described an experimental method to measure the speed of light
by arranging that two observers, each having lanterns equipped with shutters,
observe each other's lanterns at some distance. The first observer opens the
shutter of his lamp, and, the second, upon seeing the light, immediately opens
the shutter of his own lantern. The time between the first observer's opening
his shutter and seeing the light from the second observer's lamp indicates the
time it takes light to travel back and forth between the two observers.
Galileo reported that when he tried this at a distance of less than a mile, he
was unable to determine whether or not the light appeared instantaneously.[84]
Sometime between Galileo's death and 1667, the members of the Florentine
Accademia del Cimento repeated the experiment over a distance of about a mile
and obtained a similarly inconclusive result.[85]

Galileo is lesser known for, yet still credited with, being one of the first
to understand sound frequency. By scraping a chisel at different speeds, he
linked the pitch of the sound produced to the spacing of the chisel's skips, a
measure of frequency.

In his 1632 Dialogue Galileo presented a physical theory to account for tides,
based on the motion of the Earth. If correct, this would have been a strong
argument for the reality of the Earth's motion. In fact, the original title
for the book described it as a dialogue on the tides; the reference to tides
was removed by order of the Inquisition. His theory gave the first insight
into the importance of the shapes of ocean basins in the size and timing of
tides; he correctly accounted, for instance, for the negligible tides halfway
along the Adriatic Sea compared to those at the ends. As a general account of
the cause of tides, however, his theory was a failure. Kepler and others
correctly associated the Moon with an influence over the tides, based on
empirical data; a proper physical theory of the tides, however, was not
available until Newton.

Galileo also put forward the basic principle of relativity, that the laws of
physics are the same in any system that is moving at a constant speed in a
straight line, regardless of its particular speed or direction. Hence, there
is no absolute motion or absolute rest. This principle provided the basic
framework for Newton's laws of motion and is central to Einstein's special
theory of relativity.

## Mathematics

While Galileo's application of mathematics to experimental physics was
innovative, his mathematical methods were the standard ones of the day. The
analysis and proofs relied heavily on the Eudoxian theory of proportion, as
set forth in the fifth book of Euclid's Elements. This theory had become
available only a century before, thanks to accurate translations by Tartaglia
and others; but by the end of Galileo's life it was being superseded by the
algebraic methods of Descartes.

Galileo produced one piece of original and even prophetic work in mathematics:
Galileo's paradox, which shows that there are as many perfect squares as there
are whole numbers, even though most numbers are not perfect squares. Such
seeming contradictions were brought under control 250 years later in the work
of Georg Cantor.

## Church controversy

Main article: Galileo affair

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cristiano Banti's 1857 painting Galileo facing the Roman Inquisition

Western Christian biblical references Psalm 93:1, Psalm 96:10, and 1
Chronicles 16:30 include (depending on translation) text stating that "the
world is firmly established, it cannot be moved." In the same tradition, Psalm
104:5 says, "the LORD set the earth on its foundations; it can never be
moved." Further, Ecclesiastes 1:5 states that "And the sun rises and sets and
returns to its place" etc.[86]

Galileo defended heliocentrism, and claimed it was not contrary to those
Scripture passages. He took Augustine's position on Scripture: not to take
every passage literally, particularly when the scripture in question is a book
of poetry and songs, not a book of instructions or history. The writers of the
Scripture wrote from the perspective of the terrestrial world, and from that
vantage point the sun does rise and set. Galileo did, however, openly question
the veracity of the Book of Joshua (10:13) wherein the sun and moon were said
to have remained unmoved for three days to allow a victory to the Israelites.

By 1616 the attacks on Galileo had reached a head, and he went to Rome to try
to persuade the Church authorities not to ban his ideas. In the end, Cardinal
Bellarmine, acting on directives from the Inquisition, delivered him an order
not to "hold or defend" the idea that the Earth moves and the Sun stands still
at the centre. The decree did not prevent Galileo from discussing
heliocentrism hypothesis (thus maintaining a facade of separation between
science and the church). For the next several years Galileo stayed well away
from the controversy. He revived his project of writing a book on the subject,
encouraged by the election of Cardinal Barberini as Pope Urban VIII in 1623.
Barberini was a friend and admirer of Galileo, and had opposed the
condemnation of Galileo in 1616. The book, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief
World Systems, was published in 1632, with formal authorization from the
Inquisition and papal permission.

Pope Urban VIII personally asked Galileo to give arguments for and against
heliocentrism in the book, and to be careful not to advocate heliocentrism. He
made another request, that his own views on the matter be included in
Galileo's book. Only the latter of those requests was fulfilled by Galileo.
Whether unknowingly or deliberately, Simplicio, the defender of the
Aristotelian Geocentric view in Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World
Systems, was often caught in his own errors and sometimes came across as a
fool. This fact made Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems appear as
an advocacy book; an attack on Aristotelian geocentrism and defense of the
Copernican theory. To add insult to injury, Galileo put the words of Pope
Urban VIII into the mouth of Simplicio. Most historians agree Galileo did not
act out of malice and felt blindsided by the reaction to his book.[87]
However, the Pope did not take the suspected public ridicule lightly, nor the
blatant bias. Galileo had alienated one of his biggest and most powerful
supporters, the Pope, and was called to Rome to defend his writings.

With the loss of many of his defenders in Rome because of Dialogue Concerning
the Two Chief World Systems, Galileo was ordered to stand trial on suspicion
of heresy in 1633. The sentence of the Inquisition was in three essential
parts:

  * Galileo was found "vehemently suspect of heresy", namely of having held the opinions that the Sun lies motionless at the centre of the universe, that the Earth is not at its centre and moves, and that one may hold and defend an opinion as probable after it has been declared contrary to Holy Scripture. He was required to "abjure, curse and detest" those opinions.[88]
  * He was ordered imprisoned; the sentence was later commuted to house arrest.
  * His offending Dialogue was banned; and in an action not announced at the trial, publication of any of his works was forbidden, including any he might write in the future.[89]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Tomb of Galileo Galilei, Santa Croce

According to popular legend, after recanting his theory that the Earth moved
around the Sun, Galileo allegedly muttered the rebellious phrase And yet it
moves, but there is no evidence that he actually said this or anything
similarly impertinent. The first account of the legend dates to a century
after his death.[90]

After a period with the friendly Ascanio Piccolomini (the Archbishop of
Siena), Galileo was allowed to return to his villa at Arcetri near Florence,
where he spent the remainder of his life under house arrest, and where he
later became blind. It was while Galileo was under house arrest that he
dedicated his time to one of his finest works, Two New Sciences. Here he
summarized work he had done some forty years earlier, on the two sciences now
called kinematics and strength of materials. This book has received high
praise from both Sir Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein.[citation needed] As a
result of this work, Galileo is often called, the "father of modern physics".

Galileo died on 8 January 1642 at 77 years of age. The Grand Duke of Tuscany,
Ferdinando II, wished to bury him in the main body of the Basilica of Santa
Croce, next to the tombs of his father and other ancestors, and to erect a
marble mausoleum in his honour.[91] These plans were scrapped, however, after
Pope Urban VIII and his nephew, Cardinal Francesco Barberini, protested.[92]
He was instead buried in a small room next to the novices' chapel at the end
of a corridor from the southern transept of the basilica to the sacristy.[93]
He was reburied in the main body of the basilica in 1737 after a monument had
been erected there in his honour.[94]

The Inquisition's ban on reprinting Galileo's works was lifted in 1718 when
permission was granted to publish an edition of his works (excluding the
condemned Dialogue) in Florence.[95] In 1741 Pope Benedict XIV authorized the
publication of an edition of Galileo's complete scientific works[96] which
included a mildly censored version of the Dialogue.[97] In 1758 the general
prohibition against works advocating heliocentrism was removed from the Index
of prohibited books, although the specific ban on uncensored versions of the
Dialogue and Copernicus's De Revolutionibus remained.[98] All traces of
official opposition to heliocentrism by the Church disappeared in 1835 when
these works were finally dropped from the Index.[99]

In 1939 Pope Pius XII, in his first speech to the Pontifical Academy of
Sciences, within a few months of his election to the papacy, described Galileo
as being among the "most audacious heroes of research ... not afraid of the
stumbling blocks and the risks on the way, nor fearful of the funereal
monuments"[100] His close advisor of 40 years, Professor Robert Leiber wrote:
"Pius XII was very careful not to close any doors (to science) prematurely. He
was energetic on this point and regretted that in the case of Galileo."[101]

On 15 February 1990, in a speech delivered at the Sapienza University of
Rome,[102] Cardinal Ratzinger (later to become Pope Benedict XVI) cited some
current views on the Galileo affair as forming what he called "a symptomatic
case that permits us to see how deep the self-doubt of the modern age, of
science and technology goes today."[103] Some of the views he cited were those
of the philosopher Paul Feyerabend, whom he quoted as saying âThe Church at
the time of Galileo kept much more closely to reason than did Galileo himself,
and she took into consideration the ethical and social consequences of
Galileo's teaching too. Her verdict against Galileo was rational and just and
the revision of this verdict can be justified only on the grounds of what is
politically opportune.â[104] The Cardinal did not clearly indicate whether
he agreed or disagreed with Feyerabend's assertions. He did, however, say "It
would be foolish to construct an impulsive apologetic on the basis of such
views".[103]

On 31 October 1992, Pope John Paul II expressed regret for how the Galileo
affair was handled, and officially conceded that the Earth was not stationary,
as the result of a study conducted by the Pontifical Council for
Culture.[105][106] In March 2008 the Vatican proposed to complete its
rehabilitation of Galileo by erecting a statue of him inside the Vatican
walls.[107] In December of the same year, during events to mark the 400th
anniversary of Galileo's earliest telescopic observations, Pope Benedict XVI
praised his contributions to astronomy.[108]

## His writings

<IMG>

<IMG>

Statue outside the Uffizi, Florence.

Galileo's early works describing scientific instruments include the 1586 tract
entitled The Little Balance (La Billancetta) describing an accurate balance to
weigh objects in air or water[109] and the 1606 printed manual Le Operazioni
del Compasso Geometrico et Militare on the operation of a geometrical and
military compass.[110]

His early works in dynamics, the science of motion and mechanics were his 1590
Pisan De Motu (On Motion) and his circa 1600 Paduan Le Meccaniche (Mechanics).
The former was based on Aristotelian-Archimedean fluid dynamics and held that
the speed of gravitational fall in a fluid medium was proportional to the
excess of a body's specific weight over that of the medium, whereby in a
vacuum bodies would fall with speeds in proportion to their specific weights.
It also subscribed to the Hipparchan-Philoponan impetus dynamics in which
impetus is self-dissipating and free-fall in a vacuum would have an essential
terminal speed according to specific weight after an initial period of
acceleration.

Galileo's 1610 The Starry Messenger (Sidereus Nuncius) was the first
scientific treatise to be published based on observations made through a
telescope and include the discovery of the Galilean moons. Galileo published a
description of sunspots in 1613 entitled Letters on Sunspots[111] suggesting
the Sun and heavens are corruptible. It also reported his 1610 telescopic
confirmation of the gibbous and full phases of Venus that refuted pure
geocentrism and so promoted the 17th century conversion from Ptolemaic
geocentric astronomy to geo-heliocentric astronomy such as the Tychonic and
Capellan planetary models.[112] In 1615 Galileo prepared a manuscript known as
the Letter to Grand Duchess Christina which was not published in printed form
until 1636. This letter was a revised version of the Letter to Castelli, which
was denounced by the Inquisition as an incursion upon theology by advocating
Copernicanism both as physically true and as consistent with Scripture.[113]
In 1616, after the order by the inquisition for Galileo not to hold or defend
the Copernican position, Galileo wrote the Discourse on the tides (Discorso
sul flusso e il reflusso del mare) based on the Copernican earth, in the form
of a private letter to Cardinal Orsini.[114] In 1619, Mario Guiducci, a pupil
of Galileo's, published a lecture written largely by Galileo under the title
Discourse on the Comets (Discorso Delle Comete), arguing against the Jesuit
interpretation of comets.[115]

In 1623, Galileo published The Assayer â Il Saggiatore, which attacked
theories based on Aristotle's authority and promoted experimentation and the
mathematical formulation of scientific ideas. The book was highly successful
and even found support among the higher echelons of the Christian church.[116]
Following the success of The Assayer, Galileo published the Dialogue
Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi
del mondo) in 1632. Despite taking care to adhere to the Inquisition's 1616
instructions, the claims in the book favouring Copernican theory and a non
Geocentric model of the solar system led to Galileo being tried and banned on
publication. Despite the publication ban, Galileo published his Discourses and
Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences (Discorsi e
Dimostrazioni Matematiche, intorno a due nuove scienze) in 1638 in Holland,
outside the jurisdiction of the Inquisition.

  * The Little Balance (1586)
  * On Motion (1590) [117]
  * Mechanics (c1600)
  * The Starry Messenger (1610; in Latin, Sidereus Nuncius)
  * Letters on Sunspots (1613)
  * Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina (1615; published in 1636)
  * Discourse on the Tides (1616; in Italian, Discorso del flusso e reflusso del mare)
  * Discourse on the Comets (1619; in Italian, Discorso Delle Comete)
  * The Assayer (1623; in Italian, Il Saggiatore)
  * Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632; in Italian Dialogo dei due massimi sistemi del mondo)
  * Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences (1638; in Italian, Discorsi e Dimostrazioni Matematiche, intorno a due nuove scienze)

## Legacy

Galileo's astronomical discoveries and investigations into the Copernican
theory have led to a lasting legacy which includes the categorisation of the
four large moons of Jupiter discovered by Galileo (Io, Europa, Ganymede and
Callisto) as the Galilean moons. Other scientific endeavours and principles
are named after Galileo including the Galileo spacecraft,[118] the first
spacecraft to enter orbit around Jupiter, the proposed Galileo global
satellite navigation system, the transformation between inertial systems in
classical mechanics denoted Galilean transformation and the Gal (unit),
sometimes known as the Galileo which is a non-SI unit of acceleration.

<IMG>

<IMG>

International Year of Astronomy commemorative coin

To coincide in part with Galileo's first recorded astronomical observations
using a telescope, the United Nations has scheduled 2009 to be the
International Year of Astronomy.[119] A global scheme laid out by the
International Astronomical Union (IAU), it has also been endorsed by UNESCO
â the UN body responsible for Educational, Scientific and Cultural matters.
The International Year of Astronomy 2009 is intended to be a global
celebration of astronomy and its contributions to society and culture,
stimulating worldwide interest not only in astronomy but science in general,
with a particular slant towards young people.

The 20th century German playwright Bertolt Brecht dramatised Galileo's life in
his Life of Galileo (1943). There is also a 21st century drama on his life
available.[120]

Galileo Galilei was recently selected as a main motif for a high value
collectors' coin: the â¬25 International Year of Astronomy commemorative
coin, minted in 2009. This coin also commemorates the 400th anniversary of the
invention of Galileo's telescope. The obverse shows a portion of his portrait
and his telescope. The background shows one of his first drawings of the
surface of the moon. In the silver ring other telescopes are depicted: the
Isaac Newton Telescope, the observatory in KremsmÃ¼nster Abbey, a modern
telescope, a radio telescope and a space telescope.

## Notes

  1. ^ a b c d e f g O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F.. "Galileo Galilei". The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive. University of St Andrews, Scotland. http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Galileo.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-24.
  2. ^ Drake (1978, p.1). The date of Galileo's birth is given according to the Julian calendar, which was then in force throughout the whole of Christendom. In 1582 it was replaced in Italy and several other Catholic countries with the Gregorian calendar. Unless otherwise indicated, dates in this article are given according to the Gregorian calendar.
  3. ^ <IMG> "Galileo Galilei" in the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia. by John Gerard. Retrieved 11 August 2007
  4. ^ Singer, Charles (1941), A Short History of Science to the Nineteenth Century, Clarendon Press, http://www.google.com.au/books?id=mPIgAAAAMAAJ&pgis=1 (page 217)
  5. ^ a b Weidhorn, Manfred (2005). The Person of the Millennium: The Unique Impact of Galileo on World History. iUniverse. pp. 155\. ISBN 0595368778.
  6. ^ Finocchiaro (2007).
  7. ^ Sharratt (1994, pp.127â131), McMullin (2005a).
  8. ^ Reston (2000, pp. 3â14).
  9. ^ Sharratt (1994, pp. 45â66).
  10. ^ Rutkin, H. Darrel. "Galileo, Astrology, and the Scientific Revolution: Another Look". Program in History & Philosophy of Science & Technology, Stanford University.. http://www.stanford.edu/dept/HPST/colloquia0405.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-15.
  11. ^ Sharratt (1994, pp.17, 213)
  12. ^ Sobel (2000, p.5) Chapter 1. Retrieved on 26 August 2007. "But because he never married Virginia's mother, he deemed the girl herself unmarriageable. Soon after her thirteenth birthday, he placed her at the Convent of San Matteo in Arcetri."
  13. ^ Pedersen, O. (24 Mayâ27, 1984). "Galileo's Religion". Proceedings of the Cracow Conference, The Galileo affair: A meeting of faith and science: 75-102, Cracow: Dordrecht, D. Reidel Publishing Co.. Retrieved on 2008-06-09.
  14. ^ Gebler (1879, pp. 22â35).
  15. ^ Anonymous (2007). "History". Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. http://www.lincei.it/modules.php?name=Content&pa=showpage&pid=21. Retrieved on 2008-06-10.
  16. ^ There are contradictory documents describing the nature of this admonition and the circumstances of its delivery. Finocchiaro, The Galileo Affair, pp.147â149, 153
  17. ^ Carney, Jo Eldridge (2000). Renaissance and Reformation, 1500-1620: a. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0313305749.
  18. ^ Allan-Olney (1870)
  19. ^ Sharratt (1994, pp.204â05)
  20. ^ Cohen, H. F. (1984). Quantifying Music: The Science of Music at. Springer. pp. 78â84. ISBN 9027716374.
  21. ^ Field, Judith Veronica (2005). Piero Della Francesca: A Mathematician's Art. Yale University Press. pp. 317â320. ISBN 0300103425.
  22. ^ In Drake (1957, pp.237â238)
  23. ^ Wallace, (1984).
  24. ^ Feyerabend, Paul (1993). Against Method (3rd edition ed.). London: Verso. p. 129\. ISBN 0860916464.
  25. ^ Sharratt (1994, pp.202â04), Galilei (1954, pp.250â52), Favaro (1898, 8:274â75) (Italian)
  26. ^ Sharratt (1994, pp.202â04), Galilei (1954, pp.252), Favaro (1898, 8:275) (Italian)
  27. ^ Hawking (1988, p.179).
  28. ^ Einstein (1954, p.271). "Propositions arrived at by purely logical means are completely empty as regards reality. Because Galileo realised this, and particularly because he drummed it into the scientific world, he is the father of modern physicsâindeed, of modern science altogether."
  29. ^ Drake (1990, pp.133â34).
  30. ^ i.e., invisible to the naked eye.
  31. ^ Drake (1978, p.146).
  32. ^ In Sidereus Nuncius (Favaro,1892, 3:81(Latin)) Galileo stated that he had reached this conclusion on 11 January. Drake (1978, p.152), however, after studying unpublished manuscript records of Galileo's observations, concluded that he did not do so until 15 January.
  33. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.17).
  34. ^ Linton (2004, pp.98,205), Drake (1978, p.157).
  35. ^ Drake (1978, p.158â68), Sharratt (1994, p.18â19).
  36. ^ Drake (1978, p.168), Sharratt (1994, p.93).
  37. ^ Baalke, Ron. Historical Background of Saturn's Rings. Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, NASA. Retrieved on 2007-03-11
  38. ^ In Kepler's Thomist 'inertial' variant of Aristotelian dynamics as opposed to Galileo's impetus dynamics variant all bodies universally have an inherent resistance to all motion and tendency to rest, which he dubbed 'inertia'. This notion of inertia was originally introduced by Averroes in the 12th century just for the celestial spheres in order to explain why they do not rotate with infinite speed on Aristotelian dynamics, as they should if they had no resistance to their movers. And in his Astronomia Nova celestial mechanics the inertia of the planets is overcome in their solar orbital motion by their being pushed around by the sunspecks of the rotating sun acting like the spokes of a rotating cartwheel. And more generally it predicted all but only planets with orbiting satellites, such as Jupiter for example, also rotate to push them around, whereas the Moon, for example, does not rotate, thus always presenting the same face to the Earth, because it has no satellites to push around. These seem to have been the first successful novel predictions of Thomist 'inertial' Aristotelian dynamics as well as of post-spherist celestial physics. In his 1630 Epitome (See p514 on p896 of the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica 1952 Great Books of the Western World edition) Kepler keenly stressed he had proved the Sun's axial rotation from planetary motions in his Commentaries on Mars Ch 34 long before it was telescopically established by sunspot motion.
  39. ^ Drake (1978, p.209). Sizzi reported the observations he and his companions had made over the course of a year to Orazio Morandi in a letter dated 10 April 1613 (Favaro,1901, 11:491 (Italian)). Morandi subsequently forwarded a copy to Galileo.
  40. ^ In geostatic systems the apparent annual variation in the motion of sunspots could only be explained as the result of an implausibly complicated precession of the Sun's axis of rotation (Linton, 2004, p.212; Sharratt, 1994, p.166; Drake, 1970, pp.191â196) However, in Drake's judgment of this complex issue in Chapter 9 of his 1970 this is not so, for it does not refute non-geostatic geo-rotating geocentric models. For at most the variable annual inclinations of sunspotsâ monthly paths to the ecliptic only proved there must be some terrestrial motion, but not necessarily its annual heliocentric orbital motion as opposed to a geocentric daily rotation, and so it did not prove heliocentrism by refuting geocentrism. Thus it could be explained in the semi-Tychonic geocentric model with a daily rotating Earth such as that of Tycho's follower Longomontanus. Especially see p190 and p196 of Drake's article. Thus on this analysis it only refuted the Ptolemaic geostatic geocentric model whose required daily geocentric orbit of the sun would have predicted the annual variation in this inclination should be observed daily, which it is not.
  41. ^ Drake (1960, pp.vii,xxiiiâxxiv), Sharratt (1994, pp.139â140).
  42. ^ Grassi (1960a).
  43. ^ Drake (1978, p.268), Grassi (1960a, p.16).
  44. ^ Galilei & Guiducci (1960).
  45. ^ Drake (1960, p.xvi).
  46. ^ Drake (1957, p.222), Drake (1960, p.xvii).
  47. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.135), Drake (1960, p.xii), Galilei & Guiducci (1960, p.24).
  48. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.135).
  49. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.135), Drake (1960, p.xvii).
  50. ^ Grassi (1960b).
  51. ^ Drake (1978, p.494), Favaro(1896, 6:111). The pseudonym was a slightly imperfect anagram of Oratio Grasio Savonensis, a latinized version of his name and home town.
  52. ^ Galilei (1960).
  53. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.137), Drake (1957, p.227).
  54. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.138â142).
  55. ^ Drake (1960, p.xix).
  56. ^ Drake (1960, p.vii).
  57. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.175).
  58. ^ Sharratt (1994, pp.175â78), Blackwell (2006, p.30).
  59. ^ Finocchiaro (1989), pp. 67â9.
  60. ^ Finocchiaro (1989), p. 354, n. 52
  61. ^ Finocchiaro (1989), pp.119â133
  62. ^ Finocchiaro (1989), pp.127â131 and Drake (1953), pp. 432â6
  63. ^ Einstein (1952) p. xvii
  64. ^ Finocchiaro (1989), p. 128
  65. ^ Kusukawa, Sachiko. "Starry Messenger. The Telescope, Department of History and Philosophy of Science of the University of Cambridge. Retrieved on 2007-03-10"]. http://www.hps.cam.ac.uk/starry/galtele.html.
  66. ^ Sobel (2000, p.43), Drake (1978, p.196). In the Starry Messenger, written in Latin, Galileo had used the term "perspicillum".
  67. ^ "omni-optical.com "A Very Short History of the Telescope"". http://www.omni-optical.com/telescope/ut104.htm.
  68. ^ Drake (1978, p.163â164), Favaro(1892, 3:163â164)(Latin)
  69. ^ Probably in 1623, according to Drake (1978, p.286).
  70. ^ Drake (1978, p.289), Favaro(1903, 13:177) (Italian).
  71. ^ Drake (1978, p.286), Favaro(1903, 13:208)(Italian). The actual inventors of the telescope and microscope remain debatable. A general view on this can be found in the article Hans Lippershey (last updated 2003-08-01), Â© 1995â2007 by Davidson, Michael W. and the Florida State University. Retrieved 2007-08-28
  72. ^ "brunelleschi.imss.fi.it "Il microscopio di Galileo"" (PDF). http://brunelleschi.imss.fi.it/esplora/microscopio/dswmedia/risorse/testi_completi.pdf.
  73. ^ Van Helden, Al. Galileo Timeline (last updated 1995), The Galileo Project. Retrieved 2007-08-28. See also Timeline of microscope technology.
  74. ^ Drake (1978, p.286).
  75. ^ Drake (1978, pp.19,20). At the time when Viviani asserts that the experiment took place, Galileo had not yet formulated the final version of his law of free fall. He had, however, formulated an earlier version which predicted that bodies of the same material falling through the same medium would fall at the same speed (Drake, 1978, p.20).
  76. ^ Drake (1978, p.9); Sharratt (1994, p.31).
  77. ^ Groleau, Rick. "Galileo's Battle for the Heavens. July 2002". http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/galileo/experiments.html. Ball, Phil. "Science history: setting the record straight. 30 June 2005". http://www.hindu.com/seta/2005/06/30/stories/2005063000351500.htm. An exception is Drake (1978, pp.19â21, 414â416), who argues that the experiment did take place, more or less as Viviani described it.
  78. ^ Lucretius, De rerum natura II, 225â229; Relevant passage appears in: Lane Cooper, Aristotle, Galileo, and the Tower of Pisa (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1935), page 49.
  79. ^ Simon Stevin, De Beghinselen des Waterwichts, Anvang der Waterwichtdaet, en de Anhang komen na de Beghinselen der Weeghconst en de Weeghdaet [The Elements of Hydrostatics, Preamble to the Practice of Hydrostatics, and Appendix to The Elements of the Statics and The Practice of Weighing] (Leiden, Netherlands: Christoffel Plantijn, 1586) reports an experiment by Stevin and Jan Cornets de Groot in which they dropped lead balls from a church tower in Delft; relevant passage is translated here: E. J. Dijksterhuis, ed., The Principal Works of Simon Stevin (Amsterdam, Netherlands: C. V. Swets & Zeitlinger, 1955) vol. 1, pages 509 and 511. Available on-line at: http://www.library.tudelft.nl/cgi-bin/digitresor/display.cgi?bookname=Mechanics%20I&page=509
  80. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.203), Galilei (1954, pp.251â54).
  81. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.198), Galilei (1954, p.174).
  82. ^ Clagett (1968, p.561).
  83. ^ Sharratt (1994, p.198), Wallace (2004, pp.II 384, II 400, III 272) Soto, however, did not anticipate many of the qualifications and refinements contained in Galileo's theory of falling bodies. He did not, for instance, recognise, as Galileo did, that a body would only fall with a strictly uniform acceleration in a vacuum, and that it would otherwise eventually reach a uniform terminal velocity.
  84. ^ Galileo Galilei, Two New Sciences, (Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Pr., 1974) p. 50.
  85. ^ I. Bernard Cohen, "Roemer and the First Determination of the Velocity of Light (1676)," Isis, 31 (1940): 327â379, see pp. 332â333
  86. ^ Brodrick (1965, c1964, p.95) quoting Cardinal Bellarmine's letter to Foscarini, dated 12 April 1615. Translated from Favaro(1902, 12:171â172) (Italian).
  87. ^ See Langford (1966, pp.133â134), and Seeger (1966, p.30), for example. Drake (1978, p.355) asserts that Simplicio's character is modelled on the Aristotelian philosophers, Lodovico delle Colombe and Cesare Cremonini, rather than Urban. He also considers that the demand for Galileo to include the Pope's argument in the Dialogue left him with no option but to put it in the mouth of Simplicio (Drake, 1953, p.491). Even Arthur Koestler, who is generally quite harsh on Galileo in The Sleepwalkers (1959), after noting that Urban suspected Galileo of having intended Simplicio to be a caricature of him, says "this of course is untrue" (1959, p.483)
  88. ^ Fantoli (2005, p.139), Finocchiaro (1989, p.288â293). Finocchiaro's translation of the Inquisition's judgement against Galileo is available on-line. "Vehemently suspect of heresy" was a technical term of canon law and did not necessarily imply that the Inquisition considered the opinions giving rise to the verdict to be heretical. The same verdict would have been possible even if the opinions had been subject only to the less serious censure of "erroneous in faith" (Fantoli, 2005, p.140; Heilbron, 2005, pp.282-284).
  89. ^ Drake (1978, p.367), Sharratt (1994, p.184), Favaro(1905, 16:209, 230)(Italian). See Galileo affair for further details.
  90. ^ Drake (1978, p.356). The phrase "Eppur si muove" does appear, however, in a painting of the 1640s by the Spanish painter BartolomÃ© Esteban Murillo or an artist of his school. The painting depicts an imprisoned Galileo apparently pointing to a copy of the phrase written on the wall of his dungeon (Drake, 1978, p.357).
  91. ^ Shea & Artigas (2003, p.199); Sobel (2000, p.378).
  92. ^ Shea & Artigas (2003, p.199); Sobel (2000, p.378); Sharratt (1994, p.207); Favaro(1906,18:378â80) (Italian).
  93. ^ Shea & Artigas (2003, p.199); Sobel (2000, p.380).
  94. ^ Shea & Artigas (2003, p.200); Sobel (2000, p.380â384).
  95. ^ Heilbron (2005, p.299).
  96. ^ Two of his non-scientific works, the letters to Castelli and the Grand Duchess Christina, were explicitly not allowed to be included (Coyne 2005, p.347).
  97. ^ Heilbron (2005, p.303â04); Coyne (2005, p.347). The uncensored version of the Dialogue remained on the Index of prohibited books, however (Heilbron 2005, p.279).
  98. ^ Heilbron (2005, p.307); Coyne (2005, p.347) The practical effect of the ban in its later years seems to have been that clergy could publish discussions of heliocentric physics with a formal disclaimer assuring its hypothetical character and their obedience to the church decrees against motion of the earth: see for example the commented edition (1742) of Newton's 'Principia' by Fathers Le Seur and Jacquier, which contains such a disclaimer ('Declaratio') before the third book (Propositions 25 onwards) dealing with the lunar theory.
  99. ^ McMullin (2005, p.6); Coyne (2005, p.346). In fact, the Church's opposition had effectively ended in 1820 when a Catholic canon, Giuseppe Settele, was given permission to publish a work which treated heliocentism as a physical fact rather than a mathematical fiction. The 1835 edition of the Index was the first to be issued after that year.
  100. ^ Discourse of His Holiness Pope Pius XII given on 3 December 1939 at the Solemn Audience granted to the Plenary Session of the Academy, Discourses of the Popes from Pius XI to John Paul II to the Pontifical Academy of the Sciences 1939-1986, Vatican City, p.34
  101. ^ Robert Leiber, Pius XII Stimmen der Zeit, November 1958 in Pius XII. Sagt, Frankfurt 1959, p.411
  102. ^ An earlier version had been delivered on 16 December 1989, in Rieti, and a later version in Madrid on 24 February 1990 (Ratzinger, 1994, p.81). According to Feyerabend himself, Ratzinger had also mentioned him "in support of" his own views in a speech in Parma around the same time (Feyerabend, 1995, p.178).
  103. ^ a b Ratzinger (1994, p.98).
  104. ^ Ratzinger (1994, p.98)
  105. ^ "Vatican admits Galileo was right". New Scientist. 1992-11-07. http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg13618460.600-vatican-admits-galileo-was-right-.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-09. .
  106. ^ "Papal visit scuppered by scholars". BBC News. 2008-01-15. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7188860.stm. Retrieved on 2008-01-16.
  107. ^ "Vatican recants with a statue of Galileo". TimesOnline News. 2008-03-04. http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/faith/article3478943.ece. Retrieved on 2009-03-02.
  108. ^ "Pope praises Galileo's astronomy". BBC News. 2008-12-21. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7794668.stm. Retrieved on 2008-12-22.
  109. ^ Hydrostatic balance, The Galileo Project, http://galileo.rice.edu/sci/instruments/balance.html, retrieved on 2008-07-17
  110. ^ The Works of Galileo, The University of Oklahoma, College of Arts and Sciences, http://hsci.ou.edu/exhibits/exhibit.php?exbgrp=1&exbid=10&exbpg=1, retrieved on 2008-07-17
  111. ^ Sunspots and Floating Bodies, The University of Oklahoma, College of Arts and Sciences, http://hsci.ou.edu/exhibits/exhibit.php?exbgrp=1&exbid=13&exbpg=2, retrieved on 2008-07-17
  112. ^ The 17th century conversion to geo-heliocentrism is referenced in such as the following claims: (1) "But the title [of Galileo's 1632 Dialogo] was seriously misleading: by that time the Ptolemaic system had been largely abandoned by believers in a central Earth, and astronomers who could not accept the Sun-centred system - the great majority - were opting for the Tychonic or one of the other Earth-centred compromises on offer." p117, The Cambridge Concise History of Astronomy Michael Hoskin, CUP 1999.(2) "In 1691 Ignace Gaston Pardies declared that the Tychonic was still the commonly accepted system, while Francesco Blanchinus reiterated this as late as 1728." The Tychonic and semi-Tychonic world systems Christine Schofield, p41 Taton & Wilson The General History of Astronomy 2A 1989
  113. ^ Galileo, Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina, The University of Oklahoma, College of Arts and Sciences, http://hsci.ou.edu/exhibits/exhibit.php?exbgrp=1&exbid=14&exbpg=3, retrieved on 2008-07-17
  114. ^ Galileo's Theory of the Tides, The Galileo Project, http://galileo.rice.edu/sci/observations/tides.html, retrieved on 2008-07-17
  115. ^ Galileo Timeline, The Galileo Project, http://galileo.rice.edu/chron/galileo.html, retrieved on 2008-07-17
  116. ^ Galileo Galilei, Tel-Aviv University, Science and Technology Education Center, http://muse.tau.ac.il/museum/galileo/galileo.html, retrieved on 2008-07-17
  117. ^ [1]
  118. ^ Fischer, Daniel (2001). Mission Jupiter: The Spectacular Journey of the Galileo Spacecraft. Springer. pp. v. ISBN 0387987649.
  119. ^ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (11 August 2005). "Proclamation of 2009 as International year of Astronomy" (PDF). UNESCO. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001403/140317e.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-10.
  120. ^ http://www.archive.org/search.php?query=creator%3A%22Robert%20Lalonde%22

## References

  * Allan-Olney, Mary (1870). The Private Life of Galileo: Compiled primarily from his correspondence and that of his eldest daughter, Sister Maria Celeste. Boston: Nichols and Noyes. http://books.google.com/books?id=zWcSAAAAIAAJ. Retrieved on 2008-06-09.
  * Biagioli, Mario (1993). Galileo, Courtier: The Practice of Science in the Culture of Absolutism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
  * Blackwell, Richard J. (2006). Behind the Scenes at Galileo's Trial. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. ISBN 0-268-02201-1.
  * Brodrick, James, S. J. (1965) [c1964]. Galileo: the man, his work, his misfortunes. London: G. Chapman.
  * Clagett, Marshall (editor & translator) (1968). Nicole Oresme and the Medieval Geometry of Qualities and Motions; a treatise on the uniformity and difformity of intensities known as Tractatus de configurationibus qualitatum et motuum. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 0299048802.
  * Clavelin, Maurice The Natural Philosophy of Galileo MIT Press 1974
  * Coffa,J Galileo's Concept of Inertia Physis 1968
  * Consolmagno, Guy; Schaefer, Marta (1994) Worlds Apart, A Textbook in Planetary Science. Englewood, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. ISBN 0-13-964131-9
  * Cooper, Lane (1935). Aristotle, Galileo, and the Tower of Pisa. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. ISBN 1-406-75263-0.
  * Coyne, George V., S.J. (2005). The Church's Most Recent Attempt to Dispel the Galileo Myth. In McMullin (2005, pp.340â359).
  * Drabkin, Israel & Drake, Stillman (Eds & translators) On Motion and On Mechanics University of Wisconsin Press 1960 ISBN-10: 0299020304
  * Drake, Stillman (translator) (1953). Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
  * Drake, Stillman (1957). Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo. New York: Doubleday & Company. ISBN 0-385-09239-3
  * Drake, Stillman (1960). Introduction to the Controversy on the Comets of 1618. In Drake & O'Malley (1960, pp.viiâxxv).
  * Drake, Stillman (1970). Galileo Studies. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. ISBN 0-472-08283-3.
  * Drake, Stillman (1973). "Galileo's Discovery of the Law of Free Fall". Scientific American v. 228, #5, pp. 84â92.
  * Drake, Stillman (1978). Galileo At Work. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-16226-5
  * Drake, Stillman (1990). Galileo: Pioneer Scientist. Toronto: The University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-8020-2725-3.
  * Drake, Stillman, and O'Malley, C.D. (translators) (1960). The Controversy on the Comets of 1618. Philadelphia, PA: University of Philadelphia Press.
  * Dugas,RenÃ© A History of Mechanics 1955, Dover Publications 1988
  * Duhem, Pierre Etudes sur Leonard de Vinci 1906-13
  * Duhem, Pierre Le Systeme du Monde 1913 -
  * Duhem, Pierre History of Physics Catholic Encyclopedia
  * Einstein, Albert (1952). Foreword to (Drake, 1953)
  * Einstein, Albert (1954). Ideas and Opinions. translated by Sonja Bargmann. London: Crown Publishers. ISBN 0-285-64724-5.
  * Fantoli, Annibale (2003). Galileo â For Copernicanism and the Church, third English edition. Vatican Observatory Publications. ISBN 88-209-7427-4
  * Fantoli, Annibale (2005). The Disputed Injunction and its Role in Galileo's Trial. In McMullin (2005, pp.117â149).
  * Favaro, Antonio (1890â1909), ed.[2]. Le Opere di Galileo Galilei, Edizione Nazionale (Italian). (The Works of Galileo Galilei, National Edition, 20 vols.), Florence: Barbera, 1890â1909; reprinted 1929â1939 and 1964â1966. ISBN 88-09-20881-1. Searchable online copy from the Institute and Museum of the History of Science, Florence. Brief overview of Le Opere @ Finns Fine Books, [3] and here [4]
  * Feyerabend, Paul Againat Method Verso 1975
  * Feyerabend, Paul (1995). Killing Time: The Autobiography of Paul Feyerabend. Chicago, MI: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-24531-4.
  * Fillmore, Charles (1931, 17th printing July 2004). Metaphysical Bible Dictionary. Unity Village, Missouri: Unity House. ISBN 0-87159-067-0
  * Finocchiaro, Maurice A. (1989). The Galileo Affair: A Documentary History. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-06662-6.
  * Finocchiaro, Maurice A. (Fall 2007), "Book ReviewâThe Person of the Millennium: The Unique Impact of Galileo on World History", The Historian 69 (3): 601â602, doi:10.1111/j.1540-6563.2007.00189_68.x
  * Galilei, Galileo (1960) [1623]. The Assayer. translated by Stillman Drake. In Drake & O'Malley (1960, pp.151â336).
  * Galilei, Galileo [1638, 1914] (1954), Henry Crew and Alfonso de Salvio, translators, Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences, Dover Publications Inc., New York, NY. ISBN 486-60099-8
  * Galilei, Galileo Galileo: Two New Sciences (Translation by Stillman Drake of Galileo's 1638 Discourses and mathematical demonstrations concerning two new sciences) University of Wisconsin Press 1974 ISBN-10: 029906400X
  * Galilei, Galileo, and Guiducci, Mario (1960) [1619]. Discourse on the Comets. translated by Stillman Drake. In Drake & O'Malley (1960, pp.21â65).
  * Gebler, Karl von (1879). Galileo Galilei and the Roman Curia. London: C.K. Paul & Co.. http://books.google.com/books?vid=OCLC02415342&id=FheRZAirWvQC.
  * Geymonat, Ludovico (1965), Galileo Galilei, A biography and inquiry into his philosophy and science, translation of the 1957 Italian edition, with notes and appendix by Stillman Drake, McGraw-Hill
  * Grant, Edward Aristotle, Philoponus, Avempace, and Galileo's Pisan Dynamics Centaurus, 11, 1965-7
  * Grassi, Horatio (1960a) [1619]. On the Three Comets of the Year MDCXIII. translated by C.D. O'Malley. In Drake & O'Malley (1960, pp.3â19).
  * Grassi, Horatio (1960b) [1619]. The Astronomical and Philosophical Balance. translated by C.D. O'Malley. In Drake & O'Malley (1960, pp.67â132).
  * Grisar, Hartmann, S.J., Professor of Church history at the University of Innsbruck (1882). Historisch theologische Untersuchungen Ã¼ber die Urtheile RÃ¶mischen Congegationen im Galileiprocess (Historico-theological Discussions concerning the Decisions of the Roman Congregations in the case of Galileo), Regensburg: Pustet. â Google Books ISBN 0-7905-6229-4. (LCC# QB36 â microfiche) Reviewed here (1883), pp.211â213
  * Hall, A. R. From Galileo to Newton 1963
  * Hall, A. R. Galileo and the Science of Motion in 'British Journal of History of Science', 2 1964-5
  * Hawking, Stephen (1988). A Brief History of Time. New York, NY: Bantam Books. ISBN 0-553-34614-8.
  * Heilbron, John L. (2005). Censorship of Astronomy in Italy after Galileo. In McMullin (2005, pp.279â322).
  * Hellman, Hal (1988). Great Feuds in Science. Ten of the Liveliest Disputes Ever. New York: Wiley
  * Kelter, Irving A. (2005). The Refusal to Accommodate. Jesuit Exegetes and the Copernican System. In McMullin (2005, pp.38â53).
  * Humphreys, W. C. Galileo, Falling Bodies and Inclined Planes. An Attempt at Reconstructing Galileo's Discovery of the Law of Squares 'British Journal of History of Science' 1967
  * Koestler, Arthur (1990) [1959]. The Sleepwalkers: A History of Man's Changing Vision of the Universe. Penguin. ISBN 0-14-019246-8. Original edition published by Hutchinson (1959, London).
  * KoyrÃ©, Alexandre A Documentary History of the Problem of Fall from Kepler to Newton Transaction of the American Philosophical Society, 1955
  * KoyrÃ©, Alexandre Galilean Studies Harvester Press 1978
  * Kuhn, T. The Copernican Revolution 1957
  * Kuhn, T. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 1962
  * Lattis, James M. (1994). Between Copernicus and Galileo: Christopher Clavius and the Collapse of Ptolemaic Cosmology, Chicago: the University of Chicago Press
  * Langford, Jerome K., O.P. (1998) [1966]. Galileo, Science and the Church (third edition ed.). St. Augustine's Press. ISBN 1-890318-25-6. . Original edition by Desclee (New York, NY, 1966)
  * Lessl, Thomas, "The Galileo Legend". New Oxford Review, 27â33 (June 2000).
  * Linton, Christopher M. (2004). From Eudoxus to EinsteinâA History of Mathematical Astronomy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-82750-8.
  * Losee, J. Drake, Galileo, and the Law of Inertia American Journal of Physics, 34, p.430-2 1966
  * McMullin, Ernan, ed. (2005). The Church and Galileo. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. ISBN 0-268-03483-4.
  * McMullin, Ernan, (2005a). The Church's Ban on Copernicanism, 1616. In McMullin (2005, pp.150â190).
  * Mach, Ernst. The Science of Mechanics 1893
  * Machamer, Peter (Ed) The Cambridge Companion to Galileo Cambridge University Press 1998
  * Naylor, Ronald H. (1990). "Galileo's Method of Analysis and Synthesis," Isis, 81: 695â707
  * Newall, Paul (2004). "The Galileo Affair"
  * Remmert, Volker R. (2005). Galileo, God, and Mathematics. In: Bergmans, Luc/Koetsier, Teun (eds.): Mathematics and the Divine. A Historical Study, Amsterdam et al., 347â360
  * Ratzinger, Joseph Cardinal (1994). Turning point for Europe? The Church in the Modern WorldâAssessment and Forecast. translated from the 1991 German edition by Brian McNeil. San Francisco, CA: Ignatius Press. ISBN 0-89870-461-8. OCLC 60292876.
  * Reston, James (2000). Galileo: A Life. Beard Books. ISBN 189312262X.
  * Seeger, Raymond J. (1966). Galileo Galilei, his life and his works. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
  * Settle, Thomas B. (1961). "An Experiment in the History of Science". Science, 133:19â23
  * Sharratt, Michael (1994), Galileo: Decisive Innovator. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-56671-1
  * Shapere, Dudley Galileo, a Philosophical Study University of Chicago Press 1974
  * Shea, William R. and Artigas, Mario (2003). Galileo in Rome: The Rise and Fall of a Troublesome Genius. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516598-5.
  * Sobel, Dava (2000) [1999]. Galileo's Daughter. London: Fourth Estate. ISBN 1-85702-712-4.
  * Wallace, William A. (1984) Galileo and His Sources: The Heritage of the Collegio Romano in Galileo's Science, (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Pr.), ISBN 0-691-08355-X
  * Wallace, William A. (2004). Domingo de Soto and the Early Galileo. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 0-86078-964-0.
  * White, Andrew Dickson (1898). A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom. New York 1898.
  * White, Michael. (2007). Galileo: Antichrist: A Biography. Weidenfeld & Nicolson:London, ISBN 978-0-297-84868-4.
  * Wisan, Winifred Lovell (1984). "Galileo and the Process of Scientific Creation," Isis, 75: 269â286.
  * Zik Yaakov, "Science and Instruments: The telescope as a scientific instrument at the beginning of the seventeenth century", Perspectives on Science 2001, Vol. 9, 3, 259â284.

## External links

Find more about Galileo Galilei on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG>
Definitions from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Portraits of Galileo
  * Original documents on the trial of Galileo Galilei in the Vatican Secret Archives
  * Galileo Affair catholic.net
  * The Galileo Project at Rice University
  * PBS Nova Online: Galileo's Battle for the Heavens
  * Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Galileo
  * The Galilean Library, educational site.
  * Galileo and the Catholic Church article at Catholic League
  * Animated Hero Classics: Galileo (1997) at the Internet Movie Database
  * Electronic representation of Galilei's notes on motion (MS. 72)
  * Works by or about Galileo Galilei in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
  * Galileo's 1590 De Motu translation [5]
  * Works by Galileo Galilei: text with concordances and frequencies.
  * CCD Images through a Galilean Telescope Modern recreation of what Galileo might have seen
  * Galilei, Galileo. Le Operazioni del Compasso Geometrico et Militare 1610 Rome. From Rare Book Room. Scanned first edition.
  * Galilei, Galileo. Istoria e Dimostrazioni Intorno Alle Macchie Solar 1613 Rome. From Rare Book Room. Scanned first edition.
  * O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Galileo Galilei", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive

Persondata  
NAME Galilei, Galileo  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Italian mathematician, physicist, philosopher and astronomer  
DATE OF BIRTH 15 February 1564(1564-02-15)  
PLACE OF BIRTH Pisa  
DATE OF DEATH 8 January 1642  
PLACE OF DEATH Arcetri  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galileo_Galilei"

Categories: 1564 births | 1642 deaths | People from Pisa | People from Tuscany
| Galileo Galilei | Experimental physicists | Theoretical physicists | Italian
astronomers | Italian mathematicians | Italian physicists | Italian
astrologers | 16th-century Italian people | 17th-century astronomers | New
Latin writers | Italian Roman Catholics | Christian astrologers | University
of Pisa alumni | Scientific instrument makers | Religion and science | Blind
people | Discoverers of moons

Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Alemannisch
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bikol Central
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * è´èª
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Interlingue
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * Kapampangan
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Ladino
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Malti
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Norfuk / Pitkern
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Pangasinan
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Qaraqalpaqsha
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * Scots
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Taqbaylit
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * VÃµro
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * Zazaki
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 22:46.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



