
# Giuseppe Verdi

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Giuseppe Verdi. Portrait by Giovanni Boldini, 1886[1]

"Verdi" redirects here. For other uses, see Verdi (disambiguation).

Giuseppe Fortunino Francesco Verdi (pronounced [dÊuËzÉpËe Ëverdi] in
Italian; October 9 or 10, 1813 â January 27, 1901) was an Italian Romantic
composer, mainly of opera. He was one of the most influential composers in the
19th century. His works are frequently performed in opera houses throughout
the world and, transcending the boundaries of the genre, some of his themes
have long since taken root in popular culture - such as "La donna Ã¨ mobile"
from Rigoletto, "Va, pensiero" (The Chorus of the Hebrew Slaves) from Nabucco,
and "Libiamo ne' lieti calici" (The Drinking Song) from La traviata. Although
his work was sometimes criticized for using a generally diatonic rather than a
chromatic musical idiom and having a tendency toward melodrama, Verdiâs
masterworks dominate the standard repertoire a century and a half after their
composition.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
    * 1.1 Initial recognition
  * 2 Middle years
  * 3 Compositions of the mature Verdi
  * 4 Twilight and death
  * 5 Role in the Risorgimento
  * 6 Style
  * 7 Works
  * 8 Media
  * 9 Eponyms and other cultural references
  * 10 Notes
  * 11 References
    * 11.1 Life in and around Busseto
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Early life

<IMG>

<IMG>

Giuseppe Verdi in Vanity Fair (1879)

Verdi was born the son of Carlo Giuseppe Verdi and Luigia Uttini in Le
Roncole, a village near Busseto, then in the DÃ©partement Taro which was a
part of the French Empire after the annexation of the Duchy of Parma and
Piacenza. The baptismal register, on October 11, lists him as being "born
yesterday", but since days were often considered to begin at sunset, this
could have meant either 9 or 10 October. The next day he was baptized in the
Roman Catholic church in Latin as Joseph Fortuninus Franciscus. The day after
that (Tuesday), Verdi's father took his newborn the three miles to Busseto
where the baby was recorded as Joseph Fortunin Francois; the clerk wrote in
French. "So it happened that for the civil and temporal world Verdi was born a
Frenchman."[2]

When he was still a child, Verdi's parents moved from Piacenza to Busseto,
where the future composer's education was greatly facilitated by visits to the
large library belonging to the local Jesuit school. Also in Busseto, Verdi was
given his first lessons in composition.

Verdi went to Milan when he was twenty to continue his studies and he took
private lessons in counterpoint while attending operatic performances, as well
as concerts of, specifically, German music. Milan's beaumonde association
convinced him that he should pursue a career as a theatre composer. During the
mid 1830s, he attended the "Salotto Maffei" salons in Milan, hosted by Clara
Maffei.

Returning to Busseto, he became town music master and, with the support of
Antonio Barezzi, a local merchant and music lover who had long supported
Verdi's musical ambitions in Milan, Verdi gave his first public performance at
Barezziâs home in 1830.

Because he loved Verdiâs music, Barezzi invited Verdi to be his daughter
Margherita's music teacher,and the two soon fell deeply in love. They were
married on May 4, 1836 and Margherita gave birth to two children, Virginia
Maria Luigia (b. March 26, 1837 - d. August 12, 1838) and Icilio Romano (b.
July 11, 1838 - d. October 22, 1839). Both died in infancy while Verdi was
working on his first opera and, shortly afterwards, Margherita died on June
18, 1840. Verdi adored his wife and children, and he was devastated by their
deaths.

### [edit] Initial recognition

<IMG>

"O sommo Carlo"  
Play sound  
Ernani (1844), Act 3, sung by Mattia Battistini, Emilia Corsi, Luigi Colazza,
Aristodemo Sillich, and the La Scala chorus in 1906.  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
The production by Milan's La Scala of his first opera, Oberto in November 1839
achieved a degree of success, after which Bartolomeo Merelli, La Scala's
impresario, offered Verdi a contract for two more works.

It was while he was working on his second opera, Un giorno di regno, that
Verdi's wife died. The opera, given in September 1840, was a flop and he fell
into despair vowing to give up musical composition forever. However, Merelli
persuaded him to write Nabucco and its opening performance in March 1842 made
Verdi famous. Legend has it that it was the words of the famous Va pensiero
chorus of the Hebrew slaves that inspired Verdi to write music again.

A large number of operas - 14 in all - followed in the decade after 1843, a
period which Verdi was to describe as his "galley years". These included his I
Lombardi in 1843, and Ernani in 1844. For some, the most original and
important opera that Verdi wrote is Macbeth in 1847. For the first time, Verdi
attempted an opera without a love story, breaking a basic convention in 19th
century Italian opera.

In 1847, I Lombardi, revised and renamed Jerusalem, was produced by the Paris
Opera. Due to a number of Parisian conventions that had to be honored
(including extensive ballets), it became Verdi's first work in the French
Grand opera style.

## [edit] Middle years

<IMG>

<IMG>

Giuseppina (Peppina) Strepponi

<IMG>

"Bella figlia dell'amore"  
Play sound  
Rigoletto (1851), Act 3. A 1907 Victor Records recording with Enrico Caruso,
Bessie Abott, Louise Homer and Antonio Scotti.  
* * *  
"Stride la vampa"  
Play sound  
Il trovatore (1853), Act 2. Sung by Gabriella Besanzoni in 1920.  
* * *  
"Ah, fors'Ã¨ lui" ... "Sempre libera"  
Play sound  
La traviata (1853), Act 1. Sung by Lucrezia Bori.  
* * *  
Problems listening to these files? See media help.  
Sometime in the mid-1840s, after the death of Margherita Barezzi, Verdi began
an affair with Giuseppina Strepponi, a soprano in the twilight of her
career.[3] Their cohabitation before marriage was regarded as scandalous in
some of the places they lived, but Verdi and Giuseppina married on August 29,
1859 at Collonges-sous-SalÃ¨ve, near Geneva[4]. While living in Busseto with
Strepponi, Verdi bought an estate two miles from the town in 1848. Initially,
his parents lived there, but, after his mother's death in 1851, he made the
Villa Verdi at Sant'Agata his home until his death.

As the "galley years" were drawing to a close, Verdi created one of his
greatest masterpieces, Rigoletto which premiered in Venice in 1851. Based on a
play by Victor Hugo (Le roi s'amuse), the libretto had to undergo substantial
revisions in order to satisfy the epoch's censorship, and the composer was on
the verge of giving it all up a number of times. The opera quickly became a
great success.

With Rigoletto, Verdi sets up his original idea of musical drama as a cocktail
of heterogeneous elements, embodying social and cultural complexity, and
beginning from a distinctive mixture of comedy and tragedy. Rigoletto's
musical range includes band-music such as the first scene or the song La donna
Ã¨ mobile, Italian melody such as the famous quartet "Bella figlia
dell'amore", chamber music such as the duet between Rigoletto and Sparafucile
and powerful and concise declamatos often based on key-notes like the C and C#
notes in Rigoletto and Monterone's upper register.

There followed the second and third of the three major operas of Verdi's
"middle period": in 1853 Il Trovatore was produced in Rome and La traviata in
Venice. The latter was based on Alexandre Dumas, fils' play The Lady of the
Camellias.

## [edit] Compositions of the mature Verdi

<IMG>

"Ã scherzo od Ã¨ follia"  
Play sound  
Un ballo in maschera (1859), Act 1, Scene 2. Performed by Enrico Caruso,
Frieda Hempel, Maria DuchÃªne, AndrÃ©s de Segurola and LÃ©on Rothier.  
* * *  
"NÃ¨ gustare m'Ã¨ dato un'ora..."  
Play sound  
La forza del destino (1862), Act 3, Scene 3. Sung by Enrico Caruso and
Giuseppe de Luca.  
* * *  
Problems listening to these files? See media help.  
Between 1855 and 1867, an outpouring of great Verdi operas followed, among
them such repertory staples as Un ballo in maschera (1859), La forza del
destino (commissioned by the Imperial Theatre of Saint Petersburg for 1861 but
not performed until 1862), and a revised version of Macbeth (1865). Other
somewhat less often performed include Les vÃªpres siciliennes (1855) and Don
Carlos (1867), both commissioned by the Paris Opera and initially given in
French. Today, these latter two operas are most often performed in their
revised Italian versions. Simon Boccanegra followed in 1857.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Giuseppe Verdi in 1876

In 1869, Verdi was asked to compose a section for a requiem mass in memory of
Gioachino Rossini and proposed that this requiem should be a collection of
sections composed by other Italian contemporaries of Rossini. The requiem was
compiled and completed, but it was cancelled at the last minute (and was not
performed in Verdi's lifetime). Verdi blamed this on the lack of enthusiasm
for the project by the intended conductor, Angelo Mariani, who had been a
longtime friend of his. The episode led to a permanent break in their personal
relations. The soprano Teresa Stolz (who later had a strong professional -
and, perhaps, romantic - relationship with Verdi) was at that time engaged to
be married to Mariani, but she left him not long after. Five years later,
Verdi reworked his "Libera Me" section of the Rossini Requiem and made it a
part of his Requiem Mass, honoring the famous novelist and poet Alessandro
Manzoni, who had died in 1873. The complete Requiem was first performed at the
cathedral in Milan on May 22, 1874.

Verdi's grand opera, Aida, is sometimes thought to have been commissioned for
the celebration of the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, but, according to
one major critic,[5] Verdi turned down the Khedive's invitation to write an
"ode" for the new opera house he was planning to inaugurate as part of the
canal opening festivities. The opera house actually opened with a production
of Rigoletto. Later in 1869/70, the organizers again approached Verdi (this
time with the idea of writing an opera), but he again turned them down. When
they warned him that they would ask Charles Gounod instead and then threatened
to engage Richard Wagner's services, Verdi began to show considerable
interest, and agreements were signed in June 1870.

Teresa Stolz was associated with both Aida and the Requiem (as well as with a
number of Verdi roles). The role of Aida was written for her, and although she
did not appear in the world premiere in Cairo in 1871, she created Aida in the
European premiere in Milan in February 1872. She was also the soprano soloist
in the first and many later performances of the Requiem. It was widely
believed that she and Verdi had an affair after she left Angelo Mariani, and a
Florence newspaper criticised them for this in five strongly worded articles.
Whether there is any truth to the accusation may never be known with any
certainty. However, after Giuseppina Strepponi's death, Teresa Stolz became a
close companion of Verdi until his own death.

Verdi and Wagner, who were the leaders of their respective schools of music,
seemed to resent each other greatly. They never met. Verdi's comments on
Wagner and his music are few and hardly benevolent ("He invariably chooses,
unnecessarily, the untrodden path, attempting to fly where a rational person
would walk with better results"), but at least one of them is kind: upon
learning of Wagner's death, Verdi lamented: "Sad, sad, sad! ... a name that
will leave a most powerful impression on the history of art."[6] Of Wagner's
comments on Verdi, only one is well-known. After listening to Verdi's Requiem,
the great German, prolific and eloquent in his comments on some other
composers, said, "It would be best not to say anything."

## [edit] Twilight and death

<IMG>

"SÃ¬, pel ciel marmoreo giuro!"  
Play sound  
Otello (1887), Act 2. Performed by Titta Ruffo and Enrico Caruso.  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
During the following years, Verdi worked on revising some of his earlier
scores, most notably new versions of Don Carlos, La forza del destino, and
Simon Boccanegra.

Otello, based on William Shakespeare's play, with a libretto written by the
younger composer of Mefistofele, Arrigo Boito, premiered in Milan in 1887. Its
music is "continuous" and cannot easily be divided into separate "numbers" to
be performed in concert. Some feel that although masterfully orchestrated, it
lacks the melodic lustre so characteristic of Verdi's earlier, great, operas,
while many critics consider it Verdi's greatest tragic opera, containing some
of his most beautiful, expressive music and some of his richest
characterizations. In addition, it lacks a prelude, something Verdi listeners
are not accustomed to. Arturo Toscanini performed as cellist in the orchestra
at the world premiere and began his friendship with Verdi (a composer he
revered as highly as Beethoven).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Verdi's statue in the Piazza G. Verdi, Busseto

Verdi's last opera, Falstaff, whose libretto was also by Boito, was based on
Shakespeare's Merry Wives of Windsor and Victor Hugo's subsequent translation.
It was an international success and is one of the supreme comic operas which
shows Verdi's genius as a contrapuntist.

In 1894, Verdi composed a short ballet for a French production of Otello, his
last purely orchestral composition. Years later, Arturo Toscanini recorded the
music for RCA Victor with the NBC Symphony Orchestra which complements the
1947 Toscanini performance of the complete opera.

In 1897, Verdi completed his last composition, a setting of the traditional
Latin text Stabat Mater. This was the last of four sacred works that Verdi
composed, Quattro Pezzi Sacri, which are often performed together or
separately. The first performance of the four works was on April 7, 1898, at
the Grande OpÃ©ra, Paris. The four works are: Ave Maria for mixed chorus;
Stabat Mater for mixed chorus and orchestra; Laudi alla Vergine Maria for
female chorus; and Te Deum for double chorus and orchestra.

While staying at the Grand Hotel et de Milan[7] in Milan, Verdi had a stroke
on January 21, 1901. He grew gradually more feeble and died six days later, on
January 27, 1901. Arturo Toscanini conducted the vast forces of combined
orchestras and choirs composed of musicians from throughout Italy at the state
funeral for Verdi in Milan. To date, it remains the largest public assembly of
any event in the history of Italy.

## [edit] Role in the Risorgimento

<IMG>

<IMG>

Giuseppe Verdi, the bust outside of the Teatro Massimo in Palermo, Italy.

Music historians have long perpetuated a myth about the famous Va, pensiero
chorus sung in the third act of Nabucco. The myth reports that, when the Va,
pensiero chorus was sung in Milan, then belonging to the large part of Italy
under Austrian domination, the audience, responding with nationalistic fervor
to the exiled slaves' lament for their lost homeland, demanded an encore of
the piece. As encores were expressly forbidden by the government at the time,
such a gesture would have been extremely significant. However, recent
scholarship puts this to rest. Although the audience did indeed demand an
encore, it was not for Va, pensiero but rather for the hymn Immenso Jehova,
sung by the Hebrew slaves to thank God for saving His people. In light of
these new revelations, Verdi's position as the musical figurehead of the
Risorgimento has been correspondingly downplayed.[8]

On the other hand, during rehearsals, workmen in the theater stopped what they
were doing during Va, pensiero and applauded at the conclusion of this
haunting melody[9] while the growth of the "identification of Verdi's music
with Italian nationalist politics" is judged to have begun in the summer 1846
in relation to a chorus from Ernani in which the name of one of its
characters, "Carlo", was changed to "Pio", a reference to Pope Pius IX's grant
of an amnesty to political prisoners.[10]

The myth of Verdi as Risorgimento's composer also led to claims that the
slogan "Viva VERDI" was used throughout Italy to secretly call for Vittorio
Emanuele Re D'Italia (Victor Emmanuel King of Italy), referring to Victor
Emmanuel II, then king of Sardinia.

The Chorus of the Hebrews (the English title for Va, pensiero) has another
appearance in Verdi folklore. Prior to his body being driven from the cemetery
to the official memorial service and its final resting place at the Casa di
Riposo, Arturo Toscanini conducted a chorus of 820 singers in "Va, pensiero".
At the Casa, the Miserere from Il trovatore was sung.[11]

Verdi was elected as a member of the Chamber of Deputies in 1861 following a
request of Prime Minister Cavour but in 1865 he resigned from the office.[12]
In 1874 he was named Senator of the Kingdom by king Victor Emanuel II

## [edit] Style

Verdi's predecessors who influenced his music were Rossini, Bellini, Giacomo
Meyerbeer and, most notably, Gaetano Donizetti and Saverio Mercadante. With
the possible exception of Otello and Aida, he was free of Wagner's influence.
Although respectful of Gounod, Verdi was careful not to learn anything from
the Frenchman whom many of Verdi's contemporaries regarded as the greatest
living composer. Some strains in Aida suggest at least a superficial
familiarity with the works of the Russian composer Mikhail Glinka, whom Franz
Liszt, after his tour of the Russian Empire as a pianist, popularized in
Western Europe.

Throughout his career, Verdi rarely utilised the high C in his tenor arias,
citing the fact that the opportunity to sing that particular note in front of
an audience distracts the performer before and after the note appears.
However, he did provide high Cs to Duprez in JÃ©rusalem and to Tamberlick in
the original version of La forza del destino. The high C often heard in the
aria Di quella pira does not appear in Verdi's score.

Although his orchestration is often masterful, Verdi relied heavily on his
melodic gift as the ultimate instrument of musical expression. In fact, in
many of his passages, and especially in his arias, the harmony is ascetic,
with the entire orchestra occasionally sounding as if it were one large
accompanying instrument - a giant-sized guitar playing chords.[original
research?] Some critics maintain he paid insufficient attention to the
technical aspect of composition, lacking as he did schooling and
refinement.[citation needed] Verdi himself once said, "Of all composers, past
and present, I am the least learned." He hastened to add, however, "I mean
that in all seriousness, and by learning I do not mean knowledge of music."

However, it would be incorrect to assume that Verdi underestimated the
expressive power of the orchestra or failed to use it to its full capacity
where necessary. Moreover, orchestral and contrapuntal innovation is
characteristic of his style: for instance, the strings producing a rapid
ascending scale in Monterone's scene in Rigoletto accentuate the drama, and,
in the same opera, the chorus humming six closely grouped notes backstage
portrays, very effectively, the brief ominous wails of the approaching
tempest. Verdi's innovations are so distinctive that other composers do not
use them; they remain, to this day, some of Verdi's signatures.

Verdi was one of the first composers who insisted on patiently seeking out
plots to suit his particular talents. Working closely with his librettists and
well aware that dramatic expression was his forte, he made certain that the
initial work upon which the libretto was based was stripped of all
"unnecessary" detail and "superfluous" participants, and only characters
brimming with passion and scenes rich in drama remained.

Many of his operas, especially the later ones from 1851 onwards, are a staple
of the standard repertoire. No composer of Italian opera has managed to match
Verdi's popularity, perhaps with the exception of Giacomo Puccini.

## [edit] Works

Main article: List of compositions by Giuseppe Verdi

Verdi's operas, and their date of premiÃ¨re are:

  * Oberto, November 17, 1839
  * Un giorno di regno, September 5, 1840
  * Nabucco, March 9, 1842
  * I Lombardi alla prima crociata, February 11, 1843
  * Ernani, March 9, 1844
  * I due Foscari, November 3, 1844
  * Giovanna d'Arco, February 15, 1845
  * Alzira, August 12, 1845
  * Attila, March 17, 1846
  * Macbeth, March 14, 1847
  * I masnadieri, July 22, 1847
  * JÃ©rusalem (a revision and translation of I Lombardi alla prima crociata) November 26, 1847
  * Il corsaro, 25 October 1848
  * La battaglia di Legnano, January 27, 1849
  * Luisa Miller, December 8, 1849
  * Stiffelio, November 16, 1850
  * Rigoletto, March 11, 1851
  * Il trovatore, January 19, 1853
  * La traviata, March 6, 1853
  * Les vÃªpres siciliennes, June 13, 1855
  * Simon Boccanegra, March 12, 1857
  * Aroldo (A major revision of Stiffelio), August 16, 1857
  * Un ballo in maschera, February 17, 1859
  * La forza del destino, November 10, 1862
  * Don Carlos, March 11, 1867
  * Aida, December 24, 1871
  * Otello, February 5, 1887
  * Falstaff, February 9, 1893

## [edit] Media

  * La donna Ã¨ mobile  
Play sound  
Enrico Caruso sings La donna Ã¨ mobile from Verdi's Rigoletto, circa 1908  
O patria mia  
Play sound  
Marie Rappold performing "O patria mia" from Verdi's Aida (1916)  
  

  * Problems listening to the files? See media help.

## [edit] Eponyms and other cultural references

  * The Verdi Inlet on the Beethoven Peninsula of Alexander Island just off Antarctica
  * Verdi Square at Broadway and West 72nd Street in Manhattan
  * Asteroid 3975 Verdi

Verdi's name literally translates as "Joseph Green" in English [technically,
this is incorrect - in Italian, the term verdi is the plural form of "green."
So if one were to translate his last name into English, the composer would be
known as Joseph Greens). Musical comedian Victor Borge often referred to the
famous composer as "Joe Green" in his act, saying that "Giuseppe Verdi" was
merely his "stage name". The same joke-translation is mentioned in Evil Under
the Sun by Patrick Redfern to Hercule Poirot, a prank which inadvertedly gives
Poirot the answer to the murder.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ The famous portrait of Verdi by Giovanni Boldini was the main inspiration of Luchino Visconti in creating the character of Burt Lancaster in his film Il Gattopardo.
  2. ^ Martin, 3
  3. ^ Roger Parker, "Giuseppe Verdi", Grove Music Online, ed. L. Macy (Accessed 18 May 2008), (subscription access)
  4. ^ Phillips-Matz, pp.394-95
  5. ^ Budden,Volume 3
  6. ^ Schonberg, Harold C. (1997), The Lives of the Great Composers, W. W. Norton & Company, pp. 260, ISBN 0393038572, http://books.google.com/books?id=VawrK1CRFJgC&pg=PA260&lpg=PA260&dq=wagner's+death+verdi&source=web&ots=nFFimEsWY4&sig=AeMWwyeqH5fLTulrbSfy__7UoDc, retrieved on 2008-01-09
  7. ^ The hotel's website contains a brief history of the composer's stay and a few photographs of those days
  8. ^ Casini, Claudio, Verdi, Milan: Rusconi, 1982
  9. ^ Phillips-Matz, Mary Jane p.116
  10. ^ Phillips-Matz, Mary Jane, pp. 188-191
  11. ^ Phillips-Matz, p.765
  12. ^ http://www.liberalsocialisti.org/articol.php?id_articol=797

## [edit] References

  * Budden, Julian (1973). The Operas of Verdi, Volume I (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198162618.
  * Budden, Julian (1973). The Operas of Verdi, Volume II (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198162626.
  * Budden, J. (1973). The Operas of Verdi, Volume III (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198162634.
  * Kamien, R. (1997). Music: an appreciation - student brief (3rd ed.). McGraw Hill. ISBN 0070365210.
  * Gal, H. (1975). Brahms, Wagner, Verdi: Drei Meister, drei Welten. Fischer. ISBN 3100243021.
  * Martin, G. (1963). Verdi: His Music, Life and Times (1st ed.). Dodd, Mead & Company. ISBN 2001456720.
  * Parker, Roger (2001). "Giuseppe Verdi". Grove Music Online. Oxford University Press.
  * Parker, Roger (1992). "The New Grove Dictionary of Opera". in ed. Stanley Sadie. The New Grove Dictionary of Opera. ISBN 0333734327.
  * Phillips-Matz, Mary Jane (1993). Verdi: A Biography (1st ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0193132044.
  * Michels, Ulrich (1992). dtv-Atlas zur Musik: Band Zwei (7th ed.). Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag. ISBN 3423030232.

### [edit] Life in and around Busseto

  * Associazione Amici di Verdi (ed.), Con Verdi nella sua terra, Busseto, 1997, (in English)
  * Maestrelli, Maurizio, Guida alla Villa e al Parco (in Italian), publication of Villa Verdi, 2001
  * Mordacci, Alessandra, An Itinerary of the History and Art in the Places of Verdi, Busseto: Busseto Tourist Office, 2001 (in English)
  * Villa Verdi': the Visit and Villa Verdi: The Park; the Villa; the Room (pamphlets in English), publications of the Villa Verdi

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Giuseppe
Verdi  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Giuseppe Verdi  
  * Giuseppe Verdi Official Site
  * Stanford University list of Verdi operas, premiere locations and dates, etc.
  * I Lombardi alla prima crociata MP3 Creative Commons Recording (Italian)
  * Works by Giuseppe Verdi at Project Gutenberg
  * "Album Verdi" from the Digital Library of the National Library of Naples (Italy)
  * London Society for Verdi enthusiasts
  * Listen to a free MP3 recording of Ave Maria with UmeÃ¥ Akademiska KÃ¶r.
  * Free MP3 Verdi's operas
  * Free audio MP3 OnClassical - Creative Commons BY-NC-SA, 1.0 - licensed
  * Un ballo in Maschera Soprano (free MP3)
  * Free scores by Verdi in the International Music Score Library Project
  * Works by or about Giuseppe Verdi in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
  * Detailed listing of "complete" recordings of Verdi's operas and of extended excerpts.
  * "Verdi and Milan", lecture by Roger Parker on Verdi, given at Gresham College, London May 14, 2007
  * Verdi cylinder recordings, from the Cylinder Preservation and Digitization Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara Library.
  * (Italian) Giuseppe Verdi: listen to Verdi's music (airs, ouvertures, symphonies) on Magazzini-Sonori.
  * Giuseppe Verdi - "Addio del passato" from "La traviata", sung by Adelina Agostinelli, 1913

v â¢ d â¢ e

Romanticism  
Culture

Bohemianism Â· Ossian Â· Romantic nationalism Â· Wallenrodism  
Literature

Andersen Â· Blake Â· Bryant Â· Burns Â· Byron Â· Chateaubriand Â· Coleridge Â·
Cooper Â· Eichendorff Â· Espronceda Â· Goethe Â· Grimm Brothers Â· Hawthorne
Â· Heine Â· Hoffmann Â· HÃ¶lderlin Â· Hugo Â· Irving Â· Keats Â· Kleist Â·
Krasinski Â· Lamartine Â· Leopardi Â· Lermontov Â· Malczewski Â· Mickiewicz Â·
Musset Â· Nerval Â· Norwid Â· Novalis Â· OehlenschlÃ¤ger Â· Poe Â· Pushkin Â·
Schiller Â· Scott Â· Mary Shelley Â· Shelley Â· Slowacki Â· Stendhal Â· Tieck
Â· Wordsworth Â· Zhukovsky  
Music

Alkan Â· Auber Â· Beethoven Â· Bellini Â· Berlioz Â· Berwald Â· Chopin Â·
FÃ©licien David Â· Ferdinand David Â· Donizetti Â· Field Â· Franck Â· Glinka
Â· HalÃ©vy Â· Liszt Â· Loewe Â· Marschner Â· MÃ©hul Â· Mendelssohn Â·
Meyerbeer Â· Moscheles Â· Paganini Â· Rossini Â· Schubert Â· Schumann Â·
Thalberg Â· Verdi Â· Wagner Â· Weber  
Philosophy and aesthetics

Coleridge Â· Goethe Â· Schiller Â· MÃ¼ller Â· Schleiermacher Â· Tieck Â·
Feuerbach Â· Fichte Â· Wackenroder Â· Schlegel  
Visual arts

Blake Â· Briullov Â· Constable Â· Corot Â· Dahl Â· Delacroix Â· Friedrich Â·
Fuseli Â· GÃ©ricault Â· Gothic Revival architecture Â· Goya Â· Hudson River
School Â· Leutze Â· Martin Â· Nazarene movement Â· Palmer Â· Runge Â· Turner
Â· Ward Â· Wiertz  
Â« Age of Enlightenment

Realism Â»  
Persondata  
NAME Verdi, Giuseppe  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Verdi, Giuseppe Fortunino Francesco  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Italian composer  
DATE OF BIRTH October 9/10, 1813  
PLACE OF BIRTH Le Roncole, Italy  
DATE OF DEATH January 27, 1901  
PLACE OF DEATH Milan, Italy  
  

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giuseppe_Verdi"

Categories: 1813 births | 1901 deaths | Opera composers | Italian composers |
Romantic composers | People from the Province of Parma | Recipients of the
Pour le MÃ©rite (civil class) | Senators of the Kingdom of Italy

Hidden categories: All articles that may contain original research | Articles
that may contain original research since September 2008 | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Malti
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TatarÃ§a/Ð¢Ð°ÑÐ°ÑÑÐ°
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VÃ¨neto
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * Winaray
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 13:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



