
# Thomas Hobbes

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2007)  
"Hobbes" redirects here. For other people called Hobbes, see Hobbes
(disambiguation).

Thomas Hobbes Western Philosophers  
17th-century philosophy  
(Modern Philosophy)  
<IMG>  
Thomas Hobbes  
Full name Thomas Hobbes  
School/tradition Social contract, classical realism  
Main interests Political philosophy, history, ethics, geometry  
Notable ideas modern founder of the social contract tradition; life in the
state of nature is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short"  
Influenced by

Plato, Aristotle, Thucydides, Tacitus, Galileo, NiccolÃ² Machiavelli, RenÃ©
Descartes, Grotius, Selden, Great Tew circle  
Influenced

Joseph Butler; All subsequent Western political philosophy; sociology:
Ferdinand TÃ¶nnies  
Thomas Hobbes (5 April 1588 â 4 December 1679) was an English philosopher,
remembered today for his work on political philosophy. His 1651 book Leviathan
established the foundation for most of Western political philosophy from the
perspective of social contract theory.[1]

Hobbes also contributed to a diverse array of fields, including history,
geometry, physics of gases, theology, ethics, general philosophy, and
political science. His account of human nature as self-interested cooperation
has proved to be an enduring theory in the field of philosophical
anthropology.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life and education
  * 2 In Paris
  * 3 The Civil War in England
  * 4 Leviathan
  * 5 Opponents
    * 5.1 John Bramhall
    * 5.2 John Wallis
  * 6 Later life
  * 7 Selected bibliography
  * 8 In popular culture
  * 9 References
    * 9.1 General
    * 9.2 Specific
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

  
## Early life and education

Thomas Hobbes was born in Wiltshire, England on 5 April 1588 (some sources say
Malmesbury[2]). Born prematurely on April 5, 1588, when his mother heard of
the coming invasion of the Spanish Armada, Thomas Hobbes later reported that
"my mother gave birth to twins: myself and fear."[3] His childhood is almost a
complete blank, and his mother's name is unknown.[4] His father, also named
Thomas, was the vicar of Charlton and Westport. Thomas Sr. abandoned his three
children to the care of an older brother, Thomas junior's uncle Francis, when
he was forced to flee to London after being involved in a fight with a
clergyman outside his own church. Hobbes was educated at Westport church from
the age of four, passed to the Malmesbury school and then to a private school
kept by a young man named Robert Latimer, a graduate of the University of
Oxford. Hobbes was a good pupil, and around 1603 he went up to Magdalen Hall,
which is most closely related to Hertford College, Oxford.[5][6][7][8] The
principal John Wilkinson was a Puritan, and he had some influence on Hobbes.

At university, Hobbes appears to have followed his own curriculum; he was
"little attracted by the scholastic learning". He did not complete his B.A.
degree until 1608, but he was recommended by Sir James Hussey, his master at
Magdalen, as tutor to William, the son of William Cavendish, Baron of Hardwick
(and later Earl of Devonshire), and began a life-long connection with that
family.[9]

Hobbes became a companion to the younger William and they both took part in a
grand tour in 1610. Hobbes was exposed to European scientific and critical
methods during the tour in contrast to the scholastic philosophy which he had
learned in Oxford. His scholarly efforts at the time were aimed at a careful
study of classic Greek and Latin authors, the outcome of which was, in 1628,
his great translation of Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War, the
first translation of that work into English from a Greek manuscript.

Although he associated with literary figures like Ben Jonson and thinkers such
as Francis Bacon, he did not extend his efforts into philosophy until after
1629. His employer Cavendish, then the Earl of Devonshire, died of the plague
in June 1628. The widowed countess dismissed Hobbes but he soon found work,
again as a tutor, this time to the son of Sir Gervase Clifton. This task,
chiefly spent in Paris, ended in 1631 when he again found work with the
Cavendish family, tutoring the son of his previous pupil. Over the next seven
years as well as tutoring he expanded his own knowledge of philosophy,
awakening in him curiosity over key philosophic debates. He visited Florence
in 1636 and later was a regular debater in philosophic groups in Paris, held
together by Marin Mersenne. From 1637 he considered himself a philosopher and
scholar.

## In Paris

Hobbes's first area of study was an interest in the physical doctrine of
motion and physical momentum. Despite his interest in this phenomenon, he
disdained experimental work as in physics. He went on to conceive the system
of thought to the elaboration of which he would devote his life. His scheme
was first to work out, in a separate treatise, a systematic doctrine of body,
showing how physical phenomena were universally explicable in terms of motion,
at least as motion or mechanical action was then understood. He then singled
out Man from the realm of Nature and plants. Then, in another treatise, he
showed what specific bodily motions were involved in the production of the
peculiar phenomena of sensation, knowledge, affections and passions whereby
Man came into relation with Man. Finally he considered, in his crowning
treatise, how Men were moved to enter into society, and argued how this must
be regulated if Men were not to fall back into "brutishness and misery". Thus
he proposed to unite the separate phenomena of Body, Man, and the State.

Hobbes came home, in 1637, to a country riven with discontent which disrupted
him from the orderly execution of his philosophic plan. However, by the time
of the Short Parliament he had written not only his Human Nature but also De
corpore politico, which were published together ten years later as The
Elements of Law. This means his initial political doctrine was not shaped by
the English Civil War.

When in November 1640 the Long Parliament succeeded the Short, Hobbes felt he
was a marked man by the circulation of his treatise and fled to Paris. He did
not return for eleven years. In Paris he rejoined the coterie about Mersenne,
and wrote a critique of the Meditations on First Philosophy of Descartes,
which was printed as third among the sets of "Objections" appended, with
"Replies" from Descartes in 1641. A different set of remarks on other works by
Descartes succeeded only in ending all correspondence between the two.

Hobbes also extended his own works somewhat, working on the third section, De
Cive, which was finished in November 1641. Although it was initially only
circulated privately, it was well received, and included lines of
argumentation to be repeated a decade later in the Leviathan. He then returned
to hard work on the first two sections of his work and published little except
for a short treatise on optics (Tractatus opticus) included in the collection
of scientific tracts published by Mersenne as Cogitata physico-mathematica in
1644. He built a good reputation in philosophic circles and in 1645 was chosen
with Descartes, Gilles de Roberval and others, to referee the controversy
between John Pell and Longomontanus over the problem of squaring the circle.

## The Civil War in England

The English Civil War broke out in 1642, and when the Royalist cause began to
decline in the middle of 1644 there was an exodus of the king's supporters to
Europe. Many came to Paris and were known to Hobbes. This revitalised Hobbes's
political interests and the De Cive was republished and more widely
distributed. The printing began in 1646 by Samuel de Sorbiere through the
Elsevier press at Amsterdam with a new preface and some new notes in reply to
objections.

In 1647, Hobbes was engaged as mathematical instructor to the young Charles,
Prince of Wales,[10] who had come over from Jersey around July. This
engagement lasted until 1648 when Charles went to Holland.

The company of the exiled royalists led Hobbes to produce an English book to
set forth his theory of civil government in relation to the political crisis
resulting from the war. It was based on an unpublished treatise of 1640. The
State, it now seemed to Hobbes, might be regarded as a great artificial man or
monster (Leviathan), composed of men, with a life that might be traced from
its generation under pressure of human needs to its dissolution through civil
strife proceeding from human passions. The work was closed with a general
"Review and Conclusion", in direct response to the war which raised the
question of the subject's right to change allegiance when a former sovereign's
power to protect was irrecoverably gone. Also he criticized religious
doctrines on rationalistic grounds in the Commonwealth. The first public
edition was titled Elementa philosophica de cive.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Frontispiece from De Cive (1642)

During the years of the composition of Leviathan he remained in or near Paris.
In 1647 Hobbes was overtaken by a serious illness which disabled him for six
months. On recovering from this near fatal disorder, he resumed his literary
task, and carried it steadily forward to completion by the year 1650, having
also translated his prior Latin work into English. In 1650, to prepare the way
for his magnum opus, he allowed the publication of his earliest treatise,
divided into two separate small volumes (Human Nature, or the Fundamental
Elements of Policie and De corpore politico, or the Elements of Law, Moral and
Politick). In 1651 he published his translation of the De Cive under the title
of Philosophicall Rudiments concerning Government and Society. Meanwhile the
printing of the greater work was proceeding, and finally it appeared about the
middle of 1651, under the title of Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme, and Power
of a Common Wealth, Ecclesiasticall and Civil, with a famous title-page
engraving in which, from behind hills overlooking a landscape, there towered
the body (above the waist) of a crowned giant, made up of tiny figures of
human beings and bearing sword and crozier in the two hands.

The work had immediate impact. Soon Hobbes was more lauded and decried than
any other thinker of his time. However, the first effect of its publication
was to sever his link with the exiled royalists, forcing him to appeal to the
revolutionary English government for protection. The exiles might very well
have killed him; the secularist spirit of his book greatly angered both
Anglicans and French Catholics. Hobbes fled back home, arriving in London in
the winter of 1651. Following his submission to the council of state he was
allowed to subside into private life in Fetter Lane.

## Leviathan

Main article: Leviathan (book)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Frontispiece of Leviathan

In Leviathan, Hobbes set out his doctrine of the foundation of states and
legitimate governments \- based on social contract theories. Leviathan was
written during the English Civil War; much of the book is occupied with
demonstrating the necessity of a strong central authority to avoid the evil of
discord and civil war.

Beginning from a mechanistic understanding of human beings and the passions,
Hobbes postulates what life would be like without government, a condition
which he calls the state of nature. In that state, each person would have a
right, or license, to everything in the world. This inevitably leads to
conflict, a "war of all against all" (bellum omnium contra omnes), and thus
lives that are "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short" (xiii).

To escape this state of war, men in the state of nature accede to a social
contract and establish a civil society. According to Hobbes, society is a
population beneath a sovereign authority, to whom all individuals in that
society cede their natural rights for the sake of protection. Any abuses of
power by this authority are to be accepted as the price of peace. However, he
also states that in severe cases of abuse, rebellion is expected. In
particular, the doctrine of separation of powers is rejected:[11] the
sovereign must control civil, military, judicial and ecclesiastical powers.

## Opponents

### John Bramhall

Hobbes now turned to complete the fundamental treatise of his philosophical
system. He worked so steadily that De Corpore was first printed in 1654. Also
in 1654, a small treatise, Of Liberty and Necessity, was published by Bishop
John Bramhall, addressed at Hobbes. Bramhall, a strong Arminian, had met and
debated with Hobbes and afterwards wrote down his views and sent them
privately to be answered in this form by Hobbes. Hobbes duly replied, but not
for publication. But a French acquaintance took a copy of the reply and
published it with "an extravagantly laudatory epistle." Bramhall countered in
1655, when he printed everything that had passed between them (under the title
of A Defence of the True Liberty of Human Actions from Antecedent or Extrinsic
Necessity). In 1656 Hobbes was ready with The Questions concerning Liberty,
Necessity and Chance, in which he replied "with astonishing force" to the
bishop. As perhaps the first clear exposition of the psychological doctrine of
determinism, Hobbes's own two pieces were important in the history of the
free-will controversy. The bishop returned to the charge in 1658 with
Castigations of Mr Hobbes's Animadversions, and also included a bulky appendix
entitled The Catching of Leviathan the Great Whale. Hobbes never took any
notice of the Castigations.

### John Wallis

For more details on this topic, see Hobbes-Wallis controversy.

Beyond the spat with Bramhall, Hobbes was caught in a series of conflicts from
the time of publishing his De Corpore in 1655. In Leviathan he had assailed
the system of the original universities. Because Hobbes was so evidently
opposed to the existing academic arrangements, and because De Corpore
contained not only tendentious views on mathematics, but an unacceptable proof
of the squaring of the circle (which was apparently an afterthought),
mathematicians took him to be a target for polemics. John Wallis was not the
first such opponent, but he tenaciously pursued Hobbes. The resulting
controversy continued well into the 1670s.

## Later life

Hobbes published, in 1658, the final section of his philosophical system,
completing the scheme he had planned more than twenty years before. De Homine
consisted for the most part of an elaborate theory of vision. The remainder of
the treatise dealt cursorily with some of the topics more fully treated in the
Human Nature and the Leviathan. In addition to publishing some controversial
writings on mathematics and physics, Hobbes also continued to produce
philosophical works. From the time of the Restoration he acquired a new
prominence; "Hobbism" became a fashionable creed which it was the duty of
"every lover of true morality and religion" to denounce. The young king,
Hobbes's former pupil, now Charles II, remembered Hobbes and called him to the
court to grant him a pension of Â£100.

The king was important in protecting Hobbes when, in 1666, the House of
Commons introduced a bill against atheism and profaneness. That same year, on
17 October 1666, it was ordered that the committee to which the bill was
referred "should be empowered to receive information touching such books as
tend to atheism, blasphemy and profaneness... in particular... the book of Mr.
Hobbes called the Leviathan".[12] Hobbes was terrified at the prospect of
being labelled a heretic, and proceeded to burn some of his compromising
papers. At the same time, he examined the actual state of the law of heresy.
The results of his investigation were first announced in three short Dialogues
added as an Appendix to his Latin translation of Leviathan, published at
Amsterdam in 1668. In this appendix, Hobbes aimed to show that, since the High
Court of Commission had been put down, there remained no court of heresy at
all to which he was amenable, and that nothing could be heresy except opposing
the Nicene Creed, which, he maintained, Leviathan did not do.

The only consequence that came of the bill was that Hobbes could never
thereafter publish anything in England on subjects relating to human conduct.
The 1668 edition of his works was printed in Amsterdam because he could not
obtain the censor's licence for its publication in England. Other writings
were not made public until after his death, including Behemoth: the History of
the Causes of the Civil Wars of England and of the Counsels and Artifices by
which they were carried on from the year 1640 to the year 1662. For some time,
Hobbes was not even allowed to respond, whatever his enemies tried. Despite
this, his reputation abroad was formidable, and noble or learned foreigners
who came to England never forgot to pay their respects to the old philosopher.

His final works were a curious mixture: an autobiography in Latin verse in
1672, and a translation of four books of the Odyssey into "rugged" English
rhymes that in 1673 led to a complete translation of both Iliad and Odyssey in
1675.

In October 1679, Hobbes suffered a bladder disorder, which was followed by a
paralytic stroke from which he died on 4 December 1679. He is said to have
uttered the last words "A great leap in the dark" in his final moments of
life.[13] He was interred within St. John the Baptist Church in Ault Hucknall
in Derbyshire, England.

## Selected bibliography

  * 1629\. Translation of Thucydides's History of the Peloponnesian War
  * 1650\. The Elements of Law, Natural and Political, written in 1640 and comprising 
    * Human Nature, or the Fundamental Elements of Policie
    * De Corpore Politico
  * 1651â8. Elementa philosophica
    * 1642\. De Cive (Latin)
    * 1651\. Philosophicall Rudiments concerning Government and Society (English translation of De Cive)
    * 1655\. De Corpore (Latin)
    * 1656\. De Corpore (English translation)
    * 1658\. De Homine (Latin)
  * 1651\. Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme, and Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiasticall and Civil. Online.
  * 1656\. The Questions concerning Liberty, Necessity and Chance
  * 1668\. Latin translation of the Leviathan
  * 1675\. English translation of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey
  * 1681\. Posthumously Behemoth, or The Long Parliament (written in 1668, unpublished at the request of the King)

## In popular culture

  * Hobbes, the tiger in Bill Watterson's comic strip Calvin and Hobbes, was named after Thomas Hobbes, while his companion Calvin was named after the Reformation theologian John Calvin.[14]
  * Monty Python mentions Hobbes as being "fond of his dram" in Bruces' Philosophers Song.

## References

### General

  * Macpherson, C. B. (1962). The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
  * Robinson, Dave & Groves, Judy (2003). Introducing Political Philosophy. Icon Books. ISBN 1-84046-450-X.
  * Strauss, Leo (1936). The Political Philosophy of Hobbes; Its Basis and Its Genesis. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
  * Strauss, Leo (1959). "On the Basis of Hobbes's Political Philosophy," in What Is Political Philosophy?, Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, chap. 7.
  * TÃ¶nnies, Ferdinand (1925). Hobbes. Leben und Lehre, Stuttgart: Frommann, 3rd ed.
  * Shapin, Steven and Shaffer, Simon (1995). Leviathan and the Air-Pump. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
  * Malcolm, Noel. 2002. Aspects of Hobbes. New York: Oxford University Press.
  * Skinner, Quentin. 1996. Reason and Rhetoric in the Philosophy of Hobbes's. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
  * World History: The Living Legend. (2004) Changes Throughout Modern Philosophy. Pearson & Hall.
  * Malcolm, Noel. 2007. Reason of State, Propaganda, and the Thirty Years' War: An Unknown Translation by Thomas Hobbes. Oxford University Press.

### Specific

  1. ^ "Hobbes's Moral and Political Philosophy". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hobbes-moral/. (Accessed March 11, 2009)
  2. ^ "Thomas Hobbes". thomas-hobbes.com. http://www.thomas-hobbes.com/.
  3. ^ http://www.notablebiographies.com/He-Ho/Hobbes-Thomas.html
  4. ^ http://www.jstor.org/pss/3791051
  5. ^ http://philosophy.hertford.ox.ac.uk/
  6. ^ http://www.hertford.ox.ac.uk/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=88&Itemid=159
  7. ^ http://galileo.rice.edu/Catalog/NewFiles/hobbes.html
  8. ^ http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=LGSytrSTMQwC&pg=PT89&lpg=PT89&dq=hobbes+hertford&source=web&ots=-L0D0a4gm2&sig=KCcDC1kxvv15OVQuS074jwFqpm8&hl=en
  9. ^ http://www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Biographies/Hobbes.html
  10. ^ NNDB
  11. ^ "1000 Makers of the Millennium", page 42. Dorling Kindersley, 1999
  12. ^ "House of Commons Journal Volume 8". British History Online. http://www.british-history.ac.uk/report.asp?compid=26780. Retrieved on January 14 2005.
  13. ^ Norman Davies, Europe: A history p. 687
  14. ^ "Calvin and Hobbes Trivia". http://www.andrewsmcmeel.com/calvinandhobbes/trivia.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-12.

## Further reading

  * A. P. Martinich, "Thomas Hobbes," The Dictionary of Literary Biography, Volume 281: British Rhetoricians and Logicians, 1500-1660, Second Series, Detroit: Gale, 2003, pp. 130-144.
  * A. P. Martinich, A Hobbes Dictionary, Oxford: Blackwell, 1995.
  * A. P. Martinich, Thomas Hobbes, New York: St. Martin's, 1997.
  * A. P. Martinich, The Two Gods of Leviathan: Thomas Hobbes on Religion and Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
  * A. P. Martinich, Hobbes: A Biography, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
  * A. P. Martinich, trans., Computatio sive Logica: Part One of De Corpore, New York: Abaris, 1981.
  * A. P. Martinich, ed., Leviathan, Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview Press, 2002.

## External links

Find more about Thomas Hobbes on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG>
Definitions from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Works by Thomas Hobbes at Project Gutenberg
  * Thomas Hobbes at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
  * Hobbes Moral and Political Philosophy at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
  * Hobbes at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
  * Hobbes at The Philosophy pages
  * Hobbes at the History of Economic Thought website.

  * Brief biography at Oregon State University 
    * A Brief Life of Thomas Hobbes, 1588â1679 by John Aubrey
  * Leviathan at The University of Adelaide
  * Leviathan at Project Gutenberg
  * The Iliad, as translated by Hobbes, at the Online Library of Liberty
  * A short biography of Thomas Hobbes
  * A more easily readable version of Leviathan
  * Hobbes's Translation of Thucydides

v â¢ d â¢ e

Figures in the Age of Enlightenment by country  
Notable Figures  
British Colonies

Benjamin Franklin Â· Thomas Jefferson Â· James Madison Â· Thomas Paine  
Prussia and Saxe-Weimar

Immanuel Kant Â· Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Â· Johann Gottfried von Herder Â·
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Â· J.C.F. von Schiller Â· Moses Mendelssohn  
England

Edward Gibbon Â· Samuel Johnson Â· Mary Wollstonecraft Â· John Locke Â· Isaac
Newton Â· Thomas Hobbes  
Scotland

Joseph Black Â· James Boswell Â· Adam Ferguson Â· David Hume Â· Thomas Reid Â·
Adam Smith  
France

Montesquieu Â· FranÃ§ois Quesnay Â· Voltaire Â· Buffon Â· Jean-Jacques
Rousseau Â· Denis Diderot Â· HelvÃ©tius Â· Jean le Rond d'Alembert Â· Baron
d'Holbach Â· Marquis de Sade Â· Condorcet Â· Ãtienne Bonnot de Condillac  
Italy

Cesare Beccaria  
Related topics  
Atheism Â· Capitalism Â· Civil liberties Â· Critical thinking Â· Deism Â·
Democracy Â· Empiricism Â· Enlightened absolutism Â· Free markets Â· Haskalah
Â· Humanism Â· Liberalism Â· Natural philosophy Â· Rationality Â· Reason Â·
Sapere aude Â· Science Â· Socialism Â· Secularism Â· French EncyclopÃ©distes
Â· German Classicism  
  

Persondata  
NAME Hobbes, Thomas  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION English Philosopher  
DATE OF BIRTH April 5, 1588  
PLACE OF BIRTH Malmesbury, Wiltshire, England  
DATE OF DEATH December 4, 1679  
PLACE OF DEATH Derbyshire, England  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Hobbes"

Categories: 1588 births | 1679 deaths | 17th-century philosophers | English
Anglicans | Early modern philosophers | English philosophers | English
political philosophers | Empiricists | Materialists | Political theorists |
Philosophers of law | People from Malmesbury | Alumni of Magdalen Hall, Oxford

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages | Articles
needing additional references from December 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 19:22 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



