
# Fredric Jameson

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Fredric Jameson Western Philosophy  
20th- / 21st-century philosophy  
Full name Fredric Jameson  
School/tradition Marxism  
Main interests Postmodernism Â· Modernism Â· science fiction Â· Utopia Â·
history Â· narrative Â· Cultural studies Â· dialectics Â· structuralism  
Influenced by

Jacques Lacan Â· Karl Marx Â· Vladimir Lenin Â· Georg Hegel Â· Gilles Deleuze
Â· Jean-Paul Sartre Â· Frankfurt School Â· GyÃ¶rgy LukÃ¡cs Â· Ernest Mandel Â·
Raymond Williams  
Influenced

Slavoj Å½iÅ¾ek Â· Perry Anderson  
Fredric Jameson (born 14 April 1934) is an American literary critic and
Marxist political theorist. He is best known for the analysis of contemporary
cultural trendsâhe once described postmodernism as the spatialization of
culture under the pressure of organized capitalism. Jameson's best-known books
include Postmodernism: The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, The Political
Unconscious, and Marxism and Form.

Jameson is currently William A. Lane Professor in The Program in Literature
and Romance Studies at Duke University.

## Contents

  * 1 Life and works
    * 1.1 Early works
    * 1.2 Research into Marxism
    * 1.3 Analysis of structuralism
    * 1.4 Narrative and history
    * 1.5 The critique of postmodernism
    * 1.6 Recent work
    * 1.7 Holberg International Memorial Prize
  * 2 References
  * 3 Bibliography
  * 4 External links
    * 4.1 Articles by Jameson
  * 5 See also

  
## [edit] Life and works

Jameson was born in Cleveland, Ohio. After graduating from Haverford College
in 1954, he briefly traveled to Europe, studying at Aix-en-Provence, Munich
and Berlin, where he learned of new developments in continental philosophy,
including the rise of structuralism. He returned to America the following year
to pursue a doctoral degree at Yale University, where he studied under Erich
Auerbach.

### [edit] Early works

Erich Auerbach would prove to be a lasting influence on Jameson's thought.
This was already apparent in the latter's doctoral dissertation, which would
be published in 1961 as Sartre: the Origins of a Style. Auerbach's concerns
were rooted in the German philological tradition; his works on the history of
style analyzed literary form within social history. Jameson would follow in
these steps, examining the articulation of poetry, history, philology, and
philosophy in the works of Jean-Paul Sartre.

Jameson's work focused on the relation between the style of Sartre's writings
and the political and ethical positions of his existentialist philosophy. The
occasional Marxian aspects of Sartre's work were glossed over in this book;
Jameson would return to them in the following decade.

Jameson's dissertation, though it drew on a long tradition of European
cultural analysis, differed markedly from the prevailing trends of Anglo-
American academia (which were empiricism and logical positivism in philosophy
and linguistics, and New Critical formalism in literary criticism). It
nevertheless earned Jameson a position at Harvard University, where he taught
during the first half of the 1960s.

### [edit] Research into Marxism

His interest in Sartre led Jameson to intense study of Marxist literary
theory. Even though Karl Marx was becoming an important influence in American
social science, partly through the influence of the many European
intellectuals who had sought refuge from the Second World War in the U.S.,
such as Theodor Adorno, the literary and critical work of the Western Marxists
were still largely unknown in American academia in the late 1950s and early
1960s.

Jameson's shift toward Marxism was also driven by his increasing political
connection with the New Left and pacifist movements. His research focused on
thinkers such as Kenneth Burke, Gyorgy LukÃ¡cs, Ernst Bloch, Theodor Adorno,
Walter Benjamin, Herbert Marcuse, Louis Althusser, and Sartre, who viewed
cultural criticism as an integral feature of Marxist theory. This position
represented a break with more orthodox Marxism-Leninism, which held a narrow
view of historical materialism. In some ways Jameson has been concerned, along
with other Marxist cultural critics such as Terry Eagleton, to articulate
Marxism's relevance in respect to current philosophical and literary trends.

While the vulgar Marxist view of ideology held that the cultural
"superstructure" was completely determined by the economic "base", the Western
Marxists critically analyzed culture as a historical and social phenomenon
alongside economic production and distribution or political power
relationships. They held that culture must be studied using the Hegelian
concept of immanent critique: the theory that adequate description and
criticism of a philosophical or cultural text must be carried out in the same
terms that text itself employs, in order to develop its internal
inconsistencies in a manner that allows intellectual advancement. Marx
highlighted immanent critique in his early writings, derived from Hegel's
development of a new form of dialectic thinking that would, as Jameson
comments, 'pull itself up by its bootstraps.'

### [edit] Analysis of structuralism

At the same time, Jameson studied the main current alternative to Marxist
analysis, as it was taking shape in Europe: the structuralist theory of
language and literature. After moving to the University of California, San
Diego in 1967, Jameson published Marxism and Form: Twentieth-Century
Dialectical Theories of Literature (1971) and The Prison-House of Language: A
Critical Account of Structuralism and Russian Formalism (1972).

Both these books attempted to engage with features of mainstream literary and
academic life that Jameson perceived as tending toward detachment from
reality. He criticized both the enshrining of the work of art as an object
completely separate from the context of its production through the humanist
praise of the artist and the anti-historical formalism derived from a
restrictive interpretation of structuralist method. Jameson saw both trends as
failures to perceive the key elements of the contemporary production and
consumption of artistic objects. Jameson also held, as in previous works, that
cultural objects must be understood according to cultural rules; he argued
that careful and detailed analysis of cultural practices would reveal art and
culture to be grounded in economic realities.

Jameson's work during the 1970s continued in this direction. It combined a
multi-layered appraisal of literary texts, including genres and contemporary
authors who were scarcely treated by academic studies, ranging from science
fiction to Raymond Chandler, with theoretical discussions of ideology,
modernism and literary history.

### [edit] Narrative and history

History came to play an increasingly central role in Jameson's interpretation
of both the reading (consumption) and writing (production) of literary texts.
Jameson marked his full-fledged commitment to Hegelian-Marxist philosophy with
the publication of The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic
Act, the opening slogan of which is "always historicize" (1981). The Political
Unconscious takes as its object not the literary text itself, but rather the
interpretive frameworks by which they are now constructed. It emerges as a
manifesto for new activity concerning literary narrative.

The book's argument emphasizes history as the 'ultimate horizon' of literary
and cultural analysis. It borrowed notions from the structuralist tradition
and from Raymond Williams's work in cultural studies, and joined them to a
largely Marxist view of labor (whether blue-collar or intellectual) as the
focal point of analysis. Jameson's readings exploited both the explicit formal
and thematic choices of the writer and the unconscious framework guiding
these. Artistic choices that were ordinarily viewed in purely aesthetic terms
were recast in terms of historical literary practices and norms, in an attempt
to develop a systematic inventory of the constraints they imposed on the
artist as an individual creative subject. To further this metacommentary, he
described the ideologeme, or "the smallest intelligible unit of the
essentially antagonistic collective discourses of social classes."

Jameson's establishment of history as the only pertinent factor in this
analysis, which derived the categories governing artistic production from
their historical framework, was paired with a bold theoretical claim.
Jameson's book claimed to establish Marxian literary criticism, centered in
the notion of an artistic mode of production, as the most all-inclusive and
comprehensive theoretical framework for understanding literature. The
groundwork laid out in this book would serve as a basis for another of
Jameson's best-known works.

### [edit] The critique of postmodernism

"Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism" was initially
published in the journal New Left Review in 1984, during Jameson's tenure as
Professor of Literature and History of Consciousness at the University of
California, Santa Cruz. This controversial article, which would later be
expanded to a full-sized book in 1991, was part of a series of analyses of
postmodernism from the dialectical point of view Jameson had developed in his
earlier work on narrative. Jameson here viewed the postmodern "skepticism
towards metanarratives" as a "mode of experience" stemming from the conditions
of intellectual labor imposed by the late capitalist mode of production.

Postmodernists claimed that the complex differentiation between "spheres" or
fields of life (such as the political, the social, the cultural, the
commercial, etc.) and between distinct classes and rÃ´les within each field,
had been overcome by the crisis of foundationalism and the consequent
relativization of truth-claims. Jameson argued, against this, that these
phenomena had or could have been understood successfully within a modernist
framework; postmodern failure to achieve this understanding implied an abrupt
break in the dialectical refinement of thought.

In his view, postmodernity's merging of all discourse into an undifferentiated
whole was the result of the colonization of the cultural sphere, which had
retained at least partial autonomy during the prior modernist era, by a newly
organized corporate capitalism. Following Adorno and Horkheimer's analysis of
the culture industry, Jameson discussed this phenomenon in his critical
discussion of architecture, film, narrative and visual arts, as well as in his
strictly philosophical work. Two of Jameson's best-known claims from
Postmodernism are that postmodernity is characterized by pastiche and a crisis
in historicity. Jameson argued that parody (which requires a moral judgment or
comparison with societal norms) was replaced by pastiche (collage and other
forms of juxtaposition without a normative grounding). Relatedly, Jameson
argued that the postmodern era suffers from a crisis in historicity: "there no
longer does seem to be any organic relationship between the American history
we learn from schoolbooks and the lived experience of the current,
multinational, high-rise, stagflated city of the newspapers and of our own
everyday life" (22).

Jameson's analysis of postmodernism attempted to view it as historically
grounded; he therefore explicitly rejected any moralistic opposition to
postmodernity as a cultural phenomenon, and continued to insist upon a
Hegelian immanent critique. His failure to dismiss postmodernism from the
onset, however, was perceived by many as an implicit endorsement of postmodern
views.

### [edit] Recent work

Jameson's later work has dispelled the perception that he is sympathetic to
postmodern thought; however he approaches postmodern authors dialectically and
does not merely dismiss their work. He turned to Adorno again in search of a
contemporary theoretical framework for Marxian dialectics. He supplemented his
critique of postmodernism with additional material, appearing first in a
casebook compiled by Douglas Kellner in 1989 under the title
Postmodernism/Jameson, Critique and then in the extended version of the 1984
article, published in book form as Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of
Late Capitalism in 1991 (see also reference to Ernest Mandel). This book
earned him the Modern Language Association's Lowell Award.

During the 1990s Jameson further developed this line of thought in the 1994
Seeds of Time, in his Wellek Library lectures at the University of California,
and in the 1998 Brecht and Method. This last was an analysis of the political
and social context surrounding Brecht's political commitment.

Jameson's most recent work includes Archaeologies of the Future, a study of
utopia and science fiction, launched at the Monash University in Melbourne,
Australia, in December 2005; The Modernist Papers (2007), a collection of
essays on modernism; and Valences of the Dialectic (forthcoming), which will
include Jameson's critical responses to Slavoj Zizek, Gilles Deleuze, and
others. A recent overview of Jameson's work, Fredric Jameson: Live Theory, by
Ian Buchanan, was published in 2007. The first published italian monograph
about Jameson was written by Marco Gatto and published in 2008, with the
title: "Fredric Jameson. Neomarxismo, dialettica e teoria della letteratura".

### [edit] Holberg International Memorial Prize

On 16 September 2008 it was announced that Jameson received the Holberg
International Memorial Prize for 2008.[1] The prize is NOK 4.6 million (c.
$648,000) and Jameson received it from Tora Aasland, Norwegian Minister of
Education and Research, in Bergen, Norway on 26 November 2008.[2]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Professor Fredric R. Jameson awarded Holberg Prize 2008". Norway.org. 16 September 2008. http://www.norway.org/restech/holberg+2008.htm. Retrieved on 2008-09-17.
  2. ^ "American cultural theorist awarded the Holberg Prize". Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Norway). 8 December 2008. http://www.norway.org.au/Latest+News/holbergprisen_2008.htm. Retrieved on 19 December 2008.

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Sartre: The Origins of a Style. New Haven: Yale University Press. 1961.
  * Marxism and Form: Twentieth Century Dialectical Theories of Literature. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 1971.
  * The Prison-House of Language: A Critical Account of Structuralism and Russian Formalism. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 1972. http://books.google.it/books?id=B7JCvwE003kC.
  * Fables of Aggression: Wyndham Lewis, the Modernist as Fascist. Berkeley: University of California Press. 1979.
  * The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. 1981.
  * The Ideologies of Theory. Essays 1971â1986. Vol. 1: Situations of Theory. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 1988.
  * The Ideologies of Theory. Essays 1971â1986. Vol. 2: The Syntax of History. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 1988.
  * Postmodernism and Cultural Theories. Lectures in China (Houxiandaizhuyi he Wenhualilun). Xi'an: Shanxi Teacher's University. 1987.
  * Late Marxism: Adorno, or, The Persistence of the Dialectic. London & New York: Verso. 1990.
  * Signatures of the Visible. New York & London: Routledge. 1990.
  * Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 1991.
  * The Geopolitical Aesthetic: Cinema and Space in the World System. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 1992.
  * The Seeds of Time. The Wellek Library lectures at the University of California, Irvine. New York: Columbia University Press. 1994.
  * Brecht and Method. London & New York: Verso. 1998.
  * The Cultural Turn. London & New York: Verso. 1998.
  * A Singular Modernity: Essay on the Ontology of the Present. London & New York Verso. 2002.
  * Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions. London & New York: Verso. 2005.
  * The Modernist Papers. London & New York Verso. 2007.
  * Jameson on Jameson: Conversations on Cultural Marxism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 2007.
  * Valences of the Dialectic. London & New York: Verso. 2009.

## [edit] External links

  * Complete Bibliography of Jameson from the 1991 Wellek Library Lectures

### [edit] Articles by Jameson

  * Fear and Loathing in Globalization
  * Future City
  * Globalization and Political Strategy
  * The Politics of Utopia (abstract only)
  * Symptoms of Theory or Symptoms for Theory?
  * Jameson articles in Science Fiction Studies
  * Topical Excerpts from Interviews
  * Interview and texts in French
  * Postmodernism or, The Cultural logic of late capitalism(partial)

## [edit] See also

  * Dialectic
  * Dialectical materialism
  * Hegel
  * Literary theory
  * Marx
  * Marxism
  * Marxist theorists
  * Modernism
  * Political consciousness
  * Postmodernism
  * Realism
  * Utopia

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fredric_Jameson"

Categories: 1934 births | Living people | American academics | Duke University
faculty | Haverford College alumni | Literary critics | Marxist theorists |
Marxist writers | People from Cleveland, Ohio | Postmodern theory

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 19:08.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



