
# Code of Hammurabi

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

An image of the Code of Hammurabi.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The upper part of the stele of Hammurabi's code of laws

The Code of Hammurabi (Codex Hammurabi ) is a well-preserved ancient law code,
created ca. 1760 BC (middle chronology) in ancient Babylon. It was enacted by
the sixth Babylonian king, Hammurabi.[1] Only one example of the Code survives
today, inscribed on a seven foot, four inch tall basalt stone slab or stele.
Originally, several stelae would have been displayed in temples around the
empire.[2][3]

## Contents

  * 1 Discovery
  * 2 Description
  * 3 Hammurabi
  * 4 Law
    * 4.1 Examples
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
    * 6.1 Notes
    * 6.2 Bibliography
    * 6.3 External links

  
## [edit] Discovery

The stele containing the Code of Hammurabi was discovered in 1901 by the
Egyptologist Gustav JÃ©quier, a member of the expedition headed by Jacques de
Morgan. The stele was discovered in what is now KhÅ«zestÄn, Iran (ancient
Susa, Elam), where it had been taken as plunder by the Elamite king Shutruk-
Nahhunte in the 12th century BC.[4] It is currently on display at the Louvre
Museum in Paris.[1]

## [edit] Description

At the top of the stele is a bas-relief image of a Babylonian god (probably
Shamash, for sun rays are coming out of his shoulder, although the prologue of
the Codex suggests Marduk), with the king of Babylon presenting himself to the
god, with his right hand raised to his mouth as a mark of respect.[1] The god
holds the rod-and-ring symbol. The text covers the bottom portion with the
laws written in Akkadian language cuneiform script. The text has been broken
down by translators into 282 laws, but this division is arbitrary, since the
original text contains no divisional markers.

## [edit] Hammurabi

Main article: Hammurabi

Hammurabi (ruled ca. 1796 BC â 1750 BC) believed that he was chosen by the
gods to deliver the law to his people. In the preface to the law code, he
states, "Anu and Bel called by name me, Hammurabi, the exalted prince, who
feared God, to bring about the rule of righteousness in the land."[5]

## [edit] Law

Main article: Babylonian law

The Code of Hammurabi was one of several sets of laws in the Ancient Near
East.[6][7] Earlier collections of laws include the Code of Ur-Nammu, king of
Ur (ca. 2050 BC), the Laws of Eshnunna (ca. 1930 BC) and the codex of Lipit-
Ishtar of Isin (ca. 1870 BC).[8], while later ones include the Hittite laws,
the Assyrian laws, and Mosaic Law. These codes come from similar cultures in a
relatively small geographical area, and they have passages which resemble each
other.

<IMG>

<IMG>

View of the back side of the stele.

The code is often pointed to be a primary example of even a king not being
able to change fundamental laws concerning the governing of a country which
was the primitive form of what is now known as a constitution.

The Babylonians and their neighbors developed the earliest system of economics
that was fixed in a legal code, using a metric of various commodities. The
early law codes from Sumer could be considered the first (written) economic
formula, and had many attributes still in use in the current price system
today... such as codified amounts of money for business deals (interest
rates), fines in money for 'wrong doing', inheritance rules, laws concerning
how private property is to be taxed or divided, etc.[9]

### [edit] Examples

These are five (5) example laws, in their entirety, of the Code of Hammurabi,
translated into English:

    1\. If any one ensnares another, putting a ban upon him, but he can not prove it, then he that ensnared him shall be put to death.
    2\. If any one brings an accusation against a man, and the accused goes to the river and leaps into the river, if he sinks in the river his accuser shall take possession of his house. But if the river proves that the accused is not guilty, and he escapes unhurt, then he who had brought the accusation shall be put to death, while he who leaped into the river shall take possession of the house that had belonged to his accuser.
    3\. If any one brings an accusation of any crime before the elders, and does not prove what he has charged, he shall, if a capital offense is charged, be put to death.
    4\. If a Builder build a house for someone, and does not construct it properly, and the house which he built fall in and kill its owner, then that builder shall be put to death.
    5\. If a man give his child to a nurse and the child die in her hands, but the nurse unbeknown to the father and mother nurse another child, then they shall convict her of having nursed another child without the knowledge of the father and mother and her breasts shall be cut off.
There are 282 such laws in the Code of Hammurabi, each no more than a sentence
or two. The 282 laws are bracketed by a Prologue in which Hammurabi introduces
himself, and an Epilogue in which he affirms his authority and sets forth his
hopes and prayers for his code of laws.

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Law portal  
<IMG> Ancient Near East portal  
  * Urukagina \- Sumerian king and creator of what is sometimes cited as the first example of a legal code in recorded history.
  * Code of Ur-Nammu \- the oldest known tablet containing a law code surviving today, it predates the Code of Hammurabi by some 300 years.
  * Code of the Assura
  * Babylonian law
  * Cuneiform Law
  * Quid pro quo
  * Code of Hammurabi translated by R.F. Harper in 1904, Chicago University Press ~

## [edit] References

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c Gabriele Bartz, Eberhard KÃ¶nig. (2005). Louvre ( Arts and Architecture). KÃ¶ln: KÃ¶nemann. ISBN 3-8331-1943-8.
  2. ^ commonlaw.com; C. H. W. Johns. "Code of Hammurabi". commonlaw.com. http://www.commonlaw.com/Hammurabi.html. Retrieved on September 14 2007.
  3. ^ The Louvre Museum (2006). "Near Eastern Antiquities: Mesopotamia". The Louvre Museum. http://www.louvre.fr/llv/oeuvres/detail_notice.jsp?CONTENT%3C%3Ecnt_id=10134198673226487&CURRENT_LLV_NOTICE%3C%3Ecnt_id=10134198673226487&FOLDER%3C%3Efolder_id=9852723696500800&bmUID=1156475018923&bmLocale=en. Retrieved on September 14 2007.
  4. ^ David Graves, Jane Graves (1995). "Archaeological History of the Code of Hammurabi". Electronic Christian Media. http://www.abu.nb.ca/ecm/topics/arch2.htm#1. Retrieved on September 14 2007.
  5. ^ Edited by Richard Hooker; Translated by L.W. King (1910) (1996). "Mesopotamia: The Code of Hammurabi". Washington State University. http://www.wsu.edu/~dee/MESO/CODE.HTM. Retrieved on September 14 2007.
  6. ^ wwlia.org (2006). "Was Hammurabi really the first law maker in history?". wwlia.org - Legal information. http://www.wwlia.org/hamm1.htm. Retrieved on September 14 2007.
  7. ^ L. W. King (2005). "The Code of Hammurabi: Translated by L. W. King". Yale University. http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/medieval/hamframe.htm. Retrieved on September 14 2007.
  8. ^ Charles F. Horne, Ph.D. (1915). "The Code of Hammurabi : Introduction". Yale University. http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/medieval/hammint.htm. Retrieved on September 14 2007.
  9. ^ http://history-world.org/reforms_of_urukagina.htm

### [edit] Bibliography

  * Bryant, Tamera (2005). The Life & Times of Hammurabi. Bear: Mitchell Lane Publishers. ISBN 9781584153382.
  * Mieroop, Marc (2004). King Hammurabi of Babylon: a Biography. Cambridge: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 9781405126601.
  * Hammurabi, King; C. H. W. Johns (Translator) (2000). The Oldest Code of Laws in the World. City: Lawbook Exchange Ltd. ISBN 9781584770619.
  * Falkenstein, A. (1956â57). Die neusumerischen Gerichtsurkunden IâIII. MÃ¼nchen.
  * Elsen-NovÃ¡k, G. / NovÃ¡k, M.: Der 'KÃ¶nig der Gerechtigkeit'. Zur Ikonologie und Teleologie des 'Codex' Hammurapi. In: Baghdader Mitteilungen 37 (2006), pp. 131-156.
  * Julius Oppert and Joachim Menant (1877). Documents juridiques de l'Assyrie et de la Chaldee. ParÃ­s.
  * Thomas, D. Winton, ed. (1958). Documents from Old Testament Times. London and New York.
  * Beck, Roger B.; Linda Black, Larry S. Krieger, Phillip C. Naylor, Dahia Ibo Shabaka, (1999). World History: Patterns of Interaction. Evanston, IL: McDougal Littell. ISBN 0-395-87274-X.

### [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Code of Hammurabi  
Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Codex Hammurabi

Sister project Look up Hammurabi in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * Law Code of Hammurabi, king of Babylon | MusÃ©e du Louvre
  * English Translation | University of Evansville
  * English translation of the Code of Hammurabi
  * Complete scientific Englsh translation of the Code of Hammurabi

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_of_Hammurabi"

Categories: History of Iraq | Legal codes | Ancient Near East law | Babylonia
| Manuscripts | Code of conduct | Antiquities of the Louvre | 2nd-millennium
BC works | 18th-century BC works | Ancient Near East steles

Hidden categories: WikiProject Ancient Near East articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 11:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



