
# E. F. Schumacher

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2007)  
Ernst Friedrich "Fritz" Schumacher  
<IMG>  

Photograph from cover of Small Is Beautiful 1973  
Born August 16, 1911(1911-08-16)  
Bonn, Germany  
Died September 4, 1977 (aged 66)  
Switzerland  
Education Oxford and Columbia University  
Occupation Economist  
Ernst Friedrich "Fritz" Schumacher (16 August 1911 â 4 September 1977) was
an internationally influential economic thinker with a professional background
as a statistician and economist in Britain. He served as Chief Economic
Advisor to the UK National Coal Board for two decades.[1] His ideas became
well-known in much of the English-speaking world during the 1970s. He is best
known for his critique of Western economies and his proposals for human-scale,
decentralized and appropriate technologies. According to The Times Literary
Supplement, his 1973 book Small Is Beautiful is among the 100 most influential
books published since World War II.[2] It was soon translated into many
languages and brought international fame to Schumacher, after which Schumacher
was invited to many international conferences, university guest speaker
lectures and consultations. Schumacher's basic development theories have been
summed up in the catch-phrases Intermediate Size and Intermediate Technology.
Schumacher's other notable work is the 1977 A Guide For The Perplexed, which
is a critique of materialist scientism and an exploration of the nature and
organization of knowledge. Together with long-time friends and associates like
Professor Mansur Hoda, Schumacher founded the Intermediate Technology
Development Group (now Practical Action) in 1966.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Economist
    * 2.1 ProtÃ©gÃ© of Keynes
    * 2.2 Adviser to the Coal Board
    * 2.3 Thinking outside the box
  * 3 Schumacher as writer
  * 4 Later life and posthumous recognition
  * 5 Schumacher's Teachings
    * 5.1 Homo viator
    * 5.2 Three Culprits
    * 5.3 Three Planes of Thought
    * 5.4 Labour
    * 5.5 Appropriate technology
  * 6 References
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Selected bibliography
  * 9 Further reading
    * 9.1 Books about E. F. Schumacher
    * 9.2 External links

  
## [edit] Early life

Schumacher was born in Bonn, Germany in 1911. His father was a professor of
political economy. The younger Schumacher studied in Bonn and Berlin, then
from 1930 in England as a Rhodes Scholar at New College, Oxford[1], and later
at Columbia University in New York City, earning a diploma in economics. He
then worked in business, farming and journalism.[1].

## [edit] Economist

### [edit] ProtÃ©gÃ© of Keynes

Schumacher moved back to England before World War II, as he had no intention
of living under Nazism. For a period during the War, he was interned on an
isolated English farm as an "enemy alien." In these years, Schumacher captured
the attention of John Maynard Keynes with a paper entitled "Multilateral
Clearing" that he had written between sessions working in the fields of the
internment camp. Keynes recognised the young German's understanding and
abilities, and was able to have Schumacher released from internment.
Schumacher helped the British government mobilise economically and financially
during World War II, and Keynes found a position for him at Oxford University.

According to Leopold Kohr's obituary for Schumacher, when his paper "was
published in the spring of 1943 in Economica, it caused some embarrassment to
Keynes who, instead of arranging for its separate publication, had
incorporated the text almost verbatim in his famous "Plan for an International
Clearing Union," which the British government issued as a White Paper a few
weeks later." [1]

### [edit] Adviser to the Coal Board

After the War, Schumacher worked as an economic advisor to, and later Chief
Statistician for, the British Control Commission which was charged with
rebuilding the German economy.[1] From 1950 to 1970 he was Chief Economic
Adviser to the National Coal Board[1], one of the world's largest
organisations, with 800,000 employees. In this position, he argued that coal,
not petroleum, should be used to supply the energy needs of the world's
population. He viewed oil as a finite resource, fearing its depletion and
eventually prohibitive price, and viewing with alarm the fact that, as
Schumacher put it, "the richest and cheapest reserves are located in some of
the world's most unstable countries" (Daniel Yergin, The Prize [1991], p.
559).

His position on the Coal Board was often mentioned later by those introducing
Schumacher or his ideas. It is generally thought that his farsighted planning
contributed to Britain's post-war economic recovery. Schumacher predicted the
rise of OPEC and many of the problems of nuclear power.

### [edit] Thinking outside the box

In 1955 Schumacher travelled to Burma as an economic consultant. While there,
he developed the set of principles he called "Buddhist economics," based on
the belief that individuals needed good work for proper human development. He
also proclaimed that "production from local resources for local needs is the
most rational way of economic life." He traveled throughout many Third World
countries, encouraging local governments to create self-reliant economies.
Schumacher's experience led him to become a pioneer of what is now called
appropriate technology: user-friendly and ecologically suitable technology
applicable to the scale of the community. He founded the Intermediate
Technology Development Group (now Practical Action) in 1966. His theories of
development have been summed up for many in catch phrases like "intermediate
size," and "intermediate technology." He was a trustee of Scott Bader
Commonwealth and in 1970 the president of the Soil Association.

By the end of his life, it can be said that Schumacher's personal development
had led him very far afield from the ideas of John Maynard Keynes. Keynes,
second only to Adam Smith, is widely regarded as the most influential modern
orthodox economist. In contrast, Schumacher is one of the most widely
recognized heterodox economists.[citation needed]

## [edit] Schumacher as writer

Schumacher wrote on economics for London's The Times and became one of the
paper's chief editorial writers. At this post he was assigned the somewhat
uncomfortable task of compiling information for the obituary of John Keynes
many years before the event of his death. He also wrote for The Economist and
Resurgence. He served as adviser to the India Planning Commission, as well as
to the governments of Zambia and Burma â an experience that led to his much-
read essay on "Buddhist Economics."

The 1973 publication of Small is Beautiful, a collection of essays, brought
his ideas to a wider audience. Schumacher's work coincided with the growth of
ecological concerns and with the birth of environmentalism and he became a
hero to many in the environmental movement and community movement.

His 1977 work A Guide For The Perplexed is both a critique of materialistic
scientism and an exploration of the nature and organization of knowledge.

## [edit] Later life and posthumous recognition

Schumacher's rejection of materialist, capitalist, agnostic modernity was
paralleled by a growing fascination with religion. His interest in Buddhism
has been noted. However, from the late 1950s on, Catholicism heavily
influenced his thought. He noted the similarities between his own economic
views and the teaching of papal encyclicals on socio-economic issues, from Leo
XIII's "Rerum Novarum" to Pope John XXIII's "Mater et Magistra", as well as
with the distributism supported by the Catholic thinkers G. K. Chesterton,
Hilaire Belloc and Vincent McNabb. Philosophically, he absorbed much of
Thomism, which provided an objective system in contrast to what he saw as the
self-centered subjectivism and relativism of modern philosophy and society. He
also was greatly interested in the tradition of Christian mysticism, reading
deeply such writers as St. Teresa of Avila and Thomas Merton. These were all
interests that he shared with his friend, the Catholic writer Christopher
Derrick. In 1971, he converted to Catholicism.

Schumacher gave interviews and published articles for a wide readership in his
later years. He also pursued one of the loves of his life: gardening. He died
during a lecture tour of a heart attack on 4 September 1977, in Switzerland.

The Schumacher Circle organisations were founded in his memory. They include
the Schumacher College in Totnes, Devon, the E. F. Schumacher Society founded
in New England, the Soil Association and the New Economics Foundation.

Schumacher's personal collection of books and archives are currently held by
the E. F. Schumacher Society in Great Barrington, Massachusetts. The
Schumacher Society continues the work of E. F. Schumacher by maintaining a
research library, organizing lectures and seminars, publishing papers,
developing model economic programs, and providing technical assistance to
groups all for the purpose of linking people, land, and community to build
strong, diverse local economies.

## [edit] Schumacher's Teachings

### [edit] Homo viator

âIt is when we come to politics,â Schumacher insisted, âthat we can no
longer postpone or avoid the question regarding man's ultimate aim and
purpose.â If one believes in God one will pursue politics âmindful of the
eternal destiny of man and of the truths of the Gospelâ. However, if one
believes âthat there are no higher obligationsâ, it becomes impossible to
resist the appeal of Machiavellianismââpolitics as the art of gaining and
maintaining power so that you and your friends can order the world as they
like itâ(2). Once one accepted that man was created by God with a designated
purpose, politics, economics and art had value only for the end of helping man
reach a higher plane of existence, which should be his goal (2).

By the end of the fifties Schumacher had reached the conclusion that man was
homo viator (a pilgrim on a journey). He believed that it was the failure to
recognize this fact which led to society's ills (2).

### [edit] Three Culprits

For Schumacher there were three main culprits, that had all been corrosive
agents in a world which had lost sight of individual responsibility and a
world bound to the parameters of realism and science. These were Freud, Marx
and Einstein. Freud had made perception subjective through his teaching that
perception was subject to the complex interplay of the ego and the id,
literally rendering it self-centered. This led inevitably to a change of
attitude in human relations where self-fulfillment took precedence over the
needs of others. Marx, by seeking a scapegoat in the bourgeoisie, had replaced
personal responsibility with a hatred for others. His fault lay in his blaming
of others for problems with society. Einstein had supposedly undermined belief
in absolutes with his insistence on the relativity of everything. The
application of 'relativity' in all other fields including morality, led to
rejection of moral codes and responsibility (2). (Of course, Einstein's actual
theory of relativity was strictly limited to physics, and its correctness has
been thoroughly verified by experiment.)

### [edit] Three Planes of Thought

May 1957 he called his talk 'The Insufficiency of Liberalism' and it was an
exposition of what he termed the âthree stages of developmentâ. The first
great leap, he said, was made when man moved from stage one of primitive
religion to stage two of scientific realism. This was the stage modern man
tended to be at. A few move to the third stage in which one can find in the
lapses and deficiencies in science and realism, and that there is something
beyond fact and science. He called this stage three. The problem, he
explained, was that stage one and stage three appear to be exactly the same to
people stuck in stage two. Consequently, those in stage three are seen as
having had some sort of a relapse into childish nonsense. Only those in stage
three, can understand the differences between stage one and stage three.

### [edit] Labour

In 1955 Schumacher traveled to Burma as an economic consultant. While there,
he developed the principles of what he called "Buddhist economics", based on
the belief that good work was essential for proper human development and that
"production from local resources for local needs is the most rational way of
economic life." (1)

The following four quotes from Schumacher are said to exemplify his ideas:

1\. âFrom the point of view of the employer, it [work] is in any case simply
an item of cost, to be reduced to a minimum if it cannot be eliminated
altogether, say, by automation. From the point of view of the workman, it is a
'disutility'; to work is to make a sacrifice of one's leisure and comfort, and
wages are a kind of compensation for the sacrifice.â(2)

2\. âFrom a Buddhist point of view, this is standing the truth on its head
by considering goods as more important than people and consumption as more
important than creative activity. It means shifting the emphasis from the
worker to the product of work, that is, from the human to the sub-human,
surrender to the forces of evil.â(2)

3\. The Buddhist view, âtakes the function of work to be at least
threefoldâ: âto give a man a chance to utilize and develop his faculties;
to enable him to overcome his egocentredness by joining with other people in a
common task; and to bring forth the goods and services needed for a becoming
existence.â(2)

4\. âto organize work in such a manner that it becomes meaningless, boring,
stultifying, or nerve-racking for the worker would be little short of
criminal; it would indicate a greater concern with goods than with people, an
evil lack of compassion and a soul-destroying degree of attachment to the most
primitive side of this worldly existenceâ.(2)

### [edit] Appropriate technology

Interwoven with his ideas of labor were Schumacher's ideas about what would
later be called appropriate technology. His two basic development theories
were Intermediate Size, and Intermediate Technology.

To impose Intermediate Size on a national economy Schumacher suggested
superimposing on large-area states a cantonal structure of modest size so that
vast industrial concentration (with all this entails in imbalance, ineptitude,
and diseconomies of scale) becomes not only unnecessary but also impractical
and inefficient. (1)

Intermediate Technology would be a byproduct of the cantonal structure. Once a
development district is 'appropriately' reduced, it becomes possible to
fulfill a society's material requirements by means of less expensive and
simpler equipment than the costly, computerized, labor-saving machinery
necessary for satisfying the massive appetite for the remedial transport and
integration commodities without which a very large modern market community
cannot exist. Though this means a reduction in productivity, it does not mean
a reduction in even the highest humanely attainable standard of living. (1)

Putting it differently, the reduced efficiency of intermediate technology
provides the same amount of goods, but at a higher cost in labor. However,
since higher labor cost longer working hours means simply that the desired
level of production can be achieved only by full rather than partial
employment of the available labor force; they represent socially no additional
cost at all. They are, in fact, a benefit. It is unemployment, defined by
Schumacher as the degrading saving of manpower through the inappropriate use
of advanced machinery, which is the prohibitive cost which no society can
afford to pay in the long run. Furthermore the unemployment caused by
excessive technological progress will inevitably lead to the revolt of the
unemployed (1).

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d e Biography on the inner dustjacket of Small Is Beautiful
  2. ^ The Times Literary Supplement, October 6, 1995, p. 39

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Sustainable development portal  
  * Distributism
  * ecosystem
  * Friends of the Earth
  * Grameen Bank
  * International Forum on Globalization
  * John Papworth
  * Leopold Kohr
  * Kirkpatrick Sale
  * microcredit
  * natural capital
  * natural resources
  * Practical Action
  * social entrepreneurship
  * sustainable development
  * Worldwatch Institute
  * Bretton Woods system

## [edit] Selected bibliography

  * Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics As If People Mattered (1973, ISBN 0-06-131778-0); a 25th anniversary edition was published (ISBN 0-88179-169-5)
  * A Guide For The Perplexed (1977, ISBN 0-224-01496-X; still in paperback, ISBN 0-06-090611-1)
  * This I Believe and Other Essays (1977; reissued, ISBN 1-870098-66-8)
  * Good Work (1979, ISBN 0-06-013857-2)

## [edit] Further reading

### [edit] Books about E. F. Schumacher

  * Kirk, Geoffrey, ed. Schumacher on Energy (London: Sphere Books, 1983)
  * Wood, Barbara, E.F. Schumacher: His Life and Thought (New York: Harper & Row, 1984)
  * Etherden, Peter, The Schumacher Enigma, Fourth World Review, 1999
  * Pearce, Joseph, Small is Still Beautiful, (Wilmington: ISI Books, 2006)

### [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: E. F.
Schumacher  
  * The E.F. Schumacher Society in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, which houses his personal library and archives.
  * Schumacher pic.
  * Intermediate Technology Development Group / Practical Action
  * About E. F. Schumacher, from British Schumacher Society website
  * Essay on Buddhist Economics
  * The Education of E. F. Schumacher
  * Small is Still Beautiful an interview with Joseph Pearce
  * Economics as if People Mattered, E. F. Schumacher observed
  * Dialogue with E.F Schumacher and Fritjof Capra
  * E.F. Schumacher: A Retrospect and Reflection After September 11, 2001
  * Interview with E. F. Schumacher published in Manas Journal, May 19, 1976
  * Fifty Possible Ways to Challenge Over-Commercialism
  * Beyond Simplicity: Tough Issues For A New Era by Albert J. Fritsch, SJ, PhD
  * Introduction to Schumacher (MP3)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E._F._Schumacher"

Categories: 1911 births | 1977 deaths | Converts to Roman Catholicism | German
Roman Catholics | Appropriate technology advocates | British economists |
German economists | German Rhodes scholars | Green thinkers | English-language
writers | Environmental economics | Heterodox economists | Keynesian economics
| People from Bonn | People from the Rhine Province | Sustainability advocates
| Development specialists | Alumni of New College, Oxford

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2007 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since August 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * Gaeilge
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 February 2009, at 22:00.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



