
# Louis Slotin

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Louis Slotin  
<IMG>  

Slotin's Los Alamos badge photo  
Born 1 December 1910(1910-12-01)  
North End, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada  
Died 30 May 1946 (aged 35)  
Los Alamos, New Mexico  
Cause of death Radiation poisoning  
Occupation Physicist and chemist  
Louis Alexander Slotin (December 1, 1910 â May 30, 1946) was a Canadian
physicist and chemist who took part in the Manhattan Project.

As part of the Manhattan Project, Slotin performed experiments with uranium
and plutonium cores to determine their critical mass values. After World War
II, Slotin continued his research at Los Alamos National Laboratory. On May
21, 1946, Slotin accidentally began a fission reaction, which released a burst
of hard radiation. He was rushed to hospital, and died nine days later on May
30, the second victim of a criticality accident in history, from a total of 26
incidents.[1]

Slotin was hailed as a hero by the United States government for reacting
quickly enough to prevent the deaths of his colleagues due to the accident he
caused. The accident and its aftermath have been dramatized in fiction.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
    * 1.1 King's College
    * 1.2 University of Chicago
  * 2 Los Alamos
    * 2.1 The criticality accident
  * 3 Legacy
  * 4 References

  
## [edit] Early life

Slotin was the first of three children born to Israel and Sonia Slotin,
Yiddish-speaking refugees who had fled the pogroms of Russia to Winnipeg,
Manitoba.[1] He grew up in the North End neighborhood of Winnipeg, an area
with a large concentration of Eastern European immigrants. From his early days
at Machray Elementary School through his teenage years at St. John's Technical
High School, Slotin was academically exceptional. His younger brother, Sam,
later remarked that his brother "had an extreme intensity that enabled him to
study long hours."[1]

At the age of 16, Slotin entered the University of Manitoba, to pursue a
degree in science. During his undergraduate years, he received a University
Gold Medal in both physics and chemistry. Slotin received a Bachelor of
Science degree in geology from the university in 1932 and a Master of Science
degree in 1933. With the assistance of one of his mentors, he obtained a
fellowship to study at King's College London, under the supervision of Arthur
John Allmand,[1] the chair of the chemistry department, who specialized in the
field of applied electrochemistry and photochemistry.[2]

### [edit] King's College

While at King's College, Slotin distinguished himself as an amateur boxer by
winning the college's amateur bantamweight boxing championship. Later, he gave
the impression that he had fought for the Spanish Republic and flown
experimental fighter jets with the Royal Air Force.[3] Author Robert Jungk
recounts in his book Brighter than a Thousand Suns: A Personal History of the
Atomic Scientists, the first published account of the Manhattan Project, that
Slotin "had volunteered for service in the Spanish Civil War, more for the
sake of the thrill of it than on political grounds."[4] During an interview
years later, Sam stated that his brother had gone "on a walking tour in
Spain", and he "did not take part in the war" as previously thought.[1] Slotin
received a doctorate in physical chemistry from the university in 1936.[3] He
won a prize for his thesis entitled "An Investigation into the Intermediate
Formation of Unstable Molecules During some Chemical Reactions." Afterwards,
he spent six months working as a special investigator for Dublin's Great
Southern Railways, testing the Drumm nickel-zinc rechargeable batteries used
on the Dublin-Bray line.[1]

### [edit] University of Chicago

In 1937, after he unsuccessfully applied for a job with Canada's National
Research Council, the University of Chicago accepted him as a research
associate. There, Slotin gained his first experience with nuclear chemistry,
helping to build the first cyclotron in the midwestern United States.[5] The
job paid poorly and Slotin's father had to support him for two years. From
1939 to 1940, Slotin collaborated with Earl Evans, the head of the
university's biochemistry department, to produce radiocarbon (carbon-14 and
carbon-11) from the cyclotron.[1] While working together, the two men also
used carbon-11 to demonstrate that animal cells had the capacity to use carbon
dioxide for carbohydrate synthesis, through carbon fixation.[6]

Slotin may have been present at the start-up of Enrico Fermi's "Chicago
Pile-1", the first nuclear reactor, on December 2, 1942; however, the accounts
of the event do not agree on this point.[7] During this time, Slotin also
contributed to a number of papers in the field of radiobiology. His expertise
on the subject garnered the attention of the United States government, and as
a result he was invited to join the Manhattan Project, the United States'
effort to develop a nuclear bomb.[5] Slotin worked on the production of
plutonium under future Nobel laureate Eugene Wigner at the university and
later at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Oak Ridge, Tennessee. He moved
to the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico in December 1944 to work
in the bomb physics group of Robert Bacher.[1]

## [edit] Los Alamos

At Los Alamos, Slotin's duties consisted of dangerous criticality testing,
first with uranium in Otto Robert Frisch's experiments, and later with
plutonium cores. Criticality testing involved bringing masses of fissile
materials to near-critical levels in order to establish their critical mass
values.[8] Scientists referred to this flirting with the possibility of a
nuclear chain reaction as "tickling the dragon's tail," based on a remark by
physicist Richard Feynman who compared the experiments to "tickling the tail
of a sleeping dragon".[9][10] On July 16, 1945, Slotin assembled the core for
Trinity, the first detonated atomic bomb. He became known as the "chief
armourer of the United States" for his expertise in assembling nuclear
weapons.[11]

After the war, Slotin expressed growing disdain for his personal involvement
in the project. He remarked, "I have become involved in the Navy tests, much
to my disgust."[1] Unfortunately for Slotin, his participation at Los Alamos
was still required because, as he said, "I am one of the few people left here
who are experienced bomb putter-togetherers."[1] He looked forward to resuming
his research into biophysics and radiobiology at the University of Chicago and
was training a replacement, Alvin C. Graves, to take over his work once he
resumed his peacetime job.

On August 21, 1945, Harry K. Daghlian, one of Slotin's close colleagues and a
laboratory assistant, was performing a critical mass experiment when he
accidentally dropped a small tungsten carbide brick onto a 6.2 kg delta phase
plutonium bomb core.[12] The 24-year old Daghlian was irradiated with 510 rems
(5.1 Sv) of neutron radiation.[13] As the young man spent the next 21 days in
the hospital, slowly succumbing to radiation sickness, Slotin spent many hours
with him.

### [edit] The criticality accident

<IMG>

<IMG>

A re-creation of the incident.

On May 21, 1946, Slotin and seven other colleagues performed an experiment
that involved the creation of one of the first steps of a fission reaction by
placing two half-spheres of beryllium (a neutron reflector) around a plutonium
core. The experiment used the same 6.2-kilogram (13.7 lb) plutonium core that
had irradiated Daghlian, later called the "Demon core" for its role in the two
accidents. Slotin grasped the upper beryllium hemisphere with his left hand
through a thumb hole at the top while he maintained the separation of the
half-spheres using the blade of a screwdriver with his right hand, having
removed the shims normally used.[1] Using a screwdriver was not a normal part
of the experimental protocol.

At 3:20 p.m., the screwdriver slipped and the upper beryllium hemisphere fell,
causing a "prompt critical" reaction and a burst of hard radiation.[8] At the
time, the scientists in the room observed the "blue glow" of air ionization
and felt a "heat wave". In addition, Slotin experienced a sour taste in his
mouth and an intense burning sensation in his left hand.[1] Slotin
instinctively jerked his left hand upward, lifting the upper beryllium
hemisphere and dropping it to the floor, ending the reaction. However, he had
already been exposed to a lethal dose (around 2100 rems, or 21 Sv) of neutron
and gamma radiation.[13] Slotin's radiation dose was equivalent to the amount
that he would have been exposed to by being 1500 m (4800 ft) away from the
detonation of an atomic bomb.[14]

As soon as Slotin left the building, he vomited, a common reaction from
exposure to extremely intense ionizing radiation.[1] Slotin's colleagues
rushed him to the hospital, but irreversible damage had already been done. His
parents were informed of their son's inevitable death and a number of
volunteers donated blood for transfusions, but the efforts proved futile.[1]
The accident ended all hands-on assembly work at Los Alamos. At first, the
incident was classified and not made known even within the laboratory; Robert
Oppenheimer and other colleagues later reported severe emotional distress at
having to carry on with normal work and social activities while they secretly
knew that their colleague lay dying.

Louis Slotin died nine days later on May 30,[15] in the presence of his
parents. He was buried in Winnipeg on June 2, 1946.[1] The core was subject to
a number of experiments shortly after the end of the war and was used in the
ABLE detonation, during the Crossroads series of nuclear weapon testing.
Slotin's experiment was set to be the last conducted before the core's
detonation and was intended to be the final demonstration of its ability to go
critical.[14]

## [edit] Legacy

<IMG>

<IMG>

A sketch used by doctors to determine the amount of radiation to which each
person in the room had been exposed during the excursion.

On June 14, 1946, the associate editor of the Los Alamos Times, Thomas P.
Ashlock, penned a poem entitled "Slotin - A Tribute":

> May God receive you, great-souled scientist!  
>  While you were with us, even strangers knew  
>  The breadth and lofty stature of your mind  
>  Twas only in the crucible of death  
>  We saw at last your noble heart revealed.[1]

The official story released at the time was that Slotin, by quickly removing
the upper hemisphere, was a hero for ending the critical reaction and
protecting seven other observers in the room: "Dr. Slotin's quick reaction at
the immediate risk of his own life prevented a more serious development of the
experiment which would certainly have resulted in the death of the seven men
working with him, as well as serious injury to others in the general
vicinity."[1] However, Robert B. Brode, a top physicist who worked on the
project, argued that the accident was avoidable and that Slotin was not using
proper procedures, endangering the others in the lab along with himself.[1] In
1948, Slotin's colleagues at Los Alamos and the University of Chicago
initiated the Louis A. Slotin Memorial Fund for lectures on physics given by
distinguished scientists such as Robert Oppenheimer and Nobel laureates Luis
Walter Alvarez and Hans Bethe. The memorial fund lasted until 1962.[1]

The incident was recounted in Dexter Masters' 1955 novel The Accident, a
fictional account of the last few days of the life of a nuclear scientist
suffering from radiation poisoning.[16][17] The accident and its aftermath
were dramatized in the 1989 motion picture Fat Man and Little Boy, which
starred John Cusack as Michael Merriman, a fictional character based on
Slotin.[18] Slotin also appears as a character in the 1987 TV mini-series Race
for the Bomb.[19] Author Paul Mullin wrote the play Louis Slotin Sonata, a
dramatic recreation of the events that unfolded on May 21, 1946.[18] The
incident is also referenced in the 1972 novel The Jesus Factor by Edwin
Corley.

In 2002, an asteroid discovered in 1995 was named 12423 Slotin in his
honor.[20]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Zeilig, Martin (August/September 1995). "Louis Slotin And 'The Invisible Killer'". The Beaver 75 (4): 20â27. http://www.mphpa.org/classic/FH/LA/Louis_Slotin_1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-28.
  2. ^ "In memoriam: Arthur John Allmand, 1885â1951". Journal of the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 47: X001âX003. 1951. doi:10.1039/TF951470X001. http://www.rsc.org/delivery/_ArticleLinking/DisplayArticleForFree.cfm?doi=TF951470X001&JournalCode=TF. Retrieved on 2007-12-19.
  3. ^ a b Anderson, H. L.; A. Novick, and P. Morrison (August 23, 1946). "Louis A. Slotin: 1912-1946". Science 104 (2695): 182â183. doi:10.1126/science.104.2695.182. PMID 17770702.
  4. ^ Jungt, Robert (1958). Brighter Than a Thousand Suns: A Personal History of the Atomic Scientists. New York, New York: Harcourt Brace.
  5. ^ a b "science.ca Profile: Louis Slotin". GCS Research Society. 2007-11-07. http://www.science.ca/scientists/scientistprofile.php?pID=290&pg=0. Retrieved on 2007-11-21.
  6. ^ "Earl Evans, 1910-1999". University of Chicago Medical Center. 1999-10-05. http://www.uchospitals.edu/news/1999/19991005-evansobit.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-20.
  7. ^ A 1962 University of Chicago document says that Slotin "was present on December 2, 1942, when the group of 'Met Lab' [Metallurgical Laboratory] scientists working under the late Enrico Fermi achieved man's first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction in a pile of graphite and uranium under the West Stands of Stagg Field." Slotin's colleague, Henry W. Newson, recollected that he and Slotin were not present during the scientists' experimentation.
  8. ^ a b Martin, Brigitt (December 1999). "The Secret Life of Louis Slotin 1910 - 1946". Alumni Journal of the University of Manitoba 59 (3). http://www.cns-snc.ca/history/pioneers/slotin/slotin.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-22.
  9. ^ Weber, Bruce (2001-04-10). "Theater Review; A Scientist's Tragic Hubris Attains Critical Mass Onstage". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=990CE7DB1E3EF933A25757C0A9679C8B63. Retrieved on 2007-11-22.
  10. ^ "Science as Theater: The Slip of the Screwdriver". American Scientist (Sigma Xi) 90 (6): 550â555. November/December 2002.
  11. ^ Durschmied, Erik (2003). Unsung Heroes: The Twentieth Century's Forgotten History-Makers. London, England: Hodder & Stoughton. pp. 245\. ISBN 0340825197.
  12. ^ Newtan, Samuel U. (2007). Nuclear War I and Other Major Nuclear Disasters of the 20th Century. Bloomington, Indiana: AuthorHouse. pp. 67\. ISBN 1-4258-8511-4.
  13. ^ a b "LA-13638 A Review of Criticality Accidents" (PDF). Los Alamos National Laboratory. May 2000. 74-76. http://www.orau.org/ptp/Library/accidents/la-13638.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-12-05.
  14. ^ a b Miller, Richard L. (1991). Under the Cloud: The Decades of Nuclear Testing. The Woodlands, Texas: Two Sixty Press. pp. 69, 77. ISBN 0029216206.
  15. ^ Chris Austell, ed (1983). Decision-Making in the Nuclear Age. Weston, Massachusetts: Halcyon Press. pp. 353.
  16. ^ Schonberg, Harold C (1989-01-006). "Dexter Masters, 80, British Editor; Warned of Perils of Atomic Age". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=950DE1D91E38F935A35752C0A96F948260. Retrieved on 2007-11-26.
  17. ^ Badash, Lawrence; Joseph O. Hirschfelder and Herbert P. Broida (1980). Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 1943-1945. Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing Company. pp. 98â99. ISBN 90-277-1098-8.
  18. ^ a b Berson, Misha (2006-09-21). ""Louis Slotin Sonata": Tumultuous and bubbling drama". The Seattle Times. http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/theaterarts/2003268048_slotin21.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-26.
  19. ^ "Race for the Bomb" at the Internet Movie Database
  20. ^ "Manitobans Who Made a Difference: Louis Slotin (1910-1946)". Manitoba Culture, Heritage and Tourism. 2007-11-05. http://www.gov.mb.ca/chc/hrb/events/famous_manitobans/slotin_l.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-26.

Listen to this article (info/dl)  

Play sound

Spoken Wikipedia

This audio file was created from a revision dated 2008-01-21, and does not
reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles

This is a spoken version of the article. Click here to listen.

  

Featured article

Persondata  
NAME Slotin, Louis  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Physicist and chemist. Died of radiation poisoning.  
DATE OF BIRTH 1 December 1910  
PLACE OF BIRTH North End, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada  
DATE OF DEATH 30 May 1946  
PLACE OF DEATH Los Alamos, New Mexico  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Slotin"

Categories: Spoken articles | 1910 births | 1946 deaths | Canadian Jews |
Canadian physicists | Manhattan Project people | Nuclear accidents | Radiation
health effects | University of Manitoba alumni | People from Winnipeg | Alumni
of King's College London | Victims of radiological poisoning | Accidental
human deaths in New Mexico

Hidden categories: Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * Polski
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 18:10.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



