
# Green Lantern

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"The Green Lantern" redirects here. For the disc jockey, see DJ Green Lantern.

Green Lantern  
<IMG>  
Cover to Green Lantern: Rebirth #6, art by Ethan Van Sciver. Featured left to
right are Guy Gardner, Kyle Rayner, Hal Jordan, John Stewart and Kilowog.  
Publisher DC Comics  
First appearance All-American Comics #16 (July, 1940)  
Created by Bill Finger  
Martin Nodell  
Characters Alan Scott  
Hal Jordan  
Guy Gardner  
John Stewart  
Kyle Rayner  
Jade  
See also Green Lantern Corps  
List of Green Lanterns  
Green Lantern  
<IMG> Green Lantern vol. 1, #1 (Fall, 1941).  
Featuring the Alan Scott version of the character.  
Art by Howard Purcell.  
Series publication information  
Publisher (vol 1)  
All-American Publications  
(vol 2-4)  
DC Comics  
Schedule (vol 1)  
Quarterly (1-18)  
Bi-monthly (19-38)  
(vol 2)  
Bi-monthly (1-10, 82-96)  
8 times a year(11-81)  
Monthly (97-205)  
(vol 3)  
Monthly (1-27, 34-38, 43-74, 77-100, 107-159, 166-181)  
Bi-weekly (28-33, 39-42, 75-76, 101-106, 160-165)  
(vol 4)  
Monthly  
Format Ongoing series  
Genre Superhero  
Publication date (vol 1)  
Fall 1941 â May-June 1949  
(vol 2)  
July-August 1960 â April-May 1972;  
August-September 1976 â October 1986[1]  
(vol 3)  
June 1990 â November 2004  
(vol 4)  
July 2005 â Present  
Number of issues (vol 1)  
38  
(vol 2)  
205, 3 Annuals, 2 Specials  
(vol 3)  
183 (this includes issues number 0 and 1000000), 9 Annuals  
(vol 4)  
35+  
Main character(s) (vol 1)  
Alan Scott  
(vol 2 & 4)  
Hal Jordan  
John Stewart  
(vol 3)  
Hal Jordan  
Guy Gardner  
John Stewart  
Kyle Rayner  
Green Lantern is the name of several fictional characters, superheroes
appearing in comic books published by DC Comics. The first (Alan Scott) was
created by writer Bill Finger and artist Martin Nodell in All-American Comics
#16 (July 1940).[2]

Each Green Lantern possesses a power ring that gives the user great control
over the physical world as long as the wielder has sufficient willpower and
strength to wield it. While the ring of the Golden Age Green Lantern (Alan
Scott) was magically powered, the rings worn by all subsequent Lanterns were
technological creations of the Guardians of the Universe, who granted such
rings to worthy candidates. These individuals made up the intergalactic police
force known as the Green Lantern Corps.[2]

After World War II, when sales of superhero comic books generally declined, DC
ceased publishing new adventures of Alan Scott as the Green Lantern. At the
beginning of the Silver Age of Comic Books in the late 1950s, DC editor Julius
Schwartz assigned writer John Broome and artist Gil Kane to revive the Green
Lantern character, this time as test pilot Hal Jordan, who became a founding
member of the Justice League of America. In the early 1970s, writer Denny
O'Neil and artist Neal Adams teamed Green Lantern with archer Green Arrow in
groundbreaking, socially conscious, and award-winning stories that pitted the
sensibilities of the law-and-order-oriented Lantern with the populist Green
Arrow. Several cosmically themed series followed, as did occasional different
individuals in the role of Earth's Green Lantern. Most prominent of these are
John Stewart, Guy Gardner, and Kyle Rayner.

Each of the Earth's Green Lanterns has been a member of either the Justice
Society of America or the Justice League of America, and John Stewart was
featured as one of the main characters in both the Justice League and the
Justice League Unlimited animated series. The Green Lanterns are often
depicted as being close friends of the various men who have been the Flash,
the most notable friendships having been between Alan Scott and Jay Garrick
(the Golden Age Green Lantern and Flash), Hal Jordan and Barry Allen (the
Silver Age Green Lantern and Flash), and Kyle Rayner and Wally West (the
modern age Green Lantern and Flash), as well as Jordan being friends with
West.

## Contents

  * 1 Publication history
    * 1.1 Golden Age
    * 1.2 Silver Age revival
    * 1.3 Later developments
    * 1.4 Awards
  * 2 Fictional character biographies
    * 2.1 Golden Age Green Lantern
      * 2.1.1 Alan Scott
    * 2.2 Silver Age Green Lantern
      * 2.2.1 Hal Jordan
    * 2.3 Bronze Age Green Lanterns
      * 2.3.1 Guy Gardner
      * 2.3.2 John Stewart
    * 2.4 Modern Age Green Lantern
      * 2.4.1 Kyle Rayner
    * 2.5 Others who have headlined as Green Lantern
      * 2.5.1 Jade
  * 3 Powers and abilities
  * 4 Green Lantern oath
  * 5 In other media
  * 6 See also
  * 7 Footnotes
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Publication history

### [edit] Golden Age

Green Lantern was created by Martin Nodell (using the name Mart Dellon) and
Bill Finger. He first appeared in the Golden Age of comic books in All-
American Comics #16 (July 1940), published by All-American Publications, one
of three companies that would eventually merge to form DC Comics. The
collector market for original copies of this issue is strong, with a sale in
October 2007 selling on an online vintage comic trading site,
ComicConnect.com, for $29,250.[3] This Green Lantern was Alan Scott, an
engineer who had come into possession of a magic lantern. From this, he
crafted a magic ring which gave him a wide variety of powers. The limitations
of the ring were that it had to be "charged" every 24 hours by touching it to
the lantern for a time, and that it did not work on wood.

Nodell had originally planned to give Green Lantern the alter ego "Alan Ladd,"
this being a linguistic twist on Aladdin, who had a magic lamp and magic ring
of his own. DC considered the wordplay distracting and foolish, and the
character's name was changed before publication to "Alan Scott." In May 1942,
the film This Gun for Hire suddenly made the journeyman actor of the same name
a movie star. Nodell would always joke that they'd missed a great
opportunity.[4]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Green Lanterns of two worlds: Hal Jordan (left) meets Alan Scott in Green
Lantern #40 (Oct. 1965). Cover art by Gil Kane & Murphy Anderson.

Green Lantern was a popular character in the 1940s, featured in both All-
American Comics and in his own title and co-starring in Comic Cavalcade along
with Flash and Wonder Woman. He was a charter member of the Justice Society of
America, whose adventures ran in All Star Comics. After World War II, the
popularity of superheroes declined. The Green Lantern comic book was cancelled
with issue #40 (October 1949). All Star Comics #57 (1951) was the character's
last Golden Age appearance.

### [edit] Silver Age revival

In the late 1950s, DC Comics successfully revived superheroes, ushering in
what became known as the Silver Age of comic books. Rather than bringing back
the same Golden Age heroes â as Atlas Comics, the 1950s precursor of Marvel
Comics, unsuccessfully attempted â DC reimagined them as new characters for
the modern age. Following the successful revival of the Flash in Showcase #4
(Oct. 1956), a new Green Lantern was introduced in Showcase #22 (September-
October 1959).

This Green Lantern was Hal Jordan, a test pilot who was given a power ring by
a dying alien, Abin Sur, and who became a member of the Green Lantern Corps,
an interstellar organization of police overseen by the Guardians of the
Universe. The Corps' rings were powerless against anything colored yellow, due
to a necessary impurity in the ring. Jordan's creation was motivated by a
desire to make him more of a science fiction hero, editor Julius Schwartz
having been a longtime fan of that genre and literary agent who saw pop-
culture tastes turning in that direction.

The Silver Age Green Lantern was unique in several ways. He was the first DC
superhero with a family.{Green Lantern #9 'Green Lantern's Brother Act'}
Written by John Broome and drawn by Gil Kane, these stories have been
reprinted in deluxe hardback editions.

This Green Lantern was a founding member of the Justice League of America and
starred in his own title as well; in issue #40 (Oct. 1965), he met his Golden
Age predecessor, who was established to live on the parallel world of Earth-
Two, separate from Jordan's Earth-One. The two Lanterns struck up a close
friendship and have periodically come to each other's aid. Hal Jordan's Green
Lantern also became close friends with Barry Allen, and the two heroes
appeared frequently in each other's comics to team up.

### [edit] Later developments

<IMG>

<IMG>

"My ward is a junkie!" Green Lantern vol. 2, #86 (Nov. 1971). Cover art by
Neal Adams.

With issue #76 (April 1970), the series made a radical stylistic departure.
Editor Schwartz, in one of the company's earliest efforts to provide more than
light fantasy, worked with the writer-artist team of Denny O'Neil and Neal
Adams to spark new interest in the comic and address a perceived need for
social relevance. They added the character Green Arrow (with the cover though
not the official name retitled Green Lantern Co-Starring Green Arrow) and had
the pair travel through America encountering "real world" issues, to which
they reacted in different ways â Green Lantern as fundamentally a lawman,
Green Arrow as a liberal iconoclast. Additionally during this run, the
groundbreaking "Snowbirds Don't Fly" story was published (issues #85 and #86)
in which Green Arrow's teen sidekick Speedy (the later grownup hero Red Arrow)
developed a heroin addiction that he was forcibly made to quit. The stories
were critically acclaimed, with publications such as The New York Times, The
Wall Street Journal, and Newsweek citing it as an example of how comic books
were "growing up".[5] However, the O'Neil/Adams run was not a commercial
success, and after only 14 issues, the two left the title, which was
cancelled.

The title would know a number of revivals and cancellations. Its title would
change to Green Lantern Corps at one point as the popularity rose and waned.
During a time there were two regular titles, each with a Green Lantern, and a
third member in the Justice League. A new character, Kyle Rayner, was created
to become the feature while Hal Jordan first became the villain Parallax, then
died and came back as the Spectre.

In the wake of The New Frontier, writer Geoff Johns returned Hal Jordan as
Green Lantern in Green Lantern: Rebirth (2004-05). Johns began to lay
groundwork for a 2009 story to be entitled "The Blackest Night," viewing it as
the third part of the trilogy started by Rebirth. Expanding on the Green
Lantern mythology with the second part, "Sinestro Corps War" (2007), Johns,
with artist Ethan van Sciver, found wide critical acclaim and financial
success with the series, which promised the introduction of a spectrum of
colored "lanterns". Currently, all four "current" Green Lanterns have stories
being told in simultaneously published series, Green Lantern and Green Lantern
Corps respectively.

### [edit] Awards

The series and its creators have received several awards over the years,
including the 1961 Alley Award for Best Adventure Hero/Heroine with Own Book;
and Academy of Comic Book Arts' Shazam Award for Best Continuing Feature in
1970, for Best Individual Story ("No Evil Shall Escape My Sight", Green
Lantern vol. 2, #76, by Dennis O'Neil and Neal Adams), and in 1971 for Best
Individual Story ("Snowbirds Don't Fly", Green Lantern vol. 2, #85 by O'Neil
and Adams).

Writer O'Neil received the Shazam Award for Best Writer (Dramatic Division) in
1970 for his work on Green Lantern, Batman, Superman, and other titles, while
artist Adams received the Shazam for Best Artist (Dramatic Division) in 1970
for his work on Green Lantern and Batman. Inker Dick Giordano received the
Shazam Award for Best Inker (Dramatic Division) for his work on Green Lantern
and other titles.

In Judd Winick's first regular writing assignment on Green Lantern, he wrote a
storyline in which an assistant of Kyle Rayner's emerged as a gay character in
Green Lantern #137 (June 2001). In Green Lantern #154 (November 2001) the
story entitled "Hate Crime" gained media recognition when Terry was brutally
beaten in a homophobic attack. Winick was interviewed on Phil Donahue's show
on MSNBC for that storyline on August 15, 2002 and received two GLAAD awards
for his Green Lantern work.

## [edit] Fictional character biographies

<IMG>

<IMG>

Alan Scott, the original Green Lantern. Promotional cover art for JSA # 77, by
Alex Ross.

### [edit] Golden Age Green Lantern

#### [edit] Alan Scott

Main article: Alan Scott

Alan Scott's Green Lantern history traditionally began thousands of years ago
when a mystical "green flame" meteor fell to Earth in ancient China. The voice
of the flame prophesied that it would act three times: once to bring death (a
lamp-maker crafted the green metal of the meteor into a lamp; in fear and as
punishment for what they thought sacrilege, the local villagers killed him,
only to be destroyed by a sudden burst of the green flame), once to bring life
(in modern times, the lamp came into the hands of a patient in a mental
institution who fashioned the lamp into a modern lantern; the green flame
restored him to sanity and gave him a new life), and once to bring power. By
1940, the lantern passed into the possession of Alan Scott, a young engineer.
Following a railroad bridge collapse in which he was the only survivor, the
flame instructed Scott how to fashion a ring from its metal, to give him
fantastic powers as the superhero Green Lantern. He adopted a colorful costume
and became a crimefighter. Alan was a founding member of the Justice Society
of America.

After the Crisis on Infinite Earths, a Tales of the Green Lantern Corps story
was published that brought Scott even closer to the Corps' ranks. It was
revealed that Hal Jordan was predated as Earth's Green Lantern by a citizen of
ancient China. Not only was the Corps' now-familiar green, black and white
uniform motif not yet adopted, but this ancient Chinese GL altered the basic
red of his uniform to more closely resemble the style worn by his countrymen.
Power ultimately corrupted this early GL and the Guardians allowed his ring to
manifest a weakness to wood, the material from which most Chinese weapons of
the time were fashioned. This allowed the locals to ultimately defeat their
corrupted âchampion." His ring and lantern were burned and it was during
this process that the âintelligenceâ inhabiting the ring and the lantern,
and linking them to the Guardians, was damaged.

Centuries later, it was explained, when Scott found the mystical lantern, it
had no memory of its true origins, save a vague recollection of the uniform of
its last master. This was the origin of Scottâs distinctive costume. Due to
the damaged link to the Guardians, those immortals presumed the ring and
lantern to be lost in whatever cataclysm overcame their last owner of record.
Thus it was that Scott was never noticed by the Guardians and went on to carve
a history of his own separate and apart from that of the Corps, still sporting
a ring with an artificially induced weakness against anything made of wood.
Honoring this separate history, the Guardians never moved to force Scott to
relinquish the ring, formally join the Corps, or adopt its colors, although
during the Rann-Thanagar War, it was revealed that Scott is an honorary member
of the Corps.

### [edit] Silver Age Green Lantern

#### [edit] Hal Jordan

Main article: Hal Jordan

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hal Jordan, Silver Age Green Lantern. Promotional cover art for Green Lantern
(vol. 4) #1, by Carlos Pacheco & JesÃºs Merino.

The next Green Lantern to see publication was Harold "Hal" Jordan, a second-
generation test pilot, having followed in the footsteps of his father, Martin
Jordan. He was given the power ring and battery (lantern) by a dying alien
named Abin Sur, whose spaceship crashed on Earth. Abin Sur used his ring to
seek out an individual who was "utterly honest and born without fear" to take
his place as Green Lantern. Jordan became a founding member of the Justice
League of America and as of the mid-2000s is, along with John Stewart, one of
the two active-duty Lanterns in Earth's sector of space.

Jordan was also a member of the Green Lantern Corps, which was modeled after
the "Lensmen" from the science fiction novel series written by E.E. Smith. The
early 1980s miniseries "Green Lantern Corps" honors this with two characters
in the corps: Eddore of Tront and Arisia. A different interpretation of Jordan
and the Corps appears in Superman: Red Son.

Following the rebirth of Superman and the destruction of Green Lantern's
hometown of Coast City in the early 1990s, Hal Jordan seemingly went insane
and destroyed the Green Lantern Corps and the Central Power Battery. Now
calling himself Parallax, Hal Jordan would devastate the DC Universe off and
on for the next several years. However, after Earth's sun was threatened by a
Sun-Eater, Jordan sacrificed his life, expending the last of his vast power to
reignite the dying star. Jordan subsequently returned from beyond the grave as
the Spectre, the divine Spirit of God's Vengeance, whom Jordan attempted to
transform into a Spirit of Redemption, which ended in failure.

In Green Lantern: Rebirth, it is revealed that Jordan was under the influence
of a creature known as Parallax when he turned renegade. Parallax was a
creature of pure fear that had been imprisoned in the Central Power Battery by
the Guardians of the Universe in the distant past. Imprisonment had rendered
the creature dormant and it was eventually forgotten, becoming known merely as
the "yellow impurity" in the power rings. Sinestro was able to wake Parallax
and encourage it to seek out Hal Jordan as a host. Although Parallax had been
trying to corrupt Jordan (via his ring) for some time, it was not until after
the destruction of Coast City that it was able to succeed. It took advantage
of Jordan's weakened emotional state to lure him to Oa and cause him to attack
anyone who stood in his way. When Jordan finally entered the Central Power
Battery and absorbed all the power, he unwittingly freed the Parallax entity
and allowed it to graft onto his soul.

The Spectre bonded with Jordan in the hopes of freeing the former Green
Lantern's soul from Parallax's taint, but was not strong enough to do so. In
Green Lantern: Rebirth, Parallax began to assert control of the Parallax-
Spectre-Jordan composite. Thanks to a supreme effort of will, Jordan was able
to free himself from Parallax, rejoin his soul to his body and reclaim his
power ring. The newly revived (and youthened) Jordan awoke just in time to
save Kyle Rayner and Green Arrow from Sinestro. After the Korugarian's defeat,
Jordan was able to successfully lead his fellow Green Lanterns in battle
against Parallax and imprison it in the Central Power Battery once more.

Hal Jordan is once again a member of both the Justice League and the Green
Lantern Corps, and along with John Stewart is one of the two Corps members
assigned to Sector 2814, personally defeating Sinestro in the Sinestro Corps
War. Jordan is designated as Green Lantern 2814.1.

Post-"Sinestro Corps War", DC Comics revisited the origin of Hal Jordan as a
precursor to "The Blackest Night" storyline, the next chapter in the Geoff
Johns era on Green Lantern.

### [edit] Bronze Age Green Lanterns

#### [edit] Guy Gardner

Main article: Guy Gardner (comics)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Guy Gardner. Promotional interior art for Green Lantern Corps: Recharge #1
(Nov 2005), by Patrick Gleason.

In the late 1960s, Guy Gardner appeared as the second choice to replace Abin
Sur as Green Lantern of sector 2814. Gardner was originally supposed to
receive Abin Sur's ring, but Jordan was closer. This placed him as the
"backup" Green Lantern for Jordan. But early in his career as a Green Lantern,
tragedy struck Gardner as a power battery blew up in his face, putting him in
a coma for years. During the Crisis on Infinite Earths, the Guardians split
into factions, one of which appointed a newly revived Gardner as their
champion. As a result of his years in a coma, Guy was very emotionally
unstable, although he still mostly managed to fight valiantly. He has gone
through many changes, including wielding Sinestro's yellow Qwardian power
ring, then gaining and losing Vuldarian powers, and readmission to the Corps
during Green Lantern: Rebirth. He later became part of the Green Lantern Honor
Guard, and oversees new Green Lantern's training. Gardner is designated as
Green Lantern 2814.3.

#### [edit] John Stewart

Main article: John Stewart (comics)

<IMG>

<IMG>

John Stewart. Promotional cover art for Green Lantern (vol. 3) #156, by Ariel
Olivetti.

In the early 1970s, John Stewart, an unemployed architect, was selected by the
Guardians to replace a comatose Guy Gardner as the backup Green Lantern for
Jordan. When Jordan resigned from the Corps for an extended period of time,
Stewart served as the regular Lantern for that period. Since then, Stewart was
in and out of action due to various circumstances, even becoming the first
mortal Guardian of the Universe. He also joined and lead the Darkstars when
the Green Lantern Corps were destroyed by Parallax. After that, he took over
being Green Lantern for Kyle Rayner when he left Earth, also taking his place
in the JLA. Now he has begun serving with Jordan as one of his sector's two
designated regular-duty Lanterns designated as Green Lantern 2814.2.

### [edit] Modern Age Green Lantern

#### [edit] Kyle Rayner

Main article: Kyle Rayner

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kyle Rayner. Promotional cover art for Green Lantern (vol. 3) #151, by Jim Lee
& Scott Williams.

Kyle Rayner is a struggling freelance artist when he is approached by the last
Guardian of the Universe, Ganthet, to become a new Green Lantern with the last
power ring. Ganthet's reasons for choosing Rayner remained a secret for quite
some time. Despite not being cut from the same cloth of bravery and
fearlessness as Hal Jordan â or perhaps because of that â Rayner proved to
be popular with readers and his fellow characters. Having continually proven
himself on his own and with the JLA, he became known amongst the Oans as The
Torch Bearer. He was responsible for the rebirth of the Guardians and the re-
ignition of the Central Power Battery, essentially restoring all that Jordan
had destroyed as Parallax. Rayner later began operating as the Green Lantern
known as Ion.

Kyle Rayner was chosen to wield the last ring because he knew fear, and
Parallax had been released from the Central Power Battery. Ganthet knew this
and chose Kyle because his experiences dealing with fear enabled him to resist
Parallax. Because Parallax is a manifestation of fear, and yellow, none of the
other Green Lanterns, including Hal, could harm Parallax and, therefore, came
under his control. Kyle taught them to feel and overcome fear so they could
defeat Parallax and incarcerate him in the Central Power Battery once again.

Kyle became Ion, who is later revealed to be the manifestation of willpower in
the same way Parallax is fear. During the Sinestro Corps War between the Green
Lantern Corps and the Sinestro Corps, Ion was imprisoned while Parallax
possesses Kyle. In Green Lantern (vol. 4) #24, Parallax consumes Hal Jordan.
Hal Jordan enters into Kyle's prison, and with his help, Kyle finally escapes
Parallax.

Afterward, Ganthet and Sayd trap Parallax in the Lanterns of the four Green
Lanterns of Earth. Ganthet asks Kyle to give up his right to be Ion and become
a Green Lantern again. Kyle accepts, and Ganthet gives Kyle a power ring. Kyle
is outfitted with a new costume including a mask that looks like the one from
his first uniform. Kyle is now a member of the Green Lantern Corps Honor
Guard, and has been partnered with Guy Gardner.

Kyle now shows up mostly as part of the ensemble cast of Green Lantern Corps.
Corps rookie Sodam Yat took over the mantle of Ion. Sodam has made an
appearance in the Legion of Super Heroes Final Crisis tie-in Legion of Three
Worlds as the last surviving Green Lantern/Guardian of the Universe.

Kyle is designated as Green Lantern 2814.4 within the Corps.

### [edit] Others who have headlined as Green Lantern

#### [edit] Jade

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jennifer-Lynn Hayden as Green Lantern

Main article: Jade (comics)

The daughter of Alan Scott, the Golden Age Green Lantern, Jennifer-Lynn Hayden
would discover she shared her father's mystical connection to the Starheart,
which gave her the abilities of a Green Lantern. Choosing to follow in her
father's footsteps, she became the superheroine Jade. She would later fight a
manifestation of the Starheart and lose those abilities.

After Jade was stripped of her powers, Kyle Rayner gave her a copy of Hal
Jordan's power ring. When Rayner left Earth to restart the Green Lantern
Corps, Jade donned the classic Green Lantern uniform and served as the
planet's Green Lantern until losing the ring during a battle with the villain
Fatality. Later, when the ring was returned to her, she changed her Green
Lantern uniform to a modified version of Rayner's. Jade continued to function
as a Green Lantern until Rayner, as Ion, used his power to restore her
connection to the Starheart. During Infinite Crisis, she died while trying to
stop Alexander Luthor, Jr. from destroying the universe to create a new
multiverse. Upon her death, Jade returned her Starheart power to Rayner.

## [edit] Powers and abilities

Main article: Power ring (weapon)

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2007)  
Each Green Lantern wields a power ring that can generate a variety of effects,
sustained purely by the ring wearer's strength of will. The greater the user's
willpower, the more effective the ring. The limits of the power ring's
abilities are not clearly defined and it has been referred to as "the most
powerful weapon in the universe" on more than one occasion. Across the years,
the ring has been shown capable of accomplishing anything within the
imagination of the ring bearer. Stories in 2006 retconned the ring's long-
established lack of effect on yellow objects, stating that the ring-wielder
need only feel fear and overcome it in order to affect yellow objects. In one
issue Kyle Rayner blows up an entire yellow sun in order to destroy a group of
hundreds of unpopulated planets that held deadly sicknesses by manipulating
the sun's energy to destroy itself.

Power rings as used by various wielders have exhibited (but are not limited
to) the following effects:

  * Creates solid 'light energy' which is only limited by the mind
  * Constructs of green 'solid-energy,' often of tremendous size and/or complexity.
  * Flight, including flight at speeds beyond that of light.
  * Plasma bolts.
  * Ability to walk through walls by travelling through 'the Fourth Dimension' [Alan Scott]
  * The rings can act as semi-sentient computers, including accessing the Book of Oa, a massive database of everything from the laws of the Guardians and the Corps to the history of the universe.
  * Time travel.
  * The rings are still reliant on the lantern-shaped power batteries, but no longer limited to 24 hours' charge as they originally were. Kyle Rayner's ring was the first ring to absorb more power than originally thought, having stored the main power battery's energy following its explosion on Oa.
  * Telepathic powers.
  * Translation of virtually all languages.
  * Force field generation.
  * Radiation, including simulated kryptonite radiations.
  * Generate "earplugs" to block out all telepathic communication and manipulation.[6]
  * Render user invisible.[7]
  * Green Lantern: Rebirth revealed that only a certain type of willpower can use the ring effectively, as evidenced when Green Arrow's "cynical" willpower barely allows him to generate a single arrow and leaves him exhausted after this feat.
  * Put humans into a state of suspended animation [8]

## [edit] Green Lantern oath

Green Lantern is famous for the oath he recites when he charges his ring.
Originally, the oath was simple:

â

    ...and I shall shed my light over dark evil.
    For the dark things cannot stand the light,
    The light of the Green Lantern!
â  
âAlan Scott  
(This oath was later given as an in-joke to Tomar-Re, Green Lantern of sector
2813 and the first Lantern Hal Jordan met after Abin Sur.)

In the mid-1940s, this was revised into the form that became famous during the
Hal Jordan era:

â

    In brightest day, in blackest night,
    No evil shall escape my sight
    Let those who worship evil's might,
    Beware my power... Green Lantern's light!
â  
âHal Jordan/All Current Lanterns  
The word "blackest" was often replaced with "darkest" to avoid racist
connotations. The above is the most popular version of Green Lantern's oath.
Science fiction writer Alfred Bester, who wrote many Green Lantern stories in
the 1940s, has been credited as the creator of this oath. However, in an
interview with journalist F. Gwynplaine MacIntyre at the 1979 World Science
Fiction Convention in Brighton, England, Bester stated that the brightest-day
oath was already in place before he began writing for the character.

The Pre-Crisis version of Hal Jordan has created the oath when he had three
early adventures that inspired him on how he can defeat any attempt to elude
him. For instance, he captured robbers who used a powerfully bright flare to
blind everyone in an area by using his ring as a radar to find them (In
brightest day). The second was when he tracked criminals hiding in a dark cave
with a fog-like dust suspension that reflected back any external light. Jordan
solved the problem by making certain elements of the criminals' bodies grow
from within the fog, allowing the Lantern to target them (in blackest night).
Finally, Jordan tracked down safecrackers after an inefficient aerial
reconnaissance by detecting the faint shockwaves from the explosives used by
the criminals and tracing it back (No evil shall escape my sight).

It had been established in the past that each Green Lantern has his, her, or
its own oath. For example, Medphyll, the Green Lantern of the planet J586
(seen in Swamp Thing #61, "All Flesh is Grass"), a planet where a sentient
plant species lives, has the following oath:

    In forest dark or glade beferned
    No blade of grass shall go unturned
    Let those who have the daylight spurned
    Tread not where this green lamp has burned.
Other notable oaths include that of Jack T. Chance:

    You who are wicked, evil and mean
    I'm the nastiest creep you've ever seen!
    Come one, come all, put up a fight
    I'll pound your butts with Green Lantern's light!
    Yowza.
and that of Rot Lop Fan, a Green Lantern whose species lacks sight, and thus
has no concepts of brightness, darkness, day, night, color, or lanterns:

    In loudest din or hush profound
    My ears catch evil's slightest sound
    Let those who toll out evil's knell
    Beware my power, the F-Sharp Bell!
Since Green Lantern: Rebirth and the restart of the Green Lantern Corps, the
only oath used has been the Brightest Day, Blackest Night version.

In Green Lantern (vol. 4) #27, the Alpha Lanterns are revealed to have their
own oath:

    In days of peace, in nights of war
    Obey the Laws forever more
    Misconduct must be answered for,
    Swear us the chosen: The Alpha Corps!
In Legion of 3 Worlds, Sodam Yat in the 31st century as the last of the Green
Lanterns and the last of the Guardians recited a new oath.

    In brightest day, through Blackest Night,
    No other Corps shall spread its light!
    Let those who try to stop what's right,
    Burn like my power, Green Lantern's Light!
It is unknown if this represents his personal oath, or a change for all the
Corps after the events the Blackest Night storyline, which has yet to be
published. The "other Corps" line refers to the different colored Lanterns
that play a pivotal role in Blackest Night and its prelude stories. The final
two lines are lifted from the oath of the Sinestro Corps, a more brutal and
lethal version of the Green Lantern Corps

In the animated TV series Duck Dodgers, Duck Dodgers temporarily becomes a
Green Lantern after accidentally picking up Hal Jordan's laundry. In the first
part of the episode, he forgets the real quote and makes up his own version:

    In sunny day or sleepless night
    Watermelon, cantaloupe, yadda yadda
    Erm... superstitious and cowardly lot
    With liberty and justice for some!
## [edit] In other media

Main article: Green Lantern in other media

## [edit] See also

  * Doctor Spectrum a Marvel superhero based on the Green Lantern as a homage.
  * Green Lantern Corps
  * List of Green Lantern enemies
  * List of Green Lanterns
  * Power Ring
  * Sinestro Corps

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ The series was cancelled in 1972. When it was revived in 1976, the numbering was carried over. The indecia was changed to Green Lantern Corps with issue 206.
  2. ^ a b Wallace, Dan (2008), "Green Lantern", in Dougall, Alastair, The DC Comics Encyclopedia, New York: Dorling Kindersley, pp. 144-147, ISBN 0-7566-4119-5, OCLC 213309017
  3. ^ Collectors Society Message Boards: ComicConnect.com progress update: All-American #16 sells for
  4. ^ Monitor Duty (Feb. 13, 2006): "Alan Kistler's Profile On: Green Lantern!"
  5. ^ Wright, Bradford W. Comic Book Nation. Johns Hopkins, 2001. Pg. 227
  6. ^ 52, Week #13. Writers Geoff Johns, Grant Morrison, Greg Rucka and Mark Waid Artists Todd Nauck and Marlo Alquiza.
  7. ^ Identity Crisis #2
  8. ^ Justice League of America v1 #77 p18 Dec-1969"

## [edit] References

  * Emerald Dawn
  * Green Lantern Corps. JLResource.com entry
  * Green Lantern Rebirth
  * The Book of OA

## [edit] External links

  * Green Lantern in Internet Movie Database
  * The Green Lantern Shrine
  * The Unofficial Green Lantern Corps Web Page
  * Index of Hal Jordan's (and John Stewart's) Earth-1 adventures
  * Justice League: Mortal in Internet Movie Database

v â¢ d â¢ e

Green Lantern  
Creators

Bill Finger â¢ Martin Nodell â¢ John Broome â¢ Gil Kane â¢ Dennis O'Neil
â¢ Neal Adams â¢ Ron Marz â¢ Darryl Banks â¢ Other writers and artists  
Green Lanterns

Alan Scott â¢ Hal Jordan â¢ Guy Gardner â¢ John Stewart â¢ Kyle Rayner â¢
Jade  
Green Lantern Corps

Guardians of the Universe: Appa Ali Apsa â¢ Ganthet â¢ Sayd â¢ Lianna â¢
Scar

Members: Abin Sur â¢ Arisia â¢ Boodikka â¢ Ch'p â¢ Flodo Span â¢ Galius
Zed â¢ Gnort â¢ Graf Toren â¢ Green Man â¢ Isamot Kol â¢ Jack T. Chance
â¢ Katma Tui â¢ Ke'Haan â¢ Kilowog â¢ Kreon â¢ Laira â¢ Medphyll â¢
Mogo â¢ Raker Qarrigat â¢ Salaak â¢ Sodam Yat â¢ Soranik Natu â¢ Stel â¢
Tomar-Re â¢ Tomar-Tu â¢ Turytt â¢ Vath Sarn

Additional: Ion â¢ The Alpha Lanterns â¢ The Corpse  
Supporting Characters

Alexandra DeWitt â¢ Carol Ferris â¢ Doiby Dickles â¢ Oliver Queen â¢ Roy
Harper â¢ Molly Mayne â¢ Obsidian â¢ Rose Canton â¢ Terry Berg â¢ Thomas
Kalmaku â¢Jillian Pearlman  
Enemies

Amon Sur â¢ Atrocitus â¢ Black Hand â¢ Controllers â¢ Doctor Polaris â¢
Effigy â¢ Evil Star â¢ Fatality â¢ Goldface â¢ Harlequin â¢ Hector
Hammond â¢ Legion â¢ Major Force â¢ Manhunters â¢ Monsieur Stigmonus â¢
Nekron â¢ Nero â¢ Red Lantern Corps â¢ Scar â¢ Shark â¢ Solomon Grundy
â¢ Sonar â¢ Star Sapphire â¢ Tattooed Man â¢ Thorn â¢ Traitor â¢ Vandal
Savage â¢ Zamaron  
Sinestro Corps: Anti-Monitor â¢ Hank Henshaw â¢ Parallax â¢ Sinestro â¢
Superboy-Prime â¢ Other members  
Other Corps

Black Lantern Corps â¢Blue Lantern Corps â¢Orange Lantern Corps â¢Red
Lantern Corps â¢Sinestro Corps â¢Star Sapphire Corps  
Locations

Coast City â¢ Korugar â¢ Maltus â¢ Oa â¢ Qward â¢ Zamaron  
Storylines

"Snowbirds Don't Fly" â¢ "Emerald Twilight" â¢ "Emerald Knights" â¢ Circle
of Fire â¢ Rebirth â¢ Rann-Thanagar War â¢ Recharge â¢ "Sinestro Corps
War" â¢ The Blackest Night  
Miscellanea

Power Ring â¢ Emotional spectrum â¢ Green Lantern in other media â¢ Green
Lantern: First Flight  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_Lantern"

Categories: All-American Publications characters | DC Comics superheroes |
1940 comics characters debuts | 1959 comics characters debuts | 1968 comics
characters debuts | 1971 comics characters debuts | 1994 comics characters
debuts | All-American Publications titles | DC Comics titles | 1941 comic
debuts | 1960 comic debuts | 1990 comic debuts | 2005 comic debuts | Superhero
comics | Green Lantern

Hidden categories: Set index pop | Title pop | Articles needing additional
references from October 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sardu
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 01:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



