
# Nick Cave

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Nick Cave  
Nick Cave at a solo concert in Mainz, Germany on 11 November 2006  

Nick Cave at a solo concert in Mainz, Germany on 11 November 2006  
Background information  
Birth name Nicholas Edward Cave  
Born 22 September 1957 (1957-09-22) (age 51)  
Warracknabeal, Victoria, Australia  
Genre(s) Post-punk, alternative rock, garage rock  
Occupation(s) Singer-songwriter, Multi-instrumentalist, Writer, Actor  
Instrument(s) Guitar, piano, keyboards, vocals  
Years active 1973âpresent  
Label(s) Mute  
Associated acts Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, Grinderman, The Birthday Party  
Nicholas Edward Cave (born 22 September 1957 in Warracknabeal, Victoria,
Australia) is an Australian musician, songwriter, author, screenwriter,
painter, and occasional actor. He is best known for his work in the rock band
Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, established in 1984, who have become critically
acclaimed for their fascination with American roots music. Before that, he had
fronted the group The Birthday Party in the early 1980s, a band renowned for
its highly dark, challenging lyrics and violent sound influenced by free jazz,
blues, and post-punk. In 2006, he formed the garage rock band Grinderman that
released its debut the following year. Cave's music is generally characterised
by intensity and a wide variety of influences. Nick Cave currently lives in
Brighton & Hove, England.

Upon Cave's induction into the ARIA Hall of Fame, ARIA Awards committee
chairman Ed St John said âNick Cave has enjoyed - and continues to enjoy -
one of the most extraordinary careers in the annals of popular music. He is an
Australian artist like Sidney Nolan is an Australian artist - beyond
comparison, beyond genre, beyond dispute."[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Youth and education
  * 2 Personal life
  * 3 Music career
    * 3.1 Early years and The Birthday Party (1973-1984)
    * 3.2 Current career with The Bad Seeds (1984-onwards)
    * 3.3 Solo work and Grinderman
    * 3.4 Soundtrack involvement
    * 3.5 Work with other artists
  * 4 Literary career
  * 5 Acting and screenwriting
  * 6 Discography
    * 6.1 Soundtracks/scores
    * 6.2 Contributions/appearances
    * 6.3 Other
  * 7 Books by Nick Cave
  * 8 Awards and honours
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Youth and education

Cave was born in the small town of Warracknabeal in the state of Victoria,
Australia, to Dawn and Colin Cave. He has two brothers: Tim (b. 1952) and
Peter (b. 1954), and a sister, Julie (b. 1959).

As a child, Cave lived in Warracknabeal and then Wangaratta in rural Victoria,
Australia. His father Colin was an English teacher and administrator, with a
love of literature, and his mother was a librarian. Raised as an Anglican,
Cave sang in the boys choir at Wangaratta Cathedral. However, Cave grew to
detest the attitudes of small-town Australia, and he was often in trouble with
the local school authorities,[2] so his parents sent him to boarding school at
Melbourne's Caulfield Grammar School in 1970. Cave joined the school choir
under choirmaster Norman Kaye, and also benefited from having a piano in his
home. The following year he became a "day boy" when his family moved to
Murrumbeena, a suburb of Melbourne. Cave was 19 when his father was killed in
a car accident; at the moment he was informed of this, his mother Dawn Cave
was bailing him out of a St Kilda police station for a charge of burglary.
Cave would later recall that his father "died at a point in my life when I was
most confused", and "the loss of my father created in my life a vacuum, a
space in which my words began to float and collect and find their purpose".[3]

After his secondary schooling, Cave studied painting (Fine Art) at the
Caulfield Institute of Technology (now Monash University, Caulfield Campus) in
1976, but dropped out in 1977 to pursue music. He also began using heroin
around this time. On March 28, 2008 he received an honorary Doctor of Laws
from this university.

## [edit] Personal life

Cave dated Anita Lane from the late '70s to mid '80s. She had an undeniably
strong influence upon Cave and his work, often cited as his "muse." Despite
this, Cave and Lane recorded together on only a few occasions. Their most
notable collaborations include Lane's 'cameo' verse on Cave's Bob Dylan cover
"Death Is Not The End" from the album Murder Ballads, and a cover of the Serge
Gainsbourg/Jane Birkin song "Je t`aime/ I love you nor do I". Lane co-wrote
the lyrics to the title track for Cave's 1984 LP, From Her to Eternity, as
well as the lyrics of the song "Stranger Than Kindness" from Your Funeral, My
Trial. Cave, Lydia Lunch and Lane wrote a Comic book together, entitled AS-
FIX-E-8, in the style of the old "Pussy Galore"/Russ Meyer movies.

After completing his debut novel And the Ass Saw the Angel, Cave left West
Berlin shortly before the fall of the Berlin Wall and moved to SÃ£o Paulo,
Brazil, where he met Brazilian journalist Viviane Carneiro. The two have a
son, Luke (b. 10 May 1991), but never married. Cave's son, Jethro (born in
1991) lives with his mother, Beau Lazenby, in Australia and has a career in
modelling.[4]

Cave briefly dated P. J. Harvey during the mid 1990s. The love affair and
their break-up inspired him to write the album The Boatman's Call.

Cave met his current partner, British model Susie Bick and they married in
summer 1999. They have twin sons, Arthur and Earl (born in 2000).[5][6] Cave
and Bick lived for some time on a houseboat near Hove. He now lives with his
family in Hove.

Cave performed "Into My Arms" at the televised funeral of Michael Hutchence,
but refused to play in front of the cameras. Cave is godfather of Hutchence's
only child, Heavenly Hiraani Tiger Lily.[7]

Nick Cave is a devout Christian. In his recorded religious lectures, he has
claimed that any true love song is a song for God and has ascribed the
mellowing of his music to a shift in focus from the Old to the New Testaments.
He does not belong to a particular denomination and has complained about how
God has been "hijacked" by politicians.[8]

## [edit] Music career

### [edit] Early years and The Birthday Party (1973-1984)

Main article: The Birthday Party (band)

In 1973, Cave met Mick Harvey (guitar), Tracy Pew (bass) and Phill Calvert
(drums); fellow students at Caulfield Grammar. They founded a band with Cave
as singer. Their repertoire consisted of proto-punk cover versions of songs by
Lou Reed, David Bowie, Alice Cooper, Roxy Music and Alex Harvey, among others.
In 1977, after leaving school, they adopted the name The Boys Next Door and
began playing predominantly original material. Guitarist and songwriter
Rowland S. Howard joined the band in 1978.

From 1977 until their dissolution in 1984 (by which time they were known as
The Birthday Party) the band explored various styles. They were a part of
Melbourne's post-punk music scene in the late 1970s, playing hundreds of live
shows in Australia before changing their name to the Birthday Party in 1980
and moving to London, then West Berlin. Cave's Australian girlfriend and muse
Anita Lane accompanied them to London. The band were notorious for their
provocative live performances which featured Cave shrieking, bellowing and
throwing himself about the stage, backed up by harsh pounding rock music laced
with guitar feedback.

After establishing a cult following in Europe and Australia, The Birthday
Party disbanded in 1984. Howard and Cave found it difficult to continue
working together and both were rather worn down from alcohol and drug use.

### [edit] Current career with The Bad Seeds (1984-onwards)

Main article: Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds

The band with Cave as their leader and frontman has released fourteen studio
albums. Their most recent album, Dig, Lazarus, Dig!!! was released on 8 April
2008.

Critics Stephen Thomas Erlewine and Steve Huey write, "With the Bad Seeds,
Cave continued to explore his obsessions with religion, death, love, America,
and violence with a bizarre, sometimes self-consciously eclectic hybrid of
blues, gospel, rock, and arty post-punk, although in a more subdued fashion
than his work with the Birthday Party".[9]

Cave and the band curated an edition of the famous All Tomorrow's Parties
music festival, the first in Australia, throughout the country in January
2009.

### [edit] Solo work and Grinderman

Main article: Grinderman

In addition to his performances with Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, Cave has,
since the '90s, performed live 'solo' tours with himself on piano/vocals,
Warren Ellis on violin/accordion and various others on bass and drums. The
current trio are Bad Seeds' Martyn P. Casey, Jim Sclavunos and Ellis
(nicknamed the Mini-Seeds). In 2006, this line-up, now including Cave on
electric guitar, continued his 'solo' tours performing Bad Seeds material.

In the same year three other Bad Seeds, Mick Harvey, Thomas Wydler and James
Johnston, undertook Harvey's first 'solo' tours of Europe and Australia
performing material from his own albums. Melbourne double bassist Rosie
Westbrook completed the quartet.

An album of new material by Cave's 'solo' quartet, now named Grinderman, was
released in March 2007.

Nick Cave 'solo' and Grinderman both played at the All Tomorrow's Parties
music festival in April 2007. This was Grinderman's first public performance.
Bobby Gillespie from Primal Scream accompanied Grinderman on backing vocals
and percussion.

### [edit] Soundtrack involvement

Many of Cave's songs have found their way into movie soundtracks. An early fan
of Cave's was German director Wim Wenders, who lists Nick Cave, Lou Reed, and
Portishead among his favorites.[10] Two of Cave's songs were featured in his
1989 film Wings of Desire (aka Der Himmel Ã¼ber Berlin).[11] Nick Cave and the
Bad Seeds also make a cameo appearance in this film. Two more of his songs
were included in Wenders' 1993 sequel Faraway, So Close! (aka In weiter Ferne,
so nah!), including the title track. The soundtrack for the Wim Wenders' 1991
film Until the End of the World features Cave's "(I'll Love You) Till the End
of the World." His most recent production, Palermo Shooting, also contains a
Nick Cave song, as does his 2003 documentary The Soul of a Man.[12]

Somewhat surprising, since Cave is hardly a very commercial artist, is the
inclusion of Cave songs in a number of Hollywood blockbusters and major TV
shows. For instance, his "There is a Light" appears on the 1995 soundtrack for
Batman Forever, and "Red Right Hand" appeared in a number of films and TV
shows, including The X-Files, Dumb & Dumber; Scream, its sequels Scream 2 and
3, and Hellboy (performed by Pete Yorn). In Scream 3, the song was given a
reworking with Cave writing new lyrics and adding an orchestra to the
arrangement of the track. This version appears on The Bad Seeds B-Sides and
Rarities album. The song "People Ain't No Good" was featured in the animated
movie Shrek 2, as well as in one of the episodes of the television series The
L Word.

Original material written by Cave for movie productions includes a song for
the soundtrack of the 2001 French documentary film Le Peuple Migrateur (called
Winged Migration in the US), "To Be By Your Side." Most recently, Cave
composed the soundtrack for the 2005 film The Proposition with fellow
Australian and Bad Seed Warren Ellis. Cave also wrote the script for this
film. Cave and Ellis once again collaborated on the music for the 2007 film
The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford. Cave also sang in
a cover of "Let It Be," by The Beatles, for the film I Am Sam. Also in 2007,
Nick and Warren wrote the soundtrack for the feature documentary "The English
Surgeon". it is also expected that an album will be released by Nick Cave and
Warren Ellis comprising previous soundtrack work and other rare soundtrack
involvements.

### [edit] Work with other artists

Nick Cave has also played with Shane MacGowan, in a cover version of Bob
Dylan's "Death is Not the End", and Louis Armstrong's "What a Wonderful
World". Cave has also performed "What a Wonderful World" live with The Flaming
Lips. Cave recorded a cover version of the Pogues song "Rainy Night in Soho",
written by MacGowan.

MacGowan also sings a version of "Lucy", released on B-Sides and Rarities. On
3 May 2008, during the Dig, Lazarus, Dig!!! tour Shane MacGowan joined Nick
Cave and The Bad Seeds on stage to perform "Lucy" at Dublin Castle in Ireland.
Pulp's single "Bad Cover Version" includes on its B-side a cover version by
Cave of that band's song "Disco 2000". On the Deluxe Edition of Pulp's
Different Class another take of this cover can be found.

In 2000, one of Cave's heroes, Johnny Cash, covered Cave's "The Mercy Seat" on
the album American III: Solitary Man, seemingly repaying Cave for the
compliment he paid by covering Cash's "The Singer" (originally "The Folk
Singer") on his Kicking Against the Pricks album. Cave was then invited to be
one of many rock and country artists to contribute to the liner notes of the
retrospective The Essential Johnny Cash CD, released to coincide with Cash's
70th birthday. Subsequently, Cave cut a duet with Cash on a version of Hank
Williams' "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry" for Cash's American IV: The Man Comes
Around album (2002). A similar duet, the American folk song "Cindy", was
released posthumously on the "Johnny Cash: Unearthed" boxset. Cave's song "Let
the Bells Ring" is a posthumous tribute to Cash. Cave has also covered the
song Wanted Man which is best known as performed by Johnny Cash but is in fact
a Bob Dylan composition.

In 2004, Cave gave a hand to Marianne Faithfull on the album, Before the
Poison. He co-wrote and produced three songs ("Crazy Love", "There is a Ghost"
and "Desperanto"), and the Bad Seeds are featured on all of them. He is also
featured on "The Crane Wife" (originally by The Decemberists), on Faithfull's
2008 album, Easy Come, Easy Go.

Cave collaborated with the band Current 93 on their album All the Pretty
Little Horses, where he sings the title track, a children's sleep song.

For his 1996 album Murder Ballads, Cave recorded "Where The Wild Roses Grow"
with Kylie Minogue, and "Henry Lee" with P.J. Harvey.

In the 1980s he sang some tracks for the instrumentally based band "Die Haut"
from Germany, like "Pleasure is the boss". The drummer of the Bad Seeds,
Thomas Wydler, is a member of the group "Die Haut".

Cave as well took part in the "X-Files" compilation CD with some other
artists, where he reads parts from the Bible combined with own texts, like
"Time Jesum...", he outed himself as a fan of the series some years ago, but
since he does not watch much TV, it was one of the only things he watched.

Cave collaborated on the 2003 single "Bring It On", with Chris Bailey,
formerly of the seminal Australian punk group, The Saints.

Cave contributed vocals to the song "Sweet Rosyanne", on the 2006 album "Catch
That Train!" from Dan Zanes & Friends, a children's music group.

## [edit] Literary career

Cave released his first book King Ink, in 1988. It is a collection of lyrics
and plays, including collaborations with American enfant terrible Lydia Lunch.
In 1997, he followed up with King Ink II, containing lyrics, poems, and the
transcript of a radio essay he did for the BBC in July 1996, "The Flesh Made
Word," discussing in biographical format his relationship with Christianity.

While he was based in West Berlin, Cave started working on what was to become
his debut novel, And the Ass Saw the Angel (1989). Significant crossover is
evident between the themes in the book and the lyrics Cave wrote in the late
stages of the Birthday Party and the early stage of his solo career.
"Swampland", from Mutiny, in particular, uses the same linguistic stylings
('mah' for 'my', for instance) and some of the same themes (the narrator being
haunted by the memory of a girl called Lucy, being hunted like an animal,
approaching death and execution). On 21 January 2008 a special edition of
Cave's novel And the Ass Saw the Angel was released.[13] Cave is due to
publish a second novel shortly, entitled The Death of Bunny Munro which is due
in September 2009.[14]

As proof of his interest in scripture, so evident in his lyrics and his prose
writing, Cave wrote the foreword to a Canongate publication of the Gospel
according to Mark, published in the UK in 1998. The American edition of the
same book (published by Grove Press) contains a foreword by the noted American
writer Barry Hannah.

Cave and Ellis composed scores for a production by the Icelandic theatre
company Vesturport of Woyzeck by Georg BÃ¼chner, performed at the Barbican
Theatre in the Barbican Arts Centre in London in 2005,[15] and a stage
adaptation of Franz Kafka's The Metamorphosis at the Lyric Hammersmith in
London in 2006.

## [edit] Acting and screenwriting

Cave has made occasional appearances as an actor, most prominently in the 1989
film Ghosts ... of the Civil Dead, written and directed by John Hillcoat, and
in the 1991 film Johnny Suede, with Brad Pitt.

Cave appeared in the 2005 homage to Leonard Cohen, Leonard Cohen: I'm Your
Man, in which he performed "I'm Your Man" solo, and "Suzanne" with Julie
Christensen and Perla Batalla. He also appeared in the 2007 film adaptation of
Ron Hansen's novel The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford,
where he sings a song about Jesse James. Cave and Warren Ellis are credited
for the film's soundtrack.

Displaying a keen interest in other aspects of film, Cave wrote the screenplay
for The Proposition, a colonial film set in the Australian Outback. Directed
by John Hillcoat and filmed in Queensland in 2004, it premiered in October
2005 and has since been released worldwide to critical acclaim.[16] The movie
reviewer for British newspaper The Independent called it "peerless," "a star-
studded and uncompromisingly violent outlaw film."[17] It even features on a
website promoting tourism to the area.[18] The generally ambient soundtrack
was recorded by Cave and Warren Ellis.

At the request of friend Russell Crowe, Cave wrote a script for a proposed
sequel to Gladiator, which was rejected by the studio.[19]

Cave has also lent his voice in narrating a short animated film called The Cat
Piano which won the Audience Choice Award for best short at the Adelaide Film
Festival. It was Directed by Eddie White and Ari Gibson (of The Peopleâs
Republic Of Animation) with music by Benjamin Speed.[20]

Cave has also completed the script for a new film titled "The Death of a
Ladies man"

## [edit] Discography

Main articles: The Birthday Party discography, Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds
discography, and Grinderman discography

### [edit] Soundtracks/scores

  * Ghosts... of the Civil Dead, soundtrack (1988) â composed with Mick Harvey & Blixa Bargeld
  * And the Ass Saw the Angel, readings of the novel (1988), plus theatre score (1993) â text by Cave, music composed by Harvey and Ed Clayton-Jones
  * To Have and to Hold, soundtrack (1996) â composed with Harvey & Bargeld
  * Woyzeck, theatre score (2005) - composed with Warren Ellis[21]
  * The Proposition, soundtrack (2005) â composed with Ellis
  * Metamorphosis, theatre score (2006) - composed with Ellis[22]
  * The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford, soundtrack (2007) â composed with Ellis
  * The English Surgeon, soundtrack (2007) - composed with Ellis[23]
  * The Road, soundtrack (2009) â composed with Ellis[24]

### [edit] Contributions/appearances

  * Die Haut and Nick Cave: Burnin' the Ice (1982), features Nick Cave's vocals on 4 songs.
  * September Songs: The Music of Kurt Weill produced by Hal Willner. Cave contributes a cover of "Mack the Knife".
  * Nick Cave i Przyjaciele (Nick Cave and Friends) (2001). A tribute album by Polish musicians. Cave appears on tracks 1 & 10.
  * I Am Sam (2002). Cave contributes a cover of The Beatles' "Let It Be", which was later issued as a single with a cover of "Here Comes the Sun" as the B-side.
  * "Kiss of Love" (duet with Sam Brown) from Jools Holland's 2003 album Small World Big Band Friends 3 - Jack O The Green.
  * Rogue's Gallery: Pirate Ballads, Sea Songs, and Chanteys (2006). Cave contributes the tracks "Fire Down Below" and "Pinery Boy".
  * "Bad Cover Version" single by Pulp. Cave contributes a cover of Pulp's song "Disco 2000".
  * "Helpless" single by Neil Young. He did this in 1989 for the Neil Young tribute album The Bridge.
  * American IV: The Man Comes Around (2003) Duet with Johnny Cash on "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry".
  * Batman Forever soundtrack - contributes the track "There is a Light"
  * Ute Lemper's Punishing Kiss. Cave co-wrote (with Bruno Pisek) "Little Water Song".
  * "To be by your side" - from the OST for French documentary film Le Peuple Migrateur (2001).
  * Cave performs "I'm Your Man" and "Suzanne" in the documentary/concert film Leonard Cohen: I'm Your Man (2005).
  * Seasick Steve's song "Just Like A King" includes Cave's vocals
  * Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds appear on the Martin Scorcese series The Blues singing J. B. Lenoir's "I Feel So Good"

### [edit] Other

  * The Secret Life of the Love Song \- a spoken word lecture by Cave

## [edit] Books by Nick Cave

  * King Ink. Los Angeles: 2.13.61, 1988. ISBN 1-880985-08-X.
  * And the Ass Saw the Angel Los Angeles: 2.13.61, 1989. ISBN 1-880985-72-1.
  * King Ink II. Los Angeles: 2.13.61, 1997. ISBN 2-84261-053-9.
  * Introduction to The Pocket Canons Bible Series: Authorised King James Version: The Gospel According to Mark. Edinburgh: Canongate, 1998. ISBN 0-86241-796-1.
  * Complete Lyrics. London: Penguin, 2001. ISBN 0-14-100515-7.

## [edit] Awards and honours

  * 2008 ARIA Awards Male Artist of the Year (Dig, Lazarus, Dig!!!).[25]
  * 2008 MOJO Awards: Best Album of 2008 (Dig, Lazarus Dig!!!).
  * 2008 Awarded an Honorary degree as Doctor of Laws, by Monash University.[26]
  * 2007 ARIA Awards ARIA Hall of Fame inductee.[25]
  * 2006 Venice Film Festival: Gucci Award (for the script to The Proposition).
  * 2005 Q magazine: Q Classic Songwriter Award.
  * 2005 AFI Awards: Best Original Music Score with Warren Ellis (The Proposition).
  * 2005 Inside Film Awards: Best Music (The Proposition).
  * 2005 Film Critics Circle of Australia Awards: Best Musical Score (The Proposition).
  * 2004 MOJO Awards: Best Album of 2004 (Abattoir Blues/The Lyre of Orpheus).
  * 2001 ARIA Awards: Best Male Artist (No More Shall We Part).[25]
  * 2001 APRA Music Awards: "The Ship Song" voted in the Top 30 Best Australian Songs of the previous 75 years.[27]
  * 1997 APRA Music Awards: Songwriter of the year.
  * 1997 ARIA Awards: Best Original Soundtrack (To Have and to Hold).[25]
  * 1996 ARIA Awards: Song of the Year & Single of the Year & Best Pop Release ("Where the Wild Roses Grow").[25]
  * 1996 MTV Europe Music Awards: Nick Cave formally requested that his nomination for "Best Male Artist" be withdrawn as he was not comfortable with the "competitive nature" of such awards.
  * 1990 Time Out Magazine: Book Of The Year (And the Ass Saw the Angel).

## [edit] Further reading

  * Bad Seed: A Biography of Nick Cave, Ian Johnston (1997) ISBN 0316908339
  * The Life and Music of Nick Cave: An Illustrated Biography, Maximilian Dax & Johannes Beck (1999) ISBN 3-931126-27-7
  * Liner notes to the CDs Original Seeds: Songs that inspired Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, Kim Beissel (1998 & 2004), Rubber Records
  * Kicking Against the Pricks: An Armchair Guide to Nick Cave, Amy Hanson (2005), ISBN 1-900924-96-X
  * Nick Cave Stories, Janine Barrand (2007)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Nick Cave to enter ARIA Hall of Fame
  2. ^ Hattenstone, Simon. "Interview with Nick Cave", The Guardian. Retrieved on 10 November 2008.
  3. ^ Maume, Chris. "Nick Cave: Devil's advocate", The Independent. Retrieved on 10 November 2008.
  4. ^ Fiona Byrne (28 September 2008). "Cave boy joins cool kids club". Herald & Weekly Times. http://www.news.com.au/heraldsun/story/0,,24412744-27258,00.html. Retrieved on 1 January 2009.
  5. ^ Feelings are a Bourgeois luxury... | | guardian.co.uk Arts
  6. ^ Nick Cave Online
  7. ^ Richard Simpson (10 April 2002). "Sir Elton agrees to become godfather to Liz's Damian.". The Evening Standard (London). http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-84648418.html. Retrieved on 1 January 2009.
  8. ^ The Resurrection of Nick Cave: The most talented romantic Christian poet rocker in the world talks to Salon about his new record and his return to songwriting form. Interview in Salon Magazine, November 18, 2004.
  9. ^ allmusic (((Nick Cave > Biography)))
  10. ^ "Wenders unveils ode to rock'n'roll at Cannes", ABC News (Australia). Retrieved on 25 November 2008.
  11. ^ Dave Tacon, "Wim Wenders", Senses of Cinema. Retrieved on 25 November 2008.
  12. ^ "The Blues: The Soul of a Man", PBS. Retrieved on 25 November 2008.
  13. ^ Nick Cave sees debut novel 'And The Ass Saw the Angel' re-released as collectors edition
  14. ^ [1]
  15. ^ Jon Pareles, "Shaking Up âWoyzeckâ With Earthy Rock and Flying Trapeze", New York Times, 13 October 2008. [2] Access date: 14 October 2008.
  16. ^ Brett McCracken, Film Review of The Proposition, Relevant Magazine. Retrieved 25 November 2008.
  17. ^ Will Self, "The Proposition: Bringing the revisionist Western to the Australian outback," The Independent. Retrieved 25 November 2008.
  18. ^ "Australian Outback Movies," on Outback Australia Travel Guide. Retrieved 25 November 2008.
  19. ^ Dawtrey, Adam, "10 Screenwriters to Watch: Nick Cave," Variety, 22 June 2006.
  20. ^ The Cat Piano
  21. ^ http://vesturport.com/?i=27&expand=19-27&b=1,33,TnF.Display
  22. ^ http://vesturport.com/?i=27&expand=19-27&b=1,34,TnF.Display
  23. ^ http://www.theenglishsurgeon.com/?view=credits
  24. ^ Row Three Â» Nick Cave and Warren Ellis to Score The Road â Where Cinema is more than just $100 Million productions
  25. ^ a b c d e "ARIA Awards 2008: History: Winners by Artist search result for Nick Cave". Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA). http://www.ariaawards.com.au/history-by-artist.php?letter=N&artist=Nick%20Cave. Retrieved on 2008-08-25.
  26. ^ Smith, Bridie (29 March 2008). "Dr Cave is a law unto himself". The Age. http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/dr-cave-is-a-law-unto-himself/2008/03/28/1206207412959.html.
  27. ^ Kruger, Debbie (2001-05-02). ""The songs that resonate through the years"" (PDF). Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA). http://www.debbiekruger.com/pdfs/aprathirty.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-11-01.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Nick Cave  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Nick Cave  
  * Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds official website
  * nick-cave.com unofficial website
  * Nick Cave at the Internet Movie Database
  * Nick Cave at Last.fm
  * The Proposition at the Internet Movie Database
  * Nick Cave in the Yahoo! Directory
  * Nick Cave fan site
  * 2008 Nick Cave interview at musicOMH.com
  * Nick Cave receives honorary Monash degree
  * Nick Cave interview and article by Tony DuShane for Crawdaddy
  * September 2008 interview in L.A. RECORD

v â¢ d â¢ e

Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds  
Martyn P. Casey Â· Nick Cave Â· Warren Ellis Â· Ed Kuepper Â· Conway Savage Â·
Jim Sclavunos Â· Thomas Wydler  
Barry Adamson Â· Blixa Bargeld Â· Mick Harvey Â· James Johnston Â· Anita Lane
Â· Kid Congo Powers Â· Hugo Race Â· Roland Wolf  
Studio albums

From Her to Eternity Â· The Firstborn Is Dead Â· Kicking Against the Pricks Â·
Your Funeralâ¦ My Trial Â· Tender Prey Â· The Good Son Â· Henry's Dream Â·
Let Love In Â· Murder Ballads Â· The Boatman's Call Â· No More Shall We Part
Â· Nocturama Â· Abattoir Blues/The Lyre of Orpheus Â· Dig, Lazarus, Dig!!!  
Live albums

Live Seeds Â· Abattoir Blues Tour Â· Live at the Royal Albert Hall  
Compilations

The Best of Nick Cave and The Bad Seeds Â· B-Sides & Rarities  
Singles

In the Ghetto Â· Tupelo Â· The Singer Â· The Mercy Seat Â· Deanna Â· The Ship
Song Â· The Weeping Song Â· Straight to You / Jack the Ripper Â· I Had A
Dream, Joe Â· What a Wonderful World with Shane MacGowanÂ· Do You Love Me? Â·
Loverman Â· Red Right Hand Â· Where the Wild Roses Grow with Kylie MinogueÂ·
Henry Lee with PJ HarveyÂ· Into My Arms Â· (Are You) The One That I've Been
Waiting For Â· As I Sat Sadly By Her Side Â· Fifteen Feet of Pure White Snow
Â· Love Letter Â· Bring It On Â· He Wants You / Babe I'm On Fire Â· Rock Of
Gibraltar Â· Nature Boy Â· Breathless / There She Goes, My Beautiful World Â·
Get Ready For Love Â· Dig, Lazarus, Dig !!! Â· More News from Nowhere Â·
Midnight Man  
Cave and Ellis

The Proposition Â· The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford
Â· The Road  
Related articles

Discography Â· Members  

The Birthday Party: Door, Door Â· Hee Haw Â· Prayers on Fire Â· Junkyard Â·
Mutiny/The Bad Seed Â· It's Still Living  
Grinderman: Grinderman Â· "Get It On" Â· "No Pussy Blues" Â· "(I Don't Need
You To) Set Me Free"  

And the Ass Saw the Angel Â· Dirty Three Â· Ghostsâ¦ of the Civil Dead Â·
Original Seeds  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nick_Cave"

Categories: 1957 births | Alternative musicians | ARIA Award winners | ARIA
Hall of Fame inductees | Australian male singers | Australian novelists |
Australian songwriters | Caulfield Grammarians | Gothic rock musicians |
Living people | People from Wangaratta | Australian expatriates in the United
Kingdom | Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds members

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 19:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



