
# Sophocles

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Sophocles  
<IMG>  
  
Born 496 BC  
Greece  
Died 406 BC  
  
Nationality Athenian  
Writing period Theatre of ancient Greece  
Genres Tragedy and Satyr plays  
Sophocles (pronounced /ËsÉfÉkliËz/; ancient Greek Î£Î¿ÏÎ¿ÎºÎ»á¿Ï,
pronounced [sopÊ°oklÉÌËs]; c. 496 BC-406 BC) was the second of the three
ancient Greek tragedians whose work has survived. His first plays were written
later than those of Aeschylus and earlier than those of Euripides. According
to the Suda, a 10th century encyclopedia, Sophocles wrote 123 plays during the
course of his life, but only seven have survived in a complete form, namely
Ajax, Antigone, Trachinian Women, Oedipus the King, Electra, Philoctetes and
Oedipus at Colonus.[1] For almost 50 years, Sophocles was the most-awarded
playwright in the dramatic competitions of the city-state of Athens that took
place during the religious festivals of the Lenaea and the Dionysia. Sophocles
competed in around 30 dramatic competitions; he won perhaps 24 and never
received lower than second place; in comparison, Aeschylus won 14 competitions
and was defeated by Sophocles at times, while Euripides won only 4
competitions.[2]

The most famous of Sophocles' tragedies are those concerning Oedipus and
Antigone: these are often known as the Theban plays, although each play was
actually a part of different tetrology, the other members of which are now
lost. Sophocles influenced the development of the drama, most importantly by
adding a third actor and thereby reducing the importance of the chorus in the
presentation of the plot. He also developed his characters to a greater extent
than earlier playwrights such as Aeschylus.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 Life
  * 2 Works and legacy
    * 2.1 The Theban plays
      * 2.1.1 Subjects
      * 2.1.2 Composition and inconsistencies
    * 2.2 Other plays
    * 2.3 Fragmentary plays
    * 2.4 Sophocles' opinion of himself
  * 3 Notes
  * 4 References
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Life

<IMG>

<IMG>

A marble relief of a poet, perhaps Sophocles.

Sophocles, the son of Sophillus, was a wealthy member of the rural deme (small
community) of Colonus Hippius in Attica, which would later become a setting
for his plays, and was probably born there.[4] [5] His birth took place a few
years before the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC: the exact year is unclear,
although 497/6 is perhaps most likely.[6][4] His artistic career began in
earnest in 468 BC when he took first prize in the Dionysia theatre competition
over the reigning master of Athenian drama, Aeschylus.[4][7] The victory came
under unusual circumstances. At the time, the remains of the hero Theseus were
being removed by Cimon from the isle of Scyros to Athens. Instead of following
the custom of choosing judges by lot, the archon asked Cimon and his
associates to decide the victor of the contest. Aeschylus soon left for Sicily
following this loss to Sophocles. The production probably included
Triptolemus.[5] Although Plutarch says that this was Sophocles' first
production, it is now thought that this is an embellishment of the truth and
his first production was most likely in 470 BC.[5]

Sophocles became a man of importance in the public halls of Athens as well as
in the theatres. Sophocles was chosen to lead the paean, a choral chant to a
god, at the age of 16 celebrating the decisive Greek sea victory over the
Persians at the Battle of Salamis. This rather insufficient information about
Sophoclesâ civic life implies he was a well-liked man who participated in
activities in society and showed remarkable artistic ability. He was also
elected as one of ten strategoi, high executive officials that commanded the
armed forces, as a junior colleague of Pericles. Sophocles was born highly
wealthy (his father was a wealthy armour manufacturer) and was highly educated
throughout his entire life. Early in his career, the politician Cimon might
have been one of his patrons, although if he was there was no ill will borne
by Pericles, Cimon's rival, when Cimon was ostracized in 461 BC.[4] In 443/2
he served as one of the Hellenotamiai, or treasurers of Athena, helping to
manage the finances of the city during the political ascendancy of
Pericles.[4] In 420 he welcomed and set up an altar for the icon of Asclepius
at his house, when the deity was introduced in Athens. For this he was given
the posthumous epithet Dexion (receiver) by the Athenians.[8] He was also
elected, in 413 BC, to be one of the commissioners crafting a response to the
catastrophic destruction of the Athenian expeditionary force in Sicily during
the Peloponnesian War.[9]

Sophocles died at the venerable age of ninety in 406 or 405 BC, having seen
within his lifetime both the Greek triumph in the Persian Wars and the
terrible bloodletting of the Peloponnesian War.[4] He was so respected by the
Athenians that two plays performed at the Lenaia soon after his death paid
homage to him, and his unfinished play Oedipus at Colonus was completed and
performed years later.[4] Both Iophon, one of his sons, and a grandson, also
called Sophocles, followed in his footsteps to become playwrights
themselves.[10]

## [edit] Works and legacy

v â¢ d â¢ e

Plays by Sophocles  
<IMG>

Ajax Â· Antigone Â· The Trachiniae Â· Electra Â· Oedipus the King Â·
Philoctetes Â· Oedipus at Colonus  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Portrait of the Greek actor Euiaon in Sophocles' Andromeda, c. 430 BC.

Among Sophocles' earliest innovations was the addition of a third actor, which
further reduced the role of the chorus and created greater opportunity for
character development and conflict between characters.[3] Aeschylus, who
dominated Athenian playwrighting during Sophocles' early career, followed suit
and adopted the third character into his own work towards the end of his
life.[3] It was not until after the death of the old master Aeschylus in 456
BC that Sophocles became the pre-eminent playwright in Athens.[4]

Thereafter, Sophocles emerged victorious in dramatic competitions at 18
Dionysia and 6 Lenaia festivals.[4] In addition to innovations in dramatic
structure, Sophocles' work is also known for its deeper development of
characters than earlier playwrights.[3] His reputation was such that foreign
rulers invited him to attend their courts, although unlike Aeschylus who died
in Sicily, or Euripides who spent time in Macedon, Sophocles never accepted
any of these invitations.[4] Aristotle used Sophocles's Oedipus the King in
his Poetics (c. 335 BC) as an example of the highest achievement in tragedy,
which suggests the high esteem in which his work was held by later Greeks.[11]

Only two of the seven surviving plays have securely-dated first or second
performances: Philoctetes (409 BC) and Oedipus at Colonus (401 BC, staged
after Sophocles' death by his grandson). Of the others, Electra shows
stylistic similarities to these two plays, which suggests that it was probably
written in the latter part of his career. Ajax, Antigone and The Trachiniae
are generally thought to be among his early works, again based on stylistic
elements, with Oedipus the King coming in Sophocles' middle period. Most of
Sophocles' plays show an undercurrent of early fatalism and the beginnings of
Socratic logic as a mainstay for the long tradition of Greek tragedy.[12][13]

### [edit] The Theban plays

The Theban plays consist of three plays: Antigone, Oedipus the King (also
called Oedipus Tyrannos or Oedipus Rex), and Oedipus at Colonus. All three
plays concern the fate of Thebes during Greece's Mycenaean pre-history, during
and after the reign of King Oedipus. They have often been published under a
single cover. Sophocles, however, wrote the three plays for separate festival
competitions, possibly over a duration of forty years or more. He also wrote
other Theban plays, such as The Progeny, of which only fragments have
survived. Not only are the Theban plays not a true trilogy (three plays
presented as a continuous narrative) but they are not even an intentional
series and contain some inconsistencies between them.

#### [edit] Subjects

Each of the plays relates to the tale of the mythological Oedipus, who killed
his father and married his mother without knowledge that they were his
parents. His family is fated to be doomed for three generations.

In Oedipus the King, Oedipus is the protagonist. He becomes the ruler of
Thebes after solving the riddle of the sphinx. Before solving this riddle,
Oedipus had met at a crossroads a man accompanied by servants; Oedipus and the
man fought, and Oedipus killed the man. Oedipus continued on to Thebes to
marry the widowed Queen, who was, unknown to him, his mother. Oedipus
eventually learns that his mother and father gave him up when he was just an
infant in fear that he would kill his father and fulfill the Delphic Oracle's
prophecy of him. Upon learning of the completed prophecy, his mother, Jocasta,
realizes the incest and commits suicide; Oedipus, in horror of what he has
seen, blinds himself and leaves Thebes. The couple had four children, who
figure in the remaining plays of the set.

In Oedipus at Colonus, the banished Oedipus and his daughters Antigone and
Ismene arrive at the town of Colonus where they encounter Theseus, King of
Athens. Oedipus dies and strife begins between his sons Polyneices and
Eteocles.

In Antigone the protagonist is Oedipus' daughter. Antigone is faced with the
choice of allowing her brother Polyneices' body to remain unburied, outside
the city walls, exposed to the ravages of wild animals, or to bury him and
face death. The king of the land, Creon, has forbidden the burial of
Polyneices for he was a traitor to the city. Antigone decides to bury his body
and face the consequences of her actions. Creon sentences her to death.
Eventually, Creon is convinced to free Antigone from her punishment, but his
decision comes too late and Antigone commits suicide. Her suicide triggers the
suicide of two others close to King Creon: his son, Haemon, who was to wed
Antigone, and his wife who commits suicide after losing her only surviving
son.

#### [edit] Composition and inconsistencies

The plays were written across thirty-six years of Sophocles' career and were
not composed in chronological order, but instead were written in the order
Antigone, Oedipus the King, and Oedipus at Colonus.[14]

As a result, there are some inconsistencies. Notably, Creon is the undisputed
king at the end of Oedipus the King and, in consultation with Apollo, single-
handedly makes the decision to expel Oedipus from Thebes. Creon is also
instructed to look after Oedipus' daughters Antigone and Ismene at the end of
Oedipus the King. By contrast, in the other plays there is some struggle with
Oedipus' sons Eteocles and Polynices in regards to the succession.

In Oedipus at Colonus, Sophocles attempts to work these inconsistencies into a
coherent whole: Ismene explains that, in light of their tainted family
lineage, her brothers were at first willing to cede the throne to Creon.
Nevertheless, they eventually decided to take charge of the monarchy, with
each brother disputing the other's right to succeed. In addition to being in a
clearly more powerful position in Oedipus at Colonus, Eteocles and Polynices
are also culpable: they condemn their father to exile, which is one of his
bitterest charges against them.[14]

### [edit] Other plays

Other than the three Theban plays, there are four surviving plays by
Sophocles: Ajax, The Trachiniae, Electra, and Philoctetes, the last of which
won first prize.[15]

Ajax focuses on the prideful hero of the Trojan War. He is driven to treachery
and eventually his own death. Ajax becomes gravely upset when Achillesâ
armor is presented to Odysseus instead of himself. However, Odysseus persuades
the kings Menelaus and Agamemnon to grant Ajax a proper burial.

### [edit] Fragmentary plays

Fragments of The Tracking Satyrs (Ichneutae) were discovered in Egypt in
1907.[16] These amount to about half of the play, making it the best preserved
satyr play after Euripides' Cyclops, which survives in its entirety.[16]
Fragments of The Progeny (Epigonoi) were discovered in April 2005 by
classicists at Oxford University with the help of infrared technology
previously used for satellite imaging. The tragedy tells the story of the
siege of Thebes.[17] A number of other Sophoclean works have survived only in
fragments, including:

    
  * Aias Lokros (Ajax the Locrian)
  * AkhaiÃ´n Syllogos (The Gathering of the Achaeans)
  * Aleadae (The Sons of Aleus)
  * Creusa
  * Eurypylus
  * Hermione
  * Inachos
  * Lacaenae (Lacaenian Women)
  * Manteis or Polyidus (The Prophets or Polyidus)
  * Nauplios Katapleon (Nauplius' Arrival)
  * Nauplios Pyrkaeus (Nauplius' Fires)
  * Niobe
  * Oeneus
  * Oenomaus
  * Poimenes (The Shepherds)
  * Polyxene
  * Syndeipnoi (The Diners, or, The Banqueters)
  * Tereus
  * Thyestes
  * Troilus
  * Phaedra
  * Triptolemus
  * Tyro Keiromene (Tyro Shorn)
  * Tyro Anagnorizomene (Tyro Rediscovered).

### [edit] Sophocles' opinion of himself

There is a passage of Plutarch's tract De Profectibus in Virtute 7 in which
Sophocles discusses his own growth as a writer. A likely source of this
material for Plutarch was the Epidemiae of Ion of Chios, a book that recorded
many conversations of Sophocles. This book is a likely candidate to have
contained Sophocles' discourse on his own development because Ion was a friend
of Sophocles, and the book is known to have been used by Plutarch.[18] Though
some interpretations of Plutarch's words suggest that Sophocles says that he
imitated Aeschylus, the translation does not fit grammatically, nor does the
interpretation that Sophocles said that he was making fun of Aeschylus' works.
C. M. Bowra argues for the following translation of the line: "After
practising to the full the bigness of Aeschylus, then the painful ingenuity of
my own invention, now in the third stage I am changing to the kind of diction
which is most expressive of character and best."[19]

Here Sophocles says that he has completed a stage of Aeschylus' work, meaning
that he went through a phase of imitating Aeschylus' style but is finished
with that. Sophocles' opinion of Aeschylus was mixed. He certainly respected
him enough to imitate his work early on in his career, but he had reservations
about Aeschylus' style,[20] and thus did not keep his imitation up. Sophocles'
first stage, in which he imitated Aeschylus, is marked by "Aeschylean pomp in
the language".[21] Sophocles' second stage was entirely his own. He introduced
new ways of evoking feeling out of an audience, like in his Ajax when he is
mocked by Athene, then the stage is emptied so that he may commit suicide
alone.[22] Sophocles mentions a third stage, distinct from the other two, in
his discussion of his development. The third stage pays more heed to diction.
His characters spoke in a way that was more natural to them and more
expressive of their individual character feelings.[23]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Suda (ed. Finkel et al.): s.v. Î£Î¿ÏÎ¿ÎºÎ»á¿Ï.
  2. ^ Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc.
  3. ^ a b c d Freeman: 247
  4. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Sommerstein (2002): 41
  5. ^ a b c Sommerstein (2007): xi
  6. ^ Lloyd-Jones 1994: 7
  7. ^ Freeman: 246
  8. ^ Clinton, Kevin "The Epidauria and the Arrival of Asclepius in Athens", in Ancient Greek Cult Practice from the Epigraphical Evidence, edited by R. HÃ¤gg, Stockholm, 1994.
  9. ^ Lloyd-Jones: 12-13
  10. ^ Sommerstein (2002): 41-42
  11. ^ Aristotle. Ars Poetica.
  12. ^ Lloyd-Jones 1994: 8-9
  13. ^ Scullion, pp. 85â86, rejects attempts to date Antigone to shortly before 441/0 based on an anecdote that the play led to Sophocles' election as general. On other grounds, he cautiously suggests c. 450 BC.
  14. ^ a b Sophocles. Sophocles I: Oedipus the King, Oedipus at Colonus, Antigone. 2nd ed. Grene, David and Lattimore, Richard, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1991.
  15. ^ Freeman: 247â248
  16. ^ a b Seaford: 1361
  17. ^ Murray, Matthew, "Newly Readable Oxyrhynchus Papyri Reveal Works by Sophocles, Lucian, and Others", Theatermania, 18 April 2005. Retrieved 9 July 2007.
  18. ^ Bowra: 386
  19. ^ Bowra: 401
  20. ^ Bowra: 389
  21. ^ Bowra: 392
  22. ^ Bowra: 396
  23. ^ Bowra: 385â401

## [edit] References

  * Finkel, Raphael; et al. (eds.). "Suda On Line: Byzantine Lexicography". s.v. Î£Î¿ÏÎ¿ÎºÎ»á¿Ï. http://www.stoa.org/sol/. Retrieved on 2007-03-14.
  * Bowra, C. M. (1940). "Sophocles on His Own Development" (JSTOR access required). American Journal of Philology 61 (4): 385â401. doi:10.2307/291377. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9475%281940%2961%3A4%3C385%3ASOHOD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-E. Retrieved on 2007-11-24.
  * Freeman, Charles. (1999). The Greek Achievement: The Foundation of the Western World. New York: Viking Press. ISBN 0670885150
  * Lloyd-Jones, Sir Hugh (ed.) (1994). Sophocles. Ajax. Electra. Oedipus Tyrannus. Harvard University Press.
  * Scullion, Scott (2002). Tragic dates, Classical Quarterly, new sequence 52, pp. 81â101.
  * Seaford, Richard A. S. (2003). "Satyric drama". in Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth. The Oxford Classical Dictionary (revised 3rd edition ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 1361\. ISBN 0-19-860641-9.
  * Smith, Philip (1867). "Sophocles". in William Smith. Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. 3. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. pp. 865â873. http://ancientlibrary.com/smith-bio/3198.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-19.
  * Sommerstein, Alan Herbert (2002). Greek Drama and Dramatists. Routledge. ISBN 0415260272
  * Sommerstein, Alan Herbert (2007). "General Introduction" pp.xi-xxix in Sommerstein, A.H., Fitzpatrick, D. and Tallboy, T. Sophocles: Selected Fragmentary Plays: Volume 1. Aris and Phillips. ISBN 0856687669
  * Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. "Macropaedia Knowledge In Depth." The New Encyclopaedia Britannica Volume 20. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., 2005. 344-346.

## [edit] See also

  * Theatre of ancient Greece

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Sophocles  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Sophocles

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Sophocles  
  * Works by Sophocles at Project Gutenberg
  * Works by Sophocles at the Internet Archive
  * Works by Sophocles at the Perseus Digital Library (Greek and English)
  * Works by or about Sophocles in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
  * Fragmentary Tragedies of Sophocles Project
  * Films based on Sophocles plays
  * SORGLL: Sophocles, Electra 1126-1170; read by Rachel Kitzinger

v â¢ d â¢ e

Ancient Greece topics  
Timeline

Cycladic civilization Â· Minoan civilization Â· Mycenaean civilization Â·
Greek Dark Ages Â· Archaic period Â· Classical Greece Â· Hellenistic Greece Â·
Roman Greece  
Places

Aegean Sea Â· Hellespont Â· Macedon Â· Sparta Â· Athens Â· Corinth Â· Thebes
Â· Thermopylae Â· Antioch Â· Alexandria Â· Pergamon Â· Miletus Â· Ephesus Â·
Delphi Â· Delos Â· Olympia Â· Troy Â· Rhodes Â· Crete Â· Peloponnesus Â·
Cyprus  
Life

Agriculture Â· Cuisine Â· Democracy Â· Economy Â· Education Â· Law Â· Medicine
Â· Pederasty Â· Prostitution Â· Religion Â· Slavery Â· Technology Â· Olympic
Games Â· Warfare Â· Wine  
People

Philosophers

Anaxagoras Â· Anaximander Â· Anaximenes Â· Antisthenes Â· Aristotle Â·
Democritus Â· Diogenes of Sinope Â· Epicurus Â· Empedocles Â· Heraclitus Â·
Leucippus Â· Gorgias Â· Parmenides Â· Plato Â· Protagoras Â· Pythagoras Â·
Socrates Â· Thales Â· Zeno  
Authors

Aeschylus Â· Aesop Â· Aristophanes Â· Euripides Â· Herodotus Â· Hesiod Â·
Homer Â· Lucian Â· Menander Â· Pindar Â· Plutarch Â· Polybius Â· Sappho Â·
Sophocles Â· Theognis of Megara Â· Thucydides Â· Xenophon  
Others

Alexander the Great Â· Lycurgus Â· Leonidas Â· Alcibiades Â· Demosthenes Â·
Pericles Â· Solon Â· Themistocles Â· Archimedes Â· Hippocrates Â· Aspasia Â·
Milo of Croton  
Buildings

Parthenon Â· Temple of Artemis Â· Acropolis Â· Ancient Agora Â· Temple of Zeus
at Olympia Â· Temple of Hephaestus Â· Samothrace temple complex  
Arts

Architecture Â· Coinage Â· Literature Â· Music Â· Pottery Â· Sculpture Â·
Theatre  
Language

Proto-Greek Â· Mycenaean Â· Homeric Â· Dialects (Aeolic â¢ Arcadocypriot â¢
Attic â¢ Doric â¢ Ionic â¢ Locrian â¢ Macedonian) Â· Koine  
  

Persondata  
NAME Sophocles  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION One of the three major ancient Greek tragic playwrights
whose works have survived into modern times.  
DATE OF BIRTH 496 BC  
PLACE OF BIRTH Colonus Hippius  
DATE OF DEATH ca. 406 BC  
PLACE OF DEATH Athens  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sophocles"

Categories: Ancient Greek dramatists and playwrights | Ancient Athenians |
5th-century BC Greek people | 5th-century BC writers | 496 BC births | 406 BC
deaths | Tragic poets

Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * O'zbek
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * Tagalog
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 16:42.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



