
# Sidney Reilly

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the famous spy. For the television mini-series, see
Reilly, Ace of Spies.

Sidney Reilly  
Ace of Spies  
<IMG>  
the man later known as Sidney Reilly, circa 1899.  
Allegiance United Kingdom <IMG>  
Germany, Japan, Imperial Russia  
Service Scotland Yard  
Secret Service Bureau  
SIS/MI6.<  
Rank Lieutenant  
Operation(s) Lockhart Plot  
D'Arcy Affair  
Zinoviev Letter  
Award(s) MC  
Codename(s) Salomon/Shlomo/Sidney Rosenblum  
Birth name Georgi Rosenblum  
Born 24 March 1873  
Odessa, Russian Empire  
Died 5 November 1925  
Moscow, Soviet Union  
Height 1.75 m  
Nationality Jewish Russian/Ukrainian  
Spouse Margaret C. Thomas  
Nadine Massino  
Nelly "Pepita" Burton  
Purportedly Others  
Lieutenant Sidney George Reilly, MC[1] (c. March 24, 1873/1874 â November 5,
1925), famously known as the Ace of Spies, was a Jewish Russian\- or
Ukrainian-born adventurer and secret agent employed by Scotland Yard, the
British Secret Service Bureau and later the Secret Intelligence Service
(SIS).[2] He is alleged to have spied for at least four nations.[3] His
notoriety during the 1920s was created in part by his friend, British diplomat
and journalist Sir Robert Bruce Lockhart, who sensationalised their thwarted
operation to overthrow the Bolshevik government in 1918.[4]

After Reilly's death, the London Evening Standard published in May, 1931, a
Master Spy serial glorifying his exploits. Later, Ian Fleming would use Reilly
as a model for James Bond.[5] Today, many historians consider Reilly to be the
first 20th century super-spy.[2] Much of what is known about him could be
false, as Reilly was a master of deception.

## Contents

  * 1 Origins and youth
  * 2 Early life
  * 3 In London: 1890s
  * 4 Czarist Russia and the Far East
  * 5 D'Arcy affair
  * 6 Frankfurt International Air Show
  * 7 Stealing weapon plans
  * 8 World War I activity
  * 9 Ambassadors' plot
  * 10 Career with British intelligence
  * 11 Death
  * 12 Popularity
    * 12.1 Ace of Spies
    * 12.2 James Bond
    * 12.3 The Gadfly
  * 13 See also
  * 14 References
  * 15 Source notes
  * 16 External links

  
## [edit] Origins and youth

The origins, identities, and activities of Sidney George Reilly have befuddled
researchers and intelligence agencies for more than a century; hence, much of
his purported life and many of his notorious exploits should be cautiously
examined. Reilly himself told several versions of his origins to confuse and
mislead investigators. Reilly claimed to be the son of (a) an Irish merchant
seaman, (b) an Irish clergyman, and (c) an aristocratic landowner and habituÃ©
of the Imperial court of Czar Alexander III of Russia.

Apparently, Reilly was born Georgi Rosenblum in Odessa, then a Black Sea port
of the Russian Empire (now Ukraine), on March 24, 1874 (Lockhart 1986);
however, other theories of Reilly's birthplace and origins exist. In Ace of
Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly (pg. 28), author Andrew Cook states
Reilly was born on March 24, 1873, in the Jewish Kherson gubernia of Czarist
Russia, as Salomon (Shlomo) Rosenblum, and later that "Sidney Reilly" was the
illegitimate son of Paulina (Perla), his acknowledged mother, and Dr. Mikhail
Abramovich Rosenblum, the trusted first cousin of Reilly's putative father,
Grigory (Hersh) Rosenblum (Cook 2004).

## [edit] Early life

<IMG>

<IMG>

An 1880s portrait of Salomon Rosenblum photographed in his youth, one of the
few that exist.

According to Reilly, in 1892, the Imperial Russian Secret Police (Czarist
Ochrana) arrested him for being a messenger for the Friends of Enlightenment
revolutionary group. When he was released, Grigory (Reilly's assumed father)
told him that his mother, Paulina, was dead, and that his true, biological
father was her Jewish doctor, Mikhail A. Rosenblum. Re-christening himself
Sigmund Rosenblum, he faked his death in Odessa Harbour and stowed away aboard
a British ship bound for South America (Lockhart 1986).

In Brazil, Reilly adopted the name Pedro and worked odd jobs: dock worker,
road mender, plantation laborer, and in 1895, cook for a British intelligence
expedition (Deacon 1987). Allegedly Reilly saved both the expedition and the
life of Major Charles Fothergill when hostile natives attacked them. Reilly
seized a British officer's pistol and with expert, single-hand marksmanship
killed the attacking natives (Cook 2004). Appropriately for a fantastic story,
Major Fothergill rewarded Reilly with Â£1,500, a British passport, and passage
to Britain. There Reilly became Sidney Rosenblum (Lockhart 1986).

Evidence asserted in Andrew Cook's Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney
Reilly (pg. 32) contradicts the aforementioned Brazilian scenario and declares
the British expedition incident to be unsubstantiated. Cook states that the
arrival of Sidney Reilly in London in December 1895 was via France and
prompted by Reilly's unscrupulous acquisition of a large sum of money in
Saint-Maur-des-FossÃ©s, a residential suburb of Paris, necessitating a hasty
flight. According to Cook, Reilly and a Russian accomplice, Yan Voitek,
waylaid two Italian anarchists on December 25, 1895, and robbed them of a
substantial amount of revolutionary funds. One anarchist's throat was cut; the
other, Constant Della Cassa, died from knife wounds in Fontainebleau Hospital
three days later. By the time Della Cassa's death appeared in the newspapers,
police had learned that one of the assailants, whose physical description
matched Reilly's, was already en route to England. Reilly's accomplice,
Voitek, would later relate this incident and his other dealings with Reilly to
the British Secret Intelligence Service (Cook 2004).

Regardless of whether Reilly arrived in England via Brazil or France, Reilly
was residing under the name of Sigmund Rosenblum at the Albert Mansions, a
prestigious apartment block in Rosetta Street, Waterloo, London, in early 1896
(Cook 2004). Now settled in England, Reilly created the Ozone Preparations
Company, which peddled miracle cures. Because of his knowledge of languages,
Reilly became a paid informant for the Ã©migrÃ© intelligence network of
William Melville, superintendent of Scotland Yard's Special Branch and,
according to Cook, later the clandestine head of the British Secret Service
Bureau,[6] which was founded in 1909.[7]

## [edit] In London: 1890s

In 1897, Sidney Reilly was involved in the sudden and suspicious death of the
elderly Reverend Hugh Thomas. It has been verified that Reilly had a torrid
affair with Thomas' youthful wife, Margaret Callaghan, just prior to Thomas'
demise (Cook 2004).

Reilly, identifying himself as Sigmund Rosenblum, first met Thomas in London
via Reilly's Ozone Preparations Company. Thomas had a kidney inflammation and
was intrigued by the miracle cures peddled by Reilly. Thomas introduced
Rosenblum to his young wife at his Manor House, and an affair between the two
developed over the next six months (Cook 2004).

On March 4, 1898, Thomas altered his will and appointed Margaret as an
executor. A week after the making of the new will, Reverend Thomas and his
nurse arrived at Newhaven Harbour Station. On March 12, 1898, in that same
hotel, Reverend Thomas was found dead in his bed. A mysterious Dr. T.W.
Andrew, who matched the physical description of Sidney Reilly, appeared on the
scene to certify Thomas' death as generic influenza and, signing the relevant
documents, proclaimed that there was no need for an inquest. Records indicate
that no Dr. T.W. Andrew existed in Great Britain circa 1897 (Cook 2004).
Margaret Callaghan insisted Thomas' body be ready for burial a mere day and a
half after his death. Six weeks later, Margaret inherited about Â£800,000. The
Metropolitan Police did not investigate Dr. T.W. Andrew, nor did they
investigate the nurse Margaret had hired, even though the nurse was previously
linked to the arsenic poisoning of a former employer (Cook 2004).

Four months later, on August 22, 1898, Reilly married Margaret Callaghan
Thomas. The two witnesses at the ceremony were Charles Richard Cross and
Joseph Bell. Bell was an Admiralty clerk, while Charles Cross was a government
official. Both eventually married daughters of Henry Freeman Pannett, a close
associate of William Melville. The marriage brought not only the wealth Reilly
desired but provided a pretext to discard Sigmund Rosenblum and, with the help
of Melville, assume the identity of Sidney George Reilly, husband of Margaret
Thomas Reilly. This new identity was the key to achieving his desire to return
to Czarist Russia and voyage to the Far East (Cook 2004).

## [edit] Czarist Russia and the Far East

<IMG>

<IMG>

A ukiyoe print of the night attack on Port Arthur by the Japanese Navy. The
surprise attack was allegedly made possible by the intelligence gathering of
Sidney Reilly and Ho-Liang-Shung.

â [Sidney Reilly's role] is one of the unsolved riddles about the Russo-
Japanese War.[8]  
âProfessor Ian H. Nish, London School of Economics[9] â  
In June 1899, Sidney Reilly and his first wife Margaret Callaghan Thomas
traveled to Czarist Russia using Reilly's new British passportâa cover
identity purportedly created by William Melville (Cook 2004). While Margaret
remained in St. Petersburg, Reilly is alleged to have reconnoitered the
Caucasus for its oil deposits and compiled a resource prospectus as part of
"The Great Game." He reported his findings to the British government which
paid him for completing the assignment. In early 1901, Reilly and his wife
voyaged from Port Said, Egypt, across the globe to the Far East (Lockhart
1986).

Shortly before the Russo-Japanese War, Reilly appeared in Port Arthur,
Manchuria, as a double-agent serving both the British and the Japanese
interests (Deacon 1987). As the Russian-controlled Port Arthur lay under the
ever-darkening specter of Japanese invasion, Reilly and business partner
Moisei (Moses) Akimovich Ginsburg turned the precarious situation to their
financial benefit. They purchased enormous amounts of food, raw materials,
medicine, and coalâand made a small fortune as war profiteers (Cook 2004).

Reilly would have an even greater success in January 1904, when he and a
Chinese engineer acquaintance, Ho-Liang-Shung, allegedly stole the Port Arthur
harbor defense plans for the Japanese Navy. Guided by these stolen plans, the
Japanese Navy navigated through the Russian minefield protecting the harbor
and launched a surprise attack on Port Arthur. Yet the stolen plans did not
help the Japanese much. More than 31,000 Russians ultimately perished
defending Port Arthur, but Japanese losses were much higher, losses that
nearly undermined their war effort (Cook 2004).

Historian Winfried Ludecke suggests that upon leaving Port Arthur, Manchuria,
Reilly voyaged to Imperial Japan in the company of an unknown mistress. If
Reilly did visit Japan, presumably to receive espionage pay, he could not have
stayed very long, for by June 1904 Reilly appeared in Paris, France (Cook
2004). During the brief time Reilly spent in Paris, he renewed his close
acquaintance with William Melville, the first Director General of MI5, whom
Reilly had last seen in 1899 just prior to his departure from London. Reilly's
meeting with Melville is most significant, for within a matter of weeks
Melville was to use Reilly's expertise in what would later become known as The
D'Arcy Affair (Lockhart 1986).

## [edit] D'Arcy affair

In 1904, the Board of the Admiralty projected that petroleum would supplant
coal as the primary source of fuel for the Royal Navy. During their
investigation, the British Admiralty learned that William Knox D'Arcy \- who
later founded the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (APOC) in April 1909 - had
obtained a valuable concession from the Persian government regarding the oil
rights in southern Persia and that D'Arcy was negotiating a similar concession
from the Turkish Government for oil rights in Mesopotamia. The British
Admiralty purportedly initiated efforts to entice D'Arcy to sell his newly
acquired oil rights to the British Government rather than the French de
Rothschilds (Lockhart, 1986).

In Reilly: Ace of Spies, Robin Bruce Lockhart repeats one of Reilly's oft-
recited tales of how, at the British Admiralty's request, Reilly located
William Knox D'Arcy in the south of France and clandestinely approached him in
disguise. According to Reilly, he boarded Lord de Rothschild's yacht attired
as a Catholic priest and secretly persuaded D'Arcy to terminate negotiations
with the French Rothschilds and return to London to meet with the British
Admiralty (Lockhart 1986). Biographer Andrew Cook is sceptical about Reilly's
involvement in the D'Arcy Affair, for in February 1904, Reilly was purportedly
still in Port Arthur, Manchuria. Cook further claims that it was Reilly's
intelligence chief, William Melville, and a British intelligence officer,
Henry Curtis Bennett, who undertook the D'Arcy assignment (Cook, 2004).

Although the extent of his involvement in the D'Arcy Affair is unknown, it has
been verified that Reilly stayed in the French Riviera on the CÃ´te d'Azur
after the incident - a location very near the Rothschild yacht. After
conclusion of the D'Arcy Affair, Reilly journeyed to Brussels, and shortly
thereafter, in January 1905, he arrived in St. Petersburg, Russia, (Cook,
2004).

An alternative scenario put forward in The Prize by Daniel Yergin has the
Admiralty putting forward a "Syndicate of Patriots" to keep D'Arcy's
concession in British hands, apparently with the full and eager co-operation
of D'Arcy himself.[10]

## [edit] Frankfurt International Air Show

In Ace of Spies, biographer Robin Bruce Lockhart recounts Reilly's alleged
involvement in obtaining a newly developed German magneto at the first
Frankfurt International Air Show ("Internationale Luftschiffahrt-Ausstellung")
in 1909.

According to Lockhart, on the fifth day of the air show a German plane lost
control and crashed, killing the pilot. The plane's engine was alleged to have
used a new type of magneto that was far ahead of other designs. Reilly and a
British SIS agent posing as one of the exhibition pilots diverted public
attention while they removed the magneto from the wreck and substituted
another. The SIS agent quickly made detailed drawings of the German magneto,
and when the engine had been removed to a hangar, the agent and Reilly managed
to restore the original magneto (Lockhart, 1986).

Biographer Andrew Cook has countered that this incident never happened.
According to documents about the air show, no plane crashes occurred during
the event (Cook, 2004).

## [edit] Stealing weapon plans

According to Lockhart, the German Kaiser was expanding the war machine of
Imperial Germany in 1909, and British intelligence had scant knowledge
regarding the types of weapons being forged inside Germany's war plants. At
the behest of British intelligence, Reilly was sent to obtain weapons plans
(Lockhart 1967).

Reilly arrived in Essen, Germany, in 1909 disguised as a Baltic shipyard
worker by the name of Karl Hahn. Having prepared his cover identity by
learning welding at a Sheffield engineering firm, Reilly obtained a low-level
position as a welder at the Essen plant. Soon he joined the plant fire brigade
and persuaded its foreman that a set of plant schematics were needed to
indicate the position of fire extinguishers and hydrants. These schematics
were soon lodged in the foreman's office for members of the fire brigade to
consult, and Reilly set about using them to locate the weapon plans (Lockhart
1967).

In the early morning hours, Reilly used lockpicks to break into the office
where the weapon plans were kept but was discovered by the foreman. Reilly
strangled the foreman and completed the theft. From Essen, Reilly took a train
to Dortmund to a safe house, and tearing the plans into four pieces, mailed
each separately. If one was lost, the other three would still reveal the gist
of the plans (Lockhart 1967).

Cook casts doubt on this incident but concedes that German factory records
show a Karl Hahn was indeed employed by the Essen plant during this time and a
plant fire brigade was in formal operation (Cook 2004).

## [edit] World War I activity

One of Reilly claims is that he was a secret agent behind German lines and
allegedly attended a German High Command conference {see below}; however, see
Cook {Chapter 6}, which effectively debunks this by revealing Reilly's
activities between 1915 and 1918 {reference only} According to author Richard
Spence, (TRUST NO ONE), Reilly lived in New York for at least a year,
1914-1915, where he engaged in arranging munitions sales to both the Germans
and the Imperial Russian Army. Sometime in 1916-1918 Reilly reportedly
received a commission in the Royal Canadian Flying Corps, and according to
Spence, upon his return to London in 1918, Mansfield Cumming formally swore
Lieutenant Reilly into service as a staff Case Officer in His Majesty's Secret
Intelligence Service (SIS), prior to dispatching Reilly on Counter-Bolshevik
operations in Germany and Russia.

## [edit] Ambassadors' plot

<IMG>

<IMG>

From the London Evening Standard's Master Spy serial: Reilly, disguised as a
member of the Cheka, bluffs his way through a Red Army checkpoint.

â In 1918, behind-the-scenes helpers such as [...] Sidney Reilly, the
erstwhile Russian double agent who was operating on Britain's behalf, were
involved in the formulation and execution of various attempts to snatch both
Russia and the [Romanov family] from the Bolsheviks.[11]  
â Shay McNeal, historical researcher on Russian history and contributor to
BBC[12] â  
The endeavor to depose the Bolshevik Government and assassinate Vladimir
Ilyich Lenin is considered by biographers to be Reilly's most daring
scheme.[4] The Lockhart Plot, or more accurately the Reilly Plot, has sparked
debate over the years: Did the Allies launch a clandestine operation to
overthrow the Bolsheviks? If so, did the Cheka uncover the plot at the
eleventh hour or had they unmasked the conspirators from the outset? Some
historians have suggested that the Cheka orchestrated the conspiracy from
beginning to end and possibly that Reilly was a Bolshevik agent provocateur
(Cook 2004).

In May 1918, Robert Bruce Lockhart, an agent of the British Secret
Intelligence Service, and Reilly repeatedly met with Boris Savinkov, the head
of the counter-revolutionary Union for the Defense of the Fatherland and
Freedom (UDFF). Savinkov had been Deputy War Minister in the Provisional
Government of Alexander Fyodorovich Kerensky, and a key opponent of the
Bolsheviks. A former Social Revolutionary Party member, Savinkov had formed
the UDFF consisting of several thousand Russian fighters. Lockhart and Reilly
then contacted anti-Bolshevik collectives linked to Savinkov and supported
these factions with SIS funds. They also liaisoned with the intelligence
operatives of the French and U.S. consuls in Moscow (Cook 2004).

In June, disillusioned members of the Latvian Riflemen began appearing in
anti-Bolshevik circles in Petrograd and were eventually directed to Captain
Cromie, a British naval attachÃ©, and Mr. Constantine, a Turkish merchant who
was actually Reilly. As Latvians were deemed the Praetorian Guard of the
Bolsheviks and entrusted with the security of the Kremlin, Reilly believed
their participation in the pending coup to be vital and arranged their meeting
with Lockhart at the British mission in Moscow. At this stage, Reilly planned
a coup against the Bolshevik government and drew up a list of Soviet military
leaders ready to assume responsibilities on the fall of the Bolshevik
government. While the coup was prepared, an Allied force landed on August 4,
1918, at Arkhangelsk, Russia, beginning a famous military expedition dubbed
Operation Archangel. Its objective was to prevent the German Empire from
obtaining Allied military supplies stored in the region. In retaliation for
this incursion, the Bolsheviks raided the British diplomatic mission on August
5, disrupting a meeting Reilly had arranged between the anti-Bolshevik
Latvians, UDFF officials, and Lockhart (Cook 2004).

On August 17, Reilly conducted meetings between Latvian regimental leaders and
liaisoned with Captain George Hill, another British agent operating in Russia.
They agreed the coup would occur the first week of September during a meeting
of the Council of People's Commissars and the Moscow Soviet at the Bolshoi
Theatre. However, on the eve of the coup, unexpected events thwarted the
operation (Cook 2004).

On August 30, a military cadet shot and killed Moisei Uritsky, head of the
Petrograd Cheka. On this same day, Fanya Kaplan, a member of the Socialist
Revolutionary Party, shot and wounded Lenin as he left a meeting at the
Michelson factory in Moscow. These events were used by the Cheka to implicate
any malcontents in a grand conspiracy that warranted a full-scale campaign:
the "Red Terror." Thousands of political opponents were seized and executed.
Using lists supplied by undercover agents, the Cheka arrested those involved
in Reilly's pending coup. They raided the British Embassy in Petrograd and
killed Cromie, Reilly's accomplice, who put up an armed resistance. Lockhart
was arrested, but later released in exchange for Litvinov, a diplomat who had
been arrested in London in a reprisal. Elizaveta Otten, Reilly's chief
courier, was arrested as well as his other mistress Olga Starzheskaya. Another
courier, Maria Fride, with papers she carried for Reilly, was arrested at
Otten's flat (Cook 2004).

On September 3, the aborted coup was sensationalized by the Russian press.
Reilly was identified as a leader, and a dragnet ensued. The Cheka raided his
assumed refuge, but Reilly avoided capture and met with Captain Hill. Hill
proposed that Reilly escape Russia via Ukraine using their network of British
agents for safe houses and assistance. Reilly instead chose a shorter, more
dangerous route north to Finland. With the Cheka closing in, Reilly, carrying
a Baltic German passport, posed as a legation secretary and departed Moscow in
a railway car reserved for the German Embassy. In Kronstadt, Reilly sailed by
ship to Helsinki and reached Stockholm. He arrived in London on November 8
(Cook 2004).

The day before Reilly and Hill met with Sir Mansfield Smith-Cumming ("C") in
London for their debriefing, the Russian Izvestia newspaper reported that both
Reilly and Lockhart had been sentenced to death in absentia by a Revolutionary
Tribunal for their roles in the attempted coup of the Bolshevik government.
Their sentence was to be carried out immediately should either of them be
apprehended on Soviet soil. This sentence would later be served on Reilly when
he was caught by the OGPU in 1925. Yet, within the week of their debriefing,
the British Secret Intelligence Service and the Foreign Office again sent
Reilly and Hill to Russia under the cover of British trade delegates. Their
assignment was to uncover information about the Black Sea coast needed for the
Paris Peace Conference of 1919 (Cook 2004).

## [edit] Career with British intelligence

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sidney Reilly, candidly photographed in 1924, a year before his demise.

Throughout his life, Sidney Reilly maintained a close yet tempestuous
consanguinity with the British intelligence community.

In 1896, Reilly was recruited by Superintendent William Melville for the
Ã©migrÃ© intelligence network of Scotland Yard's Special Branch. Through his
close relationship with Melville, Reilly would be employed as a secret agent
for the Secret Service Bureau, which the War Office created in October
1909.[7]

In 1918, Reilly began to work for MI1(c), an early designation[13] for the
British Secret Intelligence Service, under Sir Mansfield Smith-Cumming. Reilly
was allegedly trained by the latter organization and sent to Moscow in March
1918 to assassinate Vladimir Ilyich Lenin or attempt to overthrow the
Bolsheviks. He had to escape after the Cheka unraveled the so-called Lockhart
Plot against the Bolshevik government.

Reilly told various tales about his espionage deeds and adventurous exploits.
According to Reilly, he earned and lost several fortunes in his lifetime and
had many wives and mistresses. He claimed that:

â¢ In the Second Boer War he disguised himself as a Russian arms merchant to
spy on Dutch weapons shipments to the Boers.

â¢ He procured Persian oil concessions for the British Admiralty, the so-
called D'Arcy Affair.

â¢ In the disguise of a timber company owner, he gathered information on the
Russian military presence in Port Arthur, Manchuria, and reported to the
Kempeitai, the Japanese secret police.

â¢ He spied on the Krupp armaments plant in Germany.

â¢ He volunteered for the Royal Flying Corps in Canada at the start of World
War I.

â¢ He seduced the wife of a Russian minister to obtain information about
German weapons shipments to Russia.

â¢ During World War I he donned a German officer's uniform and attended a
German Army High Command meeting.

â¢ He saved diplomats in Brazil.

â¢ He attempted but failed to engineer the downfall of the Russian Bolshevik
government.

British intelligence adhered to its policy of publicly saying nothing about
anything (Deacon 1987). Yet Reilly's espionage successes did garner indirect
recognition.

After a formal recommendation by Sir Mansfield "C" Smith-Cumming, Reilly, who
had been commissioned into the Royal Flying Corps in 1917, was awarded the
Military Cross on January 22, 1919, "for distinguished services rendered in
connection with military operations in the field."[1] Cook claims the medal
was bestowed due to Reilly's anti-Bolshevik operations in southern Russia, but
espionage historian Richard Deacon states the award was given for Reilly's
clandestine activities in World War I. Reilly had allegedly parachuted behind
German lines on a number of occasions. Once, disguised as a German officer, he
spent three weeks inside the German Empire (Deutsches Reich) gathering
information about the next planned thrust against the Allies.[14]

"Reilly was dropped by plane many times behind the German lines; sometimes in
Belgium, sometimes in Germany, sometimes disguised as a peasant, sometimes as
a German officer or soldier, when he usually carried forged papers to indicate
he had been wounded and was on sick-leave from the front. In this way he was
able to move throughout Germany with complete freedom."[15]

âRobin Bruce Lockhart, Reilly: Ace of Spies, page 71.  
Deacon asserts in History of the Russian Secret Service that in April 1912,
Reilly was an Ochrana agent with the task of befriending and profiling Sir
Basil Zaharoff, the international arms salesman and representative of Vickers-
Armstrong Munitions Ltd. Another Reilly biographer, Richard B. Spence, claims
in Trust No One: The Secret World Of Sidney Reilly that during this assignment
Reilly learned "le systeme" from Zaharoff. To Zaharoff, "le systeme" was the
strategy of playing all sides against each other in order to maximize
financial profit.

Cook counters in Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly (pg. 104) that
there is no evidence of any relationship between Reilly and Zaharoff.
According to Cook, Reilly was more of a con artist. Reilly claimed to have
been employed by the British Secret Intelligence Service since the 1890s, but
he did not volunteer his services nor was he accepted as an agent until March
15, 1918, and was effectively fired in 1921 because of his tendency to be a
rogue operative. Nevertheless, Reilly had been a renowned operative for
Scotland Yard's Special Branch and the Secret Service Bureau, which were the
early forerunners of the British intelligence community.

Author Michael Kettle has claimed in Sidney Reilly: The True Story of the
World's Greatest Spy (pg. 121) that despite having been fired by SIS, Reilly
possibly was involved with Sir Stewart Graham Menzies in the forging of the
The Zinoviev Letter in 1924.[16]

## [edit] Death

<IMG>

<IMG>

Following execution in a forest near Moscow, the alleged corpse of Sidney
Reilly (Salomon Rosenblum) was photographed in OGPU headquarters by Soviet
personnel circa November 5 1925.

In September 1925, undercover agents of the OGPU, the intelligence successor
of the Cheka, lured Reilly to Bolshevik Russia ostensibly to meet the supposed
anti-Communist organization The Trustâin reality, an OGPU deception existing
under the code name Operation Trust. At the Russian border, Reilly was
introduced to undercover OGPU agents posing as senior Trust representatives
from Moscow. One of these undercover Soviet agents, Alexander Yakushev, later
recalled the meeting:

â The first impression of [Sidney Reilly] is unpleasant. His dark eyes
expressed something biting and cruel; his lower lip drooped deeply and was too
slickâthe neat black hair, the demonstratively elegant suit. [...]
Everything in his manner expressed something haughtily indifferent to his
surroundings.[17] â  
After Reilly crossed the Finnish border, the Soviets captured, transported and
interrogated him at Lubyanka Prison. On arrival Reilly was taken to the office
of Roman Pilar, a Soviet official who the previous year had arrested and
ordered the execution of Boris Savinkov, a close friend of Reilly. Pilar
reminded Reilly that he had been sentenced to death by a 1918 Soviet tribunal
for his participation in a counter-revolutionary plot against the Bolshevik
government. While Reilly was being interrogated, the Soviets publicly claimed
that he had been shot trying to cross the Finnish border.

Historians debate whether Reilly was tortured while in OGPU custody. Cooke
contends that Reilly was not tortured other than psychologically by mock
execution scenarios designed to shake the resolve of prisoners. During OGPU
interrogation, Reilly maintained his charade of being a British subject born
in Clonmel, Ireland, and would not reveal any intelligence matters (Cook
2004). While facing such daily interrogation, Reilly kept in his cell a diary
of tiny handwritten notes on cigarette papers which he hid in the plasterwork
of a cell wall. While his Soviet captors were interrogating Reilly, Reilly in
turn was analyzing and documenting their techniques. As the diary was a
detailed record of OGPU interrogation techniques, Reilly was understandably
confident such unique documentation would, if he escaped, be of interest to
the British SIS. After Reilly's death, Soviet guards discovered the diary in
Reilly's cell, and photographic enhancements were made by OGPU technicians
(Cook 2004).

Reilly was executed in a forest near Moscow on November 5, 1925; British
intelligence documents released in 2000 confirm this. According to eyewitness
Boris Gudz, the execution of Sidney Reilly was supervised by an OGPU officer,
Grigory Feduleev. Another OGPU officer, George Syroezhkin, is credited for
firing the final shot into Reilly's chest.

After the death of Reilly, there were various rumours about his survival.
Some, for example, speculated that Reilly had defected and became an advisor
to Soviet intelligence.

## [edit] Popularity

### [edit] Ace of Spies

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sam Neill portraying Sidney Reilly in the TV mini-series, Reilly:Ace of Spies
(1983).

In 1983, a television mini-series, Reilly, Ace of Spies, dramatized the
historical adventures of Reilly. The program won the 1984 BAFTA TV Award.
Reilly was portrayed by actor Sam Neill. Leo McKern portrayed Sir Basil
Zaharoff. The series was based on Robin Bruce Lockhart's book, Ace of Spies,
which was adapted by Troy Kennedy Martin.

### [edit] James Bond

In Ian Fleming, The Man Behind James Bond by Andrew Lycett, Sidney Reilly is
listed as an inspiration for James Bond.[5] Reilly's friend, former diplomat
and journalist Sir Robert Bruce Lockhart, was a close acquaintance of Ian
Fleming for many years and recounted to Fleming many of Reilly's espionage
adventures.[18] Lockhart had worked with Reilly in Russia in 1918, where they
became embroiled in an SIS-backed plot to overthrow Lenin's Bolshevik
government. Within five years of his disappearance in Soviet Russia in 1925,
the press had turned Reilly into a household name, lauding him as a master spy
and recounting his many espionage adventures. Fleming had therefore long been
aware of Reilly's mythical reputation and had listened to Lockhart's
recollections. Like Fleming's fictional creation, Reilly was multi-lingual,
fascinated by the Far East, fond of fine living, and a compulsive gambler. He
also exercised a Bond-like mastery of women, his many love affairs standing
comparison with the amorous adventures of 007 (Cook 2004).

### [edit] The Gadfly

According to Lockhart, while in London in 1895 Reilly encountered noted author
Ethel Lilian Voynich. Voynich was a well-known figure in the late Victorian
literary scene and in Russian Ã©migrÃ© circles. Lockhart claims that Reilly
and Voynich had a sexual liaison and voyaged to Italy together. During this
dalliance, Reilly allegedly "bared his soul" to Ethel and revealed to her the
peculiar story of his youth in Russia. After their affair had concluded,
Voynich published in 1897 The Gadfly, her critically-acclaimed novel whose
central character, Arthur Burton, was allegedly based on Reilly's early
life.[2] Cook, however, disputes Lockhart's romanticized version of events and
asserts that Reilly was not Voynich's inspiration. According to Cook, Reilly
may have been merely investigating Voynich's radical, pro-Ã©migrÃ© activities
and reporting to William Melville of the Metropolitan Police Special
Branch.[19]

## [edit] See also

People

  * Sir Robert Bruce Lockhart
  * Sir Mansfield Smith-Cumming
  * Sir Basil Zaharoff
  * Boris Savinkov
  * William Melville

Events

  * The Battle of Port Arthur
  * The Red Terror of 1918
  * The Zinoviev Letter
  * Russo-Japanese War
  * Frankfurt International Air Show

Organizations

  * Secret Intelligence Service (SIS)
  * Secret Service Bureau
  * State Political Directorate (OGPU)
  * Czarist Ochrana
  * Socialist-Revolutionary Party

  
## [edit] References

  * Andrew Cook, Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly; 2004, Tempus Publishing, ISBN 0-7524-2959-0.
  * Andrew Cook, On His Majesty's Secret Service, Sydney Reilly Codename ST1; 2002, Tempus Publishing, ISBN 0-7524-2555-2.
  * Richard Deacon, Spyclopaedia; 1987, Macdonald & Company Publishers Ltd, ISBN 0-356-14600-6.
  * Natalie Grant Deception on a Grand Scale, International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence Volume 1, Number 4, 51-77, Winter 1986
  * Natalie Grant The Trust, AIJ 11-15, Winter 1991
  * Michael Kettle, Sidney Reilly: The True Story of the World's Greatest Spy; 1986, St. Martin's Press, ISBN 0-312-90321-9.
  * Robert Bruce Lockhart, Memoirs of a British Agent (reprint); 2003, Folio Society, ASIN B000E4QXIK.
  * Andrew Lycett, The Man Behind James Bond; 1996, Turner Publishing, ISBN 1-57036-343-9.
  * Robin Bruce Lockhart, Reilly: Ace of Spies; 1986, Hippocrene Books, ISBN 0-88029-072-2.
  * Richard B. Spence, Trust No One: The Secret World Of Sidney Reilly; 2002, Feral House, ISBN 0-922915-79-2.
  * Yergin, Daniel (1991). The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power. Pocket Books.

## [edit] Source notes

  1. ^ a b Page 188, Andrew Cook, Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly, 2004, Tempus Publishing, ISBN 0-7524-2959-0.
  2. ^ a b c Robin Bruce Lockhart, Reilly: Ace of Spies; 1986, Hippocrene Books, ISBN 0-88029-072-2.
  3. ^ Pages 133 to 136, Richard Deacon, Spyclopaedia; 1987, Macdonald & Company Publishers Ltd, ISBN 0-356-14600-6.
  4. ^ a b Richard B. Spence, Trust No One: The Secret World Of Sidney Reilly; 2002, Feral House, ISBN 0-922915-79-2.
  5. ^ a b Pages 118 and 132, Andrew Lycett, Ian Fleming, The Man Behind James Bond, 1996, Turner Publishing, ISBN 1-57036-343-9.
  6. ^ Andrew Cook, M: Mi5's First Spymaster, 2004, Tempus Publishing, ISBN 0-7524-2896-9.
  7. ^ a b "SIS Or MI6. What's In A Name?". SIS website. http://www.sis.gov.uk/output/Page50.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-02.
  8. ^ Page 56, Andrew Cook, Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly, 2004, Tempus Publishing, ISBN 0-7524-2959-0.
  9. ^ Ian Hill Nish, The Origins of the Russo-Japanese War, 1986, Longman Publishing Group, ISBN 0-582-49114-2.
  10. ^ Yergin (1991) p.140
  11. ^ Page 137, Shay McNeal, The Plots to Rescue the Tsar, 2002, Arrow Books, ISBN 0-09-929810-4.
  12. ^ Biographical information about McNeal on HarperCollins' site. Information retrieved on January 25, 2007.
  13. ^ MI6 website. "SIS or MI6. What's In A Name?" Article retrieved on November 14, 2006.
  14. ^ Pages 135, Richard Deacon, Spyclopaedia; 1987, Macdonald & Company Publishers Ltd, ISBN 0-356-14600-6.
  15. ^ Page 71, Robin Bruce Lockhart, Reilly: Ace of Spies; 1984, Penguin Books Ltd, ISBN 0-1400-6895-3.
  16. ^ Page 121, Michael Kettle, Sidney Reilly: The True Story of the World's Greatest Spy; 1986, St. Martin's Press, ISBN 0-312-90321-9.
  17. ^ Page 238, Andrew Cook, Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly, 2004, Tempus Publishing, ISBN 0-7524-2959-0.
  18. ^ Page 12, Andrew Cook, Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly, 2004, Tempus Publishing, ISBN 0-7524-2959-0.
  19. ^ Page 39, Andrew Cook, Ace of Spies: The True Story of Sidney Reilly, 2004, Tempus Publishing, ISBN 0-7524-2959-0.

## [edit] External links

  * SidneyReilly.com: Andrew Cook's website regarding his book about Reilly.
  * "Reilly: Ace of Spies" (1983) at the Internet Movie Database
  * List group for Reilly.
  * Sidney Reilly at Find A Grave

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sidney_Reilly"

Categories: 1870s births | 1925 deaths | British spies | Royal Flying Corps
officers | Inter-War spies | Deaths by firearm in Russia | Double agents |
World War I spies | Pre-World War I spies | German spies | Japanese spies |
Executed spies | People from Odessa | James Bond | Okhrana personnel | Royal
Air Force officers | British Jews | Ashkenazi Jews | Ukrainian Jews |
Recipients of the Military Cross | British people murdered abroad | People
murdered in the Soviet Union

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 02:53 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



