
# Free Hugs Campaign

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Juan Mann, who started the Free Hugs movement, seen at Pitt Street Mall,
Sydney, Australia, 2006

The Free Hugs Campaign is a social movement involving individuals who offer
hugs to strangers in public places.[1] The campaign in its present form was
started in 2004 by an Australian man known only by the pseudonym "Juan Mann"
[2] . The campaign became famous internationally in 2006 as the result of a
music video on YouTube by the Australian band Sick Puppies. The hugs are meant
to be random acts of kindness \- purportedly selfless acts performed by a
person for the sole reason of making others feel better. Free Hug Day took
place in 2009 on February 13.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Official website
  * 3 Publicity and expansion
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links
    * 6.1 Other countries

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

A woman holding up a Spanish-language Free Hugs sign in Buenos Aires

The Free Hugs campaign in its present form was started by Juan Mann on June
30, 2004, when he commenced giving out hugs in the Pitt St Mall in central
Sydney. In the months prior to this Mann had been feeling depressed and lonely
as a result of numerous personal difficulties. However a random hug from a
stranger made an enormous difference, with Mann stating that "...I went out to
a party one night and a completely random person came up to me and gave me a
hug. I felt like a king! It was greatest thing that ever happened." [2]

Mann carried the now iconic "FREE HUGS" sign from the outset. However on his
first attempt in his hometown, where he returned to find that he was the only
person he knew, as his friends and family had moved away, so he had to wait
fifteen minutes before an elderly lady came up to him and gave him a hug [3].

Initial distrust of Juan Mann's motives eventually gave way to a gradual
increase of people willing to be hugged, with other huggers (male and female)
helping distribute them. In October 2004 police told them they must stop, as
Mann had not obtained public liability insurance worth $25 million for his
actions. Mann and his companions used a petition to attempt to convince
authorities that his campaign should be allowed to continue without the
insurance. His petition reached 10,000 signatures. He submitted it and was
allowed to continue giving free hugs.[4]

Mann befriended Shimon Moore, lead singer for the Sick Puppies, shortly after
commencing his campaign, and over a two-month period in late 2004 Moore
recorded video footage of Mann and his fellow huggers. Moore and his band
moved to Los Angeles in March 2005 and nothing was immediately done with the
footage. Meanwhile Mann continued his campaign throughout 2005 and 2006 by
appearing in Pitt St Mall in Sydney most Thursday afternoons.

In mid 2006 Mann's grandmother died, and in consolation Moore made the music
video using the footage he had shot in 2004 to send to Mann as a gift, stating
in an interview that, "I sent it to him on a disc as a present and I wrote
down 'This is who you are'." [5] The video was later uploaded onto YouTube
where it became a popular video on the site.

On October 30, 2006, Mann was invited by Oprah Winfrey to appear on her show
Oprah after her producer's doctor saw the Free Hugs video on YouTube. Juan
Mann made an appearance outside her studio that morning, offering free hugs to
the crowd waiting to see the taping of that day's episode. Oprah's camera
crews caught several people in the audience hugging Mann as the morning
progressed.[6]

On October 23, 2007, Juan Mann announced his residential address online and
offered an open invitation to anyone to come over and chat on-camera as part
of his 'open-house project'. Mann hosted 80 guests over 36 days. On November
25, 2007, Mann's landlord threatened him with eviction, so he launched an
online appeal.[7]

On December 25, 2007, Juan Mann made his e-book "The Illustrated Guide to Free
Hugs" available as a free download.

On November 22, 2008, at YouTube Live Sick Puppies did a performance of "All
the Same" while Juan Mann gave hugs to crowd members.

## [edit] Official website

A website that is generally recognized as the official site of the free hugs
campaign, The Official Home of the Free Hugs Campaign, was launched in mid
2007. This site enables those involved in the campaign to better organize
themselves and coordinate their efforts. Many initiatives resulted from these
efforts. For example, on the websites forum (hosted on Dragon Arts), those
involved in the campaign called for an annual International Free Hugs Day.
Juan Mann declared that the day would fall on the first Saturday following
June 30 each year; this being the first date that Juan ever offered free hugs
in Pitt Street Mall, Sydney in 2004. The first International Free Hugs Day was
July 7, 2007, the second on July 5, 2008 and the third will be on July 4, 2009
(but see above re Valentine's day).

## [edit] Publicity and expansion

<IMG>

<IMG>

Free Hugs in Sydney, August 2004

  * A college student, Yu Tzu-wei, began a campaign in Taipei in October 2006 to "hug everyone in Taiwan".[8]
  * in 2006, a Free Hugs Campaign began in Tel Aviv, Israel.[9]
  * In late October 2006 several Free Hugs Campaigns were organized in a number of cities in Italy.[10]
  * On October 27, 2006 students Steve Loftus, Mark Wonnacott and Jeff Jones from Illinois-based McKendree University were featured in news media, including MLB.com, for giving free hugs before game five of the World Series in front of Busch Stadium.[11]
  * On November 6, 2006 a group of eleven people led by a twenty-four year old man named 'Baigu'(ç½éª¨) tried the same campaign in Shanghai, only to be detained for one hour for not having a permit to hold a gathering in a public place.[12]
  * A Free Hugs event on November 10, 2006 in Boulder, Colorado was covered by local media.[13]
  * In Belgium the Free Hugs campaign appeared near the end of 2006, with Free Hugs events on December 22 and December 23 in Antwerp and on December 30 in Ghent.[14][15]
  * On November 18, 2006 Geneva Online, an online community, organized the first Free Hugs event in Geneva, Switzerland.[16]
  * In December 2006 the Students Union at the University of Limerick in Ireland ran a free hugs campaign for their students during a week of study in an attempt to raise morale on campus. The story made the local newspapers. A similar campaign was arranged during their RAG week the following March in order to raise money for charity.
  * On December 24, 2006, two Korean boy students in Singapore were featured in the local national newspaper, The Straits Times, for their 'free hugs' campaign started on November 22, outside Ngee Ann City shopping mall along Orchard Road. In a novel bid to spread the festive cheer, they had this campaign for the following consecutive Saturdays.[17]
  * A group of undergraduates who met on the PTT BBS started a Free Hugs movement in the Kaohsiung, Taiwan Urban Spotlight Arcade on January 28, 2007.[18]
  * As part of an initiative to combat discrimination against people infected with AIDS or HIV, the French Government will call on its citizens to embrace strangers who hoist signs in the street offering free hugs.[19]
  * On April 14, 2007, Portuguese waitress Sara Viera living in Newcastle Upon-Tyne, England was reported on both BBC News and local press to be giving Free Hugs in the streets of Newcastle City Centre.
  * In 2008, noted music director, Oscar award winner and Golden Globe winner from India, A. R. Rahman, along with percussionist Sivamani created a song titled Jiya Se Jiya (Heart to Heart), (released through Universal Music) which was inspired by the Free Hugs Campaign and promoted it through a video shot in various cities in India [20].
  * On July 2008 during World Youth Day in Sydney, a group of teenagers did a Free Hugs Campaign. [21]
  * In December 2008, Quentin Mosimann, a talented French-Swiss writer-composer-singer, took this "Free hugs" movement up in his video clip "Il y a je t'aime et je t'aime", a song about the different meanings of âI love youâ.
  * February 2009 - Free hug offer startles downtown Toronto shoppers [2]

## [edit] See also

  * Mata Amritanandamayi, the "hugging saint"
  * List of YouTube celebrities

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Ellen Connolly Hugs and smiles, but not everyone embraces the trend Sydney Morning Herald, November 6, 2004
  2. ^ a b WHO Magazine Interview Spreading the Love: Juan Mann January 30, 2007
  3. ^ The Gift of Giving Back Oprah Winfrey Show.
  4. ^ Who Magazine Spreading the Love: Shimon Moore (Sick Puppies) January 30, 2007
  5. ^ Who Magazine Spreading the Love: Shimon Moore (Sick Puppies) January 30, 2007
  6. ^ Oprah.comJuan Mann on Oprah
  7. ^ Andrew Ramadge, Free Hugs star a 'security risk' NEWS.com.au
  8. ^ Free Hugs campaign arrives in Taiwan, Independent Online (South Africa), October 7, 2006
  9. ^ Free Hugs campaign of Tel Aviv
  10. ^ News on Corriere della Sera
  11. ^ Pre-game coverage for Game 5 of the 2006 World Series
  12. ^ Huggers end up in police custody
  13. ^ Shaun Boyd.'Free Hugs' Movement Spreads To Boulder, CBS4 News (Denver, Colorado)
  14. ^ Gratis knuffels op de Meir (in Dutch)
  15. ^ Goedaardig virus verovert de wereld (in Dutch)
  16. ^ A little tenderness in a world of roughness... (in French)
  17. ^ The Straits Times, "The Sunday Times Lifestyle", L5. December 24, 2006. "Care for a hug?" by Eunice Quek.
  18. ^ Kaohsiung Liberty Times
  19. ^ Free hugs for France, news.com.au, March 12, 2007
  20. ^ Jiya Se Jiya: Rahmanâs New Song Promotes The Free Hugs Campaign
  21. ^ [1]

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Free Hugs  
  * Official Home of the Free Hugs Campaign
  * The Illustrated Guide to Free Hugs
  * Juan Mann's site
  * Original Free Hugs video at YouTube
  * Free Hugs Campaign On Facebook
  * Free Hugs Campaign on Myspace
  * Free Hugs Group on DeviantArt
  * Random Huggers Day
  * Free Artwork for Free Hugs day
  * Streetkiss

### [edit] Other countries

  * Denmark
  * Cymru - Wales
  * France
  * Israel
  * Japan
  * Lithuania
  * Poland
  * Romania
  * Russia
  * South Korea
  * Spain
  * Sweden

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_Hugs_Campaign"

Categories: Social movements | 2006 introductions

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 07:34 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



