
# Dennis Kucinich

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Dennis John Kucinich  
Dennis Kucinich  
  
* * *
Member of the U.S. House of Representatives  
from Ohio's 10th district  
Incumbent  
Assumed office  
January 3, 1997  
Preceded by Martin Hoke  
Succeeded by Incumbent (2009)  
* * *
53rd Mayor of Cleveland  
In office  
1977 â 1979  
Preceded by Ralph J. Perk  
Succeeded by George Voinovich  
* * *  
Born October 8, 1946 (1946-10-08) (age 62)  
Cleveland, Ohio  
Nationality American  
Political party Democratic  
Spouse Elizabeth Kucinich  
Children Jackie Kucinich  
Residence Cleveland  
Alma mater Cleveland State University  
Case Western Reserve University  
Religion Roman Catholic  
Website Congressman Dennis Kucinich  
Dennis John Kucinich (IPA: [kuËsÉªnÉªtÊ]) (born October 8, 1946) is a
Democratic member of the United States House of Representatives and was a
candidate for the Democratic nomination for President of the United States in
the 2004 and 2008 elections.[1]

Kucinich currently represents the 10th District of Ohio in the House of
Representatives, which he has been serving since 1996. His district includes
most of western Cleveland as well as suburbs such as Parma and Lakewood. He is
currently the chairman of the Domestic Policy Subcommittee of the House
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. He is also a member of the
Education and Labor Committee.

From 1977 to 1979, Kucinich served as the 53rd mayor of Cleveland, Ohio, a
tumultuous term in which he survived a recall election and was successful in a
battle against selling the municipal electric utility before being defeated
for reelection by George Voinovich.

## Contents

  * 1 Personal life
  * 2 Recognition
  * 3 Early career
  * 4 Cleveland mayoralty, 1977â1979
  * 5 Post-mayoralty
  * 6 House of Representatives
    * 6.1 Committee Assignments
    * 6.2 Domestic policy voting record
    * 6.3 Foreign policy record
  * 7 2004 Presidential campaign
    * 7.1 Press coverage
    * 7.2 Polls and primaries
  * 8 2008 Presidential campaign
  * 9 Congressional campaigns
    * 9.1 2008 re-election bid
  * 10 Positions
    * 10.1 Monetary Reform
    * 10.2 Plan for Iraq
    * 10.3 Space Preservation Act of 2001
    * 10.4 Impeachment proceedings against Dick Cheney
      * 10.4.1 Cheney impeachment articles introduced
    * 10.5 Opposition to H1B/L1 visa programs
    * 10.6 Plan to ban handguns
    * 10.7 Support for reinstating the Fairness Doctrine
    * 10.8 Animal Rights
    * 10.9 Free Market Drug Act
    * 10.10 Energy policy
    * 10.11 Bush Impeachment Articles Introduced
  * 11 Electoral history
  * 12 See also
  * 13 References
  * 14 External links

  
## [edit] Personal life

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dennis and Elizabeth Kucinich in 2008

Kucinich was born in Cleveland, Ohio, on October 8, 1946, as the eldest of the
seven children of Frank and Virginia Kucinich.[2] His father, a truck driver,
was of Croatian ancestry; his Irish American mother was a homemaker.[3]
Growing up, his family moved 21 times and Kucinich was often charged with the
responsibility of finding apartments they could afford.[4]

He attended Cleveland State University from 1967 to 1970.[5] In 1973, he
graduated from Case Western Reserve University with both a Bachelor of Arts
and an Master of Arts (postgraduate) degrees in speech and communication.[6]
Kucinich was baptized a Roman Catholic.[5] He is twice divorced, with a
daughter, Jackie, from his marriage to Sandra Lee McCarthy. He married his
third wife, Elizabeth Harper, a British citizen, on August 21, 2005. The two
met while Harper was working as an assistant for the Chicago-based American
Monetary Institute, which brought her to Kucinich's House of Representatives
office for a meeting. She is 31 years younger than Kucinich.[7]

Dennis was raised with four brothers, Larry, Frank, Gary and Perry; and two
sisters, Theresa and Beth Ann. On December 19, 2007, Perry Kucinich, the
youngest brother, was found dead in his apartment.[8][9][10] On November 11,
2008, his youngest sister, Beth Ann Kucinich, also died.[11][citation needed]

## [edit] Recognition

In 2003, Kucinich was the recipient of the Gandhi Peace Award, an annual award
bestowed by the Religious Society of Friends-affiliated organization Promoting
Enduring Peace.[2]

## [edit] Early career

Kucinich's political career began early. After running unsuccessfully in 1967,
Kucinich was elected to the Cleveland City Council in 1969 at the age of
twenty-three.[3] In 1972, Kucinich ran for a seat in the United States House
of Representatives, losing narrowly to incumbent Republican William E.
Minshall, Jr. After Minshall's retirement in 1974 Kucinich sought the seat
again, this time failing to get the Democratic nomination, which instead went
to Ronald M. Mottl. Kucinich ran as an Independent candidate in the general
election, placing third with about 30% of the vote. In 1975, Kucinich became
clerk of the municipal court in Cleveland and served in that position for two
years.[12]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mayor Kucinich with Council President, George L. Forbes in 1978.

## [edit] Cleveland mayoralty, 1977â1979

Main article: Mayoral administration of Dennis Kucinich

Kucinich was elected Mayor of Cleveland in 1977 and served in that position
until 1979.[13] At thirty-one years of age, he was the youngest mayor of a
major city in the United States,[3] earning him the nickname "the boy mayor of
Cleveland".[14] Kucinich's tenure as mayor is often regarded as one of the
most tumultuous in Cleveland's history.[15][14] After Kucinich refused to sell
Muni Light, Cleveland's publicly owned electric utility, the Cleveland mafia
put out a hit on Kucinich. A hitman from Maryland planned to shoot him in the
head during the Columbus Day Parade, but the plot fell apart when Kucinich was
hospitalized and missed the event. When the city fell into default shortly
thereafter, the mafia leaders called off the contract killer.[16]

In the book Best and Worst of the Big-City Leaders, 1820â1993, Melvin G.
Holli, in consultation with a panel of selected experts, claimed Kucinich to
be among the ten worst big-city mayors of all time, while Kucinich's
supporters say that Kucinich kept his campaign promise of refusing to sell
Muni Light to CEI and was brave for not giving in to big business.[citation
needed] Specifically, it was the Cleveland Trust Company that suddenly
required all of the city's debts be paid in full, which forced the city into
default, after news of Kucinich's refusal to sell the city utility. For years
these debts were routinely rolled over, pending future payment, until
Kucinich's announcement was made public. In 1998 the council honored him for
having the "courage and foresight" to stand up to the banks and saving the
city an estimated $195 million between 1985 and 1995.[17]

## [edit] Post-mayoralty

After losing his re-election bid for Mayor to George Voinovich in 1979,
Kucinich kept a low profile in Cleveland politics. He criticized a tax
referendum proposed by Voinovich in 1980, which voters eventually approved. He
also struggled to find employment and moved to Los Angeles, California, where
he stayed with a friend, actress Shirley MacLaine.[18] During the next three
years, Kucinich earned money as a radio talk-show host, lecturer, and
consultant.[5] It was a difficult period for Kucinich financially. Without a
steady paycheck, Kucinich fell behind in his mortgage payments, nearly lost
his house in Cleveland, and ended up borrowing money from friends, including
MacLaine, to keep it.[18] On his 1982 income tax return, Kucinich reported an
income of $38.[18] When discussing this period, Kucinich stated, "When I was
growing up in Cleveland, my early experience conditioned me to hang in there
and not to quit... It's one thing to experience that as a child, but when you
have to as an adult, it has a way to remind you how difficult things can be.
You understand what people go through."[18]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kucinich gestures to the audience following his speech on the second day of
the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado.

In 1982, Kucinich moved back to Cleveland and ran for Secretary of State;
however, he lost the Democratic primary to Sherrod Brown.[18] In 1983,
Kucinich won a special election to fill the seat of a Cleveland city
councilman who had died.[19] His brother, Gary Kucinich, was also a councilman
at the time.

In 1985, there was some speculation that Kucinich might run for mayor again.
Instead his brother Gary ran against (and lost to) the incumbent Voinovich.
Kucinich, meanwhile, gave up his council position to run for Governor of Ohio
as an independent against Richard Celeste, but later withdrew from the
race.[19] After this, Kucinich, in his own words "on a quest for meaning,"
lived quietly in New Mexico until 1994, when he won a seat in the Ohio State
Senate.[19] "He was in political Siberia in the 1980s," said Joseph Tegreene
years later. "It was only when it became clear to people that he was right...
he got belated recognition for the things that he did."

In 1996, Kucinich was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives,
representing the 10th district of Ohio. He defeated two-term Republican
incumbent Martin Hoke by three percentage points. However, he has never faced
another contest nearly that close, and has since been re-elected six
times.[20]

On August 27, 2008, he delivered a widely publicized speech at the Democratic
National Convention.[21]

## [edit] House of Representatives

### [edit] Committee Assignments

  * Education and Labor Committee 
    * Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Elementary and Secondary Education
    * Subcommittee on Healthy Families and Communities
  * Oversight and Government Reform Committee 
    * Subcommittee on Domestic Policy (Chairman)
    * Subcommittee on the Federal Workforce, Postal Service, and the District of Columbia

### [edit] Domestic policy voting record

Main article: Political positions of Dennis Kucinich

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kucinich outside the Capitol in June 2007

Kucinich helped introduce and is one of 87 cosponsors in the House of
Representatives of the United States National Health Insurance Act or HR 676
proposed by Rep. John Conyers in 2003,[22] which provides for a universal
single-payer public health-insurance plan.

His voting record is not always in line with that of the Democratic Party.
Kucinich voted against the USA PATRIOT Act, against the Military Commissions
Act of 2006,[23] and was one of six who voted against the Violent
Radicalization and Homegrown Terrorism Act.[24] He also voted for authorizing
and directing the Committee on the Judiciary to investigate whether sufficient
grounds existed for the impeachment of Bill Clinton.[25]

Kucinich criticized the flag-burning amendment and voted against the
impeachment of President Clinton. His congressional voting record has leaned
strongly toward a pro-life stance, although he noted that he has never
supported a constitutional amendment prohibiting abortion altogether. But in
2003, he began describing himself as pro-choice and said he had shifted away
from his earlier position on the issue.[26] Press releases have indicated that
he is pro-choice and supports ending the abstinence-only policy of sex
education and increasing the use of contraception to make abortion "less
necessary" over time. His voting record since 2003 has reflected his pro
choice stance.

He has criticized Diebold Election Systems (now Premier Election Solutions)
for promoting voting machines that fail to leave a traceable paper trail, and
posted on his website internal company memos in which company executives
promised to deliver the 2004 Ohio election to Bush.[27] He was one of the
thirty-one who voted in the House to not count the electoral votes from Ohio
in the United States presidential election, 2004.[28]

### [edit] Foreign policy record

Kucinich has criticized the foreign policy of President Bush, including the
2003 invasion of Iraq and what he perceives as growing American hostility
towards Iran. He has always voted against funding it. In 2005, he voted
against the Iran Freedom and Support Act, calling it a "stepping stone to
war".[29] He also signed a letter of solidarity with Hugo ChÃ¡vez in Venezuela
in 2004.[30]

He advocates the abolition of all nuclear weapons, calling on the United
States to be the leader in multilateral disarmament.[31] Kucinich has also
strongly opposed space-based weapons and has sponsored legislation, HR 2977,
banning the deployment and use of space-based weapons.[32]

Kucinich advocates US withdrawal from the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) because, in his view, it causes the loss of more American jobs than it
creates, and does not provide adequate protections for worker rights and
safety and environmental safeguards. He is against the Central American Free
Trade Agreement (CAFTA) for the same reason.[33]

Kucinich is also in favor of increased dialog with Iran in order to avoid a
militaristic confrontation at all costs. He expressed such sentiments at an
American Iranian Council conference in New Brunswick, New Jersey which
included Chuck Hagel, Javad Zarif, Nicholas Kristof, and Anders Liden to
discuss Iranian-American relations, and potential ways to increase dialog in
order to avoid conflict.[34]

He believes the US should move aggressively to reduce emissions that cause
climate change due to global warming[35] and should ratify the Kyoto Protocol,
a major international agreement signed by over 160 countries to reduce the
amount of greenhouse gases emitted by each signatory.[36]

Kucinich and Ron Paul are the only two congressional representatives who
voted[37] against the Rothman-Kirk Resolution,[38] which calls on the United
Nations to charge Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad with violating the
genocide convention of the United Nations Charter based on statements that he
has made. Kucinich defended his vote by saying that Ahmadinejad's statements
could be translated to mean that he wants a regime change in Israel, not death
to its people and supporters, and that the resolution is an attempt to beat
"the war drum to build support for a US attack on Iran."[39]

On January 9, 2009, Kucinich was one of the dissenters in a 390-5 vote with 22
abstentions for a resolution recognizing Israel's "right to defend itself
[against Hamas rocket attacks]" and reaffirming the U.S.'s support for Israel.
The other 4 "no" votes were Gwen Moore of Wisconsin, Maxine Waters of
California, Nick Rahall of West Virginia, and Ron Paul of Texas. [40]

Kucinich is the only congressional representative to vote against[41] the
symbolic "9/11 Commemoration" resolution.[42] In a press statement[43] he
defended his vote by saying that the bill did not make reference to "the lies
that took us into Iraq, the lies that keep us there, the lies that are being
used to set the stage for war against Iran and the lies that have undermined
our basic civil liberties here at home."

In a visit to the rest of the Middle East in September 2007, Kucinich said he
did not visit Iraq because "I feel the United States is engaging in an illegal
occupation."[44] Kucinich was criticized for his visit to Syria and praise of
the President Bashar al-Assad on Syria's national TV.[45] He praised Syria for
taking in Iraqi refugees. "What most people are not aware of is that Syria has
taken in more than 1.5 million Iraqi refugees," Kucinich said. "The Syrian
government has actually shown a lot of compassion in keeping its doors open,
and being a host for so many refugees."[46]

Despite Kucinich's committed opposition to the war in Iraq, in the days after
the September 11, 2001 attacks he did vote to authorize President Bush broad
war making powers,[47] the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against
Terrorists. The Authorization was used by the Bush Administration in its
justification for suspension of habeas corpus in the Guantanamo Bay detention
camp and its wiretapping of American citizens under the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act. Kucinich voted along with 419 of his House colleagues in
favor of this resolution, while only one Congresswoman opposed, Representative
Barbara Lee.

## [edit] 2004 Presidential campaign

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kucinich speaks out against the occupation of Iraq at the 2004 Democratic
National Convention.

Kucinich was criticized during his 2004 campaign for changing his stance on
the issue of abortion.[26] His explanation was "I've always worked to make
abortions less necessary, through sex education and birth control. But the
direction that Congress has taken, increasingly, is to make it impossible for
women to be able to have an abortion if they need to protect their health. So
when I saw the direction taken, it finally came to the point where I
understood that women will not be truly free unless they have the right to
choose."[48]

Ralph Nader praised Kucinich as "a genuine progressive,"[citation needed] and
most Greens were friendly to Kucinich's campaign, some going so far as to
indicate that they would not have run against him had he won the Democratic
nomination. However, Kucinich was unable to carry any states in the 2004
Democratic Primaries, and John Kerry eventually won the Democratic nomination
at the Democratic National Convention.

### [edit] Press coverage

On December 10, 2003, the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) announced the
removal of its correspondents from the campaigns of Kucinich, Carol Moseley
Braun and Al Sharpton.[49]

The announcement came one day after a Democratic presidential debate hosted by
ABC News' Ted Koppel, in which Koppel asked whether the candidacies of
Kucinich, Moseley Braun and Sharpton were merely "vanity campaigns," and
Koppel and Kucinich exchanged uncomfortable dialog.[50]

Kucinich, previously critical of the limited coverage given his campaign,
characterized ABC's decision as an example of media companies' power to shape
campaigns by choosing which candidates to cover and questioned its timing,
coming immediately after the debate.[49]

ABC News, while stating its commitment to give coverage to a wide range of
candidates, argued that focusing more of its "finite resources" on those
candidates most likely to win would best serve the public debate.[50]

### [edit] Polls and primaries

In the 2004 Democratic presidential nomination race, national polls
consistently showed Kucinich's support in single digits, but rising,
especially as Howard Dean lost some support among peace activists for refusing
to commit to cutting the Pentagon budget. Though he was not viewed as a viable
contender by most, there were differing polls on Kucinich's popularity.

He placed second in MoveOn.org's primary, behind Dean. He also placed first in
other polls, particularly Internet-based ones. This led many activists to
believe that his showing in the primaries might be better than what Gallup
polls had been saying. However, in the non-binding Washington, D.C. primary,
Kucinich finished fourth (last out of candidates listed on the ballot), with
only 8% of the vote. Support for Kucinich was most prevalent in the caucuses
around the country.

In the Iowa caucuses he finished fifth, receiving about 1% of the state
delegates from Iowa; far below the 15% threshold for receiving national
delegates. He performed similarly in the New Hampshire primary, placing sixth
among the seven candidates with 1% of the vote. In the Mini-Tuesday primaries
he finished near the bottom in most states, with his best performance in New
Mexico where he received less than 6% of the vote, and still no delegates.
Kucinich's best showing in any Democratic contest was in the February 24
Hawaii caucus, in which he won 31% of caucus participants, coming in second
place to Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and winning Maui County, the only
county won by Kucinich in either of his presidential campaigns. He also saw a
double-digit showing in Maine on February 8, where he got 16% percent in that
state's caucus.

On Super Tuesday, March 2, Kucinich gained another strong showing with the
Minnesota caucus, where 17% of the ballots went to him. In his home state of
Ohio, he gained 9% in the primary.

Kucinich campaigned heavily in Oregon, spending 30 days there during the two
months leading up to the state's May 18 primary. He continued his campaign
because "the future direction of the Democratic Party has not yet been
determined"[51] and chose to focus on Oregon "because of its progressive
tradition and its pioneering spirit."[52] He even offered to campaign jointly
with Kerry during Kerry's visit to the state, though the offer was
ignored.[citation needed] He won 16% of the vote.

Even after Kerry won enough delegates to secure the nomination, Kucinich
continued to campaign until just before the convention, citing an effort to
help shape the agenda of the Democratic Party. He was the last candidate to
end his campaign. He endorsed Kerry on July 22, four days before the start of
the Democratic National Convention.[53]

## [edit] 2008 Presidential campaign

Main article: Dennis Kucinich presidential campaign, 2008

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kucinich speaking on the campaign trail, January 2007.

On December 11, 2006 in a speech delivered at Cleveland City Hall, Kucinich
announced he would seek the nomination of the Democratic Party for President
in 2008. His platform[54] for 2008 included:

  * Creating a single-payer not-for-profit system of universal health care that provides full coverage for all Americans by passage of the United States National Health Insurance Act.
  * The immediate, phased withdrawal of all U.S. forces from Iraq; replacing them with an international security force.
  * Guaranteed quality education for all; including free pre-kindergarten and college for all who want it.
  * Immediate withdrawal from the World Trade Organization (WTO) and North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
  * Immediate repeal of the USA PATRIOT Act.
  * Fostering a world of international cooperation.
  * Abolishing the death penalty.
  * Environmental renewal and clean energy.
  * Creating a moratorium on Genetically Modified Organism (GMO).
  * Implementation of H.R. 676, which integrates traditional medicine with complementary and alternative medicine (CAM).
  * Ban offshore drilling.
  * Halt all Biochemical Aerial Spraying of Pesticides and other toxins.
  * Preventing the privatization of social security.
  * Providing full social security benefits at age 65.
  * Creating a cabinet-level "Department of Peace"
  * Ratifying the ABM Treaty and the Kyoto Protocol.
  * Introducing reforms to bring about instant-runoff voting.
  * Protecting a woman's "right to choose" while decreasing the number of abortions performed in the U.S.
  * Ending the War on Drugs.
  * Legalizing same-sex marriage.
  * Strongly promoting workers' rights.
  * Ending the H-1B and L-1 visa Programs
  * Restoring rural communities and family farms.
  * Strengthening gun control.
  * Legalizing medicinal marijuana and decriminalizing non-medical possession.

Kucinich described his stance on the issues as mainstream.[55] "My politics
are center for the Democratic party," he said in an interview before an AFL-
CIO sponsored debate.[citation needed]

Kucinich told his supporters in Iowa that if he did not appear on the second
ballot in any caucus that they should back Barack Obama:

> "I hope Iowans will caucus for me as their first choice ... because of my
singular positions on the war, on health care and trade," Kucinich said. "But
in those caucus locations where my support doesn't reach the necessary
threshold, I strongly encourage all of my supporters to make Barack Obama
their second choice."[56][dead link][57]

At a debate of Democratic presidential candidates in Philadelphia on October
30, 2007, NBC's Tim Russert cited a passage from a book by Shirley MacLaine in
which the author writes that Kucinich had seen a UFO from her home in
Washington State. Russert asked if MacLaine's assertion was true. Kucinich
confirmed and emphasized that he merely meant he had seen an unidentified
flying object, just as former US president Jimmy Carter has.[58][59] Russert
then cited a statistic that 14% of Americans say they have witnessed a
UFO.[58] The next day, Russert's "UFO question" drew harsh criticism from
Kucinich's fellow candidate, former Senator from Alaska, Mike Gravel:

> "Once again Russert assumed his role as the establishment's Hatchetman. Last
debate, he sandbagged me with the bankruptcy question. This time he clocked
Dennis with the UFO. When is Russert going to ask Hillary about the billing
records or the cattle futures during a debate? Russert is America's most
overrated journalist..." [60]

On November 16, 2007, Larry Flynt hosted a fundraiser for Kucinich at the Los
Angeles-based Hustler-LFP headquarters, attended by Kucinich and his wife,
which has drawn criticism from Flynt's detractors. Attendees included such
notables as Edward Norton, Woody Harrelson, Sean Penn, Robin Wright Penn,
Melissa Etheridge, Tammy Etheridge, Stephen Stills, Kristen Stills, Frances
Fisher, and Esai Morales. Campaign spokesmen have declined to
comment.[61][62][63]

In December 2007, author Gore Vidal endorsed Kucinich for president.[64]

Kucinich's 2008 presidential campaign was advised by a steering committee
including Progressive Democrats of America (PDA) Founder Steve Cobble, long-
time Kucinich press secretary Andy Junewicz, former Carter Fundraiser Kenneth
Brandon, Ani DiFranco Tour Manager Susan Alzner, West Point Graduate and
former Army Captain Mike Klein and New Jersey-based political consultant Vin
Gopal. The campaign was seen as a platform to push progressive issues into the
Democratic Party, including a not-for-profit health care system, same-sex
marriage, increasing the minimum wage, opposing capital punishment, and
impeachment.

On Monday, January 7, 2008 actor Viggo Mortensen endorsed Kucinich's
presidential campaign in New Hampshire.[65] On Thursday, January 10, 2008,
Kucinich asked for a New Hampshire recount based on discrepancies between the
machine-counted ballots and the hand-counted ballots. He stated that he wanted
to make sure "100% of the voters had 100% of their votes counted."[66]

On Tuesday, January 15, 2008, Kucinich was "disinvited" from a Democratic
presidential debate on MSNBC. A ruling that the debate could not go ahead
without Kucinich was overturned on appeal.[67] Kucinich later responded to the
questions posed in the MSNBC debate in a show hosted by Democracy Now!.[68]

Kucinich dropped his bid for the Democratic nomination on Thursday, January
24, 2008, and did not endorse any other candidate. He later endorsed Barack
Obama after he had won the nomination.[69] [70] On Friday, January 25, 2008,
he made a formal announcement of the end of his campaign for president and his
focus on reelection to congress.[71]

## [edit] Congressional campaigns

Kucinich has always been reelected to Congress by sound margins in his
strongly Democratic-leaning district. Kucinich has so far won primary
challenges against him for the Democratic nomination convincingly. In the most
recent general election (2006), Kucinich defeated another Democratic primary
challenger by a wide margin and defeated Republican Mike Dovilla in the
general election with 66% of the vote.

### [edit] 2008 re-election bid

See also: United States House of Representatives elections in Ohio,
2008#District 10

His opponents included Cleveland City Councilman Joe Cimperman and North
Olmsted Mayor Thomas O'Grady. In February Kucinich raised around $50,000
compared to Cimperman's $228,000 [72], but through a YouTube money-raising
campaign he managed to raise $700,000, surpassing Cimperman's
$487,000.[73][74]

Cimperman, who was endorsed by the Mayor of Cleveland and the Cleveland Plain
Dealer, criticized Kucinich for focusing too much on campaigning for president
and not on the district. Kucinich accused Cimperman of representing corporate
and real estate interests. Cimperman described Kucinich as an absentee
congressman who failed to pass any major legislative initiatives in his
12-year House career. In an interview, Cimperman said he was tired of Kucinich
and Cleveland being joke fodder for late-night talk-show hosts, saying "It's
time for him to go home."[75][76] An ad paid for by Cimperman's campaign
claimed that Kucinich has missed over 300 votes, but by checking the ad's
source the actual number was 139.[77][78] However, Kucinich is well known for
his constituency service.[79]

A report suggested that representatives of Nancy Pelosi and American Israel
Public Affairs Committee would "guarantee" Kucinich's re-election if he
dropped his bid to impeach Dick Cheney and George W. Bush, though Kucinich
denies the meeting happened.[80][81] It was also suggested that Kucinich's
calls for universal health care and an immediate withdrawal from Iraq made him
a thorn in the side of the Democrats' congressional leadership, as well as his
refusal to pledge to support the eventual presidential nominee, which he later
reconsidered.[75]

Kucinich took part in a debate with the other primary challengers. Barbara
Ferris criticized him for not bringing as much money back to the district as
other area legislators and authoring just one bill that passed during his 12
years in Congress. Kucinich responded "It was a Republican Congress and there
weren't many Democrats passing meaningful legislation during a Republican
Congress."[82]

Kucinich won the primary, receiving 68,156 votes out of a total of 135,589
cast to beat Cimperman 52% to 33%.[83]

Kucinich defeated former State Representative Jim Trakas in the November 4,
2008 general election with 153,357 votes, 56.8% of those cast.

## [edit] Positions

Based on his voting record in Congress, the American Conservative Union (ACU)
gave Kucinich a conservative rating of 9.73%,[84] and for 2008, the liberal
Americans for Democratic Action (ADA) gave him a liberal rating of 95%.[85]

### [edit] Monetary Reform

In the aftermath of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 Kucinich
calls for the Federal Reserve System to be put under control of U.S.
Treasury[86]. Additionally, banks shall no longer be allowed to create money,
putting an end to Fractional-reserve banking[87]. He cites Stephen Zarlenga as
the initiatior of that proposal.

### [edit] Plan for Iraq

On January 8, 2007 Dennis Kucinich unveiled his comprehensive exit plan to
bring the troops home and stabilize Iraq. His plan includes the following
steps:[88]

  1. Announce that the US will end the occupation, close the military bases, and withdraw.
  2. Announce that existing funds will be used to bring the troops and the necessary equipment home.
  3. Order a simultaneous return of all US contractors to the US and turn over the contracting work to the Iraqi government.
  4. Convene a regional conference for developing a security and stabilization force for Iraq.
  5. Prepare an international security peacekeeping force to replace US troops, who then return home.
  6. Develop and fund a process of national reconciliation.
  7. Restart programs for reconstruction and creating jobs for the Iraqi people.
  8. Provide reparations for the damage that has been done to the lives of Iraqis.
  9. Assure the political sovereignty of Iraq and ensure that their oil isn't stolen.
  10. Repair the Iraqi economy.
  11. Guarantee economic sovereignty for Iraq.
  12. Commence an international truth and reconciliation process, which establishes a policy of truth and reconciliation between the people of the US and Iraq.

### [edit] Space Preservation Act of 2001

Kucinich introduced the first Space Preservation Act, on October 2, 2001, with
no cosponsors. The bill was designed to "preserve the cooperative, peaceful
uses of space for the benefit of all humankind." The bill was referred to the
House Science, the House Armed Services, and the House International Relations
committees. The bill died in committee (April 9, 2002) because of an
unfavorable executive comment received from the Department of Defense.[89]

### [edit] Impeachment proceedings against Dick Cheney

Sister project Wikinews has related news: Democrat submits resolution to
impeach Cheney  
Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

US House Resolution 333

On April 17, 2007, Kucinich sent a letter to his Democratic colleagues saying
that he planned to file impeachment proceedings against Dick Cheney, then Vice
President of the United States.[90] Kucinich planned to introduce the
impeachment articles on April 24, 2007, but in light of Cheney's doctor's
visit to inspect a blood clot, Kucinich decided to postpone the scheduled
press conference "until the vice president's condition is clarified."[91]

Kucinich held a press conference on the evening of April 24, 2007, revealing
House Resolution 333 and the three articles of impeachment against Cheney. He
charges Cheney with manipulating the evidence of Iraq's weapons program,
deceiving the nation about Iraq's connection to al-Qaeda, and threatening
aggression against Iran in violation of the United Nations charter. Kucinich
opened his press conference by quoting from the Declaration of Independence,
and stated: "I believe the Vice President's conduct of office has been
destructive to the founding purposes of our nation. Today, I have introduced
House Resolution 333, Articles of Impeachment Relating to Vice President
Richard B. Cheney. I do so in defense of the rights of the American people to
have a government that is honest and peaceful."[92]

During the first Democratic Presidential debate at South Carolina State
University,[93] none of the other candidates' hands went up when the
moderator, Brian Williams, asked if they would support Kucinich's plan to
impeach Cheney. In response, Kucinich retrieved a pocket-sized copy of the
U.S. Constitution from his coat and expressed the importance of protecting and
defending constitutional principles.

> This is a pocket copy of the Constitution which I carry with me, because I
took an oath to defend the Constitution. We've spent a lot of time talking
about Iraq here tonight and America's role in the world. This country was
taken into war based on lies. This country was taken into war based on lies
about weapons of mass destruction and Al Qaeda's role with respect to Iraq,
which there wasn't one at the time we went in. I want to state that Mr. Cheney
must be held accountable. He is already ginning up a cause for war against
Iran. Now, we have to stand for this Constitution, we have to protect and
defend this Constitution. And this vice president has violated this
Constitution. So I think that while my friends on the stage may not be ready
to take this stand, the American people should know that there's at least one
person running for president who wants to reconnect America with its goodness,
with its greatness, with its highest principles, which currently are not being
reflected by those who are in the White House.

> âDennis Kucinich, New York Times, April 27, 2007[94]

As of January 29, 2008, 24 other Congressional representatives have become
cosponsors.[95] Six of these are members of the House Judiciary Committee:
Tammy Baldwin, Keith Ellison, Hank Johnson, Maxine Waters, Steve Cohen and
Sheila Jackson-Lee. In addition, Congressman Robert Wexler, supported by
Representatives Luis Gutierrez and Tammy Baldwin, have begun openly calling
for impeachment hearings to begin.

#### [edit] Cheney impeachment articles introduced

On November 6, 2007, Kucinich used special parliamentary procedure and moved
for a vote on impeaching the Vice President.[96] The measure was opposed by
House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer and House Speaker Pelosi, who stood by
previous comments that, "impeachment is not on our agenda," and they initially
moved to table the bill. When that attempt failed, Mr. Hoyer quickly moved to
refer the bill to the House Judiciary Committee. That motion succeeded.[96]

### [edit] Opposition to H1B/L1 visa programs

Kucinich has been a vocal opponent of the H1B and L1 visa programs. In an
article on his campaign website, he states:[97]

> The expanded use of H-1B and L-1 visas has had a negative effect on the
workplace of Information Technology workers in America. It has caused a
reduction in wages. It has forced workers to accept deteriorating working
conditions and allowed U.S. companies to concentrate work in technical and
geographic areas that American workers consider undesirable. It has also
reduced the number of IT jobs held by Americans.

### [edit] Plan to ban handguns

In the aftermath of the Virginia Tech massacre in Blacksburg, Virginia,
Kucinich proposed a plan that he says will address violence in America.
Kucinich is currently drafting legislation that includes a ban on the
purchase, sale, transfer, or possession of handguns by civilians.[98]

The congressman has pushed for gun control, even as a city councilman. He did
carry a handgun for a period of time in 1978 (under the recommendation of the
police) when he was the target of a Mafia plot.[99]

### [edit] Support for reinstating the Fairness Doctrine

Kucinich is also involved in efforts to bring back the Fairness Doctrine,
requiring radio stations to give liberal and conservative points of view equal
time, which he and other critics of talk radio claim is not presently the
case. He is joined in this effort by fellow Democrat Maurice Hichney, among
others, as well as Vermont's independent Senator Bernie Sanders.[100]
Conservatives have criticized these plans, alleging that what they believe to
be a liberal-dominated Hollywood, academia, new media, and mainstream media
would not be subject to these regulations.[101][102][103]

### [edit] Animal Rights

Kucinich addresses the issue of factory farming in his policy encouraging
independent, family-owned, and organic farming. This would help lead to "the
meat that we consume coming from happy and healthy free-range animals,"
Kucinich states on his campaign website.[104]

Kucinich is one of the few vegans in Congress.[2] He has maintained a diet for
many years that excludes animal products in accordance with his conviction
that "all life on our Earth [is] sacred."[104][105]

### [edit] Free Market Drug Act

Kucinich believes that the prices for patented drugs are unreasonably high,
and that patent monopolies have created a restricted, unfree drug market.
"Simply put, if drug manufacturers were operating in a free market like most
other businesses in the US, drug prices would be significantly lower." On
September 29, 2004, he introduced H.R. 5155, the Free Market Drug Act; a
system where the National Institutes of Health would fund research, thus
disconnecting the manufacturing of drugs from research and increasing
competition among private manufacturers. [106]

### [edit] Energy policy

As mayor of Cleveland in the 1970s, Kucinich saved the city's Municipal Light
System and opposed construction of the Davis-Besse Nuclear Power Plant and
Perry Nuclear Power Plant on Lake Erie. Kucinich also helped Ohioans defeat a
planned regional radioactive waste dump, and has long advocated renewable
energy and efficient energy use.[107]

### [edit] Bush Impeachment Articles Introduced

See also: Movement to impeach George W. Bush

On June 9, 2008, Kucinich gave notice of his intention to introduce 35
articles of impeachment against President George W. Bush on the floor of the
House of Representatives.[108][109] video

<IMG>

This article may need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect
recent events or newly available information, and remove this template when
finished. Please see the talk page for more information.  
He officially offered his resolution the next day and the Clerk spent just
under four hours reading the resolution into the House record. After the Clerk
had finished reading the resolution, Kucinich moved to refer the resolution to
the House Judiciary Committee; the House voted on June 11 to refer the
resolution.

Calling it "a sworn duty" of Congress to act, Robert Wexler co-sponsored and
signed, on June 10, 2008, Kucinich's Articles of impeachment for President
Bush, and stated: "President Bush deliberately created a massive propaganda
campaign to sell the war in Iraq to the American people and the charges
detailed in this impeachment resolution indicate an unprecedented abuse of
executive power."[110] Democratic leaders Steny Hoyer and Nancy Pelosi opposed
it and she announced that âshe would not support a resolution calling for
Bush's impeachment, saying such a move was unlikely to succeed and would be
divisive.â

On June 20, former Bush press secretary Scott McClellan testified before the
House Judiciary Committee about his experiences in the administration leading
up to the war.[111]

On July 10, 2008, Kucinich introduced one article of impeachment against
President George W. Bush for misleading Congress into war. [112][113][114]

On July 14, 2008 Kucinich introduced a new resolution of impeachment against
George W. Bush with only one count. Kucinich charged Bush of manufacturing
evidence to sway public opinion in favor of the war in Iraq. Speaker Pelosi
said in a CBS interview on July 14 that this resolution of impeachment should
be looked at more closely. On July 15 the resolution was sent to the judiciary
committee. According the associated press the judiciary committee is expected
to hold at least one hearing on the issue and will hear testimony from
Washington insiders, and experts.

## [edit] Electoral history

Main article: Electoral history of Dennis Kucinich

## [edit] See also

  * 2008 Democratic Party presidential primaries
  * 2008 Democratic presidential candidates
  * United States presidential election, 2008
  * List of United States Representatives from Ohio
  * The Kucinich Resolution
  * Wake Up America (Speech)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Kucinich abandons White House bid", WRAL-TV, January 24, 2008
  2. ^ a b c "About Dennis Kucinich." Dennis for President. July 24, 2007. <http://www2.kucinich.us/files/pdfs/about_dennis.pdf>
  3. ^ a b c Okamoto, Lynn (2003-09-07). "Kucinich's hard childhood a 'gift' yielding strength, compassion". Des Moines Register. Archived from the original on 2004-02-09. http://web.archive.org/web/20040209061551/http://www.dmregister.com/news/stories/c4788998/22187297.html.
  4. ^ Ramer, Holly (2007-08-15). "Kucinich speaks from experience on homelessness". Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/news/local/new_hampshire/articles/2007/08/15/kucinich_speaks_from_experience_on_homelessness/. Retrieved on 2007-08-16.
  5. ^ a b c "Presidency 2004 DENNIS J. KUCINICH (Democrat - Ohio)."Politics1 â Profile of Rep. Dennis Kucinich (D-OH). Politics1.com. July 25, 2007 http://www.politics1.com/kucinich.htm
  6. ^ "About Dennis." Congressman Dennis Kucinich. July 25, 2007 http://kucinich.house.gov/Biography/
  7. ^ Theiss, Evelyn (2005-10-30). "How Kucinich Found Love". Cleveland, Ohio: The Plain Dealer. Archived from the original on 2005-10-30. http://www.commondreams.org/headlines05/1030-04.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.
  8. ^ Kucinich's brother found dead in home, CNN, December 19, 2007
  9. ^ Dennis Kucinich's brother found dead, MSNBC, December 19, 2007
  10. ^ Perry Kucinich, Dennis' younger brother, found dead in apartment, December 19, 2007, Alana Baranik, Cleveland Plain Dealer
  11. ^ McRae, Sarena (2008-11-11). "Beth Ann Kucinich, 48, musician, artist, sister of Congressman Dennis Kucinich". Cleveland Plain Dealer. http://www.cleveland.com/obituaries/index.ssf/2008/11/beth_ann_kucinich_48_musician.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-26.
  12. ^ Bartimole, Roldo (1992-07-18). "25 Years of Cleveland Mayors: Who Really Governs?" (PDF). Point of View. http://www.clevelandmemory.org/roldo/pdf/wheehl.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.
  13. ^ The Encyclopedia Of Cleveland History by Cleveland Bicentennial Commission (Cleveland, Ohio), David D. Van Tassel (Editor), and John J. Grabowski (Editor) ISBN 0253330564
  14. ^ a b The Plain Dealer, August 1, 1999. Our Century: 'Boy Mayor' Leads Battle Into Default by Fred McGunagle.
  15. ^ The Crisis of Growth Politics: Cleveland, Kucinich, and the Challenge of Urban Populism by Todd Swanstrom ISBN 0877223661
  16. ^ Renner, James (2007-07-04). "The Mafia Plot To Kill Dennis Kucinich". The Cleveland Free Times: pp. Cover story. http://www.freetimes.com/stories/15/9/the-mafia-plot-to-kill-dennis-kucinich. Retrieved on 2007-07-06.
  17. ^ [1]'Boy Mayor' Kucinich Took Charge in Utility Debt Crisis, From LA Times, January 23, 2003
  18. ^ a b c d e Pilolla, Ed (2004). "He's always had a destiny". Concord Monitor. Archived from the original on 2004-01. http://www.muhajabah.com/muslims4kucinich/archives/2004/01/hes_always_had.php. Retrieved on 2008-01-13.
  19. ^ a b c Dennis Kucinich - Congresspedia
  20. ^ "Election Statistics". Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives. http://clerk.house.gov/member_info/electionInfo/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-10.
  21. ^ [2]Kucinich's Democratic National Convention Speech (VIDEO), From Huffington Post, August 26, 2008
  22. ^ H.R. 676 The Library of Congress
  23. ^ GovTrack: H.R. 6166 [109th]: Military Commissions Act of 2006 (Vote On Passage)
  24. ^ GovTrack: H.R. 1955: Violent Radicalization and Homegrown Terrorism Prevention Act of 2007 (Vote On Passage)
  25. ^ H.RES.581 Authorizing and directing the Committee on the Judiciary to investigate whether sufficient grounds exist for the impeachment of William Jefferson Clinton
  26. ^ a b Marc Sandalow, "Ohio Presidential Hopeful Pivots Over to Pro-Choice Camp", San Francisco Chronicle, February 23, 2003.
  27. ^ "Kucinich Calls for Suspension of Electronic Voting", Common Dreams, April 23, 2004.
  28. ^ "Final Vote Results for Role Call 7", January 6, 2005.
  29. ^ Kucinich Speaks Out Against House Bill That Lays The Ground Work For War Against Iran
  30. ^ [3]'Solidarity with Chavez' Former Democrat Presidential Candidates Rev. Jesse Jackson and Rep. Dennis Kucinich support Chavez, August 11, 2004
  31. ^ Kucinich Introduces Legislation To Abolish All Nuclear Weapons
  32. ^ H.R. 2977; Space Preservation Act of 2001
  33. ^ Kucinich's House website
  34. ^ American Iranian Council website
  35. ^ Congressman Dennis Kucinich
  36. ^ Kucinich's House website
  37. ^ Calling on the United Nations Security Council to charge Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad with violating the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the United Nations Charter because of his calls for the destruction of the State of Israel, June 20, 2007
  38. ^ Bill Number H.CON.RES.21 for the 110th Congress
  39. ^ "Kucinich Iran stance outrages Ohio Jewish leaders", The Plain Dealer, July 12, 2007.
  40. ^ [4]
  41. ^ Final vote results for roll call 866 on H RES 643
  42. ^ H. Res. 643, text of "9/11 Commemoration" bill, September 10, 2007
  43. ^ Kucinich To Oppose September 11 Resolution, Says It Is Incomplete
  44. ^ US Democratic hopeful Kucinich meets Assad, blasts Bush, http://www.jpost.com/servlet/Satellite?cid=1188392553023&pagename=JPost%2FJPArticle%2FShowFull, retrieved on 2007-09-10
  45. ^ "Dennis Kucinich's Syria follies", an editorial of The Plain Dealer, September 13, 2007.
  46. ^ US Democratic hopeful Kucinich meets Assad, blasts Bush, The Jerusalem Post, September 6, 2007
  47. ^ House Joint Resolution 64
  48. ^ Democratic 2004 Primary Presidential Debate in Durham, New Hampshire, December 9, 2003.
  49. ^ a b "Kucinich & Braun Blast ABC For Reducing Campaign Coverage." Democracy Now! December 12, 2003. Accessed July 24, 2007.
  50. ^ a b Robinson, Josh and Lorna Tychostup. "How the Media Picks the Candidates." February 2004. Z Magazine. July 24, 2007.
  51. ^ Rick Lyman, "Down But Not Out, Kucinich Keeps Fighting", The New York Times, May 17, 2004.
  52. ^ "Kerry visits spotlights Oregon's state primary." May 18, 2004. kgw news. Accessed July 25, 2007.
  53. ^ David Halbfinger, "The 2004 Campaign: Campaign Briefing -- The Democrats; Kucinich Endorses Kerry", The New York Times, July 23, 2004.
  54. ^ dennis4president.com - Issues
  55. ^ Naymik, Mark, Many Kucinich backers are out there â way out, http://www.cleveland.com/kucinich/plaindealer/index.ssf?/kucinich/more/1047214686213910.html, retrieved on 2007-10-14
  56. ^ "Kucinich Asks Supporters to Back Obama". Google News. Associated Press. http://ap.google.com/article/ALeqM5gDC1l7fRNVdFdgW4JsjBd03lUOIAD8TTD8M00. Retrieved on 2008-01-02.
  57. ^ "Kucinich Urges Supporters to Back Obama on Second Iowa Ballot". http://www.dennis4president.com/go/newsroom/kucinich-urges-supporters-to-back-obama-on-second-iowa-ballot/. Retrieved on 2008-01-05.
  58. ^ a b Eaton, Sabrina, Kucinich at debate: I did see a UFO, http://blog.cleveland.com/openers/2007/10/kucinich_at_debate_i_did_see_a.html, retrieved on 2007-11-28
  59. ^ National Public Radio, When Democrats Attack, http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=15799851, retrieved on 2007-11-28
  60. ^ Russert's UFO and other Debate Mysteries \- by Sen. Mike Gravel, The Huffington Post, Oct. 31, 2007
  61. ^ Jones, Chris, Larry Flynt Hosts Fundraiser For Dennis Kucinich, http://www.bloggernews.net/111743, retrieved on 2008-01-03
  62. ^ Katz, Jackson, Dennis Kucinich Endorses Hustler, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/jackson-katz/dennis-kucinich-endorses-_b_77226.html, retrieved on 2008-01-03
  63. ^ Dufour, Jeff, Flynt gets behind Dennis Kucinich, http://www.examiner.com/blogs/Yeas_and_Nays/2007/11/19/Flynt-gets-behind-Dennis-Kucinich, retrieved on 2008-01-03
  64. ^ The Nation: Gore Vidal for Dennis Kucinich: A farsighted populist and pacifist. - Off The Bus on The Huffington Post
  65. ^ TheNation.com - The Return of the King... for Kucinich
  66. ^ Asks for New Hampshire Recount
  67. ^ Court: MSNBC Can Bar Kucinich
  68. ^ Breaking the Sound Barrier: Democracy Now! Re-Hosts NBC Las Vegas Debate to Include Kucinich After NBC Wins Appeal to Exclude Him
  69. ^ Naymik, Mark and Kavanoaugh, Molly. Kucinich drops presidential bid. The Plain Dealer (newspaper), January 24, 2008.
  70. ^ Cillizza, Chris. Why Kucinich Dropped Out Now. The Washington Post, January 24, 2008.
  71. ^ Kucinich, Dennis. Kucinich withdraws from Presidential race. January 25, 2008.
  72. ^ 10th Congressional candidate Palmer raised $133,300 in '07 - OPENERS - Ohio Politics Blog by The Plain Dealer
  73. ^ Dennis Kucinich raised nearly $700,000 in six weeks in bid to keep seat in Congress - cleveland.com
  74. ^ .[5]
  75. ^ a b American Chronicle | Is Dennis Kucinich Getting McKinneyÂ´d
  76. ^ Long Shots Could Pay High Price - WSJ.com
  77. ^ House members who missed votes | 110th Congress | Congress votes database | washingtonpost.com
  78. ^ House members who missed votes | 110th Congress | Congress votes database | washingtonpost.com
  79. ^ Cleveland to Dennis Kucinich: Phone home | Salon News
  80. ^ Breaking News - JTA, Jewish & Israel News
  81. ^ portland imc - 2008.02.06 - Kucinich throws reps from Nancy Pelosi and AIPAC out of his office
  82. ^ U.S. Rep. Dennis Kucinich, 4 challengers debate - cleveland.com
  83. ^ Kucinich Wins Chance To Keep U.S. Rep. Seat - WEWS Cleveland
  84. ^ "2007 U.S. House Votes". American Conservative Union. http://acuratings.org/2007house.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-26.
  85. ^ "ADA Congressional Voting Record 2008". ADA Today. Americans for Democratic Action. http://www.adaction.org/media/votingrecords/2008.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-26.
  86. ^ Dennis Kucinich States His Intention To Put The Federal Reserve Under Government Control
  87. ^ Dennis Kucinich Explains Our Current Economic Situation
  88. ^ "Dennis Kucinich's 12 Point Plan to End the Iraq War."Kucinich for President Volunteer Organizing Site - DK2008.us Kucinich For President. July 24, 2007 <http://dk2008.us/endthewar>
  89. ^ Library of Congress (Thomas)
  90. ^ Ann Akers, Mary (April 17, 2007). "Articles of Impeachment To Be Filed On Cheney". The Washington Post. http://blog.washingtonpost.com/sleuth/2007/04/articles_of_impeachment_to_be.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-30.
  91. ^ "Cheney returns to work after leg check-up". Reuters. April 24, 2007. http://www.reuters.com/article/newsOne/idUSN2439727520070424. Retrieved on 2007-04-30.
  92. ^ "Kucinich Introduces Impeachment Articles Against Cheney". The Washington Post. April 24, 2007. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/04/24/AR2007042401542.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-07.
  93. ^ Johnson, Alex (April 26, 2007). "Democrats seek to seize initiative on Iraq". MSNBC. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/18326264. Retrieved on 2007-05-01.
  94. ^ "The Democrats' First 2008 Presidential Debate". The New York Times. April 27, 2007. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/27/us/politics/27debate_transcript.html?pagewanted=18&_r=1.
  95. ^ Library of Congress, H.RES.333, Summary as of: 04/24/2007 â Introduced, THOMAS
  96. ^ a b "Brady Supports Kucinich Move to Impeach Cheney". The Philadelphia Bulletin. November 7, 2007. http://www.thebulletin.us/site/news.cfm?newsid=18997962&BRD=2737&PAG=461&dept_id=576361&rfi=6.
  97. ^ "Dennis on outsourcing American jobs". Kucinich for President 2008. http://www.dennis4president.com/go/resources/dennis-on-outsourcing-american-jobs/.
  98. ^ Dennis J. Kucinich (2007-04-18). Kucinich Offers Comprehensive Plan to Address Violence in America. Press release. http://kucinich.house.gov/News/DocumentSingle.aspx?DocumentID=62819.
  99. ^ Eaton, Sabrina (2007-04-27). "Kucinich packed heat after 1978 Mafia death plot". The Plain Dealer Politics Blog. http://blog.cleveland.com/openers/2007/04/kucinich_packed_heat_after_197.html.
  100. ^ Fred Lucas: Democrats' New 'Fairness' Push May Silence Conservative Radio Hosts, Critics Say, January 17, 2007
  101. ^ John Berlau: Is the Fairness Doctrine on its Way Back?, October 31, 2006
  102. ^ Hunter, Derek (2007-05-17). "'Fairness Doctrine' Anything but Fair". The Politico. http://dyn.politico.com/printstory.cfm?uuid=960F8E19-3048-5C12-0091F4C92C213AF7.
  103. ^ Will, George F. (2007-05-07). "Fraudulent 'Fairness'". Newsweek. http://www.newsweek.com/id/35081.
  104. ^ a b Animal Rights[dead link], Kucinich for President 2008, Inc. November 16, 2006.
  105. ^ Jennifer Duck, Kucinich Brings Home the Bacon, Vegan-Style, ABC News. May 4, 2007.
  106. ^ [6], Kucinich for patent free drugs.
  107. ^ New Hampshire's Nuclear Primary
  108. ^ "Rep. Kucinich introduces Bush impeachment resolution". AP/MSNBC. 2008-06-10. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/25068638/. Retrieved on 2008-06-10.
  109. ^ [7][dead link]
  110. ^ sun-sentinel.com, U.S. Rep. Wexler calling for impeachment of President Bush
  111. ^ cnn.com, Kucinich introduces Bush impeachment resolution
  112. ^ OpEdNews
  113. ^ rtsp://video1.c-span.org/15days/e071008_kucinich.rm
  114. ^ Draft Version of New Article of Impeachment | AfterDowningStreet.org

## [edit] External links

Find more about Dennis Kucinich on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG>
Definitions from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Congressman Dennis Kucinich official U.S. House site
  * Re-Elect Congressman Kucinich official campaign site
  * Campaigns Wikia - Dennis Kucinich
  * The Peace Alliance
  * Dennis Kucinich Interview at PR.com
  * Dennis Kucinich at the Open Directory Project

  * Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
  * Voting record maintained by The Washington Post
  * Campaign contributions at OpenSecrets.org
  * Biography, voting record, and interest group ratings at Project Vote Smart
  * Issue positions and quotes at On The Issues

Political offices  
Preceded by  
Ralph J. Perk Mayor of Cleveland  
1978â1979 Succeeded by  
George V. Voinovich  
United States House of Representatives  
Preceded by  
Martin R. Hoke Member of the U.S. House of Representatives  
from Ohio's 10th congressional district  
1997âpresent Succeeded by  
Incumbent  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Ohio's current delegation to the United States Congress  
Senators

George Voinovich (R), Sherrod Brown (D)  
Representative(s)

Steve Driehaus (D), Jean Schmidt (R), Mike Turner (R), Jim Jordan (R), Bob
Latta (R), Charlie Wilson (D), Steve Austria (R), John Boehner (R), Marcy
Kaptur (D), Dennis Kucinich (D), Marcia Fudge (D), Pat Tiberi (R), Betty
Sutton (D), Steve LaTourette (R), Mary Jo Kilroy (D), John Boccieri (D), Tim
Ryan (D), Zack Space (D)  
State delegations

Alabama â¢ Alaska â¢ Arizona â¢ Arkansas â¢ California â¢ Colorado â¢
Connecticut â¢ Delaware â¢ Florida â¢ Georgia â¢ Hawaii â¢ Idaho â¢
Illinois â¢ Indiana â¢ Iowa â¢ Kansas â¢ Kentucky â¢ Louisiana â¢ Maine
â¢ Maryland â¢ Massachusetts â¢ Michigan â¢ Minnesota â¢ Mississippi â¢
Missouri â¢ Montana â¢ Nebraska â¢ Nevada â¢ New Hampshire â¢ New Jersey
â¢ New Mexico â¢ New York â¢ North Carolina â¢ North Dakota â¢ Ohio â¢
Oklahoma â¢ Oregon â¢ Pennsylvania â¢ Rhode Island â¢ South Carolina â¢
South Dakota â¢ Tennessee â¢ Texas â¢ Utah â¢ Vermont â¢ Virginia â¢
Washington â¢ West Virginia â¢ Wisconsin â¢ Wyoming  
Non-voting delegations

American Samoa â¢ District of Columbia â¢ Guam â¢ Northern Mariana Islands
â¢ Puerto Rico â¢ U.S. Virgin Islands  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Dennis Kucinich  
People

Elizabeth Kucinich

<IMG>  
Politics

Positions Â· Mayoral administration Â· 2004 presidential election Â· 2008
presidential campaign Â· Electoral history  
Other

United States House of Representatives Â· 2008 Democratic Party presidential
primaries Â· Democratic Party  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Mayors of Cleveland, Ohio  
Mayors of Cleveland (1836-1854)

Willey â¢ Mills â¢ Dockstader â¢ Allen â¢ Mills â¢ Hayward â¢
Starkweather â¢ Hoadley â¢ Harris â¢ Kelsey â¢ Bingham â¢ Case â¢
Brownell  
Mayors of Ohio City (1836-1854)

Barber â¢ Burrows â¢ Baldwin â¢ Standart â¢ Lord â¢ Lamb â¢ Griffith â¢
Beverlin â¢ Burnham â¢ Sheldon â¢ Castle  
Mayors of Cleveland since 1854

Castle â¢ Starkweather â¢ Senter â¢ Flint â¢ Masters â¢ Senter â¢ Chapin
â¢ Buhrer â¢ Pelton â¢ Otis â¢ Payne â¢ Rose â¢ Herrick â¢ Farley â¢
Gardner â¢ Babcock â¢ Gardner â¢ Rose â¢ Blee â¢ McKisson â¢ Farley â¢
Johnson â¢ Baehr â¢ Baker â¢ Davis â¢ Fitzgerald â¢ Kohler â¢ Hopkins
(manager) â¢ Morgan (manager) â¢ Miller â¢ Davis â¢ Burton â¢ Blythin â¢
Lausche â¢ Burke â¢ Celebrezze â¢ Locher â¢ Stokes â¢ Perk â¢ Kucinich
â¢ Voinovich â¢ White â¢ Campbell â¢ Jackson  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States presidential election, 2008  
United States elections, 2008 Â· Candidates (Comparison) Â· Debates Â·
Congressional support Â· Fundraising Â· Ballot access Â· Timeline Â· Super
Tuesday Â· Potomac primary Â· Super Tuesday II Â· General polls Â· Statewide
general polls Â· International polls Â· International reaction  
Democratic Party  
Convention Â· Primary polls  
General polls Â· Debates Â· Primaries  
Primary results Â· Superdelegates

Nominee: Barack Obama (campaign Â· positions Â· transition)  
VP nominee: Joe Biden (positions)  
Former candidates: Evan Bayh Â· Joe Biden (campaign) Â· Hillary Rodham Clinton
(campaign) Â· Chris Dodd (campaign) Â· John Edwards (campaign) Â· Mike Gravel
(campaign) Â· Dennis Kucinich (campaign) Â· Dal LaMagna Â· Bill Richardson
(campaign) Â· Tom Vilsack (campaign)  
Republican Party  
Convention Â· Primary polls  
General polls Â· Debates Â· Primaries  
Primary results

Nominee: John McCain (campaign Â· positions)  
VP nominee: Sarah Palin (positions)  
Former candidates: Sam Brownback Â· Hugh Cort Â· John Cox Â· Dan Gilbert Â·
Jim Gilmore (campaign) Â· Rudy Giuliani (campaign) Â· Mike Huckabee (campaign)
Â· Duncan Hunter (campaign) Â· Alan Keyes (campaign) Â· Ray McKinney Â· Ron
Paul (campaign) Â· Mitt Romney (campaign) Â· Tom Tancredo (campaign) Â· Fred
Thompson (campaign) Â· Tommy Thompson (campaign)  
Constitution Party  
Convention

Nominee: Chuck Baldwin (campaign)/Darrell Castle  
Former candidates: Daniel Imperato Â· Alan Keyes (campaign)  
Green Party  
Convention

Nominee: Cynthia McKinney (campaign Â· positions)/Rosa Clemente  
Former candidates: Elaine Brown Â· Jesse Johnson Â· Kent Mesplay Â· Kat Swift  
Libertarian Party  
Convention

Nominee: Bob Barr (campaign Â· positions)/Wayne Allyn Root  
Former candidates: Mike Gravel (campaign) Â· Daniel Imperato Â· Steve Kubby Â·
George Phillies Â· Wayne Allyn Root Â· Mary Ruwart Â· Doug Stanhope  
Minor parties

America's Independent Party: Alan Keyes (campaign)/Brian Rohrbough Â· Boston
Tea Party: Charles Jay/Thomas L. Knapp Â· New American Independent Party:
Frank McEnulty Â· Objectivist Party Â· Prohibition Party: Gene Amondson/Leroy
Pletten Â· Party for Socialism and Liberation: Gloria La Riva/Eugene Puryear
Â· Reform Party: Ted Weill/Frank McEnulty Â· Socialist Party: Brian
Moore/Stewart Alexander Â· Socialist Workers Party: RÃ³ger Calero/Alyson
Kennedy  
Independent

Ralph Nader (campaign)/Matt Gonzalez  
Draft movements

Democratic Party: Al Gore Â· Mark Warner (movement) Â· Republican Party: Newt
Gingrich Â· Condoleezza Rice (movement) Â· Independent: Michael Bloomberg
(movement)  
Those listed following the "/" are the party's vice-presidential nominee  
Other 2008 elections: House Â· Senate Â· Gubernatorial  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States presidential election candidates, 2004  
Democratic Party

Straw polls Â· Primary polls Â· General polls Â· Debates Â· Primaries Â·
Results Â· Delegates Â· Convention  
Nominee

John Kerry (campaign)  
VP Candidate

John Edwards  
Other candidates

Carol Moseley Braun Â· Wesley Clark (campaign) Â· Howard Dean (campaign) Â·
John Edwards (campaign) Â· Richard Gephardt (campaign) Â· Bob Graham
(campaign) Â· Caroline Killeen Â· Dennis Kucinich (campaign) Â· Lyndon
LaRouche Â· Joe Lieberman (campaign) Â· Al Sharpton  
Republican Party

Straw polls Â· Primary polls Â· General polls Â· Debates Â· Primaries Â·
Results Â· Delegates Â· Convention  
Nominee

George W. Bush (campaign)  
VP Candidate

Dick Cheney  
Other candidates

John Buchanan Â· Robert Haines Â· Tom Laughlin Â· Bill Wyatt  
Constitution Party

Convention  
Green Party

David Cobb Â· Sheila Bilyeu Â· Peter Camejo Â· Paul Glover Â· Kent Mesplay Â·
Carol Miller Â· Lorna Salzman  
Libertarian Party

Convention Â· Michael Badnarik Â· Jeffrey Diket Â· Gary Nolan Â· RubÃ©n PÃ©rez
Â· Aaron Russo Â· Richard Campagna Â· Tamara Millay  
Other candidates

Gene Amondson Â· Stanford Andress Â· Walt Brown Â· RÃ³ger Calero Â· Earl F.
Dodge Â· Thomas Harens Â· James Harris Â· Charles Jay Â· Ralph Nader
(campaign) Â· John Parker Â· Leonard Peltier Â· Bill Van Auken Â· Eric Chester  
Persondata  
NAME Kucinich, Dennis John  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES KuÄiniÄ, Dennis (Croatian)  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Ohio politician  
DATE OF BIRTH October 8, 1946  
PLACE OF BIRTH Cleveland, Ohio  
DATE OF DEATH living  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dennis_Kucinich"

Categories: 1946 births | Dennis Kucinich | American Roman Catholics |
American vegans | Case Western Reserve University alumni | Croatian-Americans
| Social Progressives | Drug policy reform activists | Irish-Americans |
Irish-American politicians | Living people | Liberal politicians | Mayors of
Cleveland, Ohio | Cleveland City Council members | Members of the United
States House of Representatives from Ohio | Ohio Democrats | People from
Cleveland, Ohio | United States presidential candidates, 2004 | United States
presidential candidates, 2008 | UFO-related government personnel | Democratic
Party (United States) politicians

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since February 2008 | Articles with dead external links since
July 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 |
Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | Wikipedia articles in
need of updating

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 02:07.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



