
# Albert Einstein

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Einstein" redirects here. For other uses, see Einstein (disambiguation).

Semi-protected

Albert Einstein  
Albert Einstein, 1921  

Albert Einstein, 1921  
Born 14 March 1879 (1879-03-14)  
Ulm, Kingdom of WÃ¼rttemberg, German Empire  
Died 18 April 1955 (1955-04-19) (aged 76)  
Princeton, New Jersey, USA  
  
Residence Germany, Italy, Switzerland, USA  
Citizenship WÃ¼rttemberg/Germany (1879â96)  
Switzerland (1901â55)  
Austria (1911â12)  
Germany (1914â33)  
United States (1940â55)  
Ethnicity Ashkenazi Jewish  
Fields Physics  
Institutions Swiss Patent Office (Berne)  
University of Zurich  
German Karl-Ferdinands-UniversitÃ¤t, Prague  
ETH Zurich  
Prussian Academy of Sciences  
Kaiser Wilhelm Institute  
University of Leiden  
Institute for Advanced Study  
Alma mater ETH Zurich  
University of Zurich  
Doctoral advisor Alfred Kleiner  
Other academic advisors Heinrich Friedrich Weber  
Notable students Ernst G. Straus  
Nathan Rosen  
Known for General relativity  
Special relativity  
Photoelectric effect  
Brownian motion  
Mass-energy equivalence  
Einstein field equations  
Unified Field Theory  
BoseâEinstein statistics  
Notable awards Nobel Prize in Physics (1921)  
Copley Medal (1925)  
Max Planck Medal (1929)  
Person of the Century  
Religious stance See main text  
Signature  
Albert Einstein's signature  
Albert Einstein (German: Albert_Einstein_german.ogg ËalbÉt ËaÉªÌ¯nÊtaÉªÌ¯n
; English: IPA: /ËÃ¦lbÉt (-Ét) ËaÉªnstaÉªn/) (14 March 1879 â 18 April
1955) was a German-born theoretical physicist. He is best known for his theory
of relativity and specifically massâenergy equivalence, expressed by the
equation E = mc2. Einstein received the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his
services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law
of the photoelectric effect."[1]

Einstein's many contributions to physics include:

  * Special theory of relativity, which reconciled mechanics with electromagnetism
  * General theory of relativity, a new theory of gravitation which added the principle of equivalence to the principle of relativity
  * Founding of relativistic cosmology with a cosmological constant
  * The first post-Newtonian expansions for the perihelion advance of planet Mercury and frame-dragging
  * The deflection of light by gravity and gravitational lensing
  * An explanation for capillary action
  * The first fluctuation dissipation theorem which explained the Brownian movement of molecules
  * The photon theory and wave-particle duality from the thermodynamic properties of light
  * The quantum theory of atomic motion in solids
  * Zero point energy
  * The semiclassical version of the Schrodinger equation
  * Relations for atomic transition probabilities which predicted stimulated emission
  * The quantum theory of a monatomic gas which predicted Bose-Einstein condensation
  * The EPR paradox
  * A program for a unified field theory by the geometrization of physics.

Einstein published over 300 scientific works and over 150 non-scientific
works.[2][3] In 1999 Time magazine named him the "Person of the Century", and
according to Einstein biographer Don Howard, "to the scientifically literate
and the public at large, Einstein is synonymous with genius."[4]:159

## Contents

  * 1 Youth and schooling
  * 2 Patent office
  * 3 Marriage and family life
  * 4 Annus Mirabilis and special relativity
  * 5 Light and general relativity
  * 6 Nobel Prize
  * 7 Unified field theory
  * 8 Collaboration and conflict
    * 8.1 BoseâEinstein statistics
    * 8.2 SchrÃ¶dinger gas model
    * 8.3 Einstein refrigerator
    * 8.4 Bohr versus Einstein
  * 9 Religious views
  * 10 Politics
    * 10.1 Zionism
    * 10.2 Anti-Nazism
    * 10.3 Atomic bomb
    * 10.4 Cold War era
  * 11 Death
  * 12 Legacy
  * 13 Honors
  * 14 Effect on popular culture
  * 15 See also
  * 16 Publications
  * 17 References
  * 18 Further reading
  * 19 External links

  
## Youth and schooling

Albert Einstein was born into a Jewish family in Ulm, in the Kingdom of
WÃ¼rttemberg in the German Empire on March 14, 1879. His father was Hermann
Einstein, a salesman and engineer. His mother was Pauline Einstein (nÃ©e
Koch). In 1880, the family moved to Munich, where his father and his uncle
founded a company, Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein & Cie, that
manufactured electrical equipment based on Direct current.

The Einsteins were not observant of Jewish religious practices, and Albert
attended a Catholic elementary school. Although Einstein had early speech
difficulties, he was a top student in elementary school.[5][6]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Albert Einstein in 1893 (age 14), taken before the family moved to Italy

When Einstein was five, his father showed him a pocket compass. Einstein
realized that there must be something in the space, previously thought to be
empty, that was moving the needle and later stated that this experience made
"a deep and lasting impression".[7] At his mother's insistence, he took violin
lessons starting at age six, and although he disliked them and eventually
quit, he later took great pleasure in Mozart's violin sonatas. As he grew,
Einstein built models and mechanical devices for fun, and began to show a
talent for mathematics.

In 1889, family friend Max Talmud, a medical student,[8] introduced the ten-
year-old Einstein to key science, mathematics, and philosophy texts, including
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason and Euclid's Elements (Einstein called it the
"holy little geometry book").[8] From Euclid, Einstein began to understand
deductive reasoning, and by the age of twelve, he had learned Euclidean
geometry. Soon thereafter he began to investigate infinitesimal calculus.

In his early teens, Einstein attended the Luitpold Gymnasium. His father
intended for him to pursue electrical engineering, but Einstein clashed with
authorities and resented the school regimen. He later wrote that the spirit of
learning and creative thought were lost in strict rote learning.

In 1894, when Einstein was fifteen, his father's business failed, as DC had
lost the War of Currents to alternating current (AC). In search of business,
the Einstein family moved to Italy, first to Milan and then, after a few
months, to Pavia. During this time, Einstein wrote his first scientific work,
"The Investigation of the State of Aether in Magnetic Fields".[9] Einstein had
been left behind in Munich to finish high school, but in the spring of 1895,
he withdrew to join his family in Pavia, convincing the school to let him go
by using a doctor's note.

Rather than completing high school, Einstein decided to apply directly to the
EidgenÃ¶ssische Polytechnische Schule (later EidgenÃ¶ssische Technische
Hochschule (ETH)) in ZÃ¼rich, Switzerland. Lacking a school certificate, he
was required to take an entrance examination, which he did not pass, although
he got exceptional marks in mathematics and physics.[10] Einstein wrote that
it was in that same year, at age 16, that he first performed his famous
thought experiment visualizing traveling alongside a beam of light (Einstein
1979).

The Einsteins sent Albert to Aarau, Switzerland to finish secondary school.
While lodging with the family of Professor Jost Winteler, he fell in love with
the family's daughter, Marie. (Albert's sister Maja later married Paul
Winteler.)[11] In Aarau, Einstein studied Maxwell's electromagnetic theory. At
age 17 he graduated, and, with his father's approval, renounced his
citizenship in the German Kingdom of WÃ¼rttemberg to avoid military service,
to finally enroll in 1896 in the mathematics and physics program at the
Polytechnic in Zurich. Marie Winteler moved to Olsberg, Switzerland for a
teaching post.

In the same year, Einstein's future wife, Mileva MariÄ, also entered the
Polytechnic to study mathematics and physics, being the only woman in the
group. During the next few years, Einstein and MariÄ's friendship developed
into romance. Einstein graduated in 1900 from the Polytechnic with a diploma
in mathematics and physics,[12] whereas MariÄ failed her final exams. That
same year, Einstein's friend Michele Besso introduced him to the work of Ernst
Mach. The next year, Einstein published a paper in the prestigious Annalen der
Physik on the capillary forces of a straw (Einstein 1901). He gained Swiss
citizenship on 21 February 1901.[13]

## Patent office

<IMG>

<IMG>

The 'Einsteinhaus' on the Kramgasse in Berne where Einstein lived with Mileva
on the first floor during his Annus Mirabilis

Following graduation, Einstein could not find a teaching post. After almost
two years of searching, a former classmate's father helped him get a job in
Berne, at the Federal Office for Intellectual Property,[14] the patent office,
as an assistant examiner. His responsibility was evaluating patent
applications for electromagnetic devices. In 1903, Einstein's position at the
Swiss Patent Office was made permanent, although he was passed over for
promotion until he "fully mastered machine technology".[15]

With friends he met in Berne, Einstein formed a weekly discussion club on
science and philosophy, jokingly named "The Olympia Academy". Their readings
included PoincarÃ©, Mach, and Hume, who influenced Einstein's scientific and
philosophical outlook.[16]

During this period Einstein had almost no personal contact with the physics
community.[17] Much of his work at the patent office related to questions
about transmission of electric signals and electrical-mechanical
synchronization of time: two technical problems that show up conspicuously in
the thought experiments that eventually led Einstein to his radical
conclusions about the nature of light and the fundamental connection between
space and time.[15][16]

## Marriage and family life

Einstein and Mileva MariÄ had a daughter they called Lieserl, who was born in
early 1902, probably in Novi Sad.[18] Her fate is uncertain after 1903.

Einstein married Mileva on 6 January 1903, although his mother had objected to
the match because she had a prejudice against Serbs and thought MariÄ "too
old" and "physically defective."[19] [20] Their relationship was for a time a
personal and intellectual partnership. In a letter to her, Einstein called
MariÄ "a creature who is my equal and who is as strong and independent as I
am."[21] There has been occasional debate about whether MariÄ influenced
Einstein's work, however, the overwhelming consensus amongst academic
historians of science is that she did not.[22][23][24] On 14 May 1904, Albert
and Mileva's first son, Hans Albert Einstein, was born in Berne, Switzerland.
Their second son, Eduard, was born in Zurich on 28 July 1910.

Albert and MariÄ divorced on 14 February 1919, having lived apart for five
years. On 2 June of that year, Einstein married Elsa LÃ¶wenthal (nÃ©e
Einstein), who had nursed him through an illness. Elsa was Albert's first
cousin maternally and his second cousin paternally. Together the Einsteins
raised Margot and Ilse, Elsa's daughters from her first marriage.[25] Their
union produced no children.

## Annus Mirabilis and special relativity

Main articles: Annus Mirabilis Papers and History of special relativity

<IMG>

<IMG>

Albert Einstein, 1905

In 1905, while he was working in the patent office, Einstein had four papers
published in the Annalen der Physik, the leading German physics journal. These
are the papers that history has come to call the Annus Mirabilis Papers:

  * His paper on the particulate nature of light put forward the idea that certain experimental results, notably the photoelectric effect, could be simply understood from the postulate that light interacts with matter as discrete "packets" (quanta) of energy, an idea that had been introduced by Max Planck in 1900 as a purely mathematical manipulation, and which seemed to contradict contemporary wave theories of light (Einstein 1905a).
  * His paper on Brownian motion explained the random movement of very small objects as direct evidence of molecular action, thus supporting the atomic theory. (Einstein 1905c)
  * His paper on the electrodynamics of moving bodies introduced the radical theory of special relativity, which showed that the observed independence of the speed of light on the observer's state of motion required fundamental changes to the notion of simultaneity. Consequences of this include the time-space frame of a moving body slowing down and contracting (in the direction of motion) relative to the frame of the observer. This paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aetherâone of the leading theoretical entities in physics at the timeâwas superfluous. (Einstein 1905d)
  * In his paper on massâenergy equivalence (previously considered to be distinct concepts), Einstein deduced from his equations of special relativity what has been called the twentieth century's most well known equation: E = mc2.[26][27] This suggests that tiny amounts of mass could be converted into huge amounts of energy and presaged the development of nuclear power. (Einstein 1905e)

All four papers are today recognized as tremendous achievementsâand hence
1905 is known as Einstein's "Wonderful Year". At the time, however, they were
not noticed by most physicists as being important, and many of those who did
notice them rejected them outright. Some of this workâsuch as the theory of
light quantaâremained controversial for years.[28][29]

At the age of 26, having studied under Alfred Kleiner, Professor of
Experimental Physics, Einstein was awarded a PhD by the University of Zurich.
His dissertation was entitled A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions.
(Einstein 1905b)

## Light and general relativity

See also: History of general relativity and Relativity priority dispute

<IMG>

<IMG>

One of the 1919 eclipse photographs taken during Arthur Stanley Eddington's
expedition, which confirmed Einstein's predictions of the gravitational
bending of light.

In 1906, the patent office promoted Einstein to Technical Examiner Second
Class, but he had not given up on academia. In 1908, he became a privatdozent
at the University of Bern.[30] In 1910, he wrote an expository paper that
described the cumulative effect of light scattered by individual molecules in
the atmosphere, i.e., why the sky is blue.[31]

During 1909, Einstein published "Ãber die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen
Ã¼ber das Wesen und die Konstitution der Strahlung" ("The Development of Our
Views on the Composition and Essence of Radiation"), on the quantization of
light. In this and in an earlier 1909 paper, Einstein showed that Max Planck's
energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act in some respects as
independent, point-like particles. This paper introduced the photon concept
(although the term itself was introduced by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1926) and
inspired the notion of waveâparticle duality in quantum mechanics.

In 1911, Einstein became an associate professor at the University of Zurich.
However, shortly afterward, he accepted a full professorship at the German
Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague. There, Einstein published a paper
about the effects of gravity on light, specifically the gravitational redshift
and the gravitational deflection of light. The paper appealed to astronomers
to find ways of detecting the deflection during a solar eclipse.[32] German
astronomer Erwin Finlay-Freundlich publicized Einstein's challenge to
scientists around the world.[33]

In 1912, Einstein returned to Switzerland to accept a professorship at his
alma mater, the ETH. There he met mathematician Marcel Grossmann who
introduced him to Riemannian geometry and more generally differential
geometry, and at the recommendation of Italian mathematician Tullio Levi-
Civita, Einstein began exploring the usefulness of general covariance
(essentially the use of tensors) for his gravitational theory. Although for a
while Einstein thought that there were problems with that approach, he later
returned to it and by late 1915 had published his general theory of relativity
in the form that is still used today (Einstein 1915). This theory explains
gravitation as distortion of the structure of spacetime by matter, affecting
the inertial motion of other matter.

After many relocations, Mileva established a permanent home with the children
in ZÃ¼rich in 1914, just before the start of World War I. Einstein continued
on alone to Berlin, where he became a member of the Prussian Academy of
Sciences. As part of the arrangements for his new position, he also became a
professor at the Humboldt University of Berlin, although with a special clause
freeing him from most teaching obligations. From 1914 to 1932 he was also
director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics.[34]

During World War I, the speeches and writings of Central Powers scientists
were available only to Central Powers academics, for national security
reasons. Some of Einstein's work did reach the United Kingdom and the United
States through the efforts of the Austrian Paul Ehrenfest and physicists in
the Netherlands, especially 1902 Nobel Prize-winner Hendrik Lorentz and Willem
de Sitter of the Leiden University. After the war ended, Einstein maintained
his relationship with the Leiden University, accepting a contract as an
Extraordinary Professor; he travelled to Holland regularly to lecture there
between 1920 and 1930.[35]

In 1917, Einstein published an article in Physikalische Zeitschrift that
proposed the possibility of stimulated emission, the physical process that
makes possible the maser and the laser (Einstein 1917b). He also published a
paper introducing a new notion, the cosmological constant, into the general
theory of relativity in an attempt to model the behavior of the entire
universe (Einstein 1917a).

1917 was the year astronomers began taking Einstein up on his 1911 challenge
from Prague. The Mount Wilson Observatory in California, U.S., published a
solar spectroscopic analysis that showed no gravitational redshift.[36] In
1918, the Lick Observatory, also in California, announced that they too had
disproven Einstein's prediction, although their findings were not
published.[37]

However, in May 1919, a team led by British astronomer Arthur Stanley
Eddington claimed to have confirmed Einstein's prediction of gravitational
deflection of starlight by the Sun while photographing a solar eclipse in
Sobral, northern Brazil, and PrÃ­ncipe.[33] On 7 November 1919, leading
British newspaper The Times printed a banner headline that read: "Revolution
in Science â New Theory of the Universe â Newtonian Ideas Overthrown".[38]
In an interview Nobel laureate Max Born praised general relativity as the
"greatest feat of human thinking about nature";[39] fellow laureate Paul Dirac
was quoted saying it was "probably the greatest scientific discovery ever
made".[40]

From this point on, the international media guaranteed Einstein's global
renown. There have been later claims that scrutiny of the specific photographs
taken on the Eddington expedition showed the experimental uncertainty to be of
about the same magnitude as the effect Eddington claimed to have demonstrated,
and that a 1962 British expedition concluded that the method was inherently
unreliable,[38] the deflection of light during a solar eclipse has been
confirmed by later, more accurate observations.[41]

There was some resentment toward the newcomer Einstein's fame in the
scientific community, notably among some German physicists, who later started
the Deutsche Physik (German Physics) movement.[42][43]

## Nobel Prize

<IMG>

<IMG>

Einstein, 1921. Age 42.

In 1922 Einstein was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics,[44] "for his
services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law
of the photoelectric effect". This refers to his 1905 paper on the
photoelectric effect: "On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and
Transformation of Light", which was well supported by the experimental
evidence by that time. The presentation speech began by mentioning "his theory
of relativity [which had] been the subject of lively debate in philosophical
circles [and] also has astrophysical implications which are being rigorously
examined at the present time." (Einstein 1923)

It was long reported that Einstein gave the Nobel prize money directly to his
first wife, Mileva MariÄ, in compliance with their 1919 divorce settlement.
However, personal correspondence made public in 2006[45] shows that he
invested much of it in the United States, and saw much of it wiped out in the
Depression.

Einstein traveled to New York City in the United States for the first time on
2 April 1921. When asked where he got his scientific ideas, Einstein explained
that he believed scientific work best proceeds from an examination of physical
reality and a search for underlying axioms, with consistent explanations that
apply in all instances and avoid contradicting each other. He also recommended
theories with visualizable results (Einstein 1954).[46]

## Unified field theory

Main article: Classical unified field theories

Einstein's research after general relativity consisted primarily of a long
series of attempts to generalize his theory of gravitation to include new
geometric structures which would explain electromagnetism. In 1950, he
described this approach "unified field theory" in a Scientific American
article entitled "On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation" (Einstein 1950).
Although he continued to be lauded for his work, Einstein became increasingly
isolated in his research, and his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful.

In his pursuit of a unification of the fundamental forces, Einstein ignored
some mainstream developments in physics, most notably the strong and weak
nuclear forces, which were not well understood until many years after his
death. Mainstream physics, in turn, largely ignored Einstein's approaches to
unification. Einstein's dream of unifying the laws of physics with gravity is
the motivation for modern research in string theory, where new geometrical
fields emerge in a unified quantum-mechanical setting.

## Collaboration and conflict

### BoseâEinstein statistics

In 1924, Einstein received a description of a statistical model from Indian
physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, based on a counting method that assumed that
light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable particles. Bose's
statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles,
and Einstein submitted his translation of Bose's paper to the Zeitschrift fÃ¼r
Physik. Einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its
implications, among them the BoseâEinstein condensate phenomenon that should
appear at very low temperatures (Einstein 1924). It was not until 1995 that
the first such condensate was produced experimentally by Eric Allin Cornell
and Carl Wieman using ultra-cooling equipment built at the NIST-JILA
laboratory at the University of Colorado at Boulder.[47] BoseâEinstein
statistics are now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of "bosons".
Einstein's sketches for this project may be seen in the Einstein Archive in
the library of the Leiden University.[48]

### SchrÃ¶dinger gas model

Einstein suggested to Erwin SchrÃ¶dinger an application of Max Planck's idea
of treating energy levels for a gas as a whole rather than for individual
molecules, and SchrÃ¶dinger applied this in a paper using the Boltzmann
distribution to derive the thermodynamic properties of a semiclassical ideal
gas. SchrÃ¶dinger urged Einstein to add his name as co-author, although
Einstein declined the invitation.[49]

### Einstein refrigerator

In 1926, Einstein and his former student LeÃ³ SzilÃ¡rd, a Hungarian physicist
who later worked on the Manhattan Project and is credited with the discovery
of the chain reaction, co-invented (and in 1930, patented) the Einstein
refrigerator, revolutionary for having no moving parts and using only heat as
an input.[50][51]

### Bohr versus Einstein

See also: Bohr-Einstein debates

<IMG>

<IMG>

Einstein and Niels Bohr. Photo taken by Paul Ehrenfest during their 1925
Leiden visit.

In the 1920s, quantum mechanics developed into a more complete theory.
Einstein was unhappy with the "Copenhagen interpretation" of quantum theory
developed by Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg, wherein quantum phenomena are
inherently probabilistic, with definite states resulting only upon interaction
with classical systems. A public debate between Einstein and Bohr followed,
lasting for many years (including during the Solvay Conferences). Einstein
formulated thought experiments against the Copenhagen interpretation, which
were all rebutted by Bohr. In a 1926 letter to Max Born, Einstein wrote: "I,
at any rate, am convinced that He [God] does not throw dice." (Einstein
1969).[52]

Einstein was never satisfied by what he perceived to be quantum theory's
intrinsically incomplete description of nature, and in 1935 he further
explored the issue in collaboration with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen,
noting that the theory seems to require non-local interactions; this is known
as the EPR paradox (Einstein 1935). The EPR experiment has since been
performed, with results confirming quantum theory's predictions.[53]

Einstein's disagreement with Bohr revolved around the idea of scientific
determinism. For this reason the repercussions of the Einstein-Bohr debate
have found their way into philosophical discourse as well.

## Religious views

The question of scientific determinism gave rise to questions about Einstein's
position on theological determinism, and whether or not he believed in a God.
In 1929, Einstein told Rabbi Herbert S. Goldstein "I believe in Spinoza's God,
who reveals Himself in the lawful harmony of the world, not in a God Who
concerns Himself with the fate and the doings of mankind."[54] In a 1950
letter to M. Berkowitz, Einstein stated that "My position concerning God is
that of an agnostic. I am convinced that a vivid consciousness of the primary
importance of moral principles for the betterment and ennoblement of life does
not need the idea of a law-giver, especially a law-giver who works on the
basis of reward and punishment."[55] Einstein also stated: "I have repeatedly
said that in my opinion the idea of a personal God is a childlike one. You may
call me an agnostic, but I do not share the crusading spirit of the
professional atheist whose fervor is mostly due to a painful act of liberation
from the fetters of religious indoctrination received in youth." He is
reported to have said in a conversation with Hubertus, Prince of LÃ¶wenstein-
Wertheim-Freudenberg, "In view of such harmony in the cosmos which I, with my
limited human mind, am able to recognize, there are yet people who say there
is no God. But what really makes me angry is that they quote me for the
support of such views."[56] Einstein clarified his religious views in a letter
he wrote in response to those who claimed that he worshipped a Judeo-Christian
god: "It was, of course, a lie what you read about my religious convictions, a
lie which is being systematically repeated. I do not believe in a personal god
and I have never denied this but have expressed it clearly. If something is in
me which can be called religious then it is the unbounded admiration for the
structure of the world so far as our science can reveal it."[57] In his book
The World as I See It, he wrote: "A knowledge of the existence of something we
cannot penetrate, of the manifestations of the profoundest reason and the most
radiant beauty, which are only accessible to our reason in their most
elementary formsâit is this knowledge and this emotion that constitute the
truly religious attitude; in this sense, and in this alone, I am a deeply
religious man."[58]

In a 1930 New York Times article,[59] Einstein distinguished three styles
which are usually intermixed in actual religion. The first is motivated by
fear and poor understanding of causality, and hence invents supernatural
beings. The second is social and moral, motivated by desire for love and
support. Einstein noted that both have an anthropomorphic concept of God. The
third style, which Einstein deemed most mature, is motivated by a deep sense
of awe and mystery. He said, "The individual feels ... the sublimity and
marvelous order which reveal themselves in nature ... and he wants to
experience the universe as a single significant whole." Einstein saw science
as an antagonist of the first two styles of religion, but as a partner of the
third style.

Einstein was also a Humanist and a supporter of Ethical Culture. He served on
the advisory board of the First Humanist Society of New York.[60][61] For the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, he
noted that the idea of Ethical Culture embodied his personal conception of
what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism. He observed,
"Without 'ethical culture' there is no salvation for humanity."[62]

Einstein published a paper in Nature in 1940 entitled "Science and
Religion"[63] in which he said that: "a person who is religiously enlightened
appears to me to be one who has, to the best of his ability, liberated himself
from the fetters of his selfish desires and is preoccupied with thoughts,
feelings and aspirations to which he clings because of their super-personal
value ... regardless of whether any attempt is made to unite this content with
a Divine Being, for otherwise it would not be possible to count Buddha and
Spinoza as religious personalities. Accordingly a religious person is devout
in the sense that he has no doubt of the significance of those super-personal
objects and goals which neither require nor are capable of rational foundation
... In this sense religion is the age-old endeavour of mankind to become
clearly and completely conscious of these values and goals, and constantly to
strengthen their effects." He argued that conflicts between science and
religion "have all sprung from fatal errors." "[E]ven though the realms of
religion and science in themselves are clearly marked off from each other"
there are "strong reciprocal relationships and dependencies ... science
without religion is lame, religion without science is blind ... a legitimate
conflict between science and religion cannot exist." In Einstein's view,
"neither the rule of human nor Divine Will exists as an independent cause of
natural events. To be sure, the doctrine of a personal God interfering with
natural events could never be refuted ... by science, for [it] can always take
refuge in those domains in which scientific knowledge has not yet been able to
set foot." (Einstein 1940, pp. 605â607)

In a letter to Eric Gutkind in 1954 Einstein wrote:

> I read a great deal in the last days of your book, and thank you very much
for sending it to me. What especially struck me about it was this. With regard
to the factual attitude to life and to the human community we have a great
deal in common. ... The word God is for me nothing more than the expression
and product of human weaknesses, the Bible a collection of honourable, but
still primitive legends which are nevertheless pretty childish. No
interpretation no matter how subtle can (for me) change this. These subtilised
interpretations are highly manifold according to their nature and have almost
nothing to do with the original text. For me the Jewish religion like all
other religions is an incarnation of the most childish superstitions. And the
Jewish people to whom I gladly belong and with whose mentality I have a deep
affinity have no different quality for me than all other people. As far as my
experience goes, they are also no better than other human groups, although
they are protected from the worst cancers by a lack of power. Otherwise I
cannot see anything 'chosen' about them. In general I find it painful that you
claim a privileged position and try to defend it by two walls of pride, an
external one as a man and an internal one as a Jew. As a man you claim, so to
speak, a dispensation from causality otherwise accepted, as a Jew the
privilege of monotheism. But a limited causality is no longer a causality at
all, as our wonderful Spinoza recognized with all incision, probably as the
first one. And the animistic interpretations of the religions of nature are in
principle not annulled by monopolisation. With such walls we can only attain a
certain self-deception, but our moral efforts are not furthered by them. On
the contrary. Now that I have quite openly stated our differences in
intellectual convictions it is still clear to me that we are quite close to
each other in essential things, ie in our evaluations of human behaviour. What
separates us are only intellectual 'props' and 'rationalisation' in Freud's
language. Therefore I think that we would understand each other quite well if
we talked about concrete things. With friendly thanks and best wishes Yours,
A. Einstein.

Einstein had previously explored this belief that man could not understand the
nature of God when he gave an interview to Time Magazine explaining:

> I'm not an atheist. I don't think I can call myself a pantheist. The problem
involved is too vast for our limited minds. We are in the position of a little
child entering a huge library filled with books in many languages. The child
knows someone must have written those books. It does not know how. It does not
understand the languages in which they are written. The child dimly suspects a
mysterious order in the arrangement of the books but doesn't know what it is.
That, it seems to me, is the attitude of even the most intelligent human being
toward God. We see the universe marvelously arranged and obeying certain laws
but only dimly understand these laws.

## Politics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Einstein and Indian poet and Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore during their
widely publicized 14 July 1930 conversation

With increasing public demands, his involvement in political, humanitarian,
and academic projects in various countries, and his new acquaintances with
scholars and political figures from around the world, Einstein was less able
to achieve the productive isolation that he needed in order to work.[64] Due
to his fame and genius, Einstein found himself called on to give conclusive
judgments on matters that had nothing to do with theoretical physics or
mathematics. He was not timid, and he was aware of the world around him, with
no illusion that ignoring politics would make world events fade away. His very
visible position allowed him to speak and write frankly, even provocatively,
at a time when many people of conscience could only flee to the underground or
keep doubts about developments within their own movements to themselves for
fear of internecine fighting. Einstein flouted the ascendant Nazi movement,
tried to be a voice of moderation in the tumultuous formation of the State of
Israel and braved anti-communist politics and resistance to the civil rights
movement in the United States. He participated in the 1927 congress of the
League against Imperialism in Brussels.[65]

### Zionism

Einstein was a socialist Zionist who supported the creation of a Jewish
national homeland in the British mandate of Palestine.[66] In 1931, The
Macmillan Company published About Zionism: Speeches and Lectures by Professor
Albert Einstein.[67] Querido, an Amsterdam publishing house, collected eleven
of Einstein's essays into a 1933 book entitled Mein Weltbild, translated to
English as The World as I See It; Einstein's foreword dedicates the collection
"to the Jews of Germany".[68] In the face of Germany's rising militarism,
Einstein wrote and spoke for peace.[69][70]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Albert Einstein, seen here with his wife Elsa Einstein and Zionist leaders,
including future President of Israel Chaim Weizmann, his wife Dr. Vera
Weizmann, Menahem Ussishkin, and Ben-Zion Mossinson on arrival in New York
City in 1921.

Einstein publicly stated reservations about the proposal to partition the
British-supervised British Mandate of Palestine into independent Arab and
Jewish countries. In a 1938 speech, "Our Debt to Zionism", he said: "My
awareness of the essential nature of Judaism resists the idea of a Jewish
state with borders, an army, and a measure of temporal power, no matter how
modest. I am afraid of the inner damage Judaism will sustainâespecially from
the development of a narrow nationalism within our own ranks, against which we
have already had to fight strongly, even without a Jewish state. ... If
external necessity should after all compel us to assume this burden, let us
bear it with tact and patience."[71] In a 1947 letter to Indian Prime Minister
Jawaharlal Nehru, Einstein stated that the Balfour Declaration's proposal to
establish a national home for Jews in Palestine "redresses the balance" of
justice and history.[72]

The United Nations did divide the mandate, demarcating the borders of several
new countries including the State of Israel, and war broke out immediately.
Einstein was one of the authors of an open letter to the New York Times in
1948 criticizing Menachem Begin's Herut (Freedom) Party for the Deir Yassin
massacre (Einstein et al. 1948).

Einstein served on the Board of Governors of The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem. In his Will of 1950, Einstein bequeathed literary rights to his
writings to The Hebrew University, where many of his original documents are
held in the Albert Einstein Archives.[73]

When President Chaim Weizmann died in 1952, Einstein was asked to be Israel's
second president, but he declined, stating that he had "neither the natural
ability nor the experience to deal with human beings." [74] He wrote: "I am
deeply moved by the offer from our State of Israel, and at once saddened and
ashamed that I cannot accept it. "[75]

### Anti-Nazism

In January 1933, Adolf Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany. One of the
first actions of Hitler's administration was the Law for the Restoration of
the Professional Civil Service, which removed Jews and politically suspect
government employees (including university professors) from their jobs, unless
they had demonstrated their loyalty to Germany by serving in World War I. In
response to this growing threat Einstein had prudently traveled to the U.S. in
December 1932. For several years he had been wintering at the California
Institute of Technology in Pasadena, California,[76] and also was a guest
lecturer at Abraham Flexner's newly founded Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton, New Jersey.[77]

The Einsteins bought a house in Princeton (where Elsa died in 1936), and
Einstein remained an integral contributor to the Institute for Advanced Study
until his death in 1955. During the 1930s and into World War II, Einstein
wrote affidavits recommending United States visas for a huge number of
European Jews who were trying to flee persecution. He raised money for Zionist
organizations and was, in part, responsible for the formation, in 1933, of the
International Rescue Committee.[75][78]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Einstein receiving his certificate of American citizenship from Judge Phillip
Forman in 1940

Meanwhile, in Germany, a campaign to eliminate Einstein's work from the German
lexicon as unacceptable "Jewish physics" (JÃ¼dische Physik) was led by Nobel
laureates Philipp Lenard and Johannes Stark. Deutsche Physik activists
published pamphlets and even textbooks denigrating Einstein, and instructors
who taught his theories were blacklistedâincluding Nobel laureate Werner
Heisenberg, who had debated quantum probability with Bohr and Einstein.
Philipp Lenard claimed that the massâenergy equivalence formula needed to be
credited to Friedrich HasenÃ¶hrl to make it an Aryan creation.[79][80] An
anti-Einstein organization was formed, and a man who was convicted of
composing a plot to kill Einstein was fined a mere six dollars.[81]

Einstein became a citizen of the United States in 1940 and remained there the
rest of his life, although he retained his Swiss citizenship.[82]

### Atomic bomb

Main article: Manhattan Project

<IMG>

<IMG>

Einstein-SzilÃ¡rd letter

Concerned scientists, many of them refugees from European anti-Semitism in the
U.S., recognized the danger of German scientists developing an atomic bomb
based on the newly discovered phenomena of nuclear fission. In 1939, the
Hungarian Ã©migrÃ© LeÃ³ SzilÃ¡rd, having failed to arouse U.S. government
interest on his own, worked with Einstein to write a letter to U.S. President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, which Einstein signed, urging U.S. development of
such a weapon.[83] In August 1939, Roosevelt received the Einstein-SzilÃ¡rd
letter and authorized secret research into the harnessing of nuclear fission
for military purposes.[84]

By 1942 this effort had become the Manhattan Project, the largest secret
scientific endeavor undertaken up to that time. By late 1945, the U.S. had
developed operational nuclear weapons, and used them on the Japanese cities of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Einstein himself did not play a role in the
development of the atomic bomb other than signing the letter. He did help the
United States Navy with some unrelated theoretical questions it was working on
during the war.[85]

According to Linus Pauling, Einstein later expressed regret about his letter
to Roosevelt.[86] In 1947, Einstein wrote an article for The Atlantic Monthly
arguing that the United States should not try to pursue an atomic monopoly,
and instead should equip the United Nations with nuclear weapons for the sole
purpose of maintaining deterrence.[87]

### Cold War era

<IMG>

<IMG>

Einstein, 1947. Age 68.

When he was a visible figure working against the rise of Nazism, Einstein had
sought help and developed working relationships in both the West and what was
to become the Soviet bloc. After World War II, enmity between the former
allies became a very serious issue for people with international rÃ©sumÃ©s. To
make things worse, during the first days of McCarthyism Einstein was writing
about a single world government; it was at this time that he wrote, "I do not
know how the third World War will be fought, but I can tell you what they will
use in the Fourthârocks!"[88] In a 1949 Monthly Review article entitled "Why
Socialism?"[89] Albert Einstein described a chaotic capitalist society, a
source of evil to be overcome, as the "predatory phase of human development"
(Einstein 1949). With Albert Schweitzer and Bertrand Russell, Einstein lobbied
to stop nuclear testing and future bombs. Days before his death, Einstein
signed the Russell-Einstein Manifesto, which led to the Pugwash Conferences on
Science and World Affairs.[90]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Einstein's house in Princeton, NJ

Einstein was a member of several civil rights groups, including the Princeton
chapter of the NAACP. When the aged W. E. B. Du Bois was accused of being a
Communist spy, Einstein volunteered as a character witness, and the case was
dismissed shortly afterward. Einstein's friendship with activist Paul Robeson,
with whom he served as co-chair of the American Crusade to End Lynching,
lasted twenty years.[91]

In 1946, Einstein collaborated with Rabbi Israel Goldstein, Middlesex
University heir C. Ruggles Smith, and activist attorney George Alpert on the
Albert Einstein Foundation for Higher Learning, which was formed to create a
Jewish-sponsored secular university, open to all students, on the grounds of
the former Middlesex University in Waltham, Massachusetts. Middlesex was
chosen in part because it was accessible from both Boston and New York City,
Jewish cultural centers of the U.S. Their vision was a university "deeply
conscious both of the Hebraic tradition of Torah looking upon culture as a
birthright, and of the American ideal of an educated democracy."[92] The
collaboration was stormy, however. Finally, when Einstein wanted to appoint
British economist Harold Laski as the university's president, George Alpert
wrote that Laski was "a man utterly alien to American principles of democracy,
tarred with the Communist brush."[92] Einstein withdrew his support and barred
the use of his name.[93] The university opened in 1948 as Brandeis University.
In 1953, Brandeis offered Einstein an honorary degree, but he declined.[92]

Given Einstein's links to Germany and Zionism, his socialist ideals, and his
links to Communist figures, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation kept a
file on Einstein[94] that grew to 1,427 pages. Many of the documents in the
file were sent to the FBI by concerned citizens: some objecting to his
immigration, while others asked the FBI to protect him.[95]

Although Einstein had long been sympathetic to the notion of vegetarianism, it
was only near the start of 1954 that he adopted a strict vegetarian diet.[96]

## Death

On 17 April 1955, Albert Einstein experienced internal bleeding caused by the
rupture of an aortic aneurysm, which had previously been diagnosed and
reinforced.[97] He took a draft of a speech he was preparing for a television
appearance commemorating the State of Israel's seventh anniversary with him to
the hospital, but he did not live long enough to complete it.[98] He died in
Princeton Hospital early the next morning at the age of 76, having continued
to work until near the end. Einstein's remains were cremated and his ashes
were scattered.[99][100]

Before the cremation, Princeton Hospital pathologist Thomas Stoltz Harvey
removed Einstein's brain for preservation, without the permission of his
family, in hope that the neuroscience of the future would be able to discover
what made Einstein so intelligent.[101]

## Legacy

While travelling, Einstein had written daily to his wife Elsa and adopted
stepdaughters, Margot and Ilse, and the letters were included in the papers
bequeathed to The Hebrew University. Margot Einstein permitted the personal
letters to be made available to the public, but requested that it not be done
until twenty years after her death (she died in 1986[102]). Barbara Wolff, of
The Hebrew University's Albert Einstein Archives, told the BBC that there are
about 3,500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and
1955.[103]

The United States' National Academy of Sciences commissioned the Albert
Einstein Memorial, a monumental bronze and marble sculpture by Robert Berks,
dedicated in 1979 at its Washington, D.C. campus adjacent to the National
Mall.

Einstein bequeathed the royalties from use of his image to The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem. Corbis, successor to The Roger Richman Agency,
licenses the use of his name and associated imagery, as agent for the Hebrew
University.[104][105]

## Honors

<IMG>

<IMG>

Max Planck presents Albert Einstein with the Max-Planck medal of the German
Physical Society, June 28, 1929 in Berlin.

See also: List of things named after Albert Einstein

In 1999, Albert Einstein was named "Person of the Century" by Time
magazine,[106][107] a Gallup poll recorded him as the fourth most admired
person of the 20th century[108] and according to The 100: A Ranking of the
Most Influential Persons in History, Einstein is "the greatest scientist of
the twentieth century and one of the supreme intellects of all time."[109]

A partial list of his memorials:

  * The International Union of Pure and Applied Physics named 2005 the "World Year of Physics" in commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the publication of the Annus Mirabilis Papers.[110]
  * The Albert Einstein Institute
  * The Albert Einstein Memorial by Robert Berks
  * A unit used in photochemistry, the einstein
  * The chemical element 99, einsteinium
  * The asteroid 2001 Einstein
  * The Albert Einstein Award
  * The Albert Einstein Peace Prize

In 1990, his name was added to the Walhalla temple.[111]

## Effect on popular culture

Main article: Albert Einstein in popular culture

In the period before World War II, Albert Einstein was so well-known in
America that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him to
explain "that theory." He finally figured out a way to handle the incessant
inquiries. He told his inquirers "Pardon me, sorry! Always I am mistaken for
Professor Einstein."[112]

Albert Einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels, films,
and plays. Einstein is a favorite model for depictions of mad scientists and
absent-minded professors; his expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have
been widely copied and exaggerated. Time magazine's Frederic Golden wrote that
Einstein was "a cartoonist's dream come true."[107]

Einstein's association with great intelligence has made the name Einstein
synonymous with genius, often used in ironic expressions such as "Nice job,
Einstein!".

## See also

  * Annus Mirabilis Papers
  * Heinrich Burkhardt
  * Hermann Einstein
  * EPR paradox
  * History of general relativity
  * History of gravitational theory
  * History of special relativity
  * Introduction to special relativity
  * Pauline Koch
  * List of coupled cousins
  * List of scientific publications by Albert Einstein
  * List of things named after Einstein
  * Massâenergy equivalence (also known as E=mc2)
  * Photoelectric effect
  * Relativity priority dispute
  * Sticky bead argument
  * Summation convention
  * The Einstein Theory of Relativity (educational film about the theory of relativity)
  * Theory of everything
  * German inventors and discoverers

## Publications

The following publications by Albert Einstein are referenced in this article.
A more complete list of his publications may be found at List of scientific
publications by Albert Einstein.

  * Einstein, Albert (1901), "Folgerungen aus den CapillaritÃ¤tserscheinungen (Conclusions Drawn from the Phenomena of Capillarity)", Annalen der Physik 4: 513, doi:10.1002/andp.19013090306
  * Einstein, Albert (1905a), "On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light", Annalen der Physik 17: 132â148, http://lorentz.phl.jhu.edu/AnnusMirabilis/AeReserveArticles/eins_lq.pdf . This annus mirabilis paper on the photoelectric effect was received by Annalen der Physik 18 March.
  * Einstein, Albert (1905b), A new determination of molecular dimensions . This PhD thesis was completed 30 April and submitted 20 July.
  * Einstein, Albert (1905c), "On the MotionâRequired by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heatâof Small Particles Suspended in a Stationary Liquid", Annalen der Physik 17: 549â560 . This annus mirabilis paper on Brownian motion was received 11 May.
  * Einstein, Albert (1905d), "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies", Annalen der Physik 17: 891â921 . This annus mirabilis paper on special relativity was received 30 June.
  * Einstein, Albert (1905e), "Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content?", Annalen der Physik 18: 639â641 . This annus mirabilis paper on mass-energy equivalence was received 27 September.
  * Einstein, Albert (1915), "Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation (The Field Equations of Gravitation)", Koniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften: 844â847
  * Einstein, Albert (1917a), "Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen RelativitÃ¤tstheorie (Cosmological Considerations in the General Theory of Relativity)", Koniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften
  * Einstein, Albert (1917b), "Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung (On the Quantum Mechanics of Radiation)", Physikalische Zeitschrift 18: 121â128
  * Einstein, Albert (11 July 1923), "Fundamental Ideas and Problems of the Theory of Relativity", Nobel Lectures, Physics 1901â1921, Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing Company, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1921/einstein-lecture.pdf, retrieved on 2007-03-25
  * Einstein, Albert (1924), "Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases (Quantum theory of monatomic ideal gases)", Sitzungsberichte der Preussichen Akademie der Wissenschaften PhysikalischâMathematische Klasse: 261â267 . First of a series of papers on this topic.
  * Einstein, Albert (1926), "Die Ursache der MÃ¤anderbildung der FlusslÃ¤ufe und des sogenannten Baerschen Gesetzes", Die Naturwissenschaften 14: 223â224, doi:10.1007/BF01510300 . On Baer's law and meanders in the courses of rivers.
  * Einstein, Albert; Podolsky, Boris; Rosen, Nathan (15 May 1935), "Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?", Physical Review 47 (10): 777â780, doi:10.1103/PhysRev.47.777
  * Einstein, Albert (1940), "On Science and Religion", Nature 146: 605, doi:10.1038/146605a0
  * Einstein, Albert, et al. (4 December 1948), "To the editors", New York Times, http://phys4.harvard.edu/~wilson/NYTimes1948.html
  * Einstein, Albert (May 1949), "Why Socialism?", Monthly Review, http://www.monthlyreview.org/598einst.htm, retrieved on 2006-01-16
  * Einstein, Albert (1950), "On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation", Scientific American CLXXXII (4): 13â17
  * Einstein, Albert (1954), Ideas and Opinions, New York: Random House, ISBN 0-517-00393-7
  * Einstein, Albert (1969) (in German), Albert Einstein, Hedwig und Max Born: Briefwechsel 1916â1955, Munich: Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung
  * Einstein, Albert (1979), Autobiographical Notes (Centennial ed.), Chicago: Open Court, ISBN 0-875-48352-6 . The chasing a light beam thought experiment is described on pages 48â51.
  * Collected Papers: Stachel, John, Martin J. Klein, a. J. Kox, Michel Janssen, R. Schulmann, Diana Komos Buchwald and others (Eds.) (1987â2006). The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Vol 1â10. Princeton University Press. Further information about the volumes published so far can be found on the webpages of the Einstein Papers Project and on the Princeton University Press Einstein Page

## References

  1. ^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1921". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 2008-10-05. http://www.webcitation.org/5bLXMl1V0. Retrieved on 2007-03-06.
  2. ^ Paul Arthur Schilpp, editor (1951). Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, Volume II. New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers (Harper Torchbook edition). pp. 730â746. His non-scientific works include: About Zionism: Speeches and Lectures by Professor Albert Einstein (1930), "Why War?" (1933, co-authored by Sigmund Freud), The World As I See It (1934), Out of My Later Years (1950), and a book on science for the general reader, The Evolution of Physics (1938, co-authored by Leopold Infeld).
  3. ^ "Albert Einstein â Biography". Nobel Foundation. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1921/einstein-bio.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-07.
  4. ^ Howard, Don, and Stachel, John J. Einstein: The Formative Years, 1879-1909, Springer (2000)
  5. ^ Rosenkranz, Ze'ev (2005). Albert Einstein â DerriÃ¨re l'image. Neue ZÃ¼rcher Zeitung. p. 29\. ISBN 3-03823-182-7.
  6. ^ Sowell, Thomas (2001). The Einstein Syndrome: Bright Children Who Talk Late. Basic Books. pp. 89â150. ISBN 0-465-08140-1.
  7. ^ Schilpp (Ed.), P. A. (1979). Albert Einstein â Autobiographical Notes. Open Court Publishing Company. pp. 8â9.
  8. ^ a b Dudley Herschbach, "Einstein as a Student," Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, page 3, web: HarvardChem-Einstein-PDF: about Max Talmud visited on Thursdays for six years.
  9. ^ Mehra, Jagdish. "Albert Einstein's first paper" (PDF). http://www.worldscibooks.com/phy_etextbook/4454/4454_chap1.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-03-04.
  10. ^ Highfield, Roger; Carter, Paul (1993), The Private Lives of Albert Einstein, London: Faber and Faber, p. 21, ISBN 0-571-17170-2
  11. ^ Highfield (1993, pp. 21,31,56â57)
  12. ^ "A Brief Biography of Albert Einstein". April 2005. http://www.ssqq.com/archive/alberteinstein.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-11.
  13. ^ "Einstein's nationalities at einstein-website.de". http://www.einstein-website.de/z_information/variousthings.html#national. Retrieved on 4 October 2006.
  14. ^ Now the "Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property". http://www.ipi.ch/E/institut/i1.shtm. Retrieved on 16 October 2006. . See also their "FAQ about Einstein and the Institute". http://www.ipi.ch/E/institut/i1094.shtm.
  15. ^ a b Peter Galison, "Einstein's Clocks: The Question of Time" Critical Inquiry 26, no. 2 (Winter 2000): 355â389.
  16. ^ a b Galison, Peter (2003). Einstein's Clocks, PoincarÃ©'s Maps: Empires of Time. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 0393020010.
  17. ^ E.g. Pais, Abraham (1982), Subtle is the Lord. The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, Oxford University Press, p. 17, ISBN 0-19-520438-7
  18. ^ This conclusion is from Einstein's correspondence with MariÄ. Lieserl is first mentioned in a letter from Einstein to MariÄ (who was staying with her family in or near Novi Sad at the time of Lieserl's birth) dated 4 February 1902 (Collected papers Vol. 1, document 134).
  19. ^ Highfield (1993, pp. 54,58): "she did not seem to care that Mileva was not Jewish"
  20. ^ Oregon Public Broadcasting (2003), Einstein's Wife: The Life of Mileva Maric Einstein, Public Broadcasting Service, http://www.pbs.org/opb/einsteinswife/, retrieved on 2006-11-8 This web site, companion to the controversial Geraldine Hilton documentary of the same name, is currently under review for historical accuracy. (See Getler, Michael (15 December 2006), "Einsteinâs Wife: The Relative Motion of âFactsâ", PBS Ombudsman, http://www.pbs.org/ombudsman/2006/12/einsteins_wife_the_relative_motion_of_facts.html, retrieved on 2007-03-25 .)
  21. ^ Letter Einstein to MariÄ on 3 October 1900 (Collected Papers Vol. 1, document 79).
  22. ^ Alberto A MartÃ­nez. "Arguing about Einstein's wife (April 2004) - Physics World â PhysicsWeb (See above)". http://physicsweb.org/articles/world/17/4/2. Retrieved on 21 November 2005.
  23. ^ Allen Esterson. "Mileva MariÄ: Einsteinâs Wife". http://www.esterson.org/milevamaric.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-23.
  24. ^ John Stachel. "âAlbert Einstein and Mileva Maric. A Collaboration That Failed to Developâ in: Creative Couples in the Sciences, H. M. Pycior et al. (ed)" (PDF). http://philoscience.unibe.ch/lehre/winter99/einstein/Stachel1966.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-23.
  25. ^ "Short life history: Elsa Einstein". http://www.einstein-website.de/biographies/einsteinelsa_content.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-11.
  26. ^ Hawking, S. W. (2001), The Universe in a Nutshell, Bantam Books, ISBN 0-55-380202-X
  27. ^ Schwartz, J.; McGuinness, M. (1979), Einstein for Beginners, Pantheon Books, ISBN 0-39-450588-3
  28. ^ On the reception of relativity theory around the world, and the different controversies it encountered, see the articles in Thomas F. Glick, ed., The Comparative Reception of Relativity (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1987), ISBN 9027724989.
  29. ^ Pais, Abraham (1982), Subtle is the Lord. The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, Oxford University Press, pp. 382â386, ISBN 0-19-520438-7
  30. ^ Pais, Abraham (1982), Subtle is the Lord. The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein, Oxford University Press, p. 522, ISBN 0-19-520438-7
  31. ^ Levenson, Thomas. "Einstein's Big Idea." Public Broadcasting Service. 2005\. Retrieved on 25 February 2006.
  32. ^ Einstein, Albert (1911). "On the Influence of Gravity on the Propagation of Light". Annalen der Physik 35: 898â908. doi:10.1002/andp.19113401005. (also in Collected Papers Vol. 3, document 23)
  33. ^ a b Crelinsten, Jeffrey. "Einstein's Jury: The Race to Test Relativity." Princeton University Press. 2006\. Retrieved on 13 March 2007. ISBN 9780691123103
  34. ^ Kant, Horst. "Albert Einstein and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics in Berlin." in Renn, JÃ¼rgen. "Albert Einstein â Chief Engineer of the Universe: One Hundred Authors for Einstein." Ed. Renn, JÃ¼rgen. Wiley-VCH. 2005\. pp. 166â169. ISBN = 3527405747
  35. ^ "Two friends in Leiden". http://www.lorentz.leidenuniv.nl/history/einstein/einstein.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-11.
  36. ^ Crelinsten, Jeffrey (2006), Einstein's Jury: The Race to Test Relativity, Princeton University Press, pp. 103â108, ISBN 978-0-691-12310-3, http://www.pupress.princeton.edu/titles/8165.html, retrieved on 2007-03-13
  37. ^ Crelinsten, Jeffrey (2006), Einstein's Jury: The Race to Test Relativity, Princeton University Press, pp. 114â119, ISBN 978-0-691-12310-3, http://www.pupress.princeton.edu/titles/8165.html, retrieved on 2007-03-13
  38. ^ a b Andrzej, Stasiak (2003). "Myths in science". EMBO reports 4 (3): 236. doi:10.1038/sj.embor.embor779. http://www.nature.com/embor/journal/v4/n3/full/embor779.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-31.
  39. ^ "The genius of space and time". The Guardian. 2005-09-17. http://books.guardian.co.uk/reviews/scienceandnature/0,,1571826,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-03-31.
  40. ^ Schmidhuber, JÃ¼rgen. "Albert Einstein (1879â1955) and the 'Greatest Scientific Discovery Ever'." 2006. Retrieved on 4 October 2006.
  41. ^ See the table in MathPages Bending Light
  42. ^ Hentschel, Klaus and Ann M. (1996), Physics and National Socialism: An Anthology of Primary Sources, Birkhaeuser Verlag, xxi, ISBN 3-76-435312-0
  43. ^ For a discussion of astronomers' attitudes and debates about relativity, see Crelinsten, Jeffrey (2006), Einstein's Jury: The Race to Test Relativity, Princeton University Press , especially chapters 6, 9, 10 and 11.
  44. ^ "Albert Einstein - Frequently Asked Questions". Nobelprize.org. 1955-04-18. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1921/einstein-faq.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-07.
  45. ^ BBC (2006), "Letters Reveal Einstein Love Life", BBC News (BBC), http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/5168002.stm, retrieved on 2008-11-25
  46. ^ See Albert Einstein, "Geometry and Experience," (1921), reprinted in Ideas and Opinions.
  47. ^ "Cornell and Wieman Share 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics". 2001-10-09. http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n01-04.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-11.
  48. ^ "Einstein archive at the Instituut-Lorentz." Instituut-Lorentz. 2005\. Retrieved on 21 November 2005.
  49. ^ Moore, Walter (1989). SchrÃ¶dinger: Life and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-43767-9.
  50. ^ Goettling, Gary. Einstein's refrigerator Georgia Tech Alumni Magazine. 1998\. Retrieved on 21 November 2005.
  51. ^ On 11 November 1930, U.S. Patent 1,781,541 was awarded to Albert Einstein and LeÃ³ SzilÃ¡rd for the refrigerator.
  52. ^ A reprint of this book was published by Edition Erbrich in 1982, ISBN 388682005X
  53. ^ Aspect, Alain; Dalibard, Jean; Roger, GÃ©rard (1982). "Experimental test of Bell's inequalities using time-varying analyzers". Physical Review Letters 49 (25): 1804â1807. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.1804. The first of many experimental tests relating to EPR.
  54. ^ Brian, Dennis (1996), Einstein: A Life, New York: John Wiley & Sons, p. 127, ISBN 0-471-11459-6
  55. ^ Albert Einstein in a letter to M. Berkowitz, 25 October 1950; Einstein Archive 59-215; from Alice Calaprice, ed., The New Quotable Einstein, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2000, p. 216.
  56. ^ "Albert Einstein (1879-1955)". http://www.stephenjaygould.org/ctrl/quotes_einstein.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-21.
  57. ^ Helen Dukas and Banesh Hoffman (eds) (1981). Albert Einstein, The Human Side. Princeton University Press. p. 43.
  58. ^ Einstein, Albert (1949). The World as I See It. New York: Philosophical Library. ISBN 0806527900. http://www.einsteinandreligion.com/worldsee2.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-14.
  59. ^ "Albert Einstein: Religion and Science". Sacred-texts.com. 1930-11-09. http://www.sacred-texts.com/aor/einstein/einsci.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-07.
  60. ^ Stringer-Hye, Richard (1999), "Charles Francis Potter", Dictionary of Unitarian and Universalist Biography, Unitarian Universalist Historical Society
  61. ^ Wilson, Edwin H. (1995), "Chapter 2: The Background of Religious Humanism", Genesis of a Humanist Manifesto, The Secular Web Library
  62. ^ Ericson, Edward L. "The Humanist Way: An Introduction to Ethical Humanist Religion". The American Ethical Union. http://ethicalunion.org/ericson2.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-23.
  63. ^ Einstein, A. (1940). "Science and religion". Nature 146: 605â607. doi:10.1038/146605a0.
  64. ^ Clark, Ronald W. (1971), Einstein: The Life and Times, Avon, ISBN 0-380-44123-3
  65. ^ "Nationalist-Communist Civil War 1927-1937". http://san.beck.org/15-4-ChinaCivilWar1927-37.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-03.
  66. ^ Zionism and Israel Information Center, Albert Einstein and Zionism, http://www.zionism-israel.com/Albert_Einstein/Albert_Einstein_about_zionism.htm, retrieved on 2008-08-14
  67. ^ ASIN: B00085M906
  68. ^ Available in reprint paperback from Filiquarian Publishing, LLC, ISBN 1599869659.
  69. ^ American Museum of Natural History (2002), Einstein's Revolution, http://www.amnh.org/exhibitions/einstein/revolution/index.php, retrieved on 2007-03-14
  70. ^ See the AMNH site's popup of translated letter from Freud, in the section "Freud and Einstein", regarding proposed joint presentation on "What can be done to rid mankind of the menace of war?"
  71. ^ Rowe, David E.; Schulmann, Robert (2007), Einstein on Politics: His Private Thoughts and Public Stands on Nationalism, Zionism, War, Peace, and the Bomb, Princeton University Press, ISBN 0691120943
  72. ^ Jewish Virtual Library, Albert Einstein on Zionism, http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Quote/einsteinq.html, retrieved on 2008-08-14
  73. ^ Albert Einstein Archives (2007), "History of the Estate of Albert Einstein", Albert Einstein Archives, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, http://albert-einstein.org/history5.html, retrieved on 2007-03-25
  74. ^ TIME Online (1952), [www.time.com Einstein Declines], http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,817454,00.html, retrieved on 2008-08-08
  75. ^ a b Princeton Online (1995), "Einstein in Princeton: Scientist, Humanitarian, Cultural Icon", Historical Society of Princeton
  76. ^ Clark, R. "Einstein: The Life and Times" Harper-Collins, 1984. 880 pp.
  77. ^ Hakim, Joy (1995). A History of Us: War, Peace and all that Jazz. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-509514-6.
  78. ^ The International Rescue Committee gives support and shelter to refugees of social and political persecution.
  79. ^ "MathPages â Reflections on Relativity: Who Invented Relativity?". http://www.mathpages.com/rr/s8-08/8-08.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-25.
  80. ^ Christian Schlatter (April 2002). "Philipp Lenard et la physique aryenne" (PDF). Ãcole Polytechnique FÃ©dÃ©rale de Lausanne. http://ame.epfl.ch/biblio/schlatter1.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-06-25.
  81. ^ Hawking, S. W. (1988), A Brief History of Time: The updated and expanded tenth anniversary edition, Bantam Books, ISBN 0-55-338016-8
  82. ^ "An Albert Einstein Chronology". http://www.aip.org/history/einstein/chron.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-06.
  83. ^ Discover Magazine March 2008. "Chain Reaction: From Einstein to the Atomic Bomb". http://discovermagazine.com/2008/mar/18-chain-reaction-from-einstein-to-the-atomic-bomb.
  84. ^ The Atomic Heritage Foundation. "Einstein's Letter to Franklin D. Roosevelt". http://www.mphpa.org/index2.php?option=com_content&do_pdf=1&id=172. Retrieved on 2007-05-26.
  85. ^ Schwarz, Frederic (1998-04). "Einstein's Ordnance". AmericanHeritage.com. http://www.americanheritage.com/articles/magazine/it/1998/4/1998_4_8.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-03-23.
  86. ^ Scientist Tells of Einstein's A-bomb Regrets. The Philadelphia Bulletin, 13 May 1955. (PDF document from the Swiss Federal Archives from Internet Archive.)
  87. ^ Einstein, Albert (11 1947). "Atomic War or Peace". Atlantic Monthly. http://theamericanideabook.theatlantic.com/archives/2007/09/atomic_war_or_peace.php. Retrieved on 2008-03-23.
  88. ^ Calaprice, Alice (2005), The new quotable Einstein, Princeton University Press, p. 173, ISBN 0-691-12075-7 Other versions of the quote exist.
  89. ^ "Why Socialism?". http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1132/is_n8_v40/ai_6944290. Retrieved on 2007-06-30.
  90. ^ Butcher, Sandra Ionno (May 2005). "The Origins of the Russell-Einstein Manifesto" (PDF). Council of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs. http://www.pugwash.org/publication/phs/history9.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-05-02.
  91. ^ "Albert Einstein, Civil Rights activist". 2007-04-12. http://www.news.harvard.edu/gazette/2007/04.12/01-einstein.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-11.
  92. ^ a b c Reis, Arthur H., Jr (1998), "The Albert Einstein Involvement", Brandeis Review, 50th Anniversary Edition, http://www.brandeis.edu/publications/review/50threview/einstein.pdf, retrieved on 2007-03-25
  93. ^ New York Times (22 June 1947), "Dr. Einstein Quits University Plan", The New York Times, http://select.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F50812FA385D13728DDDAB0A94DE405B8788F1D3, retrieved on 2007-03-14
  94. ^ "The FBI and Albert Einstein". http://www.wsws.org/articles/2002/sep2002/eins-s03.shtml.
  95. ^ Federal Bureau of Investigation (2005), "Albert Einstein", FBI Freedom of Information Act Website, U.S. Federal Government, U.S. Department of Justice
  96. ^ "History of Vegetarianism â Albert Einstein". http://www.ivu.org/history/northam20a/einstein.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-11.
  97. ^ "The Case of the Scientist with a Pulsating Mass". 2002-06-14. http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/436253. Retrieved on 2007-06-11.
  98. ^ Albert Einstein Archives (April 1955), "Draft of projected Telecast Israel Independence Day, April 1955 (last statement ever written)", Einstein Archives Online, http://www.alberteinstein.info/db/ViewImage.do?DocumentID=20078&Page=1, retrieved on 2007-03-14
  99. ^ O'Connor, J.J.; Robertson, E.F. (1997), "Albert Einstein", The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St. Andrews
  100. ^ "Dr. Albert Einstein Dies in Sleep at 76. World Mourns Loss of Great Scientist.". New York Times. 19 April 1955, Tuesday. "Princeton, New Jersey, 18 April 1955. Dr. Albert Einstein, one of the great thinkers of the ages, died in his sleep here early today."
  101. ^ "The Long, Strange Journey of Einstein's Brain". http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4602913. Retrieved on 2007-10-03.
  102. ^ New York Times obituary [1]
  103. ^ BBC (2006), "Letters Reveal Einstein Love Life", BBC News (BBC), http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/5168002.stm, retrieved on 2007-03-14
  104. ^ Roger Richman Agency (2007), "Albert Einstein Licensing" ; Archive copy at the Internet Archive
  105. ^ "Einstein". Corbis Rights Representation. http://einstein.biz/. Retrieved on 2008-08-08.
  106. ^ Isaacson, Walter (3 January 2000), "Person of the Century: Why We Chose Einstein", Time, http://www.time.com/time/time100/poc/magazine/who_mattered_and_why4a.html, retrieved on 2007-07-16
  107. ^ a b Golden, Frederic (3 January 2000), "Person of the Century: Albert Einstein", Time, http://www.time.com/time/time100/poc/magazine/albert_einstein5a.html, retrieved on 2006-02-25
  108. ^ "Mother Teresa Voted by American People as Most Admired Person of the Century". 1999-12-31. http://www.gallup.com/poll/3367/Mother-Teresa-Voted-American-People-Most-Admired-Person-Century.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  109. ^ Hart, Michael H. (1978), The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History, Citadel Press, p. 52, ISBN 0-8065-1350-0
  110. ^ "World Year of Physics 2005". http://www.wyp2005.org/overview.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-03.
  111. ^ "Walhalla Ruhmes- und Ehrenhalle" (in German). http://www.walhalla-regensburg.de/deutsch/index.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-10-03.
  112. ^ The New Yorker April 1939 pg 69 Disguise

## Further reading

  * Moring, Gary, "The complete idiotâs guide to understanding Einstein", Indianapolis, IN : Alpha books : Macmillan USA, Inc., 2000 (2nd edition, 2004). ISBN 0028631803
  * Schweber, S. S., Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of Genius, Harvard University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0674028289.

## External links

Find more about Albert Einstein on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG>
Definitions from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Einstein Page from Princeton University Press, publisher of Einstein's writings since 1921.
  * Albert Einstein at the Open Directory Project
  * Einstein Archives Online
  * "Emilio Segre Visual Archives: Albert Einstein", American Institute of Physics
  * "The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive": Albert Einstein University of Saint Andrews, School of Mathematics and Statistics (huge bibliography for further reading)
  * "Einstein's Big Idea" Nova television documentary series website, Public Broadcasting Service
  * Nobelprize.org: The Nobel Prize in Physics 1921
  * Mathematics Genealogy Project: Albert Einstein, Mathematics Genealogy Project (a service of the NDSU Department of Mathematics, in association with the American Mathematical Society)
  * In Einstein's Shadow BBC Radio 4 series on Einstein's contributions to science
  * Works by Albert Einstein (public domain in Canada)
  * "A. Einstein: Image and Impact", on the American Institute of Physics's "AIP Center for the History of Physics" site: biography, audio and full site as downloadable PDF for classroom use
  * Einstein's Annus Mirabilis 1905 \- collection at Johns Hopkins University

Videos

<IMG> Einstein family portal  
  * Archival footage of Einstein
  * Einstein in 1943
  * Einstein explains E=mc^2
  * Einstein's 1933 arrival in the US
  * Footage of the 1927 Solvay conference
  * Einstein talks about nuclear energy

v â¢ d â¢ e

Albert Einstein's Family  
Main family

Pauline Koch Â· Hermann Einstein Â· Albert Einstein Â· Maja Einstein  
Children

Hans Albert Einstein Â· Eduard Einstein Â· Lieserl Einstein  
Grand Children

Bernhard Caesar Einstein (son of Hans Albert Einstein)  
Wives

Mileva MariÄ Â· Elsa Einstein  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Nobel Laureates in Physics  
Wilhelm RÃ¶ntgen (1901) Â· Hendrik Lorentz / Pieter Zeeman (1902) Â· Henri
Becquerel / Pierre Curie / Marie Curie (1903) Â· Lord Rayleigh (1904) Â·
Philipp Lenard (1905) Â· J. J. Thomson (1906) Â· Albert Michelson (1907) Â·
Gabriel Lippmann (1908) Â· Guglielmo Marconi / Ferdinand Braun (1909) Â·
Johannes van der Waals (1910) Â· Wilhelm Wien (1911) Â· Gustaf DalÃ©n (1912)
Â· Kamerlingh Onnes (1913) Â· Max von Laue (1914) Â· W. L. Bragg / W. H. Bragg
(1915) Â· Charles Barkla (1917) Â· Max Planck (1918) Â· Johannes Stark (1919)
Â· Charles Guillaume (1920) Â· Albert Einstein (1921) Â· Niels Bohr (1922) Â·
Robert Millikan (1923) Â· Manne Siegbahn (1924) Â· James Franck / Gustav Hertz
(1925)  
* * *
Complete roster | (1901â1925) | (1926â1950) | (1951â1975) |
(1976â2000) | (2001âpresent)  
Persondata  
NAME Einstein, Albert  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Physicist  
DATE OF BIRTH 14 March 1879(1879-03-14)  
PLACE OF BIRTH Ulm, Baden-WÃ¼rttemberg, German Empire  
DATE OF DEATH 18 April 1955  
PLACE OF DEATH Princeton, New Jersey  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein"

Categories: 1879 births | 1955 deaths | People from Ulm | Academics of the
Charles University | Albert Einstein | American humanists | American pacifists
| American philosophers | American physicists | American socialists | American
vegetarians | Cosmologists | Einstein family | ETH Zurich alumni | ETH Zurich
faculty | Fellows of the Leopoldina | German agnostics | German-American Jews
| German-American scientists | German humanists | German immigrants to
Switzerland | German immigrants to the United States | German Jews | German
Jews who emigrated to the United States to escape Nazism | German-language
philosophers | German Nobel laureates | German pacifists | German physicists |
German refugees | German socialists | German vegetarians | Institute for
Advanced Study faculty | Jewish American scientists | Jewish American writers
| Jewish inventors | Jewish skeptics | Pantheists | Jewish pacifists | Jewish
philosophers | Jewish refugees | Jewish scientists | Leiden University faculty
| Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences | Naturalized citizens of the
United States | Nobel laureates in Physics | Patent examiners | People
associated with the University of Zurich | University of Zurich alumni |
University of Zurich faculty | People from the Kingdom of WÃ¼rttemberg |
Recipients of the Pour le MÃ©rite (civil class) | Relativists | Stateless
persons | Swiss immigrants to the United States | Swiss humanitarians | Swiss
Jews | Swiss Nobel laureates | Swiss pacifists | Swiss physicists | Swiss
vegetarians | Theoretical physicists | Violinists | Walhalla enshrinees |
Zionists

Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Articles including
recorded pronunciations (German)

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Bamanankan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * EstremeÃ±u
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * àªà«àªàª°àª¾àª¤à«
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hawai`i
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ilokano
  * à¦à¦®à¦¾à¦° à¦ à¦¾à¦°/à¦¬à¦¿à¦·à§à¦£à§à¦ªà§à¦°à¦¿à¦¯à¦¼à¦¾ à¦®à¦£à¦¿à¦ªà§à¦°à§
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * Kapampangan
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Ladino
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Lojban
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Ù ÙØ²ÙØ±ÙÙÙ
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Myanmasa
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Pangasinan
  * áá¶áá¶ááááá
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Qaraqalpaqsha
  * Ripoarisch
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * Scots
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Basa Sunda
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TatarÃ§a/Ð¢Ð°ÑÐ°ÑÑÐ°
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Tok Pisin
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * VÃµro
  * Walon
  * Winaray
  * Wolof
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * Zazaki
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 02:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



