
# William Morris

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This page is about William Morris, the British writer, designer, artist and
socialist. For other people see William Morris (disambiguation)

William Morris  
<IMG>  

William Morris by George Frederic Watts, 1870  
Born 24 March 1834(1834-03-24)  
  
Died 3 October 1896 (aged 62)  
  
Nationality English  
Occupation Artist  
Writer  
Known for Arts and Crafts movement  
British Socialism  
William Morris (24 March 1834 â 3 October 1896) was an English architect,
furniture and textile designer, artist, writer, and socialist associated with
the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood and the English Arts and Crafts Movement.

Born in Walthamstow in east London, Morris was educated at Marlborough and
Oxford. In 1856, he became an apprentice to Gothic revival architect G. E.
Street. That same year he founded the Oxford and Cambridge Magazine, an outlet
for his poetry and a forum for development of his theories of hand-
craftsmanship in the decorative arts. In 1861, Morris founded a design firm in
partnership with the artist Edward Burne-Jones, and the poet and artist Dante
Gabriel Rossetti which had a profound impact on the decoration of churches and
houses into the early 20th century. Morris's chief contribution was as a
designer of repeating patterns for wallpapers and textiles, many based on a
close observation of nature. He was also a major contributor to the resurgence
of traditional textile arts and methods of production.

Morris wrote and published poetry, fiction, and translations of ancient and
medieval texts throughout his life. His best-known works include The Defence
of Guenevere and Other Poems (1858), The Earthly Paradise (1868â1870), A
Dream of John Ball and the utopian News from Nowhere.

Morris was an important figure in the emergence of socialism in Great Britain,
founding the Socialist League in 1884, but breaking with the movement over
goals and methods by the end of that decade. He devoted much of the rest of
his life to the Kelmscott Press, which he founded in 1891. The 1896 Kelmscott
edition of the Works of Geoffrey Chaucer is considered a masterpiece of book
design.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Early life and education
    * 1.2 Oxford, apprenticeship, and artistic influences
    * 1.3 Marriage and family
    * 1.4 Red House
    * 1.5 Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co.
    * 1.6 Kelmscott Manor
    * 1.7 Socialism
    * 1.8 Historic preservation
    * 1.9 Later years
  * 2 Writings
    * 2.1 Poetry
    * 2.2 Translations
    * 2.3 Prose romances
  * 3 Textiles
    * 3.1 Embroidery
    * 3.2 Printed and woven textiles
    * 3.3 Tapestry
  * 4 The Kelmscott Press
    * 4.1 Publications
  * 5 Legacy
    * 5.1 Assessment
    * 5.2 Notable collections and house museums
    * 5.3 Monuments
  * 6 Literary works
    * 6.1 Poetry, fiction, and essays
    * 6.2 Translations
  * 7 Gallery
    * 7.1 Morris & Co. stained glass
    * 7.2 Morris & Co. textiles
    * 7.3 Decorative objects
    * 7.4 Kelmscott Press
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 References
  * 11 Further reading
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

### [edit] Early life and education

Morris was born at Elm Houses, Walthamstow, on 24 March 1834, the third child
and the eldest son of William Morris, a partner in the firm of Sanderson &
Co., bill brokers in the City of London. His mother was Emma Morris nÃ©e
Shelton, daughter of Joseph Shelton, a teacher of music in Worcester.[1] As a
child Morris was delicate but studious. He learned to read very early, and by
the time he was four years old he was familiar with most of the Waverley
novels. When he was six the family moved to Woodford Hall, where new
opportunities for an out-of-door life brought the boy health and vigour. He
rode about Epping Forest, sometimes in a toy suit of armour, where he became a
close observer of animal nature and was able to recognize any bird upon the
wing.[2][3]

At the same time he continued to read whatever came in his way and was
particularly attracted by the stories in the Arabian Nights and by the designs
in Gerard's Herbal. He studied with his sisters' governess until he was nine,
when he was sent to a school at Walthamstow. In 1842, his sister Isabella was
born. She would grow up to be the churchwoman who oversaw the revival of the
Deaconess Order in the Anglican Communion.[4] In his thirteenth year their
father died, leaving the family well-to-do. The home at Woodford was broken
up, as being unnecessarily large, and in 1848 the family relocated to Water
House and William Morris entered Marlborough School, where his father had
bought him a nomination. Morris was at the school for three years, but gained
little from attending it beyond a taste for architecture, fostered by the
school library, and an attraction towards the Anglo-Catholic movement.[5] He
made but slow progress in school work and at Christmas 1851 was removed and
sent to a private tutor, the Rev. F. B. Guy, later Canon of St. Alban's, for a
year to prepare him for University.[2][6]

### [edit] Oxford, apprenticeship, and artistic influences

In June 1852 Morris entered Exeter College, Oxford, though since the college
was full, he was unable to go into residence until January 1853. At Exeter,
Morris met Edward Burne-Jones, also a first year undergraduate, who would
become his life-long friend and collaborator. Morris also joined a Birmingham
group at Pembroke College, known among themselves as the "Brotherhood" and to
historians as the "Pembroke set".[2][7] Together, they read theology,
ecclesiastical history, and medieval poetry; studied art, and fostered their
study in the long vacations by visiting English churches and the Continental
cathedrals. They became strongly influenced by the paintings of the Pre-
Raphaelites, John Ruskin's essay "The Nature of Gothic" from the second volume
of The Stones of Venice, Thomas Malory's Morte d'Arthur and the poetry of
Alfred, Lord Tennyson. Morris began to develop his philosophy of rejecting the
tawdry industrial manufacture of decorative arts and architecture in favour of
a return to hand-craftsmanship, raising artisans to the status of artists,
creating art that should be affordable and hand-made, with no hierarchy of
artistic mediums.[2]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Self-portrait, 1856

Moreover, Morris began at this time to write poetry and many of his first
pieces, afterwards destroyed, were held by sound judges to be equal to
anything else he ever worked on. Both Morris and Burne-Jones had come to
Oxford with the intention of taking holy orders, but as they felt their way,
they both came to the conclusion that there was more to be done in the
direction of social reform than of ecclesiastical work and that their energies
would be best employed outside the priesthood. Morris decided to become an
architect and for the better propagation of the views of the new brotherhood a
magazine was at the same time projected, which was to make a specialty of
social articles, besides poems and short stories. At the beginning of 1856 the
two schemes came to a head together. Morris, having passed his finals in the
previous term, was entered as a pupil at the office of George Edmund Street,
one of the leading English Gothic revival architects who had his headquarters
in Oxford as architect to the diocese;[1] and on New Year's Day the first
issue of the Oxford and Cambridge Magazine appeared. The expenses of
publishing were borne entirely by Morris, but he resigned the formal
editorship after the first issue. Many distinguished compositions appeared in
its pages, but it gradually languished and was given up after a year's
experiment. The chief immediate result was the friendship between Morris and
Dante Gabriel Rossetti, which sprang up from a successful attempt to secure
Rossetti as a contributor.[2]

In Streetâs office Morris formed an intimate and lifelong friendship with
the senior clerk, Philip Webb, which had an important influence over the
development taken by English domestic architecture during the next generation.
He worked in Streetâs office for the rest of that year, first at Oxford and
afterwards in London when Street removed there in the autumn.[1] Morris worked
very hard both in and out of office hours at architecture and painting, and he
studied architectural drawing under Webb.[8] Rossetti, however, persuaded him
that he was better suited for a painter, and after a while he devoted himself
exclusively to that branch of art. That summer the two friends visited Oxford
and finding the new Oxford Union debating-hall under construction, pursued a
commission to paint the upper walls with scenes from Le Morte d'Arthur and to
decorate the roof between the open timbers. Seven artists were recruited,
among them Valentine Prinsep and Arthur Hughes,[9] and the work was hastily
begun. Morris worked with feverish energy and on finishing the portion
assigned to him, proceeded to decorate the roof. The frescoes, done too soon
and too fast, began to fade at once and are now barely decipherable; but the
broken designs, so long as any vestige remains, will always be interesting as
a relic of an important aesthetic movement and as the first attempt on
Morris's part towards the decorative arts.

### [edit] Marriage and family

<IMG>

<IMG>

Morris's painting La belle Iseult, also inaccurately called Queen Guenevere,
is his only surviving easel painting, now in the Tate Gallery.

Rossetti had recruited two sisters, Bessie and Jane Burden, as models for the
Oxford Union murals, and Morris was smitten with Jane from the start.[10] They
became engaged in 1858 and married at St Michael at the Northgate, Oxford, on
26 April 1859, settling temporarily at 41 Great Ormond Street, London.
Morris's only surviving painting in oils is of Jane Burden as La Belle Iseult.

William and Jane had two daughters, Jane Alice (Jenny), born January 1861, who
developed epilepsy in her teens, and Mary (May) (March 1862â1938), who
became the editor of her father's works, a prominent socialist, and an
accomplished designer and craftswoman.[11]

Although of very humble origins and unschooled in her youth,[10] Jane Morris
underwent a remarkable self-education after her marriage. A striking beauty,
she mixed freely with the Pre-Raphaelites and posed many times for Rossetti,
who became passionately attached to her. The Morrises' initial happiness
together did not survive the first ten years of their marriage, but divorce
was unthinkable, and they remained together until Morris's death.[11]

### [edit] Red House

<IMG>

<IMG>

Red House, Bexleyheath

For several years after his marriage Morris was absorbed in two intimately
connected occupations: the building and decoration of a house for himself and
Jane, and the foundation of a firm of decorators who were also artists, with
the view of reinstating decoration, down to its smallest details, as one of
the fine arts. Meanwhile he was slowly abandoning painting; none of his
paintings are dated later than 1862.[1]

Red House at Bexleyheath in Kent, so named when the use of red brick without
stucco was a startling novelty in domestic architecture, was built by Phillip
Webb to designs by Webb and Morris. It was Webb's first building as an
independent architect[12] and the first serious attempt made in Victorian
England to apply art throughout to the practical objects of common life.[2]
Red House featured ceiling paintings by Morris, wall-hangings designed by
Morris and worked by himself and Jane; furniture painted by Morris and
Rossetti, and wall-paintings and stained- and painted glass designed by Burne-
Jones.[12]

### [edit] Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co.

Main article: Morris & Co.

In 1861, Morris founded the decorative arts firm of Morris, Marshall, Faulkner
& Co. with Rossetti, Burne-Jones, Ford Madox Brown and Philip Webb as
partners, together with Charles Faulkner and P. P. Marshall, the former of
whom was a member of the Oxford Brotherhood, and the latter a friend of Brown
and Rossetti.[1] The prospectus set forth that the firm would undertake
carving, stained glass, metal-work, paper-hangings, chintzes (printed
fabrics), and carpets.[2] The decoration of churches was from the first an
important part of the business. On its non-ecclesiastical side it gradually
was extended to include, besides painted windows and mural decoration,
furniture, metal and glass wares, cloth and paper wall-hangings, embroideries,
jewelery, woven and knotted carpets, silk damasks, and tapestries. The first
headquarters of the firm were at 8 Red Lion Square.

The work shown by the firm at the 1862 International Exhibition attracted much
notice, and within a few years it was flourishing. In the autumn of 1864, a
severe illness obliged Morris to choose between giving up his home at Red
House in Kent and giving up his work in London. With great reluctance he gave
up Red House, and in 1865 established himself under the same roof with his
workshops, now relocated to Queen Square, Bloomsbury.[1]

An important commission of 1867[13] was the "green dining room" at the South
Kensington Museum (now the Morris Room of the Victoria and Albert), featuring
stained glass windows and panel figures by Burne-Jones, panels with branches
of fruit or flowers by Morris, and olive branches and a frieze by Philip Webb.

In 1874 Morris proposed a reorganization, and Rossetti and Ford Madox Brown
decided to leave the firm, requiring a return on their shares which proved to
be a costly business. Throughout his life, Morris continued as principal owner
and design director, although the company changed names. Its most famous
incarnation was as Morris & Co. The firm's designs are still sold today under
licenses given to Sanderson and Sons (which markets the "Morris & Co." brand)
and Liberty of London.

### [edit] Kelmscott Manor

In 1869, Morris and Rossetti rented a country house, Kelmscott Manor at
Kelmscott, Oxfordshire, as a summer retreat, but it soon became a retreat for
Rossetti and Jane Morris to have a long-lasting and complicated liaison. The
two spent summers there, with the Morris children, while Morris himself
traveled to Iceland in 1871 and 1873. Kelmscott Manor remained an important
retreat and symbol of simple country life for Morris in later years. It was
the model for "the old house by the Thames" in Morris's News from Nowhere.[14]

### [edit] Socialism

Morris and his daughter May were amongst Britain's first socialists, working
directly with Eleanor Marx and Engels to begin the socialist movement.

In the 1870s, Morris had begun to take an active interest in politics. He
became treasurer of the National Liberal League in 1879, but after the Irish
coercive measures of 1881 he finally abandoned the Liberal party and drifted
further into socialism. For ten or twelve years this movement had been gaining
ground in England, and the Social Democratic Federation was formed in 1881. In
January 1883, within a week of his election to an honorary fellowship at his
old Oxford college, Exeter, Morris was enrolled among the SDF's members.
Thenceforward for two years his advocacy of the cause of socialism absorbed
not only his spare time, but the thought and energy of all his working hours.
For it he even neglected literature and art. In March 1883 he gave an address
at Manchester on "Art, Wealth and Riches"; in May he was elected upon the
executive of the federation. In September he wrote the first of his Chants for
Socialists. About the same time he shocked the authorities by pleading in
University Hall for the wholesale support of socialism among the
undergraduates at Oxford. Nevertheless, the federation began to weaken. At the
franchise meeting in Hyde Park in 1884 it was unable to get a hearing. Morris,
however, had not yet lost heart. Internal dissensions in 1884 led to the
Morris's foundation of the breakaway Socialist League, and in February 1885 a
new organ, Commonweal, began to print Morris's rallying-songs. Still,
differences of opinion and degree prevented concerted action. After the
Trafalgar Square riots in February 1886, the League became caught up in a
debate between those who believed in working through Parliament and with the
existing union movement (alongside preparing and propagandising for
revolutionary transformation) and an anarchist-influenced section who did not,
a debate that distanced it from the growing working-class Labour movement of
the decade. Morris played peacemaker but sided with the anti-Parliamentarians,
who won control of the League at the expense of the departure of the
'orthodox' Marxist group. In 1889, in a Socialist League now dominated by
Anarchists, Morris was deposed from the management of Commonweal. The
following years have been described as a time of disillusionment for Morris,
but he continued to write articles and give public lectures in active support
of the Socialist cause, Morris himself being perhaps the greatest British
representative of what has come to be called libertarian socialism. Liberated
from internal factional struggles, he retracted his anti-Parliamentary
position and worked for Socialist unity, giving his last public lecture in
January 1896 on the subject of 'One Socialist Party'.[2]

This side of Morris's work is well-discussed in the biography by E. P.
Thompson (subtitled Romantic to Revolutionary). It was during this period that
Morris wrote his best-known prose works, A Dream of John Ball and the utopian
News from Nowhere.

### [edit] Historic preservation

Although Morris never became a practising architect, his interest in
architecture continued throughout his life. In 1877 he founded the Society for
the Protection of Ancient Buildings (sometimes known as "Anti-Scrape"), which
sprang into being as a practical protest against a scheme for restoring and
reviving Tewkesbury Abbey.[2][15] His preservation work resulted indirectly in
the founding of the National Trust. Combined with the inspiration of John
Ruskin â in particular his essay "The Nature of Gothic" â architecture
played an important symbolic part in Morris's approach to socialism.

### [edit] Later years

<IMG>

<IMG>

Morris family tombstone at Kelmscott, designed by Phillip Webb

In his later years, Morris returned to the paramount interests of his life,
art and literature. When his business was enlarged in 1881 by the
establishment of a tapestry industry at Merton Abbey Mills, in Surrey, Morris
found yet another means for expressing the medievalism that inspired all his
work, whether on paper or at the loom. He then added another to his many
activities; he assumed a direct interest in typography. In the early seventies
he had devoted much attention to the arts of manuscript illumination and
calligraphy. He himself wrote several manuscripts, with illuminations of his
own devising. From this to attempts to beautify the art of modern printing was
but a short step. The House of the Wolfings, printed in 1889 at the Chiswick
Press, was the first essay in this direction; and in the same year, in The
Roots of the Mountains, he carried his theory a step further. Some fifteen
months later he added a private printing-press to his multifarious occupations
and started upon the first volume issued from the Kelmscott Press. For the
last few years of his life this new interest remained the absorbing one.[2]

After his departure from the Socialist League, Morris divided his time between
the Firm, then relocated to Merton Abbey,[16] Kelmscott House in Hammersmith,
the Kelmscott Press, and Kelmscott Manor. At his death at Kelmscott House in
1896 he was interred in the Kelmscott village churchyard.

## [edit] Writings

William Morris was a prolific writer of poetry, fiction, essays, and
translations of ancient and medieval texts. His first poems were published
when he was 24 years old, and he was polishing his final novel, The Sundering
Flood, at the time of his death. His daughter May's edition of Morris's
Collected Works (1910â1915) runs to 24 volumes, and two more were published
in 1936.[17]

### [edit] Poetry

Morris began publishing poetry and short stories in 1856 through the Oxford
and Cambridge Magazine which he founded with his friends and financed while at
university. His first volume, The Defence of Guenevere and Other Poems (1858),
was the first book of Pre-Raphaelite poetry to be published.[17] The dark
poems, set in a sombre world of violence, were coolly received by the critics,
and he was discouraged from publishing more for a number of years. "The
Haystack in the Floods", one of the poems in that collection, is probably now
one of his better-known poems. It is a grimly realistic piece set during the
Hundred Years War in which the doomed lovers Jehane and Robert have a last
parting in a convincingly portrayed rain-swept countryside.[17] One early
minor poem was "Masters in this Hall" (1860), a Christmas carol written to an
old French tune.[18] Another Christmas-themed poem is "The Snow in the
Street", adapted from "The Land East of the Sun and West of the Moon" in The
Earthly Paradise.[19]

When he returned to poetry in the late 1860s it was with The Life and Death of
Jason,[20] which was published with great success in 1867.[17] Jason was
followed by The Earthly Paradise, a huge collection of poems loosely bound
together in what he called a leather strapbound book. The theme was of a group
of medieval wanderers who set out to search for a land of everlasting life;
after much disillusion, they discover a surviving colony of Greeks with whom
they exchange stories. The collection brought him almost immediate fame and
popularity (all of his books thereafter were published as "by the author of
The Earthly Paradise").[17] The last-written stories in the collection are
retellings of Icelandic sagas. From then until his Socialist period Morris's
fascination with the ancient Germanic and Norse peoples dominated his writing.
Together with his Icelandic friend EirÃ­kr MagnÃºsson he was the first to
translate many of the Icelandic sagas into English, and his own epic retelling
of the story of Sigurd the Volsung was his favourite among his poems.[1] Due
to his wide poetic acclaim, Morris was quietly approached with an offer of the
Poet Laureateship after the death of Tennyson in 1892, but declined.

### [edit] Translations

<IMG>

<IMG>

Burne-Jones (left) and Morris, 1890, photographed by Frederick Hollyer.

Morris had met Eirikr MagnÃºsson in 1868, and together they began to learn the
Icelandic language. Morris published translations of The Saga of Gunnlagg
Worm-Tongue and Grettis Saga in 1869, and the Story of the Volsungs and
Niblungs in 1870. An additional volume was published under the title of Three
Northern Love Stories in 1873.[1][17]

In the mid-1870s, Morris's leisure was mainly occupied by work as a scribe and
illuminator; to this period belong, among other works, two manuscripts of
Fitzgeraldâs Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam with illustrations by Burne-Jones. He
was for some time engaged in the production of a magnificent folio manuscript
of Virgil's Aeneid, and in the course of that work had begun to translate the
poem into English verse. The manuscript was finally laid aside for the
translation, and the Eneids of Virgil was published in November 1875. Morris
also translated large numbers of medieval and classical works, including
Homer's Odyssey in 1887.

### [edit] Prose romances

In the last nine years of his life, Morris wrote a series of imaginative
fictions usually referred to as the "prose romances".[21] These novels â
including The Wood Beyond the World and The Well at the World's End â have
been credited as important milestones in the history of fantasy fiction,
because, while other writers wrote of foreign lands, or of dream worlds, or
the future (as Morris did in News from Nowhere), Morris's works were the first
to be set in an entirely invented fantasy world.[22]

These were attempts to revive the genre of medieval romance, and not wholly
successful, partly because he eschewed many literary techniques from later
eras.[23] In particular, the plots of the novels are heavily driven by
coincidence; while many things just happened in the romances, the novels are
still weakened by the dependence on it.[24] Nevertheless, large subgenres of
the field of fantasy have sprung from the romance genre, but indirectly,
through their writers' imitation of William Morris.[25] The Wood Beyond the
World is considered to have heavily influenced C. S. Lewis' Narnia series,
while J. R. R. Tolkien was inspired by Morris's reconstructions of early
Germanic life in The House of the Wolfings and The Roots of the Mountains.
(The young Tolkien attempted a retelling of the story of Kullervo from the
Kalevala in the style of The House of the Wolfings.[26]) James Joyce also drew
inspiration from his work.[27]

## [edit] Textiles

Furnishing textiles were an important offering of the firm in all its
incarnations. By 1883, Morris wrote "Almost all the designs we use for surface
decoration, wallpapers, textiles, and the like, I design myself. I have had to
learn the theory and to some extent the practice of weaving, dyeing and
textile printing: all of which I must admit has given me and still gives me a
great deal of enjoyment."[28]

Morris's preference for flat use of line and colour and abhorrence of
"realistic" three-dimensional shading was marked; in this he followed medieval
conventions. Writing on tapestry weaving, Morris said:

> As in all wall-decoration, the first thing to be considered in the designing
of Tapestry is the force, purity, and elegance of the silhouette of the
objects represented, and nothing vague or indeterminate is admissible. But
special excellences can be expected from it. Depth of tone, richness of
colour, and exquisite gradation of tints are easily to be obtained in
Tapestry; and it also demands that crispness and abundance of beautiful detail
which was the especial characteristic of fully developed MediÃ¦val Art. - Of
the Revival of Design and Handicraft

It is likely that much of Morris's preference for medieval textiles was formed
â or crystallised â during his brief apprenticeship with G. E. Street.
Street had co-written a book on Ecclesiastical Embroidery in 1848, and was a
staunch advocate of abandoning faddish woolen work on canvas in favour of more
expressive embroidery techniques based on Opus Anglicanum, a surface
embroidery technique popular in medieval England.[29]

### [edit] Embroidery

Main article: Art needlework

Morris taught himself embroidery, working with wool on a frame custom-built
from an old example, and once he had mastered the technique he trained his
wife Jane and her sister Bessie Burden and others to execute designs to his
specifications. "Embroideries of all kinds" were offered through Morris,
Marshall, Faulkner & Co. catalogues, and church embroidery became and would
remain an important line of business for its successor companies into the
twentieth century.[30] By the 1870s, the firm was offering both designs for
embroideries and finished works. Following in Street's footsteps, Morris
became active in the growing movement to return originality and mastery of
technique to embroidery, and was one of the first designers associated with
the Royal School of Art Needlework with its aim to "restore Ornamental
Needlework for secular purposes to the high place it once held among
decorative arts."[31]

### [edit] Printed and woven textiles

<IMG>

<IMG>

Design for "Tulip and Willow" indigo-discharge wood-block printed fabric, 1873

Morris was producing repeating patterns for wallpaper as early as 1862, and
some six years later he designed his first pattern specifically for fabric
printing. As in so many other areas that interested him, Morris chose to work
with the ancient technique of hand woodblock printing in preference to the
roller printing which had almost completely replaced it for commercial uses.

Morris took up the practical art of dyeing as a necessary adjunct of his
manufacturing business. He spent much of his time at Staffordshire dye works
mastering the processes of that art and making experiments in the revival of
old or discovery of new methods. One result of these experiments was to
reinstate indigo dyeing as a practical industry and generally to renew the use
of those vegetable dyes, like madder, which had been driven almost out of use
by the anilines. Dyeing of wools, silks, and cottons was the necessary
preliminary to what he had much at heart, the production of woven and printed
fabrics of the highest excellence; and the period of incessant work at the
dye-vat (1875â76) was followed by a period during which he was absorbed in
the production of textiles (1877â78), and more especially in the revival of
carpet-weaving as a fine art.[1][32]

Morris's patterns for woven textiles included intricate double-woven
furnishing fabrics in which two sets of warps and wefts are interlinked to
create complex gradations of colour and texture.[33] His textile designs are
still popular today, sometimes recoloured for modern sensibilities, but also
in the original colourways.

### [edit] Tapestry

Morris long dreamed of weaving tapestries in the medieval manner, which he
called "the noblest of the weaving arts." In September 1879 he finished his
first solo effort, a small piece called "Cabbage and Vine".[34][35] Shortly
thereafter Morris trained his employee John Henry Dearle in the technique,
setting up a tapestry loom at Queen Square and later a large tapestry works at
Merton Abbey.

## [edit] The Kelmscott Press

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kelmscott Manor depicted in the frontispiece to the 1893 Kelmscott Press
edition of News from Nowhere.

In January 1891, Morris founded the Kelmscott Press at Hammersmith, London, in
order to produce books by traditional methods, using, as far as possible, the
printing technology and typographical style of the fifteenth century. In this
he was reflecting the tenets of the Arts and Crafts movement, and responding
to the mechanization and mass-production of contemporary book-production
methods and to the rise of lithography, particularly those lithographic prints
designed to look like woodcuts. He designed two typefaces based on fifteenth-
century models, the Roman "Golden" type (inspired by the type of the early
Venetian printer Nicolaus Jenson) and the black letter "Troy" type; a third
type, the "Chaucer" was an enlargement of the Troy type. He also designed
floriated borders and initials for the books, drawing inspiration from
incunabula and their woodcut illustrations. Selection of paper and ink, and
concerns for the overall integration of type and decorations on the page, made
the Kelmscott Press the most famous of the private presses of the Arts and
Crafts movement, and the main inspiration for what became known as the
"Private Press Movement". It operated until 1898, producing more than 18,000
copies of 53 different works, comprising 69 volumes, and inspired numerous
other private presses, notably the Vale Press, Caradoc Press, Ashendene Press
and Doves Press.[36]

### [edit] Publications

Among the works issued by the Kelmscott Press were:[36][37][38]

  * William Morris, The Story of the Glittering Plain (1891)
  * William Morris, The Defence of Guenevere and other Poems (1892)
  * William Morris, A Dream of John Ball and A King's Lesson (1892)
  * Raoul Lafevre, The Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye (1892)
  * William Shakespeare, The Poems (1893)
  * William Morris, News from Nowhere (1893)
  * William Caxton (trans.), The History of Reynard the Foxe (1893)
  * William Caxton (trans.), The Order of Chivalry (1893)
  * Guilelmus, Archbishop of Tyrel, The History of Geoffrey of Boloyne (1893)
  * Sir Thomas More, Utopia (1893)
  * Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Sonnets and Lyrical Poems (1893)
  * Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Ballads and Narrative Poems (1893)
  * Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Hand and Soul (1894)
  * Wilhelm Meinhold, Sidonia the Sorceress (1894)
  * William Morris, The Story of the Glittering Plain (1894)
  * Algernon Charles Swinburne, Atalanta in Calydon (1894)
  * An American Memorial to Keats (1894)
  * Sir Percyvelle of Gales (1895)
  * William Morris, The Life and Death of Jason (1895)
  * Geoffrey Chaucer, The Works (called the Kelmscott Chaucer) (1896)
  * William Morris, The Earthly Paradise (1896)
  * Sir Ysumbrace (1897)
  * William Morris, The Story of Sigurd the Volsung (1898)

The Kelmscott Press edition of The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer, with decorations
by Morris and illustrations by Burne-Jones, is sometimes counted among the
most beautiful books ever produced. Full-scale facsimiles of the Kelmscott
Chaucer were published by the Basilisk Press in 1974 and by the Folio Society
in 2002. More modest facsimiles were published by World Publishing in 1958 and
Omega Books in 1985.

## [edit] Legacy

### [edit] Assessment

Three years after his death, Morris's biographer John William Mackail (the
husband of Burne-Jones's daughter Margaret and so a member of his immediate
circle) summed up his career for the Dictionary of National Biography in a
quote that is markedly prescient in its assessment:

> The fame of Morris during his life was probably somewhat obscured by the
variety of his accomplishments. In all his work after he reached mature life
there is a marked absence of extravagance, of display, of superficial
cleverness or effectiveness, and an equally marked sense of composition and
subordination. Thus his poetry is singularly devoid of striking lines or
phrases, and his wall-papers and chintzes only reveal their full excellence by
the lastingness of the satisfaction they give. His genius as a pattern-
designer is allowed by all qualified judges to have been unequalled. This, if
anything, he himself regarded as his specific profession; it was under the
designation of "designer" that he enrolled himself in the socialist ranks and
claimed a position as one of the working class. And it is the quality of
design which, together with a certain fluent ease, distinguishes his work in
literature as well as in industrial art. It is yet too early to forecast what
permanent place he may hold among English poets. "The Defence of Guenevere"
had a deep influence on a very limited audience. With "Jason" and the "Earthly
Paradise" he attained a wide popularity: and these poems, appearing as they
did at a time when the poetic art in England seemed narrowing into mere labour
on a thrice-ploughed field, not only gave a new scope, range, and flexibility
to English rhymed verse, but recovered for narrative poetry a place among the
foremost kinds of the art. A certain diffuseness of style may seem to be
against their permanent life, so far as it is not compensated by a uniform
wholesomeness and sweetness which indeed marks all Morrisâs work. In "Sigurd
the Volsung" Morris appears to have aimed higher than in his other poems, but
not to have reached his aim with the same certainty; and his own return
afterwards from epic to romance may indicate that the latter was the ground on
which he was most at home. The prose romances of his later years have so far
proved less popular in themselves than in the dilutions they have suggested to
other writers. Here as elsewhere Morrisâs great effect was to stimulate the
artistic sense and initiate movements. So likewise it was with his political
and social work. Much of it was not practical in the ordinary sense; but it
was based on principles and directed towards ideals which have had a wide and
profound influence over thought and practice.[1]

From a later perspective, Stansky concludes that:

> Morris's views on the environment, on preserving what is of value in both
the natural and "built" worlds, on decentralising bloated government, are as
significant now as they were in Morris's own time, or even more so. Earlier in
the twentieth century, much of his thinking, particularly its political side,
was dismissed as sheer romanticism. After the Second World War, it appeared
that modernisation, centralisation, industrialism, rationalism â all the
faceless movements of the time â were in control and would take care of the
world. Today, when we have a keen sense of the shambles of their efforts, the
suggestions which Morris made in his designs, his writings, his actions and
his politics have new power and relevance.[39]

Today, Morris's poetry is little-read. His fantasy romances languished out of
print for decades until their rediscovery amid the great fantasy revival of
the late 1960s following the phenomenal success of Tolkien's Lord of the
Rings. But his textile and wallpaper designs remain a staple of the Arts and
Crafts Revival of the turn of the 21st century, and the reproduction of Morris
designs as fabric, wrapping paper, and craft kits of all sorts is testament to
the enduring appeal of his work. The William Morris Societies in Britain, the
US, and Canada are active in preserving Morris's work and ideas.

### [edit] Notable collections and house museums

<IMG>

<IMG>

Main Entrance to Kelmscott Manor

A number of galleries and museums house important collections of Morris's work
and decorative items commissioned from Morris & Co. The William Morris Gallery
in Walthamstow, England, is a public museum devoted to Morris' life, work and
influence. There are permanent displays of printed, woven and embroidered
fabrics, rugs, carpets, wallpapers, furniture, stained glass and painted tiles
by Morris and his associates. In April 2007, The Guardian newspaper reported
that funding for the Gallery was threatened by cost cutting by the London
borough of Waltham Forest. A campaign to avoid the reduction in opening times
and dismissal of key staff is underway.[40] The former "green dining room" at
the Victoria and Albert Museum is now its "Morris Room". The V&A's British
Galleries house other decorative works by Morris and his associates.[41]

Wightwick Manor in the West Midlands, England, is a notable example of the
Morris & Co. style, with original Morris wallpapers and fabrics, De Morgan
tiles, and Pre-Raphaelite works of art, managed by the National Trust. Standen
in West Sussex, England, was designed by Webb between 1892 and 1894 and
decorated with Morris carpets, fabrics and wallpapers. Morris's homes Red
House and Kelmscott Manor have been preserved. Red House was acquired by the
National Trust in 2003 and is open to the public by advanced reservation.
Kelmscott Manor is owned by the Society of Antiquaries of London and is open
to the public.

The Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens in San Marino,
California acquired the collection of Morris materials amassed by Sanford and
Helen Berger in 1999. The collection includes stained glass, wallpaper,
textiles, embroidery, drawings, ceramics, more than 2000 books, original
woodblocks, and the complete archives of both Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & Co.
and Morris & Co.[42] These materials formed the foundation for the 2002
exhibition William Morris: Creating the Useful and the Beautiful.[43]

### [edit] Monuments

A fountain located in Bexleyheath town centre, named the Morris Fountain, was
created in his honour and unveiled on the anniversary of his birth. Also in
Bexleyheath, Morris' home Red House was opened up to the public by the
National Trust in 2004. Also, Walthamstow Central tube station has William
Morris inspired motifs (by Julia Black) in regularly spaced alcoves along the
platform walls.

## [edit] Literary works

### [edit] Poetry, fiction, and essays

  * The Hollow Land (1856)
  * The Defence of Guenevere, and other Poems (1858)
  * The Life and Death of Jason (1867)
  * The Earthly Paradise (1868â1870)
  * Love is Enough, or The Freeing of Pharamond: A Morality (1872)
  * The Story of Sigurd the Volsung and the Fall of Niblungs (1877)
  * Hopes and Fears For Art (1882)
  * The Pilgrims of Hope (1885)
  * A Dream of John Ball (1888)
  * A Tale of the House of the Wolfings, and All the Kindreds of the Mark Written in Prose and in Verse (1889)
  * The Roots of the Mountains (1890)
  * Poems By the Way (1891)
  * News from Nowhere (or, An Epoch of Rest) (1890)
  * The Story of the Glittering Plain (1891)
  * The Wood Beyond the World (1894)
  * Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair (1895)
  * The Well at the World's End (1896)
  * The Water of the Wondrous Isles (1897)
  * The Sundering Flood (1897) (published posthumously)

### [edit] Translations

  * Grettis Saga: The Story of Grettir the Strong with EirÃ­kr MagnÃºsson (1869)
  * The Saga of Gunnlaug the Worm-tongue and Rafn the Skald with EirÃ­kr MagnÃºsson (1869)
  * VÃ¶lsung Saga: The Story of the Volsungs and Niblungs, with Certain Songs from the Elder Edda with EirÃ­kr MagnÃºsson (1870) (from the Volsunga saga)
  * Three Northern Love Stories, and Other Tales with EirÃ­kr MagnÃºsson (1875)
  * The Odyssey of Homer Done into English Verse (1887)
  * The Aeneids of Virgil Done into English (1876)
  * Of King Florus and the Fair Jehane (1893)
  * The Tale of Beowulf Done out of the Old English Tongue (1895)
  * Old French Romances Done into English (1896)

## [edit] Gallery

### [edit] Morris & Co. stained glass

<IMG>

David's Charge to Solomon (1882), a stained-glass window by Edward Burne-Jones
and William Morris in Trinity Church, Boston, Massachusetts.

<IMG>

Burne-Jonesâdesigned and Morris & Co.-executed Nativity windows (1882),
Trinity Church, Boston

<IMG>

Burne-Jonesâdesigned and Morris & Co.-executed The Worship of the Shepherds
window (1882), Trinity Church, Boston.

<IMG>

Detail from The Worship of the Shepherds window (1882).  
### [edit] Morris & Co. textiles

<IMG>

Acanthus wallpaper, 1875

<IMG>

Snakeshead printed textile, 1876

<IMG>

"Peacock and Dragon" woven wool furnishing fabric, 1878

<IMG>

Design for Windrush printed textile, 1881â83  
<IMG>

Detail of Woodpecker tapestry, 1885

<IMG>

The Vision of the Holy Grail tapestry, 1890

<IMG>

Acanthus embroidered panel, designed Morris, 1890

<IMG>

Strawberry Thief, furnishing fabric, designed Morris, 1883  
### [edit] Decorative objects

<IMG>

The Rubaiyat of Omar Kayam, text and decoration by Morris with illustrations
by Burne-Jones, 1870s

<IMG>

Panel of ceramic tiles designed by Morris and produced by William De Morgan,
1876  
### [edit] Kelmscott Press

<IMG>

Kelmscott Press typefaces and colophon, 1897

<IMG>

William Morris, publisher

<IMG>

The Nature of Gothic by John Ruskin, printed by Kelmscott Press. First page of
text, with typical ornamented border

<IMG>

A page from the Kelmscott Chaucer, illustration by Burne-Jones and decorations
and typefaces by Morris  
## [edit] See also

  * Arts and Crafts movement
  * Eco-socialism
  * Merry England
  * Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood
  * Victorian decorative arts
  * Social Democratic Federation
  * Socialism
  * Socialist League

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Dictionary of National Biography, 1901, "William Morris"
  2. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Encyclopedia Britannica, 1911, "William Morris"
  3. ^ J. W. Mackail, Life of William Morris, p. 3â8
  4. ^ Robinson, Elizabeth (1924). Deaconess Gilmore. London: S.P.C.K.. pp. 53.
  5. ^ Morris's authorized biographer, John William Mackail, states that Morris left Marlborough "a committed Anglo-Catholic." See J. W. Mackail, Life of William Morris, p. 17
  6. ^ J. W. Mackail, Life of William Morris, p. 25
  7. ^ Parry, William Morris, p. 90
  8. ^ Watkinson, Ray, "Painting" in Parry, William Morris, p. 90
  9. ^ Watkinson, Ray, "Painting" in Parry, William Morris, p. 93
  10. ^ a b Parry, William Morris, p. 14-16
  11. ^ a b Daly, Pre-Raphaelites in Love, p. 340-341, 402-404
  12. ^ a b Parry, "Domestic Decoration." In William Morris, p. 136â137
  13. ^ Charles Harvey and Jon Press, "The Businessman." in Parry, William Morris, p. 49-50
  14. ^ Todd, Pre-Raphaelites at Home, p. 123â130
  15. ^ Thompson, E. P. (1976). William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary. New York: Pantheon. pp. 228\. ISBN 0394733207. "The Society, which Morris dubbed 'Anti-Scrape'..."
  16. ^ William Morris Society. "Merton Abbey". http://www.morrissociety.org/mertonabbey.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-22.
  17. ^ a b c d e f Faulkner, Peter, "The Writer". In Parry, William Morris, p. 44-45
  18. ^ "The words were written for the old French carol tune shortly before 1860 by Morris, who was in Street's office with Edmund Sedding (architect and compiler of carols, brother of the more famous J. D. Sedding; he died early, in 1868). Sedding had obtained the tune from the organist at Chartres Cathedral, and he published the words and tune in his Antient Christmas Carols, 1860." â The Oxford Book of Carols, 1928, p. 277.
  19. ^ Set to music by composers including Ralph Vaughan Williams. The Oxford Book of Carols, 1928, p. 406.
  20. ^ Full text, with illustrations, at "The Life and Death of Jason". Morris Online Edition. 1867. http://morrisedition.lib.uiowa.edu/jason.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-22.
  21. ^ Faulkner, Peter, "The Writer". In Parry, William Morris, p. 47
  22. ^ Lin Carter, ed. Kingdoms of Sorcery, p. 39 Doubleday and Company Garden City, NY, 1976.
  23. ^ L. Sprague de Camp, Literary Swordsmen and Sorcerers: The Makers of Heroic Fantasy, p. 46\. ISBN 0-87054-076-9
  24. ^ L. Sprague de Camp, Literary Swordsmen and Sorcerers, p. 40.
  25. ^ L. Sprague de Camp, Literary Swordsmen and Sorcerers, p. 26.
  26. ^ Hammond and Scull, The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide, p. 816.
  27. ^ Hero, Stephen, "Morris and James Joyce," The Journal of William Morris Studies, 6.3 (Summer 1985): 36, p. 11.
  28. ^ Quoted in Waggoner, DianeThe Beauty of Life: William Morris & the Art of Design.
  29. ^ Parry, William Morris Textiles, pp. 10â11.
  30. ^ Parry, William Morris Textiles, pp. 16â17.
  31. ^ Quoted in Parry, William Morris Textiles, pp. 18â19.
  32. ^ Parry, William Morris Textiles, pp. 36â46.
  33. ^ Waggoner, The Beauty of Life, p. 54.
  34. ^ Parry, William Morris Textiles, pp. 103â104.
  35. ^ Waggoner, The Beauty of Life, p. 86.
  36. ^ a b Fiell and Fiell (1999), William Morris pp. 160â165.
  37. ^ Dreyfus, John, "The Kelmscott Press". In Parry, William Morris (1996) pp. 310â345.
  38. ^ "William Morris and the Kelmscott Press". http://www.alfredom.com/art/morris.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-22. See also Peterson.
  39. ^ Stansky (1983) p. 89.
  40. ^ "News from Waltham Forest", The Guardian, 2007-04-21, http://arts.guardian.co.uk/art/news/story/0,,2062448,00.html
  41. ^ "William Morris at the Victoria and Albert Museum". http://www.victorianart.btinternet.co.uk/va-web/victoria_and_albert_museum.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-22.
  42. ^ "Crafts Cornered", Los Angeles Times, 15 December 1999, p. F1.
  43. ^ "Huntington Library: "William Morris: Creating the Useful and the Beautiful"". http://www.huntington.org/ArtDiv/morris.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-22.

## [edit] References

This article incorporates text from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, Eleventh
Edition, a publication now in the public domain.  
This article also incorporates text from the Dictionary of National Biography,
supplemental volume 3 (1901), a publication now in the public domain.

  * Carpenter, Humphrey, Tolkien: A Biography, New York, Ballantine Books, 1977, ISBN 0-04-928037-6
  * Coote, Stephen, William Morris: His Life and Work, Smithmark Publishers, 1995, ISBN 1-85833-479-9
  * Daly, Gay, Pre-Raphaelites in Love, New York, Ticknor & Fields, 1989, ISBN 0899194508
  * de Camp, L. Sprague, Literary Swordsmen and Sorcerers: The Makers of Heroic Fantasy, ISBN 0-87054-076-9
  * Fairclough, Oliver and Emmeline Leary, Textiles by William Morris and Morris & Co. 1861â1940, Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery, 1981, ISBN 0-89860-065-0
  * Fiell, Charlotte and Peter, William Morris Cologne, Taschen, 1999 ISBN 3822866172.
  * Hammond, Wayne and Christina Scull, The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide, Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 2006, ISBN 978-0618391134
  * Mackail, J. W., The Life of William Morris in two volumes, London, New York and Bombay: Longmans, Green and Co., 1899 
    * Google Books edition of Volume I and Volume II (1911 reprint) retrieved 16 August 2008
  * Mackail, J. W., "William Morris," in The Dictionary of National Biography. Supp. vol. 3 (London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1901), p. 197â203, reproduced at the William Morris Society
  * Parry, Linda, "Textiles", in The Earthly Paradise: Arts and Crafts by Wiliam Morris and his Circle in Canadian Collections, edited by Katharine A. Lochnan, Douglas E. Schoenherr, and Carole Silver, Key Porter Books, 1993, ISBN 1-55013-450-7
  * Parry, Linda, ed., William Morris, Abrams, 1996, ISBN 0-8109-4282-8
  * Parry, Linda, William Morris and the Arts and Crafts Movement: A Sourcebook, New York, Portland House, 1989 ISBN 0-517-69260-0
  * Parry, Linda, William Morris Textiles, New York, Viking Press, 1983, ISBN 0-670-77074-4
  * Parry, Linda, Textiles of the Arts & Crafts Movement, Thames and Hudson, revised edition 2005, ISBN 0-500-28536-5
  * Stansky, Peter (1983). William Morris. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 019287571X.
  * Peterson, William S., A bibliography of the Kelmscott Press. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984. ISBN 0-198-18199-x
  * Peterson, William S., The Kelmscott Press: a history of William Morris's typographical adventure. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991. ISBN 0-198-12887-8

  * Thompson, E.P. (2nd edition, 1976) William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary, Pantheon, ISBN 0-394-73320-7
  * Todd, Pamela, Pre-Raphaelites at Home, New York: Watson-Guptill, 2001. ISBN 0823042855
  * Waggoner, Diane, The Beauty of Life: William Morris & the Art of Design, Thames and Hudson, 2003, ISBN 0-500-28434-2

## [edit] Further reading

  * Freudenheim, Leslie. Building with Nature: Inspiration for the Arts & Crafts Home (Gibbs Smith 2005 ) ISBN 9781586854638.
  * Goodway, David. Anarchist Seeds beneath the Snow: Left Libertarian Thought and English Writers From William Morris to Colin Ward (2006).
  * MacCarthy, Fiona (1994). William Morris: A Life For Our Time. London: Faber. ISBN 0571174957.
  * Marsh, Jan (2005). William Morris and Red House: A Collaboration Between Architect and Owner. National Trust Books. ISBN 9781905400010.
  * Pinkney, Tony. William Morris in Oxford: The Campaigning Years, 1879â1895 (2007).
  * Robinson, Duncan (1982). William Morris, Edward Burne-Jones and the Kelmscott Chaucer. London: Gordon Fraser.
  * Watkinson, Ray (1979) [1967]. William Morris as Designer. London: Trefoil Books. ISBN 0862940400.

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

William Morris

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: William
Morris  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: William Morris  
Sources

  * Works by William Morris at Project Gutenberg. Plain text and HTML versions.
  * Works by William Morris at Internet Archive. Scanned books, many illustrated.
  * Works by William Morris at The Online Books Page.
  * William Morris Index Entry at Poets' Corner
  * The William Morris Internet Archive (marxists.org)
  * Biography by J. W. Mackail (Dictionary of National Biography, 1901)

Other

  * William Morris and his Circle
  * William Morris Stained Glass
  * The William Morris Gallery (London Borough of Waltham Forest)
  * The William Morris Society
  * William Morris Tiles and Textiles
  * William Morris Exhibition
  * A Morris and De Morgan tile panel at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London
  * The Pre-Raph Pack Discover more about the artists, the techniques they used and a timeline spanning 100 years.
  * William Morris online exhibition at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin

v â¢ d â¢ e

Textile designers  
18th century:

Anna Maria Garthwaite Â· William Kilburn

<IMG>  
19th century:

John Henry Dearle Â· William Morris Â· Franco ScalamandrÃ©  
Early 20th century:

Alexander Girard Â· Thelma Johnson Streat Â· Silver Studio Â· May Smith  
Late 20th century:

Laura Ashley Â· Hiroshi Awatsuji Â· Helen Berman Â· Valerie Campbell-Harding
Â· Lucienne Day Â· Ada Dietz Â· Joan Glass Â· Lily Goddard Â· Hans Krondahl Â·
Marimekko Â· Vuokko Nurmesniemi Â· Marianne Straub Â· Mary White  
Contemporary:

Celia Birtwell Â· Benoit Pierre Emery Â· Ivana Helsinki Â· Campion Platt  
  

Persondata  
NAME Morris, William  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION artist, writer, socialist, publisher  
DATE OF BIRTH 24 March 1834  
PLACE OF BIRTH London  
DATE OF DEATH 3 October 1896  
PLACE OF DEATH London  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Morris"

Categories: 1834 births | 1896 deaths | Alumni of Exeter College, Oxford |
Arts and Crafts Movement artists | British graphic designers | British
Marxists | Communalism | English architects | English designers | English
fantasy writers | English poets | English printers | English socialists |
Marxist writers | Mythopoeic writers | Old Marlburians | People from
Walthamstow | Social Democratic Federation members | Socialist League (UK,
1885) members | Textile designers | Typographers | Victorian poetry

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911
EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 01:03.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



