
# A Game of Thrones

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the board game, see A Game of Thrones (board game).

For the role-playing game, see A Game of Thrones (role-playing game).

For the TV pilot, see Game of Thrones (TV series).

A Game of Thrones  
<IMG>  
US Hardcover (2002 Bantam Reissue)  
Author George R. R. Martin  
Cover artist Steve Youll  
Country United States  
Language English  
Series A Song of Ice and Fire  
Genre(s) Fantasy  
Publisher Bantam Books (US) & Voyager Books (UK)  
Publication date 6 August 1996  
Media type print (hardback & paperback)  
Pages 694 pp (US Hardback), 672 pp (UK Hardcover), 835 pp (US Paperback)  
ISBN ISBN 0-553-10354-7 (US Hardback), ISBN 0-00-224584-1 (UK Hardback), ISBN
0-553-57340-3 (US Paperback)  
Followed by A Clash of Kings  
A Game of Thrones is the first of seven planned novels in A Song of Ice and
Fire, an epic fantasy series by American author George R. R. Martin. It was
first published on 6 August 1996. The novel was nominated for the 1998 Nebula
Award and the 1997 World Fantasy Award, and won the 1997 Locus Award. The
novella Blood of the Dragon, comprising the Daenerys Targaryen chapters from
the novel, won the 1997 Hugo Award for Best Novella.

The novel lends its name to several spin-off items based on the novels,
including a trading card game, board game and roleplaying game, and HBO has
authorized the filming of a pilot episode based on the novels.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Plot introduction
  * 2 Plot summary
    * 2.1 In the Seven Kingdoms
    * 2.2 On the Wall
    * 2.3 In the East
  * 3 Viewpoint characters
  * 4 Allusions/references to other works
  * 5 Editions
    * 5.1 Foreign language editions
  * 6 Literary significance & criticism
  * 7 Awards and nominations
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Plot introduction

A Game of Thrones is set in the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros, a land reminiscent
of Medieval Europe. In Westeros the seasons last for years, sometimes decades,
at a time.

Fifteen years prior to the novel, the Seven Kingdoms were torn apart by a
civil war, known alternately as "Robert's Rebellion" and the "War of the
Usurper." Prince Rhaegar Targaryen kidnapped Lyanna Stark, arousing the ire of
her family and of her betrothed, Lord Robert Baratheon (the war's titular
rebel). The Mad King, Aerys II Targaryen, had Lyanna's father and eldest
brother executed when they demanded her safe return. Her second brother,
Eddard, joined his boyhood friend Robert Baratheon and Jon Arryn, with whom
they had been fostered as children, in declaring war against the Targaryens,
securing the allegiances of House Tully and House Arryn through a network of
dynastic marriages (Lord Eddard to Catelyn Tully and Lord Jon Arryn to Lysa
Tully). The powerful House Tyrell continued to support the King, but House
Lannister and House Martell both dragged their feet due to insults against
their houses by the King. The civil war climaxed with the Battle of the
Trident, when Prince Rhaegar was killed in battle by Robert Baratheon. The
Lannisters finally agreed to support King Aerys, but then brutally turned
against him, sacking the capital, King's Landing. Jaime Lannister of the
Kingsguard executed King Aerys and House Lannister swore loyalty to Robert
Baratheon. The Tyrells and remaining royalists surrendered and Robert
Baratheon was declared King of the Seven Kingdoms. Unfortunately, during the
war, Lyanna Stark had died, apparently of illness; Robert Baratheon instead
married Cersei Lannister to cement the alliance. Despite Robert's victory, the
Mad King's youngest son Viserys and youngest daughter Daenerys were taken to
safety across the sea by loyal retainers. After the war House Martell chose a
path of isolation, since Prince Doran's sister Elia (Prince Rhaegar's wife)
and her young children had been killed by Lannister armsmen during the
storming of the capital.

Six years later King Robert proved his resolve by defeating a rebellion by
Lord Balon Greyjoy of the Iron Islands. Balon's two eldest sons were killed
and his youngest son, Theon, was given to the care of Eddard Stark as a ward.

## [edit] Plot summary

A Game of Thrones follows three principal storylines as they develop in tandem
with one another. The novel begins in the year 298 AL (After Landing) and
continues for many months, probably into the early months of 299 AL.

### [edit] In the Seven Kingdoms

Eddard Stark, Lord of Winterfell and the North, executes a man of the Night's
Watch who has betrayed his vows and fled from the Wall. His sons Robb and
Bran, his bastard son Jon Snow, and his ward Theon Greyjoy all attend. After
the beheading, Robb finds a dead direwolf (the symbol of House Stark), killed
by the antlers of a stag (the symbol of House Baratheon), which had given
birth to five pups before it died. Robb and his brothers ask to keep them and
Eddard consents, on the condition that the children themselves take care of
them, rather than leaving the matter to the servants of House Stark. There are
five pups, one for each of Eddard's trueborn children: Robb names his Grey
Wind and Bran names his Summer, whilst Eddard's daughters Sansa and Arya name
theirs Lady and Nymeria respectively. Eddard's youngest, three-year-old
Rickon, names his Shaggydog. Unexpectedly, Jon finds a sixth pup nearby: an
albino with white fur and red eyes. Jon claims this one, Ghost, for himself.

King Robert Baratheon arrives at Winterfell with his court and many retainers,
including his wife, Queen Cersei of House Lannister, and his children:
Joffrey, Myrcella and Tommen. The queen's twin brother, Ser Jaime Lannister of
the Kingsguard, and their younger brother Tyrion, the Imp (so named for his
dwarfism), also accompany the group. Robert asks Eddard to become the new Hand
of the King after the death of the previous office holder, Lord Jon Arryn.
Eddard and his wife Catelyn are informed by Catelyn's sister Lysa Arryn that
the Lannisters had Jon Arryn murdered. Bran witnesses the twins Jaime and
Cersei having sex, and is pushed from a high window by Jamie putting him into
a coma. Eddard reluctantly agrees to become the new Hand of the King and
travels south with his daughters Sansa and Arya, leaving Catelyn, Robb, Bran
(still in a coma) and Rickon at home. Jon Snow elects to travel north to the
Wall to join the Night's Watch and is joined by Tyrion, who is eager to see
the fabled construction for himself.

After Eddard leaves for the south, an attempt is made on Bran's life, thwarted
by the direwolf Summer. Catelyn realizes that Bran must have seen something
and been pushed from the window deliberately, and that the would-be murderers
are trying to cover their tracks. She travels by sea to King's Landing and is
informed by her childhood friend Petyr 'Littlefinger' Baelish that the dagger
used in the assassination attempt was his own before he lost it in a bet to
Tyrion Lannister. Traveling north again, Catelyn and her retainers encounter
Tyrion by chance in an inn (as he returns south from the Wall) and take him
captive to the Eyrie, where Lady Lysa places him on trial. Tyrion outwits Lysa
to win his freedom in trial by battle when one of the mercenaries that helped
capture him, a sellsword named Bronn, becomes his champion and kills Lysa's
champion.

In the capital at King's Landing, Eddard investigates Jon's death and learns
that Jon Arryn and King Robert's brother, Lord Stannis Baratheon, had
discovered that King Robert's three children were actually the products of an
incestuous liaison between Queen Cersei and her twin brother Jaime. Spurning
the advice of Robert's youngest brother Renly to take Cersei into custody,
Eddard instead tries mercy by offering Cersei the chance to flee. King Robert
dies while of a mishap engineered by Cersei whilst hunting and Cersei's eldest
son Joffrey is proclaimed King before Eddard can pass the crown to Stannis,
Robert's true heir. When Eddard moves against him, he is betrayed by
Littlefinger. Eddard reluctantly agrees to declare a false confession of
treason in return for Sansa and Arya's lives and the chance to go into exile
on the Wall. Joffrey promises Sansa that he will show mercy, then reverses
course and has Eddard brutally executed. Whilst Sansa is retained in custody,
Arya manages to escape with the help of Yoren, a recruiting agent for the
Night's Watch.

A civil war, later dubbed the War of the Five Kings, erupts. Robb Stark leads
an army of northmen into the Riverlands to support Lord Hoster Tully, whose
forces came under attack by Lord Tywin Lannister after Catelyn took Tyrion
prisoner. Riverrun, the Tully stronghold, is besieged by an army under Jaime
Lannister, whilst Lord Tywin holds a large army south of the River Trident to
prevent Robb's advance. Robb and Catelyn win the support of House Frey by
agreeing to a dynastic marriage among numerous other concessions. This allows
him to detach his cavalry and cross the Green Fork whilst his infantry carries
on to the Trident under Lord Roose Bolton, one of Robb's bannermen. Tywin,
joined by the liberated Tyrion (who has won the support of the mountain clans
of the Vale), defeats the Stark footmen before learning that Robb has
outmaneuvered him. Shortly afterwards Robb's forces surprise and capture Jaime
Lannister at the battle of Whispering Wood. Afterwards smashing the rest of
the Lannister army beseiging Riverrun. Tywin falls back on the strong castle
of Harrenhal and orders Tyrion to go to King's Landing where he will
effectively rule using Tywin's authority as Hand of the King.

Lord Renly Baratheon flees south from King's Landing to Highgarden, stronghold
of the powerful House Tyrell, and there is declared King of Westeros by
acclamation, becoming the second of the war's five kings. Robb Stark becomes
the third, when he is proclaimed the King in the North and the Riverlands by
all the Stark and Tully bannermen present.

### [edit] On the Wall

In the prologue, three men of the Night's Watch, led by Ser Waymar Royce, are
ranging in the lands beyond the Wall when they come across a camp of wildings
seemingly frozen to death. Royce does not think the wildings are dead, and
insists on investigating the camp, despite Will and Gared's fears. They are
confronted by several creatures of ice, the fabled 'Others' of legend. Ser
Waymar fights one, but is killed. The second man, Will, investigates Royce's
corpse only for it to come to life and strangle him. The third, Gared, is so
terrified of what he sees that he flees south to the Wall and then beyond. He
is executed by Ned Stark in the first chapter of the book.

Jon Snow chooses to join the Night's Watch after his father departs for King's
Landing and travels north with his uncle Benjen Stark, the First Ranger of the
Watch. At the Wall Jon finds that the Watch is beset with problems. A new
King-beyond-the-Wall has arisen in the northern lands to rally the wildlings
to his banner. This man, Mance Rayder, was once a brother of the Watch before
fleeing to join the wildlings. Jon also learns that the Watch is grievously
under strength, mustering barely a thousand men to cover the three hundred
miles of the Wall, and its manpower is now made up of murderers and criminals
who chose the Wall over execution or imprisonment. Some time after Jon's
arrival, Benjen vanishes whilst on a ranging beyond the Wall.

Jon and many of the other younger men are remorselessly bullied by the master-
at-arms, Alliser Thorne, but Jon concocts a plan for them to stand up to him.
Jon wins the friendship of Samwell Tarly, a craven but intelligent boy from
the Reach, and also that of Maester Aemon. Jon is startled to learn that Aemon
is a member of House Targaryen, the grand-uncle of the now-deposed Mad King
Aerys II.

Jon is eventually promoted to the status of full brother of the Night's Watch,
but is dismayed that, instead of being sent to the rangers, he has been made a
steward, servant to the Lord Commander of the Watch, Jeor Mormont. Sam points
out that this is not an insult; "the Old Bear" is going to keep Jon close, as
fathers keep their heirs nearby. Jon is being groomed for command. While Jon
(and Sam) say their vows just beyond the Wall, Ghost returns with evidence
that the corpses of two of Benjen Stark's men are nearby. The corpses are
carried back to Castle Black, where they come back to life and attack the
Commander's Tower, including Mormont. Jon succeeds in (re-)killing the wight
by burning it. Shaken, Mormont resolves to lead the Watch beyond the Wall in
strength to test Mance Rayder's strength. Although news of his father's death
causes Jon to doubt his calling, he decides his place is with the Watch.
Mormont takes this time to pass down the Valyrian-steel sword of House
Mormont, Longclaw, which Jon will bear henceforth.

### [edit] In the East

In the Free City of Pentos, Magister Illyrio Mopatis and the exiled Prince
Viserys Targaryen conspire to sell Viserys' thirteen-year-old sister Daenerys
in marriage to Khal Drogo of the Dothraki. Drogo commands a clan of forty
thousand mounted warriors whom Viserys plans to use to reclaim his homeland
from the usurper Robert Baratheon. Among the wedding gifts are three petrified
dragon eggs from Ilyrio. Unexpectedly, Daenerys and Drogo find love as they
journey east into the vast grasslands of the Dothraki sea, and Daenerys
becomes pregnant with a son, to be named Rhaego after her dead brother. Ser
Jorah Mormont, son of the Lord Commander of the Watch and a knight exiled from
Westeros for dealing in slaves, joins Viserys' entourage as an advisor on the
current state of the Seven Kingdoms.

Viserys becomes angry about how long he must wait before Drogo decides to
invade Westeros and, in a drunken rage, insults Drogo grievously. Drogo
decides to crown him right thereâwith molten gold. Daenerys picks up her
brother's quest to reclaim the Iron Throne, but Drogo is just as obstinate
with the moon of his life as he was with the Beggar King. The tables turn when
a Westerosi assassin, in the pay of King Robert, tries to kill her and their
unborn child; a furious Drogo agrees to invade Westeros. However, during a
warm-up raid on the peaceful Lhazareen, Drogo takes a wound which festers.
Daenerys loses both Drogo and her unborn son to the machinations of a
Lhazareen witch, whom Danaerys burns in her late husband's pyre. Daenerys had
previously felt the eggs and found them warm to her touch, though no one else
could feel the warmth. Before she had placed them in a small fire and thought
that the flames made something in the eggs alive. While the witch is being
burned she places the eggs in the very hot fire, allowing herself to be
consumed in the pyre as well. Incredibly, she remains unharmed when the pyre
dies down, the eggs hatch, and Daenerys Targaryen, the Stormborn, becomes
mother to the first three dragons seen in the world for one hundred and sixty
years.

## [edit] Viewpoint characters

All of the novels in the series use a system whereby each chapter concentrates
on one character in a third person limited point of view. Correspondingly,
each chapter bears the name of the current POV character (ex. "Bran,"
"Catelyn," "Daenerys") with the story flipping back and forth between the main
characters. This technique was previously used in The Gap Cycle by Martin's
friend, Stephen R. Donaldson.

The tale of A Game of Thrones is told through the eyes of 8 POV characters and
a one-off prologue POV.

  * Prologue: Will, a man of the Night's Watch.
  * Lord Eddard Stark, Warden of the North and Lord of Winterfell, Hand of the King.
  * Lady Catelyn Stark, of House Tully, wife of Eddard Stark.
  * Sansa Stark, elder daughter of Eddard and Catelyn Stark.
  * Arya Stark, younger daughter of Eddard and Catelyn Stark.
  * Bran Stark, middle of three sons of Eddard and Catelyn Stark.
  * Jon Snow, bastard son of Eddard Stark.
  * Tyrion Lannister, a dwarf, Queen Cersei's brother and son of Lord Tywin Lannister.
  * Daenerys Targaryen, Stormborn, the Princess of Dragonstone and heiress to the Targaryen throne through her older brother Viserys.

## [edit] Allusions/references to other works

One of Martin's earliest attempts at writing a fantasy story was 'Dark Gods of
Kor-Yuban', which was never published. The two heroes of the short story are
the exiled 'Prince R'hllor of Raugg' and his boisterous, swaggering companion
'Argilac the Arrogant'. In an abandoned sequel Argilac teams up with Barron,
the Bloody Blade of the Dothrak Empire, to slay the winged demons who killed
Barron's grandfather Barristan the Bold. Most of these names reoccur in A Game
of Thrones: R'hllor is the red god worshiped in the east (although not
specifically named until A Clash of Kings); Argilac the Arrogant was the last
Storm King thrown down by the Targaryens; the Dothrak Empire became the
Dothraki horse-riders of the eastern plains; and Barristan the Bold was recast
as Ser Barristan Selmy of the Kingsguard. Martin covers the origin of these
characters and names in his essay 'The Heirs of Turtle Castle' in his biggest
short-story collection so far, Dreamsongs: A Retrospective.

## [edit] Editions

In June 2000 Meisha Merlin released a limited edition of the book, fully
illustrated by Jeffrey Jones.

### [edit] Foreign language editions

  * Bulgarian: "ÐÐ³ÑÐ° Ð½Ð° ÑÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð²Ðµ"
  * Catalan: Devir Contenidos (2006): "La mÃ del rei"
  * Chinese: éåºåºçç¤¾(2005): ":æåçæ¸¸æ".
  * Croatian: "Igra prijestolja"
  * Czech: "Hra o trÅ¯ny"
  * Dutch: Luitingh-Sijthoff (1997): "Het spel der tronen"
  * Estonian: Varrak (2006): "Troonide mÃ¤ng"
  * Finnish: "Valtaistuinpeli" (2003)
  * French: Two volumes (hardcover: Pygmalion (1998, 1999); paperback: J'ai Lu (2001)) "Le trÃ´ne de fer", "Le donjon rouge".
  * German: Single volume, Fantasy Productions (2004): "Eisenthron". Two volumes, Goldmann (1997, 1998): "Die Herren von Winterfell", "Das Erbe von Winterfell"
  * Greek
  * Hebrew: ××©××§× ×××¡
  * Hungarian: Single volume, Alexandra: "TrÃ³nok harca"
  * Italian: Two volumes, Mondadori (hardcover: 1999, 2000; paperback: 2001): "Il trono di spade", "Il grande inverno"; as a single volume titled "Il gioco del trono" in the collection Urania Fantasy - Le grandi saghe (July 2007)
  * Japanese: "ä¸çå½ã®çåº§"
  * Korean
  * Polish: Zysk (1998): "Gra o tron"
  * Portuguese: Two volumes: SaÃ­da de EmergÃªncia (2007): "A Guerra dos Tronos", "A Muralha de Gelo". Partial and pirate edition: Entre Letras Editora (2002): "A Muralha" (1st part only)
  * Romanian: : Two volumes: "Urzeala tronurilor" (2007)
  * Russian: Single volume, AST (2001, 2004, 2007): "ÐÐ³ÑÐ° Ð¿ÑÐµÑÑÐ¾Ð»Ð¾Ð²". Two volumes, AST (1999): "ÐÐ³ÑÐ° Ð¿ÑÐµÑÑÐ¾Ð»Ð¾Ð². ÐÐ½Ð¸Ð³Ð° 1", "ÐÐ³ÑÐ° Ð¿ÑÐµÑÑÐ¾Ð»Ð¾Ð². ÐÐ½Ð¸Ð³Ð° 2".
  * Serbian: "Igra Prestola" (2003)
  * Slovenian: "Igra Prestolov" (2007)
  * Spanish: Gigamesh (2002): "Juego de tronos"
  * Swedish: Two volumes, Forum: "I vargens tid", "Kampen om jÃ¤rntronen". Single volume, Forum (2005): "Kampen om jÃ¤rntronen"
  * Turkish: Buz ve AteÅin ÅarkÄ±sÄ± Serisi: "Taht OyunlarÄ±" (2005)

## [edit] Literary significance & criticism

  * Pelletier, J. K. "FantasyBookNews.com". http://www.fantasybooknews.com/2009/review-a-game-of-thrones-by-george-rr-martin/.
  * Wagner, T. M.. "SF Reviews.Net". http://www.sfreviews.net/gameofthrones.html.
  * Seidman, James. "SF Site". http://www.sfsite.com/09a/game16.htm.
  * Silver, Steven H.. "SFF World". http://www.sfsite.com/~silverag/martin.html.

## [edit] Awards and nominations

  * Locus Award â Best Novel (Fantasy) (Won) â (1997)
  * World Fantasy Award â Best Novel (Nominated) â (1997)
  * Hugo Award â Best Novella for Blood of the Dragon (Won) â (1997)
  * Nebula Award â Best Novel (Nominated) â (1997)
  * Ignotus Award â Best Novel (Foreign) (Won) â (2003)

## [edit] External links

  * A Game of Thrones at the Internet Book List

v â¢ d â¢ e

A Song of Ice and Fire by George R. R. Martin  
Novels

A Game of Thrones (1996) Â· A Clash of Kings (1998) Â· A Storm of Swords
(2000) Â· A Feast for Crows (2005) Â· A Dance with Dragons Â· The Winds of
Winter Â· A Dream of Spring  
Novellas

The Hedge Knight Â· The Sworn Sword Â· The Mystery Knight  
Major Houses

Arryn Â· Baratheon Â· Bolton Â· Frey Â· Greyjoy Â· Lannister Â· Martell Â·
Stark Â· Targaryen (Daenerys) Â· Tully Â· Tyrell  
Other characters

Minor Houses Â· Independent characters Â· Complete character list  
Organizations

Nightâs Watch Â· Kingsguard Â· Maesters Â· Brotherhood Without Banners Â·
Other organizations  
Places

Westeros Â· Cities Â· Strongholds Â· The North Â· Across the narrow sea Â·
Free Cities Â· Ghis  
Wars and tourneys

Historic wars Â· War of the Usurper Â· War of the Five Kings Â· Tourneys  
Adaptations

A Game of Thrones: collectible card game Â· board game Â· role-playing games
Â· TV series  
v â¢ d â¢ e

George R. R. Martin's bibliography  
Novels

Dying of the Light Â· Windhaven Â· Fevre Dream Â· The Armageddon Rag Â· A Game
of Thrones Â· A Clash of Kings Â· A Storm of Swords Â· A Feast for Crows Â·
Hunter's Run  
Novellas

Night of the Vampyres Â· The Skin Trade Â· The Hedge Knight Â· The Sworn Sword  
Collections

A Song for Lya Â· Songs of Stars and Shadows Â· Sandkings Â· Songs the Dead
Men Sing Â· Nightflyers Â· Tuf Voyaging Â· Portraits of His Children Â·
Quartet Â· Dreamsongs: A RRetrospective  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Game_of_Thrones"

Categories: 1996 novels | A Song of Ice and Fire books | Fantasy novels |
Novels by George R. R. Martin

Hidden categories: Articles containing Catalan language text | Articles
containing Chinese language text | Articles containing Croatian language text
| Articles containing Czech language text | Articles containing Dutch language
text | Articles containing Estonian language text | Articles containing
Finnish language text | Articles containing French language text | Articles
containing German language text | Articles containing Hebrew language text |
Articles containing Hungarian language text | Articles containing non-English
language text | Articles containing Japanese language text | Articles
containing Polish language text | Articles containing Portuguese language text
| Articles containing Romanian language text | Articles containing Russian
language text | Articles containing Serbian language text | Articles
containing Slovenian language text | Articles containing Spanish language text
| Articles containing Swedish language text | Articles containing Turkish
language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 March 2009, at 17:22.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



