
# John Donne

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

John Donne  
<IMG>  
John Donne  
Born 1572  
London, England  
Died 31 March 1631  
  
Occupation Poet, Priest, Lawyer  
Nationality English  
Genres Satire, Love poetry, Elegy, Sermons  
Subjects Love, Sexuality, Religion, Death  
Literary movement Metaphysical Poetry  
Influences

    
    
    William Shakespeare  
Influenced

    
    
    W. B. Yeats, Ernest Hemingway, T. S. Eliot, Dylan Thomas, W. H. Auden[1]  
For the Welsh courtier and diplomat, see Sir John Donne.

John Donne (pronounced as dun, IPA: /dÊn/; 1572 â 31 March 1631) was an
English Jacobean poet, preacher and a major representative of the metaphysical
poets of the period. His works are notable for their realistic and sensual
style and include sonnets, love poetry, religious poems, Latin translations,
epigrams, elegies, songs, satires and sermons. His poetry is noted for its
vibrancy of language and inventiveness of metaphor, especially as compared to
those of his contemporaries.

Despite his great education and poetic talents he lived in poverty for several
years, relying heavily on wealthy friends. In 1615 he became an Anglican
priest and, in 1621, was appointed the Dean of St Paul's Cathedral in London.
Some scholars believe that Donne's literary works reflect these trends, with
love poetry and satires from his youth and religious sermons during his later
years. Other scholars, such as Helen Gardner, question the validity of this
dating since most of his poems were published posthumously (1633). The
exception to these is his Anniversaries which were published in 1612 and
Devotions upon Emergent Occasions published in 1623. His sermons are also
dated, sometimes quite specifically by date and year.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
    * 1.1 Early poetry
  * 2 Career and later life
    * 2.1 Later poetry
  * 3 Legacy
  * 4 Style
  * 5 Bibliography
    * 5.1 Poetry
    * 5.2 Prose
    * 5.3 Critical works
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Early life

<IMG>

<IMG>

A portrait of Donne as a young man, c. 1595. Artist unknown. In the collection
of the National Portrait Gallery, London.[2]

John Donne was born in London, England, in the year 1572, the third of six
children. His father, of Welsh descent, also called John Donne, was a warden
of the Ironmongers Company in the City of London and a respected Roman
Catholic who avoided unwelcome government attention, out of fear of being
persecuted for his Catholicism.[3][4] John Donne Sr. died in 1576, leaving his
wife, Elizabeth Heywood, the responsibility of raising their children.[4]
Elizabeth Heywood, also from a noted Catholic family, was the daughter of John
Heywood, the playwright, and sister of Jasper Heywood, the translator and
Jesuit. She was a great-niece of the Catholic martyr Thomas More.[5] This
tradition of martyrdom would continue among Donneâs closer relatives, many
of whom were executed or exiled for religious reasons.[6] Despite the obvious
dangers, Donneâs family arranged for his education by the Jesuits, which
gave him a deep knowledge of his religion that equipped him for the
ideological religious conflicts of his time.[5] Elizabeth Donne nÃ©e Heywood
married Dr. John Syminges, a wealthy widower with three children, a few months
after John Donne Sr.'s death. The next year, 1577, John Donne's sister
Elizabeth died, followed by two more of his sisters, Mary and Katherine, in
1581. Before the future poet was ten years old he had thus experienced the
deaths of four of his immediate family.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Part of the house where John Donne lived in Pyrford.

Donne was a student at Hart Hall, now Hertford College, Oxford, from the age
of 11. After three years at Oxford he was admitted to the University of
Cambridge, where he studied for another three years.[7] He was unable to
obtain a degree from either institution because of his Catholicism, since he
could not take the Oath of Supremacy required of graduates.[5] In 1591 he was
accepted as a student at the Thavies Inn legal school, one of the Inns of
Court in London. In 1592 he was admitted to Lincolnâs Inn, another of the
Inns of Court legal schools.[5] His brother Henry was also a university
student prior to his arrest in 1593 for harbouring a Catholic priest. Henry
Donne died in prison of bubonic plague, leading John Donne to begin
questioning his Catholic faith.[4]

During and after his education, Donne spent much of his considerable
inheritance on women, literature, pastimes and travel.[5][3] Although there is
no record detailing precisely where he traveled, it is known that he visited
the Continent and later fought with the Earl of Essex and Sir Walter Raleigh
against the Spanish at CÃ¡diz (1596) and the Azores (1597) and witnessed the
loss of the Spanish flagship, the San Felipe, and her crew.[8][4][1] According
to Izaak Walton, who wrote a biography of Donne in 1640:

â ... he returned not back into England till he had stayed some years, first
in Italy, and then in Spain, where he made many useful observations of those
countries, their laws and manner of government, and returned perfect in their
languages. â  
By the age of 25 he was well prepared for the diplomatic career he appeared to
be seeking.[8] He was appointed chief secretary to the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, Sir Thomas Egerton, and was established at Egertonâs London
home, York House, Strand close to the Palace of Whitehall, then the most
influential social centre in England. During the next four years he fell in
love with Egerton's niece Anne More, a girl of 17 (some say 16 or 14), and
they were secretly married in 1601 against the wishes of both Egerton and her
father, George More, Lieutenant of the Tower. This ruined his career and
earned him a short stay in Fleet Prison along with the priest who married them
and the man who acted as a witness to the wedding. Donne was released when the
marriage was proved valid, and soon secured the release of the other two.
Walton tells us that when he wrote to his wife to tell her about losing his
post, he wrote after his name: John Donne, Anne Donne, Un-done. It was not
until 1609 that Donne was reconciled with his father-in-law and received his
wife's dowry.

Following his release, Donne had to accept a retired country life in Pyrford,
Surrey.[5] Over the next few years he scraped a meagre living as a lawyer,
depending on his wifeâs cousin Sir Francis Wolly to house him, his wife, and
their children. Since Anne Donne had a baby almost every year, this was a very
generous gesture.

Though he practiced law and worked as an assistant pamphleteer to Thomas
Morton, he was in a state of constant financial insecurity, with a growing
family to provide for.[5] Before her death, Anne bore him eleven children
(including still births). The nine living were named Constance, John, George,
Francis, Lucy (after Donne's patroness Lucy, Countess of Bedford, her
godmother), Bridget, Mary, Nicholas and Margaret. Francis and Mary died before
they were ten. In a state of despair, Donne noted that the death of a child
would mean one less mouth to feed, but he could not afford the burial
expenses. During this time Donne wrote, but did not publish, Biathanatos, his
daring defense of suicide.[6]

### [edit] Early poetry

Donne's earliest poems showed a brilliant knowledge of English society coupled
with sharp criticism of its problems. His satires dealt with common
Elizabethan topics, such as corruption in the legal system, mediocre poets,
and pompous courtiers, yet stand out due to their intellectual sophistication
and striking imagery. His images of sickness, vomit, manure, and plague
assisted in the creation of a strongly satiric world populated by all the
fools and knaves of England. His third satire, however, deals with the problem
of true religion, a matter of great importance to Donne. Donne argued that it
was better to carefully examine one's religious convictions than to blindly
follow any established tradition, for none would be saved at the Final
Judgment, by claiming "A Harry, or a Martin taught [them] this."[6]

Donne's early career was also notable for his erotic poetry, especially his
elegies, in which he employed unconventional metaphors, such as a flea biting
two lovers being compared to sex.[8] In Elegy XIX: To His Mistress Going to
Bed he poetically undressed his mistress and compared the act of fondling to
the exploration of America. In Elegy XVIII he compared the gap between his
lover's breasts to the Hellespont.[8] Donne did not publish these poems,
although he did allow them to circulate widely in manuscript form.[8]

Because love-poetry was very fashionable at that time, there are different
opinions about whether the passionate love poems Donne wrote are addressed to
his wife Anne, but it seems likely. She spent most of her married life either
pregnant or nursing, so they evidently had a strong physical relationship. On
15 August 1617 his wife died five days after giving birth to a still-born
baby, their twelfth child in sixteen years of marriage. Donne mourned her
deeply, including writing the 17th Holy Sonnet.[5] He never remarried; this
was quite unusual for the time, especially as he had a large family to bring
up.

## [edit] Career and later life

Donne was elected as Member of Parliament for the constituency of Brackley in
1602, but this was not a paid position and Donne struggled to provide for his
family, relying heavily upon rich friends.[5] The fashion for coterie poetry
of the period gave him a means to seek patronage and many of his poems were
written for wealthy friends or patrons, especially Sir Robert Drury, who came
to be Donne's chief patron in 1610.[8] It was for Sir Robert that Donne wrote
the two Anniversaries, An Anatomy of the World (1611) and Of the Progress of
the Soul, (1612). While historians are not certain as to the precise reasons
for which Donne left the Catholic Church, he was certainly in communication
with the King, James I of England, and in 1610 and 1611 he wrote two anti-
Catholic polemics: Pseudo-Martyr and Ignatius his Conclave.[5] Although James
was pleased with Donne's work, he refused to reinstate him at court and
instead urged him to take holy orders.[4] Although Donne was at first
reluctant due to feeling unworthy of a clerical career, Donne finally acceded
to the King's wishes and was ordained into the Church of England in 1615.[8]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A few months before his death, Donne commissioned this portrait of himself as
he expected to appear when he rose from the grave at the Apocalypse.[9] He
hung the portrait on his wall as a reminder of the transience of life.

Donne became a Royal Chaplain in late 1615, Reader of Divinity at Lincoln's
Inn in 1616, and received a Doctor of Divinity degree from Cambridge in
1618.[5] Later in 1618 Donne became the chaplain for the Viscount Doncaster,
who was on an embassy to the princes of Germany. Donne did not return to
England until 1620.[5] In 1621 Donne was made Dean of St Paul's, a leading
(and well-paid) position in the Church of England and one he held until his
death in 1631. During his period as Dean his daughter Lucy died, aged
eighteen. It was in late November and early December of 1623 that he suffered
a nearly fatal illness, thought to be either typhus or a combination of a cold
followed by the seven-day relapsing fever. During his convalescence he wrote a
series of meditations and prayers on health, pain, and sickness that were
published as a book in 1624 under the title of Devotions upon Emergent
Occasions. Meditation XVII later became well known for its phrase "for whom
the bell tolls" and the statement that "no man is an island". In 1624 he
became vicar of St Dunstan-in-the-West, and 1625 a Royal Chaplain to Charles
I.[5] He earned a reputation as an impressive, eloquent preacher and 160 of
his sermons have survived, including the famous Deathâs Duel sermon
delivered at the Palace of Whitehall before King Charles I in February 1631.
It is thought that his final illness was stomach cancer. He died on 31 March
1631 having never published a poem in his lifetime but having left a body of
work fiercely engaged with the emotional and intellectual conflicts of his
age. John Donne is buried in St Paul's, where a memorial statue of him was
erected (carved from a drawing of him in his shroud), with a Latin epigraph
probably composed by himself.

### [edit] Later poetry

â Each man's death diminishes me, for I am involved in mankind. Therefore,
send not to know for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee. â  
â John Donne [10]  
His numerous illnesses, financial strain, and the deaths of his friends all
contributed to the development of a more somber and pious tone in his later
poems.[8] The change can be clearly seen in "An Anatomy of the World" (1611),
a poem that Donne wrote in memory of Elizabeth Drury, daughter of his patron,
Sir Robert Drury. This poem treats Elizabeth's demise with extreme gloominess,
using it as a symbol for the Fall of Man and the destruction of the
universe.[8]

The poem 'A Nocturnal upon S. Lucy's Day', being the shortest day concerns the
poet's despair at the death of a loved one. In it Donne expresses a feeling of
utter negation and hopelessness, saying that "I am every dead thing...re-begot
/ Of absence, darkness, death". This famous work was probably written in 1627
when both Donne's friend Lucy, Countess of Bedford and his daughter Lucy Donne
died. It is interesting to note that three years later in 1630 Donne wrote his
will on Saint Lucy's day (December 13th), the date the poem describes as "Both
the year's, and the day's deep midnight."

The increasing gloominess of Donne's tone may also be observed in the
religious works that he began writing during the same period. His early belief
in the value of skepticism now gave way to a firm faith in the traditional
teachings of the Bible. Having converted to the Anglican Church, Donne focused
his literary career on religious literature. He quickly became noted for his
deeply moving sermons and religious poems. The passionate lines of these
sermons would come to influence future works of English literature, such as
Hemingwayâs For Whom the Bell Tolls, which took its title from a passage in
Meditation XVII, and Thomas Mertonâs No Man is an Island, which took its
title from the same source.

Towards the end of his life Donne wrote works that challenged death, and the
fear that it inspired in many men, on the grounds of his belief that those who
die are sent to Heaven to live eternally. One example of this challenge is his
Holy Sonnet X, from which come the famous lines âDeath, be not proud, though
some have called thee / Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so.â Even as
he lay dying during Lent in 1631, he rose from his sickbed and delivered the
Death's Duel sermon, which was later described as his own funeral sermon.
Deathâs Duel portrays life as a steady descent to suffering and death, yet
sees hope in salvation and immortality through an embrace of God, Christ and
the Resurrection.[11][8][6]

## [edit] Legacy

John Donne is commemorated as a priest in the calendar of the Church of
England and in the Calendar of Saints of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in
America on March 31.[12]

The memorial to John Donne, modeled after the engraving pictured above, was
one of the few such memorials to survive the Great Fire of London in 1666 and
now appears in St Paul's Cathedral south of the choir.

## [edit] Style

John Donne was famous for his metaphysical poetry in the 17th century. His
work suggests a healthy appetite for life and its pleasures, while also
expressing deep emotion. He did this through the use of conceits, wit and
intellect â as seen in the poems "The Sunne Rising" and "Batter My Heart".

Donne is considered a master of the metaphysical conceit, an extended metaphor
that combines two vastly different ideas into a single idea, often using
imagery.[6] An example of this is his equation of lovers with saints in "The
Canonization." Unlike the conceits found in other Elizabethan poetry, most
notably Petrarchan conceits, which formed clichÃ©d comparisons between more
closely related objects (such as a rose and love), metaphysical conceits go to
a greater depth in comparing two completely unlike objects, although sometimes
in the mode of Shakespeare's radical paradoxes and imploded contraries. One of
the most famous of Donne's conceits is found in "A Valediction: Forbidding
Mourning" where he compares two lovers who are separated to the two legs of a
compass.

Donne's works are also witty, employing paradoxes, puns, and subtle yet
remarkable analogies. His pieces are often ironic and cynical, especially
regarding love and human motives. Common subjects of Donne's poems are love
(especially in his early life), death (especially after his wife's death), and
religion.[6]

John Donne's poetry represented a shift from classical forms to more personal
poetry.[13] Donne is noted for his poetic metre, which was structured with
changing and jagged rhythms that closely resemble casual speech (it was for
this that the more classically-minded Ben Jonson commented that "Donne, for
not keeping of accent, deserved hanging").[6]

His work has received much criticism over the years, with very judgmental
responses about his metaphysical form.[6] Donne's immediate successors in
poetry tended to regard his works with ambivalence, while the Neoclassical
poets regarded his conceits as abuse of the metaphor. He was revived by
Romantic poets such as Coleridge and Browning, though his more recent revival
in the early twentieth century by poets such as T. S. Eliot tended to portray
him as an anti-Romantic.[14]

## [edit] Bibliography

<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

John Donne

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: John Donne  
### [edit] Poetry

  * Poems (1633)
  * Poems on Several Occasions (2001)
  * Love Poems (1905)
  * John Donne: Divine Poems, Sermons, Devotions and Prayers (1990)
  * The Complete English Poems (1991)
  * John Donne's Poetry (1991)
  * John Donne: The Major Works (2000)
  * The Complete Poetry and Selected Prose of John Donne (2001)

### [edit] Prose

  * Six Sermons (1634)
  * Fifty Sermons (1649)
  * Paradoxes, Problemes, Essayes, Characters (1652)
  * Essayes in Divinity (1651)
  * Sermons Never Before Published (1661)
  * John Donne's 1622 Gunpowder Plot Sermon (1996)
  * Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions and Death's Duel (1999; first published in 1624)

### [edit] Critical works

  * John Carey, John Donne: Life, Mind and Art, (London 1981)
  * A. L. Clements (ed.) John Donne's Poetry (New York and London, 1966)
  * Stevie Davies, John Donne (Northcote House, Plymouth, 1994)
  * T. S. Eliot, "The Metaphysical Poets", Selected Essays, (London 1969)
  * G. Hammond (ed.) The Metaphysical Poets: A Casebook, (London 1986)
  * Sir Geoffrey Keynes, Bibliography of Donne, (Cambridge, 1958)
  * George Klawitter, The Enigmatic Narrator: The Voicing of Same-Sex Love in the Poetry of John Donne (Peter Lang, 1994)
  * Arthur F. Marotti, John Donne, Coterie Poet, (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1986)
  * H. L. Meakin, John Donne's Articulations of the Feminine, (Oxford, 1999)
  * Joe Nutt, John Donne: The Poems, (New York and London 1999)
  * E.M. Simpson, A Study of the Prose Works of John Donne, (Oxford, 1962)
  * C. L. Summers and T. L. Pebworth (eds.) The Eagle and the Dove: Reassessing John Donne (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1986)
  * John Stachniewski, The Persecutory Imagination, (Oxford, 1991)
  * Ceri Sullivan, The Rhetoric of the Conscience in Donne, Herbert, and Vaughan (Oxford 2008)
  * James Winny, A Preface to Donne (New York, 1981)

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Anglicanism portal  
## [edit] References

  * Bald, R. C. John Donne: A Life., Oxford, 1970
  * Le Comte, Edward. Grace to a Witty Sinner: A Life of Donne, (Walker, 1965)
  * Stubbs, John. Donne: The Reformed Soul, Viking, 2006. ISBN 0670915106
  * Lim, Kit. John Donne: An Eternity of Song, Penguin, 2005.
  * Warnke, Frank J. John Donne, (U of Mass., Amherst 1987)
  * Wilson, F. P. (July 1927). "Notes on the Early Life of John Donne" ([dead link] â Scholar search). The Review of English Studies 3 (11): 272â279. doi:10.1093/res/os-III.11.272. http://www.jstor.org/view/00346551/ap020014/02a00010/0.
  * Jeanne Shami, John Donne and Conformity in Crisis in the Late Jacobean Pulpit (Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 2003) (Studies in Renaissance Literature.) Pp. ix+318.
  * The Cambridge Companion to John Donne. Edited by Achsah Guibbory (Cambridge, 2006) (Cambridge Companions to Literature).

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b Donne, John. Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. Accessed 2007-2-19.
  2. ^ The painting on the NPG's website.
  3. ^ a b "Donne, John" by Richard W. Langstaff. Article from Collier's Encyclopedia, Volume 8. Bernard Johnsto n, general editor. P.F. Colliers Inc., New York: 1988. pp. 346â349.
  4. ^ a b c d e "Donne, John." Article in British Authors Before 1800: A Biographical Dictionary. Edited by Stanley Kunitz and Howard Haycraft. The H.W. Wilson Company, New York: 1952. pp. 156â158.
  5. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Jokinen, Anniina. "The Life of John Donne." Luminarium. 22 June 2006. Accessed 2007-1-22.[1]
  6. ^ a b c d e f g h Greenblatt, Stephen. The Norton anthology of English literature, Eighth edition. W. W. Norton and Company, 2006. ISBN 0393928284. pp. 600â602
  7. ^ Donne, John in Venn, J. & J. A., Alumni Cantabrigienses, Cambridge University Press, 10 vols, 1922-1958.
  8. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Will and Ariel Durant. The Story of Civilization: Part VII: The Age of Reason Begins. Simon and Schuster: New York, 1961. pp. 154â156
  9. ^ Lapham, Lewis. The End of the World. Thomas Dunne Books: New York, 1997. page 98.
  10. ^ Change: The Human Dis-ease, by Angelique Silberman, 2007, Authorhouse, ISBN 1434343952, pg 159
  11. ^ Fulfilling the Circle: A Study of John Donne's Thought by Terry G. Sherwood University of Toronto Press, 1984, page 231
  12. ^ (PDF)Evangelical Lutheran Worship - Final Draft. Augsburg Fortress Press. 2006. http://www.renewingworship.org/ELW/content/PDF/ChurchYear_asm_20060119.pdf.
  13. ^ John Donne. Island of Freedom. Accessed 2007-2-19.
  14. ^ The Best Poems of the English Language. Harold Bloom. HarperCollins Publishers, New York: 2004. pp. 138â139.

## [edit] External links

  * John Donne at Crossref-it.info
  * John Donne at Luminarium.org
  * Poems by John Donne at PoetryFoundation.org
  * The Literature Network
  * John Donne's Monument, St Paul's Cathedral
  * Homepage of the John Donne Society
  * Donne undone: Review of "John Donne: The Reformed Soul"(John Stubbs), Guardian Unlimited, July 22, 2006, by Andrew Motion.
  * Selected Poems of John Donne
  * Complete sermons of John Donne
  * John Donne: Sparknotes
  * The Donne Variorum
  * Digital Donne (digital images of early Donne editions and manuscripts)
  * An essay on Donne's "The Bait" exploring buried sexual imagery

  

Persondata  
NAME Donne, John  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION English poet  
DATE OF BIRTH 1572  
PLACE OF BIRTH London, England  
DATE OF DEATH March 31, 1631  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Donne"

Categories: 1572 births | 1631 deaths | People from the City of London |
Anglican poets | English Anglican priests | Converts to Anglicanism | English
Anglicans | English poets | English songwriters | English translators | Alumni
of Hart Hall, Oxford | Anglican saints | People celebrated in the Lutheran
liturgical calendar | Members of the pre-1707 English Parliament | Sonneteers
| Deans of St Paul's | Anglo-Welsh poets | Christian Kabbalists

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * Nedersaksisch
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 01:28 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



