
# Vlad III the Impaler

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Vlad Tepes" redirects here. For information about the band, see Vlad Tepes
(band). For information about the commune, see Vlad Å¢epeÅ, CÄlÄraÅi, and
about the village, see Vlad Å¢epeÅ, Giurgiu.

"Vlad the Impaler" redirects here. For the baseball player with this nickname,
see Vladimir Guerrero. For the Kasabian song "Vlad the Impaler", see West
Ryder Pauper Lunatic Asylum.

Vlad III Dracula  
Prince of Wallachia  
<IMG>  
Earliest known portrait of Vlad the Impaler from c. 1560  
Reign 1448; 1456â1462; 1476  
Born 1431  
Birthplace SighiÅoara, Transylvania  
Died December 1476 (age 45)  
Place of death Bucharest, Wallachia  
Predecessor Vladislav II of Wallachia,  
Basarab LaiotÄ cel BÄtrÃ¢n  
Successor Vladislav II of Wallachia,  
Radu cel Frumos,  
Basarab LaiotÄ cel BÄtrÃ¢n  
Wives (1)A Transylvanian noblewoman;  
(2) Ilona SzilÃ¡gy  
Offspring Mihnea cel RÄu (w/ first wife, a Transylvanian noblewoman);  
Vlad Dracula & another son (name unkwown) w/ second wife Ilona SzilÃ¡gy  
Royal House House of DrÄculeÅti (branch of the House of Basarab  
Father Vlad II Dracul  
Mother Princess Cneajna of Moldavia  
Vlad III, Prince of Wallachia, more commonly known as Vlad the Impaler (Vlad
Å¢epeÅ in Romanian), also known as Vlad Dracula, or simply Dracula (1431 â
December 1476), was a Wallachian (present-day southern Romania) voivode. His
three reigns were in 1448, 1456â1462, and 1476. Vlad the Impaler is known
for the exceedingly cruel punishments he imposed as ruler of Wallachia.[1]
Impalement was Å¢epeÅ's preferred method of torture and execution.[2]

In the English-speaking world, Vlad III is perhaps most commonly known for
inspiring the name of the vampire in Bram Stoker's 1897 novel Dracula.[3]

As prince, Vlad maintained an independent policy in relation to the Ottoman
Empire[4] and was a defender of Wallachia against Ottoman expansionism.

## Contents

  * 1 Names
  * 2 Biography
    * 2.1 Early years
    * 2.2 Hostage of the Ottoman Empire
    * 2.3 Brief reign and exile
    * 2.4 Turning tides
    * 2.5 Main reign (1456â1462)
    * 2.6 Personal crusade
    * 2.7 In captivity
    * 2.8 Family
    * 2.9 Death
  * 3 Methods of execution
  * 4 German stories about Vlad Å¢epeÅ
  * 5 Russian stories about Vlad Å¢epeÅ
  * 6 Vampire legend and Romanian attitudes
  * 7 Vlad in popular culture and media
    * 7.1 Dark Prince: The True Story of Dracula
    * 7.2 Bram Stoker's Dracula
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Names

His Romanian surname "DrÄculea" means "Son of Dracula" and is derived from
his father's title, Vlad the Devil (see Vlad II Dracul); the latter was a
member of the Order of the Dragon created by Emperor Sigismund. The word
"Dracula" means "the Devil" in modern Romanian but in Vlad's day also meant
"dragon" and derives from the Latin word "Draco", also meaning "dragon". The
suffix "-lea" can be translated as "son of".[5]

The old Romanian word for serpent (Cf. "drat") is nowadays the most common and
casual reference to the devil[citation needed]âthe people of Wallache gave
Vlad II the surname "Dracula" ("Dracula" being the more grammatically correct
form). His son Vlad III would later use in several documents the surname
"DrÄculea". Through various translations ("Draculea", "Drakulya") Vlad III
eventually came to be known as "Dracula" (note that this ultimate version is a
neologism).

His post-mortem moniker of "Å¢epeÅ" ("Impaler") originated in his preferred
method for executing his opponents, impalementâas popularized by medieval
Transylvanian pamphlets. In Turkish, he was known as "Kass Voyager"
(pronounced [kÉzÉ¯kËÉ«É¯]) which means "Impaler Prince". Vlad was referred
to as "Dracula" in a number of documents of his times, mainly the Transylvania
Saxon pamphlets and "The Annals of Jan DÅugosz".

## [edit] Biography

<IMG>

<IMG>

Plate honouring Vlad Dracul in SighiÅoara (marking the house where Vlad the
Impaler was allegedly born)

### [edit] Early years

Vlad was very likely born in the citadel of SighiÅoara, Transylvania in 1431.
He was born as the second son to his father Vlad Dracul and his mother
Princess Cneajna of Moldavia. He had an older brother named Mircea and a
younger brother named Radu the Handsome. Although his native country was
Wallachia to the south, the family lived in exile in Transylvania as his
father had been ousted by pro-Ottoman boyars. In the same year as his birth,
his father was living in Nuremberg, where he was vested into the Order of the
Dragon. At the age of five, young Vlad was also initiated into the Order of
the Dragon.

### [edit] Hostage of the Ottoman Empire

Vlad's father was under considerable political pressure from the Ottoman
sultan. Threatened with invasion, he gave a promise to be the vassal of the
sultan and gave up his two younger sons as hostages so that he would keep his
promise. Vlad developed a well-known hatred for Radu and for Mehmed, who would
later become the sultan. According to McNally and Florescu, he also distrusted
his own father for trading him to the Turks and betraying the Order of the
Dragon's oath to fight them.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bust of Vlad the Impaler near the birthplace plate

### [edit] Brief reign and exile

Vlad's father was assassinated in the marshes near BÄlteni in December 1447
by rebellious boyars allegedly under the orders of Hungarian regent John
Hunyadi. Vlad's older brother Mircea was also dead at this point, blinded with
hot iron stakes and buried alive by his political enemies at TÃ¢rgoviÅte. To
protect their political power in the region, the Ottomans invaded Wallachia
and the Sultan put Vlad III on the throne as a puppet ruler. His rule at this
time would be brief; Hunyadi himself invaded Wallachia and ousted him the same
year. Vlad fled to Moldavia until October 1451 and was put under the
protection of his uncle, Bogdan II.

### [edit] Turning tides

Bogdan was assassinated by Petru Aron, and Vlad, taking a gamble, fled to
Hungary. Impressed by Vlad's vast knowledge of the mindset and inner workings
of the Ottoman Empire as well as his hatred of the new sultan Mehmed II,
Hunyadi pardoned him and took him in as an advisor. Eventually Hunyadi put him
forward as the Kingdom of Hungary's candidate for the throne of Wallachia.

In 1453, the Ottomans, under Mehmed II, took Constantinople after a prolonged
siege, thus putting an end to the final major Christian presence in the
eastern Mediterranean. Ottoman influence began to spread from this base
through the Carpathians, and began to threaten mainland Europe.

In 1456, Hungary invaded Serbia to drive out the Ottomans, and Vlad III
simultaneously invaded Wallachia with his own contingent. Both campaigns were
successful, although Hunyadi died suddenly of the plague. Nevertheless, Vlad
was now prince of his native land.

### [edit] Main reign (1456â1462)

Vlad III's actions after 1456 are well-documented.

After the death of his grandfather (Mircea the Elder) in 1418, Wallachia had
fallen into a somewhat chaotic situation. A constant state of war had led to
rampant crime, falling agricultural production, and the virtual disappearance
of trade. Vlad used severe methods to restore order, as he needed an
economically stable country if he was to have any chance against his external
enemies.

The early part of Vladâs reign was dominated by the idea of eliminating all
possible threats to his power, mainly the rival nobility groups, i.e. the
boyars. This was done mainly by physical elimination, but also by reducing the
economic role of the nobility: the key positions in the Princeâs Council,
traditionally belonging to the countryâs greatest boyars, were handed to
obscure individuals, some of them of foreign origin, but who manifested
loyalty towards Vlad. For the less important functions, Vlad also ignored the
old boyars, preferring to knight and appoint men from the free peasantry. A
key element of the power of the Wallachian nobility was their connections in
the Saxon-populated autonomous towns of Transylvania, so Vlad acted against
these cities by eliminating their trade privileges in relation with Wallachia
and by organizing raids against them. In 1459, he had several of the German
settlers (Saxons) and officials of the Transylvanian city of Kronstadt who
were transgressing his authority impaled.[2]

Vlad III was constantly on guard against the adherents of the DÄneÅti clan,
and some of his raids into Transylvania may have been efforts to capture the
clan's would-be princes. Several members of the clan died at Vlad's hands.
Vladislav II of Wallachia was murdered soon after Vlad came to power in 1456.
Another DÄneÅti prince, suspected to have taken part in burying his brother
Mircea alive, was captured during one of Vlad's forays into Transylvania.
Rumors (spread by his enemies) say thousands of citizens of the town that had
sheltered his rival were impaled by Vlad. The captured prince was forced to
read his own eulogy while kneeling before an open grave before his execution.

### [edit] Personal crusade

Main article: The Night Attack

Following family traditions and due to his old hatred towards the Ottomans,
Vlad decided to side with the Hungarians. To the end of the 1450s there was
once again talk about a war against the Turks, in which the king of Hungary
Matthias Corvinus would play the main role. Knowing this, Vlad stopped paying
tribute to the Ottomans in 1459 and around 1460 made a new alliance with
Corvinus. This angered the Turks, who attempted to remove him. They failed,
however; later in the winter of 1461 to 1462 Vlad crossed south of the Danube
and devastated the area between Serbia and the Black Sea. In Vlad's own words
-: "I have killed men and women, old and young...23,884 Turks and Bulgarians
without counting those whom we burned alive in their homes or whose heads were
not chopped off by our soldiers..."[2]

In response to this, Sultan Mehmed II, the recent conqueror of Constantinople,
raised an army of around 60,000 troops and 30,000 irregulars and in the spring
of 1462 headed towards Wallachia. Other estimates for the army include 150,000
by Michael Doukas, 250,000 by Laonicus Chalcond. Mehmed was greeted by the
sight of a veritable forest of stakes on which Vlad the Impaler had impaled
20,000 Turkish prisoners.[6] With his army of 20,000â40,000 men Vlad was
unable to stop the Turks from entering Wallachia and occupying the capital
TÃ¢rgoviÅte (4 June 1462), so he resorted to guerrilla warfare, constantly
organizing small attacks and ambushes on the Turks. The most important of
these attacks took place on the nights of June 16â17, when Vlad and some of
his men allegedly entered the main Turkish camp (wearing Ottoman disguises)
and attempted to assassinate Mehmed. Unable to subdue Vlad, the Turks left the
country, leaving Vlad's half-brother, Radu the Handsome, to continue fighting.
Despite Vlad achieving military victories, he had alienated himself from the
nobility, which sided with Radu. By August 1462 Radu had struck a deal with
the Hungarian Crown. Consequently, Vlad was imprisoned by Matthias Corvinus.

His first wife, whose name is not recorded, died during the siege of his
castle in 1462. The Turkish army surrounded Poienari Castle, led by Radu. An
archer shot an arrow through a window into Vlad's main quarters, with a
message warning him that Radu's army was approaching. McNally and Florescu
explain that the archer was one of Vlad's former servants who sent the warning
out of loyalty, despite having converted to Islam to escape enslavement by the
Turks. Upon reading the message, Vlad's wife threw herself from the tower into
a tributary of the ArgeÅ River flowing below the castle. According to legend,
she remarked that she "would rather have her body rot and be eaten by the fish
of the ArgeÅ than be led into captivity by the Turks". Today, the tributary
is called RÃ¢ul Doamnei (the Lady's River, also called the Princess's River).

### [edit] In captivity

The exact length of Vlad's period of captivity is open to some debate, though
indications are that it was from 1462 until 1474. He was able to gradually win
his way back into the graces of Hungary's monarch, and eventually marry a
member of the royal family. His second wife, Countess Ilona SzilÃ¡gyi (the
cousin of Matthias), bore him two sons, Vlad Dracula & another son whose name
is unknown, who were about ten years old when he reconquered Wallachia in
1476. Diplomatic correspondence from Buda during the period in question also
seems to support the claim that Vlad's actual period of confinement was
relatively short.

The openly pro-Turkish policy of Radu (who was prince of Wallachia during most
of Vlad's captivity), was a probable factor in Vlad's rehabilitation. During
his captivity, Vlad also converted to Catholicism, in contrast to his brother
who converted to Islam. In the years before his final release in 1474, when he
began preparations for the reconquest of Wallachia, Vlad resided with his new
wife in a house in the Hungarian capital.

### [edit] Family

His first wife, whose name was not recorded but spoken about in Romanian folk
tales, was known to be a woman of innocence and beauty who bore a heart of
gold. Together they had a son, Mihnea cel RÄu, who would rule Wallachia 1508
to 1510. During a Turkish raid, his first wife flung herself out of fear for
her life, from Castle Poenari along the ArgeÅ River. Vlad III would not marry
again until after his imprisonment in Hungary in the 1460s. His second wife,
Countess Ilona SzilÃ¡gy (the cousin of Matthias) and he had two sons, Vlad
Dracula and another son whose name is unknown. His two sons Vlad Dracula and
the son whose name is not recorded, failed to rule Wallachia. The unidentified
younger son died in 1482 while living with the Bishop of Oradea. Vlad Dracula
was a claimant to the Wallachian throne, but never ruled. The Hungarian branch
of his descendants married into nobility off and on, but never ruled
Wallachia. The Romanian branch of his descendants would continue to rule off
and on until 1627, when the last descendant, Alexandru Coconul, would fail to
produce an heir.

### [edit] Death

His body went missing after the first night of his death.

## [edit] Methods of execution

<IMG>

<IMG>

Woodblock print of Vlad the Impaler attending a mass impalement

When he came to power, Vlad immediately had all the assembled nobles arrested.
The older boyars and their families were impaled on the spot. The younger and
healthier nobles and their families were marched north from TÃ¢rgoviÅte to
the ruins of Poienari Castle in the mountains above the ArgeÅ River. Vlad was
determined to rebuild this ancient fortress as his own stronghold and refuge.
The enslaved boyars and their families were forced to labor for months,
rebuilding the old castle with materials from another nearby ruin. According
to tradition, they labored until the clothes fell off their bodies and then
were forced to continue working naked. Very few of the old gentry survived the
ordeal of building Vlad's castle.

Throughout his reign, Vlad systematically eradicated the old boyar class of
Wallachia. The old boyars had repeatedly undermined the power of the prince
during previous reigns and had been responsible for the violent overthrow of
several princes. Vlad was determined that his own power be on a modern and
thoroughly secure footing. In place of the executed boyars, Vlad promoted new
men from among the free peasantry and middle class, who would be loyal only to
their prince.

Vlad Å¢epeÅ's reputation was considerably darker in Western Europe than in
Eastern Europe and Romania. In the West, Vlad III Å¢epeÅ has been
characterized as a tyrant who took sadistic pleasure in torturing and killing
his enemies. The number of his victims ranges from 40,000 to 100,000.[7]
According to the German stories the number of victims he had killed was at
least 80,000. In addition to the 80,000 victims mentioned he also had whole
villages and fortresses destroyed and burned to the ground.[8] These numbers
are most likely exaggerated.[9]

The atrocities committed by Vlad in the German stories include impaling,
torturing, burning, skinning, roasting, and boiling people, feeding people the
flesh of their friends or relatives, cutting off limbs, drowning, and nailing
people's hats to their heads. His victims included men and women of all ages,
religions and social classes, children and babies. One German account includes
the following sentence: "He caused so much pain and suffering that even the
most bloodthirstiest persecutors of Christianity like Herodes, Nero,
Diocletian and all other pagans combined hadnât even thought of."[10]

Impalement was Å¢epeÅ's preferred method of torture and execution. His method
of torture was a horse attached to each of the victim's legs as a sharpened
stake was gradually forced into the body. The end of the stake was usually
oiled, and care was taken that the stake not be too sharp; else the victim
might die too rapidly from shock. Normally the stake was inserted into the
body through the anus and was often forced through the body until it emerged
from the mouth. However, there were many instances where victims were impaled
through other bodily orifices or through the abdomen or chest. Infants were
sometimes impaled on the stake forced through their mother's chests. The
records indicate that victims were sometimes impaled so that they hung upside
down on the stake.

As expected, death by impalement was slow and painful. Victims sometimes
endured for hours or days. Vlad often had the stakes arranged in various
geometric patterns. The most common pattern was a ring of concentric circles
in the outskirts of a city that constituted his target. The height of the
spear indicated the rank of the victim. The corpses were often left decaying
for months.

There are claims that thousands of people were impaled at a single time. One
such claim says 10,000 were impaled in the Transylvanian city of Sibiu (where
Vlad had once lived) in 1460. Another allegation asserts that during the
previous year, on Saint Bartholomew's Day (in August), Vlad had 30,000 of the
merchants and officials of the Transylvanian city of BraÅov impaled for
breaking his authority. One of the most famous woodcuts of the period shows
Vlad feasting in a forest of stakes and their grisly burdens outside BraÅov,
while a nearby executioner cuts apart other victims.[11]

Vlad Å¢epeÅ is alleged to have committed even more impalements and other
tortures against invading Ottoman forces. It was reported that an invading
Ottoman army turned back in fright when it encountered thousands of rotting
corpses impaled on the banks of the Danube.[2] It has also been said that in
1462 Mehmed II, the conqueror of Constantinople, a man noted for his own
psychological warfare tactics, returned to Constantinople after being sickened
by the sight of 20,000 impaled corpses outside Vlad's capital of TÃ¢rgoviÅte.
Many of the victims were Turkish prisoners of war Vlad had previously captured
during the Turkish invasion. The total Turkish casualty toll in this battle
reached over 40,000. The warrior sultan turned command of the campaign against
Vlad over to subordinates and returned to Constantinople, even though his army
had initially outnumbered Vlad's three to one and was better equipped.

## [edit] German stories about Vlad Å¢epeÅ

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vlad the Impaler as Pontius Pilate judging Jesus Christ. National Gallery,
Ljubljana, 1463

The German stories circulated first in manuscript form in the late 15th
century and the first manuscript was probably written in 1462 before Vladâs
arrest.[12] The text was later printed in Germany and had major impact on the
general public becoming a best-seller of its time with numerous later editions
adding and altering the original text.

In addition to the manuscripts and pamphlets the German version of the stories
can be found in the poem of Michel Beheim. The poem called "Von ainem wutrich
der hies Trakle waida von der Walachei" ("Story of a Bloodthirsty Madman
Called Dracula of Wallachia") was written and performed at the court of
Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor during the winter of 1463.[13]

To this day four manuscripts and 13 pamphlets are found as well as the poem by
Michel Beheim. The surviving manuscripts date from the last quarter of the
15th century to the year 1500 and the found pamphlets date from 1488 to
1559â1568.

Eight of the pamphlets are incunabula: they were printed before 1501. The
German stories about Vlad Å¢epeÅ consist of 46 short episodes, although none
of the manuscripts, pamphlets or the poem of Beheim contain all 46 stories.

All of them begin with the story of the old governor, John Hunyadi, having
Vlad's father killed, and how Vlad and his brother renounced their old
religion and swore to protect and uphold the Christian faith. After this, the
order and titles of the stories differs by manuscript and pamphlet
editions.[14]

The German stories were written most likely for political reasons, especially
to blacken the image of the Wallachian ruler. The first version of the German
text was probably written in BraÅov by a Saxon scholar. According to some
researchers, the writer expressed the general feelings of the Saxons in
BraÅov and Sibiu who had borne the brunt of Vladâs wrath in 1456â1457 and
again in 1458â1459 and 1460.

Against this political and cultural backdrop, it is quite easy to understand
the hostility towards Vlad Å¢epeÅ. Although there is historic background for
the events described in the German stories, some are either exaggerated or
even fictitious.

The Transylvanian king Matei Corvin, also called Corvinus, also had political
reasons for promoting Vlad's image as an evil prince. Corvinus had received
large subsidies from Rome and Venice for the war against the Ottomans, but
because of a conflict with Holy Roman Emperor, Emperor Frederick III, he
couldnât afford the military support for the fight.

By making Vlad a scapegoat, Corvinus could justify his reasons for not taking
part in the war against the Ottomans. He arrested Vlad and used a forged
letter in which Vlad announced his loyalty to Mehmed II, as well as horror
stories about Vlad, to justify his actions to the Pope. In 1462 and 1463, the
court in Buda also fostered negative stories of Vlad in central and Eastern
Europe, and capitalized on the horrors attributed to him.[12]

The stories eventually changed from propaganda to literature and became very
popular in the German world in the 15th and 16th centuries. Part of the reason
for this success was the newly-invented printing press, which allowed the
texts to filter to a wide audience.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vlad the Impaler as Aegeas, the Roman proconsul in Patras, crucifying Saint
Andrew. Approximately 1470â1480, Belvedere Galleries, Vienna

In later accounts of these stories, Vlad's atrocities against the people of
Wallachia have sometimes been interpreted as attempts to enforce his own moral
code upon his country. According to the pamphlets, he appears to have been
particularly concerned with female chastity. Maidens who lost their virginity,
adulterous wives, and unchaste widows were all targets of Vlad's cruelty. Such
women often had their sexual organs cut out or their breasts cut off. They
were also often impaled through the vagina on red-hot stakes that were forced
through the body until they emerged from the mouth.[15] One report tells of
the execution of an unfaithful wife. The woman's breasts were cut off, then
she was skinned and impaled in a square in TÃ¢rgoviÅte with her skin lying on
a nearby table. Vlad also insisted that his people be honest and hard-working.
Merchants who cheated their customers were likely to find themselves mounted
on a stake beside common thieves.

## [edit] Russian stories about Vlad Å¢epeÅ

The Russian or the Slavic version of the stories about Vlad Å¢epeÅ called
"Skazakie o Drakule voevode" ("The Tale of Prince Dracula") is thought to have
been written sometime between 1481 and 1486. Copies were made from the 15th
century to the 18th century, of which some twenty-two extant manuscripts
survive in Russian archives.[16] The oldest one, from 1490, ends as follows:
"First written in the year 6994 (1486), on 13 February; then transcribed by
me, the sinner Elfrosin, in the year 6998 (1490), on 28 January". The Tales of
Prince Dracula is neither chronological nor consistent, but mostly a
collection of anecdotes of literary and historical value concerning Vlad
Å¢epeÅ.

There are 19 anecdotes in The Tales of Prince Dracula which are longer and
more constructed than the German stories. It can be divided into two sections:
The first 13 episodes are non-chronological events most likely closer to the
original folkloric oral tradition about Vlad. The last six episodes are
thought to have been written by a scholar who collected them, because they are
chronological and seem to be more structured. The stories begin with a short
introduction and the anecdote about the nailing of hats to ambassadors heads.
They end with Vlad's death and information about his family.[17]

Of the 19 anecdotes there are ten that have similarities to the German
stories.[18] Although there are similarities between the Russian and the
German stories about Vlad, there is a clear distinction with the attitude
towards him. The Russian stories tend to give him a more positive image: he is
depicted as a great ruler, a brave soldier and a just sovereign. Stories of
atrocities tend to seem to be justified as the actions of a strong ruler. Of
the 19 anecdotes, only four seem to have exaggerated violence.[19] Some
elements of the anecdotes were later added to Russian stories about Ivan the
Terrible of Russia.[20]

The nationality and identity of the original writer of the anecdotes Dracula
is disputed. The two most plausible explanations are that the writer was
either a Romanian priest or a monk from Transylvania, or a Romanian or
Moldavian from the court of Stephen the Great in Moldova. One theory claims
the writer was a Russian diplomat named Fedor Kuritsyn.[21]

## [edit] Vampire legend and Romanian attitudes

It is most likely that Bram Stoker found the name for his vampire from William
Wilkinson's book, "An Account of the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia:
with various Political Observations Relating to Them". It is known that Stoker
made notes about this book.[22] It is also suggested by some that because
Stoker was a friend of a Hungarian professor (Arminius Vambery/Hermann
Bamberger/Ãrmin VÃ¡mbÃ©ry) from Budapest, Vlad's name might have been
mentioned by this friend. Regardless of how the name came to Stoker's
attention, the cruel history of the Impaler would have readily lent itself to
Stoker's purposes.

However, recent research suggests that Stoker actually knew little about the
Prince of Wallachia.[22] Some have claimed that the novel owes more to the
legends about possibly the most prolific female serial killer in history
Elizabeth BÃ¡thory, a 16th century Hungarian countess who murdered hundreds of
her servants. ("See DraculaâHistorical connections for more detail").

The legend of the vampire was and still is deeply rooted in that region. There
have always been vampire-like creatures in various stories from across the
world. However, the vampire, as he became known in Europe, largely originated
in Southern Slavic folklore â although the tale is absent in Romanian
culture. A veritable epidemic of vampirism swept through Eastern Europe
beginning in the late 17th century and continuing through the 1700s. The
number of reported cases rose dramatically in Hungary and the Balkans. From
the Balkans, the "plague" spread westward into Germany, Italy, France,
England, and Spain. Travelers returning from the Balkans brought with them
tales of the undead, igniting an interest in the vampire that has continued to
this day. Philosophers in the West began to study the phenomenon. It was
during this period that Dom Augustine Calmet wrote his famous treatise on
vampirism in Hungary. It was also during this period that authors and
playwrights first began to explore the vampire legend. Stoker's novel was
merely the culminating work of a long series of works that were inspired by
the reports coming from the Balkans and Hungary.

Given the history of the vampire legend in Europe, it is perhaps natural that
Stoker should place his great vampire in the heart of the region that gave
birth to the story. Once Stoker had determined on a locality, Vlad Dracula
would stand out as one of the most notorious rulers of the selected region. He
was obscure enough that few would recognize the name and those who did would
know him for his acts of brutal cruelty; Dracula was a natural candidate for
vampirism.

Tales of vampires are still widespread in Eastern Europe. Similarly, the name
of Dracula is still remembered in the Romanian oral tradition but that is the
end of any connection between Dracula and the folkloric vampire. Outside of
Stoker's novel the name of Dracula was never linked with the vampires
encountered in the folklore. Despite his alleged inhuman cruelty, in Romania
Dracula is remembered as a national hero who resisted the Turkish conquerors
and asserted Romanian national sovereignty against the powerful Hungarian
kingdom. He is also remembered in a similar manner in other Balkan countries,
as he fought against the Turks.

It is somewhat ironic that Vlad's name has often been thrown into the
political and ethnic feuds between Hungarians and Romanians, because he was
ultimately far from an enemy of Hungary. While he certainly had violent
conflicts with some Hungarian nobles, he had just as many Hungarian friends
and allies, and his successes in battle with the Turks largely benefited
Hungary in the long term. Hungary later found itself under siege but was never
entirely penetrated by Ottoman forces. Though neither the first nor the last
powerful ruler to take on the Ottoman Empire, Vlad's battle tactics were quite
influential in damaging the impression of Turkish invincibility among
Europeans and reversing the European aura of appeasement.

Romanian folklore and poetry, on the other hand, paints Vlad Å¢epeÅ as a
hero. His favorite weapon being the stake, coupled with his reputation in his
native country as a man who stood up to both foreign and domestic enemies,
gives him the virtual opposite symbolism of Stoker's vampire. In Romania, he
is considered one of the greatest leaders in the country's history, and was
voted one of "100 Greatest Romanians" in the "Mari RomÃ¢ni" television series
aired in 2006.

A description of Vlad Dracula survives courtesy of Nicholas of Modrussa, who
wrote:

> He was not very tall, but very stocky and strong, with a cruel and terrible
appearance, a long straight nose, distended nostrils, a thin and reddish face
in which the large wide-open green eyes were enframed by bushy black eyebrows,
which made them appear threatening. His face and chin were shaven but for a
moustache. The swollen temples increased the bulk of his head. A bull's neck
supported the head, from which black curly locks were falling to his wide-
shouldered person.

[23]

His famous contemporary portrait, rediscovered by Romanian historians in the
late 19th century, had been featured in the gallery of horrors at Innsbruck's
Ambras Castle.

His image in modern Romanian culture has been established in reaction to
foreign perceptions: while Stoker's book did a lot to generate outrage with
nationalists, it is the last part of a rather popular previous poem by Mihai
Eminescu, "Scrisoarea a III-a", that helped turn Vlad's image into modern
legend, by having him stand as a figure to contrast with presumed social decay
under the Phanariotes and the political scene of the 19th century (even
suggesting that Vlad's violent methods be applied as a cure). This judgment
was in tune with the ideology of the inward-looking regime of Nicolae
CeauÅescu, although the identification did little justice to Eminescu's
personal beliefs.

All accounts of his life describe him as ruthless, but only the ones
originating from his Saxon detractors paint him as sadistic or insane. These
pamphlets continued to be published long after his death, though usually for
lurid entertainment rather than propaganda purposes. It has largely been
forgotten until recently that his tenacious efforts against the Ottoman Empire
won him many staunch supporters in his lifetime, not just in modern day
Romania but in the Kingdom of Hungary, Poland, the Republic of Venice, and
even the Holy See, not to take into account Balkan countries. A Hungarian
court chronicler reported that King Matthias "had acted in opposition to
general opinion" in Hungary when he had Dracula imprisoned, and this played a
considerable part in Matthias reversing his unpopular decision. During his
time as a "distinguished prisoner" before being fully pardoned and allowed to
reconquer Wallachia, Vlad was hailed as a Christian hero by visitors from all
over Europe.

## [edit] Vlad in popular culture and media

Apart from the Dracula movies, which are partially based on Vlad as well as
Elizabeth Bathory, there has been comparatively fewer movies about the man who
inspired the vampire. In 1979, Romania released a movie based on his six-year
reign and his brief return to power in late 1476 called "Vlad Å¢epeÅ"
(sometimes known, in other countries, as "The True Story of Vlad the
Impaler"), in which the character is portrayed with a mostly positive
perspective, while, at the same time, also mentioning the excesses of his
regime and his practice of impalement. The lead character is played by Åtefan
Sileanu.[24]

### [edit] Dark Prince: The True Story of Dracula

The 2000 movie "Dark Prince: The True Story of Dracula",[25] filmed on
location in Hungary and starring Rudolf Martin, attempts to portray Vlad the
Impaler as a generally sympathetic, tragic figure. The film takes a number of
liberties with the details of his life, but remains overall a fairly accurate
outline of his story. It portrays Vlad as the ruthless ruler/hero he has been
known to be, but it also goes on to portray him as the seductive vampire,
Dracula, of the popular novel and movies.

In literature, he is found as a main character of the book "The Historian",
written by Elizabeth Kostova, and published in 2005. The most recent
publication featuring Vlad the Impaler as its protagonist is written by C.C
Humphreys, and titled "Vlad: The Last Confession".

### [edit] Bram Stoker's Dracula

The 1992 Francis Ford Coppola film "Bram Stoker's Dracula", based on Bram
Stoker's novel, claims that the Dracula character is truly Vlad the Impaler.
In the opening of the film, which is set in Transylvania in 1462, he leaves
his beloved wife Elisabeta at his castle to fight an army of Turks, who have
invaded Transylvania and are threatening all of Christendom. Vlad Draculea, as
he is known in the film, leads his army to victory against the Turks and
impales many of them on stakes, before praising God for his triumph. However,
he then experiences a premonition in which Elisabeta flings herself out of the
window of the castle to her death in the river hundreds of feet below, since
the surviving Turks shot an arrow through the castle window, with a letter
attached to it falsely informing her of Vlad's death in the battle. Rushing
back to the castle, a distraught Vlad is shown his wife's dead body in the
chapel, and is told by an elderly priest that due to her suicide, Elisabeta's
soul cannot enter heaven. Overcome with grief and anger, Vlad renounces God
and proceeds to plunge his sword into a stone crucifix nearby, causing blood
to gush out of the hole and fill up the floor of the entire chapel. Vlad then
swears that he will live beyond his own death and avenge Elisabeta's death
with all the powers of darkness, and then drinks some of the blood from a
goblet next to the stone crucifix.

Over 400 years later, in 1897, Vlad is still alive in Transylvania and is
revealed through the course of the film to have been transformed into a
vampire, becoming known as Dracula and possessing all of the strengths and
weaknesses described in Bram Stoker's novel. The film then follows the plot of
the novel, except the character of Mina Harker is revealed to be the
reincarnation of Elisabeta, sharing her exact physical appearance, and a
passionate romance between Mina and Dracula is added in the film to coincide
with the opening of the film (Dracula turning Mina into a vampire so they can
be together as husband and wife for an eternity, just as he and Elisabeta were
meant to be together all of their lives). In the climax of the film, once
Dracula has been fatally wounded by having his throat slashed and a hunting
knife embedded into his heart, Mina/Elisabeta provides the finishing blow by
impaling the dying Vlad/Dracula to the floor with the knife, who reverts back
to his original appearance and then dies. Through Dracula's death, Mina is
freed of the vampire's curse, in accordance with the novel.

The film presents Vlad the Impaler as a brutal but tragic character who became
the immortal vampire Dracula out of his love for his deceased wife, and shows
his actions to be his own personal war against God for denying the entry of
Elisabeta's soul into heaven, mixing historical fact with the fiction of Bram
Stoker's character. His appearance as Vlad is similar to historical depictions
of Vlad the Impaler; his suit of armour in the battle against the Turks has a
distinct wolf-like appearance; he is shown to be able to fight multiple armed
men single-handedly, both as Vlad and Dracula, and golden dragons appear
frequently on his clothes and in his castle once he becomes the vampire
Dracula. In the film, Vlad/Dracula was played by Gary Oldman, and
Elisabeta/Mina was played by Winona Ryder.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Vlad III (ruler of Walachia). EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica.
  2. ^ a b c d DRACULA: between myth and reality. by Adrian Axinte. Stanford University.
  3. ^ Dracula
  4. ^ Count Dracula's Legend
  5. ^ http://www.honestmoneyreport.com/archives/2007/0330.pdf
  6. ^ The Real Prince Dracula
  7. ^ Florescu, Radu R. (1999). Essays on Romanian History. The Center for Romanian Studies. ISBN 973-9432-03-4.
  8. ^ Harmening, Dieter. (1983). Der Anfang von Dracula. Zur Geschichte von Geschichten. KÃ¶nigshausen+Neumann. ISBN 3-88479-144-3.
  9. ^ Andreescu, Stefan. (1999). Vlad the Impaler (Dracula). The Romanian Cultural Foundation Publishing House. ISBN 973-577-197-7.
  10. ^ Harmening
  11. ^ History of Central Europe
  12. ^ a b Andreescu
  13. ^ Miller, Elizabeth. (2003). "Beheim and the Dracula Connection". http://blooferland.com/drc/index.php?title=Journal_of_Dracula_Studies#Number_5_.282003.29
  14. ^ Harmening
  15. ^ The Historical Dracula
  16. ^ McNally, Raymond. (1982). "Origins of the Slavic Narratives about the Historical Dracula".
  17. ^ Andreescu; McNally&Florescu
  18. ^ Striedter, Jurij. (1961). "Die ErzÃ¤hlung vom walachisen Vojevoden Drakula in der russischen und deutschen Ãberlieferung".
  19. ^ Andreescu; McNally & Florescu
  20. ^ Perrie, Maureen. (1987). "The Image of Ivan the Terrible in Russian folklore".
  21. ^ Andreescu, McNally
  22. ^ a b Miller, Elizabeth "Dracula: Sense & Nonsense". ISBN 1-874287-24-4; Desert Island Books Limited 2000.
  23. ^ DRACULA
  24. ^ Vlad Tepes IMDB page
  25. ^ "Dark Prince: The True Story of Dracula" IMDB page

## [edit] References

  * Florescu, Radu R.; McNally, Raymond T. (1989). Dracula: Prince of Many Faces. Little Brown and Company. ISBN 0-316-28655-9.
  * Florescu, Radu R.; McNally, Raymond T. (1994). In Search of Dracula. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-395-65783-0.
  * Treptow, Kurt W. (2000). Vlad III Dracula: The Life and Times of the Historical Dracula. Center for Romanian Studies. ISBN 973-98392-2-3.
  * Babinger, Franz (1992). Mehmed the Conqueror and His Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0691010786.

## [edit] External links

  * Wikimedia Commons logo Media related to Vlad III the Impaler at Wikimedia Commons
  * The Tale of Dracula Russian manuscript circa 1490, with English translation (MS Word format).

Regnal titles  
Preceded by  
Vladislav II Prince of Wallachia  
1448 Succeeded by  
Vladislav II  
Preceded by  
Vladislav II Prince of Wallachia  
1456â1462 Succeeded by  
Radu cel Frumos  
Preceded by  
Basarab LaiotÄ cel BÄtrÃ¢n Prince of Wallachia  
1476 Succeeded by  
Basarab LaiotÄ cel BÄtrÃ¢n  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vlad_III_the_Impaler"

Categories: People from MureÅ County | Rulers of Wallachia | Dracula |
Vampirism (crime) | Roman Catholic monarchs | Orthodox converts to Catholicism
| Converts to Roman Catholicism | Romanian Roman Catholics | Rulers deposed as
children | Medieval child rulers | 1431 births | 1476 deaths | Former Eastern
Orthodox Christians | Cause of death disputed

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 01:50.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



