
# Richard Brautigan

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Richard Gary Brautigan  
Born January 30, 1935(1935-01-30)  
Tacoma, Washington  
Died c. September 14, 1984 (aged 49)  
Bolinas, California  
Occupation Novelist and poet  
Nationality American  
Genres Black Comedy  
Parody  
Satire  
Zen Buddhism  
Notable work(s) Trout Fishing in America (1967)  
Influences

    
    
    William Carlos Williams, Emily Dickinson, Jack Kerouac, Ernest Hemingway, Charles Bukowski, E.E. Cummings, Walt Whitman  
Influenced

    
    
    Haruki Murakami, William Michaelian, W. P. Kinsella, Don Carpenter, Ben Myers  
Richard Gary Brautigan (January 30, 1935 â ca. September 14, 1984) was a
20th century American writer. His novels and stories often have to do with
black comedy, parody, satire, and Zen Buddhism. He is probably best known for
his 1967 novel, Trout Fishing in America.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Early life
    * 1.2 Mental illness
    * 1.3 Writing career
    * 1.4 Personal life
    * 1.5 Suicide
  * 2 Legacy
  * 3 Bibliography
    * 3.1 Novels and novellas
    * 3.2 Poetry
    * 3.3 Short story collections
    * 3.4 Unpublished novel
    * 3.5 Record Album
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

### [edit] Early life

Brautigan was born in Tacoma, Washington to Bernard Frederick Brautigan, Jr.
(July 29, 1909 â May 27, 1994) a factory worker, laborer, and World War II
veteran and Lulu Mary "Mary Lou" Keho (April 7, 1911 â September 24, 2005)
who was a waitress. His father abandoned Mary Lou seven months before Richard
was born. Brautigan said that he met his biological father only twice, though
after Brautigan's death Bernard Brautigan was said to be unaware that Richard
was his child, saying "He's got the same last name, but why would they wait 45
to 50 years to tell me I've got a son."[1]

In 1938, Brautigan and his mother began cohabiting with a man named Arthur
Martin Titland. Mary Lou and Titland had a daughter together out of wedlock
named Barbara Ann, who was born on May 1, 1939. Brautigan claimed that he had
a very traumatic experience when he was six years old, when his mother left
him alone with his two-year-old sister in a motel room, where he did not know
the whereabouts of his mother until she returned two days later.

On January 20, 1943, Mary Lou married a fry cook named Robert Geoffrey
Porterfield. Mary Lou and Porterfield had a daughter together named Sandra
Jean, who was born on April 1, 1945. Mary Lou would tell Brautigan that
Porterfield was his biological father, and Brautigan began using "Richard Gary
Porterfield" as his surname. Brautigan would suffer physical abuse at the
hands of his stepfather, whom he would often witness abusing his mother. Mary
Lou separated from Porterfield in 1946, and she remarried to William David
Folston, Sr. on June 12, 1950.

Throughout his childhood, Brautigan lived in extreme poverty; he told his
daughter stories of his mother sifting rat feces from their supply of flour to
make flour-and-water pancakes. Because of Brautigan's impoverished childhood,
he and his family had trouble getting food and on some occasions would not be
able to eat for days. He lived with his family on welfare and moved to various
homes in the Pacific Northwest before settling in Eugene, Oregon in 1944. Many
of Brautigan's childhood experiences were included in the poems and stories
that he wrote from as early as the age of 12 through his high school years.
His novel So the Wind Won't Blow It All Away is loosely based on childhood
experiences including an incident where Brautigan accidentally shot the
brother of a close friend in the ear, injuring him only slightly.

On September 12, 1949, Brautigan entered South Eugene High School, after
leaving Woodrow Wilson Junior High School. He was a writer for his high school
newspaper South Eugene High School News. He also played on his school's
basketball team, and stood at 6 feet 4 inches tall (1.91 m) by the time of his
graduation. On December 19, 1952, Brautigan's first poem The Light was
published in the South Eugene High School Newspaper. Brautigan graduated from
South Eugene High School with honors on June 9, 1953. Following graduation, he
moved in with his best friend Peter Webster, and Peter's mother Edna Webster
became Brautigan's surrogate mother.

According to several accounts, Brautigan stayed with Webster for about a year
before leaving for San Francisco for the first time in August 1954, returning
to Oregon several times, apparently for lack of money.[2]

### [edit] Mental illness

On December 14, 1955, Brautigan was arrested for throwing a rock through a
police-station window, supposedly in order to be sent to prison and fed. He
was arrested for disorderly conduct and had to pay a $25 fine, however he was
instead committed to the Oregon State Hospital on December 24, 1955, after
police noticed patterns of erratic behavior.

At the Oregon State Hospital Brautigan was diagnosed with paranoid
schizophrenia and clinical depression, and was treated with electroconvulsive
therapy twelve times. While institutionalized, he began writing The God of the
Martians, a manuscript that remains unpublished. On February 19, 1956,
Brautigan was released from the Oregon State Hospital and briefly lived with
his mother, stepfather, and his siblings in Eugene, Oregon. He then left for
San Francisco, where he would spend most of the rest of his life (save for
periods of time spent in Tokyo and Montana.)[2]

### [edit] Writing career

In San Francisco, Brautigan sought to establish himself as a writer and was
known for handing out his poetry on the streets and performing at poetry
clubs.

Brautigan's first published book was The Return of the Rivers (1958), a single
poem, followed by two collections of poetry: The Galilee Hitch-Hiker (1958),
and Lay the Marble Tea (1959). During the 1960s Brautigan became involved in
the burgeoning San Francisco counterculture scene, often appearing as a
performance-poet at concerts and participating in the various activities of
The Diggers. Brautigan was also a writer for the newspaper Change, an
underground newspaper created by Ron Loewinsohn.

In the summer of 1961, Brautigan went camping with his wife and his daughter
in the Idaho Stanley Basin. While camping he completed the novels A
Confederate General From Big Sur and Trout Fishing in America. A Confederate
General from Big Sur was his first published novel and met with little
critical or commercial success. But when his novel Trout Fishing in America
was published in 1967, Brautigan was catapulted to international fame and
labeled by literary critics as the writer most representative of the emerging
countercultural youth-movement of the late 1960s, even though he was said to
be contemptuous of hippies (as noted in Lawrence Wright's article in the April
11, 1985 issue of Rolling Stone.)[3] Trout Fishing in America has so far sold
over 4 million copies worldwide.

Brautigan published four collections of poetry as well as another novel, In
Watermelon Sugar (1968) during the decade of the sixties. Also, in the spring
of 1967, Brautigan was Poet-in-Residence at the California Institute of
Technology. During this year, he published All Watched Over by Machines of
Loving Grace, a chapbook published by The Communication Company. It was
printed in an edition of 1,500 copies and distributed for free. One Brautigan
novel, The God of The Martians, remains unpublished. The 600 word, 20 chapter
manuscript was sent to at least two editors but was rejected by both.[4] A
copy of the manuscript was discovered with the papers of the last of these
editors, Harry Hooton.

During the 1970s Brautigan experimented with different literary genres,
publishing several novels throughout the decade and a collection of short
stories called Revenge of the Lawn in 1971. "When the 1960s ended, he was the
baby thrown out with the bath water," said his friend and fellow writer,
Thomas McGuane. "He was a gentle, troubled, deeply odd guy." Generally
dismissed by literary critics and increasingly abandoned by his readers,
Brautigan's popularity waned throughout the late 1970s and into the 1980s. His
work remained popular in Europe, however, as well as in Japan, and Brautigan
visited there several times.[5] To his critics, Brautigan was willfully naive.
Lawrence Ferlinghetti said of him, "As an editor I was always waiting for
Richard to grow up as a writer. It seems to me he was essentially a naÃ¯f, and
I don't think he cultivated that childishness, I think it came naturally. It
was like he was much more in tune with the trout in America than with
people."[6]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Listening to Richard Brautigan

From late 1968 to February 1969, Brautigan recorded a spoken-word album for
The Beatles' short-lived record-label, Zapple. The label was shut down by
Allen Klein before the recording could be released, but it was eventually
released in 1970 on Harvest Records as Listening to Richard Brautigan.[7]
Brautigan's writings are characterized by a remarkable and humorous
imagination. The permeation of inventive metaphors lent even his prose-works
the feeling of poetry. Evident also are themes of Zen Buddhism like the
duality of the past and the future and the impermanence of the present. Zen
Buddhism and elements of the Japanese culture can be found in his novel
Sombrero Fallout: A Japanese Novel. Brautigan's last published work before his
death was his novel So the Wind Won't Blow It All Away which was published in
1982, two years before his death.

### [edit] Personal life

On June 8, 1957, Brautigan married Virginia Dionne Alder in Reno, Nevada. They
had one daughter together named Ianthe Elizabeth Brautigan who was born on
March 25, 1960. They separated on December 24, 1962 but the divorce was not
finalized until 1970. After the separation, Brautigan pursued his career as a
writer while Alder became a civil rights activist and a anti-Vietnam War
activist.

Brautigan remarried on December 1, 1977 to Akiko Yoshimura whom he met in
Tokyo, Japan. They lived in Montana while they were married. Brautigan and
Yoshimura were divorced in 1980.

Brautigan had a relationship with a San Francisco woman named Marcia Clay from
1981â1982. He also pursued a brief relationship with Janice Meissner, a
woman from the North Beach community of San Francisco. Other relationships
were with Marcia Pacaud, who appears on the cover of The Pill Versus the
Springhill Mine Disaster, a collection of Brautigan's poems; Valerie Estes,
who appears on the cover of Listening to Richard Brautigan, a spoken-word
recording of some of Brautigan's work; and Sherry Vetter, who appears on the
cover of Revenge of the Lawn, a collection of Brautigan's short stories.

Brautigan was an alcoholic and suffered years of despair; according to his
daughter, he often mentioned suicide over a period of more than a decade
before ending his life. Brautigan was survived by his parents, both ex-wives,
and his daughter Ianthe. He has one grandchild named Elizabeth, who was born
about two years after his death.

### [edit] Suicide

In 1984, at age 49, Richard Brautigan had recently moved to Bolinas,
California, where he was living alone in a large, old house. He died of a
self-inflicted .44 Magnum gunshot wound to the head. The exact date of his
death is unknown, but his decomposed body was found by Robert Yench, a private
investigator, on October 25, 1984. The body was found on the living room
floor, in front of a large window that looked out over the Pacific Ocean. It
is speculated that Brautigan may have ended his life over a month earlier on
September 14, 1984 after talking to former girlfriend Marcia Clay, on the
telephone.

Brautigan once wrote, "All of us have a place in history. Mine is clouds."[8]

## [edit] Legacy

Brautigan's daughter, Ianthe Elizabeth Brautigan, describes her memories of
her father in her book You Can't Catch Death (2000).

Also in a 1980 letter to Brautigan from W. P. Kinsella, Kinsella states that
Brautigan is his greatest influence for writing and his favorite book is In
Watermelon Sugar.

In March 1994, a teenager named Peter Eastman Jr. from Carpinteria, California
legally changed his name to "Trout Fishing in America", and now teaches
English in Japan. [9] At around the same time, National Public Radio reported
on a young couple who had named their baby "Trout Fishing in America".

There is a folk rock band called Trout Fishing in America.[10], and another
called Watermelon Sugar[11], which quotes the opening paragraph of that book
on their home page. The industrial rock band Machines of Loving Grace took
their name from one of Brautigan's best-known poems.

Twin Rocks, Oregon, a song appearing on singer-songwriter Shawn Mullins' 1998
platinum record Soul's Core, seems to tell the story of a fictitious meeting
with Brautigan on bluffs overlooking the Pacific Ocean. Another lyrical
interpretation might be that the encounter was with Brautigan's ghost.

In the UK The Library of Unwritten Books is a project in which ideas for
novels are collected and stored. The venture is inspired by Brautigan's novel
The Abortion.

The library for unpublished works envisioned by Brautigan in his novel The
Abortion now exists as The Brautigan Library in Burlington, Vermont.[12]

There are two stores named "In Watermelon Sugar" after Brautigan's novella,
one in Baltimore, Maryland and one in Traverse City, Michigan.

## [edit] Bibliography

### [edit] Novels and novellas

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 1974 paperback edition of Richard Brautigan's novel Trout Fishing in
America, which is considered his most famous work.

  * A Confederate General From Big Sur (1964, ISBN 0-224-61923-3)
  * Trout Fishing in America (1967 ISBN 0-395-50076-1) Omnibus edition
  * In Watermelon Sugar (1968 ISBN 0-440-34026-8)
  * The Abortion: An Historical Romance 1966 (1971 ISBN 0-671-20872-1)
  * The Hawkline Monster: A Gothic Western (1974 ISBN 0-671-21809-3)
  * Willard and His Bowling Trophies: A Perverse Mystery (1975 ISBN 0-671-22065-9)
  * Sombrero Fallout: A Japanese Novel (1976 ISBN 0-671-22331-3)
  * Dreaming of Babylon: A Private Eye Novel 1942 (1977 ISBN 0-440-02146-4)
  * The Tokyo-Montana Express (1980 ISBN 0-440-08770-8)[13]
  * So The Wind Won't Blow It All Away (1982 ISBN 0-395-70674-2)
  * An Unfortunate Woman: A Journey (1982, but first published in 1994 ISBN 0-312-27710-5)

### [edit] Poetry

  * The Return of the Rivers (1958)
  * The Galilee Hitch-Hiker (1958)
  * Lay the Marble Tea (1959)
  * The Octopus Frontier (1960)
  * All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace (1963)
  * Please Plant This Book (1968)
  * The Pill Versus the Springhill Mine Disaster (1969)
  * Rommel Drives on Deep into Egypt (1970)
  * Loading Mercury with a Pitchfork (1971 ISBN 0-671-22263-5. ISBN 0-671-22271-6 pbk)
  * June 30, June 30 (1978 ISBN 0-440-04295-X)
  * The Edna Webster Collection of Undiscovered Writings (1999 ISBN 0-395-97469-0)

### [edit] Short story collections

  * Revenge of the Lawn, (October 1, 1971, ISBN 0-671-20960-4)

### [edit] Unpublished novel

From December 1955 to February 1956, Brautigan was working on a novel called
The God of the Martians which was 600 words long. Brautigan had sent the
manuscript to three different publishers but the manuscript was rejected for
publication. The God of the Martians remains unpublished.[4]

### [edit] Record Album

  * Listening to Richard Brautigan, 1973 (was supposed be be Zapple #3 but came out on EMI Harvest instead)- consists of Richard reading several poems and stories, friends reading "Love Poem" and sounds recorded in his apartment in San Francisco

## [edit] References

  1. ^ UPI news report, 27 October 1984, reproduced at http://www.brautigan.net/obituaries.html#bernard2
  2. ^ a b John F. Barber, Curator. "Biography". Brautigan Bibliography and Archive. http://www.brautigan.net/biography.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-18.
  3. ^ John F. Barber, Curator. "Memoirs". Brautigan Bibliography and Archive. http://www.brautigan.net/memoirs.html#wright. Retrieved on 2007-12-18.
  4. ^ a b http://www.brautigan.net/novels.html
  5. ^ John F. Barber, Curator. "Biography: 1970s". Brautigan Bibliography and Archive. http://www.brautigan.net/chronology1970.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-18.
  6. ^ Manso, Peter and Michael McClure. "Brautigan's Wake." Vanity Fair, May 1985: 62-68, 112-116.
  7. ^ John F. Barber, Curator. "Recordings". Brautigan Bibliography and Archive. http://www.brautigan.net/recordings.html#listening. Retrieved on 2007-12-18.
  8. ^ "Richard Brautigan 1935-1984". http://kerouacalley.com/brautigan.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-29.
  9. ^ Anne Saker (October 11, 2007). "Searching upstream: A writer goes fishing for the man who calls himself Trout Fishing in America". The Oregonian. http://www.oregonlive.com/oregonian/stories/index.ssf?/base/living/119197050984080.xml&coll=7. Retrieved on 2007-12-18.
  10. ^ The Official Trout Fishing In America Web Site
  11. ^ Watermelon Sugar :: News :: Indie Folk Duo :: Hypatia Kingsley and Louise Thompson Bendall
  12. ^ O'Kelly, Kevin (September 27, 2004). "Unusual library may get new chapter". The Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/ae/books/articles/2004/09/27/unusual_library_may_get_new_chapter. Retrieved on 2007-03-19.
  13. ^ There is some disagreement as how to classify The Tokyo-Montana Express. John Barber at brautigan.net classifies it as a collection of stories. The Brautigan Pages classifies it as a novel.

Richard Brautigan reads the poem 'Love's Not The Way To Treat A Friend' on the
1969 album 'Paradise Bar And Grill' by San Francisco band Mad River.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Richard
Brautigan  
  * The Brautigan Pages
  * Works by or about Richard Brautigan in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
  * Selected poems and directory of Richard Brautigan
  * The Brautigan Archives
  * Brief critique on the life and legacy of Richard Brautigan
  * Richard Brautigan entry on Findagrave.com
  * Poem of Richard Brautigan in the pavement of San Francisco
  * Library of Unwritten Books, UK arts project inspired by Brautigan novel; The Abortion.
  * An interview with the memoirist Ianthe Brautigan on the creative process as well as memories of her father -- about-creativity.com March 31, 2008
  * Images of Brautigan First Editions

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Brautigan"

Categories: 1935 births | 1984 deaths | American novelists | American poets |
American short story writers | Beat writers | Diggers (theater) | Writers from
Oregon | People from Tacoma, Washington | People with schizophrenia | Suicides
by firearm in California | Writers who committed suicide

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 12:07 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



