
# Book of Optics

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Book of Optics (Arabic: Kitab al-Manazirâ; Latin: De Aspectibus or
Opticae Thesaurus: Alhazeni Arabis) was a seven-volume treatise on optics,
physics, mathematics, anatomy and psychology written by the Iraqi Muslim
scientist Ibn al-Haytham (in Europe Latinized as Alhacen or Alhazen) in
1011â21, when he was under house arrest in Cairo, Egypt.

The book had an important influence on the development of optics, as it laid
the foundations for modern physical optics after drastically transforming the
way in which light and vision had been understood, and on science in general
with its introduction of the experimental scientific method. Ibn al-Haytham
has been called the "father of modern optics",[1] the "pioneer of the modern
scientific method,"[2] and the founder of experimental physics,[3] and for
these reasons he has been described as the "first scientist."[4]

The Book of Optics has been ranked alongside Isaac Newton's Philosophiae
Naturalis Principia Mathematica as one of the most influential books in the
history of physics,[5] as it is widely considered to have initiated a
revolution in the fields of optics and visual perception.[6][7][8][9][10][11]
It established experimentation as the norm of proof in optics,[2] and gave
optics a physico-mathematical conception at a much earlier date than the other
mathematical disciplines of astronomy and mechanics.[12]

The Book of Optics also contains the earliest discussions and descriptions of
the psychology of visual perception and optical illusions,[13] as well as
experimental psychology,[14] and the first accurate descriptions of the camera
obscura, a precursor to the modern camera.[15] In medicine and ophthalmology,
the book also made important advances in eye surgery, as it correctly
explained the process of sight for the first time.[16]

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
    * 1.1 Optics and vision
    * 1.2 Scientific method
    * 1.3 Latin translations
    * 1.4 Legacy
  * 2 Volumes
    * 2.1 Book I
    * 2.2 Books IIâIII
    * 2.3 Books IVâVII
  * 3 Experiments
    * 3.1 Camera obscura
  * 4 Supplementary treatises
  * 5 Other contributions
    * 5.1 Alhazen's problem
    * 5.2 Astronomy
    * 5.3 Hockney-Falco thesis
    * 5.4 Mechanics
    * 5.5 Phenomenology
    * 5.6 Physiological optics
    * 5.7 Psychology
    * 5.8 Theology
  * 6 English translations
  * 7 References
  * 8 See also

  
## [edit] Overview

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen), author of the Book of Optics

### [edit] Optics and vision

In classical antiquity, there were two major theories on vision. The first
theory, the emission theory, was supported by such thinkers as Euclid and
Ptolemy, who believed that sight worked by the eye emitting rays of light. The
second theory, the intromission theory, supported by Aristotle and his
followers, had physical forms entering the eye from an object. Alhacen argued
on the basis of common observations (such as the eye being dazzled or even
injured if we look at a very bright light) and logical arguments (such as how
a ray could proceeding from the eyes reach the distant stars the instant after
we open our eye) to maintain that we cannot see by rays being emitted from the
eye nor through physical forms entering the eye. Alhacen instead developed a
highly successful theory which explained the process of vision by rays of
light proceeding to the eye from each point on an object, which he proved
through the use of experimentation.[17] His unification of geometrical optics
with philosophical physics forms the basis of modern optics.[18]

Ibn al-Haytham proved that rays of light travel in straight lines, and carried
out a number of experiments with lenses, mirrors, refraction, and
reflection.[19] He was also the first to reduce reflected and refracted light
rays into vertical and horizontal components, which was a fundamental
development in geometric optics.[20] He also discovered a result similar to
Snell's law of sines, but did not quantify it and derive the law
mathematically,[21] unlike his contemporary Ibn Sahl who both discovered and
formulated the law of sines in his On Burning Mirrors and Lenses
(984).[22][23]

Ibn al-Haytham is also credited with the invention of the camera obscura and
pinhole camera.[15] Alhacen also wrote on the refraction of light, especially
on atmospheric refraction, for example, the cause of morning and evening
twilight. He solved the problem of finding the point on a convex mirror at
which a ray coming from one point is reflected to another point. He also
experimented on the dispersion of light into its constituent colours,[19]
experimented on the finite speed of light,[24][25][26] discovered that light
is variable and moves slower in denser bodies,[24] speculated on the
rectilinear propagation and electromagnetic aspects of light,[26] and argued
that rays of light are streams of tiny energy particles[27] travelling in
straight lines.[28] He also discovered spherical aberration.[29]

Ibn al-Haytham made a thorough examination of the passage of light through
various media and discovered the laws of refraction. He also carried out the
first experiments on the dispersion of light into its constituent colours.[19]
His book Kitab al-Manazir (Book of Optics) was translated into Latin in the
Middle Ages, as also was his book dealing with the colours of sunset. He dealt
at length with the theory of various physical phenomena such as shadows,
eclipses, and the rainbow, and speculated on the physical nature of light. He
is the first to describe accurately the various parts of the eye and give a
scientific explanation of the process of vision. He also attempted to explain
binocular vision and the apparent increase in size of the Sun and the Moon
when near the horizon. Through his extensive research on optics, he has been
hailed as the "father of modern optics".[1]

In his work on optics, Alhacen described sight as the inference of distinct
properties of two similar and dissimilar objects. The eye perceives the size,
shape, transparency (color and light), position, and motion from cognitive
distinction which is entirely different from perceiving by mere sensation the
characteristics of the object. The faculty of the mind, for Alhacen, includes
perceiving through judgement and inference of distinct properties of similar
objects outline and structure. Alhacen continues this body of work by
concluding that the discrimination performed by the faculty of judgment and
inference is in addition to sensing the objects visible form and not by pure
sensation alone. We recognize visible objects that we frequently see.
Recognition of an object is not pure sensation because we do not recognize
everything we see. Ultimately, recognition does not take place without
remembering. Recognition is due to the inference because of our mental
capacity to conclude what objects are. Alhacen uses our ability to recognize
species and likening their characteristics to that of similar individuals to
support recognition associated and processed by inference. Alhacen further
concludes that we are processing visual stimuli in very short intervals which
allows us to recognize and associate objects through inference but we do not
need syllogism to recognize it. These premises are stored infinitely in our
souls.

Sami Hamarneh writes several examples of Ibn al-Haytham's descriptions which
are correct according to modern optics:[26]

  1. "He explained that sight results from the light penetrating the eye from the object, thus initiating a revolt against the ancient belief that visionary rays emanate from the eye."
  2. "He showed that the corneal region of the eye is curved and is close to the conjunctiva; but the cornea do not coalesce with the conjunctiva."
  3. "He suggested that the inner surface of the cornea at the point where it joins the foramen of the eye becomes concave in accordance with the curvature of its outer surface. The edges of the surfaces of the foramen and the middle part of the corneal regions become even but not one."
  4. "He endeavored by use of hyperbola and geometric optics to chart and formulate basic laws on reflection, and on atmospheric and light-ray refraction. He speculated on electromagnetic aspects of light, its velocity, and its rectilinear propagation. He recorded formation of an image in a camera obscura during an eclipse of the sun (the principle of the pinhole camera)."
  5. "He stated that the lens is that part of the eye where vision is felt first."
  6. "He theorized on how the image is transmitted through the optic nerve to the brain and made a distinction between luminous and nonluminous bodies."

The Book of Optics also provides the first correct definition of the twilight,
discusses atmospheric refraction, shows that the twilight only begins when the
Sun is 19 degrees below the horizon, and uses a complex geometric
demonstration to measure the height of the Earth's atmosphere as 52,000
passuum (49 miles),[30] which is very close to the modern measurement of 50
miles. However, one has to remember that such close agreement is just a
coincidence as Boyle's Law and Charles' Law, laws of gravity were yet unknown
to us. Moreover, the definition of the boundary of the atmosphere is somewhat
arbitrary.

The Book of Optics is considered by some to mark the beginning of experimental
psychology. Ibn al-Haytham made use of his experimental method in his
pioneering work on the psychology of visual perception and optical illusions.
His investigations and experiments on psychology and visual perception
included sensation, variations in sensitivity, sensation of touch, perception
of colours, perception of darkness, the psychological explanation of the moon
illusion, and binocular vision.[14]

Other apparatus Ibn al-Haytham described in the Book of Optics, besides the
camera obscura, include "specially arranged dark chambers, specially designed
apertures for the controlled admission of light," and "viewing tubes".[31] The
Book of Optics is also credited with providing the earliest "historical proof
of a magnifying device, a convex lens forming a magnified image". Its
translation into Latin in the 12th century was instrumental to the invention
of eyeglasses in 13th century Italy.[32]

The earliest evidence of "a magnifying device, a convex lens forming a
magnified image," dates back to the Book of Optics published by Ibn al-Haytham
(Alhazen) in 1021. The properties of a magnifying lens became known to
Europeans after the book was translated into Latin in the 12th century.[32]
Ibn al-Haytham described his magnifying lens as follows:

> "If an object is placed in a dense spherical medium of which the curved
surface is turned towards the eye and is between the eye and the centre of the
sphere, the object will appear magnified."[33]

### [edit] Scientific method

Roshdi Rashed notes that "by promoting the use of experiments in scientific
research, al-Haytham played an important part in setting the scene for modern
science."[34] Rosanna Gorini wrote the following on the Book of Optic's
introduction of the scientific method:

> "According to the majority of the historians al-Haytham was the pioneer of
the modern scientific method. With his book he changed the meaning of the term
optics and established experiments as the norm of proof in the field. His
investigations are based not on abstract theories, but on experimental
evidences and his experiments were systematic and repeatable."[2]

Ibn al-Haytham's scientific method was very similar to the modern scientific
method and consisted of the following procedures:[35]

  1. Observation
  2. Statement of problem
  3. Formulation of hypothesis
  4. Testing of hypothesis using experimentation
  5. Analysis of experimental results
  6. Interpretation of data and formulation of conclusion
  7. Publication of findings

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ibn al-Haytham proved that light travels in straight lines using the
scientific method.

An aspect associated with Ibn al-Haytham's optical research is related to
systemic and methodological reliance on experimentation (i'tibar) and
controlled testing in his scientific inquiries. Moreover, his experimental
directives rested on combining classical physics ('ilm tabi'i) with
mathematics (ta'alim; geometry in particular) in terms of devising the
rudiments of what may be designated as a hypothetico-deductive procedure in
scientific research. This mathematical-physical approach to experimental
science supported most of his propositions in Kitab al-Manazir (The Optics; De
aspectibus or Perspectivae) and grounded his theories of vision, light and
colour, as well as his research in catoptrics and dioptrics. His legacy was
further advanced through the 'reforming' of his Optics by Kamal al-Din al-
Farisi (d. ca. 1320) in the latter's Kitab Tanqih al-Manazir (The Revision of
[Ibn al-Haytham's] Optics).[36][37][13]

He describes his experimental approach in the introduction to the book as
follows:[13]

> "We should distinguish the properties of particulars, and gather by
induction what pertains to the eye when vision takes place and what is found
in the manner of sensation to be uniform, unchanging, manifest, and not
subject to doubt. After which we should ascend in our inquiry and reasonings,
gradually and orderly, criticizing premises and exercising caution in regard
to conclusionsâour aim in all that we make subject to inspection and review
being to employ justice, not to follow prejudice, and to take care in all that
we judge and criticize that we seek the truth and not be swayed by opinion."

From Ibn al-Haytham to the present day, the emphasis of the scientific method
has always been on seeking truth:

> "Truth is sought for its own sake. And those who are engaged upon the quest
for anything for its own sake are not interested in other things. Finding the
truth is difficult, and the road to it is rough. ..."[38]

> "How does light travel through transparent bodies? Light travels through
transparent bodies in straight lines only. ... We have explained this
exhaustively in our Book of Optics. But let us now mention something to prove
this convincingly: the fact that light travels in straight lines is clearly
observed in the lights which enter into dark rooms through holes. ... the
entering light will be clearly observable in the dust which fills the
air."[39]

The conjecture that "Light travels through transparent bodies in straight
lines only", was corroborated by Alhacen only after years of effort. His
demonstration of the conjecture was to place a straight stick or a taut thread
next to the light beam, to prove that light travels in a straight line.[40]

The Book of Optics was the first book to emphasize the role of experimentation
as a form of proof in scientific inquiry.[41] The term "experiment" itself may
have origins in the Book of Optics. Ibn al-Haytham used the Arabic terms
i'tabara, 'itibar and mu'tabir to refer to his experiments. During the Latin
translation of the book, these terms were rendered into Latin as experimentare
(or experiri), experimentum and experimentatar respecively.[42]

Ibn al-Haytham also employed scientific skepticism and criticism, and
emphasized the role of empiricism. He also explained the role of induction in
syllogism, and criticized Aristotle for his lack of contribution to the method
of induction, which Ibn al-Haytham regarded as superior to syllogism, and he
considered induction to be the basic requirement for true scientific
research.[43]

The concept of Ockam's razor is also present in the Book of Optics. For
example, after demonstrating that light is generated by luminous objects and
emitted or reflected into the eyes, he states that therefore "the extramission
of [visual] rays is superfluous and useless."[44] He was also the first
scientist to adopt a form of positivism in his approach, centuries before a
term for positivism was coined. He wrote that "we do not go beyond experience,
and we cannot be content to use pure concepts in investigating natural
phenomena", and that the understanding of these cannot be acquired without
mathematics. After assuming that light is a material substance, he does not
discuss its nature any further but confines his investigations to the
diffusion and propagation of light. The only properties of light he takes into
account are that which can be treated by geometry and verified by experiment,
noting that energy is the only quality of light that can be sensed.[27]

### [edit] Latin translations

Optics was translated into Latin by an unknown scholar at the end of the 12th
century or the beginning of the 13th century.[45] It was printed by Friedrich
Risner in 1572, with the title Opticae thesaurus: Alhazeni Arabis libri
septem, nuncprimum editi; Eiusdem liber De Crepusculis et nubium ascensionibus
[2]. Risner is also the author of the name variant "Alhazen", before him he
was known in the west as Alhacen, which is correct transcription of the Arabic
name.[46] This work enjoyed a great reputation during the Middle Ages. Works
by Alhacen on geometrical subjects were discovered in the BibliothÃ¨que
nationale in Paris in 1834 by E. A. Sedillot. Other manuscripts are preserved
in the Bodleian Library at Oxford and in the library of Leiden.

### [edit] Legacy

The Book of Optics initiated a scientific revolution in optics[6] and visual
perception,[7] and laid the foundations for modern optics,[1] the scientific
method,[2] experimental physics[3] and experimental psychology,[14] for which
it has been ranked alongside Isaac Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
Mathematica as one of the most influential books in the history of physics.[5]
The Latin translation of the Book of Optics influenced the works of many later
European scientists, such as Robert Grosseteste, Roger Bacon, John Peckham,
Witelo, William of Ockham, Leonardo da Vinci, Francis Bacon, RenÃ© Descartes,
Johannes Kepler, Galileo Galilei, Isaac Newton, and others.[47][48] The Book
of Optics also laid the foundations for a variety of later optical
technologies, such as eyeglasses,[32] the camera,[15] the telescope and
microscope, microscopy, retinal surgery, and robotic vision. Richard Powers
expressed the opinion that Ibn al-Haytham's scientific method and scientific
skepticism in his experiments on optics to be a candidate for the most
important idea of the 2nd millennium.[48]

Besides its influence on science and technology, the Book of Optics also
influenced other aspects of Western culture. In religion, for example, John
Wycliffe, the intellectual progenitor of the Protestant Reformation, referred
to Alhazen in discussing the seven deadly sins in terms of the distortions in
the seven types of mirrors analyzed in De aspectibus. In literature, Alhazen's
Book of Optics is praised in Guillaume de Lorris' Roman de la Rose and
Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales. In art in particular, the Book of
Optics laid the foundations for the linear perspective technique and the use
of optical aids in Renaissance art (see Hockney-Falco thesis).[49] The linear
perspective technique was also employed in European geographical charts during
the Age of Exploration, such as Paolo Toscanelli's chart which was used by
Christopher Columbus when he went on a voyage to the New World.[48]

Robert S. Elliot wrote the following on the Book of Optics:

> "Alhazen was one of the ablest students of optics of all times and published
a seven-volume treatise on this subject which had great celebrity throughout
the medieval period and strongly influenced Western thought, notably that of
Roger Bacon and Kepler. This treatise discussed concave and convex mirrors in
both cylindrical and spherical geometries, anticipated Fermat's law of least
time, and considered refraction and the magnifying power of lenses. It
contained a remarkably lucid description of the optical system of the eye,
which study led Alhazen to the belief that light consists of rays which
originate in the object seen, and not in the eye, a view contrary to that of
Euclid and Ptolemy."[50]

George Sarton, the father of the history of science, wrote in the Introduction
to the History of Science:

> "Ibn Haytham's writings reveal his fine development of the experimental
faculty. His tables of corresponding angles of incidence and refraction of
light passing from one medium to another show how closely he had approached
discovering the law of constancy of ratio of sines, later attributed to Snell.
He accounted correctly for twilight as due to atmospheric refraction,
estimating the sun's depression to be 19 degrees below the horizon, at the
commencement of the phenomenon in the mornings or at its termination in the
evenings."[51]

Matthias Schramm wrote in his Ibn al-Haythams Weg zur Physik:

> âThrough a closer examination of Ibn al-Haytham's conceptions of
mathematical models and of the role they play in his theory of sense
perception, it becomes evident that he was the true founder of physics in the
modern sense of the word; in fact he anticipated by six centuries the fertile
ideas that were to mark the beginning of this new branch of science.â[52]

## [edit] Volumes

### [edit] Book I

In Book I, Ibn al-Haytham begins by writing an introduction to the two
conflicting doctrines of vision which previously dominated ancient thought on
optics: the intromission theory of the the ânatural philosophersâ[53]
(Aristotle and his followers) where âvision is effected by a form which
comes from the visible object to the eyeâ, and the emission theory of
âmathematiciansâ (such as Euclid, Ptolemy and Al-Kindi) where âvision is
effected by a ray which issues from the eye to the visible object.â He
states:[13]

> âThese two notions, appear to diverge and contradict one another if taken
at face value. Now, for any two different doctrines, it is either the case
that one of them is true and the other false; or they are both false, the
truth being other than either of them; or they both lead to one thing which is
the truthâ¦That being the caseâ¦and because the manner of vision has not
been ascertained, we have thought it appropriate that we direct our attention
to this subject as much as we can, and seriously apply ourselves to it, and
examine it, and diligently inquire into its nature.â

He states that his research and investigation of light will be based on
experimental evidence rather than on abstract theory,[19] and describes the
systematic approach he will use to resolve the problem of vision in his
investigations on optics:[13]

> âWe should distinguish the properties of particulars, and gather by
induction what pertains to the eye when vision takes place and what is found
in the manner of sensation to be uniform, unchanging, manifest, and not
subject to doubt. After which we should ascend in our inquiry and reasonings,
gradually and orderly, criticizing premises and exercising caution in regard
to conclusionsâour aim in all that we make subject to inspection and review
being to employ justice, not to follow prejudice, and to take care in all that
we judge and criticize that we seek the truth and not be swayed by opinion.â

He provides the first correct explanation of how vision is perceived by rays
of light travelling in straight lines from an object to the eye:[13]

> âStraight lines [exist between] the surface of the eye [and] each point on
the seen surface of the object. An accurate experimental examination of this
fact may be easily made with the help of rulers and tubes. [...] Ifâ¦he
covers any part of the opening, then there will be screened off only that
portionâ¦that lies on a straight line with the eye and the screening
bodyâthis straightness being secured by the ruler and the straightness of
the tube, [...] It follows from this experiment, with a necessity that dispels
doubt, that sight does not perceive any visible object existing with it in the
same atmosphere, this perception being not by reflection, except through
straight lines alone that can be imagined to extend between the surface of the
object and the surface of the eye. Sight does not perceive any visible object
unless there exists in the object some light, which the object possesses of
itself or which radiates upon it from another object.â

Ibn al-Haytham then resolves the problem by explaining that it is light that
travels from visible objects to the eye, rather than the physical âformsâ
mentioned by the physicists, and that the rays that create vision travel into
the eye, rather than travel out of the eyes as believed by the mathematicians.
Most of the volume is thus dedicated to experiments and investigations on
light. He begins by dividing light into primary light, the light radiated by
an illuminating body, and secondary light, the light reflected off another
surface. Alongside a lamp, fire and the stars, he cites sunlight as a primary
light, every other visible object (including birds, trees, stones and grass)
which reflects the sunlight as secondary light. He realized that the
atmosphere also reflects light, from his observations of the sky brightening
even before the Sun rises.[13] In support of his intromission theory, he
describes a number of observations where the eyes feel pain when exposed to a
bright light (primary light) and where the eyes see afterimages when staring
at an illuminated object (secondary light) for a prolonged period of time.[54]
He also notes that light is always the same from every source, using sunlight,
fire, and a mirror as examples. He then examines the anatomical structure of
the eye, and proposes the first use of a camera obscura.[19]

### [edit] Books IIâIII

Book II of the treatise contains a discussion on visual perception.[19] In
Book III, he pioneered the psychology of visual perception and optical
illusions, being the first scientist to argue that vision occurs in the brain,
rather than the eyes. He pointed out that personal experience has an effect on
what people see and how they see, and that vision and perception are
subjective. He explained possible errors in vision in detail, and as an
example, describes how a small child with less experience may have more
difficulty interpreting what he/she sees. He also gives an example of an adult
that can make mistakes in vision because of how one's experience suggests that
he/she is seeing one thing, when he/she is really seeing something else.[13]

### [edit] Books IVâVII

Book IV deals with the theory of reflection mathematically, while Book V deals
with catoptrics and the influential Alhazen's problem. Book VI examines errors
in vision due to reflection, while the final volume, Book VII, examines
refraction.[19]

## [edit] Experiments

In order to demonstrate that straight lines of light exist between âthe
surface of the eyeâ and âeach point on the seen surface of the objectâ,
he states than an âaccurate experimental examination of this fact may be
easily made with the help of rulers and tubes.â He describes how an observer
looking through a straight tube can only see parts of an object lying directly
across from the opening of the tube, and states:[13]

> âIfâ¦he covers any part of the opening, then there will be screened off
only that portionâ¦that lies on a straight line with the eye and the
screening bodyâthis straightness being secured by the ruler and the
straightness of the tube. It follows from this experiment, with a necessity
that dispels doubt, that sight does not perceive any visible object existing
with it in the same atmosphere, this perception being not by reflection,
except through straight lines alone that can be imagined to extend between the
surface of the object and the surface of the eye. Sight does not perceive any
visible object unless there exists in the object some light, which the object
possesses of itself or which radiates upon it from another object.â

Ibn al-Haytham states that the âlight shining from a self-luminous body into
the transparent air, radiates from every part of the luminous body facing that
air,â¦and it issues from every point on the luminous body in every straight
line that can be imagined to extend in the air from that point.â To prove
this, he describes an experiment with a sheet of copper with a large circular
hole in the center. He states that the experimenter should slide âa well-
straightened cylindrical tube of regular circularity and convenient lengthâ
through the hole, while one end of the tube is open, and the other end is
closed but punctured by an aperture that should ânot exceed the thickness of
a needle.â He then states that the experimenter should hold a candle up to
the open end of the cylinder âin the darkness of nightâ and hold an opaque
object up to the aperture at the other end. He explains that only a small
amount of light from the flame passes through the aperture, while the rest of
the light is blocked by the sheet of copper. He then states that âthe
experimenter shouldâ¦gently move the flame so another part of it may face the
hole, and then inspect the body opposite.â He explains that as the flame
moves, the light projected onto the opaque object changes, like how the light
on the object appears weak when the tip of the flame is opposite the aperture
and the light on the object appears bright when the center of the flame is
opposite the aperture. He concludes: âTherefore, it appears from this
experiment that light radiates from each part of the fire.â[13]

Ibn al-Haytham also constructed a tube which he used to prove that light is
emitted equally from all parts of a wick and dispersed radially. "When the
light was rotated around the aperture of the tube, the spot projected onto the
screen remained unaltered. With the narrowing of the opening, the luminous
spot, fainter and smaller, still continued to appear. In this way, he
demonstrated that light is emitted equally from all parts of the wick and
dispersed radially."[55]

### [edit] Camera obscura

In his various experiments, Ibn al-Haytham used the term âal-Bayt al-
Muthlimâ (Arabic: Ø§ÙØ¨ÙØª Ø§ÙÙ Ø¸ÙÙ â), translated in English as
"dark room", to describe the camera obscura. While earlier philosophers such
as Mozi, Aristotle, Theon of Alexandria and Al-Kindi (Alkindus) described the
effects of a single light passing through a pinhole camera, none of them
suggested that what is being projected onto the screen is an image of
everything on the other side of the aperture. Ibn al-Haytham was the first to
demonstrate this with his lamp experiment where several different light
sources are arranged across a large area, and he was thus the first scientist
to successfully project an image from outdoors onto a screen indoors with a
camera obscura.[13]

One of the most famous experiments described in the Book of Optics is the lamp
experiment with the camera obscura, used to test the hypothesis that lights
and colours cannot blend in the air. This experiment covers all the necessary
steps in Ibn al-Haytham's scientific method of inquiry: stating the problem,
gathering information through observation, the formulation of a hypothesis, an
experiment to test the hypothesis, repeating the experiment to confirm the
results, and then stating the conclusion.[56] He describes it as follows:[57]

> "The proof that lights and colours do not blend in the air or in transparent
bodies is [the following]. Let several lamps be positioned at various points
in the same area, all being opposite a single aperture leading to a dark
place; opposite the aperture let there be a wall in that dark place or let an
opaque body be held facing the aperture: the lights of those lamps will appear
separately on that wall or body and in the same number as the lamps, each
light being opposite one of the lamps on the straight line passing through
aperture. If one of the lamps is screened, only the light opposite that lamp
in the dark will vanish. When the screen is moved away from the lamp, that
light will return to its place. Whichever lamp is screened, only the light
facing it in the [dark] place will disappear. When the screen is removed, the
light will return to its place."

> "Now this fact may be easily examined experimentally at any time [in the
following way]. Let the experimenter employ a chamber with a two-panel door in
a dark night, and let him bring several lamps which he should set up at
different points in front of the door. The experimenter should enter the
chamber, close the door but leave a small gap between the panels, and observe
the wall opposite the door. On it he will find separate lights, in the same
number as the lamps, which have entered through the opening at the door, each
facing one of those lamps. If the experimenter then screens one of the lamps,
the light facing it will vanish; and upon his lifting the screen, that light
will return. If he covers the opening at the door, leaving only a small
aperture facing the lamps, he will again find on the chamberâs wall the
separate lights in the number of those lamps, all according to the magnitude
of the aperture."

> "Now all the lights that appear in the dark place have reached it through
the aperture alone, and therefore the lights of all those lamps have come
together at the aperture, then separated after passing through it. Thus, if
lights blended in the atmosphere, the lights of the lamps meeting at the
aperture would have mixed in the air at the aperture and in the air preceding
it before they reached the aperture, and they would have come out so mingled
together that they would not be subsequently distinguishable. We do not,
however, find the matter to be so; rather the lights are found to come out
separately, each being opposite the lamp from which it has arrived."

Ibn al-Haytham theorized on the rectilinear propagation and finite speed of
light. He argued that light is a âsubstantial matterâ, the propagation of
which requires time âeven if this is hidden to our sensesâ.[58] He argued
that its "forms" (or "species" in the Latin translation) were dimensional, and
on this basis, he "demonstrated that the perception of light required time:
light entering a darkened chamber would have to pass through a dimensional
aperture, which could only be opened temporally."[47] In an experiment he
undertook with the camera obscura, in order to establish that light travels in
time and with finite speed, he states:

> âIf the hole was covered with a curtain and the curtain was taken off, the
light traveling from the hole to the opposite wall will consume time.â

He reiterated the same experience when he established that light travels in
straight lines. The most revealing experiment which indeed introduced the
camera obscura was in his studies of the half-moon shape of the sunâs image
during eclipses which he observed on the wall opposite a small hole made in
the window shutters. In his famous essay "On the form of the Eclipse"
(Maqalah-fi-Surat-al-Kosuf) (Arabic: Ù ÙØ§ÙØ© ÙÙ ØµÙØ±Ø©Ø§ÙÙØ³ÙÙâ)
he commented on his observation:

> âThe image of the sun at the time of the eclipse, unless it is total,
demonstrates that when its light passes through a narrow, round hole and is
cast on a plane opposite to the hole it takes on the form of a moon-sickle.â

In his experiment of the sun light he extended his observation of the
penetration of light through the pinhole camera to conclude that when the sun
light reaches and penetrates the hole it makes a conic shape at the points
meeting at the pinhole, forming later another conic shape reverse to the first
one on the opposite wall in the dark room. This happens when sun light
diverges from point âïºâ until it reaches an aperture âïºïº¤â and is
projected through it onto a screen at the luminous spot âïº©ï»«â. Since
the distance between the aperture and the screen is insignificant in
comparison to the distance between the aperture and the sun, the divergence of
sunlight after going through the aperture should be insignificant. In other
words, âïºïº¤â should be about equal to âïº©ï»«â. However, it is
observed to be much greater âï»ï»â when the paths of the rays which form
the extremities of âï»ï»â are retraced in the reverse direction, it is
found that they meet at a point outside the aperture and then diverge again
toward the sun. This was indeed the first accurate description of the Camera
Obscura phenomenon.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Alhacen's observations of light's behaviour through a pinhole camera.

In camera terms, the light converges into the room through the hole
transmitting with it the object(s) facing it. The object will appear in full
colour but upside down on the projecting screen/wall opposite the hole inside
the dark room. The explanation is that light travels in a straight line and
when some of the rays reflected from a bright subject pass through the small
hole in thin material they do not scatter but cross and reform as an upside
down image on a flat white surface held parallel to the hole. Ibn al-Haitham
established that the smaller the hole is, the clearer the picture is.

## [edit] Supplementary treatises

Ibn al-Haytham's Risala fi l-Dawâ (Treatise on Light) is a supplement to his
Kitab al-Manazir (Book of Optics). The text contained further investigations
on the properties of luminance and its radiant dispersion through various
transparent and translucent media. He also carried out further observations,
investigations and examinations on the anatomy of the eye, the camera obscura
and pinhole camera, the illusions in visual perception, the meteorology of the
rainbow and the density of the atmosphere, various celestial phenomena
(including the eclipse, twilight, and moonlight), refraction, catoptrics,
dioptrics, spherical and parabolic mirrors, and magnifying lenses.[59]

According to Giambattista della Porta, Ibn al-Haytham was the first to give a
correct explanation of the apparent increase in the size of the Moon and Sun
when near Earth's horizon, known as the Sun and Moon illusion
respectively.[60] (Ptolemy made earlier attempts at explaining it, according
to Roger Bacon.)

In another supplementary treatise, Ibn al-Haytham attempted to provide a
scientific explanation for the rainbow phenomenon. In his Maqala fi al-Hala wa
Qaws Quzah (On the Rainbow and Halo), he "explained the formation of rainbow
as an image, which forms at a concave mirror. If the rays of light coming from
a farther light source reflect to any point on axis of the concave mirror,
they form concentric circles in that point. When it is supposed that the sun
as a farther light source, the eye of viewer as a point on the axis of mirror
and a cloud as a reflecting surface, then it can be observed the concentric
circles are forming on the axis."[61] He was not able to verify this because
his theory that "light from the sun is reflected by a cloud before reaching
the eye" did not allow for a possible experimental verification.[24] This
explanation was later repeated by Averroes,[61] and, though incorrect,
provided the groundwork for the correct explanations later given by KamÄl al-
DÄ«n al-FÄrisÄ« and Theodoric of Freiberg.[62]

## [edit] Other contributions

While the Book of Optics was mainly concerned with the field of optics, the
book also had a significant influence on several other fields of science,
mathematics and philosophy.

### [edit] Alhazen's problem

Ibn al-Haytham's work on catoptrics in Book V of the Book of Optics contains
the important mathematical problem known as Alhazen's problem. It comprises
drawing lines from two points in the plane of a circle meeting at a point on
the circumference and making equal angles with the normal at that point. This
is equivalent to finding the point on the edge of a circular billiard table at
which a cue ball at a given point must be aimed in order to canon off the edge
of the table and hit another ball at a second given point. Thus, its main
application in optics is to solve the problem, "Given a light source and a
spherical mirror, find the point on the mirror were [sic] the light will be
reflected to the eye of an observer." This leads to an equation of the fourth
degree.[24][63]

This eventually led Ibn al-Haytham to derive the earliest formula for the sum
of the fourth powers, and using an early proof by mathematical induction, he
developed a method for determining the general formula for the sum of any
integral powers. He used his result on sums of integral powers to perform an
integration, in order to find the volume of a paraboloid. He was thus able to
find the integrals for polynomials up to the fourth degree, and came close to
finding a general formula for the integrals of any polynomials. This was
fundamental to the development of infinitesimal and integral calculus.[64]

Ibn al-Haytham solved the problem using conic sections and a geometric proof,
but Alhazen's problem remained influential in Europe, when later
mathematicians such as Christiaan Huygens, James Gregory, Guillaume de
l'HÃ´pital, Isaac Barrow, and many others, attempted to find an algebraic
solution to the problem, using various methods, including analytic methods of
geometry and derivation by complex numbers.[65] An algebraic solution to the
problem was finally found in 1997 by the Oxford mathematician Peter M.
Neumann.[66]

### [edit] Astronomy

Chapters 15-16 of the Book of Optics dealt with astronomy. Ibn al-Haytham was
the first to discover that the celestial spheres do not consist of solid
matter, and he also discovered that the heavens are less dense than the
air:[67]

> "The body of heaven differs ... from the air. [...] In fineness, the body of
air being denser than the body of heaven, [which is] finer than the body of
air. The entire heaven differs from the transparency of air. The body in which
the fixed stars are, differs in transparency from the air. The body of heaven
is finer than the body of air, that is, it is more transparent. In the heavens
there is no clear body that is dense."

These views were later repeated by Witelo and had a significant influence on
the Copernican and Tychonic systems of astronomy.[67]

### [edit] Hockney-Falco thesis

Main article: Hockney-Falco thesis

At a scientific conference in February 2007, Charles M. Falco argued that Ibn
al-Haytham's work on optics may have influenced the use of optical aids by
Renaissance artists. Falco said that his and David Hockney's examples of
Renaissance art "demonstrate a continuum in the use of optics by artists from
circa 1430, arguably initiated as a result of Ibn al-Haytham's influence,
until today."[68]

His principle of linear perspective was also employed in the art of Leonardo
da Vinci and other Renaissance artists.[69]

### [edit] Mechanics

The Book of Optics describes several experimental observations that Ibn al-
Haytham made in mechanics and how he used his results to explain certain
optical phenomena using mechanical analogies. He conducted experiments with
projectiles, and concluded that "it was only the impact of perpendicular
projectiles on surfaces which was forceful enough to enable them to penetrate
whereas the oblique ones were deflected. For example, to explain refraction
from a rare to a dense medium, he used the mechanical analogy of an iron ball
thrown at a thin slate covering a wide hole in a metal sheet. A perpendicular
throw would break the slate and pass through, whereas an oblique one with
equal force and from an equal distance would not." He used this result to
explain explained how intense direct light hurts the eye: "Applying mechanical
analogies to the effect of light rays on the eye, lbn al-Haytham associated
'strong' lights with perpendicular rays and 'weak' lights with oblique ones.
The obvious answer to the problem of multiple rays and the eye was in the
choice of the perpendicular ray since there could only be one such ray from
each point on the surface of the object which could penetrate the eye."[70]

### [edit] Phenomenology

In philosophy, Ibn al-Haytham is considered a pioneer of phenomenology. He
articulated a relationship between the physical and observable world and that
of intuition, psychology and mental functions. His theories regarding
knowledge and perception, linking the domains of science and religion, led to
a philosophy of existence based on the direct observation of reality from the
observer's point of view. Much of his thought on phenomenology was not further
developed until the 20th century.[71]

### [edit] Physiological optics

Ibn al-Haytham discussed the topics of medicine, ophthalmology and eye surgery
in the anatomical and physiological portions of the Book of Optics and in his
commentaries on Galenic works.[72] He made several improvements to eye surgery
and accurately described the process of sight,[73] the structure of the eye,
image formation in the eye and the visual system. He also discovered the
underlying principles of Hering's law of equal innervation, binocular vision,
motion perception, vertical horopters, and binocular disparity.[74]

He discussed ocular anatomy, and was the first author to deal with the
"descriptive anatomy" and "functional anatomy" of the eye independently.[75]
Much of his decriptive anatomy was faithful to Galen's gross anatomy, but with
significant differences in his approach.[76] For example, the whole area of
the eye behind the iris constitutes what Ibn al-Haytham uniquely called the
uveal sphere, and his description of the eye was devoid of any teleological or
humoural theories associated with Galenic anatomy.[77] He also described the
eye as being made up of two interesecting globes, which was essential to his
functional anatomy of the eye.[78]

After describing the construction of the eye, Ibn al-Haytham makes his most
original anatomical contribution in describing the functional anatomy of the
eye as an optical system,[79] or optical instrument. His mulitple light-source
experiment via a reduction slit with the camera obscura, also known as the
lamp experiment, provided sufficient empirical grounds for him to develop his
theory of corresponding point projection of light from the surface of an
object to form an image on a screen. It was his comparison between the eye and
the beam-chamber, or camera obscura, which brought about his synthesis of
anatomy and optics, giving rise to a new field of optics now known as
"physiological optics". As he conceptualized the essential principles of
pinhole projection from his experiments with the pinhole camera, he considered
image inversion to also occur in the eye,[75] and viewed the pupil as being
similar to an aperture.[80] Regarding the process of image formation, however,
he incorrectly agreed with Avicenna that the lens was the receptive organ of
sight, but correctly hinted at the retina also being involved in the
process.[81]

### [edit] Psychology

Ibn al-Haytham is considered by some to be the founder of experimental
psychology,[14] for his pioneering work on the psychology of visual perception
and optical illusions.[13] Ibn al-Haytham made many subjective reports
regarding vision and can therefore be argued to be the first "psychologist".

In the Book of Optics, Ibn al-Haytham was the first scientist to argue that
vision occurs in the brain, rather than the eyes. He pointed out that personal
experience has an effect on what people see and how they see, and that vision
and perception are subjective. He explained possible errors in vision in
detail, and as an example described how a small child with less experience may
have more difficulty interpreting what he or she sees. He also gave an example
of how an adult can make mistakes in vision due to experience that suggests
that one is seeing one thing, when one is really seeing something else.[13]

In the Book of Optics, Ibn al-Haytham also developed the "concept of a sensory
core that interprets visual stimuli" and which was "highly sophisticated,
incorporating mathematical, anatomical and physiopsychological
components."[82]

Ibn al-Haytham also described what became known as Hering's law of equal
innervation, vertical horopters, and binocular disparity,[74] and improved on
the theories of binocular vision, motion perception and horopters previously
discussed by earlier scholars such as Aristotle, Euclid and Ptolemy.[81][83]

Omar Khaleefa has argued that Ibn al-Haytham should be considered the founder
of psychophysics,[14] contrary to the orthodox opinion that Gustav Fechner
founded this field in 1860 with the publication of his Elements of
Psychophysics. There is, however, no evidence that Ibn al-Haytham employed any
quantitative psychophysical techniques, so this remains a minority opinion.
The psychophysicist Craig Aaen-Stockdale has written a rebuttal to Khaleefa's
arguments, noting that the claim for Ibn al-Haytham being the âfounder of
psychophysicsâ "rests upon unsupported assertions, a conflation of
psychophysics with the wider discipline of psychology, and semantic arguments
over what it is to âfoundâ a school of thought."[84]

Ibn al-Haytham was also the first to study the cognitive process of reading,
giving the first descriptions on the role of perception in the understanding
of written language. For example, he wrote the following observation on the
dual nature of word recognition:[85]

> "For when a literate person glances at the form abjad on a written paper ,
he would immediately perceive it to be abjad [a word denoting the Arabic
alphabet] because of his recognition of the form. Thus from his perception
that the 'a' and the 'd' last, or from his perception of the configuration of
the total form, he perceives that it is abjad. Similarly, when he sees the
written name of Allah, be He exalted, he perceives by recognition, at the
moment of glancing at it, that it is Allah's name. And it is so with all well-
known written words which have appeared many times before the eye: a literate
person immediately perceives what the word is by recognition, without the need
to inspect the letters in it one by one. The case is different when a literate
person notices a strange word which he has not come upon beforehand or the
like of which he has not already read. For he will perceive such a word only
after inspecting its letters one by one and discerning their meanings; then he
will perceive the meaning of the word."

Ibn al-Haytham's psychology may have also possibly been influenced by Buddhist
philosophy, echoes of which can be in some of his views on pain and sensation.
He writes that every sensation is a form of 'suffering' and that what people
call pain is only an exaggerated perception; that there is no qualitative
difference but only a quantitative difference between pain and ordinary
sensation.[43]

He also came up with a theory to explain the Moon illusion, which played an
important role in the scientific tradition of medieval Europe. It was an
attempt to the solve the problem of the Moon appearing larger near the horizon
than it does while higher up in the sky. Arguing against Ptolemy's refraction
theory, he redefined the problem in terms of perceived, rather than real,
enlargement. He said that judging the distance of an object depends on there
being an uninterrupted sequence of intervening bodies in between the object
and the observer. With the Moon however, there are no intervening objects.
Therefore, since the size of an object depends on its observed distance, which
is in this case inaccurate, the Moon appears larger on the horizon. Through
works by Roger Bacon, John Pecham and Witelo based on Ibn al-Haytham's
explanation, the Moon illusion gradually came to be accepted as a
psychological phenomenon, with Ptolemy's theory being rejected in the 17th
century.[86]

### [edit] Theology

Ibn al-Haytham attributed his experimental scientific method and scientific
skepticism to his Islamic faith. He believed that human beings are inherently
flawed and that only God is perfect. He reasoned that to discover the truth
about nature, it is necessary to eliminate human opinion and error, and allow
the universe to speak for itself.[35]

Ibn al-Haytham described his search for truth and knowledge as a way of
leading him closer to God:

> "I constantly sought knowledge and truth, and it became my belief that for
gaining access to the effulgence and closeness to God, there is no better way
than that of searching for truth and knowledge."[87]

## [edit] English translations

  * Sabra, A. I., ed. (1983), The Optics of Ibn al-Haytham, Books I-II-III: On Direct Vision. The Arabic text, edited and with Introduction, Arabic-Latin Glossaries and Concordance Tables, Kuwait: National Council for Culture, Arts and Letters
  * Sabra, A. I., ed. (2002), The Optics of Ibn al-Haytham. Edition of the Arabic Text of Books IV-V: On Reflection and Images Seen by Reflection. 2 vols., Kuwait: The National Council for Culture, Arts and Letters
  * Sabra, A. I., trans. (1989), The Optics of Ibn al-Haytham. Books I-II-III: On Direct Vision. English Translation and Commentary. 2 vols., Studies of the Warburg Institute, vol. 40, London: The Warburg Institute, University of London, ISBN 0-85481-072-2
  * Smith, A. Mark, ed. and trans. (2001), "Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with English Translation and Commentary, of the First Three Books of Alhacen's De aspectibus, the Medieval Latin Version of Ibn al-Haytham's KitÄb al-ManÄzir, 2 vols.", Transactions of the American Philosophical Society (Philadelphia) 91 (4â5), ISBN 0-87169-914-1
  * Smith, A. Mark, ed. and trans. (2006), "Alhacen on the Principles of Reflection: A Critical Edition, with English Translation and Commentary, of Books 4 and 5 of Alhacen's De Aspectibus, the Medieval Latin version of Ibn-al-Haytham's KitÄb al-ManÄzir, 2 vols.", Transactions of the American Philosophical Society (Philadelphia) 96 (2â3), ISBN 0-87169-962-1

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c R. L. Verma (1969). Al-Hazen: father of modern optics.
  2. ^ a b c d Rosanna Gorini (2003). "Al-Haytham the Man of Experience. First Steps in the Science of Vision", International Society for the History of Islamic Medicine. Institute of Neurosciences, Laboratory of Psychobiology and Psychopharmacology, Rome, Italy.
  3. ^ a b RÃ¼diger Thiele (2005). "In Memoriam: Matthias Schramm", Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 15, p. 329â331. Cambridge University Press.
  4. ^ Bradley Steffens (2006), Ibn al-Haytham: First Scientist, Morgan Reynolds Publishing, ISBN 1599350246 (cf. Reviews of Ibn al-Haytham: First Scientist, The Critics, Barnes & Noble)
  5. ^ a b H. Salih, M. Al-Amri, M. El Gomati (2005). "The Miracle of Light", A World of Science 3 (3). UNESCO.
  6. ^ a b Sabra, A. I.; Hogendijk, J. P., The Enterprise of Science in Islam: New Perspectives, MIT Press, pp. 85-118, ISBN 0262194821
  7. ^ a b Hatfield, Gary (1996), "Was the Scientific Revolution Really a Revolution in Science?", in Ragep, F. J.; Ragep, Sally P.; Livesey, Steven John, Tradition, Transmission, Transformation: Proceedings of Two Conferences on Pre-modern Science held at the University of Oklahoma, Brill Publishers, p. 500, ISBN 9004091262
  8. ^ Simon, GÃ©rard (2006), "The Gaze in Ibn al-Haytham", The Medieval History Journal 9 (1): 89-98, doi:10.1177/097194580500900105
  9. ^ Bellosta, HÃ©lÃ¨na (2002), "Burning Instruments: From Diocles to Ibn Sahl", Arabic Sciences and Philosophy (Cambridge University Press) 12: 285-303, doi:10.1017/S095742390200214X
  10. ^ Rashed, Roshdi (2 August 2002), "Portraits of Science: A Polymath in the 10th Century", Science 297 (5582): 773, doi:10.1126/science.1074591
  11. ^ Lindberg, David C. (1967), "Alhazen's Theory of Vision and Its Reception in the West", Isis 58 (3): 321â341 [332], doi:10.1086/350266
  12. ^ Dijksterhuis, Fokko Jan (2004), Lenses and Waves: Christiaan Huygens and the Mathematical Science of Optics in the Seventeenth Century, Springer, pp. 113-5, ISBN 1402026978 : 
> "Through the influential work of Alhacen the onset of a physico-mathematical
conception of optics was established at a much earlier time than would be the
case in the other mathematical sciences."

  13. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Bradley Steffens (2006), Ibn al-Haytham: First Scientist, Chapter Five, Morgan Reynolds Publishing, ISBN 1599350246
  14. ^ a b c d e Omar Khaleefa (Summer 1999). "Who Is the Founder of Psychophysics and Experimental Psychology?", American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 16 (2).
  15. ^ a b c Nicholas J. Wade, Stanley Finger (2001), "The eye as an optical instrument: from camera obscura to Helmholtz's perspective", Perception 30 (10), p. 1157-1177.
  16. ^ Bashar Saad, Hassan Azaizeh, Omar Said (October 2005). "Tradition and Perspectives of Arab Herbal Medicine: A Review", Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2 (4), p. 475-479 [476]. Oxford University Press.
  17. ^ D. C. Lindberg, Theories of Vision from al-Kindi to Kepler, (Chicago, Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1976), pp. 60-7.
  18. ^ Toomer, G. J. (December 1964), "Review: Ibn al-Haythams Weg zur Physik by Matthias Schramm", Isis 55 (4): 463â465
  19. ^ a b c d e f g Dr. Mahmoud Al Deek. "Ibn Al-Haitham: Master of Optics, Mathematics, Physics and Medicine, Al Shindagah, November-December 2004.
  20. ^ Albrecht Heeffer. Keplerâs near discovery of the sine law: A qualitative computational model, Ghent University, Belgium.
  21. ^ A. I. Sabra (1981), Theories of Light from Descartes to Newton, Cambridge University Press. (cf. Pavlos Mihas, Use of History in Developing ideas of refraction, lenses and rainbow, p. 5, Demokritus University, Thrace, Greece.)
  22. ^ K. B. Wolf, "Geometry and dynamics in refracting systems", European Journal of Physics 16, p. 14-20, 1995.
  23. ^ R. Rashed, "A pioneer in anaclastics: Ibn Sahl on burning mirrors and lenses", Isis 81, p. 464â491, 1990.
  24. ^ a b c d O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Abu Ali al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive
  25. ^ MacKay, R. J.; Oldford, R. W. (August 2000), "Scientific Method, Statistical Method and the Speed of Light", Statistical Science 15 (3): 254-78
  26. ^ a b c Sami Hamarneh (March 1972). Review of Hakim Mohammed Said, Ibn al-Haitham, Isis 63 (1), p. 119.
  27. ^ a b Rashed, Roshdi (2007), "The Celestial Kinematics of Ibn al-Haytham", Arabic Sciences and Philosophy (Cambridge University Press) 17: 7â55 [19], doi:10.1017/S0957423907000355 : 
> "In reforming optics he as it were adopted ââpositivismââ (before
the term was invented): we do not go beyond experience, and we cannot be
content to use pure concepts in investigating natural phenomena. Understanding
of these cannot be acquired without mathematics. Thus, once he has assumed
light is a material substance, Ibn al-Haytham does not discuss its nature
further, but confines himself to considering its propagation and diffusion. In
his optics ââthe smallest parts of lightââ, as he calls them, retain
only properties that can be treated by geometry and verified by experiment;
they lack all sensible qualities except energy."

  28. ^ J. J. O'Connor and E. F. Robertson (2002). Light through the ages: Ancient Greece to Maxwell, MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
  29. ^ Hamid-Eddine Bouali, Mourad Zghal, Zohra Ben Lakhdar (2005). "Popularisation of Optical Phenomena: Establishing the First Ibn Al-Haytham Workshop on Photography" (PDF). The Education and Training in Optics and Photonics Conference. http://spie.org/etop/ETOP2005_080.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
  30. ^ Frisinger, H. Howard (March 1973), "Aristotle's Legacy in Meteorology", Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 3 (3): 198â204 [201]
  31. ^ Huff, Toby, The Rise of Early Modern Science, Cambridge University Press, p. 216, ISBN 0521529948
  32. ^ a b c Kriss, Timothy C.; Kriss, Vesna Martich (April 1998), "History of the Operating Microscope: From Magnifying Glass to Microneurosurgery", Neurosurgery 42 (4): 899-907
  33. ^ King, Henry C. (2003), The History of the Telescope, Courier Dover Publications, p. 25, ISBN 0486432653
  34. ^ (Rashed 2002, p. 773): 
> "His work on optics, which includes a theory of vision and a theory of
light, is considered by many to be his most important contribution, setting
the scene for developments well into the 17th century. His contributions to
geometry and number theory go well beyond the archimedean tradition. And by
promoting the use of experiments in scientific research, al-Haytham played an
important part in setting the scene for modern science."

  35. ^ a b Bradley Steffens (2006), Ibn al-Haytham: First Scientist, Morgan Reynolds Publishing, ISBN 1599350246. (cf. Bradley Steffens, "Who Was the First Scientist?", Ezine Articles.)
  36. ^ Nader El-Bizri, "A Philosophical Perspective on Alhazenâs Optics," Arabic Sciences and Philosophy, Vol. 15, Issue 2 (2005), pp. 189-218 (Cambridge University Press)
  37. ^ Nader El-Bizri, "Ibn al-Haytham," in Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia, eds. Thomas F. Glick, Steven J. Livesey, and Faith Wallis (New York â London: Routledge, 2005), pp. 237-240.
  38. ^ Alhazen (Ibn Al-Haytham) Critique of Ptolemy, translated by S. Pines, Actes X CongrÃ¨s internationale d'histoire des sciences, Vol I Ithaca 1962, as referenced on p.139 of Shmuel Sambursky (ed. 1974) Physical Thought from the Presocratics to the Quantum Physicists ISBN 0-87663-712-8
  39. ^ Alhazen, translated into English from German by M. Schwarz, from "Abhandlung Ã¼ber das Licht", J. Baarmann (ed. 1882) Zeitschrift der Deutschen MorgenlÃ¤ndischen Gesellschaft Vol 36 as referenced on p.136 by Shmuel Sambursky (1974) Physical thought from the Presocratics to the Quantum Physicists ISBN 0-87663-712-8
  40. ^ p.136, as quoted by Shmuel Sambursky (1974) Physical thought from the Presocratics to the Quantum Physicists ISBN 0-87663-712-8
  41. ^ Rashed, Roshdi; Armstrong, Angela (1994), The Development of Arabic Mathematics, Springer, pp. 345-6, ISBN 0792325656
  42. ^ Huff, Toby, The Rise of Early Modern Science, Cambridge University Press, p. 91, ISBN 0521529948
  43. ^ a b Plott, C. (2000), Global History of Philosophy: The Period of Scholasticism, Motilal Banarsidass, p. 462, ISBN 8120805518
  44. ^ Alhazen; Smith, A. Mark (2001), Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with English Translation and Commentary of the First Three Books of Alhacen's De Aspectibus, the Medieval Latin Version of Ibn al-Haytham's Kitab al-Manazir, DIANE Publishing, pp. 372 & 408, ISBN 0871699141
  45. ^ A. C. Crombie, Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental Science, 1100 - 1700, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), p. 147, n. 2.
  46. ^ Smith, A Mark (2001). Alhacen's theory of visual perception: a critical edition, with English translation and commentary, of the first three books of Alhacen's De aspectibus, the medieval Latin version of Ibn al-Haytham's Kitab al-Manazir. Vol 1. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society. pp. xxi. ISBN 9780871699145. .
  47. ^ a b Marshall, Peter (September 1981), "Nicole Oresme on the Nature, Reflection, and Speed of Light", Isis 72 (3): 357-374 [367-74]
  48. ^ a b c Richard Powers (University of Illinois), Best Idea; Eyes Wide Open, New York Times, April 18, 1999.
  49. ^ Falco, Charles M. (12â15 February 2007), Ibn al-Haytham and the Origins of Modern Image Analysis, International Conference on Information Sciences, Signal Processing and its Applications
  50. ^ R. S. Elliott (1966). Electromagnetics, Chapter 1. McGraw-Hill.
  51. ^ Dr. A. Zahoor and Dr. Z. Haq (1997), Quotations from Famous Historians of Science
  52. ^ Thiele, RÃ¼diger (August 2005), "In Memoriam: Matthias Schramm, 1928â2005", Historia Mathematica 32 (3): 271-274
  53. ^ Alhazen; Smith, A. Mark (2001), Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with English Translation and Commentary of the First Three Books of Alhacen's De Aspectibus, the Medieval Latin Version of Ibn al-Haytham's Kitab al-Manazir, DIANE Publishing, pp. 372 & 408, ISBN 0871699141
  54. ^ Alhazen; Smith, A. Mark (2001), Alhacen's Theory of Visual Perception: A Critical Edition, with English Translation and Commentary of the First Three Books of Alhacen's De Aspectibus, the Medieval Latin Version of Ibn al-Haytham's Kitab al-Manazir, DIANE Publishing, pp. 343-6, ISBN 0871699141
  55. ^ G. A. Russell, "Emergence of Physiological Optics", pp. 686-7, in Morelon, RÃ©gis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 2, Routledge, ISBN 0415124107
  56. ^ Bradley Steffens (2006), Ibn al-Haytham: First Scientist, Morgan Reynolds Publishing, ISBN 1599350246
  57. ^ A. I. Sabra (1989), Ibn al-Haytham, The Optics of Ibn al-Haytham, London: The Warburg Institute, vol. I, pp. 90-91
  58. ^ Lauginie, Pierre (July 2005). "Measuring: Why? How? What?" (PDF). Eighth International History, Philosophy, Sociology & Science Teaching Conference. http://www.ihpst2005.leeds.ac.uk/papers/Lauginie.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  59. ^ Dr. Nader El-Bizri, "Ibn al-Haytham or Alhazen", in Josef W. Meri (2006), Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopaedia, Vol. II, p. 343-345, Routledge, New York, London.
  60. ^ Vernon O. Georgia (2003). A History of the Muslim World to 1405: The Making of a Civilization, p. 200. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-098389-6.
  61. ^ a b Topdemir, HÃ¼seyin Gazi (2007), "Kamal Al-Din Al-Farisiâs Explanation of the Rainbow" (PDF), Humanity & Social Sciences Journal 2 (1): 75-85 [77], http://www.idosi.org/hssj/hssj2(1)07/10.pdf, retrieved on 2008-09-16
  62. ^ Topdemir, HÃ¼seyin Gazi (2007), "Kamal Al-Din Al-Farisiâs Explanation of the Rainbow" (PDF), Humanity & Social Sciences Journal 2 (1): 75-85 [83], http://www.idosi.org/hssj/hssj2(1)07/10.pdf, retrieved on 2008-09-16
  63. ^ Weisstein, Eric. "Alhazen's Billiard Problem". Mathworld. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/AlhazensBilliardProblem.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-24.
  64. ^ Victor J. Katz (1995), "Ideas of Calculus in Islam and India", Mathematics Magazine 68 (3): 163-174 [165-9 & 173-4]
  65. ^ John D. Smith (1992), "The Remarkable Ibn al-Haytham", The Mathematical Gazette 76 (475): 189-198
  66. ^ Highfield, Roger (1 April 1997), "Don solves the last puzzle left by ancient Greeks", Electronic Telegraph 676, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/htmlContent.jhtml?html=/archive/1997/04/01/ngre01.html, retrieved on 2008-09-24
  67. ^ a b Edward Rosen (1985), "The Dissolution of the Solid Celestial Spheres", Journal of the History of Ideas 46 (1), p. 13-31 [19-20, 21].
  68. ^ Falco, Charles M. "Ibn al-Haytham and the Origins of Modern Image Analysis", presented at a plenary session at the International Conference on Information Sciences, Signal Processing and its Applications, 12â15 February 2007. Sharjah, United Arab Emirates (U.A.E.). [1]
  69. ^ Covington, Richard (May-June 2007), "Rediscovering Arabic Science", Saudi Aramco World: 2-16, http://www.saudiaramcoworld.com/issue/200703/rediscovering.arabic.science.htm, retrieved on 2008-01-23
  70. ^ Gul A. Russell, "Emergence of Physiological Optics", p. 695, in Morelon, RÃ©gis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 2, Routledge, ISBN 0415124107
  71. ^ Dr ValÃ©rie Gonzalez, "Universality and Modernity", The Ismaili United Kingdom, December 2002, p. 50-53.
  72. ^ Steffens (cf. Review by Sulaiman Awan)
  73. ^ Bashar Saad, Hassan Azaizeh, Omar Said (October 2005). "Tradition and Perspectives of Arab Herbal Medicine: A Review", Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2 (4), p. 475-479 [476]. Oxford University Press
  74. ^ a b Ian P. Howard (1996). "Alhazen's neglected discoveries of visual phenomena". Perception 25 (10): 1203 â 1217. doi:10.1068/p251203.
  75. ^ a b Gul A. Russell, "Emergence of Physiological Optics", p. 689, in Morelon, RÃ©gis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 2, Routledge, ISBN 0415124107
  76. ^ Gul A. Russell, "Emergence of Physiological Optics", pp. 689-90, in Morelon, RÃ©gis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 2, Routledge, ISBN 0415124107
  77. ^ Gul A. Russell, "Emergence of Physiological Optics", p. 690, in Morelon, RÃ©gis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 2, Routledge, ISBN 0415124107
  78. ^ Gul A. Russell, "Emergence of Physiological Optics", p. 692, in Morelon, RÃ©gis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 2, Routledge, ISBN 0415124107
  79. ^ Gul A. Russell, "Emergence of Physiological Optics", p. 691, in Morelon, RÃ©gis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 2, Routledge, ISBN 0415124107
  80. ^ Gul A. Russell, "Emergence of Physiological Optics", p. 695-8, in Morelon, RÃ©gis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 2, Routledge, ISBN 0415124107
  81. ^ a b N. J. Wade (1998). A Natural History of Vision. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
  82. ^ Lutz, Peter L. (2002), The Rise of Experimental Biology: An Illustrated History, Humana Press, p. 60, ISBN 0896038351
  83. ^ Ian P. Howard & N. J. Wade (1996). "Ptolemy's contributions to the geometry of binocular vision". Perception 25 (10): 1189â201. doi:10.1068/p251189.
  84. ^ Aaen-Stockdale, Craig (2008), "Ibn al-Haytham and psychophysics", Perception 37 (4): 636â638
  85. ^ Kennedy, Alan; Radach, R.; Heller, D.; Pynte, J. (2000), Reading as a Perceptual Process, Elsevier, p. ii, ISBN 0080436420
  86. ^ Hershenson, Maurice (1989), The Moon Illusion, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 9â10, ISBN 0805801219, http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=x1qcL4CTwlIC, retrieved on 2008-09-22
  87. ^ C. Plott (2000), Global History of Philosophy: The Period of Scholasticism, Pt. II, p. 465. ISBN 8120805518, Motilal Banarsidass Publ.

## [edit] See also

  * History of optics
  * History of physics
  * History of science
  * History of scientific method
  * Physics in medieval Islam
  * Science in medieval Islam
  * Scientific method

v â¢ d â¢ e

Islamic mathematics  
Mathematicians

'Abd al-HamÄ«d ibn Turk Â· Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi Â· AbÅ« al-Hasan ibn AlÄ« al-
QalasÄdÄ« Â· AbÅ« al-WafÄ' al-BÅ«zjÄnÄ« Â· AbÅ« IshÄq IbrÄhÄ«m al-
ZarqÄlÄ« Â· AbÅ« Ja'far al-KhÄzin Â· AbÅ« KÄmil ShujÄ ibn Aslam Â·
Abu'l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi Â· Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi Â· Abu Nasr Mansur Â· AbÅ«
RayhÄn al-BÄ«rÅ«nÄ« Â· AbÅ« Sahl al-QÅ«hÄ« Â· Ahmed ibn Yusuf Â· Al-AbbÄs
ibn Said al-JawharÄ« Â· Al-Birjandi Â· Al-HajjÄj ibn YÅ«suf ibn Matar Â· Al-
Jayyani Â· Al-Karaji Â· Al-Khazini Â· Al-Kindi Â· Al-Mahani Â· Al-Nayrizi Â·
Al-Saghani Â· Al-Sijzi Â· AlÄ« ibn Ahmad al-NasawÄ« Â· Ali KuÅÃ§u Â· Avicenna
Â· BanÅ« MÅ«sÄ Â· Brethren of Purity Â· Hunayn ibn Ishaq Â· Ibn al-Banna al-
Marrakushi Â· Ibn al-Haytham Â· Ibn al-Shatir Â· Ibn Sahl Â· Ibn Tahir al-
Baghdadi Â· Ibn YahyÄ al-MaghribÄ« al-Samaw'al Â· Ibn Yunus Â· Ibrahim ibn
Sinan Â· JamshÄ«d al-KÄshÄ« Â· KamÄl al-DÄ«n al-FÄrisÄ« Â· Kushyar ibn
Labban Â· Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Â· Muhammad ibn JÄbir al-HarrÄnÄ« al-
BattÄnÄ« Â· Muhammad ibn MÅ«sÄ al-KhwÄrizmÄ« Â· Muhyi al-DÄ«n al-MaghribÄ«
Â· NasÄ«r al-DÄ«n al-TÅ«sÄ« Â· Omar KhayyÃ¡m Â· QÄá¸Ä« ZÄda al-RÅ«mÄ« Â·
Al-Khalili Â· Shams al-DÄ«n al-SamarqandÄ« Â· Sharaf al-DÄ«n al-TÅ«sÄ« Â·
Sinan ibn Thabit Â· Taqi al-Din Â· ThÄbit ibn Qurra Â· Ulugh Beg Â· Yusuf al-
Mu'taman ibn Hud  
Treatises

Almanac Â· Book of Fixed Stars Â· Book of Optics Â· De Gradibus Â·
Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Â· Tables of Toledo Â· Tabula Rogeriana
Â· The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing Â· The Book
of Healing Â· Zij Â· Zij-i Ilkhani Â· Zij-i-Sultani  
Centers

Al-Azhar University Â· Al-Mustansiriya University Â· House of Knowledge Â·
House of Wisdom Â· Istanbul observatory of Taqi al-Din Â· Madrasah Â· Maktab
Â· Maragheh observatory Â· University of Al-Karaouine  
Influences

Babylonian mathematics Â· Greek mathematics Â· Indian mathematics  
Influenced

Byzantine mathematics Â· European mathematics Â· Indian mathematics  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_Optics"

Categories: 11th-century books | 11th century in science | Optics | History of
Islamic science | Islamic mathematics | Islamic books | Arabic books

Hidden categories: Articles containing Arabic language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 10:45.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



