
# Adolf Hitler

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Hitler" redirects here. For other uses, see Hitler (disambiguation).

Semi-protected

<IMG>

This article may be too long to comfortably read and navigate. Please consider
splitting content into sub-articles and using this article for a summary of
the key points of the subject. (January 2009)  
Adolf Hitler  
Adolf Hitler  

Adolf Hitler in 1933  
* * *
FÃ¼hrer of Germany  
In office  
2 August 1934 â 30 April 1945  
Preceded by Paul von Hindenburg  
(as President)  
Succeeded by Karl DÃ¶nitz  
(as President)  
* * *
Reichskanzler (Chancellor) of Germany  
In office  
30 January 1933 â 30 April 1945  
Preceded by Kurt von Schleicher  
Succeeded by Joseph Goebbels  
* * *  
Born 20 April 1889  
Braunau am Inn, Austria-Hungary  
Died 30 April 1945 (aged 56)  
Berlin, Germany  
Nationality Austrian citizen until 1925[1] German citizen after 1932  
Political party National Socialist German Workers Party (NSDAP)  
Spouse Eva Braun  
(married on 29 April 1945)  
Occupation politician, artist  
Signature Adolf Hitler's signature  
Military service  
Allegiance Flag of German Empire German Empire  
Service/branch <IMG> Reichsheer  
Years of service 1914-1918  
Rank Gefreiter  
Unit 16th Bavarian Reserve Regiment  
Battles/wars World War I  
Awards Iron Cross First and Second Class  
Wound Badge  
The Holocaust  
Early elements  
Racial policy Â· Nazi eugenics Â· Nuremberg Laws Â· Euthanasia program Â·
Concentration camps (list)  
Jews  
Jews in Nazi Germany (1933â1939)  
Pogroms: Kristallnacht Â· Bucharest Â· Dorohoi Â· IaÅi Â· Kaunas Â· Jedwabne
Â· Lviv  
Ghettos: Åachwa Â· ÅÃ³dÅº Â· LwÃ³w Â· KrakÃ³w Â· Budapest Â· Theresienstadt
Â· Kovno Â· Vilna Â· Warsaw  
Einsatzgruppen: Babi Yar Â· Rumbula Â· Ponary Â· Odessa Â· Erntefest Â· Ninth
Fort  
Final Solution: Wannsee Â· Operation Reinhard Â· Holocaust trains  
Concentration camps:  
Auschwitz-Birkenau Â· BeÅÅ¼ec Â· CheÅmno Â· Majdanek Â· SobibÃ³r Â·
Treblinka Â· Bogdanovka Â· Jasenovac Â· Kaiserwald Â· Maly Trostenets Â·
Mauthausen Â· SajmiÅ¡te Â· Sachsenhausen Â· Uckermark

Resistance: Jewish partisans Â· Ghetto uprisings (Warsaw Â· BiaÅystok)  
End of World War II: Death marches Â· Berihah Â· Surviving Remnant  
Other victims  
Romani people Â· Homosexuals Â· Disabled individuals Â· Slavs in Eastern
Europe Â· Poles Â· Soviet POWs Â· Jehovah's Witnesses Â· Serbs  
Responsible parties  
Nazi Germany: Adolf Hitler Â· Heinrich Himmler Â· Ernst Kaltenbrunner Â·
Reinhard Heydrich Â· Adolf Eichmann Â· Rudolf HÃ¶Ã Â· Nazi Party Â·
Schutzstaffel Â· Gestapo Â· Sturmabteilung

Collaborators

Aftermath: Nuremberg Trials Â· Denazification Â· Reparations Agreement  
between Israel and West Germany  
Lists  
Survivors Â· Victims Â· Rescuers  
Resources  
The Destruction of the European Jews Functionalism versus intentionalism  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Adolf Hitler (20 April 1889 â 30 April 1945) was an Austrian-born German
politician and the leader of the National Socialist German Workers Party
(German: Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, abbreviated NSDAP),
popularly known as the Nazi Party. He was the ruler of Germany from 1933 to
1945, serving as chancellor from 1933 to 1945 and as head of state (FÃ¼hrer
und Reichskanzler) from 1934 to 1945. He was named by Time Magazine as one of
the 100 most influential people of the 20th century.[2]

A decorated veteran of World War I, Hitler joined the Nazi Party in 1920 and
became its leader in 1921. Following his imprisonment after a failed coup in
1923, he gained support by promoting nationalism, antisemitism and anti-
communism with charismatic oratory and propaganda. He was appointed chancellor
in 1933, and quickly established a totalitarian and fascist dictatorship.
Hitler pursued a foreign policy with the declared goal of seizing Lebensraum
("living space") for Germany, directing the resources of the state toward this
goal. His rebuilt Wehrmacht invaded Poland in 1939, leading to the outbreak of
World War II in Europe.[3]

Within three years, Germany and the Axis powers occupied most of Europe and
large parts of Africa, East and Southeast Asia and the Pacific Ocean. However,
the Allies gained the upper hand from 1942 onward and in 1945 Allied armies
invaded Germany from all sides. His forces committed numerous atrocities
during the war, including the systematic killing of as many as 17 million
civilians[4] including the genocide of an estimated six million Jews, known as
the Holocaust.

During the final days of the war in 1945, Hitler married his long-time
mistress Eva Braun. Less than two days later, the two committed suicide.[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Early years
    * 1.1 Childhood and heritage
      * 1.1.1 Childhood
      * 1.1.2 Heritage
    * 1.2 Early adulthood in Vienna and Munich
    * 1.3 World War I
  * 2 Entry into politics
    * 2.1 Beer Hall Putsch
    * 2.2 Mein Kampf
    * 2.3 Rebuilding of the party
  * 3 Rise to power
    * 3.1 BrÃ¼ning Administration
    * 3.2 Cabinets of Papen and Schleicher
    * 3.3 Appointment as Chancellor
    * 3.4 Reichstag fire and the March elections
    * 3.5 "Day of Potsdam" and the Enabling Act
    * 3.6 Removal of remaining limits
  * 4 Third Reich
    * 4.1 Economy and culture
    * 4.2 Rearmament and new alliances
    * 4.3 The Holocaust
  * 5 World War II
    * 5.1 Early diplomatic triumphs
      * 5.1.1 Alliance with Japan
      * 5.1.2 Austria and Czechoslovakia
    * 5.2 Start of the Second World War
    * 5.3 Path to defeat
    * 5.4 Defeat and death
  * 6 Legacy
  * 7 Religious beliefs
  * 8 Health and sexuality
    * 8.1 Health
    * 8.2 Sexuality
  * 9 Family
  * 10 Hitler in media
    * 10.1 Oratory and rallies
    * 10.2 Recorded in private conversation
    * 10.3 Patria picture disc
    * 10.4 Documentaries during the Third Reich
    * 10.5 Television
    * 10.6 Documentaries post Third Reich
    * 10.7 Dramatizations
  * 11 See also
  * 12 Notes
  * 13 References
  * 14 External links

  
## Early years

<IMG>

It has been suggested that this section be split into a new article. (Discuss)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Adolf Hitler as an infant.

### Childhood and heritage

#### Childhood

Adolf Hitler was born at the Gasthof zum Pommer, an inn in Braunau am Inn,
Austria-Hungary, on 20 April 1889,[6] the fourth child of six.[7] His father,
Alois Hitler (1837â1903), was a customs official. His mother, Klara PÃ¶lzl
(1860â1907), was Alois' third wife. She was also his cousin,[8] so a papal
dispensation was obtained for the marriage. Of Alois and Klara's six children,
only Adolf and his sister Paula, seven years his junior, reached adulthood.[9]
Hitler's father also had a son, Alois, Jr., and a daughter, Angela, by his
second wife.[9]

Hitler had a troubled childhood, as his father was violent to him and violent
towards his mother. Hitler himself said that, as a boy, he was often beaten by
his father. Years later, he told his secretary: "I then resolved never again
to cry when my father whipped me. A few days later I had the opportunity of
putting my will to the test. My mother, frightened, took refuge in front of
the door. As for me, I counted silently the blows of the stick which lashed my
rear end".[10] Some historians believe a history of family violence committed
by his father against his mother is indicated in a section of his book Mein
Kampf in which Hitler describes in vivid detail an anonymous example of family
violence committed by a husband against a wife. This along with beatings by
his father against him could explain Hitler's deep emotional attachment to his
mother while at the same time having deep resentment towards his father.

Hitler's family moved often, from Braunau am Inn to Passau, Lambach, Leonding,
and Linz. The young Hitler was a good student in elementary school. But in the
sixth grade, his first year of high school (Realschule) in Linz he failed and
had to repeat the grade. His teachers said that he had "no desire to work".
For one school year he was a student there at the same time as Ludwig
Wittgenstein, a 20th century philosopher. But although both boys were exactly
the same age, Hitler was placed two school years below Wittgenstein.[11] It is
a matter of controversy whether Hitler and Wittgenstein even knew of each
other, and if so whether either had any memory of the other.[12]

Hitler later said that his educational slump was a rebellion against his
father, who wanted the boy to follow him in a career as a customs official; he
wanted to become a painter instead. This explanation is further supported by
Hitler's later description of himself as a misunderstood artist. After Alois
died on 3 January 1903, Hitler's schoolwork did not improve. At age 16, Hitler
dropped out of high school without a diploma.

In Mein Kampf, Hitler attributed his conversion to German nationalism to a
time during his early teenage years when he read a book of his father's about
the Franco-Prussian War, which caused him to question why his father and other
German Austrians failed to fight for the Germans during the war.[13]

#### Heritage

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2008)  
Hitler's father, Alois Hitler, was an illegitimate child. For the first 39
years of his life he bore his mother's surname, Schicklgruber. In 1876, he
took the surname of his stepfather, Johann Georg Hiedler. The name was spelled
Hiedler, Huetler, Huettler and Hitler, and was probably regularized to Hitler
by a clerk. The origin of the name is either "one who lives in a hut"
(Standard German HÃ¼tte), "shepherd" (Standard German hÃ¼ten "to guard",
English heed), or is from the Slavic word Hidlar and Hidlarcek. (Regarding the
first two theories: some German dialects make little or no distinction between
the Ã¼-sound and the i-sound.)

Allied propaganda exploited Hitler's original family name during World War II.
Pamphlets bearing the phrase "Heil Schicklgruber" were airdropped over German
cities. He was legally born a Hitler, however, and was also related to Hiedler
via his maternal grandmother, Johanna Hiedler.

The name "Adolf" comes from Old High German for "noble wolf" (Adel=nobility +
wolf). Hence, one of Hitler's self-given nicknames was Wolf or Herr Wolf; he
began using this nickname in the early 1920s and was addressed by it only by
intimates (as "Uncle Wolf" by the Wagners) up until the fall of the Third
Reich.[14] The names of his various headquarters scattered throughout
continental Europe (Wolfsschanze in East Prussia, Wolfsschlucht in France,
Werwolf in Ukraine, etc.) reflect this. By his closest family and relatives,
Hitler was known as "Adi".

Hitler's paternal grandfather was most likely one of the brothers Johann Georg
Hiedler or Johann Nepomuk Hiedler. There were rumors that Hitler was one-
quarter Jewish and that his grandmother, Maria Schicklgruber, became pregnant
while working as a servant in a Jewish household. The implications of these
rumors were politically explosive for the proponent of a racist and
antisemitic ideology. Opponents tried to prove that Hitler had Jewish or Czech
ancestors. Although these rumors were never confirmed, for Hitler they were
reason enough to conceal his origins. According to Robert G. L. Waite in The
Psychopathic God: Adolf Hitler, Hitler made it illegal for German women to
work in Jewish households, and after the "Anschluss" (annexation) of Austria,
Hitler turned his father's hometown into an artillery practice area. Waite
says that Hitler's insecurities in this regard may have been more important
than whether Judaic ancestry could have been proven by his peers.

### Early adulthood in Vienna and Munich

From 1905 on, Hitler lived a bohemian life in Vienna on an orphan's pension
and support from his mother. He was rejected twice by the Academy of Fine Arts
Vienna (1907â1908), citing "unfitness for painting", and was told his
abilities lay instead in the field of architecture.[15] His memoirs reflect a
fascination with the subject:

> The purpose of my trip was to study the picture gallery in the Court Museum,
but I had eyes for scarcely anything but the Museum itself. From morning until
late at night, I ran from one object of interest to another, but it was always
the buildings which held my primary interest.[16]

Following the school rector's recommendation, he too became convinced this was
his path to pursue, yet he lacked the proper academic preparation for
architecture school:

> In a few days I myself knew that I should some day become an architect. To
be sure, it was an incredibly hard road; for the studies I had neglected out
of spite at the Realschule were sorely needed. One could not attend the
Academy's architectural school without having attended the building school at
the Technic, and the latter required a high-school degree. I had none of all
this. The fulfillment of my artistic dream seemed physically impossible.[16]

On 21 December 1907, Hitler's mother died of breast cancer at age 47. Ordered
by a court in Linz, Hitler gave his share of the orphans' benefits to his
sister Paula. When he was 21, he inherited money from an aunt. He struggled as
a painter in Vienna, copying scenes from postcards and selling his paintings
to merchants and tourists. After being rejected a second time by the Academy
of Arts, Hitler ran out of money. In 1909, he lived in a shelter for the
homeless. By 1910, he had settled into a house for poor working men on
MeldemannstraÃe.

Hitler said he first became an anti-Semite in Vienna,[16] which had a large
Jewish community, including Orthodox Jews who had fled the pogroms in Russia.
But according to a childhood friend, August Kubizek, Hitler was a "confirmed
anti-Semite" before he left Linz, Austria.[16] Vienna at that time was a
hotbed of traditional religious prejudice and 19th century racism. Hitler may
have been influenced by the writings of the ideologist and anti-Semite Lanz
von Liebenfels and polemics from politicians such as Karl Lueger, founder of
the Christian Social Party and Mayor of Vienna, the composer Richard Wagner,
and Georg Ritter von SchÃ¶nerer, leader of the pan-Germanic Away from Rome!
movement. Hitler claims in Mein Kampf that his transition from opposing
antisemitism on religious grounds to supporting it on racial grounds came from
having seen an Orthodox Jew:

> There were very few Jews in Linz. In the course of centuries the Jews who
lived there had become Europeanised in external appearance and were so much
like other human beings that I even looked upon them as Germans. The reason
why I did not then perceive the absurdity of such an illusion was that the
only external mark which I recognized as distinguishing them from us was the
practice of their strange religion. As I thought that they were persecuted on
account of their faith my aversion to hearing remarks against them grew almost
into a feeling of abhorrence. I did not in the least suspect that there could
be such a thing as a systematic antisemitism. Once, when passing through the
inner City, I suddenly encountered a phenomenon in a long caftan and wearing
black side-locks. My first thought was: Is this a Jew? They certainly did not
have this appearance in Linz. I carefully watched the man stealthily and
cautiously but the longer I gazed at the strange countenance and examined it
feature by feature, the more the question shaped itself in my brain: Is this a
German?[16]

If this account is true, Hitler apparently did not act on his new belief. He
often was a guest for dinner in a noble Jewish house, and he interacted well
with Jewish merchants who tried to sell his paintings.[17]

Hitler may also have been influenced by Martin Luther's On the Jews and their
Lies. In Mein Kampf, Hitler refers to Martin Luther as a great warrior, a true
statesman, and a great reformer, alongside Wagner and Frederick the Great.[18]
Wilhelm RÃ¶pke, writing after the Holocaust, concluded that "without any
question, Lutheranism influenced the political, spiritual and social history
of Germany in a way that, after careful consideration of everything, can be
described only as fateful."[19][20]

Hitler claimed that Jews were enemies of the Aryan race. He held them
responsible for Austria's crisis. He also identified certain forms of
Socialism and Bolshevism, which had many Jewish leaders, as Jewish movements,
merging his antisemitism with anti-Marxism. Later, blaming Germany's military
defeat in World War I on the 1918 revolutions, he considered Jews the culprits
of Imperial Germany's downfall and subsequent economic problems as well.

Generalising from tumultuous scenes in the parliament of the multi-national
Austrian monarchy, he decided that the democratic parliamentary system was
unworkable. However, according to August Kubizek, his one-time roommate, he
was more interested in Wagner's operas than in his politics.

Hitler received the final part of his father's estate in May 1913 and moved to
Munich. He wrote in Mein Kampf that he had always longed to live in a "real"
German city. In Munich, he became more interested in architecture and, he
says, the writings of Houston Stewart Chamberlain. Moving to Munich also
helped him escape military service in Austria for a time, but the Munich
police (acting in cooperation with the Austrian authorities) eventually
arrested him. After a physical exam and a contrite plea, he was deemed unfit
for service and allowed to return to Munich. However, when Germany entered
World War I in August 1914, he petitioned King Ludwig III of Bavaria for
permission to serve in a Bavarian regiment. This request was granted, and
Adolf Hitler enlisted in the Bavarian army.[21]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A young Hitler (left) posing with other German soldiers.

### World War I

Hitler served in France and Belgium in the 16th Bavarian Reserve Regiment
(called Regiment List after its first commander), ending the war as a
Gefreiter (equivalent at the time to a lance corporal in the British and
private first class in the American armies). He was a runner, one of the most
dangerous jobs on the Western Front, and was often exposed to enemy fire.[22]
He participated in a number of major battles on the Western Front, including
the First Battle of Ypres, the Battle of the Somme, the Battle of Arras and
the Battle of Passchendaele.[23] The Battle of Ypres (October 1914), which
became known in Germany as the Kindermord bei Ypern (Massacre of the
Innocents) saw approximately 40,000 men (between a third and a half) of the
nine infantry present killed in twenty days, and Hitler's own company of 250
reduced to 42 by December. Biographer John Keegan has said that this
experience drove Hitler to become aloof and withdrawn for the remaining years
of war.[24]

Hitler was twice decorated for bravery. He received the Iron Cross, Second
Class, in 1914 and Iron Cross, First Class, in 1918, an honour rarely given to
a Gefreiter.[25] However, because the regimental staff thought Hitler lacked
leadership skills, he was never promoted to Unteroffizier (equivalent to a
British corporal). Other historians say that the reason he was not promoted is
that he was not a German citizen. His duties at regimental headquarters, while
often dangerous, gave Hitler time to pursue his artwork. He drew cartoons and
instructional drawings for an army newspaper. In 1916, he was wounded in
either the groin area[26] or the left thigh[27] during the Battle of the
Somme, but returned to the front in March 1917. He received the Wound Badge
later that year. Sebastian Haffner, referring to Hitler's experience at the
front, suggests he did have at least some understanding of the military.

On 15 October 1918, Hitler was admitted to a field hospital, temporarily
blinded by a mustard gas attack. The English psychologist David Lewis and
Bernhard Horstmann suggest the blindness may have been the result of a
conversion disorder (then known as hysteria).[28] Hitler said it was during
this experience that he became convinced the purpose of his life was to "save
Germany." Some scholars, notably Lucy Dawidowicz,[29] argue that an intention
to exterminate Europe's Jews was fully formed in Hitler's mind at this time,
though he probably had not thought through how it could be done. Most
historians think the decision was made in 1941, and some think it came as late
as 1942.

Two passages in Mein Kampf mention the use of poison gas:

> At the beginning of the Great War, or even during the War, if twelve or
fifteen thousand of these Jews who were corrupting the nation had been forced
to submit to poison-gas . . . then the millions of sacrifices made at the
front would not have been in vain.[30]

> These tactics are based on an accurate estimation of human weakness and must
lead to success, with almost mathematical certainty, unless the other side
also learns how to fight poison gas with poison gas. The weaker natures must
be told that here it is a case of to be or not to be.[16]

Hitler had long admired Germany, and during the war he had become a passionate
German patriot, although he did not become a German citizen until 1932. Hitler
found the war to be 'the greatest of all experiences' and afterwards he was
praised by a number of his commanding officers for his bravery.[31] He was
shocked by Germany's capitulation in November 1918 even while the German army
still held enemy territory.[32] Like many other German nationalists, Hitler
believed in the DolchstoÃlegende ("dagger-stab legend") which claimed that
the army, "undefeated in the field," had been "stabbed in the back" by
civilian leaders and Marxists back on the home front. These politicians were
later dubbed the November Criminals.

The Treaty of Versailles deprived Germany of various territories,
demilitarised the Rhineland and imposed other economically damaging sanctions.
The treaty re-created Poland, which even moderate Germans regarded as an
outrage. The treaty also blamed Germany for all the horrors of the war,
something which major historians like John Keegan now consider at least in
part to be victor's justice: most European nations in the run-up to World War
I had become increasingly militarised and were eager to fight. The culpability
of Germany was used as a basis to impose reparations on Germany (the amount
was repeatedly revised under the Dawes Plan, the Young Plan, and the Hoover
Moratorium). Germany in turn perceived the treaty and especially, Article 231
the paragraph on the German responsibility for the war as a humiliation. For
example, there was a nearly total demilitarisation of the armed forces,
allowing Germany only six battleships, no submarines, no air force, an army of
100,000 without conscription and no armoured vehicles. The treaty was an
important factor in both the social and political conditions encountered by
Hitler and his Nazis as they sought power. Hitler and his party used the
signing of the treaty by the "November Criminals" as a reason to build up
Germany so that it could never happen again. He also used the "November
Criminals" as scapegoats, although at the Paris peace conference, these
politicians had had very little choice in the matter.

## Entry into politics

Main article: Hitler's political beliefs

<IMG>

<IMG>

A copy of Adolf Hitler's forged German Workers' Party (DAP) membership card.
His actual membership number was 555 (the 55th member of the partyâthe 500
was added to make the group appear larger) but later the number was reduced to
create the impression that Hitler was one of the founding members.[33] Hitler
had wanted to create his own party, but was ordered by his superiors in the
Reichswehr to infiltrate an existing one instead.

After World War I, Hitler remained in the army and returned to Munich, where
heâin contrast to his later declarationsâattended the funeral march for
the murdered Bavarian prime minister Kurt Eisner.[34] After the suppression of
the Bavarian Soviet Republic, he took part in "national thinking" courses
organized by the Education and Propaganda Department (Dept Ib/P) of the
Bavarian Reichswehr Group, Headquarters 4 under Captain Karl Mayr. Scapegoats
were found in "international Jewry", communists, and politicians across the
party spectrum, especially the parties of the Weimar Coalition.

In July 1919, Hitler was appointed a Verbindungsmann (police spy) of an
AufklÃ¤rungskommando (Intelligence Commando) of the Reichswehr, both to
influence other soldiers and to infiltrate a small party, the German Workers'
Party (DAP). During his inspection of the party, Hitler was impressed with
founder Anton Drexler's anti-semitic, nationalist, anti-capitalist and anti-
Marxist ideas, which favoured a strong active government, a "non-Jewish"
version of socialism and mutual solidarity of all members of society. Drexler
was impressed with Hitler's oratory skills and invited him to join as the
party's 55th member. He was also made the seventh member of the executive
committee. Years later, he claimed to be the party's seventh overall member,
but it has been established that this claim is false.[citation needed]

Here Hitler also met Dietrich Eckart, one of the early founders of the party
and member of the occult Thule Society.[35] Eckart became Hitler's mentor,
exchanging ideas with him, teaching him how to dress and speak, and
introducing him to a wide range of people. Hitler thanked Eckart by paying
tribute to him in the second volume of Mein Kampf. To increase the party's
appeal, the party changed its name to the Nationalsozialistische Deutsche
Arbeiterpartei or National Socialist German Workers Party.

Hitler was discharged from the army in March 1920 and with his former
superiors' continued encouragement began participating full time in the
party's activities. By early 1921, Hitler was becoming highly effective at
speaking in front of large crowds. In February, Hitler spoke before a crowd of
nearly six thousand in Munich. To publicize the meeting, he sent out two
truckloads of party supporters to drive around with swastikas, cause a
commotion and throw out leaflets, their first use of this tactic. Hitler
gained notoriety outside of the party for his rowdy, polemic speeches against
the Treaty of Versailles, rival politicians (including monarchists,
nationalists and other non-internationalist socialists) and especially against
Marxists and Jews.

The NSDAP[36] was centered in Munich, a hotbed of German nationalists who
included Army officers determined to crush Marxism and undermine the Weimar
republic. Gradually they noticed Hitler and his growing movement as a suitable
vehicle for their goals. Hitler traveled to Berlin to visit nationalist groups
during the summer of 1921, and in his absence there was a revolt among the DAP
leadership in Munich.

The party was run by an executive committee whose original members considered
Hitler to be overbearing. They formed an alliance with a group of socialists
from Augsburg. Hitler rushed back to Munich and countered them by tendering
his resignation from the party on 11 July 1921. When they realized the loss of
Hitler would effectively mean the end of the party, he seized the moment and
announced he would return on the condition that he replace Drexler as party
chairman, with unlimited powers. Infuriated committee members (including
Drexler) held out at first. Meanwhile an anonymous pamphlet appeared entitled
Adolf Hitler: Is he a traitor?, attacking Hitler's lust for power and
criticizing the violent men around him. Hitler responded to its publication in
a Munich newspaper by suing for libel and later won a small settlement.

The executive committee of the NSDAP eventually backed down and Hitler's
demands were put to a vote of party members. Hitler received 543 votes for and
only one against. At the next gathering on 29 July 1921, Adolf Hitler was
introduced as FÃ¼hrer of the National Socialist German Workers' Party, marking
the first time this title was publicly used.

Hitler's beer hall oratory, attacking Jews, social democrats, liberals,
reactionary monarchists, capitalists and communists, began attracting
adherents. Early followers included Rudolf Hess, the former air force pilot
Hermann GÃ¶ring, and the army captain Ernst RÃ¶hm, who eventually became head
of the Nazis' paramilitary organization, the SA (Sturmabteilung, or "Storm
Division"), which protected meetings and attacked political opponents. Hitler
also assimilated independent groups, such as the Nuremberg-based Deutsche
Werkgemeinschaft, led by Julius Streicher, who became Gauleiter of Franconia.
Hitler also attracted the attention of local business interests, was accepted
into influential circles of Munich society, and became associated with wartime
General Erich Ludendorff during this time.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Drawing of Hitler, 1923.

### Beer Hall Putsch

Main article: Beer Hall Putsch

Encouraged by this early support, Hitler decided to use Ludendorff as a front
in an attempted coup later known as the Beer Hall Putsch (sometimes as the
Hitler Putsch or Munich Putsch). The Nazi Party had copied Italy's fascists in
appearance and also had adopted some programmatical points, and in 1923,
Hitler wanted to emulate Benito Mussolini's "March on Rome" by staging his own
"Campaign in Berlin". Hitler and Ludendorff obtained the clandestine support
of Gustav von Kahr, Bavaria's de facto ruler, along with leading figures in
the Reichswehr and the police. As political posters show, Ludendorff, Hitler
and the heads of the Bavarian police and military planned on forming a new
government.

On 8 November 1923, Hitler and the SA stormed a public meeting headed by Kahr
in the BÃ¼rgerbrÃ¤ukeller, a large beer hall in Munich. He declared that he
had set up a new government with Ludendorff and demanded, at gunpoint, the
support of Kahr and the local military establishment for the destruction of
the Berlin government.[37] Kahr withdrew his support and fled to join the
opposition to Hitler at the first opportunity.[38] The next day, when Hitler
and his followers marched from the beer hall to the Bavarian War Ministry to
overthrow the Bavarian government as a start to their "March on Berlin", the
police dispersed them. Sixteen NSDAP members were killed.[39]

Hitler fled to the home of Ernst Hanfstaengl and contemplated suicide. He was
soon arrested for high treason. Alfred Rosenberg became temporary leader of
the party. During Hitler's trial, he was given almost unlimited time to speak,
and his popularity soared as he voiced nationalistic sentiments in his defence
speech. A Munich personality became a nationally known figure. On 1 April
1924, Hitler was sentenced to five years' imprisonment at Landsberg Prison.
Hitler received favoured treatment from the guards and had much fan mail from
admirers. He was pardoned and released from jail on 20 December 1924, by order
of the Bavarian Supreme Court on 19 December, which issued its final rejection
of the state prosecutor's objections to Hitler's early release.[40] Including
time on remand, he had served little more than one year of his sentence.[41]

On 28 June 1925 Hitler wrote a letter from Uffing to the editor of The Nation
in New York City stating how long he had been in prison at "Sandberg a. S."
[sic] and how much his privileges had been revoked.[42]

### Mein Kampf

Main article: Mein Kampf

<IMG>

<IMG>

While at Landsberg he dictated most of the first volume of Mein Kampf (My
Struggle, originally entitled Four and a Half Years of Struggle against Lies,
Stupidity, and Cowardice) to his deputy Rudolf Hess.[41] The book, dedicated
to Thule Society member Dietrich Eckart, was an autobiography and an
exposition of his ideology. It was published in two volumes in 1925 and 1926,
selling about 240,000 copies between 1925 and 1934. By the end of the war,
about 10 million copies had been sold or distributed (newlyweds and soldiers
received free copies).

Hitler spent years dodging taxes on the royalties of his book and had
accumulated a tax debt of about 405,500 Reichsmarks (â¬6 million in today's
money) by the time he became chancellor (at which time his debt was
waived).[43][44]

The copyright of Mein Kampf in Europe is claimed by the Free State of Bavaria
and scheduled to end on 31 December 2015. Reproductions in Germany are
authorized only for scholarly purposes and in heavily commented form. The
situation is, however, unclear. Historian Werner Maser, in an interview with
Bild am Sonntag has stated that Peter Raubal, son of Hitler's nephew, Leo
Raubal, would have a strong legal case for winning the copyright from Bavaria
if he pursued it. Raubal has stated he wants no part of the rights to the
book, which could be worth millions of euros.[45] The uncertain status has led
to contested trials in Poland and Sweden. Mein Kampf, however, is published in
the U.S., as well as in other countries such as Turkey and Israel, by
publishers with various political positions.

### Rebuilding of the party

<IMG>

<IMG>

Adolf Hitler (left), standing up behind Hermann GÃ¶ring at a Nazi rally in
Nuremberg, 1928.

At the time of Hitler's release, the political situation in Germany had calmed
and the economy had improved, which hampered Hitler's opportunities for
agitation. Though the Hitler Putsch had given Hitler some national prominence,
his party's mainstay was still Munich.

The NSDAP and its organs were banned in Bavaria after the collapse of the
putsch. Hitler convinced Heinrich Held, Prime Minister of Bavaria, to lift the
ban, based on representations that the party would now only seek political
power through legal means. Even though the ban on the NSDAP was removed
effective 16 February 1925,[46] Hitler incurred a new ban on public speaking
as a result of an inflammatory speech. Since Hitler was banned from public
speeches, he appointed Gregor Strasser, who in 1924 had been elected to the
Reichstag, as Reichsorganisationsleiter, authorizing him to organize the party
in northern Germany. Strasser, joined by his younger brother Otto and Joseph
Goebbels, steered an increasingly independent course, emphasizing the
socialist element in the party's programme. The Arbeitsgemeinschaft der
Gauleiter Nord-West became an internal opposition, threatening Hitler's
authority, but this faction was defeated at the Bamberg Conference in 1926,
during which Goebbels joined Hitler.

After this encounter, Hitler centralized the party even more and asserted the
FÃ¼hrerprinzip ("Leader principle") as the basic principle of party
organization. Leaders were not elected by their group but were rather
appointed by their superior and were answerable to them while demanding
unquestioning obedience from their inferiors. Consistent with Hitler's disdain
for democracy, all power and authority devolved from the top down.

A key element of Hitler's appeal was his ability to evoke a sense of offended
national pride caused by the Treaty of Versailles imposed on the defeated
German Empire by the Western Allies. Germany had lost economically important
territory in Europe along with its colonies and in admitting to sole
responsibility for the war had agreed to pay a huge reparations bill totaling
132 billion marks. Most Germans bitterly resented these terms, but early Nazi
attempts to gain support by blaming these humiliations on "international
Jewry" were not particularly successful with the electorate. The party learned
quickly, and soon a more subtle propaganda emerged, combining antisemitism
with an attack on the failures of the "Weimar system" and the parties
supporting it.

Having failed in overthrowing the Republic by a coup, Hitler pursued a
"strategy of legality": this meant formally adhering to the rules of the
Weimar Republic until he had legally gained power. He would then use the
institutions of the Weimar Republic to destroy it and establish himself as
dictator. Some party members, especially in the paramilitary SA, opposed this
strategy; RÃ¶hm and others ridiculed Hitler as "Adolphe LegalitÃ©".

## Rise to power

Main article: Hitler's rise to power

Nazi Party Election Results  
  
Date Votes Percentage Seats in Reichstag Background  
May 1924 1,918,300 6.5 32 Hitler in prison  
December 1924 907,300 3.0 14 Hitler is released from prison  
May 1928 810,100 2.6 12  
September 1930 6,409,600 18.3 107 After the financial crisis  
July 1932 13,745,800 37.4 230 After Hitler was candidate for presidency  
November 1932 11,737,000 33.1 196  
March 1933 17,277,000 43.9 288 During Hitler's term as Chancellor of Germany  
### BrÃ¼ning Administration

<IMG>

<IMG>

An NSDAP meeting in December, 1930, with Hitler in the centre

The political turning point for Hitler came when the Great Depression hit
Germany in 1930. The Weimar Republic had never been firmly rooted and was
openly opposed by right-wing conservatives (including monarchists), communists
and the Nazis. As the parties loyal to the democratic, parliamentary republic
found themselves unable to agree on counter-measures, their Grand Coalition
broke up and was replaced by a minority cabinet. The new Chancellor, Heinrich
BrÃ¼ning of the Roman Catholic Centre Party, lacking a majority in parliament,
had to implement his measures through the president's emergency decrees.
Tolerated by the majority of parties, this rule by decree would become the
norm over a series of unworkable parliaments and paved the way for
authoritarian forms of government.

The Reichstag's initial opposition to BrÃ¼ning's measures led to premature
elections in September 1930. The republican parties lost their majority and
their ability to resume the Grand Coalition, while the Nazis suddenly rose
from relative obscurity to win 18.3% of the vote along with 107 seats. In the
process, they jumped from the ninth-smallest party in the chamber to the
second largest.

In SeptemberâOctober 1930, Hitler appeared as a major defence witness at the
trial in Leipzig of two junior Reichswehr officers charged with membership of
the Nazi Party, which at that time was forbidden to Reichswehr personnel.[47]
The two officers, Lieutenants Richard Scheringer and Hans Ludin admitted quite
openly to Nazi Party membership, and used as their defence that the Nazi Party
membership should not be forbidden to those serving in the Reichswehr.[48]
When the Prosecution argued that the Nazi Party was a dangerous revolutionary
force, one of the defence lawyers, Hans Frank had Hitler brought to the stand
to prove that the Nazi Party was a law-abiding party.[49] During his
testimony, Hitler insisted that his party was determined to come to power
legally, that the phrase "National Revolution" was only to be interpreted
"politically", and that his Party was a friend, not an enemy of the
Reichswehr.[50] Hitler's testimony of 25 September 1930 won him many admirers
within the ranks of the officer corps.[51]

BrÃ¼ning's measures of budget consolidation and financial austerity brought
little economic improvement and were extremely unpopular. Under these
circumstances, Hitler appealed to the bulk of German farmers, war veterans and
the middle class, who had been hard-hit by both the inflation of the 1920s and
the unemployment of the Depression.

In September 1931, Hitler's niece Geli Raubal was found dead in her bedroom in
his Munich apartment (his half-sister Angela and her daughter Geli had been
with him in Munich since 1929), an apparent suicide. Geli, who was believed to
be in some sort of romantic relationship with Hitler, was 19 years younger
than he was and had used his gun. His niece's death is viewed as a source of
deep, lasting pain for him.[52]

In 1932, Hitler intended to run against the aging President Paul von
Hindenburg in the scheduled presidential elections. Though Hitler had left
Austria in 1913, he still had not acquired German citizenship and hence could
not run for public office. In February, however, the state government of
Brunswick, in which the Nazi Party participated, appointed Hitler to a minor
administrative post and also made him a citizen of Brunswick on 25 February
1932.[53] In those days, the states conferred citizenship, so this
automatically made Hitler a citizen of Germany and thus eligible to run for
president.

The new German citizen ran against Hindenburg, who was supported by a broad
range of reactionary nationalist, monarchist, Catholic, republican and even
social democratic parties. Also in the field was a Communist candidate and a
member of a fringe right-wing party. Hitler's campaign was called "Hitler
Ã¼ber Deutschland" (Hitler over Germany).[54] The name had a double meaning;
besides a reference to his dictatorial ambitions, it also referred to the fact
that he campaigned by aircraft.[54] This was a brand new political tactic that
allowed Hitler to speak in two cities in one day, which was practically
unheard of at the time. Hitler came in second on both rounds, attaining more
than 35% of the vote during the second one in April. Although he lost to
Hindenburg, the election established Hitler as a realistic alternative in
German politics.

### Cabinets of Papen and Schleicher

Hindenburg, influenced by the Camarilla, became increasingly estranged from
BrÃ¼ning and pushed his Chancellor to move the government in a decidedly
authoritarian and right-wing direction. This culminated, in May 1932, with the
resignation of the BrÃ¼ning cabinet.

Hindenburg appointed the nobleman Franz von Papen as Chancellor, heading a
"Cabinet of Barons". Papen was bent on authoritarian rule and, since in the
Reichstag only the conservative German National People's Party (DNVP)
supported his administration, he immediately called for new elections in July.
In these elections, the Nazis achieved their biggest success yet and won 230
seats, becoming the largest party in the Reichstag.

Knowing that it was not possible to form a stable government without Nazi
support, Papen tried to persuade Hitler to become Vice-Chancellor and enter a
new government with a parliamentary basis. Hitler, however, would settle for
nothing less than the chancellorship. He put further pressure on Papen by
entertaining parallel negotiations with the Centre Party, Papen's former
party, which was bent on bringing down the renegade Papen. In both
negotiations, Hitler demanded that he, as leader of the strongest party, must
be Chancellor, but Hindenburg consistently refused to appoint the "Bohemian
lance corporal" to the chancellorship.

After a vote of no-confidence in the Papen government, supported by 84% of the
deputies, the new Reichstag was dissolved, and new elections were called in
November. This time, the Nazis lost some seats but still remained the largest
party in the Reichstag, with 33.1% of the vote.

After Papen failed to secure a majority, he proposed to dissolve the
parliament again along with an indefinite postponement of elections.
Hindenburg at first accepted this, but after General Kurt von Schleicher and
the military withdrew their support, Hindenburg instead dismissed Papen and
appointed Schleicher, who promised he could secure a majority government by
negotiations with the Social Democrats, the trade unions, and dissidents from
the Nazi Party under Gregor Strasser. In January 1933, however, Schleicher had
to admit failure in these efforts and asked Hindenburg for emergency powers
along with the same postponement of elections that he had opposed earlier, to
which the president reacted by dismissing Schleicher.

### Appointment as Chancellor

Meanwhile, Papen tried to get his revenge on Schleicher by working toward the
General's downfall, through forming an intrigue with the camarilla and Alfred
Hugenberg, media mogul and chairman of the DNVP. Also involved were Hjalmar
Schacht, Fritz Thyssen and other leading German businessmen. They financially
supported the Nazi Party, which had been brought to the brink of bankruptcy by
the cost of heavy campaigning. The businessmen also wrote letters to
Hindenburg, urging him to appoint Hitler as leader of a government
"independent from parliamentary parties" which could turn into a movement that
would "enrapture millions of people."[55]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Adolf Hitler, at a window of the Reich's Chancellory, receives an ovation from
supporters in his first day in office as Chancellor. (January 30, 1933)

Finally, the president reluctantly agreed to appoint Hitler Chancellor of a
coalition government formed by the NSDAP and DNVP. However, the Nazis were to
be contained by a framework of conservative cabinet ministers, most notably by
Papen as Vice-Chancellor and by Hugenberg as Minister of the Economy. The only
other Nazi besides Hitler to get a portfolio was Wilhelm Frick, who was given
the relatively powerless interior ministry (in Germany at the time, most
powers wielded by the interior minister in other countries were held by the
interior ministers of the states). As a concession to the Nazis, GÃ¶ring was
named minister without portfolio. While Papen intended to use Hitler as a
figurehead, the Nazis gained key positions. For instance, as part of the deal
in which Hitler became Chancellor, GÃ¶ring was named interior minister of
Prussiaâgiving him command of the largest police force in Germany.

On the morning of 30 January 1933, in Hindenburg's office, Adolf Hitler was
sworn in as Chancellor during what some observers later described as a brief
and simple ceremony. His first speech as Chancellor took place on February 10.
The Nazis' seizure of power subsequently became known as the Machtergreifung.
Hitler established the Reichssicherheitsdienst as his personal bodyguards.

### Reichstag fire and the March elections

Having become Chancellor, Hitler foiled all attempts by his opponents to gain
a majority in parliament. Because no single party could gain a majority,
Hitler persuaded President Hindenburg to dissolve the Reichstag again.
Elections were scheduled for early March, but on 27 February 1933, the
Reichstag building was set on fire.[56] Since a Dutch independent communist
was found in the building, the fire was blamed on a communist plot. The
government reacted with the Reichstag Fire Decree of 28 February which
suspended basic rights, including habeas corpus. Under the provisions of this
decree, the German Communist Party (KPD) and other groups were suppressed, and
Communist functionaries and deputies were arrested, put to flight, or
murdered.

Campaigning continued, with the Nazis making use of paramilitary violence,
anti-communist hysteria, and the government's resources for propaganda. On
election day, 6 March, the NSDAP increased its result to 43.9% of the vote,
remaining the largest party, but its victory was marred by its failure to
secure an absolute majority, necessitating maintaining a coalition with the
DNVP.[57]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Parade of SA troops past Hitler. Nuremberg, November 1935.

### "Day of Potsdam" and the Enabling Act

On 21 March, the new Reichstag was constituted with an opening ceremony held
at Potsdam's garrison church. This "Day of Potsdam" was staged to demonstrate
reconciliation and unity between the revolutionary Nazi movement and "Old
Prussia" with its elites and virtues. Hitler appeared in a tail coat and
humbly greeted the aged President Hindenburg.

Because of the Nazis' failure to obtain a majority on their own, Hitler's
government confronted the newly elected Reichstag with the Enabling Act that
would have vested the cabinet with legislative powers for a period of four
years. Though such a bill was not unprecedented, this act was different since
it allowed for deviations from the constitution. Since the bill required a
two-thirds majority in order to pass, the government needed the support of
other parties. The position of the Centre Party, the third largest party in
the Reichstag, turned out to be decisive: under the leadership of Ludwig Kaas,
the party decided to vote for the Enabling Act. It did so in return for the
government's oral guarantees regarding the Church's liberty, the concordats
signed by German states and the continued existence of the Centre Party.

On 23 March, the Reichstag assembled in a replacement building under extremely
turbulent circumstances. Some SA men served as guards within while large
groups outside the building shouted slogans and threats toward the arriving
deputies. Kaas announced that the Centre Party would support the bill with
"concerns put aside," while Social Democrat Otto Wels denounced the act in his
speech. At the end of the day, all parties except the Social Democrats voted
in favour of the bill. The Communists, as well as some Social Democrats, were
barred from attending. The Enabling Act, combined with the Reichstag Fire
Decree, transformed Hitler's government into a legal dictatorship.

### Removal of remaining limits

With this combination of legislative and executive power, Hitler's government
further suppressed the remaining political opposition. The Communist Party of
Germany and the Social Democratic Party (SPD) were banned, while all other
political parties were forced to dissolve themselves. Finally, on 14 July, the
Nazi Party was declared the only legal party in Germany. Labour unions were
merged with employers' federations into an organisation under Nazi control,
and the traditional autonomy of German state governments was abolished.

Hitler also used the SA paramilitary to push Hugenberg into resigning, and
proceeded to politically isolate Vice-Chancellor Papen. Because the SA's
demands for political and military power caused much anxiety among military
leaders, Hitler used allegations of a plot by the SA leader Ernst RÃ¶hm to
purge the SA's leadership during the Night of the Long Knives. Opponents
unconnected with the SA were also murdered, notably Gregor Strasser and former
Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher.[58]

President Paul von Hindenburg died on 2 August 1934. Rather than holding new
presidential elections, Hitler's cabinet passed a law proclaiming the
presidency dormant and transferred the role and powers of the head of state to
Hitler as FÃ¼hrer und Reichskanzler (leader and chancellor). As head of state,
Hitler now became supreme commander of the armed forces. When it came time for
the soldiers and sailors to swear the traditional loyalty oath, it had been
altered into an oath of personal loyalty to Hitler.[59] In a mid-August
plebiscite, these acts found the approval of 84.6% of the electorate.[60] This
action technically violated both the constitution and the Enabling Act. The
constitution had been amended in 1932 to make the president of the High Court
of Justice, not the chancellor, acting president until new elections could be
held. The Enabling Act specifically barred Hitler from taking any action that
tampered with the presidency. However, no one dared object. With this action,
Hitler effectively eliminated the last remedy by which he could be legally
dismissedâand with it, all checks and balances on his power.

In 1938, Hitler forced the resignation of his War Minister (formerly Defense
Minister), Werner von Blomberg, after evidence surfaced that Blomberg's new
wife had a criminal past. Prior to removing Blomberg, Hitler and his clique
removed Fritsch whom they denounced as a homosexual (John Toland: Adolf
Hitler). Hitler replaced the Ministry of War with the Oberkommando der
Wehrmacht (High Command of the Armed Forces, or OKW), headed by General
Wilhelm Keitel. More importantly, Hitler announced he was assuming personal
command of the armed forces. He took over Blomberg's other old post, that of
Commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces, for himself. He was already Supreme
Commander by virtue of holding the powers of the president. The next day, the
newspapers announced, "Strongest concentration of powers in FÃ¼hrer's hands!"
In effect, Hitler had neutered the last group that was still strong enough to
overthrow him.

## Third Reich

Main article: Nazi Germany

Having secured supreme political power, Hitler went on to gain public support
by convincing most Germans he was their savior from the economic Depression,
the Versailles treaty, communism, the "Judeo-Bolsheviks", and other
"undesirable" minorities. The Nazis eliminated opposition through a process
known as Gleichschaltung ("bringing into line").

### Economy and culture

Hitler oversaw one of the greatest expansions of industrial production and
civil improvement Germany had ever seen, mostly based on debt flotation and
expansion of the military. Nazi policies toward women strongly encouraged them
to stay at home to bear children and keep house. In a September 1934 speech to
the National Socialist Women's Organization, Adolf Hitler argued that for the
German woman her "world is her husband, her family, her children, and her
home." This policy was reinforced by bestowing the Cross of Honor of the
German Mother on women bearing four or more babies. The unemployment rate was
cut substantially, mostly through arms production and sending women home so
that men could take their jobs. Given this, claims that the German economy
achieved near full employment are at least partly artifacts of propaganda from
the era. Much of the financing for Hitler's reconstruction and rearmament came
from currency manipulation by Hjalmar Schacht, including the clouded credits
through the Mefo bills.

<IMG>

<IMG>

1934 Nuremberg rally

Hitler also oversaw one of the largest infrastructure-improvement campaigns in
German history, with the construction of dozens of dams, autobahns, railroads,
and other civil works. Hitler's policies emphasised the importance of family
life: men were the "breadwinners", while women's priorities were to lie in
bringing up children and in household work. This revitalising of industry and
infrastructure came at the expense of the overall standard of living, at least
for those not affected by the chronic unemployment of the later Weimar
Republic, since wages were slightly reduced in pre-World War II years, despite
a 25% increase in the cost of living.[61] Laborers and farmers, the
traditional voters of the NSDAP, however, saw an increase in their standard of
living.

Hitler's government sponsored architecture on an immense scale, with Albert
Speer becoming famous as the first architect of the Reich. While important as
an architect in implementing Hitler's classicist reinterpretation of German
culture, Speer proved much more effective as armaments minister during the
last years of World War II. In 1936, Berlin hosted the summer Olympic games,
which were opened by Hitler and choreographed to demonstrate Aryan superiority
over all other races, achieving mixed results.

Although Hitler made plans for a Breitspurbahn (broad gauge railroad network),
they were preempted by World War II. Had the railroad been built, its gauge
would have been three metres, even wider than the old Great Western Railway of
Britain.

Hitler contributed slightly to the design of the car that later became the
Volkswagen Beetle and charged Ferdinand Porsche with its design and
construction.[62] Production was also deferred because of the war.

Hitler considered Sparta to be the first National Socialist state, and praised
its early eugenics treatment of deformed children.[63]

An important historical debate about Hitlerâs economic policies concerns the
âmodernizationâ debate. Historians such as David Schoenbaum and Henry
Ashby Turner have argued that social and economic polices under Hitler were
modernization carried out in pursuit of anti-modern goals.[64] Other group of
historians centered around Rainer Zitelmann have contended that Hitler had a
delibrate strategy of pursuing a revolutionary modernization of German
society.[65]

### Rearmament and new alliances

Main articles: Axis Powers, Tripartite Treaty, and German re-armament

<IMG>

<IMG>

Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini during Hitler's visit to Venice from 14â16
June 1934.

In a meeting with his leading generals and admirals on 3 February 1933 Hitler
spoke of "conquest of Lebensraum in the East and its ruthless Germanisation"
as his ultimate foreign policy objectives.[66] In March 1933, the first major
statement of German foreign policy aims appeared with the memo submitted to
the German Cabinet by the State Secretary at the AuswÃ¤rtiges Amt (Foreign
Office), Prince Bernhard von BÃ¼low (not to be confused with his more famous
uncle, the former Chancellor Bernhard von BÃ¼low), which advocated Anschluss
with Austria, the restoration of the frontiers of 1914, the rejection of the
Part V of Versailles, the return of the former German colonies in Africa, and
a German zone of influence in Eastern Europe as goals for the future. Hitler
found the goals in BÃ¼low's memo to be too modest.[67] In March 1933, to
resolve the deadlock between the French demand for sÃ©curitÃ© (âsecurityâ)
and the German demand for gleichberechtigung (âequality of armamentsâ) at
the World Disarmament Conference in Geneva, Switzerland, the British Prime
Minister Ramsay MacDonald presented the compromise âMacDonald Planâ.
Hitler endorsed the âMacDonald Planâ, correctly guessing that nothing
would come of it, and that in the interval he could win some goodwill in
London by making his government appear moderate, and the French obstinate.[68]

In May 1933, Hitler met with Herbert von Dirksen, the German Ambassador in
Moscow. Dirksen advised the FÃ¼hrer that he was allowing relations with the
Soviet Union to deteriorate to a unacceptable extent, and advised to take
immediate steps to repair relations with the Soviets.[69] Much to Dirksen's
intense disappointment, Hitler informed that he wished for an anti-Soviet
understanding with Poland, which Dirksen protested implied recognition of the
German-Polish border, leading Hitler to state he was after much greater things
than merely overturning the Treaty of Versailles.[70]

In June 1933, Hitler was forced to disavow Alfred Hugenberg of the German
National People's Party, who while attending the London World Economic
Conference put forth a programme of colonial expansion in both Africa and
Eastern Europe, which created a major storm abroad.[71] Speaking to the
Burgermeister of Hamburg in 1933, Hitler commented that Germany required
several years of peace before she could be sufficiently rearmed enough to risk
a war, and until then a policy of caution was called for.[72] In his "peace
speeches" of 17 May 1933; 21 May 1935 and 7 March 1936 Hitler stressed his
supposed pacific goals and a willingness to work within the international
system.[73] In private, Hitler's plans were something less than pacific. At
the first meeting of his Cabinet in 1933, Hitler placed military spending
ahead of unemployment relief, and indeed was only prepared to spend money on
the latter if the former was satisfied first.[74] When the president of the
Reichsbank, the former Chancellor Dr. Hans Luther, offered the new government
the legal limit of 100 million Reichmarks to finance rearmament, Hitler found
the sum too low, and sacked Luther in March 1933 to replace him with Hjalmar
Schacht, who during the next five years was to advance 12 billion Reichmarks
worth of "Mefo-bills" to pay for rearmament.[75]

A major initiative in Hitler's foreign policy in his early years was to create
an alliance with Britain. In the 1920s, Hitler wrote that a future National
Socialist foreign policy goal was "the destruction of Russia with the help of
England."[76] In May 1933, Alfred Rosenberg in his capacity as head of the
Nazi Party's Aussenpolitisches Amt (Foreign Political Office) visited London
as part of a disastrous effort to win an alliance with Britain.[77] In October
1933, Hitler pulled Germany out of both the League of Nations and World
Disarmament Conference after his Foreign Minister Baron Konstantin von Neurath
made it appear to world public opinion that the French demand for sÃ©curitÃ©
was the principal stumbling block.[78]

In line with the views he advocated in Mein Kampf and Zweites Buch about the
necessity of building an Anglo-German alliance, Hitler, in a meeting in
November 1933 with the British Ambassador, Sir Eric Phipps, offered a scheme
in which Britain would support a 300,000-strong German Army in exchange for a
German âguaranteeâ of the British Empire.[79] In response, the British
stated a ten-year waiting period would be necessary before Britain would
support an increase in the size of the German Army.[79] A more successful
initiative in foreign policy occurred with relations with Poland. In spite of
intense opposition from the military and the AuswÃ¤rtiges Amt who preferred
closer ties with the Soviet Union, Hitler, in the fall of 1933 opened secret
talks with Poland that were to lead to the GermanâPolish Non-Aggression Pact
of January 1934.[78]

In February 1934, Hitler met with the British Lord Privy Seal, Sir Anthony
Eden, and hinted strongly that Germany already possessed an Air Force, which
had been forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles.[80] In the fall of 1934,
Hitler was seriously concerned over the dangers of inflation damaging his
popularity.[81] In a secret speech given before his Cabinet on November 5,
1934, Hitler stated he had "given the working class his word that he would
allow no price increases. Wage-earners would accuse him of breaking his word
if he did not act against the rising prices. Revolutionary conditions among
the people would be the further consequence."[81]

Although a secret German armaments programme had been on-going since 1919, in
March 1935, Hitler rejected Part V of the Versailles treaty by publicly
announcing that the German army would be expanded to 600,000 men (six times
the number stipulated in the Treaty of Versailles), introducing an Air Force
(Luftwaffe) and increasing the size of the Navy (Kriegsmarine). Britain,
France, Italy and the League of Nations quickly condemned these actions.
However, after re-assurances from Hitler that Germany was only interested in
peace, no country took any action to stop this development and German re-
armament continued. Later in March 1935, Hitler held a series of meetings in
Berlin with the British Foreign Secretary Sir John Simon and Eden, during
which he successfully evaded British offers for German participation in a
regional security pact meant to serve as an Eastern European equivalent of the
Locarno pact while the two British ministers avoided taking up Hitler's offers
of alliance.[82] During his talks with Simon and Eden, Hitler first used what
he regarded as the brilliant colonial negotiating tactic, when Hitler parlayed
an offer from Simon to return to the League of Nations by demanding the return
of the former German colonies in Africa.[83]

Starting in April 1935, disenchantment with how the Third Reich had developed
in practice as opposed to what been promised led many in the Nazi Party,
especially the Alte KÃ¤mpfer (Old Fighters; i.e., those who joined the Party
before 1930, and who tended to be the most ardent anti-Semitics in the Party),
and the SA into lashing out against Germany's Jewish minority as a way of
expressing their frustrations against a group that the authorities would not
generally protect.[84] The rank and file of the Party were most unhappy that
two years into the Third Reich, and despite countless promises by Hitler prior
to 1933, no law had been passed banning marriage or sex between those Germans
belonging to the âAryanâ and Jewish âracesâ. A Gestapo report from the
spring of 1935 stated that the rank and file of the Nazi Party would "set in
motion by us from below," a solution to the "Jewish problem," "that the
government would then have to follow."[85] As a result, Nazi Party activists
and the SA started a major wave of assaults, vandalism and boycotts against
German Jews.[86]

On 18 June 1935, the Anglo-German Naval Agreement (A.G.N.A.) was signed in
London which allowed for increasing the allowed German tonnage up to 35% of
that of the British navy. Hitler called the signing of the A.G.N.A. "the
happiest day of his life" as he believed the agreement marked the beginning of
the Anglo-German alliance he had predicted in Mein Kampf.[87] This agreement
was made without consulting either France or Italy, directly undermined the
League of Nations and put the Treaty of Versailles on the path towards
irrelevance.[88] After the signing of the A.G.N.A., in June 1935 Hitler
ordered the next step in the creation of an Anglo-German alliance: taking all
the societies demanding the restoration of the former German African colonies
and coordinating (Gleichschaltung) them into a new Reich Colonial League
(Reichskolonialbund) which over the next few years waged an extremely
aggressive propaganda campaign for colonial restoration.[89] Hitler had no
real interest in the former German African colonies. In Mein Kampf, Hitler had
excoriated the Imperial German government for pursuing colonial expansion in
Africa prior to 1914 on the grounds that the natural area for Lebensraum was
Eastern Europe, not Africa.[90] It was Hitlerâs intention to use colonial
demands as a negotiating tactic that would see a German ârenunciationâ of
colonial claims in exchange for Britain making an alliance with the Reich on
German terms.[91]

In the summer of 1935, Hitler was informed that, between inflation and the
need to use foreign exchange to buy raw materials Germany lacked for
rearmament, there were only 5 million Reichmarks available for military
expenditure, and a pressing need for some 300,000 Reichmarks/day to prevent
food shortages.[92] In August 1935, Dr. Hjalmar Schacht advised Hitler that
the wave of anti-Semitic violence was interfering with the workings of the
economy, and hence rearmament.[93] Following Dr. Schachtâs complaints, plus
reports that the German public did not approve of the wave of anti-Semitic
violence, and that continuing police toleration of the violence was hurting
the regime's popularity with the wider public, Hitler ordered a stop to
"individual actions" against German Jews on 8 August 1935.[93] From Hitler's
perspective, it was imperative to bring in harsh new anti-Semitic laws as a
consolation prize for those Party members who were disappointed with Hitler's
halt order of 8 August, especially because Hitler had only reluctantly given
the halt order for pragmatic reasons, and his symapthies were with the Party
radicals.[93] The annual Nazi Party Rally held at Nuremberg in September 1935
was to feature the first session of the Reichstag held at that city since
1543. Hitler had planned to have the Reichstag pass a law making the Nazi
Swastika flag the flag of the German Reich, and a major speech in support of
the impending Italian aggression against Ethiopia.[94] Hitler felt that the
Italian aggression opened great opportunities for Germany. In August 1935,
Hitler told Goebbels his foreign policy vision as: "With England eternal
alliance. Good relationship with Poland . . . Expansion to the East. The
Baltic belongs to us . . . Conflicts Italy-Abyssinia-England, then Japan-
Russia imminent."[95]

At the last minute before the Nuremberg Party Rally was due to begin, the
German Foreign Minister Baron Konstantin von Neurath persuaded Hitler to
cancel his speech praising Italy for her willingness to commit aggression.
Neurath convinced Hitler that his speech was too provocative to public opinion
abroad as it contradicted the message of Hitlerâs âpeace speechesâ, thus
leaving Hitler with the sudden need to have something else to address the
first meeting of the Reichstag in Nuremberg since 1543, other than the Reich
Flag Law.[96] On 13 September 1935, Hitler hurriedly ordered two civil
servants, Dr. Bernhard LÃ¶sener and Franz Albrecht Medicus of the Interior
Ministry to fly to Nuremberg to start drafting anti-Semitic laws for Hitler to
present to the Reichstag for 15 September.[94] On the evening of 15 September,
Hitler presented two laws before the Reichstag banning sex and marriage
between âAryanâ and Jewish Germans, the employment of âAryanâ woman
under the age of 45 in Jewish households, and deprived ânon-Aryansâ of the
benefits of German citizenship.[97] The laws of September 1935 are generally
known as the Nuremberg Laws.

In October 1935, in order to prevent further food shortages and the
introduction of rationing, Hitler reluctantly ordered cuts in military
spending[98] In the spring of 1936 in response to requests from Richard
Walther DarrÃ©, Hitler ordered 60 million Reichmarks of foreign exchange to be
used to buy seed oil for German farmers, a decision that led to bitter
complaints from Dr. Schacht and the War Minister Field Marshal Werner von
Blomberg that it would be impossible to achieve rearmament as long as foreign
exchange was diverted to preventing food shortages[95] Given the economic
problems which was affecting his popularity by early 1936, Hitler felt the
pressing need for a foreign policy triumph as a way of distracting public
attention from the economy.[95]

In an interview with the French journalist Bertrand de Jouvenel in February
1936, Hitler appeared to disavow Mein Kampf by saying that parts of his book
were now out of date and he was not guided by them, though precisely which
parts were out of date was left unclear.[99] In March 1936, Hitler again
violated the Versailles treaty by reoccupying the demilitarized zone in the
Rhineland. When Britain and France did nothing, he grew bolder. In July 1936,
the Spanish Civil War began when the military, led by General Francisco
Franco, rebelled against the elected Popular Front government. After receiving
an appeal for help from General Franco in July 1936, Hitler sent troops to
support Franco, and Spain served as a testing ground for Germany's new forces
and their methods. At the same time, Hitler continued with his efforts to
create an Anglo-German alliance. In July 1936, he offered to Phipps a promise
that if Britain were to sign an alliance with the Reich, then Germany would
commit to sending twelve divisions to the Far East to protect British colonial
possessions there from a Japanese attack.[100] Hitler's offer was refused.

In August 1936, in response to a growing crisis in the German economy caused
by the strains of rearmament, Hitler issued the "Four-Year Plan Memorandum"
ordering Hermann GÃ¶ring to carry out the Four Year Plan to have the German
economy ready for war within the next four years.[101] During the 1936
economic crisis, the German government was divided into two factions, with one
(the so-called "free market" faction) centering around the Reichsbank
President Hjalmar Schacht and the former Price Commissioner Dr. Carl Friedrich
Goerdeler calling for decreased military spending and a turn away from
autarkic policies, and another faction around GÃ¶ring calling for the
opposite. Supporting the "free-market" faction were some of Germany's leading
business executives, most notably Hermann Duecher of AEG, Robert Bosch of
Robert Bosch GmbH, and Albert Voegeler of Vereinigte Stahlwerke AG.[102]
Hitler hesitated for the first half of 1936 before siding with the more
radical faction in his "Four Year Plan" memo of August.[103] Historians such
as Richard Overy have argued that the importance of the memo, which was
written personally by Hitler, can be gauged by the fact that Hitler, who had
something of a phobia about writing, hardly ever wrote anything down, which
indicates that Hitler had something especially important to say.[104] The
"Four-Year Plan Memorandum" predicated an imminent all-out, apocalyptic
struggle between "Judo-Bolshevism" and German National Socialism, which
necessitated a total effort at rearmament regardless of the economic
costs.[105] In the memo, Hitler wrote:

> Since the outbreak of the French Revolution, the world has been moving with
ever increasing speed toward a new conflict, the most extreme solution of
which is called Bolshevism, whose essence and aim, however, are solely the
elimination of those strata of mankind which have hitherto provided the
leadership and their replacement by worldwide Jewry. No state will be able to
withdraw or even remain at a distance from this historical conflict . . . It
is not the aim of this memorandum to prophesy the time when the untenable
situation in Europe will become an open crisis. I only want, in these lines,
to set down my conviction that this crisis cannot and will not fail to arrive
and that it is Germany's duty to secure her own existence by every means in
face of this catastrophe, and to protect herself against it, and that from
this compulsion there arises a series of conclusions relating to the most
important tasks that our people have ever been set. For a victory of
Bolshevism over Germany would not lead to a Versailles treaty, but to the
final destruction, indeed the annihilation of the German people . . . I
consider it necessary for the Reichstag to pass the following two laws: 1) A
law providing the death penalty for economic sabotage and 2) A law making the
whole of Jewry liable for all damage inflicted by individual specimens of this
community of criminals upon the German economy, and thus upon the German
people.[106]

Hitler called for Germany to have the world's "first army" in terms of
fighting power within the next four years and that "the extent of the military
development of our resources cannot be too large, nor its pace too swift"
(italics in the original) and the role of the economy was simply to support
"Germany's self-assertion and the extension of her Lebensraum."[107][108]
Hitler went on to write that given the magnitude of the coming struggle that
the concerns expressed by members of the "free market" faction like Schacht
and Goerdeler that the current level of military spending was bankrupting
Germany were irrelevant. Hitler wrote that: "However well balanced the general
pattern of a nation's life ought to be, there must at particular times be
certain disturbances of the balance at the expense of other less vital tasks.
If we do not succeed in bringing the German army as rapidly as possible to the
rank of premier army in the world . . . then Germany will be lost!"[102] and
"The nation does not live for the economy, for economic leaders, or for
economic or financial theories; on the contrary, it is finance and the
economy, economic leaders and theories, which all owe unqualified service in
this struggle for the self-assertion of our nation."[102] Documents such as
the Four Year Plan Memo have often used by right historians such as Henry
Ashby Turner and Karl Dietrich Bracher who argue for a âprimacy of
politicsâ approach (that Hitler was not subordinate to German business, but
rather the contrary was the case) against the âprimacy of economicsâ
approach championed by Marxist historians (that Hitler was a âagentâ of
and subordinate to German business).[109]

In August 1936, the freelance Nazi diplomat Joachim von Ribbentrop was
appointed German Ambassador to the Court of St. James. Before Ribbentrop left
to take up his post in October 1936, Hitler told him: âRibbentrop . . . get
Britain to join the Anti-Comintern Pact, that is what I want most of all. I
have sent you as the best man Iâve got. Do what you can . . . But if in
future all our efforts are still in vain, fair enough, then Iâm ready for
war as well. I would regret it very much, but if it has to be, there it is.
But I think it would be a short war and the moment it is over, I will then be
ready at any time to offer the British an honourable peace acceptable to both
sides. However, I would then demand that Britain join the Anti-Comintern Pact
or perhaps some other pact. But get on with it, Ribbentrop, you have the
trumps in your hand, play them well. Iâm ready at any time for an air pact
as well. Do your best. I will follow your efforts with interestâ.[110]

An Axis was declared between Germany and Italy by Count Galeazzo Ciano,
foreign minister of Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini on 25 October 1936. On
25 November of the same year, Germany concluded the Anti-Comintern Pact with
Japan. At the time of the signing of the Anti-Comintern Pact invitations were
sent out for Britain, China, Italy and Poland to adhere; of the invited powers
only the Italians were to sign the pact, in November 1937. To strengthen
relationship with Japan, Hitler met in 1937 in Nuremberg Prince Chichibu, a
brother of emperor Hirohito. However, the meeting with Prince Chichibu had
little consequence, as Hitler refused the Japanese request to halt German arms
shipments to China or withdraw the German officers serving with the Chinese in
the Second Sino-Japanese War. Both the military and the AuswÃ¤rtiges Amt
(Foreign Office) were strongly opposed to ending the informal German alliance
with China that existed since the 1910s, and pressured Hitler to avoid
offending the Chinese. The AuswÃ¤rtiges Amt and the military both argued to
Hitler that given the foreign exchange problems which afflicted German
rearmament, and the fact that various Sino-German economic agreements provided
Germany with raw materials that would otherwise use up precious foreign
exchange, it was folly to seek an alliance with Japan that would have the
inevitable result of ending the Sino-German alignment.

By the latter half of 1937, Hitler had abandoned his dream of an Anglo-German
alliance, blaming "inadequate" British leadership for turning down his offers
of an alliance.[111] In a talk with the League of Nations High Commissioner
for the Free City of Danzig, the Swiss diplomat Carl Jacob Burckhardt in
September 1937, Hitler protested what he regarded as British interference in
the "German sphere" in Europe, though in the same talk, Hitler made clear his
view of Britain as an ideal ally, which for pure selfishness was blocking
German plans.[111]

Hitler had suffered severely from stomach pains and eczema in 1936â37,
leading to his remark to the Nazi Party's propaganda leadership in October
1937 that because both parents died early in their lives, he would probably
follow suit, leaving him with only a few years to obtain the necessary
Lebensraum.[112][113] About the same time, Dr. Goebbels noted in his diary
Hitler now wished to see the "Great Germanic Reich" he envisioned in his own
lifetime rather than leaving the work of building the "Great Germanic Reich"
to his successors.[114]

On 5 November 1937, at the Reich Chancellory, Adolf Hitler held a secret
meeting with the War and Foreign Ministers plus the three service chiefs,
recorded in the Hossbach Memorandum and stated his intentions for acquiring
"living space" Lebensraum for the German people. He also ordered them to make
plans for war in the east no later than 1943 in order to acquire Lebensraum.
Hitler stated the conference minutes were to be regarded as his "political
testament" in the event of his death.[115] In the memo, Hitler was recorded as
saying that such a state of crisis had been reached in the German economy that
the only way of stopping a severe decline in living standards in Germany was
to embark sometime in the near-future on a policy of aggression by seizing
Austria and Czechoslovakia.[116][117] Moreover, Hitler stated that the arms
race meant that time for action had to occur before Britain and France
obtained a permanent lead in the arms race.[116] A striking change in the
Hossbach Memo was Hitlerâs changed view of Britain from the prospective ally
of 1928 in the Zweites Buch to the "hate-inspired antagonist" of 1937 in the
Hossbach memo.[118] The historian Klaus Hildebrand described the memo as the
start of an "ambivalent course" towards Britain while the late historian
Andreas Hillgruber argued that Hitler was embarking on expansion "without
Britain," preferably "with Britain," but if necessary "against
Britain."[91][119]

Hitler's intentions outlined in the Hossbach memorandum led to strong protests
from the Foreign Minister, Baron Konstantin von Neurath, the War Minister
Field Marshal Werner von Blomberg and the Army Commander General Werner von
Fritsch that any German aggression in Eastern Europe was bound to trigger a
war with France because of the French alliance system in Eastern Europe, the
so-called cordon sanitaire and if a Franco-German war broke out, then Britain
was almost certain to intervene rather than risk the chance of a French
defeat.[120] The aggression against Austria and Czechoslovakia were intended
to be the first of a series of localized wars in Eastern Europe that would
secure Germanyâs position in Europe before the final showdown with Britain
and France. Fritsch, Blomberg and Neurath all argue that Hitler was pursuing
an extremely high risk strategy of localized wars in Eastern Europe that was
most likely to cause a general war before Germany was ready for such a
conflict, and advised Hitler to wait until Germany had more time to rearm.
Neurath, Blomberg and Fritsch had no moral objections to German aggression,
but rather based their opposition on the question of timingâdetermining the
best time for aggression.[120]

Late in November 1937, Hitler received as his guest the British Lord Privy
Seal, Lord Halifax who was visiting Germany ostensibly as part of a hunting
trip. Speaking of changes to Germany's frontiers, Halifax told Hitler that:
"All other questions fall into the category of possible alterations in the
European order which might be destined to come about with the passage of time.
Amongst these questions were Danzig, Austria and Czechoslovakia. England was
interested to see that any alterations should come through the course of
peaceful evolution and that the methods should be avoided which might cause
far-reaching disturbances."[121] Significantly, Halifax made clear in his
statements to Hitler, though whether Hitler appreciated the significance of
this or not is unclear, that any possible territorial changes had to be
accomplished peacefully, and that though Britain had no security commitments
in Eastern Europe beyond the Covenant of the League of Nations, that Britain
would not tolerate territorial changes via war.[122] Hitler seems to have
misunderstood Halifax's remarks as confirming his conviction that Britain
would just stand aside while he pursued his strategy of limited wars in
Eastern Europe.

Hitler was most unhappy with the criticism of his intentions expressed by
Neurath, Blomberg, and Fritsch in the Hossbach Memo, and in early 1938
asserted his control of the military-foreign policy apparatus through the
Blomberg-Fritsch Affair, the abolition of the War Ministry and its replacement
by the OKW, and by sacking Neurath as Foreign Minister on 4 February 1938,
assuming the rank, role and tile of the Oberster Befehlshaber der
Wehrmacht.[123] The British economic historian Richard Overy commented that
the establishment of the OKW in February 1938 was a clear sign of what
Hitler's intentions were since supreme headquarters organizations such as the
OKW are normally set up during wartime, not peacetime.[124] The Official
German history of World War II has argued that from early 1938 onwards, Hitler
was not carrying out a foreign policy that had carried a high risk of war, but
was carrying out a foreign policy aiming at war.[125]

### The Holocaust

Main article: The Holocaust

<IMG>

<IMG>

"Selection" on the Judenrampe, Auschwitz, May/June 1944. To be sent to the
right meant slave labor; to the left, the gas chambers. This image shows the
arrival of Hungarian Jews from Carpatho-Ruthenia, many of them from the
Berehov ghetto. It was taken by Ernst Hofmann or Bernhard Walter of the SS.
Courtesy of Yad Vashem.[126]

One of the foundations of Hitler's social policies was the concept of racial
hygiene. It was based on the ideas of Arthur de Gobineau, a French count,
eugenics, a pseudo-science that advocated racial purity, and social Darwinism.
Applied to human beings, "survival of the fittest" was interpreted as
requiring racial purity and killing off "life unworthy of life." The first
victims were children with physical and developmental disabilities; those
killings occurred in a programme dubbed Action T4.[127] After a public outcry,
Hitler made a show of ending this program, but the killings in fact continued
(see Nazi eugenics).

Between 1939 and 1945, the SS, assisted by collaborationist governments and
recruits from occupied countries, systematically killed somewhere between 11
and 14 million people, including about six million Jews,[128][129] in
concentration camps, ghettos and mass executions, or through less systematic
methods elsewhere. In addition to those gassed to death, many also died as a
result of starvation and disease while working as slave labourers (sometimes
benefiting private German companies). Along with Jews, non-Jewish Poles (over
three million), communists or political opponents, members of resistance
groups, homosexuals, Roma, the physically handicapped and mentally retarded,
Soviet prisoners of war (possibly as many as three million), Jehovah's
Witnesses, Adventists and Neopagans, trade unionists, and psychiatric patients
were killed. One of the biggest centres of mass-killing was the extermination
camp complex of Auschwitz-Birkenau. Hitler never visited the concentration
camps and did not speak publicly about the killing in precise terms.

The Holocaust (the EndlÃ¶sung der jÃ¼dischen Frage or "Final Solution of the
Jewish Question") was planned and ordered by leading Nazis, with Heinrich
Himmler playing a key role. While no specific order from Hitler authorizing
the mass killing has surfaced, there is documentation showing that he approved
the Einsatzgruppen, killing squads that followed the German army through
Poland and Russia, and that he was kept well informed about their activities.
The evidence also suggests that in the fall of 1941 Himmler and Hitler decided
upon mass extermination by gassing. During interrogations by Soviet
intelligence officers declassified over fifty years later, Hitler's valet
Heinz Linge and his military aide Otto Gunsche said Hitler had "pored over the
first blueprints of gas chambers." Also his private secretary, Traudl Junge,
testified that Hitler knew all about the death camps.

To make for smoother cooperation in the implementation of this "Final
Solution", the Wannsee conference was held near Berlin on 20 January 1942,
with fifteen senior officials participating, led by Reinhard Heydrich and
Adolf Eichmann. The records of this meeting provide the clearest evidence of
planning for the Holocaust. On 22 February, Hitler was recorded saying to his
associates, "we shall regain our health only by eliminating the Jews".

## World War II

Main article: World War II

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hitler and Benito Mussolini in Munich, 1940

### Early diplomatic triumphs

#### Alliance with Japan

In February 1938, Hitler finally ended the dilemma that had plagued German Far
Eastern policy, namely whether to continue the informal Sino-German alliance
that existed with China since the 1910s or to create a new alliance with
Japan. The military at the time strongly favored continuing Germany's alliance
with China. China had the support of Foreign Minister Konstantin von Neurath
and War Minister Werner von Blomberg, the so called "China Lobby" who tried to
steer German foreign policy away from war in Europe.[130] Both men, however,
were sacked by Hitler in early 1938. Upon the advice of Hitler's newly
appointed Foreign Minister, the strongly pro-Japanese Joachim von Ribbentrop,
Hitler chose to end the alliance with China as the price of gaining an
alignment with the more modern and powerful Japan. In an address to the
Reichstag, Hitler announced German recognition of Manchukuo, the Japanese-
occupied puppet state in Manchuria, and renounced the German claims to the
former colonies in the Pacific held by Japan.[131] Hitler ordered an end to
arm shipments to China, and ordered the recall of all the German officers
attached to the Chinese Army.[131] In retaliation for ending German support to
China in the war against Japan, Chinese Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek canceled
all of the Sino-German economic agreements, which deprived the Germans of raw
materials such as tungsten that the Chinese had previously provided. The
ending of the Sino-German alignment increased the problems of German
rearmament as the Germans were now forced to use their limited supply of
foreign exchange to buy raw materials on the open market.

#### Austria and Czechoslovakia

In March 1938, Hitler pressured Austria into unification with Germany (the
Anschluss) and made a triumphant entry into Vienna on 14 March.[132][133]
Next, he intensified a crisis over the German-speaking Sudetenland districts
of Czechoslovakia.[134]

On 3 March 1938, the British Ambassador Sir Neville Henderson met with Hitler
and presented on behalf of his government a proposal for an international
consortium to rule much of Africa (in which Germany would be assigned a
leading role) in exchange for a German promise never to resort to war to
change the frontiers.[135] Hitler, who was more interested in Lebensraum in
Eastern Europe then in participating in international consortiums, rejected
the British offer, using as his excuse that he wanted the former German
African colonies returned to the Reich, not an international consortium
running Central Africa. Moreover, Hitler argued that it was totally outrageous
on Britainâs part to impose conditions on German conduct in Europe as the
price for territory in Africa.[136] Hitler ended the conversation by telling
Henderson he would rather wait twenty years for the return of the former
colonies than accept British conditions for avoiding war.[136][137]

On 28 to 29 March 1938, Hitler held a series of secret meetings in Berlin with
Konrad Henlein of the Sudeten Heimfront (Home Front), the largest of the
ethnic German parties of the Sudetenland. During the Hitler-Henlein meetings,
it was agreed that Henlein would provide the pretext for German aggression
against Czechoslovakia by making demands on Prague for increased autonomy for
Sudeten Germans that Prague could never be reasonably expected to fulfill. In
April 1938, Henlein told the foreign minister of Hungary that âwhatever the
Czech government might offer, he would always raise still higher demands...he
wanted to sabotage an understanding by all means because this was the only
method to blow up Czechoslovakia quicklyâ.[138] In private, Hitler
considered the Sudeten issue unimportant; his real intentions being to use the
Sudeten question as the justification both at home and abroad for a war of
aggression to destroy Czechoslovakia, under the grounds of self-determination,
and Pragueâs refusal to meet Henleinâs demands.[139] Hitlerâs plans
called for a massive military build-up along the Czechoslovak border,
relentless propaganda attacks about the supposed ill treatment of the
Sudetenlanders, and finally, âincidentsâ between Heimfront activists and
the Czechoslovak authorities to justify an invasion that would swiftly destroy
Czechoslovakia in a few days campaign before other powers could act.[140]
Since Hitler wished to have the fall harvest brought in as much as possible,
and to complete the so-called âWest Wallâ to guard the Rhineland, the date
for the invasion was chosen for late September or early October 1938.[141]

In April 1938, Hitler ordered the OKW to start preparing plans for Fall GrÃ¼n
(Case Green), the codename for an invasion of Czechoslovakia.[142] Further
increasing the tension in Europe was the May Crisis of 19â22 May 1938. The
May Crisis of 1938 was a false alarm caused by rumors that Czechoslovakia
would be invaded the weekend of the municipal elections in that country,
erroneous reports of major German troop movements along the Czechoslovak
border just prior to the elections, the killing of two ethnic Germans by the
Czechoslovak police, and Ribbentrop's highly bellicose remarks to Henderson
when the latter asked the former if an invasion was indeed scheduled for the
weekend, which led to a partial Czechoslovak mobilization and firm warnings
from London against a German move against Czechoslovakia before it was
realized that no invasion was intended for that weekend.[143] Through no
invasion had been planned for May 1938, it was believed in London that such a
course of action was indeed being considered in Berlin, leading to two
warnings on 21 May and 22 May that the United Kingdom would go to war with
Germany if France became involved in a war with Germany.[144] Hitler, for his
part, was to use the words of an aide, highly âfuriousâ with the
perception that he had been forced to back down by the Czechoslovak
mobilization, and warnings from London and Paris, when he had in fact had been
planning nothing for that weekend.[145] Though plans had already been drafted
in April 1938 for an invasion of Czechoslovakia in the near future, the May
Crisis and the perception of a diplomatic defeat further reinforced Hitler in
his chosen course. The May Crisis seemed to have had the effect of convincing
Hitler that expansion "without Britain" was not possible, and expansion
"against Britain" was the only viable course.[146] In the immediate aftermath
of the May crisis, Hitler ordered an acceleration of German naval building
beyond the limits of the A.G.N.A., and in the "Heye memorandum", drawn at
Hitler's orders, envisaged the Royal Navy for the first time as the principle
opponent of the Kriegsmarine.[147]

At the conference of 28 May 1938, Hitler declared that it was his
"unalterable" decision to "smash Czechoslovakia" by 1 October of the same
year, which was explained as securing the eastern flank "for advancing against
the West, England and France.[148] At the same conference, Hitler expressed
his belief that Britain would not risk a war until British rearmament was
complete, which Hitler felt would be around 1941â42, and Germany should in a
series of wars eliminate France and her allies in Europe in the interval in
the years 1938â41 while German rearmament was still ahead.[148] Hitler's
determination to go through with Fall GrÃ¼n in 1938 provoked a major crisis in
the German command structure.[149] The Chief of the General Staff, General
Ludwig Beck protested in a lengthy series of memos that Fall GrÃ¼n would start
a world war that Germany would lose, and urged Hitler to put off the projected
war.[149] Hitler called Beck's arguments against war "kindische
KrÃ¤fteberechnugen" ("childish calculations").[150]

Starting in August 1938, information reached London that Germany was beginning
to mobilize reservists, together with information leaked by anti-war elements
in the German military that the war was scheduled for sometime in
September.[151] Finally, as a result of intense French, and especially British
diplomatic pressure, President Edvard BeneÅ¡ unveiled on 5 September 1938, the
âFourth Planâ for constitutional reorganization of his country, which
granted most of the demands for Sudeten autonomy made by Henlein in his
Karlsbad speech of April 1938, and threatened to deprive the Germans of their
pretext for aggression.[152] Henleinâs Heimfront promptly responded to the
offer of âFourth Planâ by having a series of violent crashes with the
Czechoslovak police, culminating in major clashes in mid-September that led to
the declaration of martial law in certain Sudeten districts.[153][154] In a
response to the threatening situation, in late August 1938, the British Prime
Minister Neville Chamberlain had conceived of Plan Z, namely to fly to
Germany, meet Hitler, and then work out an agreement that could end the
crisis.[155][156] On 13 September 1938, Chamberlain offered to fly to Germany
to discuss a solution to the crisis. Chamberlain had decided to execute Plan Z
in response to erroneous information supplied by the German opposition that
the invasion was due to start any time after 18 September.[157] Though Hitler
was not happy with Chamberlainâs offer, he agreed to see the British Prime
Minister because to refuse Chamberlainâs offer would put the lie to his
repeated claims that he was a man of peace driven reluctantly to war because
of BeneÅ¡âs intractability.[158] In a summit at Berchtesgaden, Chamberlain
promised to pressure BeneÅ¡ into agreeing to Hitler's publicly stated demands
about allowing the Sudetenland to join Germany, in return for a reluctant
promise by Hitler to postpone any military action until Chamberlain had given
a chance to fulfill his promise.[159] Hitler had agreed to the postponement
out of the expectation that Chamberlain would fail to secure Pragueâs
consent to transferring the Sudetenland, and was, by all accounts, most
disappointed when Franco-British pressure secured just that.[160] The talks
between Chamberlain and Hitler in September 1938 were made difficult by their
innately differing concepts of what Europe should look like, with Hitler
aiming to use the Sudeten issue as a pretext for war and Chamberlain genuinely
striving for a peaceful solution.[161]

When Chamberlain returned to Germany on 22 September to present his peace plan
for the transfer of the Sudetenland at a summit with Hitler at Bad Godesberg,
the British delegation was most unpleasantly surprised to have Hitler reject
his own terms he had presented at Berchtesgaden as now unacceptable.[162] To
put an end to Chamberlainâs peace-making efforts once and for all, Hitler
demanded the Sudetenland be ceded to Germany no later then 28 September 1938
with no negotiations between Prague and Berlin and no international commission
to oversee the transfer; no plebiscites to held in the transferred districts
until after the transfer; and for good measure, that Germany would not forsake
war as an option until all the claims against Czechoslovakia by Poland and
Hungary had been satisfied.[163] The differing views between the two leaders
were best symbolized when Chamberlain was presented with Hitlerâs new
demands and protested at being presented with an ultimatum, leading Hitler in
turn to retort that because his document stating his new demands was entitled
âMemorandumâ, it could not possibly be an ultimatum.[164] On 25 September
1938 Britain rejected the Bad Godesberg ultimatum, and began preparations for
war.[165][166] To further underline the point, Sir Horace Wilson, the British
governmentâs Chief Industrial Advisor, and a close associate of Chamberlain
was dispatched to Berlin to inform Hitler that if the Germans attacked
Czechoslovakia, then France would honor her commitments as demanded by the
Franco-Czechoslovak alliance of 1924, and âthen England would feel honor
bound, to offer France assistanceâ.[167] Initially, determined to continue
with attack planned for 1 October 1938, sometime between 27 and 28 September,
Hitler changed his mind, and asked to take up a suggestion, of and through the
intercession of Mussolini, for a conference to be held in Munich with
Chamberlain, Mussolini, and the French Premier Ãdouard Daladier to discuss
the Czechoslovak situation.[168] Just what had caused Hitler to change his
attitude is not entirely clear, but it is likely that the combination of
Franco-British warnings, and especially the mobilization of the British fleet,
had finally convinced him of what the most likely result of Fall GrÃ¼n would
be; the minor nature of the alleged casus belli being the timetables for the
transfer made Hitler appear too much like the aggressor; the view from his
advisors that Germany was not prepared either militarily or economically for a
world war; warnings from the states that Hitler saw as his would-be allies in
the form of Italy, Japan, Poland and Hungary that they would not fight on
behalf of Germany; and very visible signs that the majority of Germans were
not enthusiastic about the prospect of war.[169][170][171] Moreover, Germany
lacked sufficient supplies of oil and other crucial raw materials (the plants
that would produce the synthetic oil for the German war effort were not in
operation yet), and was highly dependent upon imports from abroad.[172] The
Kriegsmarine reported that should war come with Britain, it could not break a
British blockade, and since Germany had hardly any oil stocks, Germany would
be defeated for no other reason than a shortage of oil.[173] The Economics
Ministry told Hitler that Germany had only 2.6 million tons of oil at hand,
and should war with Britain and France, would require 7.6 million tons of
oil.[174] Starting on 18 September 1938, the British refused to supply metals
to Germany, and on 24 September the Admiralty forbade British ships to sail to
Germany. The British detained the tanker Invershannon carrying 8,600 tons of
oil to Hamburg, which caused immediate economic pain in Germany.[175] Given
Germany's dependence on imported oil (80% of German oil in the 1930s came from
the New World), and the likelihood that a war with Britain would see a
blockade cutting Germany off from oil supplies, historians have argued that
Hitler's decision to see a peaceful end to call off Fall GrÃ¼n was due to
concerns about the oil problem.[172]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chamberlain, Daladier, Hitler and Mussolini at the Munich Conference

On 30 September 1938, a one-day conference was held in Munich attended by
Hitler, Chamberlain, Daladier and Mussolini that led to the Munich Agreement,
which gave to Hitler's ostensible demands by handing over the Sudetenland
districts to Germany.[176] Since London and Paris had already agreed to the
idea of a transfer of the disputed territory in mid-September, the Munich
Conference mostly comprised discussions in one day of talks on technical
questions about how the transfer of the Sudetenland would take place, and
featured the relatively minor concessions from Hitler that the transfer would
take place over a ten day period in October, overseen by an international
commission, and Germany would wait until Hungarian and Polish claims were
settled.[177] At the end of the conference, Chamberlain had Hitler sign a
declaration of Anglo-German friendship, to which Chamberlain attached great
importance and Hitler none at all.[178] Though Chamberlain was well-satisfied
with the Munich conference, leading to his infamous claim to have secured
âpeace in our timeâ, Hitler was privately furious about being
âcheatedâ out of the war he was desperate to have in 1938.[179][180] As a
result of the summit, Hitler was TIME magazine's Man of the Year for
1938.[181]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hitler enters the German populated Sudetenland region of Czechoslavakia in
October 1938 which was annexed to Germany proper due to the Munich agreement

<IMG>

<IMG>

Destroyed Jewish businesses in Magdeburg due to Kristallnacht.

British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain hailed this agreement as "peace in
our time", but by appeasing Hitler, Britain and France left Czechoslovakia to
Hitler's mercy.[176] Though Hitler professed happiness in public over the
achievement of his ostensible demands, in private he was determined to have a
war the next time around by ensuring that Germany's future demands would not
be met.[182] In Hitlerâs view, a British-brokered peace, though extremely
favorable to the ostensible German demands, was a diplomatic defeat which
proved that Britain needed to be ended as a power to allow him to pursue his
dreams of eastern expansion.[183][184] In the aftermath of Munich, Hitler felt
since Britain would not ally herself nor stand aside to facilitate Germanyâs
continental ambitions, it had become a major threat, and accordingly, Britain
replaced the Soviet Union in Hitlerâs mind as the main enemy of the Reich,
with German policies being accordingly reoriented.[185][186][187][188] Hitler
expressed his disappointment over the Munich Agreement in a speech on 9
October 1938 in SaarbrÃ¼cken when he lashed out against the Conservative anti-
appeasers Winston Churchill, Alfred Duff Cooper and Anthony Eden, whom Hitler
described as a warmongering anti-German fraction, who would attack Germany at
the first opportunity, and were likely to come to power at any moment.[189] In
the same speech, Hitler claimed âWe Germans will no longer endure such
governessy interference. Britain should mind her own business and worry about
her own troublesâ.[190] In November 1938, Hitler ordered a major anti-
British propaganda campaign to be launched with the British being loudly
abused for their "hypocrisy" in maintaining world-wide empire while seeking to
block the Germans from acquiring an empire of their own.[191] A particular
highlight in the anti-British propaganda was alleged British humans rights
abuses in dealing with the Arab uprising in the Palestine Mandate and in
India, and the "hyprocrisy" of British criticism of the November 1938
Kristallnacht event.[192] This marked a huge change from the earlier years of
the Third Reich, when the German media had portrayed the British Empire in
very favorable terms.[193] In November 1938, the Foreign Minister Joachim von
Ribbentrop was ordered to convert the Anti-Comintern Pact into an open anti-
British military alliance, as a prelude for a war against Britain and
France.[194] On 27 January 1939, Hitler approved the Z Plan, a five-year naval
expansion program which called for a Kriegsmarine of 10 battleships, four
aircraft carriers, three battle cruisers, 44 light cruisers, eight heavy
cruisers, 68 destroyers and 249 U-boats by 1944 that was intended to crush the
Royal Navy.[195] The importance of the Z Plan can be seen in Hitler's orders
that henceforward the Kriegsmarine was to go from third to one in allotment of
raw materials, money and skilled workers.[196] In the spring of 1939, the
Luftwaffe was ordered to start building a strategic bombing force that was
meant to level British cities.[197] Hitlerâs war plans against Britain
called for a joint Kriegsmarine-Luftwaffe offensive that was to stage "rapid
annihilating blows" against British cities and shipping with the expectation
that "The moment England is cut off from her supplies she is forced to
capitulate" as Hitler expected that the experience of living in a blockaded,
famine-stricken, bombed out island to be too much for the British public.[198]

In November 1938, in a secret speech to a group of German journalists, Hitler
noted that he had been forced to speak of peace as the goal in order to attain
the degree of rearmament "which were an essential prerequisite...for the next
step".[72] In the same speech, Hitler complained that his peace propaganda of
the last five years had been too successful, and it was time for the German
people to be subjected to war propaganda.[199] Hitler stated: "It is self-
evident that such peace propaganda conducted for a decade has its risky
aspect; because it can too easily induce people to come to the conclusion that
the present government is identical with the decision and with the intention
to keep peace under all circumstances", and instead called for new journalism
that "had to present certain foreign policy events in such a fashion that the
inner voice of the people itself slowly begins to shout out for the use of
force."[199] In later November 1938, Hitler expressed his frustration with his
more cautious advice he was receiving from some quarters[200] Hitler called
the economic expert Carl Friedrich Goerdeler, General Ludwig Beck, Dr. Hjalmar
Schacht, the diplomat Ulrich von Hassell, and the economist Rudolf Brinkmann
as âthe overbred intellectual circles" whom were trying to block him from
fulifilling his mission by their appeals to caution, and but for the fact that
he needed their skills "otherwise, perhaps we could someday exterminate them
or do something of this kind to them"[201]

In December 1938, the Chancellery of the FÃ¼hrer headed by Philipp Bouhler
received a letter concerning a severely physically and mentally disabled baby
girl named Sofia Knauer living in Leipzig.[202] At that time, there was a
furious rivalry existing between Bouhlerâs office, the office of the Reich
Chancellery led by Hans-Heinrich Lammers, the Presidential Chancellery of Otto
Meissner, the office of Hitlerâs adjutant Wilhelm BrÃ¼ckner and the Deputy
FÃ¼hrerâs office which was effectively headed by Martin Borman over control
over access to Hitler.[203] As part of a power play against his rivals,
Bouhler presented the letter concerning the disabled girl to Hitler, who
thanked Bouhler for bringing the matter to his attention and responded by
ordering his personal physician Dr. Karl Brandt to kill Knauer.[204] In
January 1939, Hitler ordered Bouhler and Dr. Brandt to henceforward have all
disabled infants born in Germany killed.[204] This was the origin of the
Action T4 program. Subsequently Dr. Brandt and Bouhler acting on their own
initiative, in the expectation of winning Hitlerâs favor, expanded the T4
program to killing, first, all physically and/or mentally disabled children in
Germany, and, second, all disabled adults.[205]

In late 1938 and early 1939, the continuing economic crisis caused by problems
of rearmament, especially the shortage of foreign hard currencies needed to
pay for raw materials Germany lacked together with reports from GÃ¶ring that
the Four Year Plan was hopelessly behind schedule forced Hitler in January
1939 to reluctantly order major defense cuts with the Wehrmacht having its
steel allocations cut by 30%, aluminum 47%, cement 25%, rubber 14% and copper
20%.[206] On 30 January 1939, Hitler made his "Export or die" speech calling
for a German economic offensive ("export battle", to use Hitler's term), to
increase German foreign exchange holdings to pay for raw materials such high-
grade iron needed for military materials.[206] The "Export or die" speech of
30 January 1939 is also known as Hitlerâs "Prophecy Speech". The name which
that speech is known comes from Hitlerâs "prophecy" issued towards the end
of the speech:

> "One thing I should like to say on this day which may be memorable for
others as well for us Germans: In the course of my life I have very often been
a prophet, and I usually been ridiculed for it. During the time of my struggle
for power it was in the first instance the Jewish race which only received my
prophecies with laughter when I said I would one day take over the leadership
of the State, and it that of the whole nation, and I that I would then among
many other things settle the Jewish problem. Their laughter was uproarious,
but I think that for some time now they have been laughing on the other side
of the face. Today I will be once more the prophet. If the international
Jewish financiers outside Europe should succeed in plunging the nations once
more into a world war, then the result will not be the bolsheviszation of the
earth, and thus the victory of Jewry, but the annihilation of the Jewish race
in Europe!"[207]

A significant historical debate has swung around the âProphecy Speechâ.
Historians who take an intentionist line such as Eberhard JÃ¤ckel have argued
that at minimum from the time of the âProphecy Speechâ onwards, Hitler was
committed to genocide of the Jews as his central goal.[208] Lucy Dawidowicz
and Gerald Fleming have argued that the "Prophecy Speech" was simply Hitler's
way of saying that once he started a world war, he would use that war as a
cover for his already pre-existing plans for genocide.[207] Functionalist
historians as Christopher Browning have dismissed this interpretation under
the grounds that if Hitler were serious with the intentions expressed in the
âProphecy Speechâ, then why the thirty-month âstay of executionâ
between the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, and the opening of the
first Vernichtungslager in late 1941.[209] In addition, Browning has pointed
to the existence of the Madagascar Plan of 1940â41 and various other schemes
as proof that there was no genocidal master plan.[209] In Browningâs
opinion, the "Prophecy Speech" was merely an manifestation of bravado on
Hitlerâs part, and had little connection with actual unfolding of anti-
Semitic policies.[209]

At least part of the reason why Hitler violated the Munich Agreement by
seizing the Czech half of Czechoslovakia in March 1939 was to obtain
Czechoslovak assets to help with the economic crisis.[210] Hitler ordered
Germany's army to enter Prague on 15 March 1939, and from Prague Castle
proclaimed Bohemia and Moravia a German protectorate.

### Start of the Second World War

As part of the anti-British course, it was deemed necessary by Hitler to have
either Poland a satellite state or otherwise neutralized. Hitler believed this
necessary on both strategic grounds as way of securing the Reichâs eastern
flank and on economic grounds as a way of evading the effects of a British
blockade.[211] Initially, the German hope was transform Poland into a
satellite state, but by March 1939 when the German demands had been rejected
by the Poles three times, which led Hitler to decide upon the destruction of
Poland as the main German foreign policy goal of 1939.[212] On April 3, 1939
Hitler ordered the military to start preparing for Fall Weiss (Case White),
the plan for a German invasion to be executed on 25 August 1939[212] In August
1939, Hitler spoke to his generals that his original plan for 1939 had to
â...establish a acceptable relationship with Poland in order to fight
against the Westâ but since the Poles would not co-operate in setting up an
âacceptable relationshipâ (i.e. becoming a German satellite), he believed
he had no other choice other than wiping Poland off the map.[213] The
historian Gerhard Weinberg has argued since Hitlerâs audience comprised men
who were all for the destruction of Poland (anti-Polish feelings were
traditionally very strong in the German Army), but rather less happy about the
prospect of war with Britain and France, if that was the price Germany had to
pay for the destruction of Poland, it is quite likely that Hitler was speaking
the truth on this occasion.[213] In his private discussions with his officials
in 1939, Hitler always described Britain as the main enemy that had to be
defeated, and in his view, Polandâs obliteration was the necessary prelude
to that goal by securing the eastern flank and helpfully adding to Germanyâs
Lebensraum.[214] Hitler was much offended by the British âguaranteeâ of
Polish independence issued on March 31, 1939, and told his associates that "I
shall brew them a devil's drink"[215] In a speech in Wilhelmshaven for the
launch of the Admiral Tirpitz battleship on April 1, 1939, Hitler threatened
to denounce the A.G.N.A if the British persisted with their "encirclement"
policy as represented by the "guarantee" of Polish independence.[216] As part
of the new course, in a speech before the Reichstag on April 28, 1939, Adolf
Hitler complaining of British âencirclement" of Germany, renounced both the
Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the GermanâPolish Non-Aggression Pact.

As a pretext for aggression against Poland, Hitler claimed the Free City of
Danzig and the right for âextra-territorialâ roads across the Polish
Corridor which Germany had unwillingly ceded under the Versailles treaty. For
Hitler, Danzig was just a pretext for aggression as the Sudetenland had been
intended to be in 1938, and throughout 1939, while highlighting the Danzig
issue as a grievance, the Germans always refused to engage in talks about the
matter.[217] A notable contradiction existed in Hitler's plans between the
long-term anti-British course, whose major instruments such as a vastly
expanded Kriegsmarine and Luftwaffe that would take several years to complete,
and Hitler's immediate foreign policy in 1939, which was likely to provoke a
general war by engaging in such actions as attacking Poland.[218][219]
Hitler's dilemma between his short-term and long-term goals was resolved by
Foreign Minister Ribbentrop who told Hitler that neither Britain nor France
would honor their commitments to Poland, and any German-Polish war would
accordingly be a limited regional war.[220][221] Ribbentrop based his
appraisal partly on an alleged statement made to him by the French Foreign
Minister Georges Bonnet in December 1938 that France now recognized Eastern
Europe as Germanyâs exclusive sphere of influence.[222] In addition,
Ribbentrop's status as the former Ambassador to London made him in Hitler's
eyes the leading Nazi British expert, and as a result, Ribbentrop's advice
that Britain would not honor her commitments to Poland carried much weight
with Hitler.[222] Ribbentrop only showed Hitler diplomatic cables that
supported his analysis.[223] In addition, the German Ambassador in London,
Herbert von Dirksen tended to send reports that supported Ribbentrop's
analysis such as a dispatch in August 1939 that reported Neville Chamberlain
knew âthe social structure of Britain, even the conception of the British
Empire, would not survive the chaos of even a victorious warâ, and so would
back down.[221] The extent that Hitler was influenced by Ribbentropâs advice
can be seen in Hitler's orders to the German military on 21 August 1939 for a
limited mobilization against Poland alone.[224] Hitler chose late August as
his date for Fall Weiss in order to limit disruption to German agricultural
production caused by mobilization.[225] The problems caused by the need to
begin a campaign in Poland in late August or early September in order to have
the campaign finished before the October rains arrived, and the need to have
sufficient time to concentrate German troops on the Polish border left Hitler
in a self-imposed situation in August 1939 where Soviet co-operation was
absolutely crucial if he were to have a war that year.[225]

The Munich agreement appeared to be sufficient to dispel most of the remaining
hold which the "collective security" idea may have had in Soviet circles,[226]
and, on 23 August 1939, Joseph Stalin accepted Hitler's proposal to conclude a
non-aggression pact (the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact), whose secret protocols
contained an agreement to partition Poland. A major historical debate about
the reasons for Hitlerâs foreign policy choices in 1939 concerns whether a
structural economic crisis drove Hitler into a âflight into warâ as
claimed by the Marxist historian Timothy Mason or whether Hitlerâs actions
were more influenced by non-economic factors as claimed by the economic
historian Richard Overy.[227] Historians such as William Carr, Gerhard
Weinberg and Ian Kershaw have argued that a non-economic reason for Hitlerâs
rush to war was due to Hitlerâs morbid and obsessive fear of an early death,
and hence his feeling that he did not have long to accomplish his
work.[113][228][229] In the last days of peace, Hitler oscillated between the
determination to fight the Western powers if he had to, and various schemes
intended to keep Britain out of the war, but in any case, Hitler was not to be
deterred from his aim of invading Poland.[230] Only very briefly, when news of
the Anglo-Polish alliance being signed on 25 August 1939 in response to the
German-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact (instead of the severing of ties between
London and Warsaw predicted by Ribbentrop) together with news from Italy that
Mussolini would not honor the Pact of Steel, caused Hitler to postpone the
attack on Poland from 25 August to 1 September.[231] Hitler chose to spend the
last days of peace either trying to maneuver the British into neutrality
through his offer of 25 August 1939 to âguaranteeâ the British Empire, or
having Ribbentrop present a last-minute peace plan to Henderson with an
impossibly short time limit for its acceptance as part of an effort to blame
the war on the British and Poles.[232][233] On 1 September 1939, Germany
invaded western Poland. Britain and France declared war on Germany on 3
September but did not immediately act. Hitler was most unpleasantly surprised
at receiving the British declaration of war on September 3, 1939, and turning
to Ribbentrop angrily asked âNow what?â[234] Ribbentrop had nothing to say
other then that Robert Coulondre, the French Ambassador would probably be by
later that day to present the French declaration of war.[235] Not long after
this, on 17 September, Soviet forces invaded eastern Poland.[236]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Members of the Reichstag greet Hitler in October 1939 after the conclusion of
the Polish campaign

â Poland never will rise again in the form of the Versailles treaty. That is
guaranteed not only by Germany, but also... Russia.[237] â  
    âAdolf Hitler in a public speech in Danzig at the end of September 1939.
After the fall of Poland came a period journalists called the "Phoney War". In
part of north-western Poland annexed to Germany, Hitler instructed the two
Gauleiters in charge of the area, namely Albert Forster and Arthur Greiser to
âGermanizeâ the area, and promised them "There would be no questions
asked" about how this "Germanization" was to be accomplished.[238] Hitlerâs
orders were interpreted in very different ways by Forster and Greiser. Forster
followed a policy of simply having the local Poles sign forms stating they had
German blood with no documention required, whereas Greiser carried out a
brutual ethnic cleansing campaign of expelling the entire Polish population
into the Government-General of Poland.[239] When Greiser, seconded by Himmler
complained to Hitler that Forster was allowing thousands of Poles to be
accepted as âracialâ Germans and thus "contaminating" German âracial
purityâ , and asked Hitler to order Forster to stop. Hitler merely told
Himmler and Greiser to take up their difficulties with Forster, and not to
involve him.[240] Hitlerâs handling of the Forster-Greiser dispute has often
been advanced as an example of Ian Kershaw's theory of âWorking Towards the
FÃ¼hrerâ, namely that Hitler issued vague instructions, and allowed his
subordinates to work out policy on their own.

After the conquest of Poland, another major dispute broke out between
different fractions with one centering ReichsfÃ¼herer SS Heinrich Himmler and
Arthur Greiser championing and carrying out ethnic cleansing schemes for
Poland, and another centering around Hermann GÃ¶ring and Hans Frank calling
for turning Poland into the "granary" of the Reich.[241] At a conference held
at GÃ¶ring's Karinhall estate on 12 February, 1940, the dispute was settled in
favor of the GÃ¶ring-Frank view of economic exploitation, and ending mass
expulsions as economically disruptive.[241] On 15 May, 1940 Himmler showed
Hitler a memo entitled "Some Thoughts on the Treatment of Alien Population in
the East", which called for expelling the entire Jewish population of Europe
into Africa and reducing the remainer of the Polish population to a
â"leaderless laboring class"[241] Hitler called Himmler's memo "good and
correct".[241] Hitlerâs remark had the effect of scuttling the so-called
Karinhall argreement, and led to the Himmler-Greiser viewpoint triumphing as
German policy for Poland.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Adolf Hitler in Paris, 1940, with Albert Speer (left) and Arno Breker (right)

During this period, Hitler built up his forces on Germany's western frontier.
In April 1940, German forces invaded Denmark and Norway. In May 1940, Hitler's
forces attacked France, conquering the Luxembourg, Netherlands and Belgium in
the process. France surrendered on 22 June 1940. These victories persuaded
Benito Mussolini of Italy to join the war on Hitler's side on 10 June 1940.

Britain, whose forces evacuated France by sea from Dunkirk, continued to fight
alongside other British dominions in the Battle of the Atlantic. After having
his overtures for peace rejected by the British, now led by Winston Churchill,
Hitler ordered bombing raids on the United Kingdom. The Battle of Britain was
Hitler's prelude to a planned invasion. The attacks began by pounding Royal
Air Force airbases and radar stations protecting South-East England. However,
the Luftwaffe failed to defeat the Royal Air Force. On 27 September 1940, the
Tripartite Treaty was signed in Berlin by Saburo Kurusu of Imperial Japan,
Hitler, and Ciano. The purpose of the Tripartite treaty, which was directed
against an unnamed power that was clearly meant to be the United States was to
deter the Americans from supporting the British. It was later expanded to
include Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria. They were collectively known as the
Axis Powers. By the end of October 1940, air superiority for the invasion
Operation Sealion could not be assured, and Hitler ordered the bombing of
British cities, including London, Plymouth, and Coventry, mostly at night.

### Path to defeat

On 22 June 1941, three million German troops attacked the Soviet Union,
breaking the non-aggression pact Hitler had concluded with Stalin two years
earlier. A major historical dispute concerns Hitler's reasons for Operation
Barbarossa. Some historians such as Andreas Hillgruber have argued that
Barbarossa was merely one "stage" of Hitler's Stufenplan (stage by stage plan)
for world conquest, which Hillgruber believed that Hitler had formulated in
the 1920s.[242] Other historians such as John Lukacs have contended that
Hitler never had a stufenplan, and that the invasion of the Soviet Union was
an ad hoc move on the part of Hitler due to Britain's refusal to
surrender.[243] Lukacs has argued that the reason Hitler gave in private for
Barbarossa, namely that Winston Churchill held out the hope that the Soviet
Union might enter the war on the Allied side, and that the only way of forcing
a British surrender was to eliminate that hope, was indeed Hitler's real
reason for Barbarossa.[244] In Lukacs's perspective, Barbarossa was thus
primarily an anti-British move on the part of Hitler intended to force Britain
to sue for peace by destroying her only hope of victory rather than an anti-
Soviet move. Klaus Hildebrand has maintained that Stalin and Hitler were
independently planning to attack each other in 1941.[245] Hildebrand has
claimed that the news in the spring of 1941 of Soviet troop concentrations on
the border led to Hitler engaging in a flucht nach vorn ("flight
forward"âi.e. responding to a danger by charging on rather than
retreating.)[246] A third fraction comprising a diverse group such as Viktor
Suvorov, Ernst Topitsch, Joachim Hoffmann, Ernst Nolte, and David Irving have
argued that the official reason given by the Germans for Barbarossa in 1941
was the real reason, namely that Barbarossa was a "preventive war" forced on
Hitler to avert an impeding Soviet attack scheduled for July 1941. This theory
has been widely attacked as erroneous; the American historian Gerhard Weinberg
once compared the advocates of the preventive war theory to believers in
"fairy tales"[247]

This invasion seized huge amounts of territory, including the Baltic states,
Belarus, and Ukraine. It also encircled and destroyed many Soviet forces,
which Stalin had ordered not to retreat. However, the Germans were stopped
barely short of Moscow in December 1941 by the Russian winter and fierce
Soviet resistance. The invasion failed to achieve the quick triumph Hitler
wanted. On 18 December, 1941, the appointment book of the ReichsfÃ¼hrer-SS
Heinrich Himmler shows he met with Hitler, where to in answer to Himmler's
question "What to do with the Jews of Russia?", Hitler's response is recorded
as "als Partisanen auszurotten" ("exterminate them as partisans").[248] The
Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer has commented that the remark recorded in
Himmlerâs book is probably as close historians will ever get to a definitive
order from Hitler for the Holocaust.[249]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Adolf Hitler in Reichstag during his speech against Franklin D. Roosevelt. 11
December 1941.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The destroyed 'Wolf's Lair' barracks after the 20 July 1944 plot

<IMG>

<IMG>

20 March 1945 (often incorrectly dated 20 April). Hitler awards the Iron Cross
to Hitler Youth outside his bunker.

Hitler's declaration of war against the United States on 11 December 1941,
four days after the Empire of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii and six
days after Nazi Germany's closest approach to Moscow, set him against a
coalition that included the world's largest empire (the British Empire), the
world's greatest industrial and financial power (the United States), and the
world's largest army (the Soviet Union).

In late 1942, German forces were defeated in the second battle of El Alamein,
thwarting Hitler's plans to seize the Suez Canal and the Middle East. In
February 1943, the titanic Battle of Stalingrad ended with the destruction of
the German 6th Army. Thereafter came the gigantic Battle of Kursk. Hitler's
military judgment became increasingly erratic, and Germany's military and
economic position deteriorated. Hitler's health was also deteriorating. His
left hand trembled. Hitler's biographer Ian Kershaw and others believe that he
may have suffered from Parkinson's disease.[250] Syphilis has also been
suspected as a cause of at least some of his symptoms, although the evidence
is slight.[251]

Following the allied invasion of Sicily (Operation Husky) in 1943, Mussolini
was deposed by Pietro Badoglio, who surrendered to the Allies. Throughout 1943
and 1944, the Soviet Union steadily forced Hitler's armies into retreat along
the Eastern Front. On 6 June 1944, the Western Allied armies landed in
northern France in what was one of the largest amphibious operations in
history, Operation Overlord. Realists in the German army knew defeat was
inevitable, and some plotted to remove Hitler from power. In July 1944, Claus
von Stauffenberg planted a bomb in Hitler's FÃ¼hrer Headquarters, the
Wolfsschanze (Wolf's Lair) at Rastenburg, but Hitler narrowly escaped death.
He ordered savage reprisals, resulting in the executions of more than 4,900
people,[252] sometimes by starvation in solitary confinement followed by slow
strangulation. The main resistance movement was destroyed, although smaller
isolated groups continued to operate.

### Defeat and death

Main article: Death of Adolf Hitler

By late 1944, the Red Army had driven the Germans back into Central Europe and
the Western Allies were advancing into Germany. Hitler realized that Germany
had lost the war, but allowed no retreats. He hoped to negotiate a separate
peace with America and Britain, a hope buoyed by the death of Franklin D.
Roosevelt on 12 April 1945.[253][254][255][256] Hitler's stubbornness and
defiance of military realities also allowed the Holocaust to continue. He also
ordered the complete destruction of all German industrial infrastructure
before it could fall into Allied hands, saying that Germany's failure to win
the war forfeited its right to survive.[257] Rather, Hitler decided that the
entire nation should go down with him. Execution of this scorched earth plan
was entrusted to arms minister Albert Speer, who disobeyed the order.[257]

In April 1945, Soviet forces attacked the outskirts of Berlin. Hitler's
followers urged him to flee to the mountains of Bavaria to make a last stand
in the National Redoubt. But Hitler was determined to either live or die in
the capital.

On 20 April, Hitler celebrated his 56th birthday in the "FÃ¼hrer's shelter"
(FÃ¼hrerbunker) below the Reich Chancellery (Reichskanzlei). The garrison
commander of the besieged "fortress Breslau" (Festung Breslau), General
Hermann Niehoff, had chocolates distributed to his troops in honor of Hitler's
birthday.[258]

By 21 April, Georgi Zhukov's 1st Belorussian Front had broken through the
defenses of German General Gotthard Heinrici's Army Group Vistula during the
Battle of the Seelow Heights. The Soviets were now advancing towards Hitler's
bunker with little to stop them. Ignoring the facts, Hitler saw salvation in
the ragtag units commanded by General Felix Steiner. Steiner's command became
known as "Army Detachment Steiner" (Armeeabteilung Steiner). But "Army
Detachment Steiner" existed primarily on paper. It was something more than a
corps but less than an army. Hitler ordered Steiner to attack the northern
flank of the huge salient created by the breakthrough of Zhukov's 1st
Belorussian Front. Meanwhile, the German Ninth Army, which had been pushed
south of the salient, was ordered to attack north in a pincer attack.

Late on 21 April, Heinrici called Hans Krebs chief of the Supreme Army Command
(Oberkommando des Heeres or OKH) and told him that Hitler's plan could not be
implemented. Heinrici asked to speak to Hitler but was told by Krebs that
Hitler was too busy to take his call.

On 22 April, during one of his last military conferences, Hitler interrupted
the report to ask what had happened to General Steiner's offensive. There was
a long silence. Then Hitler was told that the attack had never been launched,
and that the withdrawal from Berlin of several units for Steiner's army, on
Hitler's orders, had so weakened the front that the Russians had broken
through into Berlin. Hitler asked everyone except Wilhelm Keitel, Hans Krebs,
Alfred Jodl, Wilhelm Burgdorf, and Martin Bormann to leave the room,[259] and
launched a tirade against the perceived treachery and incompetence of his
commanders. This culminated in an oath to stay in Berlin, head up the defense
of the city, and shoot himself at the end.[260]

Before the day ended, Hitler again found salvation in a new plan that included
General Walther Wenck's Twelfth Army.[261] This new plan had Wenck turn his
armyâcurrently facing the Americans to the westâand attack towards the
east to relieve Berlin.[261] Twelfth Army was to link up with Ninth Army and
break through to the city. Wenck did attack and, in the confusion, managed to
make temporary contact with the Potsdam garrison. But the link with the Ninth
Army, like the plan in general, was ultimately unsuccessful.[262]

On 23 April, Joseph Goebbels made the following proclamation to the people of
Berlin:

> I call on you to fight for your city. Fight with everything you have got,
for the sake of your wives and your children, your mothers and your parents.
Your arms are defending everything we have ever held dear, and all the
generations that will come after us. Be proud and courageous! Be inventive and
cunning! Your Gauleiter is amongst you. He and his colleagues will remain in
your midst. His wife and children are here as well. He, who once captured the
city with 200 men, will now use every means to galvanize the defense of the
capital. The Battle for Berlin must become the signal for the whole nation to
rise up in battle...[259]

Also on 23 April, second in command of the Third Reich and commander of the
Luftwaffe Hermann GÃ¶ring sent a telegram from Berchtesgaden in Bavaria.
GÃ¶ring argued that, since Hitler was cut off in Berlin, he should assume
leadership of Germany as Hitler's designated successor. GÃ¶ring mentioned a
time limit after which he would consider Hitler incapacitated.[263] Hitler
responded, in anger, by having GÃ¶ring arrested, and when he wrote his will on
29 April, GÃ¶ring was removed from all his positions in the
government.[263][264][265]

By the end of the day on 27 April Berlin was completely cut off from the rest
of Germany.

On 28 April, Hitler discovered that SS leader Heinrich Himmler was trying to
discuss surrender terms with the Allies (through the Swedish diplomat Count
Folke Bernadotte).[266] Hitler ordered Himmler's arrest and had Himmler's
representative in Berlin Hermann Fegelein shot.[264][267]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cover of US military newspaper The Stars and Stripes, May 1945

During the night of 28 April, General Wenck reported that his Twelfth Army had
been forced back along the entire front. Wenck noted that no further attacks
towards Berlin were possible. General Alfred Jodl (Supreme Army Command) did
not provide this information to Hans Krebs in Berlin until early in the
morning of 30 April.

On 29 April, Hans Krebs, Wilhelm Burgdorf, Joseph Goebbels, and Martin Bormann
witnessed and signed the last will and testament of Adolf Hitler.[264] Hitler
dictated the document to his private secretary, Traudl Junge.[268] Hitler was
also that day informed of the violent death of Italian dictator Benito
Mussolini on 28 April, which is presumed to have increased his determination
to avoid capture.[269]

On 30 April 1945, after intense street-to-street combat, when Soviet troops
were within a block or two of the Reich Chancellery, Hitler committed suicide,
shooting himself in the mouth while simultaneously biting into a cyanide
capsule.[270][271] Hitler's body and that of Eva Braun (his mistress whom he
had married the day before) were put in a bomb crater,[272][273] doused in
gasoline by Otto GÃ¼nsche and other FÃ¼hrerbunker aides, and set alight as the
Red Army advanced and shelling continued.[270]

On 2 May, Berlin surrendered. In the postwar years there were conflicting
reports about what happened to Hitler's remains. After the fall of the Soviet
Union, however, it was revealed from records in the Soviet archives that the
bodies of Hitler, Eva Braun, Joseph and Magda Goebbels, the six Goebbels
children, General Hans Krebs and Hitler's dogs, were secretly buried in graves
near Rathenow in Brandenburg.[274] In 1970, the remains were disinterred,
cremated and scattered in the Elbe River by the Soviets.[275] According to the
Russian Federal Security Service, a fragment of human skull stored in its
archives and displayed to the public in a 2000 exhibition came from the
remains of Hitler's body and is all that remains of Hitler. The authenticity
of the skull has been challenged by many historians and researchers.[276]

## Legacy

Further information: Consequences of German Nazism and Neo-Nazism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Outside the building in Braunau am Inn, Austria where Adolf Hitler was born is
a memorial stone warning of the horrors of World War II

â "What manner of man is this grim figure who has performed these superb
toils and loosed these frightful evils?"âWinston Churchill in Great
Contemporaries (1935) â  
Hitler, the Nazi Party and the results of Nazism are typically regarded as
gravely immoral. Historians, philosophers, and politicians have often applied
the word evil in both a secular sense of the word and in a religious sense.
Historical and cultural portrayals of Hitler in the west are overwhelmingly
condemnatory. The display of swastikas or other Nazi symbols is prohibited in
Germany and Austria. Holocaust denial is prohibited in both countries.

Outside of Hitler's birthplace in Braunau am Inn, Austria is a stone marker
engraved with the following message:

    FÃ¼r Frieden Freiheit
    Und Demokratie
    Nie wieder Faschismus
    Millionen Tote mahnen
Loosely translated, it reads: "For peace, freedom and democracyânever again
fascismâmillions dead serve as a reminder."

However, some people have referred to Hitler's legacy in neutral or favourable
terms. Former Egyptian President Anwar El Sadat spoke of his 'admiration' of
Hitler in 1953, when he was a young man, though it is possible he was speaking
in the context of a rebellion against the British Empire.[277] Louis Farrakhan
has referred to him as a "very great man".[278] Bal Thackeray, leader of the
right-wing Hindu Shiv Sena party in the Indian state of the Maharashtra,
declared in 1995 that he was an admirer of Hitler.[279] Friedrich Meinecke,
the German historian quotes of Hitler, "It is one of the great examples of the
singular and incalculable power of personality in historical life".[280]

## Religious beliefs

Main article: Adolf Hitler's religious beliefs

Hitler was raised by Roman Catholic parents, but after he left home, he never
attended Mass or received the sacraments.[281] However, after he had moved to
Germany, where the Catholic and the Protestant church are largely financed
through a church tax collected by the state, Hitler (like Goebbels) never
"actually left his church or refused to pay church taxes. In a nominal sense
therefore," the historian Steigmann-Gall states, Hitler "can be classified as
Catholic."[282] But, as Steigmann-Gall has also pointed out in the debate
about religion in Nazi Germany: "Nominal church membership is a very
unreliable gauge of actual piety in this context."[283]

In public, Hitler often praised Christian heritage, German Christian culture,
and professed a belief in an Aryan Jesus Christ, a Jesus who fought against
the Jews.[284] In his speeches and publications Hitler spoke of his
interpretation of Christianity as a central motivation for his antisemitism,
stating that "As a Christian I have no duty to allow myself to be cheated, but
I have the duty to be a fighter for truth and justice."[285][286] His private
statements, as reported by his intimates, are more mixed, showing Hitler as a
religious man but critical of traditional Christianity.[287] Here Hitler made
at least one attack against Catholicism that "resonated Streicher's contention
that the Catholic establishment was allying itself with the Jews."[288] In
light of these private statements, for John S. Conway and many other
historians it is beyond doubt that Hitler held a "fundamental antagonism"
towards the Christian churches.[289] The various accounts of Hitler's private
statements vary strongly in their reliability; Most importantly, Hermann
Rauschning's Hitler speaks is considered by most historians to be an
invention.[290][291] An overview about Hitler's religious beliefs, based on
his apparent private statements, can be found in the acclaimed book by Michael
RiÃmann or in Richard Steigmann-Gall's controversial book on Nazism and
Christianity, pp. 252â259.

In the political relations with the churches in Germany however, Hitler
readily adopted a strategy "that suited his immediate political
purposes".[289] According to some, Hitler had a general plan, even before the
rise of the Nazis to power, to destroy Christianity within the
Reich.[292][293][294] The leader of the Hitler Youth stated "the destruction
of Christianity was explicitly recognized as a purpose of the National
Socialist movement" from the start, but "considerations of expedience made it
impossible" publicly to express this extreme position.[295]

Most historians[citation needed] believe that, in contrast to some Nazi
ideologues, Hitler did not adhere to esoteric ideas, occultism, or
Ariosophy,[287] and he ridiculed such beliefs in Mein Kampf.[296][297] Others
believe the young Hitler was strongly influenced, particularly in his racial
views, by an abundence of occult works on the mystical superiority of the
Germans, like the occult and anti-semitic magazine Ostara, and give credence
to the claim of its publisher Lanz von Liebenfels that Hitler visited
Liebenfels in 1909 and praised his work.[298] The historians are still divided
on the question of the reliability of Lanz' claim of a contact with
Hitler.[299] Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke considers his account reliable, Brigitte
Hamann leaves the question open and Ian Kershaw is extremely sceptical.[300]

Hitler for a time advocated for Germans a form of the Christian faith he
called "Positive Christianity",[296][301] a belief system purged of what he
objected to in orthodox Christianity, and featuring added racist elements. By
1940 however, it was public knowledge that Hitler had abandoned advocating for
Germans even the syncretist idea of a positive Christianty.[302] Hitler
maintained that the "terrorism in religion is, to put it briefly, of a Jewish
dogma, which Christianity has universalized and whose effect is to sow trouble
and confusion in men's minds."[303]

In addition to not attending Mass or receiving the sacraments, Hitler favored
aspects of Protestantism if they were more amenable to his own objectives. At
the same time, he adopted some elements of the Catholic Church's hierarchical
organization, liturgy and phraseology in his politics.[304][305]

Hitler expressed admiration for the Muslim military tradition and directed
Himmler to initiate Muslim SS Divisions as a matter of policy.[306] According
to one confidant, Hitler stated in private, "The Mohammedan religion too would
have been much more compatible to us than Christianity. Why did it have to be
Christianity with its meekness and flabbiness ..."[307]

Hitler once stated, "We do not want any other god than Germany itself. It is
essential to have fanatical faith and hope and love in and for Germany."[308]

## Health and sexuality

### Health

Main articles: Adolf Hitler's medical health and Adolf Hitler's vegetarianism

Hitler's health has long been the subject of debate. He has variously been
said to have suffered from irritable bowel syndrome, skin lesions, irregular
heartbeat, Parkinson's disease,[251] syphilis,[251] and a strongly suggested
addiction to methamphetamine. One film exists that shows his left hand
trembling, which might suggest Parkinson's.[309] Another film, to which words
have been added using lip-reading technology, shows him complaining of his arm
shaking.[310] Beyond these accounts, however, the evidence is sparse.

After the early 1930s, Hitler generally followed a vegetarian diet, although
he ate meat on occasion. There are reports of him disgusting his guests by
giving them graphic accounts of the slaughter of animals in an effort to make
them shun meat.[311] A fear of cancer (from which his mother died) is the most
widely cited reason, though many authors also assert Hitler had a profound and
deep love of animals. Martin Bormann had a greenhouse constructed for him near
the Berghof (near Berchtesgaden) to ensure a steady supply of fresh fruit and
vegetables for Hitler throughout the war. Photographs of Bormann's children
tending the greenhouse survive and, by 2005, its foundations were among the
only ruins visible in the area that was associated with Nazi leaders.

Hitler was a non-smoker and promoted aggressive anti-smoking campaigns
throughout Germany. He reportedly promised a gold watch to any of his close
associates who quit (and gave a few away). Several witness accounts relate
that, immediately after his suicide was confirmed, many officers, aides, and
secretaries in the FÃ¼hrerbunker lit cigarettes.[312]

### Sexuality

Main article: Adolf Hitler's sexuality

Hitler presented himself publicly as a man without a domestic life, dedicated
entirely to his political mission.

He had a fiancÃ©e in the 1920s, Mimi Reiter, and later had a mistress, Eva
Braun. He had a close bond with his half-niece Geli Raubal, which some
commentators have claimed was sexual, though there is no evidence that proves
this.[313] In John Toland's book (Adolf Hitler: The Definitive Biography)
Hitler would often visit Geli as though a suitor and restricted her niece's
movement unless chaperoned by Hitler himself. All three women attempted
suicide (two succeeded), a fact that has led to speculation that Hitler may
have had sexual fetishes, such as urolagnia, as was claimed by Otto Strasser,
a political opponent of Hitler. Reiter, the only one to survive the Nazi
regime, denied this.[314] During the war and afterwards psychoanalysts offered
numerous inconsistent psycho-sexual explanations of his pathology.[315] Some
theorists have claimed that Hitler had a relationship with British fascist
Unity Mitford.[316] More recently, Lothar Machtan has argued in his book, The
Hidden Hitler, that Hitler was homosexual.

## Family

Main article: Hitler (disambiguation)

Paula Hitler, the last living member of Adolf Hitler's immediate family, died
in 1960.

The most prominent and longest-living direct descendants of Adolf Hitler's
father, Alois, was Adolf's nephew William Patrick Hitler. With his wife
Phyllis, he eventually moved to Long Island, New York, and had four sons. None
of William Hitler's children have yet had any children of their own.

Over the years various investigative reporters have attempted to track down
other distant relatives of the FÃ¼hrer; many are now alleged to be living
inconspicuous lives and have long since changed their last name.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Adolf Hitler's genealogy

  * Alois Hitler, father
  * Alois Hitler, Jr., half-brother
  * Angela Hitler Raubal, half-sister
  * Bridget Dowling, sister-in-law
  * Eva Braun, mistress and then wife
  * Geli Raubal, niece
  * Heinz Hitler, nephew
  * Hermann Fegelein, brother-in-law through Hitler's marriage to Eva Braun
  * Johann Georg Hiedler, presumed grandfather
  * Johann Nepomuk Hiedler, maternal great-grandfather, presumed great uncle and possibly Hitler's true paternal grandfather
  * Klara Hitler, mother
  * Maria Schicklgruber, grandmother
  * Paula Hitler, sister
  * William Patrick Hitler, nephew

## Hitler in media

Adolf Hitler at Berchtesgaden.ogg

Play video

<IMG>

Video of Adolf Hitler at Berchtesgaden

See also: Hitler in popular culture

### Oratory and rallies

Main article: List of Adolf Hitler speeches

Hitler was a gifted orator who captivated many with his beating of the lectern
and growling, emotional speech. He honed his skills by giving speeches to
soldiers during 1919 and 1920. He became adept at telling people what they
wanted to hear (the stab-in-the-back, the Jewish-Marxist plot to conquer the
world, and the betrayal of Germany in the Versailles treaty) and identifying a
scapegoat for their plight. Over time Hitler perfected his delivery by
rehearsing in front of mirrors and carefully choreographing his display of
emotions. He was coached by a self-styled clairvoyant who focused on hand and
arm gestures. Munitions minister and architect Albert Speer, who may have
known Hitler as well as anyone, said that Hitler was above all else an
actor.[317][318]

Massive Nazi rallies staged by Speer were designed to spark a process of self-
persuasion for the participants. By participating in the rallies, by marching,
by shouting heil, and by making the stiff armed salute, the participants
strengthened their commitment to the Nazi movement. This process can be
appreciated by watching Leni Riefenstahl's Triumph of the Will, which presents
the 1934 Nuremberg Rally. The camera shoots Hitler from on high and from
below, but only twice head-on. These camera angles give Hitler a Christ-like
aura. Some of the people in the film are paid actors, but most of the
participants are not. Whether the film itself recruited new Nazis out of
theater audiences is unknown. The process of self-persuasion may have affected
Hitler. He gave the same speech (though it got smoother and smoother with
repetition) hundreds of times first to soldiers and then to audiences in beer
halls. These performances may have made his hatreds more intense, especially
his all-consuming hatred of the Jews.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hitler and Baron Mannerheim (June 1942)

### Recorded in private conversation

Hitler visited Finnish Field Marshal Mannerheim on 4 June 1942. During the
visit an engineer of the Finnish broadcasting company YLE, Thor Damen,
recorded Hitler and Mannerheim in conversation, something which had to be done
secretly since Hitler never allowed recordings of him off-guard.[319] Today
the recording is the only known recording of Hitler not speaking in an
official tone. The recording captures 11 and a half minutes of the two leaders
in private conversation.[320] Hitler speaks in a slightly excited, but still
intellectually detached manner during this talk (the speech has been compared
to that of the working class). The majority of the recording is a monologue by
Hitler. In the recording, Hitler admits to underestimating the Soviet Union's
ability to conduct war (some English transcripts exist).

### Patria picture disc

Adolf Hitler even released a 7" picture disc with one of his speeches. Known
as the Patria (Fatherland) picture disc, the obverse bears an image of Hitler
giving a speech and has a recording of both a speech by Hitler and also Party
Member Hans Hinkel. The reverse bears a hand holding a swastika flag and the
Carl Woitschach recording (1933âTelefunken A 1431) "In Dem Kampf um die
HeimatâFaschistenmarsch".

### Documentaries during the Third Reich

Hitler appeared in and was involved to varying degrees with a series of films
by the pioneering filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl via Universum Film AG (UFA):

  * Der Sieg des Glaubens (Victory of Faith, 1933).
  * Triumph des Willens (Triumph of the Will, 1934), co-produced by Hitler.
  * Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht (Day of Freedom: Our Armed Forces, 1935).
  * Olympia (1938).

Hitler was the central figure of the first three films; they focused on the
party rallies of the respective years and are considered propaganda films.
Hitler also featured prominently in the Olympia film. Whether the latter is a
propaganda film or a true documentary is still a subject of controversy, but
it nonetheless perpetuated and spread the propagandistic message of the 1936
Olympic Games depicting Nazi Germany as a prosperous and peaceful
country.[321] As a prominent politician, Hitler was also featured in many
newsreels.

### Television

Hitler's attendance at various public functions, including the 1936 Olympic
Games and Nuremberg Rallies, appeared on television broadcasts made between
1935 and 1939. These events, along with other programming highlighting
activity by public officials, were often repeated in public viewing rooms.
Samples from a number of surviving television films from Nazi Germany were
included in the 1999 documentary Das Fernsehen unter dem Hakenkreuz
(Television Under the Swastika).

### Documentaries post Third Reich

  * The World at War (1974): a Thames Television series which contains much information about Hitler and Nazi Germany, including an interview with his secretary, Traudl Junge.
  * Adolf Hitler's Last Days: from the BBC series "Secrets of World War II" tells the story about Hitler's last days during World War II.
  * The Nazis: A Warning From History (1997): six-part BBC TV series on how the cultured and educated Germans accepted Hitler and the Nazis up to its downfall. Historical consultant is Ian Kershaw.
  * Im toten WinkelâHitlers SekretÃ¤rin (Blind Spot: Hitler's Secretary) (2002): an exclusive 90 minute interview with Traudl Junge, Hitler's secretary. Made by Austrian Jewish director AndrÃ© Heller shortly before Junge's death from lung cancer, Junge recalls the last days in the Berlin bunker. Clips of the interview were used in Downfall.
  * UndergÃ¥ngens arkitektur (The Architecture of Doom) (1989): documentary about the National Socialist aesthetic as envisioned by Hitler.
  * Das Fernsehen unter dem Hakenkreuz (Television Under the Swastika) (1999): documentary by Michael Kloft about the domestic use of television in Nazi Germany for propaganda purposes from 1935 to 1944.

### Dramatizations

  * Hitler: The Last Ten Days (1973): movie depicting the days leading up to Adolf Hitler's death, starring Sir Alec Guinness.
  * The Bunker (1978): movie describing the last days in the FÃ¼hrerbunker from 17 January 1945 to 2 March 1945. Made into the TV movie The Bunker (1981), starring Anthony Hopkins.
  * Max (2002): fictional drama depicting a friendship between Jewish art dealer Max Rothman (John Cusack) and a young Adolf Hitler (Noah Taylor) as a failed painter in Vienna.
  * Valkyrie (2008); Hitler, played by David Bamber, is portrayed as a target of the infamous assassination plot by Stauffenberg.
  * Hitler: The Rise of Evil (2003): two-part TV series about the early years of Adolf Hitler and his rise to power (up to 1933), starring Robert Carlyle.
  * Der Untergang (Downfall) (2004): German movie about the last days of Adolf Hitler and the Third Reich, starring Bruno Ganz. This film is partly based on the autobiography of Traudl Junge, a favorite secretary of Hitler's. In 2002, Junge said she felt great guilt for "...liking the greatest criminal ever to have lived."
  * Hans-JÃ¼rgen Syberberg's HitlerâEin Film aus Deutschland (Hitler: A Film from Germany) (1977): a seven-hour work in four parts. The director uses documentary clips, photographic backgrounds, puppets, theatrical stages, and other elements.[322]
  * The Empty Mirror (1996): fictional psychodrama which speculates on the events following Hitler surviving the fall of Nazi Germany. He is portrayed by Norman Rodway.
  * Dr Freud Will See You Now Mr Hitler (2008): radio drama by Laurence Marks and Maurice Gran presenting an imagined scenario when Sigmund Freud treated the young Hitler. Toby Jones played Hitler.
  * Fatherland; set in a 1960s Nazi Germany, this TV film looks at what life would be like had Hitler won the war.

## See also

  * Ex-Nazis
  * FÃ¼hrer Headquarters
  * FÃ¼hrermuseum
  * List of Adolf Hitler books
  * List of Nazi Party leaders and officials
  * Poison Kitchen
  * Adolf Hitler's Directives

## Notes

  1. ^ "Hitler ersucht um Entlassung aus der Ã¶sterreichischen StaatsangehÃ¶rigkeit", 7 April 1925 (in German). Translation: "Hitler's official application to end his Austrian citizenship". NS-Archiv. Retrieved on 2008-08-19
  2. ^ Time 100: Adolf Hitler By Elie Wiesel, 13 April 1998.
  3. ^ Keegan 1989
  4. ^ Niewyk, Donald L.; Francis R. Nicosia (2000). The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust. Columbia University Press. p. 45\. ISBN 0231112009. http://books.google.ca/books?id=lpDTIUklB2MC&pg=PA45.
  5. ^ Wistrich, Robert S. (1995). Who's Who In Nazi Germany?. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0415118880. http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Holocaust/braun.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-07.
  6. ^ Shirer 1961, p. 21
  7. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 23
  8. ^ Since the identity of Alois' biological father is an unsolved mystery of Third Reich history, it is consequently impossible to determine the true biological relationship between Alois and Klara. See discussion in Alois Hitler article. If, as the official records (as modified when Alois was 39 years old) show, Johann Georg Hiedler was Alois' biological father, then Alois and Klara were first cousins, once removed; if Johann Nepomuk Hiedler (the younger brother of Johann Georg) was his biological father, then Alois was Klara's half-uncle. In either case Alois and Klara were within the proscribed degrees of consanguinity.
  9. ^ a b Bullock 1962, p. 25
  10. ^ Toland 1991, pp. 12â13
  11. ^ Hamann, Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship, p.15
  12. ^ The controversial book The Jew of Linz by Kimberley Cornish suggests that conflict between Hitler and Wittgenstein was a critical moment in Hitler's formation as an anti-Semite, although there is no evidence for any such conflict. Cornish 1999
  13. ^ "In the House of my Parents". Mondo Politico. http://www.mondopolitico.com/library/meinkampf/v1c1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  14. ^ Langer, Walter C. 1972, p. 246
  15. ^ Bullock 1962, pp. 30â31
  16. ^ a b c d e f Hitler 1998, Â§2
  17. ^ Hamann 1999
  18. ^ Hitler 1998, Â§7
  19. ^ RÃ¶pke1946, p. 117
  20. ^ Waite 1993, p. 251
  21. ^ Shirer 1961
  22. ^ Bullock 1962, pp. 50â51
  23. ^ Shirer 1990, p. 53
  24. ^ Keegan 1987, p. 239
  25. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 52
  26. ^ Alastair Jamieson, Nazi leader Hitler really did have only one ball.html, The Daily Telegraph, retrieved on 20 November 2008
  27. ^ Rosenbaum, Ron, "Everything You Need To Know About Hitler's "Missing" Testicle", Slate, Nov. 28, 2008
  28. ^ Lewis 2003
  29. ^ Dawidowicz 1986
  30. ^ Hitler 1998, Â§15
  31. ^ Keegan 1987, p. 238â240
  32. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 60
  33. ^ Kerhsaw 1999
  34. ^ "1919 Picture of Hitler". Historisches Lexikon Bayerns. http://www.historisches-lexikon-bayerns.de/document/artikel_44676_bilder_value_6_beisetzung-eisners3.jpg. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  35. ^ Fest 1970
  36. ^ The party's name was officially changed in 1920 to include the prefix "National Socialist."
  37. ^ Shirer 1961, pp. 104â106
  38. ^ Shirer 1961, p. 109
  39. ^ Shirer 1961, pp. 111â113
  40. ^ Kershaw p. 239.
  41. ^ a b Bullock 1962, p. 121
  42. ^ Katrina Vanden Heuvel The Nation 1865â1990, p. 66, Thunder's Mouth Press, 1990 ISBN 1-56025-001-1
  43. ^ "Hitler dodged taxes, expert finds". BBC. 2004-12-17. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/4105683.stm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  44. ^ Hinrichs, Per (2006-08-25). "Mythos LadenhÃ¼ter" (in German). Der Spiegel. http://www.spiegel.de/kultur/gesellschaft/0,1518,433526,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  45. ^ "Hitler Relative Eschews Royalties". Reuters. 2004-05-25. http://www.fpp.co.uk/Hitler/MeinKampf/Raubal.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  46. ^ See Verbotzeit for details.
  47. ^ Wheeler-Bennett 1967, p. 218
  48. ^ Wheeler-Bennett 1967, p. 216
  49. ^ Wheeler-Bennett 1967, p. 216
  50. ^ Wheeler-Bennett 1967, p. 218â219
  51. ^ Wheeler-Bennett 1967, p. 222
  52. ^ Bullock 1962, pp. 393â394
  53. ^ "Des FÃ¼hrers Pass, Hitlers EinbÃ¼rgerung". Der Spiegel. http://www.spiegel.de/panorama/zeitgeschichte/0,1518,470844,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  54. ^ a b Bullock 1962, p. 201
  55. ^ "Eingabe der Industriellen an Hindenburg vom November 1932". Glasnost. http://www.glasnost.de/hist/ns/eingabe.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  56. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 262
  57. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 265
  58. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 305
  59. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 309
  60. ^ Fest 1974, p. 476
  61. ^ Shirer 1990
  62. ^ Wistrich, Robert S. (2002). Who's Who in Nazi Germany. New York: Routledge. p. 193.
  63. ^ Hitler, Adolf (1961). Hitler's Secret Book. New York: Grove Press. p. 18. http://www.worldfuturefund.org/wffmaster/Reading/Germany/Radical%20Ecology.htm#EUGENICS%20JUSTIFIED%20BY%20NATURE.
  64. ^ Kershaw 2000a, pp. 166â168
  65. ^ Kershaw 2000a, pp. 244â245
  66. ^ Weinberg 1970, pp. 26â27
  67. ^ Kershaw 1999, pp. 490â491
  68. ^ Leitz, Christian Nazi Foreign Policy, Routledge: London, United Kingdom, 2004, p. 50
  69. ^ Weinbeg, Gerhard The Foreign Policy of Hitler's Germany Diplomatic Revolution in Europe 1933â36, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970, p. 65
  70. ^ Weinberg, Gerhard The Foreign Policy of Hitler's Germany Diplomatic Revolution in Europe 1933â36, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970, p. 66
  71. ^ Hildebrand 1973, pp. 31â32
  72. ^ a b Carr 1972, p. 29
  73. ^ Kershaw 1999, pp. 492, 555â556, 586â587
  74. ^ Carr 1972, p. 23
  75. ^ Weinberg 1970, p. 31
  76. ^ Overy 1989, p. 39
  77. ^ Weinberg 1970, p. 35
  78. ^ a b Kershaw 2000a, pp. 145â147
  79. ^ a b Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990 pp. 596â597
  80. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990 pp. 599â600
  81. ^ a b Kershaw, Ian Hitler Hubris, New York: Norton, 1999 p. 578
  82. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990 pp. 601â602
  83. ^ Hildebrand 1973, pp. 36â37
  84. ^ Kershaw 1999, pp. 560â561
  85. ^ Kershaw 1999, p. 561
  86. ^ Kershaw 1999, pp. 561â562
  87. ^ Hildebrand 1973, p. 39
  88. ^ Roberts, Martin (1975). The New BarbarismâA Portrait of Europe 1900â1973. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0199132259.
  89. ^ Hildebrand 1973, pp. 40â41
  90. ^ Hitler, Adolf Mein Kampf; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1971 p. 138
  91. ^ a b Hildebrand 1973, p. 42
  92. ^ Kershaw 1999, p. 578â579
  93. ^ a b c Kershaw 1999, p. 563
  94. ^ a b Kershaw 1999, p. 567
  95. ^ a b c Kershaw 1999, p. 580
  96. ^ Kershaw 1999, pp. 567â568
  97. ^ Kershaw 1999, p. 568
  98. ^ Kershaw 1999, p. 579
  99. ^ Doerr 1998, p. 158
  100. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990 pp. 630â631
  101. ^ Overy, Richard âMisjudging Hitlerâ pp. 93â115 from The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered edited by Gordon Martel Routledge: London, United Kingdom, 1999 pp. 98â99
  102. ^ a b c Tooze 2006, p. 704
  103. ^ Kershaw 2000b, pp. 18â20
  104. ^ Overy, Richard âMisjudging Hitlerâ pp. 93â115 from The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered edited by Gordon Martel Routledge: London, United Kingdom, 1999 p. 98
  105. ^ Carr 1972, pp. 56â57
  106. ^ Dawidowicz 1976, p. 32
  107. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990 pp. 623â624
  108. ^ Overy, Richard âMisjudging Hitlerâ from The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered edited by Gordon Martel Routledge: London, United Kingdom, 1999 p. 103
  109. ^ Kershaw, Ian The Nazi Dictatorship : Problems and Perspectives of Interpretation, London : Arnold ; New York p. 51
  110. ^ Jeremy Noakes & Geoffrey Pridham (editors) Nazism 1919â1945 Volume 3 Foreign Policy, War and Racial Extermination A Documentary Reader, University of Exeter Press, Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom, 1997 p. 673
  111. ^ a b Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990 p. 642
  112. ^ Kershaw 2000b, p. 37
  113. ^ a b Carr 1972, pp. 76â77
  114. ^ Kershaw 2000b, p. 92
  115. ^ Aigner, Dietrich âHitlerâs Ultimate Aimsâ from Aspects of the Third Reich edited by H.W. Koch, London: Macmillan, 1985 p. 264
  116. ^ a b Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990 pp. 636â637
  117. ^ Carr 1972, pp. 73â78
  118. ^ Robertson 1963, p. 106
  119. ^ Hillgruber, Andreas "England's Place In Hitler's Plans for World Dominion" pp. 5â22 from Journal of Contemporary History, Volume 9, 1974 pp. 13â14
  120. ^ a b Weinberg 1980, pp. 39â40
  121. ^ Roberts 1991, p. 71
  122. ^ Doerr 1998, p. 216
  123. ^ Overy, Richard Overy, Richard âMisjudging Hitlerâ pp. 93â115 from The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered edited by Gordon Martel Routledge: London, United Kingdom, 1999 pp. 101â103
  124. ^ Overy, Richard "Misjudging Hitler" from The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered edited by Gordon Martel Routledge: London, United Kingdom, 1999 pp. 101â102
  125. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Volume I, Clarendon Press: Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom, 1990 p. 638
  126. ^ "The Auschwitz Album", Yad Vashem
  127. ^ Overy 2005, p. 252
  128. ^ "How many Jews were murdered in the Holocaust? How do we know? Do we have their names?". Yad Vashem. http://www1.yadvashem.org/about_holocaust/faqs/answers/faq_3.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  129. ^ "The Holocaust". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. http://www.ushmm.org/wlc/article.php?lang=en&ModuleId=10005143. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  130. ^ The Munich Crisis, 1938 Edited by Igor Lukes, Erik Goldstein, Routledge: 1999
  131. ^ a b Bloch & 1992 178â179
  132. ^ Butler 1989, p. 159
  133. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 434
  134. ^ Overy 2005, p. 425
  135. ^ Crozier 1988, p. 236
  136. ^ a b Crozier 1988, p. 239
  137. ^ Overy 1989, p. 84â85
  138. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 334â335
  139. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 338â340
  140. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 338â339
  141. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 418
  142. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 366
  143. ^ Bloch 1992, pp. 183â185
  144. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 368
  145. ^ Kee 1988, p. 132
  146. ^ Hillgruber, Andreas "England's Place In Hitler's Plans for World Dominion" pp. 5â22 from Journal of Contemporary History, Volume 9, 1974 pp. 14â15
  147. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War, Clarendon Press: Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom, 1990 p. 663
  148. ^ a b Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War, Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1990 p. 654
  149. ^ a b Murray 1984, pp. 178â184
  150. ^ Murray 1984, p. 183
  151. ^ Kee 1988, p. 147
  152. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 418â419
  153. ^ Kee 1988, pp. 149â150
  154. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 419
  155. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 425â426
  156. ^ Overy 1989, pp. 87â88
  157. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 428
  158. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 431
  159. ^ Middlemas, Keith Diplomacy of Illusion Weidenfeld and Nicolson: London, United Kingdom, 1972 pp. 340â341
  160. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 432, 447
  161. ^ Hildebrand 1973, p. 72
  162. ^ Middlemas, Keith Diplomacy of Illusion Weidenfeld and Nicolson: London, United Kingdom, 1972 p. 364
  163. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 447
  164. ^ Dilks, David â`We Must Hope For The Best and Prepare For The Worseââ from The Origins of The Second World War edited by Patrick Finney, London: Arnold 1997 p. 44
  165. ^ Middlemas, Keith Diplomacy of Illusion p. 368
  166. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 448
  167. ^ Overy, Richard âGermany and the Munich Crisis: A Mutilated Victory?â from The Munich Crisis, London: Frank Cass, 1999 p. 208
  168. ^ Overy, Richard âGermany and the Munich Crisis: A Mutilated Victory?â from The Munich Crisis, London: Frank Cass, 1999 p. 207
  169. ^ Overy, Richard âGermany and the Munich Crisis: A Mutilated Victory?â from The Munich Crisis London: Frank Cass 1999 pp. 207â209
  170. ^ Overy 1989, p. 49
  171. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 452â453, 457
  172. ^ a b Murray 1984, pp. 256â260
  173. ^ Murray 1984, pp. 257â258, 260
  174. ^ Murray 1984, p. 257
  175. ^ Murray 1984, p. 259
  176. ^ a b Bullock, A. Hitler: A Study in Tyranny, 469
  177. ^ Kee 1988, pp. 198â200
  178. ^ Kee 1988, pp. 201â202
  179. ^ Kee 1988, pp. 202â203
  180. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 462â463
  181. ^ "Man of the Year". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,760539-1,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  182. ^ Weinberg 1980, p. 463
  183. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1990 pp. 671, 682â683
  184. ^ Rothwell, Victor The Origins of the Second World War, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2001 pp. 90â91
  185. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War edited by Wilhelm Deist, Hans-Erich Vokmann & Wolfram Wette, Volume I, Clarendon Press: Oxford, United Kingdom, 1990 pp. 671, 682â683
  186. ^ Rothwell, Victor The Origins of the Second World War, Manchester University Press: Manchester, United Kingdom, 2001 pp. 90â91
  187. ^ Hillgruber, Andreas "England's Place In Hitler's Plans for World Dominion" pp. 5â22 from Journal of Contemporary History, Volume 9, 1974 p. 15
  188. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 506â507
  189. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War, Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1990 p. 672
  190. ^ Watt, D.C. How War Came Heinemann: London, 1989 p. 38
  191. ^ Strobl 2000, pp. 161â162
  192. ^ Strobl 2000, pp. 168â170
  193. ^ Strobl 2000, pp. 61â62
  194. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War, Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1990 pp. 682â683
  195. ^ Overy 1989, p. 61
  196. ^ Maiolo, Joseph The Royal Navy and Nazi Germany Macmillan Press: London, 1998 pp. 164â165
  197. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War, Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1990 p. 91
  198. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1990 p. 691
  199. ^ a b Weinberg, Gerhard âPropaganda for Peace and Preparation For Warâ pp. 68â82 from Germany, Hitler and World War II, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom, 1995 p. 73
  200. ^ Roberston, E.M. "Hitler Planning for War and the Response of the Great Powers (1938âearly 1939)" pp. 196â234 from Aspects of the Third Reich edited by H.W. Koch, Macmillan: London, United Kingdom p. 204
  201. ^ Roberston, E.M. "Hitler's Planning for War and the Response of the Great Powers (1938âearly 1939)" pp. 196â234 from Aspects of the Third Reich edited by H.W. Koch, Macmillan: London, United Kingdom p. 204
  202. ^ Rees, Lawrence The Nazis, New York: New Press, 1997 p. 80
  203. ^ Rees, Lawrence The Nazis, New York: New Press, 1997 p. 79
  204. ^ a b Rees, Lawrence The Nazis, New York: New Press, 1997 p. 78
  205. ^ Rees, Lawrence The Nazis, New York: New Press, 1997 pp. 84â85
  206. ^ a b Murray 1984, p. 268
  207. ^ a b Marrus 2000, p. 37
  208. ^ Marrus 2000, p. 38
  209. ^ a b c Marrus 2000, p. 43
  210. ^ Murray 1984, pp. 268â269
  211. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War, Volume I, Clarendon Press: Oxford, United Kingdom, 1990 pp. 688â690
  212. ^ a b Weinberg 1980, pp. 537â539, 557â560
  213. ^ a b Weinberg 1980, p. 558
  214. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 579â581
  215. ^ Maiolo, Joseph The Royal Navy and Nazi Germany Macmillan Press: London, 1998 p. 178
  216. ^ Maiolo, Joseph The Royal Navy and Nazi Germany Macmillan Press: London, 1998 p. 178
  217. ^ Weinberg 1980, pp. 561â562, 583â584
  218. ^ Roberston, E.M. âHitler Planning for War and the Response of the Great Powersâ from Aspects of the Third Reich edited by H.W. Koch, London: Macmillan 1985 p. 212
  219. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War Clarendon Press: Oxford, United Kingdom, 1990 pp. 688â690
  220. ^ Bloch 1992, p. 228
  221. ^ a b Overy 1989, p. 56
  222. ^ a b Bloch 1992, pp. 210, 228
  223. ^ Craig, Gordon "The German Foreign Office from Neurath to Ribbentrop" from The Diplomats 1919â39 edited by Gordon A. Craig and Felix Gilbert pp. 435â436
  224. ^ Overy, Richard âEconomy Germany, âDomestic Crisisâ and War in 1939â from The Third Reich: The Essential Readings edited by Christian Leitz, Blackwell: Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom, 1999 p. 125
  225. ^ a b Robertson 1963, pp. 178â180
  226. ^ MAX BELOFF, The Foreign Policy of Soviet Russia, vol. II, I936â4I. Issued under the auspices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, Oxford University Press, 1949
  227. ^ Mason, Tim & Overy, R.J. âDebate: Germany, `domestic crisisâ and the war in 1939â from The Origins of The Second World War edited by Patrick Finney Edward Arnold: London, United Kingdom, 1997 pp. 91â98
  228. ^ Kershaw 2000b, pp. 36â37, 92
  229. ^ Weinberg, Gerhard âHitler's Private Testament of 2 May 1938â pp. 415â419 from The Journal of Modern History, Volume 27, Issue # 4, December 1955
  230. ^ Messerschmidt, Manfred âForeign Policy and Preparation for Warâ from Germany and the Second World War, Clarendon Press: Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom, 1990 p. 714
  231. ^ Bloch 1992, pp. 252â253
  232. ^ Weinberg, Gerhard "Hitler and England, 1933â1945: Pretense and Realityâ pp. 85â94 from Germany, Hitler and World War II Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom, 1995 pp. 89â90
  233. ^ Bloch 1992, pp. 255â257
  234. ^ Bloch, Michael Ribbentrop, Crown Publishers Inc: New York, United States of America, 1992 p. 260
  235. ^ Bloch, Michael Ribbentrop, Crown Publishers Inc: New York, United States of America, 1992 p. 260
  236. ^ Hakim 1995
  237. ^ (2 October 1939). Seven Years War?, TIME Magazine. Retrieved on 30 August 2008
  238. ^ Rees 1997, p. 141
  239. ^ Rees 1997, pp. 141â142
  240. ^ Rees 1997, pp. 141â145
  241. ^ a b c d Rees 1997, pp. 148â149
  242. ^ Hillgruber, Andreas Germany and the Two World Wars, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981 pp. 53â55 & 81â82
  243. ^ Lukacs, John The Hitler of History New York: Vintage Books, 1997, 1998 p. 133
  244. ^ Lukacs, John The Hitler of History New York: Vintage Books, 1997, 1998 pp. 149â151
  245. ^ Evans, Richard In Hitler's Shadow, New York, NY: Pantheon, 1989 p. 43
  246. ^ Evans, Richard In Hitler's Shadow, New York, NY: Pantheon, 1989 p. 43
  247. ^ Weinberg, Gerhard Review of Stalin's War: A Radical New Theory of the Origins of the Second World War by Ernst Topitsch pp. 800â801 from The American Historical Review, Volume 94, Issue # 3, June 1989 p. 800
  248. ^ Bauer, Yehuda Rethinking the Holocaust Yale University Press, 2000, p. 5
  249. ^ Bauer, Yehuda Rethinking the Holocaust Yale University Press, 2000, p. 5
  250. ^ "Parkinson's part in Hitler's downfall". BBC. 1999-07-29. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/health/406713.stm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  251. ^ a b c Bullock 1962, p. 717
  252. ^ Shirer 1990, Â§29
  253. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 753
  254. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 763
  255. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 778
  256. ^ Bullock 1962, pp. 780â781
  257. ^ a b Bullock 1962, pp. 774â775
  258. ^ Dollinger 1995, p. 112
  259. ^ a b Dollinger 1995, p. 231
  260. ^ Bullock 1962, pp. 783â784
  261. ^ a b Bullock 1962, p. 784
  262. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 790
  263. ^ a b Bullock 1962, p. 787
  264. ^ a b c Bullock 1962, p. 795
  265. ^ Butler 1989, pp. 227â228
  266. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 791
  267. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 792
  268. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 793
  269. ^ Bullock 1962, p. 798
  270. ^ a b Bullock 1962, pp. 799â800
  271. ^ "Hitler's final witness". BBC. 2002-02-04. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/1800287.stm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  272. ^ Trevor-Roper, H. (1947). The Last Days of Hitler. University of Chicago Press.
  273. ^ Kershaw 2000b
  274. ^ V.K. Vinogradov and others, Hitler's Death: Russia's Last Great Secret from the Files of the KGB, Chaucer Press 2005, 111. This work reproduces a Soviet map showing that the bodies were buried in a field near the village of Neu Friedrichsdorf, approximately one kilometre east of Rathenow.
  275. ^ Hans Meissner, Magda Goebbels, First Lady of the Third Reich, 260â277
  276. ^ "Russia displays 'Hitler skull fragment'". BBC. 2000-04-26. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/725537.stm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  277. ^ Finklestone, Joseph (1996). Anwar Sadat: Visionary Who Dared. Routledge. ISBN 0714634875. http://books.google.com/books?id=PoW4pO4q9VwC&pg=PA16&dq=sadat+hitler&sig=xMPc2506hgitYGGS9x-lSigZkD4.
  278. ^ Bierbauer, Charles (1995-10-17). "Million Man March: Its Goal More Widely Accepted than Its Leader". CNN. http://www.cnn.com/US/9510/megamarch/10-17/notebook/index.html.
  279. ^ "Portrait of a Demagogue". Asiaweek. 1995-09-22. http://web.archive.org/web/20010709213551/http://www.asiaweek.com/asiaweek/95/0922/nat5.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  280. ^ Shirer, p 21
  281. ^ RiÃmann 2001, pp. 94â96
  282. ^ Steigmann-Gall 2003: XV
  283. ^ Steigmann-Gall 2007, Christianity and the Nazi Movement: A Response, p. 205, in: Journal of Contemporary History Volume 42, No. 2
  284. ^ Steigmann-Gall 2003
  285. ^ Hitler 1942
  286. ^ Hitler 1973
  287. ^ a b Bullock 1962, p. 389
  288. ^ Steigmann-Gall 2003: 65; He is referring to: Otto Wagener, Hitler: Memoirs of a Confidant, Henry Ashby Turner, ed. (New Haven, 1985), p. 65
  289. ^ a b Conway 1968: 3
  290. ^ RiÃmann 2001, p. 22
  291. ^ Steigmann-Gall 2003, pp. 28â29
  292. ^ SHARKEY, JOE Word for Word/The Case Against the Nazis; How Hitler's Forces Planned To Destroy German Christianity, New York Times, January 13, 2002
  293. ^ The Nazi Master Plan: The Persecution of the Christian Churches, Rutgers Journal of Law and Religion, Winter 2001, publishing evidence compiled by the O.S.S. for the Nuremberg war-crimes trials of 1945 and 1946
  294. ^ http://www.adherents.com/people/ph/Adolf_Hitler.html The Religious Affiliation of Adolf Hitler] Adherents.com
  295. ^ SHARKEY, JOE Word for Word/The Case Against the Nazis; How Hitler's Forces Planned To Destroy German Christianity, New York Times, January 13, 2002
  296. ^ a b Steigmann-Gall 2003, p. passim
  297. ^ Overy 2005, p. 282
  298. ^ Rosenbaum, Ron [Explaining Hitler] p. xxxvii, p. 282 (citing Yehuda Bauerâs belief that Hitlerâs racism is rooted in occult groups like Ostara), p. 333, 1998 Random House
  299. ^ RiÃmann 2001: 122
  300. ^ RiÃmann 2001: 249 (Footnote 539)
  301. ^ Overy 2005, p. 278
  302. ^ Poewe, Karla O, New Religions and the Nazis, p. 30, Routledge 2006
  303. ^ "Hitler's Table Talks" Christianity: 4 April 1942, Martin Bormann, published 1953)
  304. ^ Rissmann 2001, p. 96
  305. ^ Bullock 2001, p. 388
  306. ^ [http://video.aol.com/video-detail/history-of-the-bosnian-muslim-nazi-13th-ss-handzar-division/1148500113 # History of the Bosnian Muslim Nazi 13th SS Handzar Division] AOL News
  307. ^ Speer 2003, p. 96ff
  308. ^ Heiden, Konrad A History of National Socialism, p. 100, A.A. Knopf, 1935
  309. ^ "The last 12 days of Hitler recalled". The Kingdom. 2005-04-06. http://www.the-kingdom.ie/news/story/?trs=kfgbqlojmh. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  310. ^ Midgley, Neil (2006-11-23). "New technology catches Hitler off guard". The Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1534830/New-technology-catches-Hitler-off-guard.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  311. ^ Wilson, Bee (1998-10-09). "Mein DiatâAdolf Hitler's diet". New Statesman. http://web.archive.org/web/20050321091219/http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0FQP/is_n4406_v127/ai_21238666. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  312. ^ Toland 1991, p. 741
  313. ^ Rosenbaum 1998, pp. 99â117
  314. ^ Rosenbaum 1998, p. 116
  315. ^ "The Pink SwastikaâHomosexuality in the Nazi Party, 4th edition". Abiding Truth. http://www.abidingtruth.com/pfrc/books/pinkswastika/html/the_pinkswastika_4th_edition_-_final.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  316. ^ "Unity Mitford and 'Hitler's baby'". New Statesman. http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/martin-bright/2007/12/unity-mitford-home-hitler-war. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  317. ^ Frauenfeld, A. E.. "The Power of Speech". Calvin College. http://www.calvin.edu/academic/cas/gpa/machtrede.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  318. ^ Goebbels, Joseph. "The FÃ¼hrer as a Speaker". Calvin College. http://www.calvin.edu/academic/cas/gpa/ahspeak.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  319. ^ Moring, Kirsikka (2004-09-21). "Conversation secretly recorded in Finland helped German actor prepare for Hitler role". Helsingin Sanomat. http://www.hs.fi/english/article/1076153999513. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  320. ^ "Hitlerin salaa tallennettu keskustelu Suomessa" (in Finnish). YLE. http://www.yle.fi/elavaarkisto/?s=s&g=1&ag=3&t=22&a=376. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  321. ^ "IMDb: Adolf Hitler". IMDB. http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0386944/. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  322. ^ "HitlerâA Film from Germany (HitlerâEin Film aus Deutschland)". German Films. http://www.german-cinema.de/app/filmarchive/film_view.php?film_id=404. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.

## References

  * Bloch, Michael (1992), Ribbentrop, New York: Crown Publishing
  * Bullock, A. (1962), Hitler: A Study in Tyranny, Penguin Books, ISBN 0140135642
  * Butler, Ewan; Young, Gordon (1989), The Life and Death of Hermann Goering, David & Charles, ISBN 071539455X
  * Carr, William (1972), Arms, Autarky and Aggression, London: Edward Arnold, ISBN 9780713156683
  * Conway, John S. (1968), The Nazi Persecution of the Churches 1933â45
  * Cornish, Kimberley (1999), The Jew of Linz: Hitler, Wittgenstein and their secret battle for the mind
  * Crozier, Andrew (1988), Appeasement and Germany's Last Bid for Colonies, London: Macmillan Press, ISBN 0312015461
  * Dawidowicz, Lucy (1976), A Holocaust Reader, New York: Behrman House
  * Dawidowicz, Lucy (1986), The War Against the Jews, Bantam Books
  * Doerr, Paul (1998), British Foreign Policy, Manchester: Manchester University Press
  * Dollinger, Hans (1995-03-28), The Decline and Fall of Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan, Gramercy, ISBN 0517123991
  * Fest, Joachim C. (1970), The Face Of The Third Reich, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson
  * Fest, Joachim C. (1974), Hitler, New York: Harcourt Trade Publishers
  * Haffner, Sebastian (1979), The Meaning of Hitler, Harvard University Press
  * Hakim, Joy (1995), A History of Us: War, Peace and all that Jazz, New York: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-509514-6
  * Hamann, Brigitte (1999), Hitler's Vienna. A dictator's apprenticeship, Oxford University Press
  * Hildebrand, Klaus (1973), The Foreign Policy of the Third Reich, London: Batsford
  * Hitler, Adolf (1942), The Speeches of Adolf Hitler, April 1922âAugust 1939, London: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-598-75893-3
  * Hitler, Adolf (1973), My New Order, Octagon Books, ISBN 0-374-93918-7
  * Hitler, Adolf (15 September), Mein Kampf, Mariner Books, ISBN 0395925037
  * Kee, Robert (1988), Munich, London: Hamish Hamilton
  * Keegan, John (1987), The Mask of Command: A Study of Generalship, Pimlico (Random House)
  * Keegan, John (1989), The Second World War, Glenfield, New Zealand: Hutchinson
  * Kershaw, Ian (1999), Hitler: 1889â1936: Hubris, New York: W. W. Norton & Company
  * Kershaw, Ian (2000a), The Nazi Dictatorship: Problems and Perspectives of Interpretation (4th ed.), London: Arnold
  * Kershaw, Ian (2000b), Hitler, 1936â1945: Nemesis, New York; London: W. W. Norton & Company
  * Langer, Walter C. (1972), The Mind of Adolf Hitler, New York: Basic Books
  * Lewis, David (2003), The Man who invented Hitler, Hodder Headline, ISBN 0-7553-1148-5
  * Marrus, Michael (2000), The Holocaust in History, Toronto: Key Porter
  * Murray, Williamson (1984), The Change in the European Balance of Power, Princeton: Princeton University Press
  * Overy, Richard (1989), The Road To War, London: Macmillan, ISBN 0-14-028530-X
  * Overy, Richard (2005), The Dictators: Hitler's Germany, Stalin's Russia, Penguin Books, ISBN 0393020304
  * Rees, Laurence (1997), The Nazis: A Warning From History, New York: New Press
  * RiÃmann, Michael (2001) (in (German)), Hitlers Gott. Vorsehungsglaube und SendungsbewuÃtsein des deutschen Diktators, ZÃ¼rich MÃ¼nchen: Pendo, ISBN 3-85842-421-8
  * Roberts, Andrew (1991), The Holy Fox, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson
  * Robertson, E.M. (1963), Hitler's Pre-War Policy and Military Plans, London: Longmans
  * RÃ¶pke, Wilhelm (1946), The Solution to the German Problem, G. P. Putnam's Sons
  * Rosenbaum, R. (1998), Explaining Hitler: The Search for the Origins of his Evil, Macmillan Publishers, ISBN 006095339X
  * Shirer, William L. (1990-11-15), The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-671-72868-7
  * Speer, Albert (2003), Inside the Third Reich, Weidenfeld & Nicolson History, ISBN 1-842-127357
  * Steigmann-Gall, Richard (2003), The Holy Reich: Nazi Conceptions of Christianity, 1919â1945, Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, doi:10.2277/0521823714, ISBN 0521823714
  * Strobl, Gerwin (2000), The Germanic Isle, Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press
  * Toland, John (1991-12-01), Adolf Hitler: The Definitive Biography, Doubleday, ISBN 0385420536
  * Tooze, Adam (2006), The Wages of Destruction, New York: Viking Press
  * Waite, Robert G. L. (1993), The Psychopathic God: Adolf Hitler, Da Capo Press, ISBN 0-306-80514-6
  * Weinberg, Gerhard (1970), The Foreign Policy of Hitler's Germany Diplomatic Revolution in Europe 1933â1936, Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0226885097
  * Weinberg, Gerhard (1980), The Foreign Policy of Hitler's Germany Starting World War II, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0226885119
  * Wheeler-Bennett, John (1967), The Nemesis of Power, London: Macmillan

## External links

Find more about Adolf Hitler on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions
from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

Images and videos

  * Adolf Hitler at the Internet Movie Database (The Character portrayed in film and television)
  * Color Footage of HitlerâWatch color footage of Hitler during WWII
  * Photos of Adolf Hitler
  * Download "The Young Hitler I Knew" on archive.org

Speeches and publications

  * A speech from 1932 (text and audiofile), German Museum of History Berlin
  * Hitler Speech (10 February 1933) with English Translation
  * Hitler's book Mein Kampf (full English translation)
  * The Testament of Adolf Hitler the Bormann-Hitler documents (transcripts of conversations in FebruaryâApril 2, 1945)
  * Adolf Hitler's Private Will, Marriage Certificate and Political Testament, April 1945 (34 pages)
  * "The Discovery of Hitler's Wills" (Office of Strategic Services report on how the testament was found).
  * Matthew Brzezinski, "Giving Hitler Hell", Washington Post Sunday, July 24, 2005; p. W08 (Narrative of how the testament was found)

Political offices  
Preceded by  
Anton Drexler Leader of the NSDAP  
1921â1945 Succeeded by  
None  
Preceded by  
Franz Pfeffer von Salomon Leader of the SA  
1930â1945  
Preceded by  
Kurt von Schleicher Chancellor of Germany(1)  
1933â1945 Succeeded by  
Joseph Goebbels  
Preceded by  
Paul von Hindenburg (as President) FÃ¼hrer of Germany(1)  
1934â1945 Succeeded by  
Karl DÃ¶nitz (as President)  
Military offices  
Preceded by  
Walther von Brauchitsch Oberbefehlshaber des Heeres (Army Commander)  
1941â1945 Succeeded by  
Ferdinand SchÃ¶rner  
Notes and references  
1\. The positions of Head of State and Government were combined 1934â1945 in
the office of FÃ¼hrer and Chancellor of Germany  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Adolf Hitler  
Politics

Political beliefs Â· Speeches Â· Mein Kampf Â· Zweites Buch Â· Last will and
testament  
Events

Rise to power Â· Third Reich Â· Holocaust Â· World War II Â· Death  
Personal life

Home Â· Medical health Â· Religious beliefs Â· Sexuality Â· Diet  
Perceptions

Books Â· In popular culture Â· Der Sieg des Glaubens Â· Triumph of the Will Â·
The Empty Mirror Â· Hitler: The Last Ten Days Â· The Meaning of Hitler Â· Max
Â· Hitler: The Rise of Evil Â· Der Untergang (Downfall)  
Family

Eva Braun (wife) Â· Alois (father) Â· Klara (mother) Â· Alois (half-brother)
Â· Angela (half-sister) Â· Gustav (brother) Â· Ida (sister) Â· Otto (brother)
Â· Edmund (brother) Â· Paula (sister) Â· William Patrick (nephew) Â· Heinz
(nephew) Â· Geli (niece)  Â· Blondi (dog)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Chancellors of Germany  
German Empire  
(1871â1918)

Otto von Bismarck Â· Leo von Caprivi Â· Prince Chlodwig zu Hohenlohe-
SchillingsfÃ¼rst Â· Bernhard von BÃ¼low Â· Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg Â·
Georg Michaelis Â· Georg von Hertling Â· Prince Maximilian of Baden

Coat of arms of Germany  
Weimar Republic  
(1919â1933)

Philipp Scheidemann Â· Gustav Bauer Â· Hermann MÃ¼ller Â· Konstantin
Fehrenbach Â· Joseph Wirth Â· Wilhelm Cuno Â· Gustav Stresemann Â· Wilhelm
Marx Â· Hans Luther Â· Wilhelm Marx Â· Hermann MÃ¼ller Â· Heinrich BrÃ¼ning Â·
Franz von Papen Â· Kurt von Schleicher  
Third Reich  
(1933â1945)

Adolf Hitler Â· Joseph Goebbels  
Federal Republic  
(1949â)

Konrad Adenauer Â· Ludwig Erhard Â· Kurt Georg Kiesinger Â· Willy Brandt Â·
Helmut Schmidt Â· Helmut Kohl Â· Gerhard SchrÃ¶der Â· Angela Merkel  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Coat of arms of Nazi Germany The Hitler Cabinet  
(30 January 1933 â 30 April 1945)  
Adolf Hitler (Chancellor and FÃ¼hrer)  
Franz von Papen (ind) Â· Konstantin von Neurath Â· Joachim von Ribbentrop Â·
Wilhelm Frick Â· Heinrich Himmler Â· Lutz Graf Schwerin von Krosigk (ind) Â·
Alfred Hugenberg (DNVP) Â· Kurt Schmitt Â· Hjalmar Schacht (ind) Â· Hermann
GÃ¶ring Â· Walther Funk Â· Franz Seldte Â· Franz GÃ¼rtner (DNVP) Â· Franz
Schlegelberger Â· Otto Georg Thierack Â· Werner von Blomberg (ind) Â· Wilhelm
Keitel (ind) Â· Freiherr von Eltz-RÃ¼benach (ind) Â· Julius DorpmÃ¼ller Â·
Wilhelm Ohnesorge Â· Richard Walther DarrÃ© Â· Herbert Backe Â· Joseph
Goebbels Â· Bernhard Rust Â· Fritz Todt Â· Albert Speer Â· Alfred Rosenberg Â·
Hanns Kerrl Â· Hermann Muhs Â· Otto MeiÃner (ind) Â· Hans Lammers Â· Martin
Bormann Â· Karl Hermann Frank Â· Rudolf Hess Â· Ernst RÃ¶hm  
All personnel were or became NSDAP members except where indicated ("ind" =
nominally independent)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Final occupants of the FÃ¼hrerbunker by date of departure  
April 21

Robert Ley  
April 22

Karl Gebhardt Â· Julius Schaub Â· Christa Schroeder Â· Johanna Wolf  
April 23

Theodor Morell Â· Albert Speer Â· Joachim von Ribbentrop  
April 24

Walter Frentz  
April 28

Robert Ritter von Greim Â· Hanna Reitsch Â· Walter Wagner  
April 29

Heinrich MÃ¼ller Â· Bernd von Freytag-Loringhoven Â· Gerhardt Boldt Â· Rudolf
Weiss  
April 30

Nicolaus von Below  
May 1

Erich Kempka Â· Traudl Junge Â· Gerda Christian Â· Constanze Manziarly Â· Else
KrÃ¼ger Â· Otto GÃ¼nsche Â· Johann Rattenhuber Â· Werner Naumann Â· Wilhelm
Mohnke Â· Hans-Erich Voss Â· Ludwig Stumpfegger Â· Martin Bormann Â· Artur
Axmann Â· Walther Hewel Â· GÃ¼nther SchwÃ¤germann Â· Armin D. Lehmann  
May 2

Rochus Misch Â· Helmuth Weidling Â· Hans Refior Â· Theodor von Dufving Â·
Siegfried Knappe  
Date uncertain

Wilhelm Zander Â· Heinz Lorenz Â· Heinz Linge Â· Hans Baur Â· Helmut Kunz  
Still present on May 2

Erna Flegel Â· Werner Haase Â· Johannes Hentschel  
Committed suicide

Ernst-Robert Grawitz Â· Adolf Hitler / Eva Hitler (Eva Braun) Â· Joseph
Goebbels / Magda Goebbels Â· Wilhelm Burgdorf Â· Hans Krebs Â· Peter HÃ¶gl  
Killed

Hermann Fegelein Â· Goebbels children Â· Grawitz family Â· Blondi  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Time Persons of the Year  
1927â1950  
Charles Lindbergh (1927) Â· Walter Chrysler (1928) Â· Owen D. Young (1929) Â·
Mahatma Gandhi (1930) Â· Pierre Laval (1931) Â· Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Â· Hugh Samuel Johnson (1933) Â· Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Â· Haile
Selassie I (1935) Â· Wallis Simpson (1936) Â· Chiang Kai-shek / Soong May-ling
(1937) Â· Adolf Hitler (1938) Â· Joseph Stalin (1939) Â· Winston Churchill
(1940) Â· Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Â· Joseph Stalin (1942) Â· George
Marshall (1943) Â· Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Â· Harry S. Truman (1945) Â·
James F. Byrnes (1946) Â· George Marshall (1947) Â· Harry S. Truman (1948) Â·
Winston Churchill (1949) Â· The American Fighting-Man (1950)  
1951â1975  
Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Â· Elizabeth II (1952) Â· Konrad Adenauer (1953) Â·
John Foster Dulles (1954) Â· Harlow Curtice (1955) Â· Hungarian Freedom
Fighters (1956) Â· Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Â· Charles de Gaulle (1958) Â·
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) Â· U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper
/ John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus
Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio SegrÃ¨ / William Shockley /
Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) Â·
John F. Kennedy (1961) Â· Pope John XXIII (1962) Â· Martin Luther King, Jr.
(1963) Â· Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) Â· William Westmoreland (1965) Â· The
Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Â· Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) Â· The
Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) Â· The
Middle Americans (1969) Â· Willy Brandt (1970) Â· Richard Nixon (1971) Â·
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) Â· John Sirica (1973) Â· King Faisal
(1974) Â· American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek /
Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie
Jean King / Carol Sutton / Susie Sharp / Addie Wyatt (1975)  
1976â2000  
Jimmy Carter (1976) Â· Anwar Sadat (1977) Â· Deng Xiaoping (1978) Â· Ayatollah
Khomeini (1979) Â· Ronald Reagan (1980) Â· Lech WaÅÄsa (1981) Â· The
Computer (1982) Â· Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Â· Peter Ueberroth
(1984) Â· Deng Xiaoping (1985) Â· Corazon Aquino (1986) Â· Mikhail Gorbachev
(1987) Â· The Endangered Earth (1988) Â· Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) Â· George H.
W. Bush (1990) Â· Ted Turner (1991) Â· Bill Clinton (1992) Â· The Peacemakers:
Yasser Arafat / F.W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Â· Pope
John Paul II (1994) Â· Newt Gingrich (1995) Â· David Ho (1996) Â· Andrew Grove
(1997) Â· Bill Clinton / Kenneth Starr (1998) Â· Jeffrey P. Bezos (1999) Â·
George W. Bush (2000)  
2001âpresent  
Rudolph Giuliani (2001) Â· The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley
/ Sherron Watkins (2002) Â· The American Soldier (2003) Â· George W. Bush
(2004) Â· The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) Â· You
(2006) Â· Vladimir Putin (2007) Â· Barack Obama (2008)  
Persondata  
NAME Hitler, Adolf  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION FÃ¼hrer of the National Socialist German Workers Party;
Reichskanzler of Germany  
DATE OF BIRTH 20 April 1889  
PLACE OF BIRTH Braunau am Inn, Austria  
DATE OF DEATH 30 April 1945  
PLACE OF DEATH Berlin, Germany  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adolf_Hitler"

Categories: Adolf Hitler | Antisemitism | Homophobia | Discrimination |
Austrian expatriates in Germany | Austrian Nazis | Austrian painters | Beer
Hall Putsch | Chancellors of Germany | Presidents of Germany | German anti-
communists | German military leaders | German military personnel of World War
I | German people of World War II | German political writers | German
vegetarians | Germans of Austrian descent | Hitler family | Holocaust
perpetrators | Nazi leaders | Nazis who committed suicide | People from
Braunau am Inn | People with Parkinson's disease | Politicians who committed
suicide | Recipients of the Iron Cross | Suicides by firearm | Suicides by
poison | Time magazine Persons of the Year | World War II political leaders |
Deaths by firearm in Germany | Suicides in Germany | Burials in Germany | 1889
births | 1945 deaths

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages | Wikipedia
indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles containing German language text |
Wikipedia articles to be split from November 2008 | Articles needing
additional references from August 2008 | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles
with unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * á áá­á
  * Anglo-Saxon
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * ÜÜªÜ¡ÜÜ
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * ArmÃ£neashce
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bikol Central
  * Boarisch
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Cebuano
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * EstremeÃ±u
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FÃ¸royskt
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * è´èª
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * Kiswahili
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Limburgs
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Malti
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * Nedersaksisch
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Ù¾ÚØªÙ
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ripoarisch
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Rumantsch
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Scots
  * Seeltersk
  * Sesotho
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Soomaaliga
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Taqbaylit
  * TatarÃ§a/Ð¢Ð°ÑÐ°ÑÑÐ°
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * VÃ¨neto
  * Walon
  * West-Vlams
  * Winaray
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * Zazaki
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 12:42.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



