
# M.C. Escher

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Maurits Cornelis Escher  
<IMG>  
M.C. Escher (self-portrait), 1929  
Born June 17, 1898(1898-06-17)  
Leeuwarden, The Netherlands  
Died 27 March 1972 (aged 73)  
Laren, The Netherlands  
Nationality Dutch  
Field drawing, printmaking  
Works Relativity, Waterfall, Hand with Reflecting Sphere  
Awards Knighthood of the Order of Orange-Nassau  
Maurits Cornelis Escher (17 June 1898 â 27 March 1972), usually referred to
as M.C. Escher (IPA: ['ÉsjÉr]), was a Dutch graphic artist. He is known for
his often mathematically-inspired woodcuts, lithographs, and mezzotints. These
feature impossible constructions, explorations of infinity, architecture, and
tessellations.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Later life
  * 3 Works
  * 4 Escher's legacy
  * 5 Selected works
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 Bibliography
  * 9 External links

  
## Early life

Maurits Cornelis, or "Mauk" as he came to be nicknamed,[1] was born in
Leeuwarden, The Netherlands. He was the youngest son of civil engineer George
Arnold Escher and his second wife, Sara Gleichman. He was a sickly child, and
was placed in a special school at the age of seven and failed the second
grade.[2] In 1903, the family moved to Arnhem where he took carpentry and
piano lessons until he was thirteen years old.

From 1903 until 1918 he attended primary school and secondary school. Though
he excelled at drawing, his grades were generally poor. In 1919, Escher
attended the Haarlem School of Architecture and Decorative Arts. He briefly
studied architecture, but he failed a number of subjects (partly due to a
persistent skin infection) and switched to decorative arts.[2] Here he studied
under Samuel Jessurun de Mesquita, with whom he would remain friends for
years. In 1922 Escher left the school, having gained experience in drawing and
making woodcuts.

## Later life

In 1922, an important year of his life, Escher traveled through Italy
(Florence, San Gimignano, Volterra, Siena) and Spain (Madrid, Toledo,
Granada). He was impressed by the Italian countryside and by the Alhambra, a
fourteenth-century Moorish castle in Granada, Spain. He came back to Italy
regularly in the following years. In Italy he met Jetta Umiker, whom he
married in 1924. The young couple settled down in Rome and stayed there until
1935, when the political climate under Mussolini became unbearable. Their son,
Giorgio Arnaldo Escher, named after his grandfather, was born in Rome. The
family next moved to ChÃ¢teau-d'Åx, Switzerland where they remained for two
years.

Escher, who had been very fond of and inspired by the landscapes in Italy, was
decidedly unhappy in Switzerland, so in 1937, the family moved again, to
Ukkel, a small town near Brussels, Belgium. World War II forced them to move
in January 1941, this time to Baarn, the Netherlands, where Escher lived until
1970. Most of Escher's better-known pictures date from this period. The
sometimes cloudy, cold, wet weather of the Netherlands allowed him to focus
intently on his works, and only during 1962, when he underwent surgery, was
there a time when no new images were created.

Escher moved to the Rosa-Spier house in Laren in 1970, a retirement home for
artists where he had his own studio. He died at the home on 27 March 1972, at
73 years of age.

## Works

<IMG>

<IMG>

Drawing Hands, 1948

Escher's first print of an impossible reality was Still Life and Street, 1937.
His artistic expression was created from images in his mind, rather than
directly from observations and travels to other countries. Well known examples
of his work also include Drawing Hands, a work in which two hands are shown,
each drawing the other; Sky and Water, in which light plays on shadow to morph
the water background behind fish figures into bird figures on a sky
background; and Ascending and Descending, in which lines of people ascend and
descend stairs in an infinite loop, on a construction which is impossible to
build and possible to draw only by taking advantage of quirks of perception
and perspective.

He worked primarily in the media of lithographs and woodcuts, though the few
mezzotints he made are considered to be masterpieces of the technique. In his
graphic art, he portrayed mathematical relationships among shapes, figures and
space. Additionally, he explored interlocking figures using black and white to
enhance different dimensions. Integrated into his prints were mirror images of
cones, spheres, cubes, rings and spirals.

In addition to sketching landscape and nature in his early years, he also
sketched insects, which frequently appeared in his later work. His first
artistic work, completed in 1922, featured eight human heads divided in
different planes. Later around 1924, he lost interest in "regular division" of
planes, and turned to sketching landscapes in Italy with irregular
perspectives that are impossible in natural form.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Relativity, 1953

Although Escher did not have a mathematical trainingâhis understanding of
mathematics was largely visual and intuitiveâEscher's work had a strong
mathematical component, and more than a few of the worlds which he drew are
built around impossible objects such as the Necker cube and the Penrose
triangle. Many of Escher's works employed repeated tilings called
tessellations. Escher's artwork is especially well-liked by mathematicians and
scientists, who enjoy his use of polyhedra and geometric distortions. For
example, in Gravity, multi-colored turtles poke their heads out of a stellated
dodecahedron.

The mathematical influence in his work emerged around 1936, when he was
journeying the Mediterranean with the Adria Shipping Company. Specifically, he
became interested in order and symmetry. Escher described his journey through
the Mediterranean as "the richest source of inspiration I have ever tapped."

After his journey to the Alhambra, Escher tried to improve upon the art works
of the Moors using geometric grids as the basis for his sketches, which he
then overlaid with additional designs, mainly animals such as birds and lions.

His first study of mathematics, which would later lead to its incorporation
into his art works, began with George PÃ³lya's academic paper on plane
symmetry groups sent to him by his brother Berend. This paper inspired him to
learn the concept of the 17 wallpaper groups (plane symmetry groups).
Utilizing this mathematical concept, Escher created periodic tilings with 43
colored drawings of different types of symmetry. From this point on he
developed a mathematical approach to expressions of symmetry in his art works.
Starting in 1937, he created woodcuts using the concept of the 17 plane
symmetry groups.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Circle Limit III, 1959

In 1941, Escher wrote his first paper, now publicly recognized, called Regular
Division of the Plane with Asymmetric Congruent Polygons, which detailed his
mathematical approach to artwork creation. His intention in writing this was
to aid himself in integrating mathematics into art. Escher is considered a
research mathematician of his time because of his documentation with this
paper. In it, he studied color based division, and developed a system of
categorizing combinations of shape, color and symmetrical properties. By
studying these areas, he explored an area that later mathematicians labeled
crystallography.

Around 1956, Escher explored the concept of representing infinity on a two-
dimensional plane. Discussions with Canadian mathematician H.S.M. Coxeter
inspired Escher's interest in hyperbolic tessellations, which are regular
tilings of the hyperbolic plane. Escher's works Circle Limit IâIV
demonstrate this concept. In 1995, Coxeter verified that Escher had achieved
mathematical perfection in his etchings in a published paper. Coxeter wrote,
"Escher got it absolutely right to the millimeter."

His works brought him fame: he was awarded the Knighthood of the Order of
Orange Nassau in 1955. Subsequently he regularly designed art for dignitaries
around the world. An asteroid, 4444 Escher, was named in his honour in 1985.

In 1958, he published a paper called Regular Division of the Plane, in which
he described the systematic buildup of mathematical designs in his artworks.
He emphasized, "Mathematicians have opened the gate leading to an extensive
domain."

Overall, his early love of Roman and Italian landscapes and of nature led to
his interest in the concept of regular division of a plane, which he applied
in over 150 colored works. Other mathematical principles evidenced in his
works include the superposition of a hyperbolic plane on a fixed 2-dimensional
plane, and the incorporation of three-dimensional objects such as spheres,
columns and cubes into his works. For example, in a print called "Reptiles,"
he combined two and three-dimensional images. In one of his papers, Escher
emphasized the importance of dimensionality and described himself as
"irritated" by flat shapes: "I make them come out of the plane."

<IMG>

<IMG>

Waterfall, 1961

Escher also studied the mathematical concepts of topology. He learned
additional concepts in mathematics from the British mathematician Roger
Penrose. From this knowledge he created Waterfall and Up and Down, featuring
irregular perspectives similar to the concept of the MÃ¶bius strip.

Escher printed Metamorphosis I in 1937, which was a beginning part of a series
of designs that told a story through the use of pictures. These works
demonstrated a culmination of Escher's skills to incorporate mathematics into
art. In Metamorphosis I, he transformed convex polygons into regular patterns
in a plane to form a human motif. This effect symbolizes his change of
interest from landscape and nature to regular division of a plane.

One of his most notable works is the piece Metamorphosis III, which is wide
enough to cover all the walls in a room, and then loop back onto itself.

After 1953, Escher became a lecturer at many organizations. A planned series
of lectures in North America in 1962 was cancelled due to an illness, but the
illustrations and text for the lectures, written out in full by Escher, was
later published as part of the book Escher on Escher. In July 1969, he
finished his last work before his death, a woodcut called Snakes. It features
etchings of patterns that fade to infinity both to the center and the edge of
a circle. Snakes transverse the circle and the patterns in it, with their
heads sticking out of the circle.

## Escher's legacy

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Escher Museum in The Hague

Ownership of the Escher intellectual property and of his unique art works have
been separated from each other.

In 1969, Escher's business advisor, the late Jan W. Vermeulen, author of a
biography in Dutch on the artist, established the M.C. Escher Stichting (M.C.
Escher Foundation), and transferred into this entity virtually all of Escher's
unique work as well as hundreds of his original prints. These works were lent
by the Foundation to the Hague Museum. Upon Escher's death, his three sons
dissolved the Foundation, and they became partners in the ownership of the art
works. In 1980, this holding was sold to an American art dealer and the Hague
Museum. The Museum obtained all of the documentation and the smaller portion
of the art works.

The copyrights remained the possession of the three sons - who later sold them
to Cordon Art, a Dutch company. Control of the copyrights was subsequently
transferred to The M.C. Escher Company B.V. of Baarn, Netherlands, which
licenses use of the copyrights on all of Escher's art and on his spoken and
written text, and also controls the trademarks. Filing of the trademark "M.C.
Escher" in the United States was opposed, but the Dutch company prevailed in
the courts on the grounds that an artist or his heirs have a right to
trademark his name.

A related entity, the M.C. Escher Foundation of Baarn, promotes Escher's work
by organizing exhibitions, publishing books and producing films about his life
and work.

The primary institutional collections of original works by M.C. Escher are the
Escher Museum, a subsidiary of the Haags Gemeentemuseum in The Hague; the
National Gallery of Art (Washington, DC); the National Gallery of Canada
(Ottawa); the Israel Museum (Jerusalem); Huis ten Bosch (Nagasaki, Japan); and
the Boston Public Library.  

## Selected works

  * Trees, ink (1920)
  * St. Bavo's, Haarlem, ink (1920)
  * Flor de Pascua (The Easter Flower), woodcut/book illustrations (1921)
  * Eight Heads, woodcut (1922)
  * Dolphins also known as Dolphins in Phosphorescent Sea, woodcut (1923)
  * Tower of Babel, woodcut (1928)
  * Street in Scanno, Abruzzi, lithograph (1930)
  * Castrovalva, lithograph (1930)
  * The Bridge, lithograph (1930)
  * Palizzi, Calabria, woodcut (1930)
  * Pentedattilo, Calabria, lithograph (1930)
  * Atrani, Coast of Amalfi, lithograph (1931)
  * Ravello and the Coast of Amalfi, lithograph (1931)
  * Covered Alley in Atrani, Coast of Amalfi, wood engraving (1931)
  * Phosphorescent Sea, lithograph (1933)
  * Still Life with Spherical Mirror, lithograph (1934)
  * Hand with Reflecting Sphere also known as Self-Portrait in Spherical Mirror, lithograph (1935)
  * Inside St. Peter's, wood engraving (1935)
  * Portrait of G.A. Escher, lithograph (1935)
  * âHellâ, lithograph, (copied from a painting by Hieronymus Bosch) (1935)
  * Regular Division of the Plane, series of drawings that continued until the 1960s (1936)
  * Still Life and Street (His first impossible reality), woodcut (1937)
  * Metamorphosis I, woodcut (1937)
  * Day and Night, woodcut (1938)
  * Cycle, lithograph (1938)
  * Sky and Water I, woodcut (1938)
  * Sky and Water II, lithograph (1938)
  * Metamorphosis II, woodcut (1939â1940)
  * Verbum (Earth, Sky and Water), lithograph (1942)
  * Reptiles, lithograph (1943)
  * Ant, lithograph (1943)
  * Encounter, lithograph (1944)
  * Doric Columns, wood engraving (1945)
  * Three Spheres I, wood engraving (1945)
  * Magic Mirror, lithograph (1946)
  * Three Spheres II, lithograph (1946)
  * Another World Mezzotint also known as Other World Gallery, mezzotint (1946)
  * Eye, mezzotint (1946)
  * Another World also known as Other World, wood engraving and woodcut (1947)
  * Crystal, mezzotint (1947)
  * Up and Down also known as High and Low, lithograph (1947)
  * Drawing Hands, lithograph (1948)
  * Dewdrop, mezzotint (1948)
  * Stars, wood engraving (1948)
  * Double Planetoid, wood engraving (1949)
  * Order and Chaos (Contrast), lithograph (1950)
  * Rippled Surface, woodcut and linoleum cut (1950)
  * Curl-up, lithograph (1951)
  * House of Stairs, lithograph (1951)
  * House of Stairs II, lithograph (1951)
  * Puddle, woodcut (1952)
  * Gravitation, (1952)
  * Dragon, woodcut lithograph and watercolor (1952)
  * Cubic Space Division, lithograph (1952)
  * Relativity, lithograph (1953)
  * Tetrahedral Planetoid, woodcut (1954)
  * Compass Rose (Order and Chaos II), lithograph (1955)
  * Convex and Concave, lithograph (1955)
  * Three Worlds, lithograph (1955)
  * Print Gallery, lithograph (1956)
  * Mosaic II, lithograph (1957)
  * Cube with Magic Ribbons, lithograph (1957)
  * Belvedere, lithograph (1958)
  * Sphere Spirals, woodcut (1958)
  * Ascending and Descending, lithograph (1960)
  * Waterfall, lithograph (1961)
  * MÃ¶bius Strip II (Red Ants) woodcut (1963)
  * Knot, pencil and crayon (1966)
  * Metamorphosis III, woodcut (1967â1968)
  * Snakes, woodcut (1969)

## See also

<IMG> Art portal  
  * GÃ¶del, Escher, Bach by Douglas Hofstadter
  * M. C. Escher in popular culture
  * M. C. Escher's legacy
  * Printmaking
  * IstvÃ¡n Orosz
  * echochrome

## References

  1. ^ "We named him Maurits Cornelis after S.'s [Sara's] beloved uncle Van Hall, and called him 'Mauk' for short ....", Diary of Escher's father, quoted in M. C. Escher: His Life and Complete Graphic Work, Abradale Press, 1981, p. 9.
  2. ^ a b Barbara E, PhD. Bryden. Sundial: Theoretical Relationships Between Psychological Type, Talent, And Disease. Gainesville, Fla: Center for Applications of Psychological Type. ISBN 0-935652-46-9.

## Bibliography

  * M.C. Escher, The Graphic Work of M.C. Escher, Ballantine, 1971. Includes Escher's own commentary.
  * M.C. Escher, The Fantastic World of M.C. Escher, Video collection of examples of the development of his art, and interviews, Director, Michele Emmer.
  * Locher, J.L. (2000). The Magic of M. C. Escher. Harry N. Abrams, Inc. ISBN 0-8109-6720-0.
  * Ernst, Bruno; Escher, M.C. (1995). The Magic Mirror of M.C. Escher (Taschen Series). TASCHEN America Llc. ISBN 1-886155-00-3 Escher's art with commentary by Ernst on Escher's life and art, including several pages on his use of polyhedra.
  * Abrams (1995). The M.C. Escher Sticker Book. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 0-8109-2638-5 .
  * "Escher, M. C.." The World Book Encyclopedia. 10th ed. 2001.
  * O'Connor, J. J. "Escher." Escher. 01 2000. University of St Andrews, Scotland. 17 June 2005. http://www-gap.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Mathematicians/Escher.html.
  * Schattschneider, Doris and Walker, Wallace. M. C. Escher Kaleidocycles, Pomegranate Communications; Petaluma, California, 1987. ISBN 0-906212-28-6.
  * Schattschneider, Doris. M.C. Escher : visions of symmetry, New York, N.Y. : Harry N. Abrams, 2004. ISBN 0-8109-4308-5.
  * M.C. Escher's legacy: a centennial celebration; collection of articles coming from the M.C. Escher Centennial Conference, Rome, 1998 / Doris Schattschneider, Michele Emmer (editors). Berlin; London: Springer-Verlag, 2003. ISBN 3-540-42458-X (alk. paper), ISBN 3-540-42458-X (hbk).
  * M.C. Escher: His Life and Complete Graphic Work, edited by J. L. Locher, Amsterdam 1981.

## External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: M.C.
Escher  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: M.C. Escher  
  * M.C. Escher â Official website
  * World of Escher â Commercial site. gallery, discussion forum and tessellation contests.
  * Math and the Art of M.C. Escher
  * A website devoted to information on Escher and his original works
  * A big Escher gallery with high resolution images
  * Escher and the Droste effect \- Applying mathematics to Escher's Print Gallery
  * Escherization problem and its solution
  * If It Moved Him, He Had To Draw It
  * Escher for Real \- physical replicas of some of Escher's "impossible" designs.
  * NGA - M.C. Escher: Life and Work
  * Copyright issue regarding Escher

Persondata  
NAME Escher, M. C.  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Escher, Maurits Cornelis (full name)  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Artist  
DATE OF BIRTH 17 June 1898  
PLACE OF BIRTH Leeuwarden, Netherlands  
DATE OF DEATH 27 March 1972  
PLACE OF DEATH Hilversum, Netherlands  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M.C._Escher"

Categories: M. C. Escher | Dutch illustrators | Dutch printmakers | Modern
printmakers | 1898 births | 1972 deaths | Impossible objects | People from
Leeuwarden

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Malti
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 14:54.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



