
# Chinua Achebe

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Achebe" redirects here. For the fictional character, see Achebe (comics).  
<IMG>  
Chinua Achebe (2008)  
Born Albert Chiná»¥alá»¥má»gá»¥ Achebe  
16 November 1930 (1930-11-16) (age 78)  
Nneobi, Nigeria  
Nationality Nigerian  
Ethnicity Igbo  
Writing period 1958âpresent  
Notable work(s) "The African Trilogy" â Things Fall Apart, No Longer at Ease
and Arrow of God  
Chinua Achebe (pronounced /ËtÊÉªnwÉË ÉËtÊÉbeÉª/[1]), born Albert
Chiná»¥alá»¥má»gá»¥ Achebe on 16 November 1930, is a Nigerian[2] novelist,
poet, professor and critic. He is best known for his first novel, Things Fall
Apart (1958), which is the most widely read book in modern African
literature.[3].

Raised by Evangelical Protestant parents in the Igbo village of Ogidi in
southeastern Nigeria, Achebe excelled at school and won a scholarship for
undergraduate studies. He became fascinated with world religions and
traditional African cultures, and began writing stories as a university
student[4]). After graduation, he worked for the Nigerian Broadcasting Service
and soon moved to the metropolis of Lagos. He gained worldwide attention for
Things Fall Apart in the late 1950s; his later novels include No Longer at
Ease (1960), Arrow of God (1964), A Man of the People (1966), and Anthills of
the Savannah (1987). Achebe writes his novels in English and has defended the
use of English, a language of colonizers, in African literature. In 1975, his
lecture An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad's "Heart of Darkness" became the
focus of controversy, for its criticism of Joseph Conrad as "a thoroughgoing
racist".

When the region of Biafra broke away from Nigeria in 1967, Achebe became a
devoted supporter of Biafran independence and served as ambassador for the
people of the new nation. The war ravaged the populace, and as starvation and
violence took its toll, he appealed to the people of Europe and the Americas
for aid. When the Nigerian government retook the region in 1970, he involved
himself in political parties but soon resigned due to frustration over the
corruption and elitism he witnessed. He lived in the United States for several
years in the 1970s, and returned to the U.S. in 1990 after a car accident left
him partially disabled.

Achebe's novels focus on the traditions of Igbo society, the effect of
Christian influences, and the clash of values during and after the colonial
era. His style relies heavily on the Igbo oral tradition, and combines
straightforward narration with representations of folk stories, proverbs, and
oratory. He has also published a number of short stories, children's books,
and essay collections. He is currently the Charles P. Stevenson Professor of
Languages and Literature at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York,
United States.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Early life
      * 1.1.1 Education
      * 1.1.2 University
    * 1.2 Teaching and producing
    * 1.3 Things Fall Apart
    * 1.4 Marriage and family
    * 1.5 No Longer at Ease and fellowship travels
    * 1.6 Voice of Nigeria and African Writers Series
    * 1.7 Arrow of God
    * 1.8 A Man of the People
    * 1.9 Civil War
    * 1.10 Postwar academia
      * 1.10.1 Criticism of Conrad
    * 1.11 Retirement and politics
    * 1.12 Anthills and paralysis
  * 2 Style
    * 2.1 Oral tradition
    * 2.2 Use of English
  * 3 Themes
    * 3.1 Culture and colonialism
    * 3.2 Masculinity and femininity
  * 4 Legacy
  * 5 Works
  * 6 References
  * 7 Bibliography
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

Achebe's parents, Isaiah Okafo Achebe and Janet Anaenechi Iloegbunam, were
converts to the Protestant Church Mission Society (CMS) in Nigeria.[5] The
elder Achebe stopped practising the religion of his ancestors, but he
respected its traditions and sometimes incorporated elements of its rituals
into his Christian practice. Chinua's unabbreviated name, Chinualumogu ("May
God fight on my behalf"[6]), was a prayer for divine protection and
stability.[6] The Achebe family had five other surviving children, named in a
similar fusion of traditional words relating to their new religion: Frank
Okwuofu, John Chukwuemeka Ifeanyichukwu, Zinobia Uzoma, Augustine Nduka, and
Grace Nwanneka.[6]

### [edit] Early life

Chinua was born Albert Chinualumogu Achebe in the Igbo village of Nneobi, on
16 November 1930.[6] Tofunicaon and Tyleesha Achebe stood at a crossroads of
traditional culture and Christian influence; this made a significant impact on
the children, especially Chinualumogu. After the youngest daughter was born,
the family moved to Isaiah Achebe's ancestral village of Ogidi, in what is now
the state of Anambra.[2]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of Nigeria's linguistic groups. Achebe's homeland, the Igbo region
(sometimes called Ibo), lies in the central south.

Storytelling was a mainstay of the Igbo tradition and an integral part of the
community. Chinua's mother and sister Zinobia Uzoma told him many stories as a
child, which he repeatedly requested. His education was furthered by the
collages his father hung on the walls of their home, as well as almanacs and
numerous books â including a prose adaptation of A Midsummer Night's Dream
(c. 1590) and an Igbo version of The Pilgrim's Progress (1678).[7][8] Chinua
also eagerly anticipated traditional village events, like the frequent
masquerade ceremonies, which he recreated later in his novels and stories.[9]

#### [edit] Education

In 1936, Achebe entered St Philips' Central School. Despite his protests, he
spent a week in the religious class for young children, but was quickly moved
to a higher class when the school's chaplain took note of his
intelligence.[10] One teacher described him as the student with the best
handwriting in class, and the best reading skills.[11] He also attended Sunday
school every week and the special evangelical services held monthly, often
carrying his father's bag. A controversy erupted at one such session, when
apostates from the new church challenged the catechist about the tenets of
Christianity. Achebe later included a scene from this incident in Things Fall
Apart.[12][13]

At the age of twelve, Achebe moved away from his family to the village of
Nekede, four kilometres from Owerri. He enrolled as a student at the Central
School, where his older brother John taught.[14] In Nekede, Achebe gained an
appreciation for Mbari, a traditional art form which seeks to invoke the gods'
protection through symbolic sacrifices in the form of sculpture and
collage.[15] When the time came to change to secondary school, in 1944, Achebe
sat entrance examinations for and was accepted at both the prestigious Dennis
Memorial Grammar School in Onitsha and the even more prestigious Government
College in Umuahia.[16]

Modelled on the British public school, and funded by the colonial
administration, Government College had been established in 1929 to educate
Nigeria's future elite.[16] It had rigorous academic standards and was
vigorously egalitarian, accepting boys purely on the basis of ability.[16] The
language of the school was English, not only to develop proficiency but also
to provide a common tongue for pupils from different Nigerian language
groups.[17] Achebe described this later as being ordered to "put away their
different mother tongues and communicate in the language of their
colonisers".[18] The rule was strictly enforced and Achebe recalls that his
first punishment was for asking another boy to pass the soap in Igbo.[17]

Once there, Achebe was double-promoted in his first year, completing the first
two years' studies in one, and spending only four years in secondary school,
instead of the standard five.[19] Achebe was unsuited to the school's sports
regimen and belonged instead to a group of six exceedingly studious pupils. So
intense were their study habits that the headmaster banned the reading of
textbooks from five to six o'clock in the afternoon (though other activities
and other books were allowed).[20]

Achebe started to explore the school's "wonderful library".[21] There he
discovered Booker T. Washington's Up From Slavery (1901), the autobiography of
an American former slave; Achebe "found it sad, but it showed him another
dimension of reality".[20] He also read classic novels, such as Gulliver's
Travels (1726), David Copperfield (1850), and Treasure Island (1883) together
with tales of colonial derring-do such as H. Rider Haggard's Allan Quatermain
(1887) and John Buchan's Prester John (1910). Achebe later recalled that, as a
reader, he "took sides with the white characters against the savages"[21]and
even developed a dislike for Africans. "The white man was good and reasonable
and intelligent and courageous. The savages arrayed against him were sinister
and stupid or, at the most, cunning. I hated their guts."[21]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 2007 street scene in Ibadan

#### [edit] University

In 1948, in preparation for independence, Nigeria's first university
opened.[22] Known as University College, (now the University of Ibadan), it
was an associate college of the University of London. Achebe obtained such
high marks in the entrance examination that he was admitted as a Major Scholar
in the university's first intake and given a bursary to study medicine.[22]
After a year of gruelling work, however, he decided science was not for him
and he changed to English, history, and theology.[23] Because he switched his
field, however, he lost his scholarship and had to pay tuition fees. He
received a government bursary, and his family also donated money â his older
brother Augustine even gave up money for a trip home from his job as a civil
servant so Chinua could continue his studies.[24] From its inception, the
university had a strong English faculty and it includes many famous writers
amongst its alumni. These include Nobel Laureate Wole Soyinka, novelist Elechi
Amadi, poet and playwright John Pepper Clark, and poet Christopher Okigbo.[25]
In 1950 Achebe wrote a piece for the University Herald entitled "Polar
Undergraduate", his debut as an author. It used irony and humour to celebrate
the intellectual vigour of his classmates.[26] He followed this with other
essays and letters about philosophy and freedom in academia, some of which
were published in another campus magazine, The Bug.[27] He served as the
Herald's editor during the 1951â2 school year.[28]

While at the university, Achebe wrote his first short story, "In a Village
Church", which combines details of life in rural Nigeria with Christian
institutions and icons, a style which appears in many of his later works.[29]
Other short stories he wrote during his time at Ibadan (including "The Old
Order in Conflict with the New" and "Dead Men's Path") examine conflicts
between tradition and modernity, with an eye toward dialogue and understanding
on both sides.[30] When a professor named Geoffrey Parrinder arrived at the
university to teach comparative religion, Achebe began to explore the fields
of Christian history and African traditional religions.[31]

It was during his studies at Ibadan that Achebe began to become critical of
European literature about Africa. He read Irish novelist Joyce Cary's 1939
book Mister Johnson, about a cheerful Nigerian man who (among other things)
works for an abusive British storeowner. Achebe recognised his dislike for the
African protagonist as a sign of the author's cultural ignorance. One of his
classmates announced to the professor that the only enjoyable moment in the
book is when Johnson is shot.[32]

After the final examinations at Ibadan in 1953, Achebe was awarded a second-
class degree. Rattled by not receiving the highest result possible, he was
uncertain how to proceed after graduation. He returned to his hometown of
Ogidi to sort through his options.[33]

### [edit] Teaching and producing

While he meditated on his possible career paths, Achebe was visited by a
friend from the university, who convinced him to apply for an English teaching
position at the Merchants of Light school at Oba. It was a ramshackle
institution with a crumbling infrastructure and a meagre library; the school
was built on what the residents called "bad bush" â a section of land
thought to be tainted by unfriendly spirits.[34] Later, in Things Fall Apart,
Achebe describes a similar area called the "evil forest", where the Christian
missionaries are given a place to build their church.[35]

As a teacher he urged his students to read extensively and be original in
their work.[36] The students did not have access to the newspapers he had read
as a student, so Achebe made his own available in the classroom. He taught in
Oba for four months, but when an opportunity arose in 1954 to work for the
Nigerian Broadcasting Service (NBS), he left the school and moved to
Lagos.[37]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lagos in 2007

The NBS, a radio network started in 1933 by the colonial government,[38]
assigned Achebe to the Talks Department, preparing scripts for oral delivery.
This helped him master the subtle nuances between written and spoken language,
a skill that helped him later to write realistic dialogue.[39]

The city of Lagos also made a significant impression on him. A huge
conurbation, the city teemed with recent migrants from the rural villages.
Achebe revelled in the social and political activity around him and later drew
upon his experiences when describing the city in his 1960 novel No Longer At
Ease.[40]

While in Lagos, Achebe started work on a novel. This was challenging, since
very little African fiction had been written in English, although Amos
Tutuola's Palm-Wine Drinkard (1952) and Cyprian Ekwensi's People of the City
(1954) were notable exceptions. While appreciating Ekwensi's work, Achebe
worked hard to develop his own style, even as he pioneered the creation of the
Nigerian novel itself.[41] A visit to Nigeria by Queen Elizabeth II in 1956
brought issues of colonialism and politics to the surface, and was a
significant moment for Achebe.[42]

Also in 1956, Achebe was selected for training in London at the Staff School
run by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). His first trip outside
Nigeria was an opportunity to advance his technical production skills, and to
solicit feedback on his novel (which was later split into two books). In
London, he met a novelist named Gilbert Phelps, to whom he offered the
manuscript. Phelps responded with great enthusiasm, asking Achebe if he could
show it to his editor and publishers. Achebe declined, insisting that it
needed more work.[41]

### [edit] Things Fall Apart

Main article: Things Fall Apart

Back in Nigeria, Achebe set to work revising and editing his novel (now titled
Things Fall Apart, after a line in the poem "The Second Coming" by William
Butler Yeats). He cut away the second and third sections of the book, leaving
only the story of a yam farmer named Okonkwo. He added sections, improved
various chapters, and restructured the prose. By 1957, he had sculpted it to
his liking, and took advantage of an advertisement offering a typing service.
He sent his only copy of his handwritten manuscript (along with the â¤22 fee)
to the London company. After he waited several months without receiving any
communication from the typing service, Achebe began to worry. His boss at the
NBS, Angela Beattie, was going to London for her annual leave; he asked her to
visit the company. She did, and angrily demanded to know why it was lying
ignored in the corner of the office. The company quickly sent a typed copy to
Achebe. Beattie's intervention was crucial for his ability to continue as a
writer. Had the novel been lost, he later said, "I would have been so
discouraged that I would probably have given up altogether."[43]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A spiral stack of the 1994 Anchor Books edition of Things Fall Apart

In 1958, Achebe sent his novel to the agent recommended by Gilbert Phelps in
London. It was sent to several publishing houses; some rejected it
immediately, claiming that fiction from African writers had no market
potential.[44] Finally it reached the office of Heinemann, where executives
hesitated until an educational adviser, Donald MacRae â just back in England
after a trip through west Africa â read the book and forced the company's
hand with his succinct report: "This is the best novel I have read since the
war".[45]

Heinemann published 2,000 hardcover copies of Things Fall Apart on 17 June
1958. According to Alan Hill, employed by the publisher at the time, the
company did not "touch a word of it" in preparation for release.[46] The book
was received well by the British press, and received positive reviews from
critic Walter Allen and novelist Angus Wilson. Three days after publication,
the Times Literary Supplement wrote that the book "genuinely succeeds in
presenting tribal life from the inside". The Observer called it "an excellent
novel", and the literary magazine Time and Tide said that "Mr. Achebe's style
is a model for aspirants".[47]

Initial reception in Nigeria was mixed. When Hill tried to promote the book in
West Africa, he was met with scepticism and ridicule. The faculty at the
University of Ibadan was amused at the thought of a worthwhile novel being
written by an alumnus.[48] Others were more supportive; one review in the
magazine Black Orpheus said: "The book as a whole creates for the reader such
a vivid picture of Ibo life that the plot and characters are little more than
symbols representing a way of life lost irrevocably within living memory."[49]

In the book Okonkwo struggles with the legacy of his father â a shiftless
debtor fond of playing the flute â as well as the complications and
contradictions that arise when white missionaries arrive in his village of
Umuofia.[50] Exploring the terrain of cultural conflict, particularly the
encounter between Igbo tradition and Christian doctrine, Achebe returns to the
themes of his earlier stories, which grew from his own background.

Things Fall Apart has become one of the most important books in African
literature.[51] Selling over 8 million copies around the world, it has been
translated into 50 languages, making Achebe the most translated African writer
of all time.[52][53]

### [edit] Marriage and family

In the same year Things Fall Apart was published, Achebe was promoted at the
NBS and put in charge of the network's eastern region coverage. He moved to
Enugu and began to work on his administrative duties. There he met a woman
named Christie Okoli, who had grown up in the area and joined the NBS staff
when he arrived. They first conversed when she brought to his attention a pay
discrepancy; a friend of hers found that, although they had been hired
simultaneously, Christie had been rated lower and offered a lower wage. Sent
to the hospital for an appendectomy soon afterwards, she was pleasantly
surprised when Achebe visited her with gifts and magazines.[54]

Achebe and Okoli grew closer in the following years, and on 22 October 1953
were married in the Chapel of Resurrection on the campus of the University of
Ibadan.[55] Christie Achebe has described their marriage as one of trust and
mutual understanding; some tension arose early in their union, due to
conflicts about attention and communication. However, as their relationship
matured, husband and wife made efforts to adapt to one another.[56]

Their first child, a daughter named Chinelo, was born on 11 July 1962. They
had a son, Ikechukwu, on 3 December 1964, and another boy named Chidi on 24
May 1967. When the children began attending school in Lagos, their parents
became worried about the world view â especially with regard to race â
expressed at the school, especially through the mostly white teachers and
books that presented a prejudiced view of African life.[57] In 1966, Achebe
published his first children's book, Chike and the River, to address some of
these concerns.[58] After the Biafran War, the Achebes had another daughter on
7 March 1970, named Nwando.[59]

### [edit] No Longer at Ease and fellowship travels

In 1960, while they were still dating, Achebe dedicated to Christie Okoli his
second novel, No Longer at Ease, about a civil servant who is embroiled in the
corruption of Lagos. The protagonist is Obi, grandson of Things Fall Apart's
main character, Okonkwo.[60] Drawing on his time in the city, Achebe writes
about Obi's experiences in Lagos to reflect the challenges facing a new
generation on the threshold of Nigerian independence. Obi is trapped between
the expectations of his family, its clan, his home village, and larger
society. He is crushed by these forces (like his grandfather before him) and
finds himself imprisoned for bribery. Having shown his acumen for portraying
traditional Igbo culture, Achebe demonstrated in his second novel an ability
to depict modern Nigerian life.[61]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A map of areas using the Swahili language

Later that year, Achebe was awarded a Rockefeller Fellowship for six months of
travel, which he called "the first important perk of my writing career";[62]
Achebe set out for a tour of East Africa. One month after Nigeria achieved its
independence, he travelled to Kenya, where he was required to complete an
immigration form by checking a box indicating his ethnicity: European,
Asiatic, Arab, or Other. Shocked and dismayed at being forced into an "Other"
identity, he found the situation "almost funny" and took an extra form as a
souvenir.[63] Continuing to Tanganyika and Zanzibar (now united in Tanzania),
he was frustrated by the paternalistic attitude he observed among non-African
hotel clerks and social elites.[64]

Achebe also found in his travels that Swahili was gaining prominence as a
major African language. Radio programs were broadcast in Swahili, and its use
was widespread in the countries he visited. Nevertheless, he also found an
"apathy" among the people toward literature written in Swahili.[65] He met the
poet Sheikh Shaaban Robert, who complained of the difficulty he had faced in
trying to publish his Swahili-language work.[66]

In Northern Rhodesia (now called Zambia), Achebe found himself sitting in a
whites-only section of a bus to Victoria Falls. Interrogated by the ticket
taker as to why he was sitting in the front, he replied, "if you must know I
come from Nigeria, and there we sit where we like in the bus."[67] Upon
reaching the waterfall he was cheered by the black travellers from the bus,
but he was saddened by the irony that they felt unable to stand up to the
policy of segregation.[68]

Two years later, Achebe again left Nigeria, this time as part of a Fellowship
for Creative Artists awarded by UNESCO. He travelled to the United States and
Brazil. He met with a number of writers from the US, including novelists Ralph
Ellison and Arthur Miller.[69] In Brazil, he met with several other authors,
with whom he discussed the complications of writing in Portuguese. Achebe
worried that the vibrant literature of the nation would be lost if left
untranslated into a more widely-spoken language.[70]

### [edit] Voice of Nigeria and African Writers Series

Once he returned to Nigeria, Achebe was promoted at the NBS to the position of
Director of External Broadcasting. One of his first duties was to help create
the Voice of Nigeria network. The station broadcast its first transmission on
New Year's Day 1962, and worked to maintain an objective perspective during
the turbulent era immediately following independence.[71] This objectivity was
put to the test when Nigerian Prime Minister Abubakar Tafawa Balewa declared a
state of emergency in the Western Region, responding to a series of conflicts
between officials of varying parties. Achebe became saddened by the evidence
of corruption and silencing of political opposition.[72]

In 1962 he attended a conference of African writers in English at the Makerere
University College in Kampala, Uganda. He met with important literary figures
from around the continent and the world, including Ghanaian poet Kofi Awoonor,
Nigerian playwright and poet Wole Soyinka, and US poet-author Langston Hughes.
Among the topics of discussion was an attempt to determine whether the term
African literature ought to include work from the diaspora, or solely that
writing composed by people living within the continent itself. Achebe
indicated that it was not "a very significant question",[73] and that scholars
would do well to wait until a body of work were large enough to judge. Writing
about the conference in several journals, Achebe hailed it as a milestone for
the literature of Africa, and highlighted the importance of community among
isolated voices on the continent and beyond.[74]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Achebe selected the novel Weep Not, Child by Ngugi wa Thiong'o as one of the
first titles of Heinemann's African Writers Series.

While at Makerere, Achebe was asked to read a novel written by a student
(James Ngugi, later known as Ngugi wa Thiong'o) called Weep Not, Child.
Impressed, he sent it to Alan Hill at Heinemann, which published it two years
later to coincide with its paperback line of books from African writers. Hill
indicated this was to remedy a situation where British publishers "regarded
West Africa only as a place where you sold books." Achebe was chosen to be
General Editor of the African Writers Series, which became a significant force
in bringing postcolonial literature from Africa to the rest of the world.[75]

As these works became more widely available, reviews and essays about African
literature â especially from Europe â began to flourish. Bristling against
the commentary flooding his home country, Achebe published an essay titled
"Where Angels Fear to Tread" in the December 1962 issue of Nigeria Magazine.
In it, he distinguished between the hostile critic (entirely negative), the
amazed critic (entirely positive), and the conscious critic (who seeks a
balance). He lashed out at those who critiqued African writers from the
outside, saying: "no man can understand another whose language he does not
speak (and 'language' here does not mean simply words, but a man's entire
world view)."[76]

### [edit] Arrow of God

Achebe's third book, Arrow of God, was published in 1964. Like its
predecessors, it explores the intersections of Igbo tradition and European
Christianity. Set in the village of Umuaro at the start of the twentieth
century, the novel tells the story of Ezeulu, a Chief Priest of Ulu. Shocked
by the power of British intervention in the area, he orders his son to learn
the foreigners' secret. As with Okonkwo in Things Fall Apart and Obi in No
Longer at Ease, Ezeulu is consumed by the resulting tragedy.

The idea for the novel came in 1959, when Achebe heard the story of a Chief
Priest being imprisoned by a District Officer.[77] He drew further inspiration
a year later when he viewed a collection of Igbo objects excavated from the
area by archaeologist Thurstan Shaw; Achebe was startled by the cultural
sophistication of the artefacts. When an acquaintance showed him a series of
papers from colonial officers (not unlike the fictional Pacification of the
Primitive Tribes of the Lower Niger referenced at the end of Things Fall
Apart), Achebe combined these strands of history and began work on Arrow of
God in earnest.[78] Like Achebe's previous works, Arrow was roundly praised by
critics.[79] A revised edition was published in 1974 to correct what Achebe
called "certain structural weaknesses".[80]

In a letter to Achebe, the US writer John Updike expressed his surprised
admiration for the sudden downfall of Arrow of God's protagonist. He praised
the author's courage to write "an ending few Western novelists would have
contrived".[81] Achebe responded by suggesting that the individualistic hero
was rare in African literature, given its roots in communal living and the
degree to which characters are "subject to non-human forces in the
universe".[82]

### [edit] A Man of the People

A Man of the People was published in 1966. A bleak satire set in an unnamed
African state which has just attained independence, the novel follows a
teacher named Odili Samalu from the village of Anata who opposes a corrupt
Minister of Culture named Nanga for his Parliament seat. Upon reading an
advance copy of the novel, Achebe's friend John Pepper Clark declared:
"Chinua, I know you are a prophet. Everything in this book has happened except
a military coup!"[83]

Soon afterward, Nigerian Major Chukwuma Kaduna Nzeogwu seized control of the
northern region of the country as part of a larger coup attempt. Commanders in
other areas failed, and the plot was answered by a military crackdown. A
massacre of three thousand people from the eastern region living in the north
occurred soon afterwards, and stories of other attacks on Igbo Nigerians began
to filter into Lagos.[84]

The ending of his novel had brought Achebe to the attention of military
personnel, who suspected him of having foreknowledge of the coup. When he
received word of the pursuit, he sent his wife (who was pregnant) and children
on a squalid boat through a series of unseen creeks to the Igbo stronghold of
Port Harcourt. They arrived safely, but Christie suffered a miscarriage at the
journey's end. Chinua rejoined them soon afterwards in Ogidi. These cities
were safe from military incursion because they were in the southeast, part of
the region which would later secede.[85]

Once the family had resettled in Enugu, Achebe and his friend Christopher
Okigbo started a publishing house called Citadel Press, to improve the quality
and increase the quantity of literature available to younger readers. One of
its first submissions was a story called How the Dog was Domesticated, which
Achebe revised and rewrote, turning it into a complex allegory for the
country's political tumult. Its final title was How the Leopard Got His
Claws.[86] Years later a Nigerian intelligence officer told Achebe, "of all
the things that came out of Biafra, that book was the most important."[87]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of the Biafra secession

### [edit] Civil War

In May 1967, the southeastern region of Nigeria broke away to form the
Republic of Biafra; in July the Nigerian military attacked to suppress what it
considered an unlawful rebellion. Achebe's partner, Christopher Okigbo, who
had become a close friend of the family (especially of Achebe's son, young
Ikechukwu), volunteered to join the secessionist army while simultaneously
working at the press. Achebe's house was bombed one afternoon; Christie had
taken the children to visit her sick mother, so the only victims were his
books and papers. The Achebe family narrowly escaped disaster several times
during the war. Five days later, Christopher Okigbo was killed on the war's
front line.[88] Achebe was shaken considerably by the loss; in 1971 he wrote
"Dirge for Okigbo", originally in the Igbo language but later translated to
English.[89]

As the war intensified, the Achebe family was forced to leave Enugu for the
Biafran capital of Aba. As the turmoil closed in, he continued to write, but
most of his creative work during the war took the form of poetry. The shorter
format was a consequence of living in a war zone. "I can write poetry," he
said, "something short, intense more in keeping with my mood ... All this is
creating in the context of our struggle."[90] Many of these poems were
collected in his 1971 book Beware, Soul Brother. One of his most famous,
"Refugee Mother and Child", spoke to the suffering and loss that surrounded
him. Dedicated to the promise of Biafra, he accepted a request to serve as
foreign ambassador, refusing an invitation from the Program of African Studies
at Northwestern University in the US. Achebe travelled to many cities in
Europe, including London, where he continued his work with the African Writers
Series project at Heinemann.[91]

During the war, relations between writers in Nigeria and Biafra were strained.
Achebe and John Pepper Clark had a tense confrontation in London over their
respective support for opposing sides of the conflict. Achebe demanded that
the publisher withdraw the dedication of A Man of the People he had given to
Clark. Years later, their friendship healed and the dedication was
restored.[92] Meanwhile, their contemporary Wole Soyinka was imprisoned for
meeting with Biafran officials, and spent many years in jail. Speaking in
1968, Achebe said: "I find the Nigerian situation untenable. If I had been a
Nigerian, I think I would have been in the same situation as Wole Soyinka is
â in prison."[93]

The Nigerian government, under the leadership of General Yakubu Gowon, was
backed by the British government; the two nations enjoyed a vigorous trade
partnership.[94] Addressing the causes of the war in 1968, Achebe lashed out
at the Nigerian political and military forces that, to his mind, had forced
Biafra to secede. He framed the conflict in terms of the country's colonial
past. The writer in Nigeria, he said, "found that the independence his country
was supposed to have won was totally without content ... The old white master
was still in power. He had got himself a bunch of black stooges to do his
dirty work for a commission."[93]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Flag of the Republic of Biafra

Conditions in Biafra worsened as the war continued. In September 1968, the
city of Aba fell to the Nigerian military and Achebe once again moved his
family, this time to Umuahia, where the Biafran government had also relocated.
He was chosen to chair the newly formed National Guidance Committee, charged
with the task of drafting principles and ideas for the post-war era.[95] In
1969, the group completed a document entitled The Principles of the Biafran
Revolution, later released as The Ahiara Declaration.[96]

In October of the same year, Achebe joined writers Cyprian Ekwensi and Gabriel
Okara for a tour of the United States to raise awareness about the dire
situation in Biafra. They visited thirty college campuses and conducted
countless interviews. While in the southern US, Achebe learned for the first
time of the "Igbo Landing", a true story of a group of Igbo captives who
drowned themselves in 1803 â rather than endure the brutality of slavery â
after surviving through the Middle Passage.[97][98] Although the group was
well-received by students and faculty, Achebe was "shocked" by the harsh
realpolitik attitude toward Africa he saw in the US. At the end of the tour,
he said that "world policy is absolutely ruthless and unfeeling".[99]

The beginning of 1970 saw the end of the state of Biafra. On 12 January, the
military surrendered to Nigeria, and Achebe returned with his family to Ogidi,
where their home had been destroyed. He took a job at the University of
Nigeria in Nsukka and immersed himself once again in academia. He was unable
to accept invitations to other countries, however, because the Nigerian
government revoked his passport due to his support for Biafra.[100]

### [edit] Postwar academia

After the war, Achebe helped start two magazines: the literary journal Okike,
a forum for African art, fiction, and poetry; and Nsukkascope, an internal
publication of the University (motto: "Devastating, Fearless, Brutal and
True").[101] Achebe and the Okike committee later established another cultural
magazine, Uwa Ndi Igbo, to showcase the indigenous stories and oral traditions
of the Igbo community.[102] In February 1972 he released Girls at War, a
collection of short stories ranging in time from his undergraduate days to the
recent bloodshed. It was the 100th book in Heinemann's African Writers
Series.[103]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The University of Massachusetts Amherst at night

The University of Massachusetts Amherst offered Achebe a professorship later
that year, and the family moved to the United States. Their youngest daughter
was displeased with her nursery school, and the family soon learned that her
frustration involved language. Achebe helped her face the "alien experience"
(as he called it) by telling her stories during the car trips to and from
school.[104]

As he presented his lessons to a wide variety of students (he taught only one
class, to a large audience), he began to study the perceptions of Africa in
Western scholarship: "Africa is not like anywhere else they know ... there are
no real people in the Dark Continent, only forces operating; and people don't
speak any language you can understand, they just grunt, too busy jumping up
and down in a frenzy".[105]

#### [edit] Criticism of Conrad

Achebe expanded this criticism when he presented a Chancellor's Lecture at
Amherst on 18 February 1975, An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad's "Heart of
Darkness". Decrying Joseph Conrad as "a thoroughgoing racist",[106] Achebe
asserted that Conrad's famous novel dehumanises Africans, rendering Africa as
"a metaphysical battlefield devoid of all recognisable humanity, into which
the wandering European enters at his peril."[107]

Achebe also discussed a quote from Albert Schweitzer, a 1952 Nobel Peace Prize
laureate: "The African is indeed my brother," he is reported to have said,
"but my junior brother."[108] Some were surprised that Achebe would challenge
a man honoured in the West for his "reverence for life",[109] and recognised
as a paragon of Western liberalism.

The lecture caused a storm of controversy, even at the reception immediately
following his talk. Many English professors in attendance were upset by his
remarks; one elderly professor approached him, said: "How dare you!",[110] and
stormed away. Another suggested that Achebe had "no sense of humour",[110] but
several days later Achebe was approached by a third professor, who told him:
"I now realize that I had never really read Heart of Darkness although I have
taught it for years."[111] Although the lecture angered many of his
colleagues, he was nevertheless presented later in 1975 with an honorary
doctorate from the University of Stirling and the Lotus Prize for Afro-Asian
Writers.[112]

The first comprehensive rebuttal of Achebe's critique was published in 1983 by
British critic Cedric Watts. His essay "A Bloody Racist: About Achebe's View
of Conrad" defends Heart of Darkness as an anti-imperialist novel, suggesting
that "part of its greatness lies in the power of its criticisms of racial
prejudice."[113] PalestinianâAmerican theorist Edward Said agreed in his
book Culture and Imperialism that Conrad criticised imperialism, but added:
"As a creature of his time, Conrad could not grant the natives their freedom,
despite his severe critique of the imperialism that enslaved them".[114]

Achebe's criticism has become a mainstream perspective on Conrad's work. The
essay was included in the 1988 Norton critical edition of Conrad's novel.
Editor Robert Kimbrough called it one of "the three most important events in
Heart of Darkness criticism since the second edition of his book...."[115]
Critic Nicolas Tredell divides Conrad criticism "into two epochal phases:
before and after Achebe."[116] Asked frequently about his essay, Achebe once
explained that he never meant for the work to be abandoned: "It's not in my
nature to talk about banning books. I am saying, read it â with the kind of
understanding and with the knowledge I talk about. And read it beside African
works."[115]

### [edit] Retirement and politics

When he returned to the University of Nigeria in 1976, he hoped to accomplish
three goals: finish the novel he had been writing, renew the native
publication of Okike, and further his study of Igbo culture. He also showed
that he would not restrict his criticism to European targets. In an August
1976 interview, he lashed out at the archetypal Nigerian intellectual, who is
divorced from the intellect "but for two things: status and stomach. And if
there's any danger that he might suffer official displeasure or lose his job,
he would prefer to turn a blind eye to what is happening around him."[117] In
October 1979, Achebe was awarded the first-ever Nigerian National Merit
Award.[118]

<IMG>

<IMG>

James Baldwin in 1955

In 1980 he met James Baldwin at a conference held by the African Literature
Association in Gainesville, Florida USA. The writers â with similar
political perspectives, beliefs about language, and faith in the liberating
potential of literature â were eager to meet one another. Baldwin said:
"It's very important that we should meet each other, finally, if I must say
so, after something like 400 years."[119]

In 1982, Achebe retired from the University of Nigeria. He devoted more time
to editing Okike and became active with the left-leaning People's Redemption
Party (PRP). In 1983, he became the party's deputy national vice-president. He
published a book called The Trouble with Nigeria to coincide with the upcoming
elections. On the first page, Achebe says bluntly: "the Nigerian problem is
the unwillingness or inability of its leaders to rise to the responsibility
and to the challenge of personal example which are the hallmarks of true
leadership."[120]

The elections that followed were marked by violence and charges of fraud.
Asked whether he thought Nigerian politics had changed since A Man of the
People, Achebe replied: "I think, if anything, the Nigerian politician has
deteriorated."[121] After the elections, he engaged in a heated argument â
which almost became a fistfight â with Bakin Zuwo, the newly-elected
governor of Kano State. He left the PRP and afterwards kept his distance from
political parties, expressing his sadness at the dishonesty and weakness of
the people involved.[122]

He spent most of the 1980s delivering speeches, attending conferences, and
working on his sixth novel. He also continued winning awards and collecting
honorary degrees.[123] In 1986 he was elected president-general of the Ogidi
Town Union; he reluctantly accepted and began a three-year term. In the same
year, he stepped down as editor of Okike.[124]

### [edit] Anthills and paralysis

In 1987 Achebe released his fifth novel, Anthills of the Savannah, about a
military coup in the fictional West African nation of Kangan. A finalist for
the Man Booker Prize, the novel was hailed in the Financial Times: "in a
powerful fusion of myth, legend and modern styles, Achebe has written a book
which is wise, exciting and essential, a powerful antidote to the cynical
commentators from 'overseas' who see nothing ever new out of Africa."[125] An
opinion piece in the magazine West Africa said the book deserved to win the
Booker Prize, and that Achebe was "a writer who has long deserved the
recognition that has already been accorded him by his sales figures."[125] The
prize went instead to Penelope Lively's novel Moon Tiger.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Stone Row at the centre of the Bard College campus

On 22 March 1990, Achebe was riding in a car to Lagos when an axle collapsed
and the car flipped. His son Ikechukwu and the driver suffered minor injuries,
but the weight of the vehicle fell on Achebe and his spine was severely
damaged. He was flown to the Paddocks Hospital in Buckinghamshire England, and
treated for his injuries. In July doctors announced that although he was
recuperating well, he was paralysed from the waist down and would require the
use of a wheelchair for the rest of his life.[126]

Soon afterwards, Achebe became the Charles P. Stevenson Professor of Languages
and Literature at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York; he has held
the position for over fifteen years.[127]

In October 2005, the London Financial Times reported that Achebe was planning
to write a novella for the Canongate Myth Series, a series of short novels in
which ancient myths from myriad cultures are reimagined and rewritten by
contemporary authors.[128] Achebe's novella has not yet been scheduled for
publication.

In June 2007, Achebe was awarded the Man Booker International Prize.[129] The
judging panel included US critic Elaine Showalter, who said he "illuminated
the path for writers around the world seeking new words and forms for new
realities and societies";[130] and South African writer Nadine Gordimer, who
said Achebe has achieved "what one of his characters brilliantly defines as
the writerâs purpose: 'a new-found utterance' for the capture of lifeâs
complexity".[130]

## [edit] Style

### [edit] Oral tradition

The style of Achebe's fiction draws heavily on the oral tradition of the Igbo
people.[131] He weaves folk tales into the fabric of his stories, illuminating
community values in both the content and the form of the storytelling. The
tale about the Earth and Sky in Things Fall Apart, for example, emphasises the
interdependency of the masculine and the feminine. Although Nwoye enjoys
hearing his mother tell the tale, Okonkwo's dislike for it is evidence of his
imbalance.[132] Later, Nwoye avoids beatings from his father by pretending to
dislike such "women's stories".[133]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A digital representation of the Igbo udu instrument

Another hallmark of Achebe's style is the use of proverbs, which often
illustrate the values of the rural Igbo tradition. He sprinkles them
throughout the narratives, repeating points made in conversation. Critic
Anjali Gera notes that the use of proverbs in Arrow of God "serves to create
through an echo effect the judgement of a community upon an individual
violation."[134] The use of such repetition in Achebe's urban novels, No
Longer at Ease and A Man of the People, is less pronounced.[134]

For Achebe, however, proverbs and folk stories are not the sum total of the
oral Igbo tradition. In combining philosophical thought and public performance
into the use of oratory ("Okwu Oka" â "speech artistry" â in the Igbo
phrase), his characters exhibit what he called "a matter of individual
excellence ... part of Igbo culture."[135] In Things Fall Apart, Okonkwo's
friend Obierika voices the most impassioned oratory, crystallising the events
and their significance for the village. Nwaka in Arrow of God also exhibits a
mastery of oratory, albeit for malicious ends.[136]

Achebe frequently includes folk songs and descriptions of dancing in his work.
Obi, the protagonist of No Longer At Ease, is at one point met by women
singing a "Song of the Heart", which Achebe gives in both Igbo and English:
"Is everyone here? / (Hele ee he ee he)"[137] In Things Fall Apart, ceremonial
dancing and the singing of folk songs reflect the realities of Igbo tradition.
The elderly Uchendu, attempting to shake Okonkwo out of his self-pity, refers
to a song sung after the death of a woman: "For whom is it well, for whom is
it well? There is no one for whom it is well."[138] This song contrasts with
the "gay and rollicking tunes of evangelism" sung later by the white
missionaries.[139]

Achebe's short stories are not as widely studied as his novels, and Achebe
himself does not consider them a major part of his work. In the preface for
Girls at War and Other Stories, he writes: "A dozen pieces in twenty years
must be accounted a pretty lean harvest by any reckoning."[140] Like his
novels, the short stories are heavily influenced by the oral tradition. And
like the folktales they follow, the stories often have morals emphasising the
importance of cultural traditions.[141]

### [edit] Use of English

As the decolonization process unfolded in the 1950s, a debate about choice of
language erupted and pursued authors around the world; Achebe was no
exception. Indeed, because of his subject matter and insistence on a non-
colonial narrative, he found his novels and decisions interrogated with
extreme scrutiny â particularly with regard to his use of English. One
school of thought, championed by Kenyan writer Ngugi wa Thiong'o, urged the
use of indigenous African languages. English and other European languages, he
said in 1986, were "part of the neo-colonial structures that repress
progressive ideas".[142]

Achebe chose to write in English. In his essay "The African Writer and the
English Language", he discusses how the process of colonialism â for all its
ills â provided colonised people from varying linguistic backgrounds "a
language with which to talk to one another". As his purpose is to communicate
with readers across Nigeria, he uses "the one central language enjoying
nationwide currency".[143] Using English also allowed his books to be read in
the colonial ruling nations.[144]

Still, Achebe recognises the shortcomings of what Audre Lorde called "the
master's tools". In another essay he notes:

> For an African writing in English is not without its serious setbacks. He
often finds himself describing situations or modes of thought which have no
direct equivalent in the English way of life. Caught in that situation he can
do one of two things. He can try and contain what he wants to say within the
limits of conventional English or he can try to push back those limits to
accommodate his ideas ... I submit that those who can do the work of extending
the frontiers of English so as to accommodate African thought-patterns must do
it through their mastery of English and not out of innocence.[145]

In another essay, he refers to James Baldwin's struggle to use the English
language to accurately represent his experience, and his realization that he
needed to take control of the language and expand it.[146] Nigerian poet and
novelist Gabriel Okara likens the process of language-expansion to the
evolution of jazz music in the United States.[147]

Achebe's novels laid a formidable groundwork for this process. By altering
syntax, usage, and idiom, he transforms the language into a distinctly African
style.[148] In some spots this takes the form of repetition of an Igbo idea in
standard English parlance; elsewhere it appears as narrative asides integrated
into descriptive sentences.[149]

## [edit] Themes

Achebe's novels approach a variety of themes. In his early writing, a
depiction of the Igbo culture itself is paramount. Critic Nahem Yousaf
highlights the importance of these depictions: "Around the tragic stories of
Okonkwo and Ezeulu, Achebe sets about textualising Igbo cultural
identity".[150] The portrayal of indigenous life is not simply a matter of
literary background, he adds: "Achebe seeks to produce the effect of a
precolonial reality as an Igbo-centric response to a Eurocentrically
constructed imperial 'reality' ".[151] Certain elements of Achebe's depiction
of Igbo life in Things Fall Apart match those in Oloudah Equiano's
autobiographical Narrative. Responding to charges that Equiano was not
actually born in Africa, Achebe wrote in 1975: "Equiano was an Ibo, I believe,
from the village of Iseke in the Orlu division of Nigeria".[152]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 1901 stamp from southern colonial Nigeria

### [edit] Culture and colonialism

A prevalent theme in Achebe's novels is the intersection of African tradition
(particularly Igbo varieties) and modernity, especially as embodied by
European colonialism. The village of Umuofia in Things Fall Apart, for
example, is violently shaken with internal divisions when the white Christian
missionaries arrive. Nigerian English professor Ernest N. Emenyonu describes
the colonial experience in the novel as "the systematic emasculation of the
entire culture".[153] Achebe later embodied this tension between African
tradition and Western influence in the figure of Sam Okoli, the president of
Kangan in Anthills of the Savannah. Distanced from the myths and tales of the
community by his Westernised education, he does not have the capacity for
reconnection shown by the character Beatrice.[154]

The colonial impact on the Igbo in Achebe's novels is often effected by
individuals from Europe, but institutions and urban offices frequently serve a
similar purpose. The character of Obi in No Longer at Ease succumbs to
colonial-era corruption in the city; the temptations of his position overwhelm
his identity and fortitude.[155] The courts and the position of District
Commissioner in Things Fall Apart likewise clash with the traditions of the
Igbo, and remove their ability to participate in structures of decision-
making.[156]

The standard Achebean ending results in the destruction of an individual and,
by synecdoche, the downfall of the community. Odili's descent into the luxury
of corruption and hedonism in A Man of the People, for example, is symbolic of
the post-colonial crisis in Nigeria and elsewhere.[157] Even with the emphasis
on colonialism, however, Achebe's tragic endings embody the traditional
confluence of fate, individual and society, as represented by Sophocles and
Shakespeare.[158]

Still, Achebe seeks to portray neither moral absolutes nor a fatalistic
inevitability. In 1972, he said: "I never will take the stand that the Old
must win or that the New must win. The point is that no single truth satisfied
meâand this is well founded in the Ibo world view. No single man can be
correct all the time, no single idea can be totally correct."[159] His
perspective is reflected in the words of Ikem, a character in Anthills of the
Savannah: "whatever you are is never enough; you must find a way to accept
something, however small, from the other to make you whole and to save you
from the mortal sin of righteousness and extremism."[160] And in a 1996
interview, Achebe said: "Belief in either radicalism or orthodoxy is too
simplified a way of viewing things ... Evil is never all evil; goodness on the
other hand is often tainted with selfishness."[161]

### [edit] Masculinity and femininity

The gender roles of men and women, as well as societies' conceptions of the
associated concepts, are frequent themes in Achebe's writing. He has been
criticised as a sexist author, in response to what many call the uncritical
depiction of traditionally patriarchal Igbo society, where the most masculine
men take numerous wives, and women are beaten regularly.[162] Others suggest
that Achebe is merely representing the limited gendered vision of the
characters, and they note that in his later works, he tries to demonstrate the
inherent dangers of excluding women from society.[163]

In Things Fall Apart, Okonkwo's furious manhood overpowers everything feminine
in his life, including his own conscience. For example, when he feels bad
after killing his adopted son, he asks himself: "When did you become a
shivering old woman?"[164] He views all things feminine as distasteful, in
part because they remind him of his father's laziness and cowardice.[165] The
women in the novel, meanwhile, are obedient, quiet, and absent from positions
of authority â despite the fact that Igbo women were traditionally involved
in village leadership.[166] Nevertheless, the need for feminine balance is
highlighted by Ani, the earth goddess, and the extended discussion of "Nneka"
("Mother is supreme") in chapter fourteen.[167] Okonkwo's defeat is seen by
some as a vindication of the need for a balancing feminine ethos.[165][168]
Achebe has expressed frustration at frequently being misunderstood on this
point, saying that "I want to sort of scream that Things Fall Apart is on the
side of women...And that Okonkwo is paying the penalty for his treatment of
women; that all his problems, all the things he did wrong, can be seen as
offenses against the feminine."[169]

Achebe's first central female character in a novel is Beatrice Nwanyibuife in
Anthills of the Savannah. As an independent woman in the city, Beatrice
strives for the balance that Okonkwo lacked so severely. She refutes the
notion that she needs a man, and slowly learns about Idemili, a goddess
balancing the aggression of male power.[170] Although the final stages of the
novel show her functioning in a nurturing mother-type role, Beatrice remains
firm in her conviction that women should not be limited to such
capacities.[171]

## [edit] Legacy

Achebe has been called "the father of modern African writing",[130] and many
books and essays have been written about his work over the past fifty years.
In 1992, he became the first living author to be represented in the Everyman's
Library collection published by Alfred A. Knopf.[172] His 60th birthday was
celebrated at the University of Nigeria by "an international Who's Who in
African Literature". One observer noted: "Nothing like it had ever happened
before in African literature anywhere on the continent."[173]

Many writers of succeeding generations view his work as having paved the way
for their efforts.[3] In 1982 he was awarded an honorary degree from the
University of Kent. At the ceremony, professor Robert Gibson said that the
Nigerian author "is now revered as Master by the younger generation of African
writers and it is to him they regularly turn for counsel and
inspiration."[174] Even outside of Africa, his impact resonates strongly in
literary circles. Novelist Margaret Atwood called him "a magical writer â
one of the greatest of the twentieth century". Poet Maya Angelou lauded Things
Fall Apart as a book wherein "all readers meet their brothers, sisters,
parents and friends and themselves along Nigerian roads".[175] Nelson Mandela,
recalling his time as a political prisoner, once referred to Achebe as a
writer "in whose company the prison walls fell down."[176]

Achebe is the recipient of over 30 honorary degrees from universities in
England, Scotland, Canada, South Africa, Nigeria and the United States,
including Dartmouth College, Harvard, and Brown University.[172] He has been
awarded the Commonwealth Poetry Prize, an Honorary Fellowship of the American
Academy of Arts and Letters, the Nigerian National Order of Merit (Nigeria's
highest honour for academic work), Italy's prestigious International Nonino
Prize and the Peace Prize of the German Book Trade.[177] In 2007, he won the
prestigious Man Booker International Prize.[178] He also serves on the
contributing editorial board of the literary journal Conjunctions.

Some scholars have suggested that Achebe has been shunned by intellectual
society for criticising Conrad and traditions of racism in the West.[179]
Despite his scholarly achievements and the global importance of his work,
Achebe has never received a Nobel Prize, which some observers view as
unjust.[180] The Nobel Committee has been criticised in the past for
overlooking other important writers, such as Marcel Proust, Jorge Luis Borges,
Vladimir Nabokov and Leo Tolstoy.

When Wole Soyinka won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1986, Achebe joined the
rest of Nigeria in celebrating the first African ever to win the prize. He
lauded Soyinka's "stupendous display of energy and vitality", and said he was
"most eminently deserving of any prize".[181] In 1988 Achebe was asked by a
reporter for Quality Weekly how he felt about never winning a Nobel Prize; he
replied: "My position is that the Nobel Prize is important. But it is a
European prize. It's not an African prize ... Literature is not a heavyweight
championship. Nigerians may think, you know, this man has been knocked out.
It's nothing to do with that"[182]. In 2007 Achebe received the Man Booker
International Prize (Oxford, UK) and the National Art Club's Medal of Honor
for Literature (New York, USA).

In 2008 Things Fall Apart reached the fiftieth anniversary of its first
publication, and several conferences and events were held across the globe in
Europe, the Americas, Africa, and Asia to celebrate the author and his
canonical first novel. Coinciding with this milestone was the publication of
Achebe's new book of autobiographical essays called Education of A British
Protected Child.

In March 2009, Chinua Achebe, visited the Indiana campus of the University of
Notre Dame, to deliver the 2009 Blessed Pope John XXIII Lecture Series in
Theology and Culture. The three part lectures was on âThe Igbo and their
Perception of God, Human Beings and Creation,â and will be published later
this year by the University of Notre Dame Press.

## [edit] Works

Novels

  * Things Fall Apart, (1958)
  * No Longer at Ease, (1960)
  * Arrow of God, (1964)
  * A Man of the People, (1966)
  * Anthills of the Savannah, (1987)

Short Stories

  * "Marriage Is A Private Affair", (1952)
  * "Dead Men's Path", (1953)
  * The Sacrificial Egg and Other Stories, (1953)
  * "Civil Peace", (1971)
  * Girls at War and Other Stories, (1973)
  * African Short Stories (editor, with C.L. Innes), (1985)
  * Heinemann Book of Contemporary African Short Stories (editor, with C.L. Innes), (1992)
  * The Voter

Poetry

  * Beware, Soul-Brother, and Other Poems, (1971) (published in the US as Christmas at Biafra, and Other Poems, 1973)
  * Don't let him die: An anthology of memorial poems for Christopher Okigbo (editor, with Dubem Okafor), (1978)
  * Another Africa, (1998)
  * Collected Poems, Carcanet Press (2005)
  * Refugee Mother And Child
  * Vultures, which is used GCSE English as a 'Different Cultures' poem

Essays, Criticism and Political Commentary

  * The Novelist as Teacher, (1965)
  * An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad's "Heart of Darkness", (1975)
  * Morning Yet on Creation Day, (1975)
  * The Trouble With Nigeria, (1984)
  * Hopes and Impediments, (1988)
  * Home and Exile, (2000)
  * Education of a British protected Child (2008) (Forthcoming)
  * âThe Igbo and their Perception of God, Human Beings and Creation,â 2009 Blessed Pope John XXIII Lecture Series in Theology and Culture University of Notre Dame Press ( Forthcoming)

Children's Books

  * Chike and the River, (1966)
  * How the Leopard Got His Claws (with John Iroaganachi), (1972)
  * The Flute, (1975)
  * The Drum, (1978)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Achebe pronouncing his own name. Accessed 9 October 2008
  2. ^ a b Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 6.
  3. ^ a b Ogbaa, p. xv.
  4. ^ Achebe Famous Africa Chinua Achebe. Accessed 25 February 2009
  5. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 3.
  6. ^ a b c d Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 7.
  7. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 8.
  8. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 16.
  9. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 10â11.
  10. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 11.
  11. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 14.
  12. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 12.
  13. ^ Achebe 1994, pp 146â147.
  14. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 18.
  15. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 19.
  16. ^ a b c Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 22â23.
  17. ^ a b Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 30.
  18. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 30.
  19. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 25.
  20. ^ a b Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 26â27.
  21. ^ a b c Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 26â27.
  22. ^ a b "Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 34â36
  23. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 37.
  24. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 38.
  25. ^ July, p. 64; Laurence, p. viii.
  26. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 39.
  27. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 40.
  28. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 46.
  29. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 42.
  30. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 49.
  31. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 43.
  32. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 44.
  33. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 50â52.
  34. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 53.
  35. ^ Achebe (1994). The "evil forest" is a place where twins (considered an abomination by the community) are thrown away to die. When the Christian missionaries persevere despite their location, they are able to convince some in the community that the superstition is unwarranted.
  36. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 55.
  37. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 56.
  38. ^ Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria. "About Us". Online at Radio Nigeria Online. Retrieved on 15 October 2007.
  39. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 57.
  40. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 58.
  41. ^ a b Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 62.
  42. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 60.
  43. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 63.
  44. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 65.
  45. ^ Hill, Alan (1991). Quoted in Petersen, reprinted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 65.
  46. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 65.
  47. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 65â66.
  48. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 68.
  49. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 69.
  50. ^ Achebe 1994, p. 4.
  51. ^ Booker, p. xvii.
  52. ^ Yousaf, p. 34.
  53. ^ Ogbaa, p. 5.
  54. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 67â68.
  55. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 85.
  56. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 86.
  57. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 105.
  58. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 112.
  59. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 155.
  60. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 77.
  61. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 78.
  62. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 79.
  63. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 79.
  64. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 80.
  65. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 81.
  66. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 81.
  67. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 83.
  68. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 83.
  69. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 97.
  70. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 98.
  71. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 87â88.
  72. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 89.
  73. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 89.
  74. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 89â90.
  75. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 90â92.
  76. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 94.
  77. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 70.
  78. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 75.
  79. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 99.
  80. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 187.
  81. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 105.
  82. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 106.
  83. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 109.
  84. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 115.
  85. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 117.
  86. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 125.
  87. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 154.
  88. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 124â129.
  89. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 129.
  90. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 149.
  91. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 129â133.
  92. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 134.
  93. ^ a b Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 137.
  94. ^ Yousaf, p. 88.
  95. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 138â140.
  96. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 146.
  97. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 150.
  98. ^ Powell, Timothy B. (2004). "Ebos Landing". The New Georgia Encyclopedia.
  99. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 150.
  100. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 158â160.
  101. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 162.
  102. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 225.
  103. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 166.
  104. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 174.
  105. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 174.
  106. ^ Achebe (1989), p. 8.
  107. ^ Achebe (1989), pp 1â20.
  108. ^ Achebe (1989), p. 7.
  109. ^ Schweitzer, Albert (1936). "Reverence for Life". Online at Association Internationale Albert Schweitzer.
  110. ^ a b Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 191.
  111. ^ Achebe (1989), p. x.
  112. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 191â192.
  113. ^ Watts, Cedric (1983). "A Bloody Racist: About Achebe's View of Conrad". The Yearbook of English Studies Vol. 13, pp 196â209.
  114. ^ Quoted in Atkinson, William (1 January 2004). "Bound in Blackwood's: The Imperialism of 'The Heart of Darkness' in Its Immediate Context". Twentieth Century Literature Vol. 50, No. 4. p. 368.
  115. ^ a b Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 259.
  116. ^ Tredell, p. 71.
  117. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 197.
  118. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 211.
  119. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 214.
  120. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 228.
  121. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 229.
  122. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 231â232.
  123. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 235â249.
  124. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 251.
  125. ^ a b Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 253.
  126. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 278â279.
  127. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 280.
  128. ^ Gurria-Quintana, Angel. "Myth understood", Financial Times, 2005-10-28. Retrieved on 2007-11-07.
  129. ^ "Nigeria author wins Booker honour" (13 June 2007). BBC News Online. Retrieved on 23 September 2007.
  130. ^ a b c The Booker Prize Foundation (13 June 2007). "The father of modern African writing, wins 2007 Man Booker International Prize". Online at The Man Booker International Prize. Retrieved on 11 October 2007.
  131. ^ Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 66.
  132. ^ Gera, pp 24â25.
  133. ^ Achebe (1994), p. 54.
  134. ^ a b Gera, p. 32.
  135. ^ Quoted in Egejuru, p. 394.
  136. ^ Egejuru, pp 395â396.
  137. ^ Quoted in Gera, p. 25.
  138. ^ Achebe (1994), p. 135.
  139. ^ Achebe (1994), p. 146.
  140. ^ Quoted in Feuser, Willfried F (2001). "Nothing Puzzles God!": Chinua Achebe's Civil War Stories" No Condition Is Permanent: Nigerian Writing and the Struggle for Democracy (Holger G. Ehling and Claus-Peter Holste-von Mutius, eds). Amsterdam and New York: Editions Rodopi. p. 65.
  141. ^ Ogede, Ode (1 January 2001). "Oral Tradition and Modern Storytelling: Revisiting Chinua Achebe's Short Stories". International Fiction Review. Vol. 28, Issue 1/2. pp 67â77. ISSN 0315-4149.
  142. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 246.
  143. ^ Achebe (1975), pp 77â78.
  144. ^ Ogbaa, p. 192.
  145. ^ Quoted in Ogbaa, p. 193.
  146. ^ Mezu, p. 23.
  147. ^ Okara (1991), p. 17.
  148. ^ Azohu, p. 413.
  149. ^ Azohu, pp 415â419.
  150. ^ Yousaf, p. 37.
  151. ^ Yousaf, p. 38.
  152. ^ Mezu, pp 164â207.
  153. ^ Emenyonu, p. 84.
  154. ^ Gera, p. 71.
  155. ^ Nnolim, p. 173.
  156. ^ Emenyonu, p. 86.
  157. ^ Mezu, pp 104â118.
  158. ^ Niven, pp 46â47.
  159. ^ Quoted in Lindfors, pp 101â102.
  160. ^ Quoted in Mezu, p. 132.
  161. ^ Mezu, p. 229.
  162. ^ Mezu, p. 24.
  163. ^ Mezu, pp 27â28.
  164. ^ Achebe (1994), p. 65.
  165. ^ a b Yousaf, p. 44.
  166. ^ Bicknell, p. 266. The author cites a study by Kemene Okonjo, "The Dual-Sex Political System in Operation: Igbo Women and Community Politics in Midwestern Nigeria", in Women in Africa, edited by Nancy J. Hafkin and Edna G. Bay.
  167. ^ Bicknell, pp 266â267.
  168. ^ Mezu, p. 214.
  169. ^ Thompson, Bob (9 March 2008). "Things Fall Into Place". Washington Post. Retrieved on 15 March 2008.
  170. ^ Bicknell, p. 271.
  171. ^ Bicknell, p. 276.
  172. ^ a b Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 285.
  173. ^ Emenyonu (1996), p. vi.
  174. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 224.
  175. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 283.
  176. ^ Jaggi, Maya (14 June 2007). "The unseen literary world". The Guardian. Online at Guardian Unlimited. Retrieved on 19 September 2007.
  177. ^ "Chinua Achebe". Alfred A. Knopf. Online at The Borzoi Reader Online. Retrieved on 14 October 2007.
  178. ^ John Ezard. "Man Booker International judges honour Chinua Achebe | Books | guardian.co.uk". guardian.co.uk. http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2007/jun/13/chinuaachebe. Retrieved on 2008-09-10.
  179. ^ Obaze, Oseloka (14 October 2006). "Chinua Achebe: The unacknowledged Nobel laureate". Online at kwenu.com. Retrieved on 24 September 2007.
  180. ^ Akubuiro, Henry (1 October 2006). "Chinua Achebe deserves Nobel Prize". Sun News (Nigeria). Retrieved on 24 September 2007.
  181. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, p. 250.
  182. ^ Quoted in Ezenwa-Ohaeto, pp 263â264.

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Achebe, Chinua (1965). "English and the African Writer". Transition 18: 27â30. ISSN 0041-1191.
  * Achebe, Chinua (1975). Morning Yet on Creation Day. London: Heinemann Educational. ISBN 978-0-435-18026-3.
  * Achebe, Chinua (1989). Hopes and Impediments: Selected Essays. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-24730-6.
  * Achebe, Chinua (1994). Things Fall Apart. New York: Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-385-47454-2.
  * Agetua, John (Ed.) (1977). Critics on Chinua Achebe, 1970-76. Benin City, Nigeria: Bendel Newspapers Corp.
  * Azohu, Virginia (1996). "Culture and the Frontiers of Language". In Ihekweazu, Edith. Eagle on Iroko: Selected Papers from the Chinua Achebe International Symposium, 1990. Ibadan, Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) PLC. ISBN 978-978-129-379-5.
  * Bicknell, Catherine (1996). "Achebe's Women: Mothers, Priestesses, And Young Urban Professionals". In Ihekweazu, Edith. Eagle on Iroko: Selected Papers from the Chinua Achebe International Symposium, 1990. Ibadan, Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) PLC. ISBN 978-978-129-379-5.
  * Booker, M. Keith and Simon Gikandi (2003). The Chinua Achebe Encyclopedia. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-325-07063-6.
  * Egar, Emmanuel Edame (2000). The Rhetorical Implications of Chinua Achebe's 'Things Fall Apart' Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America. ISBN 978-0-7618-1721-5.
  * Egejuru, Phanuel (1996). "Orethory Okwu Oka: A Neglected Technique In Achebe's Literary Artistry". In Ihekweazu, Edith. Eagle on Iroko: Selected Papers from the Chinua Achebe International Symposium, 1990. Ibadan, Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) PLC. ISBN 978-978-129-379-5.
  * Egejuru, Phanuel Akubueze (2001). Chinua Achebe: Pure and Simple, an Oral Biography. Stoke-on-Trent: Malthouse Press. ISBN 978-978-023-148-4.
  * Ekwe-Ekwe, Herbert (2001). African Literature in Defence of History: An Essay on Chinua Achebe. Dakar: African Renaissance. ISBN 978-1-903625-10-1.
  * Emenyonu, Ernest N. (1991). "Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart: A Classic Study in Colonial Diplomatic Tactlessness". In Petersen, Kirsten Holst and Anna Rutherford, eds. Chinua Achebe: A Celebration. Oxford, England: Dangeroo Press. ISBN 978-0-435-08060-0.
  * Emenyonu, Ernest N. (1996). "Foreword: For Whom The Honour Is Due". In Ihekweazu, Edith. Eagle on Iroko: Selected Papers from the Chinua Achebe International Symposium, 1990. Ibadan, Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) PLC. ISBN 978-978-129-379-5.
  * Emenyonu, Ernest N. (Ed.) (2004). Emerging Perspectives on Chinua Achebe Trenton, New Jersey: Africa World Press. ISBN 978-0-86543-876-7 (v. 1), ISBN 978-0-86543-878-1 (v. 2).
  * Ezenwa-Ohaeto (1997). Chinua Achebe: A Biography. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-33342-1.
  * Gera, Anjali (2001). Three Great African Novelists. New Delhi: Creative Books. ISBN 978-81-86318-79-9.
  * Gikandi, Simon (1991). Reading Chinua Achebe: Language and Ideology in Fiction London: J. Currey. ISBN 978-0-85255-527-9.
  * Innes, Catherine Lynette (1990). Chinua Achebe. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
  * Innes, C. L. and Bernth Lindfors (Eds.) (1978). Critical Perspectives on Chinua Achebe. Washington: Three Continents Press. ISBN 978-0-914478-45-4.
  * Jaya Lakshmi, Rao V (2003). Culture and Anarchy in the Novels of Chinua Achebe Bareilly: Prakash Book Depot.
  * July, Robert W (1987). An African Voice. Durham (NC): Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-0769-3.
  * Killam, G. D. (1977). The Writings of Chinua Achebe London: Heinemann Educational. ISBN 978-0-435-91665-7.
  * Laurence, Margaret (2001). Long Drums and Cannons: Nigerian Dramatists and Novelists, 1952-1966. Alberta: University of Alberta Press. ISBN 978-0-88864-332-2.
  * Lindfors, Bernth (1982). Early Nigerian Literature. New York: Holmes & Meier Publishers, Ltd. ISBN 978-0-8419-0740-9.
  * Mezu, Rose Ure (2006). Chinua Achebe: The Man and His Works. London: Adonis & Abbey Publishers Ltd. ISBN 978-1-905068-21-0.
  * Niven, Alistair (1991). "Chinua Achebe and the Possibility of Modern Tragedy". In Petersen, Kirsten Holst and Anna Rutherford, eds. Chinua Achebe: A Celebration. Oxford, England: Dangeroo Press. ISBN 978-0-435-08060-0.
  * Njoku, Benedict Chiaka (1984). The Four Novels of Chinua Achebe: A Critical Study New York: P. Lang. ISBN 978-0-8204-0154-6.
  * Nnolim, Charles (1996). "The Artist in Search of The Right Leadership: Achebe As A Social Critic". In Ihekweazu, Edith. Eagle on Iroko: Selected Papers from the Chinua Achebe International Symposium, 1990. Ibadan, Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books (Nigeria) PLC. ISBN 978-978-129-379-5.
  * Ogbaa, Kalu (1999). Understanding Things Fall Apart. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-30294-7.
  * Ogede, Ode (2001). Achebe and the Politics of Representation: Form Against Itself, From Colonial Conquest and Occupation to Post-Independence Disillusionment Trenton, New Jersey: Africa World Press. ISBN 978-0-86543-774-6.
  * Ojinmah, Umelo (1991). Chinua Achebe: New Perspectives Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited. ISBN 978-978-2461-16-2.
  * Okpewho, Isidore, (Ed.) (2003). Chinua Achebe's 'Things Fall Apart': A Casebook Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514763-6.
  * Sallah, Tijan M. and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala (2003). Chinua Achebe, Teacher of Light: A Biography Trenton, New Jersey: Africa World Press. ISBN 978-1-59221-031-2.
  * Tredell, Nicolas (2000). Joseph Conrad: Heart of Darkness. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-11923-8.
  * Yankson, Kofi E. (1990). Chinua Achebe's Novels: A Sociolinguistic Perspective. Uruowulu-Obosi, Nigeria: Pacific Publishers. ISBN 978-978-2347-79-4.
  * Yousaf, Nahem (2003). Chinua Achebe. Tavistock : Northcote House in Association with the British Council. ISBN 978-0-7463-0885-1.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Chinua
Achebe  
<IMG> Igbo portal  
<IMG> Nigeria portal  
  * A long way from home Interview in the The Guardian, 10 July 2007
  * Interview, online from CBC Words at Large (audio)
  * Achebe reading his poetry
  * Chinua Achebe at the Internet Book List
  * Chinua Achebe at the Internet Book Database of Fiction
  * Chinua Achebe at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database

v â¢ d â¢ e

Works by Chinua Achebe  
Novels:

Things Fall Apart (1958) â¢ No Longer at Ease (1960) â¢ Arrow of God (1964)
â¢ A Man of the People (1966) â¢ Anthills of the Savannah (1987)  
Short stories:

The Sacrificial Egg and Other Stories (1962) â¢ "Civil Peace" (1971) â¢
Girls at War and Other Stories (1973) â¢ African Short Stories (1985) â¢
Heinemann Book of Contemporary African Short Stories (1992)  
Children's stories:

Chike and the River (1966) â¢ How the Leopard Got His Claws (1972) â¢ The
Flute (1975) â¢ The Drum (1978)  
Non-fiction:

An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad's "Heart of Darkness" (1975) â¢ The
Trouble with Nigeria (1983)  
Featured article

  

Persondata  
NAME Achebe, Chinua  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Achebe, Albert Chinualumogu (birth name)  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Nigerian novelist, poet and critic  
DATE OF BIRTH 16 November 1930  
PLACE OF BIRTH Nneobi, Nigeria  
DATE OF DEATH  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinua_Achebe"

Categories: 1930 births | Living people | African philosophers | Bard College
faculty | English-language writers | Fellows of the Royal Society of
Literature | Igbo writers | Igbo novelists | Igbo essayists | Igbo children's
writers | Igbo literary critics | Igbo poets | Igbo short story writers |
Nigerian children's writers | Nigerian essayists | Nigerian literary critics |
Nigerian novelists | Nigerian poets | Nigerian short story writers | People
from Kogi State | University of Ibadan alumni

Hidden categories: Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * á áá­á
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Igbo
  * Italiano
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * Kiswahili
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * YorÃ¹bÃ¡
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 22:06.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



