
# Ramana Maharshi

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For a place-name in Azerbaijan, see Ramana (settlement).

For the scriptwriter, see Mullapudi Venkata Ramana.

Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi  
<IMG>

  
Ramana Maharshi  
Date of Birth 30 December 1879  
Place of birth Tiruchuzhi  
Birth Venkataraman Iyer  
Date of death 14 April 1950 (age 70)  
Place of death Tiruvannamalai  
Philosophy Advaita Vedanta  
Quote Of all the thoughts that rise in the mind, the thought 'I' is the first
thought.  
This box: view â¢ talk  
Sri Ramana Maharshi (Tamil: à®°à®®à®£ à®®à®¹à®°à®¿à®·à®¿) (December 30, 1879
â April 14, 1950), born Venkataraman Iyer, was an Indian sage. He was born
to a Tamil Hindu Brahmin family in Tiruchuzhi, Tamil Nadu. After having
attained liberation at the age of 16, he left home for Arunachala, a mountain
considered sacred by Hindus, at Tiruvannamalai, and lived there for the rest
of his life. Arunachala is located in Tamil Nadu, South India.[1] Although
born a Brahmin, after having attained moksha he declared himself an
"Atiasrami", a Sastraic state of unattachment to anything in life and beyond
all caste restrictions[2].

Sri Ramana maintained that the purest form of his teachings was the powerful
silence which radiated from his presence and quieted the minds of those
attuned to it. He gave verbal teachings only for the benefit of those who
could not understand his silence.[3] His verbal teachings were said to flow
from his direct experience of Consciousness as the only existing reality.[4]
When asked for advice, he recommended self-enquiry as the fastest path to
moksha. Though his primary teaching is associated with Non-dualism, Advaita
Vedanta, and Jnana yoga, he highly recommended Bhakti, and gave his approval
to a variety of paths and practices.[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Life
    * 1.1 Family Background
    * 1.2 Childhood
    * 1.3 The Awakening
    * 1.4 The Journey to Arunachala
    * 1.5 Early Life at Arunachala
    * 1.6 Discovery by Westerners
    * 1.7 Mother's Arrival
    * 1.8 Mother's Death
    * 1.9 The Later Years
    * 1.10 Final Years
  * 2 Teachings
  * 3 Sri Ramana's teachings and Advaita
  * 4 Teachers in his tradition
  * 5 Notable followers
  * 6 Books
    * 6.1 Teachings
    * 6.2 Biographies
    * 6.3 Reminiscences
    * 6.4 For Children
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Life

### [edit] Family Background

Sri Ramana was born in a village called Tiruchuzhi near Madurai in Tamil Nadu,
South India on Ardra Darshanam day, into an orthodox Hindu Tamil (Iyer)
family, the second of four children of Sundaram Iyer (1845?-1892) and
Azhagammal (?-1922), and named Venkataraman at birth. His siblings were
Nagaswamy (1877-1900), Nagasundaram (1886-1953) and sister Alamelu
(1891/92-1953). Venkataraman's father was a respected pleader.[6]

### [edit] Childhood

Venkataraman seemed a normal child with no apparent signs of future greatness.
He was popular, good at sports, very intelligent but lazy at school, indulged
in an average amount of mischief, and showed little religious interest. He did
have a few unusual traits. When he slept, he went into such a deep state of
unconsciousness that his friends could physically assault his body without
waking him up. He also had an extraordinary amount of luck. In team games,
whichever side he played for always won. This earned him the nickname
'Tangakai', which means 'golden hand'[7]. When Venkataraman was about 11, his
father sent him to live with his paternal uncle Subbaiyar in Dindigul because
he wanted his sons to be educated in English so they would be eligible to
enter government service and only Tamil was taught at the village school in
Tiruchuzhi. In 1891, when his uncle was transferred to Madurai, Venkataraman
and his older brother Nagaswami moved with him. In Madurai, Venkataraman
attended Scott's Middle School[8]

### [edit] The Awakening

In 1892, Venkataraman's father Sundaram Iyer suddenly fell seriously ill and
unexpectedly died several days later at the age of 42.[8] For some hours after
his father's death he contemplated the matter of death, and how his father's
body was still there, but the 'I' was gone from it.

After leaving Scott's Middle School, Venkataraman went to the American Mission
High School. One November morning in 1895, he was on his way to school when he
saw an elderly relative and enquired where the relative had come from. The
answer was "From Arunachala."[9] Krishna Bikshu describes Venkataraman's
response: "The word 'Arunachala' was familiar to Venkataraman from his younger
days, but he did not know where it was, what it looked like or what it meant.
Yet that day that word meant to him something great, an inaccessible,
authoritative, absolutely blissful entity. Could one visit such a place? His
heart was full of joy. Arunachala meant some sacred land, every particle of
which gave moksha. It was omnipotent and peaceful. Could one behold it? 'What?
Arunachala? Where is it?' asked the lad. The relative was astonished, 'Don't
you know even this?' and continued, 'Haven't you heard of Tiruvannamalai? That
is Arunachala.' It was as if a balloon was pricked, the boy's heart sank."

A month later he came across a copy of Sekkizhar's Periyapuranam, a book that
describes the lives of 63 Saivite saints, and was deeply moved and inspired by
it.[10] Filled with awe, and a desire for emulation, he began devotional
visits to the nearby Meenakshi Temple in Madurai, and associated with this
bhakti, later reported fever like sensations[11]. Soon after, on July 17,
1896,[10] at age 16, Venkataraman had a life changing experience. He
spontaneously initiated a process of self-enquiry that culminated, within a
few minutes, in his own permanent awakening. In one of his rare written
comments on this process he wrote: 'Enquiring within Who is the seer? I saw
the seer disappear leaving That alone which stands forever. No thought arose
to say I saw. How then could the thought arise to say I did not see.'.[7] As
Sri Ramana reportedly described it later:

> "It was in 1896, about 6 weeks before I left Madurai for good (to go to
Tiruvannamalai \- Arunachala) that this great change in my life took place. I
was sitting alone in a room on the first floor of my uncle's house. I seldom
had any sickness and on that day there was nothing wrong with my health, but a
sudden violent fear of death overtook me. There was nothing in my state of
health to account for it nor was there any urge in me to find out whether
there was any account for the fear. I just felt I was going to die and began
thinking what to do about it. It did not occur to me to consult a doctor or
any elders or friends. I felt I had to solve the problem myself then and
there. The shock of the fear of death drove my mind inwards and I said to
myself mentally, without actually framing the words: 'Now death has come; what
does it mean? What is it that is dying? This body dies.' And at once I
dramatised the occurrence of death. I lay with my limbs stretched out still as
though rigor mortis has set in, and imitated a corpse so as to give greater
reality to the enquiry. I held my breath and kept my lips tightly closed so
that no sound could escape, and that neither the word 'I' nor any word could
be uttered. 'Well then,' I said to myself, 'this body is dead. It will be
carried stiff to the burning ground and there burn and reduced to ashes. But
with the death of the body, am I dead? Is the body I? It is silent and inert,
but I feel the full force of my personality and even the voice of I within me,
apart from it. So I am the Spirit transcending the body. The body dies but the
spirit transcending it cannot be touched by death. That means I am the
deathless Spirit.' All this was not dull thought; it flashed through me
vividly as living truths which I perceived directly almost without thought
process. I was something real, the only real thing about my present state, and
all the conscious activity connected with the body was centered on that I.
From that moment onwards, the I or Self focused attention on itself by a
powerful fascination. Fear of death vanished once and for all. The ego was
lost in the flood of Self-awareness. Absorption in the Self continued unbroken
from that time. Other thought might come and go like the various notes of
music, but the I continued like the fundamental sruti [that which is heard]
note which underlies and blends with all other notes."[12].

After this event, he lost interest in school-studies, friends, and relations.
Avoiding company, he preferred to sit alone, absorbed in concentration on the
Self, and went daily to the Meenakshi Temple, ecstatically devoted to the
images of the Gods, tears flowing profusely from his eyes.[13]

Venkataramanâs elder brother, Nagaswamy, was aware of a great change in him
and on several occasions rebuked him for his detachment from all that was
going on around him. About six weeks after Venkataramanâs absorption into
the Self, on August 29, 1896, he was attempting to complete a homework
assignment which had been given to him by his English teacher for indifference
in his studies. Suddenly Venkataraman tossed aside the book and turned inward
in meditation. His elder brother rebuked him again, asking, "What use is all
this to one who is like this?" Venkataraman did not answer, but recognized the
truth in his brotherâs words[14].

### [edit] The Journey to Arunachala

He decided to leave his home and go to Arunachala. Knowing his family would
not permit this, he slipped away, telling his brother he needed to attend a
special class at school. Fortuitously, his brother asked him to take five
rupees and pay his college fees on his way to school. Venkataraman took out an
atlas, calculated the cost of his journey, took three rupees and left the
remaining two with a note which read: "I have set out in quest of my Father in
accordance with his command. This (meaning his person) has only embarked on a
virtuous enterprise. Therefore, no one need grieve over this act. And no money
need be spent in search of this. Your college fee has not been paid. Herewith
rupees two."[15]

At about noon, Venkataraman left his uncle's house and walked to the railway
station. At about three o'clock the next morning, he arrived at Viluppuram and
walked into the town at daybreak. Tired and hungry, he asked for food at a
hotel and had to wait until noon for the food to be ready. He then went back
to the station and spent his remaining money on a ticket to Mambalappattu, a
stop on the way to Tiruvannamalai. From there, he set out, intending to walk
the remaining distance of about 30 miles (48 km).[10]

After walking about 11 miles (18 km), he reached the temple of Arayaninallur,
outside of which he sat down to rest. When the priest opened the temple for
puja, Venkataraman entered and sat in the pillared hall where he had a vision
of brilliant light enveloping the entire place. He sat in deep meditation
after the light disappeared until the temple priests who needed to lock up the
temple roused him. He asked them for food and was refused, though they
suggested he might get food at the temple in Kilur where they were headed for
service. Venkataraman followed, and late in the evening when the puja ended at
this temple, he asked for food and was refused again. When he asked for water,
he was directed to a Sastriâs house. He set out but fainted and fell down,
spilling the rice he had been given in the temple. When he regained
consciousness, he began picking up the scattered rice, not wanting to waste
even a single grain.[16]

Muthukrishna Bhagavatar was amongst the crowd that gathered around
Venkataraman when he collapsed. He was so struck by Venkataramanâs
extraordinary beauty and felt such compassion for him that he led the boy to
his house, providing him with a bed and food. It was August 31, the
Gokulastami day, the day of Sri Krishnaâs birth. Venkataraman asked
Bhagavatar for a loan of four rupees on the pledge of his ear-rings so that he
could complete his pilgrimage. Bhagavatar agreed and gave Venkataraman a
receipt he could use to redeem his ear-rings. Venkataraman continued on his
journey, tearing up the receipt immediately because he knew he would never
have any need for the ear-rings.

On the morning of September 1, 1896, Venkataraman boarded the train and
traveled the remaining distance. In Tiruvannamalai he went straight to the
temple of Arunachaleswara. There, Venkataraman found not only the temple gates
standing open, but the doors to the inner shrine as well, and not a single
person, even a priest, was in the temple. He entered the sanctum sanctorum and
addressed Arunachaleswara, saying: "I have come to Thee at Thy behest. Thy
will be done." He embraced the linga in ecstasy. The burning sensation that
had started back at Madurai (which he later described as "an inexpressible
anguish which I suppressed at the time") merged in Arunachaleswara.
Venkataraman was safely home.[14]

### [edit] Early Life at Arunachala

The first few weeks he spent in the thousand-pillared hall, but shifted to
other spots in the temple and eventually to the Patala-lingam vault so that he
might remain undisturbed. There, he would spend days absorbed in such deep
samÄdhi that he was unaware of the bites of vermin and pests. Seshadri
Swamigal, a local saint, discovered him in the underground vault and tried to
protect him.[17] After about six weeks in the Patala-lingam, he was carried
out and cleaned up. For the next two months he stayed in the Subramanya
Shrine, so unaware of his body and surroundings that food had to be placed in
his mouth or he would have starved.

From there, he was invited to stay in a mango orchard next to Gurumurtam, a
temple about a mile out of Tiruvannamalai, and shortly after his arrival a
sadhu named Palaniswami went to see him. Palaniswami's first darshan left him
filled with peace and bliss, and from that time on his sole concern was
serving Sri Ramana, joining him as his permanent attendant. From Gurumurtam to
Virupaksha Cave (1899-1916) to Skandasramam Cave (1916-22), he was the
instrument of divine protection for Sri Ramana, who would be without
consciousness of the body and lost in inner bliss most of the time. Besides
physical protection, Palaniswami would also beg for alms, cook and prepare
meals for himself and Sri Ramana, and care for him as needed[18].

Gradually, despite Sri Ramana's silence, austerities, and desire for privacy,
he attracted attention from visitors, and some became his disciples.
Eventually, his family discovered his whereabouts. First his uncle Nelliappa
Iyer came and pled with him to return home, promising that the family would
not disturb his ascetic life. Sri Ramana sat motionless and eventually his
uncle gave up.[19] It was at the temple at Pavalakkunru, one of the eastern
spurs of Arunachala, that his mother and brother Nagaswami found him in
December 1898. Day after day his mother begged him to return, but no amount of
weeping and pleading had any visible effect on him. She appealed to the
devotees who had gathered around, trying to get them to intervene on her
behalf until one requested that Sri Ramana write out his response to his
mother.[20] He then wrote on a piece of paper, "In accordance with the
prarabdha of each, the One whose function it is to ordain makes each to act.
What will not happen will never happen, whatever effort one may put forth. And
what will happen will not fail to happen, however much one may seek to prevent
it. This is certain. The part of wisdom therefore is to stay quiet." At this
point his mother returned to Madurai saddened.[14]

Soon after this, in February 1899, Sri Ramana moved further up Arunachala
where he stayed briefly in Satguru Cave and Guhu Namasivaya Cave before taking
up residence at Virupaksha Cave for the next 17 years, using Mango Tree cave
during the summers (except for a six month period at Pachaiamman Koil during
the plague epidemic).[21]

In 1902, a government official named Sivaprakasam Pillai, with writing slate
in hand, visited the young Swami in the hope of obtaining answers to questions
about "How to know one's true identity". The fourteen questions put to the
young Swami and his answers were Sri Ramana's first teachings on Self-enquiry,
the method for which he became widely known, and were eventually published as
'Nan Yar?', or in English, âWho am I?â.[22]

Several visitors came to him and many became his disciples. Kavyakantha Sri
Ganapati Sastri, a Vedic scholar of repute in his age, came to visit Sri
Ramana in 1907. After receiving instructions from him, he proclaimed him as
Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi. Sri Ramana was known by this name from then
on.[23]

### [edit] Discovery by Westerners

It was in 1911 that the first westerner, Frank Humphreys, then a policeman
stationed in India, discovered Sri Ramana and wrote articles about him which
were first published in The International Psychic Gazette in 1913.[24]
However, Sri Ramana only became relatively well known in and out of India
after 1934 when Paul Brunton, having first visited Sri Ramana in January 1931,
published the book A Search in Secret India, which became very popular.
Resulting visitors included Paramahansa Yogananda, Somerset Maugham (whose
1944 novel The Razor's Edge models its spiritual guru after Sri Ramana),[25]
Mercedes de Acosta, Julian P. Johnson, and Arthur Osborne. Sri Ramana's
relative fame spread throughout the 1940s. However, even as his fame spread,
Sri Ramana was noted for his belief in the power of silence and his relatively
sparse use of speech, as well as his lack of concern for fame or
criticism[26]. His lifestyle remained that of a renunciate.

### [edit] Mother's Arrival

In 1912, while in the company of disciples, he was observed to undergo about a
15 minute period where he showed the outward symptoms of death, which
reportedly resulted thereafter in an enhanced ability to engage in practical
affairs while remaining in Sahaja Nirvikalpa Samadhi. In 1916 his mother
Alagammal and younger brother Nagasundaram joined Sri Ramana at Tiruvannamalai
and followed him when he moved to the larger Skandashram Cave, where Bhagavan
lived until the end of 1922. His mother took up the life of a sannyasin, and
Sri Ramana began to give her intense, personal instruction, while she took
charge of the Ashram kitchen. Ramana's younger brother, Nagasundaram, then
became a sannyasin, assuming the name Niranjanananda, becoming known as
Chinnaswami (the younger Swami).

During this period, Sri Ramana composed The Five Hymns to Arunachala, his
magnum opus in devotional lyric poetry. Of them the first is Akshara Mana
Malai (the Marital Garland of Letters). It was composed in Tamil in response
to the request of a devotee for a song to be sung while wandering in the town
for alms. The Marital Garland tells in glowing symbolism of the love and union
between the human soul and God, expressing the attitude of the soul that still
aspires.[27]

### [edit] Mother's Death

Beginning in 1920, his mother's health deteriorated. On the day of her death,
May 19, 1922, at about 8 a.m., Sri Ramana sat beside her. It is reported that
throughout the day, he had his right hand on her heart, on the right side of
the chest, and his left hand on her head, until her death around 8:00 p.m.,
when Sri Ramana pronounced her liberated, literally, âAdangi Vittadu,
Addakamâ (âabsorbedâ). Later Sri Ramana said of this: "You see, birth
experiences are mental. Thinking is also like that, depending on sanskaras
(tendencies). Mother was made to undergo all her future births in a
comparatively short time.".[28] Her body was enshrined in a samadhi, on top of
which a Siva lingam was installed and given the name Mathrubutheswara [Siva
manifesting as mother].[29] To commemorate the anniversary of Ramana
Maharshi's mother's death, a puja, known as her Aradhana or Mahapooja, is
performed every year at the Mathrubutheswara.

After this, Sri Ramana often walked from Skandashram to her tomb. Then in
December 1922, he came down from Skandashram permanently and settled at the
base of the Hill, where Sri Ramanasramam is still located today. At first,
there was only one hut at the samadhi, but in 1924 two huts, one opposite the
samadhi and the other to the north were erected.

### [edit] The Later Years

The Sri Ramanasramam grew to include a library, hospital, post-office and many
other facilities. Sri Ramana displayed a natural talent for planning building
projects. Annamalai Swami gave detailed accounts of this in his
reminiscences.[30] Until 1938, Annamalai Swami was entrusted with the task of
supervising the projects and received his instructions from Ramana directly.

The 1940s saw many of Sri Ramana's most ardent devotees pass away. These
included Echamma (1945), attendant Madhavaswami (1946), Ramanatha Brahmachari
(1946), Mudaliar Granny and Lakshmi (1948).[31] Sri Ramana was noted for his
unusual love of animals and his assertion that liberation was possible for
animals too. On the morning of June 18, 1948, he realized his favorite cow
Lakshmi was near death. Just as he had with his own Mother, Sri Ramana placed
his hand on her head and over her heart. The cow died peacefully at 11:30 a.m.
and Sri Ramana later declared that the cow was liberated[32].

Sri Ramana was noted for his belief in the power of silence and relatively
sparse use of speech. He led a modest and renunciate life, and depended on
visitors and devotees for the barest necessities. However, a popular image of
him as a person who spent most of his time doing nothing except silently
sitting in samadhi is highly inaccurate, according to David Godman, who has
written extensively about Sri Ramana. According to Godman, from the period
when an Ashram began to rise around him after his mother arrived into his
later years, Sri Ramana was actually quite active in Ashram activities until
his health failed[33].

### [edit] Final Years

In November 1948, a tiny cancerous lump was found on the Maharshi's arm and
was removed in February 1949 by the ashram doctor. Soon, another growth
appeared, and another operation was done by an eminent surgeon in March, 1949,
with Radium applied. The doctor told Sri Ramana that a complete amputation of
the arm to the shoulder was required to save his life, but he refused. A third
and fourth operation were performed in August and December 1949, but only
weakened him. Other systems of medicine were then tried; all proved fruitless
and were stopped by the end of March when devotees gave up all hope. During
all this, Sri Ramana reportedly remained peaceful and unconcerned. As his
condition worsened, Sri Ramana remained available for the thousands of
visitors who came to see him, even when his attendants urged him to rest.
Reportedly, his attitude towards death was serene. To devotees who begged him
to cure himself for the sake of his devotees, Sri Ramana is said to have
replied "Why are you so attached to this body? Let it go.", and "Where can I
go? I am here."[13]

By April 1950, Sri Ramana was too weak to go to the hall, and visiting hours
were limited. Visitors would file past the small room where he spent his final
days to get one final glimpse. Swami Satyananda, the attendant at the time,
reports, "On the evening of 14 April 1950, we were massaging Sri Ramana's
body. At about 5 o'clock, he asked us to help him to sit up. Precisely at that
moment devotees started chanting 'Arunachala Siva, Arunachala Siva'. When Sri
Ramana heard this his face lit up with radiant joy. Tears began to flow from
his eyes and continued to flow for a long time. I was wiping them from time to
time. I was also giving him spoonfuls of water boiled with ginger. The doctor
wanted to administer artificial respiration but Sri Ramana waved it away. Sri
Sri Ramanaâs breathing became gradually slower and slower and at 8:47 p.m.
it subsided quietly." At that very moment, all over India, there were
independent reports of seeing a bright light rising into the sky.[34] Henri
Cartier-Bresson, the French photographer, who had been staying at the ashram
for a fortnight prior to Sri Ramanaâs passing, recounted the event:

> "It is a most astonishing experience. I was in the open space in front of my
house, when my friends drew my attention to the sky, where I saw a vividly-
luminous shooting star with a luminous tail, unlike any shooting star I had
before seen, coming from the South, moving slowly across the sky and, reaching
the top of Arunachala, disappeared behind it. Because of its singularity we
all guessed its import and immediately looked at our watches â it was 8:47
â and then raced to the Ashram only to find that our premonition had been
only too sadly true: the Master had passed into parinirvana at that very
minute."[35]

Cartier-Bresson took some of the last photographs of Sri Ramana on April 4,
and went on to take pictures of the burial preparations. Reportedly, millions
in India mourned his passing. A long article about his death in the New York
Times concluded: "Here in India, where thousands of so-called holy men claim
close tune with the infinite, it is said that the most remarkable thing about
Ramana Maharshi was that he never claimed anything remarkable for himself, yet
became one of the most loved and respected of all."[36].

## [edit] Teachings

Part of a series on  
Hindu philosophy  
Aum  
Schools

Samkhya Â· Yoga Â· Nyaya Â· Vaisheshika Â· Purva Mimamsa Â· Vedanta (Advaita
Â· Vishishtadvaita Â· Dvaita Â· Achintya Bheda Abheda)  
Persons

Ancient  

Gautama Â· Jaimini Â· Kanada Â· Kapila Â· Markandeya Â· PataÃ±jali Â· Valmiki
Â· Vyasa  

Medieval  
Adi Shankara Â· Dnyaneshwar Â· Chaitanya Â· Kabir Â· Madhusudana Â· Madhva Â·
Namdeva Â· Nimbarka Â· Ramanuja Â· Vedanta Desika Â· Tukaram Â· Tulsidas Â·
Vallabha  

Modern  
Aurobindo Â· Coomaraswamy Â· Gandhi Â· Narayana Guru Â· Prabhupada Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa Â· Radhakrishnan Â· Yogananda Â· Ramana Maharshi Â· Dayananda
Saraswati Â· Sivananda Â· Swaminarayan Â· Vivekananda  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Sri Ramana's teachings about self-enquiry, the practice he is most widely
associated with, have been classified as the Path of Knowledge (Jnana marga)
among the Indian schools of thought. Though his teaching is consistent with
and generally associated with Hinduism, the Upanishads and Advaita Vedanta,
there are some differences with the traditional Advaitic school, and Sri
Ramana gave his approval to a variety of paths and practices from various
religions.[5]

His earliest teachings are documented in the book Nan Yar?(Who am I?), first
written in Tamil. The original book was published by Sri Pillai,[37] although
the essay version of the book (Sri Ramana Nutrirattu) prepared by Sri Ramana
is considered definitive as unlike the original it had the benefit of his
revision and review. A careful translation with notes is available in English
as 'The Path of Sri Ramana, Part One' by Sri Sadhu Om, one of the direct
disciples of Sri Ramana. Selections from this definitive version follow[38]:

  * As all living beings desire to be happy always, without misery, as in the case of everyone there is observed supreme love for one's self, and as happiness alone is the cause for love, in order to gain that happiness which is one's nature and which is experienced in the state of deep sleep where there is no mind, one should know one's self. For that, the path of knowledge, the inquiry of the form "Who am I?", is the principal means.
  * Knowledge itself is 'I'. The nature of (this) knowledge is existence-consciousness-bliss.
  * What is called mind is a wondrous power existing in Self. It projects all thoughts. If we set aside all thoughts and see, there will be no such thing as mind remaining separate; therefore, thought itself is the form of the mind. Other than thoughts, there is no such thing as the world.
  * Of all the thoughts that rise in the mind, the thought 'I' is the first thought.
  * That which rises in this body as 'I' is the mind. If one enquires 'In which place in the body does the thought 'I' rise first?', it will be known to be in the heart [spiritual heart is 'two digits to the right from the centre of the chest']. Even if one incessantly thinks 'I', 'I', it will lead to that place (Self)'
  * The mind will subside only by means of the enquiry 'Who am I?'. The thought 'Who am I?', destroying all other thoughts, will itself finally be destroyed like the stick used for stirring the funeral pyre.
  * If other thoughts rise, one should, without attempting to complete them, enquire, 'To whom did they arise?', it will be known 'To me'. If one then enquires 'Who am I?', the mind (power of attention) will turn back to its source. By repeatedly practising thus, the power of the mind to abide in its source increases.
  * The place where even the slightest trace of the 'I' does not exist, alone is Self.
  * Self itself is the world; Self itself is 'I'; Self itself is God; all is the Supreme Self (siva swarupam)

Sri Ramana warned against considering self-enquiry as an intellectual
exercise. Properly done, it involves fixing the attention firmly and intensely
on the feeling of 'I', without thinking. It is perhaps more helpful to see it
as 'Self-attention' or 'Self-abiding' (cf. Sri Sadhu Om - The Path of Sri
Ramana Part I). The clue to this is in Sri Ramana's own death experience when
he was 16. After raising the question 'Who am I?' he "turned his attention
very keenly towards himself" (cf. description above). Attention must be fixed
on the 'I' until the feeling of duality disappears.

Although he advocated self-enquiry as the fastest means to realization, he was
also known to have advised the practice of bhakti and self-surrender (to one's
Deity or Guru) either concurrently or as an adequate alternative, which would
ultimately converge with the path of self-enquiry.[39]

## [edit] Sri Ramana's teachings and Advaita

Sri Ramana's teachings and the traditional Advaitic school of thought
pioneered by Sri Sankaracharya have many things in common. Sri Ramana often
mentioned and is known to have encouraged study of the following classical
works: Ashtavakra Gita, Ribhu Gita and Essence of Ribhu Gita, Yoga Vasista
Sara,[40] Tripura Rahasya[[41]], Kaivalya Navaneetam,[42] Advaita Bodha
Deepika,[43] and Ellam Ondre.[44] However, there are some practical
differences with the traditional Advaitic school, which recommends a
negationist neti, neti (Sanskrit, "not this", "not this") path, or mental
affirmations that the Self was the only reality, such as "I am Brahman" or "I
am He", while Sri Ramana advocates the enquiry "Nan Yar" (Tamil, "Who am I").
Furthermore, unlike the traditional Advaitic school, Sri Ramana strongly
discouraged most who came to him from adopting a renunciate lifestyle.

To elaborate:

  * The traditional Advaitic (non-dualistic) school advocates "elimination of all that is non-self (the five sheaths) until only the Self remains".[45] The five kosas, or sheaths, that hide the true Self are: Material, Vital, Mental, Knowledge, and Blissful.

  * Sri Ramana says "enquiry in the form 'Who am I' alone is the principal means. To make the mind subside, there is no adequate means other than self-enquiry. If controlled by other means, mind will remain as if subsided, but will rise again"[46]

## [edit] Teachers in his tradition

He considered his own guru to be the Self, in the form of the sacred mountain
Arunachala. Sri Ramana did not publicize himself as a guru, never claimed to
have disciples, and never appointed any successors. While a few who came to
see him are said to have become enlightened through association, and there are
accounts of private acknowledgements, he did not publicly acknowledge any
living person as liberated other than his mother at death. Sri Ramana declared
himself an atiasrama[47](beyond all caste and religious restrictions, not
attached to anything in life), and did not belong to or promote any lineage.
Despite his non-affiliations,[48] there are numerous contemporary teachers who
publicly associate themselves with Sri Ramana, and some who assert being in
his lineage.

His method of teaching was characterized by the following:

  1. He urged people who came to him to practice self-enquiry;
  2. He directed people to look inward rather than seeking outside themselves for Realization. ("The true Bhagavan resides in your Heart as your true Self. This is who I truly am.");
  3. He viewed all who came to him as the Self rather than as lesser beings. ("The jnani sees no one as an ajnani. All are only jnanis in his sight.");
  4. He charged no money, and was adamant that no one ever ask for money (or anything else) in his name;
  5. He never promoted or called attention to himself. Instead, Sri Ramana remained in one place for 54 years, offering spiritual guidance to anyone of any background who came to him, and asking nothing in return;
  6. He considered humility to be the highest quality;
  7. He said the deep sense of peace one felt around a jnani was the surest indicator of their spiritual state, that equality towards all was a true sign of liberation, and that what a true jnani did was always for others, not themselves.

## [edit] Notable followers

Over the course of Sri Ramana's lifetime, people from a wide variety of
backgrounds, religions, and countries were drawn to him. Some stayed for the
rest of their lives (or his) and served him with great devotion, and others
came for a single darshan and left, deeply affected by the peace he radiated.

Quite a number of followers wrote books conveying Sri Ramana's teachings. Sri
Muruganar (1893-1973), one of Sri Ramana's foremost devotees who lived as Sri
Ramana's shadow for 26 years,[49] recorded the most comprehensive collection
of Sri Ramana's sayings in a work called Guru Vachaka Kovai (The Garland of
Guru's Sayings).[50] Sri Ramana carefully reviewed this work with Sri
Muruganar, modifying many verses to most accurately reflect his teaching, and
adding in additional verses. Sri Muruganar was also instrumental in Sri
Ramana's writing of Upadesa Saram (The Essence of Instruction)[51] and Ulladu
Narpadu (Forty Verses on Reality).[52] Sri Sadhu Om (1922-1985)[53] spent five
years with Sri Ramana and about 28 years with Sri Muruganar. His deep
understanding of Sri Ramana's teachings on self-enquiry are explained in his
book The Path of Sri Ramana â Part One.[54] Suri Nagamma wrote a series of
letters to her brother in Telugu, describing Sri Ramana's conversations with
devotees over a five year period. Each letter was corrected by Sri Ramana
before it was sent. Attendants of Sri Ramana included Palaniswami (from 1897),
Kunju Swami (from 1920), Madhava Swami, Krishna Bhikshu and Annamalai Swami
(from 1928).

Paul Brunton's writings about Sri Ramana brought considerable attention to him
in the West. Other Westerners who wrote about Sri Ramana include Arthur
Osborne (the first editor of the ashram journal, The Mountain Path), Major
Chadwick (who ran the Veda Patasala during Ramana's time), and S.S. Cohen.
More recently, David Godman, a former librarian at the ashram, has written
about Sri Ramana's teaching, as well as a series of books (The Power of the
Presence) vividly portraying the lives of a number of lesser-known attendants
and devotees of Sri Ramana. Swami Ramdas visited Ramana Maharshi while on
pilgrimage in 1922, and after darshan, spent the next 21 days meditating in
solitude in a cave on Arunachala. Thereafter, he attained the direct
realization that "All was Rama, nothing but Rama".[55]

Maurice Frydman (a.k.a. Swami Bharatananda) a Polish Jew who later translated
Nisargadatta Maharaj's work from Marathi to English called "I Am That" was
also deeply influenced by Sri Ramana's teachings.

## [edit] Books

### [edit] Teachings

  * The Spiritual Teaching of Ramana Maharshi (ISBN 1-59030-139-0)
  * Be as You Are: The Teachings of Sri Ramana Maharshi, by David Godman (ISBN 0-14-019062-7)
  * Guru Vachaka Kovai (Garland of Guru's Sayings) by Sri Muruganar, translation Sri Sadhu Om PDF[56]
  * The Collected Works Of Sri Ramana Maharshi. Contains compositions by Sri Ramana, as well as a large number of adaptations and translations by him of classical advaita works (ISBN 81-88018-06-6)
  * The Path of Sri Ramana, Part One and The Path of Sri Ramana, Part Two, by Sri Sadhu Om (ASIN B000KMKFX0) PDF[57]
  * Happiness and the Art of Being: A Layman's Introduction to the Philosophy and Practice of the Spiritual Teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana (ISBN 1-4251-2465-8) PDF[58]
  * The Essential Teachings of Ramana Maharshi: A Visual Journey (ISBN 1-878019-18-X)
  * Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi, by Munagal Venkataramiah, covers the period 1935 to 1939 (ISBN 81-88018-07-4) PDF[59]
  * Reflections: On Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi, by S.S.Cohen (ISBN 81-88018-38-4) PDF[60]
  * Padamalai: Teachings of Ramana Maharshi Recorded by Sri Muruganar, edited by David Godman (ISBN 0971137137)
  * Sri Ramana Gita (ISBN 81-88018-17-1)
  * The Teachings of Ramana Maharshi in his own words, by Arthur Osborne (ISBN 81-88018-15-5) PDF[61]
  * Day by Day with Bhagavan by A Devaraja Mudaliar (ISBN 81-88018-82-1). An account of daily discussions during the period 1945 to 1947.
  * Gems from Bhagavan, by A. Devaraja Mudaliar
  * Maha Yoga, by 'Who' (Lakshmana Sharma), Rev 2002 (ISBN 81-88018-20-1), PDF[62]
  * Ramana Puranam: Composed by Sri Ramana Maharshi and Sri Muruganar (ISBN 81-8289-059-9)
  * Origin of Spiritual Instruction by Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi
  * Who am I?: the teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi by Ramana Maharshi

### [edit] Biographies

  * Self-Realization: The Life and Teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi, by B.V. Narasimha Swami (ISBN 81-88225-74-6)
  * Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self Knowledge, by Arthur Osborne online text
  * Sri Ramana Leela, by Krishna Bhikshu (Telegu Original) PDF version online[63]
  * Timeless in Time: Sri Ramana Maharshi, by A.R. Natarajan (ISBN 81-85378-82-7)
  * Ramana Maharshi: His Life, by Gabriele Ebert (ISBN-13 978-1411673502)

### [edit] Reminiscences

  * A Sadhu's Reminiscences of Ramana Maharshi, by Major A. W. Chadwick (ISBN 81-88018-37-6)
  * Living By The Words of Bhagavan, by David Godman (no ISBN) about Annamalai Swami
  * The Power of the Presence, Part One, by David Godman (ISBN 0-9711371-1-0), about several devotees
  * The Power of the Presence, Part Two, by David Godman (ISBN 0-9711371-0-2), about several devotees
  * The Power of the Presence, Part Three, by David Godman (ISBN 0-9711371-2-9), about several devotees
  * Letters from Sri Ramanasramam, by Suri Nagamma (ISBN 81-88018-10-4), contains 273 letters from the period 1945 to 1950, each one corrected by Sri Ramana.
  * A Practical Guide to Know Yourself: Conversations with Sri Ramana Maharshi (ISBN 81-85378-09-6)
  * Talks With Sri Ramana Maharshi: On Realizing Abiding Peace and Happiness (ISBN 1-878019-00-7)
  * Guru Ramana, by S.S. Cohen (ISBN 81-88225-22-3)
  * Moments Remembered, Reminiscences of Bhagavan Ramana, by V. Ganesan (ISBN 978-8188018437)
  * Living with the Master, Reminiscences by Kunjuswami (ISBN 81-88018-99-6)
  * Sri Ramana Reminiscences, by G. V. Subbaramayya

### [edit] For Children

  * Sri Ramana, Friend of Animals: Hobbler and the Monkeys of Arunachala ISBN 81-8288-047-5
  * Sri Ramana, Friend of Animals: The Life of Lakshmi the Cow
  * Ramana Thatha (Grand Father Ramana), by Kumari Sarada ISBN 81-85378-03-7
  * Ramana Maharshi (Amar Chitra Katha: The Glorious Heritage of India series) ISBN 81-7508-048-5

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-Knowledge
  2. ^ Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi the Atiasrami, p.1
  3. ^ Talks with Sri Ramana Maharshi
  4. ^ Be As You Are Introduction
  5. ^ a b Sri Ramana's approval of other practices
  6. ^ Arthur Osborne, Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-Knowledge
  7. ^ a b Interview on Sri Ramana Maharshi's life and teachings, p.1
  8. ^ a b Sri Ramana Leela, Krishna Bikshu
  9. ^ Krishna Bikshu, Sri Ramana Leela
  10. ^ a b c Timeless in Time, Sri Ramana Maharshi, A. R. Natarajan
  11. ^ Path of Self-Knowledge:1  
EARLY YEARS

  12. ^ Sri Ramana Maharshi's Life
  13. ^ a b Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-Knowledge, Arthur Osborne
  14. ^ a b c Bhagavan Ramana, the complete book on the website dedicated to Arunachala and Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi
  15. ^ Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi, A Pictorial Biography
  16. ^ Bhagavan Sri Ramana, A Pictorial Biography
  17. ^ Bhagavan Sri Ramana, A Pictorial Biography, Joan and Matthew Greenblatt
  18. ^ Palaniswami
  19. ^ The Path of Sri Ramana (Part One), Sri Sadhu Om
  20. ^ Bhagavan Sri Ramana, A Pictorial Biography. page 34
  21. ^ Timeless in Time, Sri Ramana Maharshi, A.R. Natarajan, pages 27-29
  22. ^ Who Am I? - Nan Yar
  23. ^ The path of Sri Ramana, Part One by Sri Sadhu Om. Fifth Ed. page 15
  24. ^ Account of Frank Humphreys, First Western Disciple
  25. ^ Sri Ramana Maharshi and Somerset Maugham
  26. ^ Sri Ramana Maharshi's Response to Criticism
  27. ^ Introduction to Sri Ramana's Hymns to Arunachala
  28. ^ Sri Ramana Maharshi's Mother
  29. ^ Krishnamurti Aiyer in David Godman's "The Power of the Presence - Part One" (2000) p.140
  30. ^ Living by the Words of Bhagavan, David Godman
  31. ^ Sri Ramana Leela, Ch 40
  32. ^ Lakshmi
  33. ^ Interview on Sri Ramana Maharshi's life and teachings, p.3
  34. ^ Sri Ramana Leela, Chapter 43
  35. ^ Memoirs and Notes, S. S. Cohen
  36. ^ PAGE TWO: Here Lies the Heart
  37. ^ http://www.ramana-maharshi.org/downloads/who_am_I_english.zip
  38. ^ Who Am I? (Nan Yar?)
  39. ^ Path of Sri Ramana - Part Two, by Sri Sadhu Om
  40. ^ Yoga Vasista Sara
  41. ^ TRIPURA RAHASYA. Chapters I - XV of XXII
  42. ^ Kaivalya Navaneetam
  43. ^ Advaita Bodha Deepika
  44. ^ Ellam Ondre
  45. ^ Vivekachudamani, Verse 210, Sri Sankaracharya
  46. ^ "Nan Yar" by Sri Ramana as reproduced in Path of Sri Ramana, Part One, Fifth Edition. Page 149, :152. Note that "Nan Yar" was documented by his disciple M. Sivaprakasam Pillai, who was already heavily influenced by traditional Advaita, and so had added notes about the traditional Advaitic negation method for his own clarification; these additional notes were later removed by Sri Ramana (ibid: Page 147)
  47. ^ Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi the Atiasrami, p.1
  48. ^ lineage
  49. ^ The Mountain Path, Vol. 1 - October 1964 - No. 4
  50. ^ Guru Vachaka Kovai
  51. ^ Upadesa Saram
  52. ^ Ulladu Narpadu
  53. ^ Sadhu Om
  54. ^ The Path of Sri Ramana - Part One
  55. ^ The Mountain Path, January 1965
  56. ^ http://www.happinessofbeing.com/guru_vachaka_kovai.html
  57. ^ http://www.happinessofbeing.com/path_ramana.html
  58. ^ http://www.happinessofbeing.com/happiness_art_being.html
  59. ^ http://www.sriramanamaharshi.org/downloads/talks_full.zip
  60. ^ http://www.sriramanamaharshi.org/downloads/reflections.zip
  61. ^ http://www.sriramanamaharshi.org/downloads/own_words.zip
  62. ^ http://www.tamilnation.org/sathyam/east/ramana/maha_yoga.pdf
  63. ^ http://www.sriramanamaharshi.org/downloads/ramana_leela.zip

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Ramana
Maharshi  
  * The official Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi website
  * David Godman - Author - contains many articles and translated works of or about Ramana Maharshi
  * Bhagavan-Ramana.org Site (Comprehensive, extensively sourced information on Ramana Maharshi)
  * Kheper article, information on Sri Ramana Maharshi
  * The Ramana Maharshi Centre for Learning(RMCL) - established to create greater awareness of the timeless heritage and culture of India, with particular focus on the life and teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi

v â¢ d â¢ e

Modern Dharma/Dhamma writers (1875 to date)  
Buddhist

Lama Ole Nydahl Â· B. R. Ambedkar Â· Lokesh Chandra Â· Chogyam Trungpa
Rinpoche Â· Edward Conze Â· Lama Surya Das Â· Alexandra David-NÃ©el Â·
Henepola Gunaratana Â· Kelsang Gyatso Â· Dalai Lama Â· Thrangu Rinpoche Â·
Walpola Rahula Â· C.A.F. Rhys Davids Â· T.W. Rhys Davids Â· Seongcheol Â·
Sogyal Rinpoche Â· Robert Thurman Â· Richard Gombrich Â· Chah Subhatto Â·
Nanavira Thera Â· Thanissaro Bhikkhu Â· Bhikkhu Bodhi Â· Nyanaponika Thera Â·
Jack Kornfield Â· Gil Fronsdal Â· Seung Sahn Â· Kitaro Nishida Â· Khyentse
Norbu Â· D.T. Suzuki Â· Paul Reps Â· Scott Shaw Â· Alan Watts Â· Thich Nhat
Hanh Â· Yin Shun Â· Hsuan Hua Â· Hsing Yun Â· Philip Kapleau Â· Shunryu Suzuki
Â· Taizan Maezumi Â· Han Yong-un  
Hindu

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Â· Aurobindo Â· Satsvarupa dasa Goswami Â· A.
Coomaraswamy Â· Bankim Â· Alain DaniÃ©lou Â· Dayananda Â· Sita Ram Goel Â·
Ramana Maharshi Â· The Mother Â· Prabhupada Â· Sivananda Â· Ram Swarup Â·
Tilak Â· Vivekananda Â· Yogananda  
Jain

Satish Kumar Â· Claudia Pastorino Â· Yashodev Suri Â· Jayantsain Suri  
Sikh

Bhai Vir Singh Â· Harjot Oberoi Â· G.S. Talib Â· Khushwant Singh  
Syncretic  
and others

Annie Besant Â· Ram Dass Â· Eknath Easwaran Â· Sathya Sai Baba Â· Georg
Feuerstein Â· H.S. Olcott Â· Meher Baba Â· Osho Â· Swami Sivananda Radha Â·
Ken Wilber Â· David Frawley  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Indian philosophy  
Topics

Logic Â· Idealism Â· Monotheism Â· Atheism  
Ästika

Samkhya Â· Nyaya Â· Vaisheshika Â· Yoga Â· Mimamsa Â· Vedanta (Advaita Â·
Vishishtadvaita Â· Dvaita Â· Acintya bheda abheda)  
NÄstika

CÄrvÄka Â· Jaina (Anekantavada Â· Syadvada)  Â· Buddha (Shunyata Â·
Madhyamaka Â· Yogacara Â· Sautrantika Â· Svatantrika)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramana_Maharshi"

Categories: 1879 births | 1950 deaths | 20th-century philosophers | Advaitin
philosophers | Hindu gurus | Spiritual teachers | Indian religious leaders |
Tamil people

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 06:03.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



