
# John Mearsheimer

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

John J. Mearsheimer

John J. Mearsheimer, PhD (born December 1947) is an American professor of
Political Science at the University of Chicago. He is an international
relations theorist. Known for his pioneering book on offensive realism, The
Tragedy of Great Power Politics, more recently Mearsheimer has attracted
attention for co-authoring and publishing the article The Israel Lobby and
U.S. Foreign Policy, which was subsequently published as a book, becoming a
New York Times Best Seller.

## Contents

  * 1 Early years
  * 2 University of Chicago
  * 3 "Israel Lobby" controversy
    * 3.1 Statements and Views on the "Israel Lobby"
    * 3.2 Statements on the 2006 Lebanon War
  * 4 Offensive realism
  * 5 Conventional deterrence
  * 6 Positions
    * 6.1 Nuclear proliferation
    * 6.2 Iraq war (1991)
    * 6.3 Iraq war (2003-present)
  * 7 References
  * 8 See also
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Early years

Mearsheimer was born in December 1947 in Brooklyn, New York. He was raised in
New York City until the age of eight, when his parents moved his family to
Croton-on-Hudson, New York, a suburb located in Westchester County.

<IMG>

<IMG>

At age 17, Mearsheimer enlisted in the U.S. Army. After one year as an
enlisted member, he chose to attend the United States Military Academy at West
Point. He attended West Point from 1966-1970. After graduation, he served for
five years as an officer in the U.S. Air Force.

While in the Air Force, Mearsheimer earned a Masters Degree in International
Relations from the University of Southern California in 1974. He subsequently
entered Cornell University and earned a Ph.D. in government, specifically in
international relations, in 1981. From 1978-1979, was a research fellow at the
Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C. From 1980-1982, he was a post-
doctoral fellow at Harvard Universityâs Center for International Affairs.

## [edit] University of Chicago

Since 1982, Mearsheimer has been a member of the faculty of the Department of
Political Science at the University of Chicago. He became an associate
professor in 1984, a full professor in 1987, and was appointed to the Harrison
chair in 1996. From 1989-1992, he served as chairman of the department. He
currently holds a position as a faculty member in the Committee on
International Relations graduate program.

Mearsheimer has written extensively about national security policy and
international relations theory, especially neo-realism, which he defines as a
stateâs tendency to attempt to gain as much relative power as possible and
eventually become the hegemon of the international system.

Mearsheimerâs books include Conventional Deterrence (1983), Nuclear
Deterrence: Ethics and Strategy (1985), Liddell Hart and the Weight of History
(1988), and The Tragedy of Great Power Politics (2001). He has also written
numerous book chapters, journal articles, and newspaper op-ed pieces.

Mearsheimer has won a number of teaching awards. He received the Clark Award
for Distinguished Teaching when he was a graduate student at Cornell in 1977,
and he won the Quantrell Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching at the
University of Chicago in 1985. In addition, he was selected as a Phi Beta
Kappa Visiting Scholar for the 1993-1994 academic year. In that capacity, he
gave a series of talks at eight colleges and universities. In 2003, he was
elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

## [edit] "Israel Lobby" controversy

Main article: The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy

In March 2006, Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt, the academic dean and professor
of International Relations at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government,
published a working paper [1] and an article[2] in the London Review of Books
discussing the power of the "Israel lobby" in shaping US foreign policy. They
define the Israel lobby as "a loose coalition of individuals and organizations
who actively work to steer US foreign policy in a pro-Israel direction." Those
pieces generated media coverage, and led to debate between supporters and
opponents of their argument.

### [edit] Statements and Views on the "Israel Lobby"

At a forum held by the Council on American-Islamic Relations, Mearsheimer
criticized U.S. leaders for "falling all over themselves to express support
for Israel." At the end of the forum, Mearsheimer accepted a button
proclaiming "Walt & Mearsheimer Rock. Fight the Israel Lobby." He then smiled
broadly and stated "I like it." A reporter covering the event later claimed
that Mearsheimer used the terms "Jewish activists," "major Jewish
organizations" and the "Israel lobby" interchangeably.[3]

### [edit] Statements on the 2006 Lebanon War

In August 2006, Mearsheimer accused Israel of using the kidnapping of its
soldiers by Hezbollah as an excuse to attack Lebanon and start the 2006
Lebanon War. Mearsheimer stated that "Israel had been planning to strike at
Hezbollah for months. Key Israelis had briefed the administration about their
intentions." When asked if there was any "hard evidence" to support his
statements, Mearsheimer cited the "public record" and "Israeli civilian
strategists," then repeated the allegation that Israel was seeking "a cover
for launching this offensive."[3]

## [edit] Offensive realism

John Mearsheimer is the leading proponent of a branch of realist theory called
offensive realism. Offensive realism is a structural theory which, unlike the
classical realism of Hans Morgenthau, blames security competition among great
powers on the anarchy of the international system, not on human nature. In
contrast to another structural realist theory, the defensive realism of
Kenneth Waltz, offensive realism maintains that states are not satisfied with
a given amount of power, but seek hegemony for security. Mearsheimer summed
this view up in The Tragedy of Great Power Politics:

    Given the difficulty of determining how much power is enough for today and tomorrow, great powers recognize that the best way to ensure their security is to achieve hegemony now, thus eliminating any possibility of a challenge by another great power. Only a misguided state would pass up an opportunity to become hegemon in the system because it thought it already had sufficient power to survive.[4]
In this world, there is no such thing as a status quo power, since according
to Mearsheimer, "a great power that has a marked power advantage over its
rivals is likely to behave more aggressively because it has the capability as
well as the incentive to do so." He has also dismissed democratic peace
theory, which claims that democraciesâspecifically, liberal
democraciesânever or rarely go to war with one another.

Although Mearsheimer does not believe it is possible for a state to become a
global hegemon, he believes states seek regional hegemony. Furthermore, he
argues that states attempt to prevent other states from becoming regional
hegemons, since peer competitors could interfere in a state's affairs. States
which have achieved regional hegemony, such as the U.S., will act as offshore
balancers, interfering in other regions only when the great powers in those
regions are not able to prevent the rise of a hegemon.

Mearsheimer has been a vocal critic of American policy toward China. Though
China does not have openly militaristic ambitions today, he thinks that by
trading with China and helping its economy, the United States is providing a
base from which the Chinese could seriously threaten American national
security in the years to come. Furthermore, he thinks that China's neighbours
are increasingly worried about the growing power of China and that there are
already indications that they are trying to balance China by improving ties
with the United States, making the U.S. an offshore balancer. [1]

## [edit] Conventional deterrence

Mearsheimer's first book Conventional Deterrence (1983) addresses the question
of how decisions to start a war depend on the projected outcome of military
conflict. In other words, how do decision makers' beliefs about the outcome of
war affect the success or failure of deterrence? Mearsheimer's basic argument
is that deterrence is likely to obtain when the potential attacker believes
that a successful attack will be unlikely and costly. If the potential
attacker, however, has reason to believe the attack will likely succeed and
entail low costs, then deterrence is likely to breakdown. Specifically,
Mearsheimer argues that the success of deterrence is determined by the
strategy available to the potential attacker. He lays out three strategies.
First, a war-of-attrition strategy, which entails a high level of uncertainty
about the outcome of war and high costs for the attacker. Second, a limited-
aims strategy, which entails less risks and lower costs. And, third, a
blitzkrieg strategy, which provides a way to defeat the enemy rapidly and
decisively, with relatively low costs. For Mearsheimer, failures in the modern
battlefield are due mostly to the potential attacker's belief that it can
successfully implement a blitzkrieg strategy -- in which tanks and other
mechanized forces are employed swiftly to effect a deep penetration and
disrupt the enemy's rear.[citation needed] The other two strategies are
unlikely to lead to deterrence failures because they would entail a low
probability of success accompanied by high costs (war of attrition) or limited
gains and the possibility of the conflict turning into a war of attrition
(limited aims). If the attacker has a coherent blitzkrieg strategy available,
however, an attack is likely to ensue, as its potential benefits outweigh the
costs and risks of starting a war.[citation needed]

Besides analyzing cases from World War II and the Arab-Israeli conflict,
Mearsheimer extrapolates implications from his theory for the prospects of
conventional deterrence in Central Europe during the late Cold War. Here, he
argues that a Soviet attack is unlikely because the Soviet military would be
unable to successfully implement a blitzkrieg strategy. The balance of forces,
the difficulty of advancing rapidly with mechanized forces through Central
Europe, and the formidable NATO forces opposing such a Soviet attack made it
unlikely, in Mearsheimer's view, that the Soviets would start a conventional
war in Europe.[citation needed] Conversely, the same premise held true for
NATO forces.

## [edit] Positions

### [edit] Nuclear proliferation

In 1990 he published a controversial essay [5] where he predicted that Europe
would revert to a multipolar environment similar to that in the first half of
the Twentieth century if American and Soviet forces left following the end of
the Cold War.

In this essay and in the 1993 article in Foreign Affairs The case for a
Ukrainian nuclear deterrent, he argued that to reduce the dangers of war, the
United States should encourage Germany and Ukraine to develop a nuclear
arsenal, while working to prevent the rise of hyper-nationalism. Mearsheimer
presented several possible scenarios for a post-Cold-War Europe from which
American and Russian forces had departed. He believed that a Europe with
nuclear proliferation was most likely to remain at peace, because without a
nuclear deterrent Germany would be likely to once more try to conquer the
continent (See pages 32-33).[5] Also, he refused the possibility that the
Ukraine would give up its nuclear arsenal (a remnant of the soviet stockpile
there) though this in fact occurred. When challenged on the former assertion
at a lecture given to the International Politics department at the University
of Wales in Aberystwyth, he maintained that in spite of all European
integration and expansion, he still believed that his predictions would come
true if the United States military left Europe.[6]

Also, in op-ed pieces on the New York Times written in 1998 and 2000,
Mearsheimer defended India's right to acquire nuclear weapons. In support of
this position, he argued that India has good strategic reasons to want a
nuclear deterrent, especially in order to balance against China and Pakistan,
guaranteeing regional stability. He also criticized US counter-proliferation
policy towards India, which he considered unrealistic and harmful to American
interests in the region.[citation needed]

### [edit] Iraq war (1991)

In January and early February 1991, Mearsheimer published two op-eds in the
Chicago Tribune and the New York Times arguing that the war to liberate Kuwait
from Iraqi forces should be quick and lead to a decisive US victory, with less
than 1,000 American casualties. This view countered the conventional wisdom at
the start of the war, that predicted a conflict lasting for months and costing
thousands of American lives. Mearsheimer's argument was based on several
points. First, the Iraqi Army was a Third World military, unprepared to fight
mobile armored battles. Second, US armored forces were better equipped and
trained. Third, US artillery was also far better than its Iraqi counterpart.
Fourth, US airpower, unfettered by the weak Iraqi air force, should prove
devastating against Iraqi ground forces. Fifth and finally, the forward
deployment of Iraqi reserves boded ill for their ability to counter US efforts
to penetrate the Iraqi defense line along the Saudi-Kuwaiti border. All these
predictions came true in the course of the war.[citation needed]

### [edit] Iraq war (2003-present)

Mearsheimer is an outspoken opponent of the Iraq War. In 2002, he was one of
thirty-three professors to sign a letter in the New York Times arguing against
President Bushâs intention to invade Iraq and topple Saddam Hussein from
power. He felt that invading Iraq would distract from the war against al
Qaeda, which he described as a greater threat to national security. The war
was unnecessary, Mearsheimer felt, because the United States could continue to
effectively contain Hussein, as it had done for over a decade since the Gulf
War. His thinking on the matter is underpinned by a belief in a rational
deterrence theory of weapons of mass destructionânamely, that there is no
way by which a power with nuclear weapons equal to or less than another power
can effectively coerce it into policies against its choosing (this presumes,
and he holds, that Saddam Hussein was a rational actor). Mearsheimer predicted
that after invading Iraq, the U.S. would need to occupy it for decades. He
also wrote several Op-Ed pieces in 2003, including An Unnecessary War [7] and
Keeping Saddam in a Box [8] in which he made the same points.

In a December 2004 interview [9], Mearsheimer argued that the architects of
the invasion, however misguided, were motivated by a sincere desire to protect
American interests. In his March 2006 paper with Walt (discussed in the
section above on the Israel Lobby) he argued that "the war was motivated in
good part by a desire to make Israel more secure". [10]

He further wrote in an article in Foreign Policy in May 2006 [11]:

> We also traced the lobbyâs impact on recent U.S. policies, including the
March 2003 invasion of Iraq. Neoconservatives inside and outside the Bush
administration, as well as leaders of a number of prominent pro-Israel
organizations, played key roles in making the case for war. We believe the
United States would not have attacked Iraq without their efforts. That said,
these groups and individuals did not operate in a vacuum, and they did not
lead the country to war by themselves. For instance, the war would probably
not have occurred absent the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, which helped
convince President George W. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney to support
it.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy by John J. Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt, Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government Working Paper, Submitted 13 March 2006
  2. ^ The Israel Lobby by John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt, London Review of Books, 23 March 2006
  3. ^ a b Dana Milbank:Pronouncing Blame on the Israel Lobby, Mearsheimer and Walt speak at a forum at invitation of the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), Washington Post, August 29, 2006
  4. ^ Mearsheimer, John (2001). The Tragedy of Great Power Politics. New York: W. W. Norton. p. 35\. ISBN 0-393-02025-8.
  5. ^ a b Mearsheimer, John (1990). "Back to the Future". International Security 15 (1). http://johnmearsheimer.uchicago.edu/pdfs/A0017.pdf.
  6. ^ Mearsheimer, John (2006). "Conversations in International Relations: Interview with John J. Mearsheimer (Part I)". International Relations 20 (1): 105-123. http://johnmearsheimer.uchicago.edu/pdfs/A0020.pdf. See page 116
  7. ^ An unnecessary war, John J. Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt, Foreign Policy, Jan/Feb 2003.
  8. ^ Keeping Saddam in a Box by John J. Mearsheimer and Stephen M. Walt, New York Times, 2 February 2003
  9. ^ American Amnesia Interviews John Mearsheimer
  10. ^ Alex Safian in CAMERA, Will the real John Mearsheimer please stand up
  11. ^ Unrestricted Access

## [edit] See also

  * Great Powers
  * Hegemony
  * Realism in international relations
  * Political power
  * Power projection

## [edit] External links

  * John Mearsheimer's Home Page
  * All Publications by John Mearsheimer
  * Conversations With History Interview, conducted by the Institute of International Studies at Berkeley
  * Hans Morgenthau and the Iraq War: Realism Versus Neo-Conservatism by John J. Mearsheimer, OpenDemocracy, May 19, 2005
  * Recent survey recognizing Mearsheimer as one of the five most important IR scholars of his time.
  * The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy A Harvard Study, March, 2006
  * WSJ response to Mearsheimer-Walt working paper on the Israel Lobby
  * Kennedy School removes its logo from lobby 'study' Rosner's Blog, Haaretz, March 22, 2006
  * Study Decrying "Israel Lobby" Marred by Numerous Errors, March 20, 2006
  * Analysis of The Israel Lobby and U.S. Foreign Policy
  * "A Lobby, Not a Conspiracy" by Tony Judt, The New York Times, April 20, 2006
  * "Yes, It's Anti-Semitic" by Eliot A. Cohen, Washington Post, April 5, 2006 
    * "Stephen Walt Responds to the Washington Post's Nazi Smear" \- New York Observer
  * (a response to the critiques) John Mearsheimer & Stephen Walt, May 11, 2006
  * Transcript of C-SPAN interview, June 23, 2006
  * "Pronouncing Blame on the Israel Lobby Authors" -Timothy Stinson, Al-Jazeerah.info
  * What the Israel lobby wants, it too often gets Mearsheimer and Walt respond to their critics in Foreign Policy
  * Video debate about the Israel lobby in the US involving John Mearsheimer and Bruce Feiler on Bloggingheads.tv
  * Middle East: Know the Limits of U.S. Power, Newsweek, Published Nov 29, 2008, from the magazine issue dated Dec 8, 2008.
  * Another War, Another Defeat on Gaza conflict, The American Conservative, January 26, 2009 Issue

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Mearsheimer"

Categories: 1947 births | Cornell University alumni | Living people |
International relations scholars | Political realists | American political
scientists | Contributors to Bloggingheads.tv | United States Air Force
officers | University of Chicago faculty | United States Military Academy
alumni | University of Southern California alumni | Harvard Fellows | German-
Americans

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since September 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 19:25.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



