
# Romance of the Three Kingdoms

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Romance of the Three Kingdoms (disambiguation).

Stories of the Three Kingdoms  
<IMG>  
An illustration of the book  
Author Luo Guanzhong  
Original title ä¸åæ¼ç¾©  
Country China  
Language Chinese  
Genre(s) Historical novel  
Publication date 14th century  
ISBN 978-7119005904  
OCLC 49389330  
<IMG>

This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may
see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters.  
Romance of the Three Kingdoms (traditional Chinese: ä¸åæ¼ç¾©; simplified
Chinese: ä¸å½æ¼ä¹; pinyin: sÄnguÃ³ yÇnyÃ¬), written by Luo Guanzhong in
the 14th century, is a Chinese historical novel based upon events in the
turbulent years near the end of the Han Dynasty and the Three Kingdoms era of
China, starting in 169 and ending with the reunification of the land in
280.[1]

It is acclaimed as one of the Four Great Classical Novels of Chinese
literature, with a grand total of 800,000 words, nearly a thousand
characters[2], and 120 chapters.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Story
    * 2.1 Yellow Turban Rebellion
    * 2.2 Dong Zhuo's tyrannical rule
    * 2.3 Conflict among the various warlords and nobles
    * 2.4 Sun Ce builds a dynasty in Jiangdong
    * 2.5 Liu Bei's unrealized ambition
    * 2.6 Battle of the Red Cliff
    * 2.7 Tension between Liu Bei and Sun Quan
    * 2.8 Ma Chao
    * 2.9 Liu Bei controls Xichuan and Jingzhou
    * 2.10 Death of Guan Yu
    * 2.11 Battle of Yiling
    * 2.12 Zhuge Liang calmly fends off five armies
    * 2.13 Battle of wits between Zhuge Liang and Sima Yi
    * 2.14 Sima family controls Wei
    * 2.15 End of the Three Kingdoms
  * 3 Historical accuracy
  * 4 Literary analysis
    * 4.1 Buddhist aspects
    * 4.2 Popular saying
  * 5 Cultural references
    * 5.1 Chinese manhua
    * 5.2 Japanese manga
    * 5.3 Film and television
    * 5.4 Computer and video games
  * 6 See also
  * 7 Notes
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

Myths from the Three Kingdoms era existed as oral traditions before any
written compilations. In these popular stories, the characters typically took
on exaggerated characteristics, often becoming immortals or supernatural
beings with magical powers. With their focus on the history of Han Chinese,
the stories grew in popularity during the reign of the foreign Mongol emperors
of the Yuan Dynasty. During the succeeding Ming Dynasty, an interest in plays
and novels resulted in further expansions and retelling of the stories.

The earliest attempt to combine these stories into a written work was
Sanguozhi Pinghua (ä¸åèªè©è©±ï¼ä¸å½å¿è¯è¯; SÄnguÃ³zhÃ¬ PÃ­nghuÃ ),
literally "Story of Sanguozhi", published sometime between 1321 and 1323. This
version combined themes of legend, magic, and morality to appeal to the
peasant class. Elements of reincarnation and karma were woven into this
version of the story.

The Romance of the Three Kingdoms is traditionally attributed to Luo
Guanzhong, who lived sometime between 1315 and 1400 (late Yuan to early Ming
period). Some scholars argue for an origin from around the second half of the
fifteenth century (mid-Ming) based on characteristics of the text. This theory
is extensively developed in Andrew Plaks' Four Masterworks of the Ming
Novel.[3] It was written in partly vernacular and partly Classical Chinese and
was considered the standard text for 300 years. The author made use of
available historical records, including the Records of the Three Kingdoms
compiled by Chen Shou, which covered events from the Yellow Turban Rebellion
in 184 up to the unification of the three kingdoms under the Jin Dynasty in AD
280. The novel also includes material from Tang Dynasty poetic works, Yuan
Dynasty operas and his own personal interpretation of elements such as virtue
and legitimacy. The author combined this historical knowledge with a gift for
storytelling to create a rich tapestry of personalities, and initially
published it in 24 volumes. It was copied by hand until first printed in
1522[4] as Sanguozhi tongsu yanyi[5] In the 1660s, during Kangxi's reign in
the Qing Dynasty, Mao Lun (æ¯ç¶¸; æ¯çº¶)[2] and his son Mao Zonggang
(æ¯å®å´; æ¯å®å²) significantly edited the text, fitting it into 120
chapters, and abbreviating the title to Sanguozhi yanyi[5]. The text was
reduced from 900,000 to 750,000 characters; significant editing was done for
narrative flow; use of third party poems was reduced and shifted from
conventional verse to finer pieces; and most passages praising Cao Cao's
advisers and commanders were removed.[6] Scholars have long debated whether
Mao's viewpoint was anti-Qing (identifying Southern Ming remnants with Shu-
Han) or pro-Qing.[7] The previous version was almost completely supplanted by
Mao's edition, which is considered to be the superior literary work.[8]

This novel reflects the Confucian values that were prominent at the time it
was written. According to Confucian moral standards, loyalty to one's family,
friends, and superiors are important measures for distinguishing good and bad
people. In the novel, characters who were not loyal to the collapsing Han
Dynasty are portrayed as bad people; on the contrary, modern mainstream
ideology in Communist China would say that the deeply suffering masses were
trying to overthrow the ruling feudal lords.

## [edit] Story

One of the greatest achievements of Romance of the Three Kingdoms is the
extreme complexity of its stories and characters. The novel contains numerous
secondary stories. As such, the following only serves as a summary of the
central plot.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Three Heroes of Three Kingdoms, silk painting by Sekkan Sakurai (1715-1790),
depicting Liu Bei, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei. This painting is usually hung in the
offices of businessmen to show that they are trustworthy, just as these
brothers were to each other.

### [edit] Yellow Turban Rebellion

The story begins in the final years of the Han Dynasty when incompetent
eunuchs deceived the emperor and banished good officials. The government had
become extremely corrupt on all levels, leading to widespread deterioration of
the empire. During the reign of the penultimate Han emperor, Emperor Ling, the
Yellow Turban Rebellion broke out under the leadership of Zhang Jiao, who
allegedly practiced Taoist wizardry. Zhang Jiao pretended to be a traveling
healer curing people of sickness while secretly inciting them to revolt. In
this time of turmoil, many of the major characters in the story are
introduced; Liu Bei, Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, Cao Cao, Sun Jian, etc.

The rebellion was barely suppressed by imperial troops under the command of He
Jin, Emperor Lingâs brother-in-law and the Supreme Commander of the armies
of the Central Government. Fearing his growing power, the eunuchs under Zhang
Rang lured He Jin alone into the palace following Emperor Ling's death and
murder that was orchestrated by his rivals. His stunned guards, led by Yuan
Shao, responded by charging into the palace, which turned into an
indiscriminate slaughter. In the ensuing confusion, the child Emperor Shao and
the Prince of Chenliu (later Emperor Xian) disappeared from the palace.

### [edit] Dong Zhuo's tyrannical rule

Soon, the Emperor and the Prince were discovered by soldiers belonging to the
warlord Dong Zhuo from Western Liang, who proceeded to seize control of the
capital under the pretext of protecting the emperor. DÇng later had Emperor
Shao deposed and replaced with the Prince of Chenliu, who became Emperor Xian.
Under Dong Zhuoâs violent rule, the people suffered greatly. There were
assassination attempts on him by both the court physician Wu Fu and Cao Cao
but both attempts failed.

Cao Cao managed to escape and issued an edict in the emperor's name to all
governors, calling them to remove Dong Zhuo from power. Under general Yuan
Shao, 18 governors and nobles joined forces in a campaign against Dong Zhuo,
but undermined by poor leadership and conflict of interest, they only managed
to drive him from the capital Luoyang to Chang'an. However, Dong Zhuo was
later betrayed and murdered by his own foster son LÃ¼ Bu, from a dispute over
the beautiful Diaochan, in a scheme orchestrated by minister Wang Yun.

### [edit] Conflict among the various warlords and nobles

In the meantime, however, the empire was already disintegrating into civil
war. Sun Jian, governor of Changsha, found the Imperial Seal at the bottom of
a well in the ruins of Luoyang but secretly kept it for his own purposes,
further weakening royal authority. Without a strong central government,
warlords began to rise up and fight each other for land and power. In the
north, Yuan Shao and Gongsun Zan were at war, and in the south, Sun Jian and
Liu Biao. Many others, even those without title or land, such as Cao Cao and
Liu Bei, were also starting to build up power.

Cao Cao took Emperor Xian from Dong Zhuoâs former subordinates Li Jue and
Guo Si and established the new court in Xuchang. Even more powerful now with
the emperor in his control, Cao Cao quickly subdued his rivals such as LÃ¼ Bu,
Yuan Shu and Zhang Xiu, culminating in his greatest military victory, over
Yuan Shao in the famous Battle of Guandu despite being outnumbered 10-to-1.
Cao Cao pursued the defeated Yuan clan and finally united northern China,
which later served as the foundation for the Kingdom of Wei.

### [edit] Sun Ce builds a dynasty in Jiangdong

Meanwhile, an ambush had violently concluded Sun Jian's life in a war with Liu
Biao, fulfilling his own rash oath to heaven. His eldest son Sun Ce then
delivered the Imperial Seal as tribute to rising royal pretender Yuan Shu of
Huainan, in exchange for much needed reinforcements. Now, like the proverbial
tiger that has been given claws, he soon secured himself a state in the rich
riverlands of Jiangdong, on which the Kingdom of Wu would eventually be
founded. Tragically, Sun Ce also died at the height of his career from illness
under stress of his terrifying encounter with the ghost of Yu Ji, a venerable
magician whom he had falsely accused and executed in jealousy. However, his
successor and younger brother Sun Quan, led by skilled advisors Zhou Yu and
Zhang Zhao, proved to be a masterful and charismatic ruler, inspiring hidden
talents from across the land such as Lu Su to join his service, while raising
a strong military which would truly receive a trial by fire in Cao Caoâs
great southern campaign.

### [edit] Liu Bei's unrealized ambition

Liu Bei, along with his sworn brothers Guan Yu and Zhang Fei had sworn
allegiance to the Han Dynasty (in the famous Oath of the Peach Garden) and
pledged to do their best to serve the emperor and the common people. However,
their goals and ambitions had not been realized until the later part of the
novel. Liu Bei, ever since he had successfully quelled the Yellow Turban
Rebellion, was not recognized for his efforts and was made only the magistrate
of a small county. Later, Liu Bei joined Gongsun Zan and participated in the
war against Dong Zhuo. Cao Cao invaded Xuzhou as a revenge against Tao Qian,
the governor of Xuzhou who unknowingly allowed his subordinate to kill Cao
Caoâs father. Liu Bei led his troops from Pingyuan to help Tao Qian and Tao
passed on his post as Governor of Xuzhou to Liu Bei before he died. At that
same time, Lu Bu was at war with Cao Cao as he also longed to dominate China
ever since he had killed Dong Zhuo. Lu Bu was defeated by Cao Cao and he
sought refuge under Liu Bei. Later, Lu Bu repaid Liu Beiâs kindness with
evil and seized control of Xuzhou. Liu Bei was forced to join forces with Cao
Cao and they defeated Lu Bu. Lu Bu was executed and Liu Bei became officially
recognized by Emperor Xian as the Emperorâs Uncle. Liu Bei plotted with some
officials to kill Cao Cao as Cao Cao wielded far too much power and had the
intention of usurping the throne. Liu Bei failed to kill Cao Cao as the plot
was exposed. He seized control of Xuzhou but lost to Cao Cao when Cao Cao led
his troops to conquer Xuzhou. Liu Bei got control of Runan with help from some
former Yellow Turban rebels but was defeated once again by Cao Cao in battle.
Liu Bei had no choice but to move to Jingzhou to seek Liu Biaoâs protection.
Liu Biao treated Liu Bei with respect and put him in charge of Xinye. At
Xinye, Liu Bei recruited the talented military strategist Zhuge Liang
personally and slowly built up his forces.

### [edit] Battle of the Red Cliff

Cao Cao, who declared himself the Prime Minister, led his troops to attack
southern China after uniting the north. At Xinye, he was defeated twice by Liu
Beiâs forces but Liu Bei lost Xinye and had to move to Jingzhou.
Unfortunately, Liu Biao had died by then and left Jingzhou split between his
two sons Liu Qi and Liu Cong. Liu Bei led the civilians of Xinye to Xiangyang,
where Liu Cong ruled but Liu Bei was denied entry. Liu Cong later surrendered
to Cao Cao, and Liu Bei had no choice but to move to Jiangxia where Liu Qi
ruled. On the way, Liu Bei and the civilians were pursued by Cao Caoâs
troops and several innocent civilians were killed. Liu Bei and his men managed
to reach Jiangxia where he established a strong foothold against Cao Caoâs
invasion.

To resist Cao Caoâs invasion, Liu Bei sent Zhuge Liang to persuade Sun Quan
in Jiangdong to form an alliance. Zhuge Liang managed to persuade Sun Quan to
form an alliance with Liu Bei against Cao Cao and stayed in Jiangdong as a
temporary advisor. Sun Quan placed Zhou Yu in command of the forces of
Jiangdong (Eastern Wu) to defend against Cao Caoâs invasion. Zhou Yu felt
that the talented Zhuge Liang would become a future threat to Eastern Wu and
tried several times to kill Zhuge Liang, but failed. In the end, he had no
choice but to co-operate with Zhuge Liang for the time being as Cao Caoâs
armies were at the border. Cao Cao was defeated at the Battle of the Red
Cliff, also called the battle of Chibi, by the combined forces of Liu Bei and
Sun Quan and forced to flee back to Jingzhou.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Traditional site of the Red Cliff

### [edit] Tension between Liu Bei and Sun Quan

After the great battle at the Red Cliff, Eastern Wu and Liu Bei vied for
control of Jingzhou. Zhou Yu led the troops of Eastern Wu to attack Jingzhou
and gained a victory, but eventually Jingzhou ended up in Liu Beiâs hands,
as Zhuge Liang had advised Liu Bei to seize Jingzhou while Zhou Yu and Cao
Caoâs forces were at war. Zhou Yu was extremely unhappy and reported the
matter to Sun Quan. Sun Quan dispatched Lu Su to Jingzhou to negotiate with
Liu Bei for Jingzhou. Again and again, Liu Bei refused to hand over Jingzhou
to Eastern Wu. Sun Quan had no choice but to use new strategies suggested by
Zhou Yu to take Jingzhou. One of these was the Beauty Scheme, in which Sun
Quan lured Liu Bei to Jiangdong (where he intended to hold Liu Bei hostage in
exchange for Jingzhou) by pretending to betroth his younger sister, Lady Sun
to Liu Bei. However, Zhuge Liang outwitted Zhou Yu, and Liu Bei returned to
Jingzhou safely with his new wife. Zhou Yu tried and failed repeatedly to take
Jingzhou. After being infuriated by Zhuge Liang twice, Zhou Yu eventually
coughed out blood. The third time, he coughed out even more, and died
unconscious.

### [edit] Ma Chao

In the northwest, Ma Chao started a campaign against Cao Cao to avenge his
father, Ma Teng, who was killed by Cao Cao. Ma Chaoâs forces were formidable
as he had the support of Han Sui and troops from the Qiang minority. However,
Cao Cao managed to defeat Ma Chaoâs forces by using cunning strategies to
make Ma Chao and Han Sui turn against each other. Han Sui surrendered to Cao
Cao and Ma Chao was left stranded. Ma Chao later sought refuge under Zhang Lu
of Hanzhong, and eventually joined Liu Bei.

### [edit] Liu Bei controls Xichuan and Jingzhou

After Zhou Yuâs death, relations between Liu Bei and Sun Quan deteriorated,
but not to the point of outright war. Following Zhuge Liang's advice, Liu Bei
invaded and conquered Xichuan, where the incompetent noble Liu Zhang ruled. He
also took Hanzhong, which had been in Cao Caoâs control. Liu Bei proclaimed
himself King of Hanzhong, while Cao Cao had himself promoted from Prime
Minister to King of Wei; Sun Quan was known as the Duke of Wu. At this time,
Liu Bei ruled a vast area of land from Jingzhou to Sichuan in the west. This
would later serve as a strong foundation for the founding of the Kingdom of
Shu. Meanwhile, Cao Cao and Sun Quan were also at war, with defeats and
victories for both sides at the Battle of Ruxukou and Battle of Hefei.

The situation among the three major powers almost reached a stalemate after
this, until Cao Cao died due to a brain tumor. The following year, Cao Caoâs
son Cao Pi forced Emperor Xian to abdicate, ending the Han Dynasty which had
lasted for centuries. Cao Pi proclaimed himself emperor and renamed his
dynasty Cao Wei. In response to this, Liu Bei declared himself Emperor of Shu
Han, to signify that he still carried on the bloodline of the Han royal
family, but was based in the lands of Shu.

### [edit] Death of Guan Yu

Sun Quan, tired of Liu Beiâs repeated refusals to hand over Jingzhou, made
plans to retake it. He made peace with Cao Cao and was bestowed the title of
Prince of Wu. Liu Bei left his sworn brother Guan Yu in charge of Jingzhou,
and Guan led the Jingzhou troops to attack Cao Cao. Sun Quan took advantage of
the situation and sent Lu Meng to seize Jingzhou. Lu Meng disguised his troops
as merchants and finessed a quiet entry. As Guan Yu was besieging Cao Wei
general Cao Ren, Lu Meng's forces attacked Guan Yu from the rear, and routed
his army with ease. Guan Yu's general Liao Hua volunteered to ride his horse
through the oncoming horde of Wu soldiers to Liu Feng's castle to request
reinforcements. Liu Feng, fearing that he would be in danger with a smaller
force of soldiers, refused, and this ultimately led to the fall of Guan Yu. In
desperate retreat, Guan Yu's army scattered, and Guan was captured. Sun Quan
had him beheaded after he refused to renounce his loyalty to Liu Bei. Liu Bei
deeply grieved the death of Guan Yu and the loss of Jingzhou. He was already
planning to avenge Guan Yu when he heard that his other sworn brother, Zhang
Fei, had been murdered in his sleep by subordinates who then fled to Eastern
Wu. Liu Bei was determined to avenge both brothers. Disregarding advice from
Zhuge Liang, Zhao Yun, and others, Liu Bei led a formidable army of 750,000 to
attack Eastern Wu.

### [edit] Battle of Yiling

Sun Quan offered Liu Bei the return of the Jing province and of his sister
(Liu's ex-wife Lady Sun). Liu Bei's advisers, including Zhuge Liang, urged him
to accept these terms, but Liu persisted. After initial victories, a series of
strategic mistakes due to the impetuosity of Liu Bei led to the cataclysmic
defeat of Han troops in the Battle of Yiling. However, Lu Xun, the commander
of Wu who spearheaded the war against Shu Han, refrained from pursuing Liu
Beiâs defeated troops. Famous generals from both Shu Han and Eastern Wu
forces perished. Lu Xunâs caution was vindicated when Cao Pi launched an
invasion against Wu, thinking that Wu forces would still be abroad. The
invasion was crushed by strong Wu resistance, coupled with a plague outbreak.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An artist impression of Zhuge Liang holding his trademark feather fan.

Meanwhile, in Baidicheng, sixty-two year old Liu Bei, ailing after three years
of neglecting his health, died, leaving his young son Liu Shan in the care of
Zhuge Liang. In a moving final conversation between Liu Bei and Zhuge Liang,
Liu Bei asked Zhuge Liang to assume the imperial throne himself in place of
Liu Shan, should Liu Shan prove to be inept. He refused to do so, and swore
that he would remain faithful to the trust that Liu Bei had for him. This
promise was to be a raison d'Ãªtre for the rest of Zhuge Liang's life.

### [edit] Zhuge Liang calmly fends off five armies

Cao Pi, following Sima Yiâs advice, induced several forces, including Sun
Quan, turncoat Shu general Meng Da, Meng Huo of the Nanman, and the Qiang
tribe, to attack Shu Han, in coordination with a Cao Wei army. Zhuge Liang
successfully deployed the Shu Han troops and caused the five armies to retreat
without shedding a single drop of blood. An envoy from Shu Han named Deng Zhi
subsequently persuaded Sun Quan to renew its former alliance with Shu Han.

In one of his final strokes of brilliance, Zhuge Liang personally led the Shu
troops to subdue the southern barbarian king Meng Huo of the Nanman tribe. The
barbarian troops were no match for the Shu troops and Zhuge Liang captured
Meng Huo seven times by using cunning strategies. The first six times, Meng
Huo complained that he had been captured by trickery, and had no chance to
fight a real battle with the Shu troops. Zhuge Liang agreed to let him go
every time, allowing him to come back again for another battle. The seventh
time, Zhuge Liang wanted to release Meng Huo once again but this time Meng Huo
refused. Meng Huo was ashamed of rebelling against Shu Han and was so deeply
touched by Zhuge Liangâs benevolence that he swore allegiance to Shu Han
forever.

### [edit] Battle of wits between Zhuge Liang and Sima Yi

At this time, Cao Pi also died of illness and was succeeded by Cao Rui. Ma
Chao died of illness as well at age 46. In Jiangdong, Sun Quan declared
himself Emperor of Eastern Wu. Zhuge Liang then turned his eyes northwards,
and planned to attack Wei to restore the Han Dynasty as he had promised Liu
Bei at the latterâs deathbed. However, his days were numbered and Shu was
far too weak to overcome the material superiority of Wei. His last significant
victory against Wei was probably the defection of Jiang Wei, a young general
whose brilliance paralleled his own.

Zhuge Liang all along had a chronic illness, which was compounded when he
refused to rest even into the early hours of the morning, so that he would be
able to complete his analysis of the battlegrounds or to formulate his next
plan. He finally died of sickness at the Battle of Wuzhang Plains, while
leading a stalemated battle against the Wei commander, Sima Yi, with his far
superior force. As a final ploy, he ordered his trusted generals to fake a
statue of himself to scare off Sima Yi in order to buy time for the Shu army
to retreat to Hanzhong.

### [edit] Sima family controls Wei

The long years of battle between Shu and Wei saw many changes in the ruling
Cao family in Wei. The Cao family gradually grew weak after the death of Cao
Rui and Sima Yi slowly plotted to usurp the throne. Sima Yi removed Cao
Shuang, a powerful noble of Wei from power with a cunning strategy and since
then the power of Wei had been in the hands of Sima Yi. After Sima Yiâs
death, his sons Sima Shi and Sima Zhao continued wielding the power of Wei in
their hands. Sima Zhao had Cao Fang removed from the throne and replaced Cao
Fang with Cao Mao. Later, Cao Mao tried to assassinate Sima Zhao, who had the
intention of usurping the throne, but was killed by Sima Zhaoâs subordinate.
Sima Zhao pretended to grieve and mourn Cao Maoâs death and even later had
his subordinate, whom he ordered to kill Cao Mao, executed for committing
regicide.

### [edit] End of the Three Kingdoms

Jiang Wei carried on Zhuge Liangâs campaign against Wei for a bitter three
decades. However, Liu Beiâs son Liu Shan did not heed Jiang Weiâs advice
and listened to the evil eunuch Huang Hao instead. In order to escape from the
rival officials in the court, Jiang Wei decided to resign from his military
title for the time being and went off to a fertile land of Tazhong. The Wei
general Deng Ai, who was at war with Jiang Wei, took the chance to attack Shu
Han. Deng Ai and his troops arrived in front of Chengdu, the capital city of
Shu-Han, by taking a shortcut. Liu Shan surrendered without a battle and ended
the Kingdom of Shu-Han. Jiang Wei planned to rebuild Shu-Han by uniting forces
with a Wei general, Zhong Hui, who was at odds with Deng Ai. However, he was
not able to see it to the end when his heartache grew intolerable in the midst
of the final battle. Seeing the rebellion has failed, he then killed himself
with a sword, marking the last stand of Shu.

In Eastern Wu, there was internal conflict among the nobles ever since the
death of Sun Quan. Zhuge Ke tried to usurp the throne of Eastern Wu but was
assassinated by Sun Lin. Later, Sun Lin himself also lusted for power and had
the emperor of Eastern Wu Sun Liang deposed and replaced with Sun Xiu. Sun Xiu
sought help from the old veteran general Ding Feng and had Sun Lin
assassinated, and the power of Eastern Wu went back into the hands of the
emperor. This did not last for long.

In Wei, Sima Yan, son of Sima Zhao, finally forced the last Wei emperor Cao
Huan to abdicate in the same manner as Cao Pi had forced Emperor Xian of Han
to abdicate. Sima Yan established the Jin Dynasty in AD 265, declaring himself
the first emperor of the new dynasty. The Kingdom of Wei came to an end.

Sima Yan ordered the Jin troops to attack Eastern Wu from the former land of
Shu-Han and succeeded in conquering Eastern Wu after a long period of struggle
when the last tyrannical emperor of Eastern Wu, Sun Hao surrendered. Thus the
Three Kingdoms period concluded after almost a century of civil strife.

## [edit] Historical accuracy

See also: List of fictitious stories in Romance of the Three Kingdoms

The novel draws from historical sources, including Chen Shou's Records of
Three Kingdoms. Other major influences include Liu Yiqing's Shishuo xinyu or A
New Account of Tales of the World, published 430,[9] and the Sanguozhi
pinghua, a chronological collection of eighty fictional sketches starting with
the peach garden oath and ending with Zhuge Liang's death.[10] Some fifty or
sixty Yuan and early Ming plays about the Three Kingdoms are known to have
existed, and their material is almost entirely fictional, based on thin
threads of actual history. The novel is thus a return to greater emphasis on
history, compared to these dramas.[11] The novel also shifted towards better
acknowledgement of the Southland's historical importance, while still
betraying some prejudice against them.[12] Zhang Xuecheng wrote that the novel
consists of 70% history and 30% non-history.[5] The "non-history" parts have
different sources, besides unofficial historical records, folk stories and
Sanguozhi pinghua, some were created by the author on his own. Nonetheless,
the description of the social conditions and the logic that the characters use
is accurate to the Three Kingdoms period, creating "believable" situations and
characters, even if they are not historically accurate.[13].

Romance of the Three Kingdoms, like the dramas and folk stories of its day,
features Liu Bei and his kingdom as the protagonist; hence the depiction of
the people in Shu-Han was glorified. The antagonists, Cao Cao, Sun Quan and
their kingdoms, on the other hand, were often denigrated. This suited the
political climate in the Ming Dynasty, unlike in the Jin Dynasty, when Cao Wei
was considered the legitimate successor to the Han.

Some non-historical scenes in the novel have become well-known and entered
traditional Chinese culture.

## [edit] Literary analysis

<IMG>

<IMG>

Portrait of Pang De in a scene during the Battle of Fancheng from a Qing
Dynasty edition of the Romance of the Three Kingdoms

Dominant themes of the novel include: the rise and fall of the ideal liege
(Liu Bei) finding the ideal minister (Zhuge Liang); the conflict between the
ideal liege (Liu Bei) and the consummate villain (Cao Cao); and the cruelties
and injustice of feudal or dynastic government.[2]

Luo Guanzhong's re-telling of this story also gives a window into the politics
of his time. The later MÃ­ng Emperor WanlÃ¬ had officially elevated Guan Yu to
the position of a god, Lord Guan, to promote Guan Yu's characteristics of
bravery and extreme fidelity (characteristics the emperor no doubt wanted to
promote in his subjects). Recent research finds in Luo Guanzhong's Guan Yu a
fascinating reflection of Chinese culture under MÃ­ng rule, the author
complying with the program of imperial propaganda while also subtly subverting
it.

Besides the famous oath, many Chinese proverbs in use today are derived from
the novel:

Translation Chinese Interpretation  
The relationship between a husband and a wife is like a garment; if a garment
is torn, it can be mended. The relationship between two brothers is like a
limb; if a limb is broken, it cannot be repaired. å¤«å¦»å¦è¡£æ, å
å¼å¦æè¶³

It is much easier for husband and wife to make up after a quarrel than it is
for two brothers.

Some Chinese people also interpret this phrase to mean

A wife can be changed, like laundry, but friendship can never be replaced  
Liu Bei "borrows" Jingzhou â borrowing without returning.
åå¤åèå·ââæåæ è¿ There are people who borrow but never return
what they borrowed, so be wary of them.  
Speak of 'Cao Cao' and Cao Cao arrives. èªªæ¹æï¼æ¹æå°

or,

èªªæ¹ææ¹æå°±å°

equivalent to "speak of the devil" in English when a person under discussion
suddenly appears  
Three reeking tanners (are enough to) overcome one Zhuge Liang.

ä¸åè­ç®å , åéä¸åè«¸èäº®

or more colloquially,

ä¸åè­ç®å , è³½éä¸åè«¸èäº®

When together, three incapable persons will always overpower one capable
person  
Losing your wife and your army. è³ äºå¤«äººåæå µ In reference to Lady Sun
leaving for Liu Bei. Representing a bad deal in which a person loses on both
sides of the deal.  
East Wu arranges for a marriage, turning fake into real

æ±å³æè¦ªââå¼åæç

Refers to planning something that is intended to be fake, but becomes real.  
### [edit] Buddhist aspects

Romance of the Three Kingdoms recorded stories of a Buddhist monk, who was a
friend of the renowned general Guan Yu and informed him of an assassination
attempt. As the novel was written in the Ming Dynasty, more than 1000 years
after the era, these stories showed that Buddhism had long been a significant
ingredient of the mainstream culture and may not be historically accurate. Luo
Guanzhong preserved these descriptions from earlier versions of the novel to
support his portrait of Guan Yu as a faithful and a man of virtue. Guan Yu
was, from then onwards, known as Guan Gong, "Lord Guan."

### [edit] Popular saying

Regarding this novel and another Chinese classic Water Margin, there is a
popular saying in China that goes: "å°ä¸è®æ°´æ»¸, èä¸è®ä¸å",
translated as "The young shouldn't read Water Margin while the old shouldn't
read The Three Kingdoms." The former depicts the lives of outlaws and their
defiance with the established social system. Depicting frequent violence,
brawls, passionate brotherhood and an emphasis on machismo, it could easily
have a negative influence on young boys. The latter presents all kinds of
sophisticated stratagems, deceptions, frauds, trickeries, traps and snares
employed by the three kingdoms and their individual characters to compete with
each other, which might tempt the experienced old readers (the elderly are
traditionally well respected, trusted and considered wise and kindhearted in
Chinese society) to use them to harm other people. Also, old people are
supposed to "know the will of the heavens" (says Confucius). They shouldn't
exhaust or strain themselves with always having to consider how to deceive
others.

## [edit] Cultural references

The story of the Romance of the Three Kingdoms has been told in numerous forms
including television series, manga and video games.

### [edit] Chinese manhua

List of related manhua

    
  * The Ravages of Time is a Chinese manhua which retells the events of Romance of the Three Kingdoms. The drawing style is dark and grim, and while it keeps the main plot intact, the finer details are dramatized.
  * Lee Chi Ching also has a manhua named Sanguozhi and a spin-off Battle of Chi Bi[1]. He also has the 20-volume manhua Story of Heroes in Three Kingdoms[2] and the 13-volume manhua Zhuge Kongming[3].
  * The manhua Wu Ba San Guo[4] authored by Yong Ren (æ°¸ ä») and Cai Jing Dong (è¡ æ¯ä¸).
  * The manhua Sanguo Yanyi[5] by Sun Jia Yu (å­ å®¶è£)
  * The manhua Jia Qing Qu[6] by LÃ¼ Xiang Ru (å ç¸å).
  * The manhua San Guo Shen Bing[7] by Ip Ming Fat (å¶ æå).
  * The manhua San Guo Wu Shuang[8] and San Guo Wu Shuang Zhuan [9] adapted from the game Shin Sangoku MusÅ by Koei, illustrated by Heui Ging-Sam (è®¸ æ¯ç).
  * The manhua San Guo Wu Shuang Meng Jiang Zhuan[10] by Liu Gwong-Jou (å» å ç¥).
  * The manhua series Shu Yun Canglong Ji 1, 2 and 3 by Lam Ming-Fung (æ æé).

### [edit] Japanese manga

The Romance of the Three Kingdoms has been adapted into several comic versions
in Japan, varying in levels of historical accuracy and loyalty to the original
novel and popular tradition. Some of the most widely read in Japan are:

    
  * Sangokushi (which is also the Japanese reading for "The Three Kingdoms", the historical account on which "Romance of the Three Kingdoms" is based) by Yokoyama Mitsuteru (Ushio Shuppansha) and the adapted anime Yokoyama Mitsuteru Sangokushi.
  * SÅten KÅro by King Gonta (Kodansha)
  * RyÅ«rÅden by Yoshito Yamahara (Kodansha)
  * Tenchi o Kurau by Motomiya Hiroshi (Shueisha)
  * Qwan (Media Factory) and its spin-off Foreign Grass by Aki Shimizu.
  * The manga Ikki Tousen is loosely based on Romance of the Three Kingdoms, but the characters in the story refer to the names in the Japanese version of the book. In the series most characters appear to have similar fates to the characters of the same name from the classic novel.
  * The manga Lord (è¦-LORD-) by Ryoichi Ikegami and Buronson is very loosely based on Romance of the Three Kingdoms. In the series a general from the Nakoku country became Liu Bei.
  * The story serves as the basis for SD Gundam Sangokuden: Romance of the Three Kingdoms, a manga/model kit line in the long running Musha Gundam SD Gundam series.
  * The manga Dragon Sister! Sangokushi Hyakka RyÅran by Nini.
  * The comedy manga Sangoku ShÅden no Gentoku Daishingeki by Ichikawa RyÅ«nosuke (å£±æ²³ æ³ä¹å©).
  * The manga Magical Musou Tenshi Tsuki Irase!! Ryofuko-chan by Suzuki Jiro and its adapted anime Yawaraka Sangokushi Tsuki Isase!! Ryofuko-chan.
  * The manga Shinbu - Can Two Lords Be in the Grand Country? by Yasuhiko Yoshikazu (å®å½¦ è¯å).
  * The manga Koutou no Akatsuki (Dusk of Jiangdong) by Takizawa Rinrin (æ»å£ ç³ç³).
  * The manga Sousou Moutoku Seiden by Daisuke KÅichi (å¤§è¥¿ å··ä¸)

### [edit] Film and television

There are multiple television series based on this tale. The 84-episode TV
serial Romance of the Three Kingdoms was aired by CCTV, while the Japanese
anime series Yokoyama Mitsuteru Sangokushi ran for 47 episodes on TV Tokyo
between 1991 and 1992, focusing on the stories before the Battle of Chibi. A
remake of the original CCTV series is currently in production and scheduled to
be released in 2010.

In 2007, a new anime series was created, focusing very loosely on the tale, it
is called Koutetsu Sangokushi. It is a Shounen-Ai type of anime, in that it
features homosexual relationships between some of the main male characters.

Three Kingdoms: Resurrection of the Dragon is a movie based on Romance of the
Three Kingdoms, released in 2008. The movie focused on the story of Shu
general Zhao Yun. The plot is very different and chronologically out of sync
compared to the novel. A new fictional character, Cao Cao's grand daughter, is
shown as campaigning against Zhao Yun, although in the novel she does not
appear.

Red Cliff is an acclaimed Chinese epic movie based on the pivotal Battle of
Red Cliff, the first part released widely in Asia in July 2008. The plot hews
very closely to the novel and its historical basis, the Chronicle of the Three
Kingdoms. Notable scenes depicted in the novel are the initial attacks of Cao
Cao on Liu Bei's army in Shu territory; Zhuge Liang's skillful persuasion of
Sun Quan to go to war; and the innovative battle formations used in war. The
movie is highly acclaimed, claiming the Singapore box office #1 spot for many
weeks.

### [edit] Computer and video games

<IMG>

<IMG>

Liu Bei (middle), Guan Yu (right), and Zhang Fei (left), as they appear in
Dynasty Warriors 5.

There are also PC games based on this tale. The best known of these games are
from Koei, which released eleven Romance of the Three Kingdoms strategy
titles, usually only released in Asia, excluding expansions (known as 'PK'
packs). These strategy titles are one of their most famous franchises and were
originally based on the same concept as the earlier Nobunaga's Ambition. This
series is also released on video games consoles such as the NES, Super NES,
Sega Genesis, Sega CD, Sega Saturn, PlayStation and PlayStation 2. Unlike
their PC counterparts, the console versions are much more frequently found
outside of Asia.

Another popular Three Kingdoms game series by Koei is Dynasty Warriors, which
uses an action "beat 'em up"-style with tactical elements. The series has been
released for PlayStation, PlayStation 2, PlayStation3, Xbox, Xbox 360,
PlayStation Portable, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, and the PC. It has also
generated a spinoff series, Dynasty Tactics, and Warriors Orochi series.

Also seen are the Sango Fighter series which portrayed the generals as
characters in a two-dimensional fighting game.

A 2D computer role-playing game series, entitled Fantasia Sango, was released
by Taiwanese game company UserJoy Technology. It uses the events of the
Romance of the Three Kingdoms as the backdrop for the plot. The re-telling of
the story also involves traditional Chinese supernatural entities and
concepts. Besides Fantasia Sango, UserJoy Technology has also developed The
Legend of Three Kingdoms Online, a MMORPG.

Capcom released various games based on Motomiya Hiroshi's manga Tenchi o
Kurau. These were "brawler" games released for the arcade known as Dynasty
Wars, and its sequel, Warriors of Fate. There are also two console role
playing games for the NES, the first of which was released in North America as
Destiny of an Emperor.

Three installments of a similar game to Warriors of Fate, Knights of Valour,
were released by International Games System. These are best described as side-
scrolling "beat-'em-up" games, similar to the Double Dragon arcade games.

Sega released a hybrid card/board/strategy game entitled Sangokushi Taisen, in
which players manipulate cards on a tabletop to move military units in order
to take destroy enemy castles.

The real-time strategy game Three Kingdoms: Fate of the Dragon, released for
the PC by Eidos Interactive in 2001, portrays all of the events appearing in
the Romance of the Three Kingdoms story.

The visual novel Koihime MusÅ by BaseSon illustrates many heroes from Romance
of the Three Kingdoms as female warriors and lords.

## [edit] See also

  * Records of Three Kingdoms
  * List of fictitious stories in Romance of the Three Kingdoms
  * Romance of the Three Kingdoms (TV series)
  * Romance of the Three Kingdoms (2010 TV series)
  * Personages of the Three Kingdoms
  * Timeline of the Three Kingdoms period
  * Military history of the Three Kingdoms
  * Dynasty Warriors
  * List of Dynasty Warriors characters
  * Chinese literature
  * The Yellow Turban Rebellion
  * Battle of Hulao Pass
  * Battle of Red Cliffs
  * Battle of Wu Zhang Plains
  * The Battle of Red Cliff (film)
  * Three Kingdoms: Resurrection of the Dragon
  * End of Han Dynasty

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Wu, Jonathan. "Romance of the Three Kingdoms Novel and History Introduction". http://kongming.net/novel/intro/. Retrieved on 2007-11-11.
  2. ^ a b c Roberts 1991, pg. 940
  3. ^ Roberts 1991, pg. 964
  4. ^ Roberts 1991, pg. 938
  5. ^ a b c Roberts 1991, pg. 980
  6. ^ Roberts 1991, pg. 965
  7. ^ Roberts 1991, pp. 967-71
  8. ^ Roberts 1991, pg. 979
  9. ^ Roberts 1991, pg. 981
  10. ^ Roberts 1991, pg. 954
  11. ^ Roberts 1991, pp. 958-9
  12. ^ Roberts 1991, pp. 959, 983
  13. ^ Guanzhong 2006, pg. 14

## [edit] References

  * Luo, Guanzhong; English translation by Moss Roberts, Introduction by Shi Changyu (2006). Three Kingdoms. Beijing: Foreign Language Press. ISBN 7-119-00590-1.
  * Roberts, Moss, tr. Three Kingdoms: A Historical Novel (1991) University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-22503-1

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Romance of the Three Kingdoms

Wikisource

Chinese Wikisource has original text related to this article:

ä¸åæ¼ç¾©

Sister project Wikiversity has learning materials about Romance of the Three
Kingdoms (by Luo Guanzhong)  
  * Kongming's Archives: Romance of the Three Kingdoms
  * Sanguo Yanyi Novel Online
  * The New ROTK EBook Free Download

v â¢ d â¢ e

Four Great Chinese Classical Novels  
Romance of the Three Kingdoms Â· Water Margin Â· Journey to the West Â· Dream
of the Red Chamber  
Jin Ping Mei is sometimes regarded as the fifth classic  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Romance_of_the_Three_Kingdoms"

Categories: Chinese classic novels | Three Kingdoms | Historical novels |
14th-century novels

Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 19:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



