
# Adi Shankara

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Adi Shankara  
<IMG>

  
Adi Shankara  
Date of Birth 788 CE  
Place of birth Kalady, Kerala, India  
Birth Shankara  
Date of death 820 CE [1]  
Place of death Kedarnath, Uttarakhand, India  
Guru/Teacher Govinda Bhagavatpada  
Philosophy Advaita Vedanta  
Titles/Honors Introduced Advaita Vedanta, Hindu Revivalism, Founded Dashanami
Sampradaya, Shanmata  
This box: view â¢ talk  
<IMG>

This article contains Indic text. Without proper rendering support, you may
see question marks or boxes, misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of
Indic text.  
Adi Shankara (Malayalam: à´à´¦à´¿ à´¶à´àµà´à´°à´¨àµâ, DevanÄgarÄ«:
à¤à¤¦à¤¿ à¤¶à¤à¥à¤à¤°, Ädi Åaá¹ kara, pronounced [aËdÌªi ÉaÅkÉrÉ]);
(788 CE - 820 CE), also known as Åaá¹ kara BhagavatpÄdÄcÄrya and Ädi
Åaá¹ karÄcÄrya, was an Indian philosopher who consolidated the doctrine of
Advaita Vedanta, the most influential sub-school of Vedanta. His teachings are
based on the unity of the soul and Brahman, in which Brahman is viewed as
without attributes.

Shankara travelled across India and other parts of South Asia to propagate his
philosophy through discourses and debates with other thinkers. He founded four
mathas ("monasteries"), which helped in the historical development, revival
and spread of Advaita Vedanta. Adi Shankara is believed to be the founder of
the Dashanami monastic order and the Shanmata tradition of worship.

His works in Sanskrit, all of which are extant today, concern themselves with
establishing the doctrine of Advaita (Nondualism). He also established the
importance of monastic life as sanctioned in the Upanishads and Brahma Sutra,
in a time when the Mimamsa school established strict ritualism and ridiculed
monasticism. Shankara relied entirely on the Upanishads for reference
concerning Brahman and wrote copious commentaries on the Vedic Canon (Brahma
Sutra, Principal Upanishads and Bhagavadgita) in support of his thesis. The
main opponent in his work is the Mimamsa school of thought, though he also
offers some arguments against the views of some other schools like Samkhya and
certain schools of Buddhism that he was partially familiar with.

## Contents

  * 1 Life
    * 1.1 Birth and childhood
    * 1.2 Sannyasa
    * 1.3 Meeting with Mandana Mishra
    * 1.4 Missionary tour
    * 1.5 Accession to Sarvajnapitha
    * 1.6 Dates
  * 2 Mathas
  * 3 Philosophy and religious thought
  * 4 Historical and cultural impact
  * 5 Works
  * 6 Film
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 References
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Life

Traditional accounts of Adi Shankara's life can be found in the Shankara
Vijayams, which are poetic works that contain a mix of biographical and
legendary material, written in the epic style. The most important among these
biographies are the MÄdhavÄ«ya Åaá¹ kara Vijayaá¹ (of MÄdhava, c. 14th
century), the CidvilÄsÄ«ya Åaá¹ kara Vijayaá¹ (of CidvilÄsa, c. between
15th century and 17th century), and the KeraÄ¼Ä«ya Åaá¹ kara Vijayaá¹ (of
the Kerala region, extant from c. 17th century).[2][3]

### [edit] Birth and childhood

<IMG>

<IMG>

The birth place of Adi Shankara at Kalady

Shankara was born to Kaippilly Sivaguru Nambudiri and Aryambya Antharjanam in
the region of Kalady, in central Kerala. According to lore, it was after his
parents, who had been childless for many years, prayed at the Vadakkunnathan
temple, that Sankara was born under the star Thiruvathirai.[4] [5]

His father died while Shankara was very young. Shankara's upanayanaá¹, the
initiation into student-life, was performed at the age of five. As a child,
Shankara showed remarkable scholarship, mastering the four Vedas by the age of
eight.[6]

### [edit] Sannyasa

From a young age, Shankara was inclined towards sannyasa. But it was only
after much compulsion that his mother gave him consent.[7] Shankara then left
Kerala and travelled towards North India in search of a guru. On the banks of
the Narmada River, he met Govinda Bhagavatpada, the disciple of Gaudapada.
When Govinda Bhagavatpada asked Shankara's identity, he replied with an
extempore verse that brought out the Advaita Vedanta philosophy. Govinda
Bhagavatapada was impressed and took Shankara as his disciple.[8]

The guru instructed Shankara to write a commentary on the Brahma Sutras and
propagate the Advaita philosophy. Shankara travelled to Kashi, where a young
man named Sanandana, from Choladesha in South India, became his first
disciple. According to legend, while on his way to the Vishwanath Temple,
Sankara came upon an untouchable accompanied by four dogs. When asked to move
aside by Shankara's disciples, the untouchable replied: "Do you wish that I
move my ever lasting Ätman ("the Self"), or this body made of flesh?"
Realizing that the untouchable was none other than god Shiva himself, and his
dogs the four Vedas, Shankara prostrated himself before him, composing five
shlokas known as Manisha Panchakam.[9][10]

At Badari he wrote his famous Bhashyas ("commentaries") and Prakarana granthas
("philosophical treatises"). [11][12]

### [edit] Meeting with Mandana Mishra

One of the most famous debates of Adi Shankara was with the ritualist Mandana
Mishra. Mandana Mishra's guru was the famous Mimamsa philosopher, KumarÄ«la
Bhaá¹­á¹­a. Shankara sought a debate with KumarÄ«la Bhaá¹­á¹­a and met him in
Prayag where he had buried himself in a slow burning pyre to repent for sins
committed against his guru: KumarÄ«la Bhaá¹­á¹­a had learned Buddhist
philosophy incognito from his guru in order to be able to refute it. Learning
anything without the knowledge of one's guru while still under his authority
constitutes a sin according to the Vedas.[13] KumarÄ«la Bhaá¹­á¹­a thus asked
Adi Shankara to proceed to Mahiá¹£mati (known today as Mahishi Bangaon,
Saharsa in Bihar)[14] to meet Mandana Mishra and debate with him instead.

Adi Shankara had a famous debate with Mandana Mishra in which the wife of
Mandana Mishra, Ubhaya BhÄratÄ«, was the referee. After debating for over
fifteen days, Mandana Mishra accepted defeat.[15] Ubhaya BhÄratÄ« then
challenged Adi Shankara to have a debate with her in order to 'complete' the
victory. Later, Ubhaya BhÄratÄ« concedes defeat in the debate and allows
Mandana Mishra to accept sannyasa with the monastic name, SureÅvarÄcÄrya as
per the agreed rules of the debate.[16]

### [edit] Missionary tour

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sharada temple at Sringeri Sharada Peetham, Sringeri

Adi Shankara then travelled with his disciples to Maharashtra and Srisailam.
In Srisailam, he composed Shivanandalahari, a devotional hymn in praise of
Shiva. The Madhaviya Shankaravijayam says that when Shankara was about to be
sacrificed by a Kapalika, the god Narasimha appeared to save Shankara on
Padmapada's prayer to him. So Adi Shankara composed the Laksmi-Narasimha
stotra.[17]

He then travelled to Gokará¹a, the temple of Hari-Shankara and the MÅ«kambika
temple at Kollur. At Kollur, he accepted as his disciple a boy believed to be
dumb by his parents. He gave him the name, HastÄmalakÄcÄrya ("one with the
amalaka fruit on his palm", i.e., one who has clearly realised the Self).
Next, he visited Åá¹ngeri to establish the ÅÄrada PÄ«á¹­ham and made
Toá¹­akÄcÄrya his disciple.[18]

After this, Adi Shankara began a Dig-vijaya (tour of conquest) for the
propagation of the Advaita philosophy by controverting all philosophies
opposed to it. He travelled throughout India, from the South to Kashmir and
Nepal, preaching to the local populace and debating philosophy with Hindu,
Buddhist and other scholars and monks along the way.

With the Malayali King Sudhanva as companion, Shankara passed through Tamil
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Vidarbha. He then started towards Karnataka where he
encountered a band of armed Kapalikas. King Sudhanva, with his army, resisted
and defeated the Kapalikas. They safely reached Gokarna where Shankara
defeated in debate the Shaiva scholar, Neelakanta.

Proceeding to Saurashtra (the ancient Kambhoja)[19] and having visited the
shrines of Girnar, Somnath and Prabhasa and explaining the superiority of
Vedanta in all these places, he arrived at Dwarka. Bhaá¹­á¹­a BhÄskara of
Ujjayini, the proponent of BhedÄbeda philosophy, was humbled. All the
scholars of Ujjayini (also known as Avanti) accepted Adi Shankara's
philosophy.

He then defeated the Jainas in philosophical debates at a place called
Bahlika. Thereafter, the Acharya established his victory over several
philosophers and ascetics in Kamboja (region of North Kashmir), Darada
(Dabistan) and many regions situated in the desert and crossing mighty peaks,
entered Kashmir. Later, he had an encounter with a tantrik, Navagupta at
Kamarupa.[20]

### [edit] Accession to Sarvajnapitha

<IMG>

<IMG>

Statue of Adi Shankara at his Samadhi Mandir, behind Kedarnath Temple, in
Kedarnath, India

Adi Shankara visited SarvajÃ±apÄ«á¹­ha (Sharada Peeth) in Kashmir (now in
Pakistan-occupied Kashmir).[21] The Madhaviya Shankaravijayam states this
temple had four doors for scholars from the four cardinal directions. The
southern door (representing South India) had never been opened, indicating
that no scholar from South India had entered the Sarvajna Pitha. Adi Shankara
opened the southern door by defeating in debate all the scholars there in all
the various scholastic disciplines such as Mimamsa, Vedanta and other branches
of Hindu philosophy; he ascended the throne of Transcendent wisdom of that
temple.[22]

Towards the end of his life, Adi Shankara travelled to the Himalayan area of
Kedarnath-Badrinath and attained videha mukti ("freedom from embodiment").
There is a samadhi mandir dedicated to Adi Shankara behind the Kedarnath
temple. However, there are variant traditions on the location of his last
days. One tradition, expounded by Keraliya Shankaravijaya, places his place of
death as Vadakkunnathan temple in Thrissur, Kerala.[23] The followers of the
Kanchi kamakoti pitha claim that he ascended the SarvajÃ±apÄ«á¹­ha and
attained videha-mukti in Kanchipuram (Tamil Nadu).

### [edit] Dates

At least two different dates have been proposed for Shankara:

  * 788â820 CE: This is the mainstream scholarly opinion, placing Shankara in mid to late 8th century CE. These dates are based on records at the Åá¹á¹ geri ÅÄradÄ PÄ«á¹­ham, which is the only matha to have maintained a relatively unbroken record of its Acharyas; starting with the third Acharya, one can with reasonable confidence date the others from the 8th century down.[24] The Sringeri records state that Sankara was born in the 14th year of the reign of "VikramAditya", but it is unclear as to which king this name may refer. Though some researchers identify the name with Chandragupta II (4th. c. CE), modern scholarship accepts the VikramAditya as being from the Chalukya dynasty of Badami, most likely Vikramaditya II (733â746 CE),[25] which would place him in the middle of the 8th c.[24] The date 788â820 is also among those considered acceptable by Swami Tapasyananda, though he raises a number of questions.[26] It is also acceptable to Keay.[27]
  * 509â477 BCE: This dating, more than a millennium ahead of all others, is based on records of the heads of the Shankara Maá¹­has at Dwaraka matha and Puri matha and the fifth Peetham at Kanchi.[28] However, such an early date is not consistent with the fact that Sankara quotes the Buddhist logician Dharmakirti, who finds mention in Huen Tsang (7th c.).[24] Also, his near-contemporary Kumarila Bhatta is usually dated ca. 8th c. CE. Most scholars feel that due to invasions and other discontinuities, the records of the Dwarka and Puri mathas are not as reliable as those for Sringeri.[24] Thus, while considerable debate exists, the pre-Christian Era dates are usually discounted, and the most likely period for Shankara is during the 8th c. CE.

## [edit] Mathas

<IMG>

<IMG>

à¤µà¤¿à¤¦à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¶à¤à¤à¤° à¤®à¤à¤¦à¤¿à¤° (Vidyashankara temple) at
Sringeri Sharada Peetham, Sringeri

Adi Shankara founded four Maá¹­has (Sanskrit: à¤®à¤ ) to guide the Hindu
religion. These are at Sringeri in Karnataka in the south, Dwaraka in Gujarat
in the west, Puri in Orissa in the east, and Jyotirmath (Joshimath) in
Uttarakhand in the north. Hindu tradition states that he put in charge of
these mathas his four main disciples: Sureshwaracharya, Hastamalakacharya,
Padmapadacharya, and Totakacharya respectively. The heads of the mathas trace
their authority back to these figures. Each of the heads of these four mathas
takes the title of Shankaracharya ("the learned Shankara") after the first
Shankaracharya. The table below gives an overview of the four Amnaya Mathas
founded by Adi Shankara and their details.[29]

Åishya Maá¹­ha MahÄvÄkya Veda Sampradaya  
HastÄmalakÄcÄrya Govardhana PÄ«á¹­haá¹ PrajÃ±Änam brahma (Brahman is
Knowledge) Rig Veda Bhogavala  
SureÅvarÄcÄrya ÅÄrada PÄ«á¹­haá¹ Aham brahmÄsmi (I am Brahman) Yajur
Veda BhÅ«rivala  
PadmapÄdÄcÄrya DvÄraka PÄ«á¹­haá¹ Tattvamasi (That thou art) Sama Veda
Kitavala  
Toá¹­akÄcÄrya Jyotirmaá¹­ha PÄ«á¹­haá¹ AyamÄtmÄ brahma (This Atman is
Brahman) Atharva Veda Nandavala  
## [edit] Philosophy and religious thought

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)  
Main article: Advaita Vedanta

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Hamsa (Sanskrit: "swan") is an important motif in Advaita Vedanta. Its
symbolic meanings are: firstly; upon verbally repeating hamsa, it becomes
soham (Sanskrit, "I am That"). Secondly, even as a hamsa lives in water its
feathers are not sullied by it, a liberated Advaitin lives in this world full
of Maya but is untouched by its illusion. Thirdly, a monk of the Dashanami
order is called a Paramahamsa ("supreme hamsa")

Advaita ("non-dualism") is often called a monistic system of thought. The word
"Advaita" essentially refers to the identity of the Self (Atman) and the Whole
(Brahman[30]). The key source texts for all schools of VedÄnta are the
Prasthanatrayiâ the canonical texts consisting of the Upanishads, the
Bhagavad Gita and the Brahma Sutras.

Adi Shankara was the first in its tradition to consolidate the siddhÄnta
("doctrine") of Advaita Vedanta. He wrote commentaries on the Prasthana Trayi.
A famous quote from VivekacÅ«á¸Ämaá¹i, one of his prakarana granthas that
succinctly summarises his philosophy is:

> Brahma satyaá¹ jagat mithyÄ, jÄ«vo brahmaiva nÄparah

> Brahman is the only truth, the spatio-temporal world is an illusion, and
there is ultimately no difference between Brahman and individual self.

Advaita Vedanta is based on ÅÄstra ("scriptures"), yukti ("reason") and
anubhava ("experience"), and aided by karmas ("spiritual practices").[31] This
philosophy provides a clear-cut way of life to be followed. Starting from
childhood, when learning has to start, the philosophy has to be realised in
practice throughout one's life even up to death. This is the reason why this
philosophy is called an experiential philosophy, the underlying tenet being
"That thou art", meaning that ultimately there is no difference between the
experiencer and the experienced (the world) as well as the universal spirit
(Brahman). Among the followers of Advaita, as well those of other doctrines,
there are believed to have appeared Jivanmuktas, ones liberated while alive.
These individuals (commonly called Mahatmas, great souls, among Hindus) are
those who realised the oneness of their self and the universal spirit called
Brahman. Some of the Translated philosophies of Adi Shankara are - Adi
Sanakara Philosophy.

Adi Shankara's Bhashyas (commentaries) on the Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita
and the Brahma Sutras are his principal and almost undeniably his own works.
Although he mostly adhered to traditional means of commenting on the Brahma
Sutra, there are a number of original ideas and arguments to establish that
the essence of Upanishads is Advaita. He taught that it was only through
direct knowledge that one is Brahman that one could be enlightened.

Adi Shankara's opponents accused him of teaching Buddhism in the garb of
Hinduism, because his non-dualistic ideals seemed rather radical to
contemporary Hindu philosophy. However, although Advaita proposes the theory
of Maya, explaining the universe as a "trick of a magician", Adi Shankara and
his followers see this as a consequence of their basic premise that Brahman
alone is real. Their idea of Maya emerges from their belief in the reality of
Brahman, as opposed to Buddhist doctrines of emptiness, which emerge from the
empirical Buddhist approach of insightfully observing the nature of reality.

## [edit] Historical and cultural impact

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)  
Part of a series on  
Hindu philosophy  
Aum  
Schools

Samkhya Â· Yoga Â· Nyaya Â· Vaisheshika Â· Purva Mimamsa Â· Vedanta (Advaita
Â· Vishishtadvaita Â· Dvaita Â· Achintya Bheda Abheda)  
Persons

Ancient  

Gautama Â· Jaimini Â· Kanada Â· Kapila Â· Markandeya Â· PataÃ±jali Â· Valmiki
Â· Vyasa  

Medieval  
Adi Shankara Â· Dnyaneshwar Â· Chaitanya Â· Kabir Â· Madhusudana Â· Madhva Â·
Namdeva Â· Nimbarka Â· Ramanuja Â· Vedanta Desika Â· Tukaram Â· Tulsidas Â·
Vallabha  

Modern  
Aurobindo Â· Coomaraswamy Â· Gandhi Â· Narayana Guru Â· Prabhupada Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa Â· Radhakrishnan Â· Yogananda Â· Ramana Maharshi Â· Dayananda
Saraswati Â· Sivananda Â· Swaminarayan Â· Vivekananda  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
At the time of Adi Shankara's life, Hinduism was increasing in influence in
India at the expense of Buddhism and Jainism. Hinduism was divided into
innumerable sects, each quarreling with the others. The followers of Mimamsa
and Sankhya philosophy were atheists, insomuch that they did not believe in
God as a unified being. Besides these atheists, there were numerous theistic
sects. There were also those who rejected the Vedas, like the Charvakas.

Adi Shankara held discourses and debates with the leading scholars of all
these sects and schools of philosophy to controvert their doctrines. He
unified the theistic sects into a common framework of Shanmata system. In his
works, Adi Shankara stressed the importance of the Vedas, and his efforts
helped Hinduism regain strength and popularity. Many trace the present
worldwide domination of Vedanta to his works. He travelled on foot to various
parts of India to restore the study of the Vedas.

Even though he lived for only thirty-two years, his impact on India and on
Hinduism was striking. He reintroduced a purer form of Vedic thought. His
teachings and tradition form the basis of Smartism and have influenced Sant
Mat lineages.[32] He is the main figure in the tradition of Advaita Vedanta.
He was the founder of the DaÅanÄmi SampradÄya of Hindu monasticism and
á¹¢aá¹mata of Smarta tradition. He introduced the PaÃ±cÄyatana form of
worship.

Adi Shankara, along with Madhava and Ramanuja, was instrumental in the revival
of Hinduism. These three teachers formed the doctrines that are followed by
their respective sects even today. They have been the most important figures
in the recent history of Hindu philosophy. In their writings and debates, they
provided polemics against the non-Vedantic schools of Sankhya, Vaisheshika
etc. Thus they paved the way for Vedanta to be the dominant and most widely
followed tradition among the schools of Hindu philosophy. The Vedanta school
stresses most on the Upanishads (which are themselves called Vedanta, End or
culmination of the Vedas), unlike the other schools that gave importance to
the ritualistic Brahmanas, or to texts authored by their founders. The Vedanta
schools hold that the Vedas, which include the Upanishads, are unauthored,
forming a continuous tradition of wisdom transmitted orally. Thus the concept
of apaurusheyatva ("being unauthored") came to be the guiding force behind the
Vedanta schools. However, along with stressing the importance of Vedic
tradition, Adi Shankara gave equal importance to the personal experience of
the student. Logic, grammar, Mimamsa and allied subjects form main areas of
study in all the Vedanta schools. Regarding meditation, Shankara refuted the
system of Yoga and its disciplines as a direct means to attain moksha,
rebutting the argument that it can be obtained through concentration of the
mind. His position is that the mental states discovered through the practices
of Yoga can be indirect aids to the gain of knowledge, but cannot themselves
give rise to it. According to his philosophy, knowledge of brahman springs
from inquiry into the words of the Upanishads, and the knowledge of brahman
that shruti provides cannot be obtained in any other way.[33]

It has to be noted that it is generally considered that for Shankara the
Absolute Reality is attributeless and impersonal, while for Madhava and
Ramanuja, the Absolute Truth is Vishnu. This has been a subject of debate,
interpretation, and controversy since Shankara himself is attributed to
composing the popular 8th century Hindu devotional composition Bhaja Govindam
(literal meaning, "Worship Govinda"). This work of Adi Shankara is considered
as a good summary of Advaita Vedanta and underscores the view that devotion to
God, Govinda, is not only an important part of general spirituality, but the
concluding verse drives through the message of Shankara: "Worship Govinda,
worship Govinda, worship Govinda, Oh fool! Other than chanting the Lordâs
names, there is no other way to cross the life's ocean". Bhaja Govindam
invokes the almighty in the aspect of Vishnu; it is therefore very popular not
only with Sri Adi Shankaracharya's immediate followers, the Smarthas, but also
with Vaishnavas and others.

A well known verse, recited in the Smarta tradition, in praise of Adi Shankara
is:

> à¤¶à¥à¤°à¥à¤¤à¤¿ à¤¸à¥à¤®à¥à¤¤à¤¿
à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¾à¤£à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤®à¤¾à¤²à¤¯à¤ à¤à¤°à¥à¤£à¤¾à¤²à¤¯à¤|  
>  à¤¨à¤®à¤¾à¤®à¤¿ à¤­à¤à¤µà¤¤à¥à¤ªà¤¾à¤¦à¤¶à¤à¤à¤°à¤
à¤²à¥à¤à¤¶à¤à¤à¤°à¤ ||  
>  Åruti smá¹ti purÄá¹ÄnÄá¹Älayaá¹ karuá¹Älayaá¹|  
>  NamÄmi BhagavatpÄdaÅaá¹ karaá¹ lokaÅaá¹ karaá¹||  
>  I salute the compassionate abode of the Vedas, Smritis and Puranas known as
Shankara Bhagavatpada, who makes the world auspicious.

See also: History of Hinduism

Adi Shankara begins his Gurustotram or Verses to the Guru with the following
Sanskrit Sloka, that has become a widely sung Bhajan:

> Guru Brahma, Guru Vishnu, Guru Deva Maheshwara. Guru Sakshath Parambrahma,
Tasmai Shri Gurave Namaha. (tr: Guru is the creator Brahma, Guru is the
preserver Vishnu, Guru is the destroyer Siva. Guru is directly the supreme
spirit â I offer my salutations to this Guru.)

## [edit] Works

<IMG>

<IMG>

Adi Shankara statue

For more details on this topic, see Works of Adi Shankara.

Adi Shankara's works deal with logically establishing the doctrine of Advaita
Vedanta as he saw it in the Upanishads. He formulates the doctrine of Advaita
Vedanta by validating his arguments on the basis of quotations from the Vedas
and other Hindu scriptures. He gives a high priority to svÄnubhava ("personal
experience") of the student. His works are largely polemical in nature. He
directs his polemics mostly against the Sankhya, Buddha, Jaina, Vaisheshika
and other non-vedantic Hindu philosophies.

Traditionally, his works are classified under BhÄá¹£ya ("commentary"),
Prakaraá¹a gratha ("philosophical treatise") and Stotra ("devotional hymn").
The commentaries serve to provide a consistent interpretation of the
scriptural texts from the perspective of Advaita Vedanta. The philosophical
treatises provide various methodologies to the student to understand the
doctrine. The devotional hymns are rich in poetry and piety, serving to
highlight the relationship between the devotee and the deity.

Adi Shankara wrote Bhashyas on the ten major Upanishads, the Brahma Sutras and
the Bhagavad Gita. In his works, he quotes from Shveshvatara, Kaushitakai,
Mahanarayana and Jabala Upanishads, among others. Bhashyas on Kaushitaki,
Nrisimhatapani and Shveshvatara Upanishads are extant but the authenticity is
doubtful.[34] Adi Shankara's is the earliest extant commentary on the Brahma
Sutras. However, he mentions older commentaries like those of Dravida,
Bhartrprapancha and others.[35]

In his Brahma Sutra Bhashya, Adi Shankara cites the examples of Dharmavyadha,
Vidura and others, who were born with the knowledge of Brahman acquired in
previous births. He mentions that the effects cannot be prevented from working
on account of their present birth. He states that the knowledge that arises
out of the study of the Vedas could be had through the Puranas and the
Itihasas. In the Taittiriya Upanishad Bhashya 2.2, he says:[36]

> SarveÅÄá¹ cÄdhikÄro vidyÄyÄá¹ ca Åreyah: kevalayÄ vidyÄyÄ veti
siddhaá¹

> It has been established that everyone has the right to the knowledge (of
Brahman) and that the supreme goal is attained by that knowledge alone.

Among the independent philosophical treatises, only UpadeÅasÄhasrÄ« is
accepted as authentic by modern academic scholars. Many other such texts
exist, among which there is a difference of opinion among scholars on the
authorship of Viveka Chudamani. The former pontiff of Sringeri Math, Shri Shri
Chandrashekhara Bharati III has written a voluminous commentary on the Viveka
Chudamani.

## [edit] Film

In 1983 a film named Adi Shankaracharya was premiered , the first film ever
made entirely in Sanskrit, directed by G. V. Iyer.[37][38]

## [edit] See also

  * List of Advaita Vedanta-related topics

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Sharma, Chandradhar Indian Philosophy: A Critical Survey New York:1962 Barnes & Noble Page vi Chronological Summary of History of Indian philosophy
  2. ^ Vidyasankar, S.. "The Sankaravijaya literature". http://www.advaita-vedanta.org/avhp/sankara-vijayam.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-23.
  3. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. viii.
  4. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 14.
  5. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 17.
  6. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 28â29.
  7. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 40â50.
  8. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 51â56.
  9. ^ Adi Shankara. "Manisha Panchakam". http://www.celextel.org/adisankara/manishapanchakam.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-04.
  10. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 57â62.
  11. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 62â63.
  12. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 70â73.
  13. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 77â80.
  14. ^ "Pilgrimages- Maheshwar". http://www.1upindia.com/pilgrimages/maheshwar.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-26.
  15. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 81â104.
  16. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 117â129.
  17. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 130â135.
  18. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 136â150.
  19. ^ See Link: [1].
  20. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 160â185.
  21. ^ "Photos of Sharada Temple (Sarvajna Pitha), Sharda, PoK". http://closing.photos.yahoo.com/uk/photos_closed.php. Retrieved on 2006-06-26.
  22. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. 186â195.
  23. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. xxv-xxxv.
  24. ^ a b c d Vidyasankar, S.. "Determining Sankara's Date - An overview of ancient sources and modern literature". http://www.advaita-vedanta.org/avhp/dating-Sankara.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-26.
  25. ^ K. A. Nilakantha Sastry, A History of South India, 4th ed., Oxford University Press, Madras, 1976.
  26. ^ Tapasyananda, Swami (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya. pp. xv-xxiv.
  27. ^ The dating of 788â820 is accepted in Keay, p. 194.
  28. ^ "(53) Chronological chart of the history of Bharatvarsh since its origination". encyclopedia of authentic hinduism. http://encyclopediaofauthentichinduism.org/articles/53.3.htm. This site claims to integrate characters from the epics into a continuous chronology. They present the list of Dwarka and Kanchi Acharya's, along with their putative dates. However, the succession of Acharya's at these two mathas were often disrupted by geopolitical realities, and these records are not considered as reliable as the Sringeri chronology. Also, such an early date would be in conflict with much else in Indian chronology. According to these revisionist models, these are the actual dates, and it is other collateral dates, such as the date of Buddha (which serves as an anchor for modern academic history of India), that need to be moved back.
  29. ^ "Adi Shankara's four Amnaya Peethams". Archived from the original on 2006-06-26. http://web.archive.org/web/20060626233820/http://www.sringerisharadapeetham.org/html/History/amnaya.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-20.
  30. ^ Brahman is not to be confused with Brahma, the Creator and one-third of the Trimurti along with Shiva, the Destroyer and Vishnu, the Preserver.
  31. ^ See "Study the Vedas daily. Perform diligently the duties ("karmas") ordained by them" from Sadhana Panchakam of Adi Shankara
  32. ^ Ron Geaves (March 2002). From Totapuri to Maharaji: Reflections on a Lineage (Parampara). 27th Spalding Symposium on Indian Religions, Oxford.
  33. ^ Anantanand Rambachan, The limits of scripture: Vivekananda's reinterpretation of the Vedas. University of Hawaii Press, 1994, pages 124, 125: [2].
  34. ^ Vidyasankar, S. "Sankaracarya". http://www.advaita-vedanta.org/avhp/sankara.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-24.
  35. ^ Mishra, Godavarisha. "A Journey through Vedantic History -Advaita in the Pre-Sankara, Sankara and Post- Sankara Periods" (pdf). http://www.ochs.org.uk/downloads/classes/gmishra02mmas04.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-07-24.
  36. ^ Subbarayan, K. "Sankara, the Jagadguru". http://www.svbf.org/sringeri/journal/vol1no3/sankara.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-24.
  37. ^ Adi Shankaracharya, (1983), IMDb
  38. ^ Short clip from the film, YouTube

## [edit] References

  * Isayeva, Natalia (1993). Shankara and Indian Philosophy. Albany: State University of New York Press (SUNY).
  * Keay, John (2000). India: A History. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-3797-0.
  * Mudgal, S.G. (1975). Advaita of Shankara: A Reappraisal. New Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass.
  * Swami, Tapasyananda (2002). Sankara-Dig-Vijaya: The Traditional Life of Sri Sankaracharya by Madhava-Vidyaranya. India: Sri Ramakrishna Math. ISBN 81-7120-434-1.
  * Greaves, Ron (March 2002). From Totapuri to Maharaji: Reflections on a Lineage (Parampara). 27th Spalding Symposium on Indian Religions, Oxford.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Tenzin, Kencho (2006). Shankara: A Hindu Revivalist or a Crypto Buddhist?. Georgia State University (M.A. Thesis). http://etd.gsu.edu/theses/available/etd-11302006-094652/unrestricted/Tenzin_Kencho_200612_ma.pdf.

  * Ingalls, Daniel H. H. (1954). "Saá¹kara's Arguments Against the Buddhists". Philosophy East and West (Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press) 3 (4): 291-306. http://ccbs.ntu.edu.tw/FULLTEXT/JR-PHIL/ew27155.htm.

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Adi Shankara

Works

  * Complete Works of Adi Shankara
  * Advaita Vedanta Anusandhana Kendra
  * Complete works of Adi Shankara
  * Advaita Vedanta Library
  * Some major works of Adi Shankaracharya
  * Adi Sankara's Books

Historical

  * "Guru Parampara of Sringeri Sharada Peetham". Archived from the original on 2006-06-19. http://web.archive.org/web/20060619031752/http://www.sringerisharadapeetham.org/html/History/guruparampara.html.
  * Guru Parampara of the Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham
  * Sankara's date supporting the 788â820 CE date
  * Material supporting the 509â477 BCE dates (PDF)

Life and teachings

  * Brief life history of Adi Shankara with informative additional links
  * Adi ÅaÅkaraâshort introduction to his life & philosophy (by Peter J. King)
  * Biography of Shankara by Swami Sivananda
  * Another biography of Sankara from kamakoti.org

Mathas

  * Shringeri Sharada Peetham
  * Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham

Preceded by  
'(none)'' Jagadguru of Sringeri Sharada Peetham  
?â820(videha-mukti) Succeeded by  
Sureshwaracharya  
Featured article

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Indian philosophy  
Topics

Logic Â· Idealism Â· Monotheism Â· Atheism  
Ästika

Samkhya Â· Nyaya Â· Vaisheshika Â· Yoga Â· Mimamsa Â· Vedanta (Advaita Â·
Vishishtadvaita Â· Dvaita Â· Acintya bheda abheda)  
NÄstika

CÄrvÄka Â· Jaina (Anekantavada Â· Syadvada)  Â· Buddha (Shunyata Â·
Madhyamaka Â· Yogacara Â· Sautrantika Â· Svatantrika)  
Persondata  
NAME Shankara, Adi  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES à´¶à´àµà´à´°à´¨, à´à´¦à´¿ (Malayalam); à¤¶à¤à¥à¤à¤°,
à¤à¤¦à¤¿ (DevanÄgarÄ«); Åaá¹ kara BhagavatpÄdÄcÄrya; Ädi Åaá¹
karÄcÄrya  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Philosopher  
DATE OF BIRTH 788  
PLACE OF BIRTH Kalady, Kerala, India  
DATE OF DEATH 820  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adi_Shankara"

Categories: Advaitin philosophers | Hindu monks | Hindu gurus | Hindu
philosophers | 9th-century philosophers

Hidden categories: Articles containing Sanskrit language text | Articles
needing additional references from September 2008 | Articles needing
additional references from March 2009 | Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 16:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



