
# Fred Phelps

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

Fred Phelps, Sr.  
<IMG>  

Fred Phelps on his pulpit  
Born Fred Waldron Phelps  
November 13, 1929 (1929-11-13) (age 79)  
Meridian, Mississippi, U.S.  
Residence Topeka, Kansas  
Title Pastor  
Term November 27, 1955âPresent  
Predecessor None (position created)  
Successor Incumbent  
Political party Democrat  
Religious beliefs Independent Baptist, Calvinist  
Spouse(s) Margie Marie Simms  
Children 13:

  * Fred Phelps, Jr.
  * Margie Phelps
  * Shirley Phelps-Roper
  * Jonathon B. Phelps
  * Rebekah Phelps-Davis
  * Elizabeth Phelps
  * Timothy Phelps
  * Rachel Phelps
  * Abigail Phelps

Estranged from family:

  * Mark Phelps
  * Katherine Phelps
  * Nathan "Nate" Phelps
  * Dorotha Bird (nee Phelps)

  
Parents Fred Wade Phelps  
Catherine Idalette Johnston  
Fred Waldron Phelps, Sr. (born November 13, 1929) is an American pastor of the
Westboro Baptist Church (WBC), an independent Baptist church based in Topeka,
Kansas.[1][2][3][4][5][6] His church is monitored as a hate group by the Anti-
Defamation League and Southern Poverty Law Center.[7][8][9] He is a disbarred
lawyer, founder of the Phelps Chartered law firm and previous candidate for
political office. He and his family are currently notorious for their anti-gay
protests, claiming that most natural disasters and terrorist attacks are God's
punishment for a society that tolerates homosexuality.

He is known for the slogans that he and his ministry use against people he
deems sinful, including "God Hates Fags", "Thank God for Dead Soldiers",
"America Is Doomed" and "Priests Rape Boys." He claims that God will punish
homosexuals as well as various public figures such as Bill O'Reilly, Coretta
Scott King, Ronald Reagan, Howard Dean, and anyone else whom his church
considers "fag-enablers".[10][11]

Phelps and his followers frequently picket various events, especially military
funerals, gay pride gatherings, high-profile political gatherings, and even
Christian gatherings and concerts with which he has no affiliation, arguing it
is their sacred duty to warn others of God's anger. When criticized, Phelps'
followers say they are protected in doing so by the First Amendment.[12][13]
In response to Phelps' protests at military funerals, President Bush signed
the Respect for America's Fallen Heroes Act into law in May 2006,[14] and, in
April 2007, Kansas governor Kathleen Sebelius signed into law a bill
establishing a 150-foot no-picketing buffer zone around funerals.[15]

Phelps says that he is a preacher who believes that homosexuality and its
acceptance have doomed most of the world to eternal damnation. The church at
Westboro which he leads has 71 confirmed members, 60 of whom are related to
Phelps.

The group is built around a core of anti-homosexual theology, with many of
their activities stemming from the slogan "God hates fags," which is also the
name of the group's main website. Gay rights activists, as well as Christians
of virtually every denomination, have denounced him as a producer of anti-gay
propaganda and violence-inspiring hate speech.[16]

## Contents

  * 1 Education
  * 2 Civil rights attorney
  * 3 Disbarment
  * 4 Activities and statements
  * 5 Religious beliefs
  * 6 Allegations of abuse and cult behavior
  * 7 The Laramie Project
  * 8 Political views
    * 8.1 Anti-gay
    * 8.2 Anti-Semitism
    * 8.3 Anti-Catholicism
    * 8.4 Anti-Swedish
    * 8.5 Anti-Irish
    * 8.6 Against flag idolatry
    * 8.7 Freedom of speech
    * 8.8 Democratic Party
    * 8.9 Support for Al Gore
    * 8.10 Opposition to Al Gore, Bill Clinton, and Hillary Rodham Clinton
    * 8.11 Saddam Hussein
  * 9 Arrests and immigration restrictions
    * 9.1 United States
    * 9.2 Canada
    * 9.3 United Kingdom
  * 10 Lawsuit against Westboro Baptist Church
  * 11 People targeted by Fred Phelps
  * 12 Efforts to discourage funeral protests
    * 12.1 Legislation
    * 12.2 Other responses
  * 13 Phelps in the media
  * 14 Electoral history
  * 15 See also
  * 16 Footnotes
  * 17 External links
    * 17.1 Biographical information

  
## Education

In 1947, Phelps enrolled as a student at the fundamentalist Bob Jones
University, which he left after three semesters.[17] He then spent two
semesters at the Prairie Bible Institute. In 1951, he earned a two-year degree
from John Muir College. While at John Muir, Phelps' preaching on campus,
attacking "sins committed on campus by students and teachers ... promiscuous
petting ... evil language ... profanity ... cheating ... teachers' filthy
jokes in classrooms ... [and] pandering to the lusts of the flesh", were
written about in Time Magazine.[18]

## Civil rights attorney

Phelps earned a law degree from Washburn University in 1962, and founded the
Phelps Chartered law firm in 1964. The first notable cases were of a civil
rights nature. "I systematically brought down the Jim Crow laws of this town,"
he says.[16] Phelps' daughter was quoted as saying, "We took on the Jim Crow
establishment, and Kansas did not take that sitting down. They used to shoot
our car windows out, screaming we were nigger lovers," and that the Phelps law
firm made up one-third of the stateâs federal docket of civil-rights
cases.[19]

Phelps took cases on behalf of African American clients alleging
discrimination by school systems, and a predominately black American Legion
post which had been raided by police, alleging racially-based police abuse.
Phelps' law firm obtained settlements for some clients.[20] Phelps also sued
then-President Ronald Reagan over Reagan's appointment of a U.S. ambassador to
the Vatican, alleging this violated separation of church and state. The case
was dismissed by the U.S. district court.[21][20] Phelps' law firm, staffed by
himself and family members also represented non-white Kansans in
discrimination actions against Kansas Power and Light, Southwestern Bell, and
the Topeka City Attorney, and represented two female professors alleging
discrimination in Kansas universities.[19]

In the 1980s Fred Phelps received awards from the Greater Kansas City Chapter
of Blacks in Government and the Bonner Springs branch of the NAACP for his
work on behalf of black clients.[22]

Phelps Chartered also won one of the first reverse discrimination cases.[23]

## Disbarment

A formal complaint was filed against Fred W. Phelps, Sr. on November 8, 1977
by the Kansas State Board of Law Examiners for his conduct during a lawsuit
against a court reporter named Carolene Brady. Brady had failed to have a
court transcript ready for Phelps on the day he asked for it; though it did
not affect the outcome of the case for which Phelps had requested the
transcript, Phelps still requested $22,000 in damages from her. In the ensuing
trial, Phelps called Brady to the stand, declared her a hostile witness, and
then cross-examined her for nearly a week, during which he accused her of
being a "slut," tried to introduce testimony from former boyfriends whom
Phelps wanted to subpoena, and accused her of a variety of perverse sexual
acts, ultimately reducing her to tears on the stand.[24] Phelps lost the case;
according to the Kansas Supreme Court:

> The trial became an exhibition of a personal vendetta by Phelps against
Carolene Brady. His examination was replete with repetition, badgering,
innuendo, belligerence, irrelevant and immaterial matter, evidencing only a
desire to hurt and destroy the defendant. The jury verdict didn't stop the
onslaught of Phelps. He was not satisfied with the hurt, pain, and damage he
had visited on Carolene Brady.[24]

In an appeal, Phelps prepared affidavits swearing to the court that he had
eight witnesses whose testimony would convince the court to rule in his favor.
Brady, in turn, obtained sworn, signed affidavits from the eight people in
question, all of whom said that Phelps had never contacted them and that they
had no reason to testify against Brady; Phelps had committed perjury.[24]

On July 20, 1979, Fred Phelps was permanently disbarred from practicing law in
the state of Kansas,[24] but continued to practice in the Federal courts.

In 1985, nine Federal judges filed a disciplinary complaint against Phelps and
five of his children, alleging false accusations against the judges. In 1989,
the complaint was settled, with Phelps agreeing to stop practicing in Federal
court permanently, and two of his children suspended for periods of six months
and one year.[25]

## Activities and statements

Main article: Westboro Baptist Church

All of Phelps' recent actions were in conjunction with the congregation of
Westboro Baptist Church; see Westboro's notable activities. In 2001, Phelps
estimated that the WBC had held 40 pickets a week for the previous 10 years.
[26]

## Religious beliefs

Phelps says he is an old school Baptist, and holds to all five points of
Calvinism [27]. Phelps particularly highlights John Calvin's doctrine of
unconditional election, the belief that God has elected certain people for
salvation before birth, and limited atonement, the belief that Christ only
died for the elect, and condemns those who believe otherwise.[28]

Phelps views Arminianism (particularly the views of the Methodist theologian
William Munsey) as a "worse blasphemy and heresy than that heard in all filthy
Saturday night fag bars in the aggregate in the world."[29] In addition to
John Calvin, Phelps admires Martin Luther, Bob Jones, Sr., John Gill, and has
stated that "what this country needs is 50 Jonathan Edwardses turned loose in
it."[30] Fred Phelps particularly holds to equal ultimacy, believing that "God
Almighty makes some willing and he leads others into sin," although Phelps
denies being a hyper-Calvinist. [31]

Phelps is against common practices like Sunday school meetings, Bible colleges
and seminaries, and multi-denominational crusades[32], although he attended
Bob Jones University and worked with Billy Graham in his Los Angeles Crusade
before Graham changed his views on a literal Hell and salvation outside of
Jesus Christ. Phelps considers Graham the greatest false prophet since Balaam,
and also condemns large church leaders such as Robert Schuller and Jerry
Falwell, in addition to all current Catholics.[33]

Many other Calvinists, such as James White[34], do not acknowledge Phelps, and
regard his church as a cult.

## Allegations of abuse and cult behavior

Two of his sons, Mark and Nate, who allege that their father is a child abuser
who repeatedly beat them with a leather strap and a mattock handle (similar to
an axe handle)[35], insist that the church is actually a carefully planned
cult that allows Phelps to see himself as a demigod, wielding absolute control
over the lives of his family and congregants, essentially turning them into
slaves that he can use for the sole purpose of gratifying his every whim and
acting as the structure for his delusion that he is the only righteous man on
Earth.[36] In 1995, Mark Phelps wrote a letter to the people of Topeka to this
effect; it was run in the Topeka Capital-Journal.[37] The children's claim is
partially backed up by B.H. McAllister, the Baptist minister who ordained
Phelps. McAllister said in a 1993 interview that Phelps developed a delusion
wherein he was one of the few people on Earth worthy of God's grace and that
everyone else in the world was going to Hell, and that salvation or damnation
could be directly obtained by either aligning with or opposing Phelps. As of
2006, Phelps maintains this belief.[36] Phelps and his family picket
approximately six locations every day, including many in Topeka and some
events farther afield. On Sundays, up to 15 churches may receive pickets.[38]
By their own count, WBC has conducted over 30,000 pickets, in all 50 states,
in over 500 cities and towns.[39] Their travel budget exceeds $200,000
annually.[40]

## The Laramie Project

<IMG>

Phelps giving an interview about The Laramie Project in 2000

Many of Westboro's pickets revolve around the play The Laramie Project; Phelps
says he consistently sends his followers across the country to picket every
performance he finds out about.[41][42] The play documents the reaction of the
people of Laramie, Wyoming, to the murder of Matthew Shepard.

Phelps is a character in the play and is portrayed negatively. When the play
was made into a movie by HBO, (The Laramie Project), Phelps and the WBC
traveled to New York City to picket the HBO home offices with signs reading
"United You'll Fall."[43]

â The Laramie Project is a tawdry bit of banal fag melodrama â sordid,
cheap, unaffecting, drearily predictable â without the least artistic or
literary merit or redeeming social value. Indeed, its only purpose is to
promote sinful, soul-damning sodomy by playing on the sick, maudlin emotions
of doomed, godless America and thereby to recruit ill-bred teenagers to lives
of sin, shame, disease, death and hell.[44] â  
## Political views

Phelps' stated political views and activities are primarily driven by his view
that the United States is "a sodomite nation of flag-worshiping
idolators."[45]

### Anti-gay

In the movie Hatemongers, members of the Westboro Baptist Church claim their
children were being "accosted" by homosexuals in Gage Park, about half-a-mile
from the Phelps' home. Shirley Phelps-Roper claims that in the late 1980s Fred
Phelps even witnessed a homosexual attempting to lure her then 5-year-old son
Joshua into some shrubbery.[46] After several complaints to the local
government about the large amount of homosexual sex occurring in the park,
with no resulting action, the Phelps put up signs warning of homosexual
activity. This resulted in much negative attention towards the family. When
the Phelps called on local churches to speak against the activity in Gage
Park, the churches also lashed against the Phelps family, leading to the
family protesting homosexuality on a regular basis. [19] [47]

In 2005, Phelps and his family held a signature drive to bring about a vote to
repeal a law that protected homosexuals from workplace discrimination; they
collected over 6000 signatures, enough to bring the measure to a vote. In the
aftermath of the election, sixty-four individuals who'd signed the petition
came forward to state that Phelps' family had lied to them about what they
were signing, and asked that their names be removed.[48]

Also in 2005, Phelps' granddaughter Jael was an unsuccessful candidate for
Topeka's City Council; Jael was seeking to replace Tiffany Muller, the first
openly gay member of the Topeka City Council.[49]

### Anti-Semitism

Phelps was cited by the Anti-Defamation League for his numerous anti-semitic
comments:[50] On General Wesley Clark and John Kerry (of Jewish descent):

â His Christ-rejecting, God-hating Jew blood bubbled to the surface. Yes,
like his boss [John] Kerry, Clark is a Jew... That these two turds are Jews
would not matterâexcept when they ask for supreme political power and spit
in the Face of God, pushing for same-sex marriage, threatening to bring down
Godâs wrath on us as on Sodomâthen some inquiries are in order. Beware!
"Jews killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us;
and they please not God, and are contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak
to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always; for
the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. 1 Thess. 2:14." Apostate fags
and Jews certain to bring Godâs wrath. â  
â Homosexuals and Jews dominated Nazi Germany... just as they now dominate
this doomed U.S.A... The Jews now wander the earth despised, smitten with
moral and spiritual blindness by a divine judicial stroke... And God has
smitten Jews with a certain unique madness, whereby they are an astonishment
of heart, a proverb, and a byword (the butt of jokes and ridicule) among all
peoples whither the Lord has driven and scattered them... Jews, thus
perverted, out of all proportion to their numbers energize the militant
sodomite agenda... The American Jews are the real Nazis (misusers and abusers
of governmental power) who hate God and the rule of law. â  
### Anti-Catholicism

Fred Phelps and the Westboro Baptist Church claim that the Roman Catholic
Church is a "fag church" and states that a large part of the Catholic
priesthood are either active homosexuals, active pedophiles, or both.[1]

On April 3, 2005, the day after the death of longtime Pope John Paul II (Karol
Jozef Wojtyla), Phelps held a special service celebrating the late pontiff's
perceived entrance into hell. In his sermon, Phelps railed: "You don't think
he split Hell wide open? We're the only one's (sic) telling the truth about
that son of a bitch".

That day, a photo of John Paul II also appeared on Westboro Baptist Church's
godhatesfags.com website. It was altered to depict the pope with horns
emanating from his forehead. A caption read:

â "Deal with it, you idolatrous morons! The pope is in Hell. Westboro
Baptist Church members are competent expert witnesses, having picketed
hundreds of Catholic churches in all fifty states over the past fourteen
years. We will bear witness on Judgment Day: Catholics are the meanest, most
violent people on Earth, and their churches are filled with filthy fag
priests. On John Paul II's watch, the Catholic Church became the CHURCH OF THE
HOLY PEDOPHILES and sodomite feces and semen replaced bread and wine." â  
The Westboro Baptist Church maintains the priestsrapeboys.com website.

### Anti-Swedish

Phelps and the Westboro church run the website godhatessweden.com. Phelps has
declared that the heavy Swedish losses in the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake,
initially overestimated to be near 20,000, were God's punishment of Sweden for
the promotion of homosexuality. In particular, Phelps criticized Sweden's
prosecution of Ã ke Green. Phelps' website depicts a granite monument designed
by himself that says that Green is a Christian martyr and Phelps announced
plans to erect copies of the monument throughout the United States.[51]

In response, Green called Phelps "appalling" and "extremely unpleasant",[52]
which led to Phelps taking down his monument of Green.

### Anti-Irish

In 2003 Phelps turned his attacks on Ireland. In a sermon preached on July 29
2007 in which he returned to the topic, he told his congregation that he had
launched a website godhatesireland.com to "expose Ireland as the Emerald (now
Pink) Isle of the Sodomite Damned, âsaturated with fags and dykes at every
level of society and government."[citation needed] His most recent tirade was
triggered off when the Literary and Historical Society, a debating society in
University College Dublin invited Phelps to participate in a debate on
homosexual adoption. The invitation was made in error, and was withdrawn
within a few days. He told his congregation that in the past he had

â ...warned America about Irelandâs sad, sick, sodomite culture and fag
Irish Senator David Norrisâ case before the European Court of Human Rights.
(Incidentally, the âOpenly-Gayâ Irish Senator Norris was represented
before that Strasbourg European Court, by the famous Irish President, Mary
Robinson.) We warned that WBC has had lots of experience with Irelandâs
militant sodomite citizenry, steeped for many decades in ignorant, blind,
idolatrous Catholicism, belching out their vile fagspeak, slander, and
blasphemy against God and His Word â cursing WBC members as guests on Dublin
talk-radio shows. Remember, Martin Luther said Catholic churches, seminaries
and monasteries are nothing but sodomite whorehouses filled with unnatural
brute beasts and devils. We warned that the very leprechauns of Ireland are
likely to be fags![53] â  
Phelps' attack on former president Mary Robinson and Senator David Norris,
both widely respected figures, drew ridicule in Ireland.

### Against flag idolatry

Fred Phelps refers to the United States as "A sodomite nation of flag-
worshiping idolators."

"Military funerals are pagan orgies of idolatrous blasphemy where they pray to
the dunghill gods of Sodom and play taps to a fallen fool, 'They shall not
lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament
for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory! He shall be buried with the burial
of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.'" Jer.
22:18&19.[54]

### Freedom of speech

Phelps is critical of laws against hate speech pertaining to homosexuality as
sin. Hate speech laws in Sweden, resulting in the trial of Pastor Ã ke Green,
and Canada are given particular emphasis by Phelps. Phelps has used the term
"homo-fascist" to describe countries with such laws.[55]

### Democratic Party

Phelps has run in various Kansas Democratic Party primaries five times, but
has never won. These included races for governor in 1990, 1994, and 1998,
receiving about 15% of the vote in 1998.[56] In the 1992 Democratic Party
primary for U.S. Senate, Phelps received 31% of the vote.[57] Phelps ran for
mayor of Topeka in 1993[58] and 1997.[59]

### Support for Al Gore

Phelps supported Al Gore in the 1988 Democratic Party primary election.[60] In
his 1984 Senate race, Gore opposed a "gay bill of rights" and stated that
homosexuality was not something that "society should affirm".[61] Phelps has
stated that he supported Gore because of these earlier comments.[62] According
to Phelps, members of the Westboro Baptist Church helped run Gore's 1988
campaign in Kansas. Phelps' son, Fred Phelps Jr., hosted a Gore fundraiser at
his home in Topeka and was a Gore delegate to the 1988 Democratic National
Convention.[16] Gore spokesman Dag Vega declined to comment; "We are not
dignifying those stories with a response."[63]

### Opposition to Al Gore, Bill Clinton, and Hillary Rodham Clinton

During the 1992 presidential campaign, Phelps protested Hillary Rodham Clinton
during a campaign speech in support of the Clinton-Gore ticket at the
University of Kansas on October 14, 1992. In Bill Clinton's second
presidential campaign, Phelps and the Westboro church also opposed Clinton and
Gore because of the administration's support for gay rights. The entire
Westboro congregation picketed a 1997 inaugural ball,[64] denouncing Gore as a
"famous fag pimp."[65] In 1998, Westboro picketed the funeral of Gore's
father, screaming vulgarities at Gore and telling him, "your dad's in
Hell."[65]

### Saddam Hussein

In 2003, before the fall of Saddam Hussein during the Iraq War, Phelps wrote
Hussein a letter praising his regime for being, in his opinion, "the only
Muslim state that allows the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ to be freely and
openly preached on the streets."[66] Furthermore, he stated that he would like
to send a delegation to Baghdad to "preach the Gospel" for one week. Saddam
granted permission, and a group of WBC congregants traveled to Iraq to protest
against the U.S. The WBC members stood on the streets of Baghdad holding signs
condemning both Bill and Hillary Clinton, as well as anal sex.[67] After
Saddam was executed in 2006, Phelps released a video commentary that stated
that both Saddam Hussein and Gerald Ford (who had died the same week) were now
in Hell.

## Arrests and immigration restrictions

### United States

Phelps was first arrested in 1951 and found guilty of misdemeanor battery
after attacking a Pasadena police officer. He has since been arrested for
assault, battery, threats, trespassing, disorderly conduct, contempt of court,
and several other charges; each time, he (along with Westboro and its other
members) has filed suit against the city, the police, and the arresting
officers. Though he has been able to avoid prison time, he has been convicted
more than once:[68][69][70]

  * 1994: Contempt of court[68]
  * 1994: Two counts of assault (reduced to disorderly conduct on appeal)[69]

Phelps' 1995 conviction for assault and battery carried a five-year prison
sentence, with a mandatory 18 months to be served before he became eligible
for parole. Phelps fought to be allowed to remain free until his appeals
process went through. Days away from being arrested and sent to prison, a
judge ruled that Phelps had been denied a speedy trial and that he was not
required to serve any time.[69][70]

### Canada

Phelps has also claimed that his congregation, along with him, have been
arrested in Canada for hate speech.[71] This prompted the founding of
"Godhatescanada.com." He has also strongly opposed the legalization of same-
sex marriage in Canada and Canada's Supreme Court.

### United Kingdom

On February 18, 2009, two days before the Westboro Baptist Church's first ever
UK picket, the UK Home Office announced that Fred Phelps and Shirley Phelps-
Roper are excluded from entering the UK, and that âother church members
could also be flagged and stopped if they tried to enter Britainâ[72].

## Lawsuit against Westboro Baptist Church

On March 10, 2006 WBC picketed the funeral of Lance Cpl. Matthew A. Snyder. On
June 5, 2006 the Snyder family sued Fred Phelps, WBC, and unnamed others for
defamation, invasion of privacy, and intentional infliction of emotional
distress.[73] On 31 October 2007, WBC, Fred Phelps and his two daughters,
Shirley Phelps-Roper and Rebecca Phelps-Davis, were found liable for invasion
of privacy and intentional infliction of emotional distress. A federal jury
awarded Mr. Snyder $2.9 million in compensatory damages, then later added a
decision to award $6 million in punitive damages for invasion of privacy and
an additional $2 million for causing emotional distress (A total of
$10,900,000).[74][75] The organization said it wouldn't change its message
because of the verdict.

The lawsuit named Albert Snyder as the plaintiff and Fred W. Phelps, Sr.;
Westboro Baptist Church, Inc.; Rebekah Phelps-Davis; and Shirley Phelps-Roper
as defendants, alleging that they were responsible for publishing defamatory
information about the Snyder family on the Internet, including statements that
Albert and his wife had "raised [Matthew] for the devil" and taught him "to
defy his Creator, to divorce, and to commit adultery." Other statements
denounced them for raising their son Catholic. Snyder further complained the
defendants had intruded upon and staged protests at his son's funeral. The
claims of invasion of privacy and defamation arising from comments posted
about Snyder on the Westboro website were dismissed on First Amendment
grounds, but the case proceeded to trial on the remaining three counts.

Albert Snyder, the father of Marine Lance Cpl. Matthew A. Snyder, testified:

> They turned this funeral into a media circus and they wanted to hurt my
family. They wanted their message heard and they didn't care who they stepped
over. My son should have been buried with dignity, not with a bunch of clowns
outside.

In his instructions to the jury U.S. District Judge Richard Bennett stated
that the First Amendment protection of free speech has limits, including
vulgar, offensive and shocking statements, and that the jury must decide
"whether the defendant's actions would be highly offensive to a reasonable
person, whether they were extreme and outrageous and whether these actions
were so offensive and shocking as to not be entitled to First Amendment
protection." See also Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, a case where certain
personal slurs and obscene utterances by an individual were found unworthy of
First Amendment protection, due to the potential for violence resulting from
their utterance.

WBC is seeking a mistrial based on alleged prejudicial statements made by the
judge and violations of the gag order by the plaintiff's attorney. An appeal
is also likely. WBC has said that it is thankful for the verdict.

On February 4, 2008 U.S. District Judge Richard D. Bennett upheld the ruling
but reduced the punitive damages from $8 million to $2.1 million. The total
judgment now stands at $5 million. An appeal by WBC is still pending. Court
liens have been ordered on church buildings and Phelps' law office in an
attempt to ensure that the damages are paid. [76]

## People targeted by Fred Phelps

Since the early 1990s, Phelps has targeted several individuals and groups in
the public eye for criticism by the Westboro Baptist Church after their
deaths. Prominent examples include President Ronald Reagan, Diana, Princess of
Wales, Supreme Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist, National Football League
star Reggie White, Sonny Bono, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, atheists, Islam and Muslims, murdered college student Matthew Shepard,
the late children's television host Fred Rogers, Australian actor Heath
Ledger, Jews,[77] Catholics, Swedes, the Irish and US soldiers killed in Iraq.
He has also targeted the Joseph Estabrook Elementary School in Lexington,
Massachusetts, center of the David Parker controversy. In 2007 he stated that
he would target the late Rev. Jerry Falwell's funeral.[78]

Shirley Phelps-Roper, the eldest daughter of Fred Phelps, has appeared on Fox
News, defending the WBC and attacking homosexuality.

In a recent video sermon, Phelps targeted comedians Jon Stewart and Stephen
Colbert, claiming that they are among the "scoffers and mockers" referred to
in the Bible, and used them as evidence that we are in the "last of the Last
Days." He was particularly critical of Colbert's Emmy Awards show performance,
in which Colbert, tongue-in-cheek, called the Hollywood audience "Godless
sodomites."[79] He compared Colbert's comments to the "blaspheming comics" of
Sodom and Gomorrah and referred to both Colbert and Stewart as "sacrilegious
buffoons."

Phelps' followers have repeatedly protested the University of Kansas School of
Law's graduation ceremonies.

In August 2007, in the wake of the Minneapolis I-35W bridge collapse, Phelps
and his congregation stated that they will protest at the funerals of the
victims. In a statement, the church said that Minneapolis is the "land of the
Sodomite damned."[80]

## Efforts to discourage funeral protests

### Legislation

On May 24, 2006, the United States House and Senate passed the Respect for
America's Fallen Heroes Act, which President Bush signed five days later. The
act bans protests within 300 feet of national cemeteries â which numbered
122 when the bill was signed â from an hour before a funeral to an hour
after it. Violators face up to a $100,000 fine and up to a year in prison.[81]

As of April 2006, at least 17 states have banned protests near funeral sites
immediately before and after ceremonies, or are considering it. These are:
Illinois,[82][83] Indiana,[84] Iowa,[85] Kansas,[86] Kentucky,[87]
Louisiana,[88] Maryland,[89] Michigan,[90] Missouri,[91] which passed the law,
and Nebraska, Ohio, Oklahoma,[92] South Carolina,[93] South Dakota, Texas,
Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.[94] Florida increased the
penalty for disturbing military funerals, amending a previous ban on the
disruption of lawful assembly.[95]

These bans have been contested. Bart McQueary, having protested with Phelps on
at least three occasions,[96] filed a lawsuit in federal court challenging the
constitutionality of Kentucky's funeral protest ban. On September 26, 2006, a
district court agreed and entered an injunction prohibiting the ban from being
enforced.[96] In the opinion, the judge wrote:

    Sections 5(1)(b) and (c) restrict substantially more speech than that which would interfere with a funeral or that which would be so obtrusive that funeral participants could not avoid it. Accordingly, the provisions are not narrowly tailored to serve a significant government interest but are instead unconstitutionally overbroad.
The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit in Missouri on behalf of
Phelps and Westboro Baptist Church to overturn the ban on the picketing of
soldier's funerals.[97] The ACLU of Ohio also filed a similar lawsuit.[98]

### Other responses

WBC is listed as a "hate group" by the Southern Poverty Law Center.[99]

To counter the Phelps protests at funerals of soldiers, a group of motorcycle
riders has formed the Patriot Guard Riders to provide a nonviolent, volunteer
buffer between the protesters and mourners.[81]

## Phelps in the media

The Phelps family was the subject of the TV programme "The Most Hated Family
in America"; presented on the BBC by Louis Theroux.[100] In early 2007, Kevin
Smith announced plans to produce a horror film entitled Red State featuring a
religious extremist based on Phelps as a villain.[101]

## Electoral history

Democratic primary for Governor of Kansas, 1990

  * Joan Finney \- 81,250 (47.18%)
  * John Carlin \- 79,406 (46.11%)
  * Fred Phelps \- 11,572 (6.72%)

Democratic primary for United States Senate, Kansas 1992

  * Gloria O'Dell \- 111,015 (69.20%)
  * Fred Phelps \- 49,416 (30.80%)

Democratic primary for Governor of Kansas, 1994

  * Jim Slattery \- 84,389 (53.02%)
  * Joan Wagnon \- 42,115 (26.46%)
  * James Francisco \- 16,048 (10.08%)
  * Leslie Kitchenmaster \- 11,253 (7.07%)
  * Fred Phelps \- 5,349 (3.36%)

Democratic primary for Governor of Kansas, 1998

  * Tom Sawyer \- 88,248 (85.28%)
  * Fred Phelps \- 15,233 (14.72%)

Source

## See also

  * A Union In Wait
  * Shirley Phelps-Roper
  * The Bible and homosexuality
  * Christianity and homosexuality
  * Homophobia

## Footnotes

  1. ^ http://www.xtra.ca/public/viewstory.aspx?AFF_TYPE=3&STORY_ID=5194&PUB_TEMPLATE_ID=3
  2. ^ http://www.nerve.com/CS/blogs/scanner/archive/2008/01/23/homophobic-propagandist-fred-phelps-will-picket-heath-ledgers-funeral.aspx
  3. ^ http://www.queerty.com/queer/fred-phelps/
  4. ^ Flamers, family & fanaticism
  5. ^ Homophobic Propagandist Fred Phelps Will Picket Heath Ledger's Funeral
  6. ^ Fred Phelps / Queerty
  7. ^ Anti-Defamation League (2006). "Fred Phelps and the Westboro Baptist Church". http://www.adl.org/special_reports/wbc/default.asp. Retrieved on 2007-02-23.
  8. ^ Southern Poverty Law Center." The Year in Hate:2005". Accessed 5 October 2006.
  9. ^ Southern Poverty Law Center. Active U.S. Hate Groups in 2005. Accessed 5 October 2006.
  10. ^ God Hates Fags. Flyer dated November 9, 2001.
  11. ^ God Hates Fags. Flyer dated December 11, 2001.
  12. ^ God Hates Fags. EPIC TO THE KANSAS SENATE ON FEBRUARY 1, 2006 (PDF)
  13. ^ God Hates Fags. Pandering Fliers, 2006 (PDF)
  14. ^ Pickler, Nedra, "Bush Says U.S. Must Honor War Dead", The Washington Post, Associated Press, 2006-05-30. Retrieved on 2006-06-09
  15. ^ Carpenter, Tim "A Buffer For Mourners" The Topeka Capital-Journal, Associated Press, 2007-04-13. Retrieved on 2007-09-20
  16. ^ a b c Lauerman, Kerry. "The Man Who Loves To Hate". Mother Jones. March/April 1999.
  17. ^ In 2006, Phelps--who has picketed BJU as well as funerals of servicemen--denied that he had ever attended BJU. News article from the Columbia (SC) State.
  18. ^ "Repentance in Pasadena". Time Magazine. 1951-06-11. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,814897,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-06.
  19. ^ a b c Donna Ladd (1999-09-09), A Love/Hate Thing: Web prank stonewalls anti-gay attorneys, OC Weekly, http://www.ocweekly.com/news/machine-age/a-lovehate-thing/18104/, retrieved on 2006-12-20
  20. ^ a b Joe Taschler and Steve Fry, As a lawyer, Phelps was good in court, The Topeka Capital-Journal, http://cjonline.com/webindepth/phelps/stories/080394_phelps17.shtml, retrieved on 2006-12-20
  21. ^ U.S. Department of Justice (1986-10). "On Petition for a Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit" (txt). United States Department of Justice. http://www.justice.gov/osg/briefs/1986/sg860401.txt. Retrieved on 2007-11-01.
  22. ^ Fred Phelps and the Westboro Baptist Church: In Their Own Words, Anti-Defamation League, 2006-06-21, http://www.adl.org/special_reports/wbc/default.asp, retrieved on 2006-12-14
  23. ^ Phelps-Chartered. Firm History. Accessed April 2, 2007
  24. ^ a b c d State v. Phelps, 226 Kan. 371, 598 P.2d 180 (Kan. 1979) (Kansas Supreme Court opinion)
  25. ^ Southern Poverty Law Center, Fred Phelps timeline
  26. ^ A City Held Hostage Southern Poverty Law Center, 2001
  27. ^ Westboro Baptist Church FAQ, Question 1
  28. ^ Sermon Outline for Dec. 30, 2007
  29. ^ Sermon Outline, September 7, 2008
  30. ^ Debate with John Rankin, opening statement
  31. ^ Debate with John Rankin, Q&A session
  32. ^ Memo on the Church
  33. ^ Sermon Outline, June 17, 2007
  34. ^ Dr. James White, "Dividing Line," November 6, 2007
  35. ^ Liberty Press, Kansas, 2001 "A City Held Hostage"
  36. ^ a b Fry, Steven, and Taschler, Joe. "Phelps flock: Afterlife is prearranged."
  37. ^ Phelps, Mark. "Letter from a Son Who Left."
  38. ^ Mann, Fred, "Road to Westboro: What led Fred Phelps to his beliefs and actions?", Wichita Eagle, 2006-04-02. Retrieved on 2006-08-24.
  39. ^ "animation". http://animation.speakfree.net/video/sott/wbcvn/qt/20070929ussenateframesmischiefbyalaw.mov.
  40. ^ Video: The Most Hated Family in America. Documentary by Louis Theroux; produced by the BBC.
  41. ^ God Hates Fags. Fliers
  42. ^ God Hates Fags. Flier archive 2004.
  43. ^ God Hates Fags. Photo Archive Accessed April 2, 2007(direct link to photo)
  44. ^ God Hates America. Laramie Project (PDF).
  45. ^ God Hates Fags. Flier dated May 11, 2006.
  46. ^ "Phelps children raised on faith". examiner.com. http://www.examiner.com/a-1068141~Phelps_children_raised_on_faith.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-13.
  47. ^ "Hatemongers", Steve Drain
  48. ^ 365Gay.com staff. "Phelps Clan Forces Vote on Gay Rights Law." 5 January 2005.
  49. ^ Topeka Capital-Journal. "A District." 23 February 2005.
  50. ^ [http://www.adl.org/special_reports/wbc/wbc_on_jews.asp Fred Phelps and the Westboro Baptist Church: In Their Own Words]
  51. ^ God Hates Sweden!!! Telling Bible Truth is not a Crime!!!!
  52. ^ "Swedish pastor disowns US hate site", The Local
  53. ^ Fred Phelpsâ July 29, 2007, Sermon
  54. ^ God Hates Fags. WBC flier. May 11, 2006.
  55. ^ God Hates Canada, a Phelps website
  56. ^ 1998 Kansas Primary Results. Compiled by Congressional Quarterly.
  57. ^ State of Kansas Secretary of State Website
  58. ^ Kansas anti-gay church embarrasses Topekans
  59. ^ FrontPage Magazine
  60. ^ Tooley, Mike D. (February 9, 2006). The "God Hates Fags" Left. FrontPageMagazine.com
  61. ^ Hohler, Bob; Michael Crowley (2000-02-15). "Bradley rips Gore's 'scare tactics' to win gay votes". Boston Globe. http://graphics.boston.com/news/politics/campaign2000/news/Bradley_rips_Gore_s_scare_tactics_to_win_gay_votes+.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-10-01.
  62. ^ Hogenson, Scott (2000-10-16). "Gore Sought Support of 'God Hates Fags' Creator in '88". http://www.cnsnews.com/ViewPolitics.asp?Page=\Politics\archive\200010\POL20001016c.html. Retrieved on 2006-12-14.
  63. ^ Dougherty, John E. (2000-10-25). "Gore sought help from anti-homosexual group". World Net Daily. http://www.worldnetdaily.com/news/article.asp?ARTICLE_ID=15559. Retrieved on 2006-09-19.
  64. ^ Friedman, et al. "This Way Out Newswrap", 25 January 1997
  65. ^ a b God Hates Fags.Westboro Baptist Church Flier (PDF), distributed 18 November, 2002.
  66. ^ Anti-Defamation League. "Fred Phelps and the Westboro Baptist Church: In their own words." 2006.
  67. ^ Tooley, Mark D. "The 'God Hates Fags' Left." Front Page Magazine. February 9, 2006.
  68. ^ a b Notable Names Database. Fred Phelps entry.
  69. ^ a b c Southern Poverty Law Center. Timeline of the life of Fred Phelps, Sr.
  70. ^ a b Musser, Rick. "Fred Phelps versus Topeka." Republished from Culture Wars & Local Politics, ed. Elaine B. Sharp. University of Press Kansas. 2000.Cloth ISBN 0-7006-0935-0, Paper ISBN 0-7006-0936-9.
  71. ^ Dan Kapelovitz Interview. "Fred Phelps Hates Fags: Straight Talk With God's Favorite Homophobe"
  72. ^ "BBC News - Anti-gay preachers banned from UK". bbc.co.uk. February 19, 2009. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/hampshire/7898972.stm?lss. Retrieved on 2009-02-19.
  73. ^ [http://www.matthewsnyder.org/ Snyder family web page
  74. ^ Dominguez, Alex (2007-10-31), "Jury Awards Father $2.9M in Funeral Case", Associated Press, http://www.breitbart.com/article.php?id=D8SKEED02&show_article=1
  75. ^ Dominguez, Alex (2007-10-31), "Jury awards father $11M in funeral case", Associated Press, http://www.nctimes.com/articles/2007/11/02/military/6_23_2911_1_07.txt
  76. ^ "Damages Reduced in Funeral Protest Case", Associated Press, 2008-02-06, http://www.advocate.com/news_detail_ektid52070.asp
  77. ^ Anti-Defamation League. [http://www.adl.org/special_reports/wbc/wbc_on_jews.asp Fred Phelps and the Westboro Baptist Church: In Their Own Words]. Accessed April 2, 2007
  78. ^ Bonisteel, Sara. "Anti-Gay Kansas Church Members Plan to Picket Falwell Funeral", FOX News, May 17, 2007.
  79. ^ YouTube - Evil Reverend Fred Phelps Diatribe Against Stewart/Colbert
  80. ^ Black, Eric "Fred Phelps is Coming", Minnesota Monitor, August 7, 2007.
  81. ^ a b Congress Bars Military Funeral Protesters
  82. ^ Blagojevich Signs Funeral Protest Bill.
  83. ^ Illinois.gov - Illinois Government News Network (IGNN) - Search the News Results
  84. ^ Ind. enacts funeral-protest law
  85. ^ Vilsack orally 'signs' funeral bill - Metro
  86. ^ http://www.kansascity.com/mld/kansascity/news/local/14090898.htm
  87. ^ Ky. enacts limits for funeral protests
  88. ^ Senate committee approves bill to limit funeral protests.
  89. ^ Funeral Protest Ban Clears Maryland House
  90. ^ WLNS TV 6 Lansing Jackson Michigan News and Weather - WLNS.COM | Our Apologies
  91. ^ Blunt Signs Funeral Protest Bill - Kansas City News Story - KMBC Kansas City
  92. ^ OkInsider.com - Selected News Story
  93. ^ 2005â2006 Bill 4965: Funeral services - www.scstatehouse.net - LPITS
  94. ^ WorldWide Religious News-Wisconsin enacts ban on protests at funerals
  95. ^ HB 7127 - Disturbance of Assemblies
  96. ^ a b http://www.aclu-ky.org/Funeral%20Protest%20PI%20Order%20&%20Opinion%2009%2027%2006.pdf
  97. ^ ACLU Sues for Anti-Gay Group That Pickets at Troops' Burials - washingtonpost.com
  98. ^ http://www.acluohio.org/pressreleases/2006_press_releases/2006.05.08.htm
  99. ^ Southern Poverty Law Center. Active U.S. Hate Groups in 2005. Accessed 5 October 2006.
  100. ^ BBC
  101. ^ Kevin Smithâs Red State | /Film

## External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Fred
Phelps  
  * God Hates Fags.com
  * [2] \- Phelps explains what "God Hates Fags" means.

    For external links related to Westboro Baptist Church and not Phelps specifically, see this section.
### Biographical information

  * Phelps-Chartered, Attorneys At Law \- A law firm founded by Fred Phelps, Sr., in 1964 and staffed by WBC members
  * Topeka Capital-Journal Phelps and WBC archived stories
  * Fred Phelps at the Internet Movie Database
  * Fred Phelps at TV.com
  * Repentance In Pasadena The Jun. 11, 1951 TIME magazine article mentioning Phelps.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fred_Phelps"

Categories: 1929 births | Anti-Catholicism in the United States | Anti-Judaism
| Baptist ministers from the United States | Christian fundamentalists |
Criticism of Islam | Disbarred American lawyers | Eagle Scouts | Homophobia |
Kansas Democrats | Living people | People convicted of assault | People from
Topeka, Kansas | People from Meridian, Mississippi | Westboro Baptist Church

Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 12:27.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



