
# Antony Flew

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Antony Flew Western Philosophy  
20th-century philosophy  
Full name Antony Garrard Newton Flew  
School/tradition Analytic  
Main interests Philosophy of religion  
Notable ideas No True Scotsman  
Influenced by

David Hume, Richard Swinburne  
Professor Antony Garrard Newton Flew (born 11 February 1923) is a British
philosopher. Belonging to the analytic and evidentialist schools of thought,
he is notable for his works on the philosophy of religion.

Flew was a strong advocate of atheism, arguing that one should presuppose
atheism until evidence of a God surfaces. He has also criticised the idea of
life after death,[1] the free will defence to the problem of evil, and the
meaningfulness of the concept of God.[2] However, in 2004 he stated an
allegiance to deism,[3] and later wrote the book There is a God: How the
World's Most Notorious Atheist Changed His Mind, with contributions from Roy
Abraham Varghese. This book has been the subject of controversy, following an
article in the New York Times magazine alleging that Flew has mentally
declined, and that Varghese was the primary author.[4] The matter remains
contentious, with some commentators including PZ Myers and Richard Carrier
supporting the allegations, and others (including Flew himself)[5] opposing
them.

Flew has taught at the universities of Oxford, Aberdeen, Keele and Reading,
and at York University in Toronto. He is also known for the development of the
no true Scotsman fallacy, and his debate on retrocausality with Michael
Dummett.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
  * 2 Atheism and deism
    * 2.1 Prominent atheist
    * 2.2 Revised views
    * 2.3 Book with Varghese
  * 3 Awards
  * 4 Works
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

Antony Flew, the son of a Methodist minister, was born in London, England. He
was educated at St Faith's School, Cambridge followed by Kingswood School,
Bath. During the Second World War he studied Japanese at the School of
Oriental and African Studies, University of London, and was a Royal Air Force
intelligence officer. After a period with the Inter-Services Topographical
Department in Oxford, he was posted to Bletchley Park in June 1944.[6]

After the war, Flew achieved a first class degree in Literae Humaniores at St
John's College, Oxford. Flew was a graduate student of Gilbert Ryle, prominent
in ordinary language philosophy. Both Flew and Ryle were among many Oxford
philosophers fiercely criticised in Ernest Gellner's book Words and Things
(1959). A 1954 debate with Michael Dummett over backward causation was an
early highlight in Flew's career.[7]

Flew was a Lecturer in Philosophy at Christ Church, Oxford from 1949 to 1950,
following which he was a lecturer for four years at the University of
Aberdeen, and a Professor of Philosophy at the University of Keele for twenty
years. Between 1973 and 1983 he was Professor of Philosophy at the University
of Reading. At this time, he developed the No true Scotsman fallacy in his
1975 book, Thinking About Thinking. Upon his retirement, Flew took up a half-
time post for a few years at York University, Toronto.

Flew married on 28 June 1952. He has two daughters.[8]

## [edit] Atheism and deism

### [edit] Prominent atheist

While an undergraduate, Flew attended the weekly meetings of C. S. Lewis's
Socratic Club fairly regularly. Although he found Lewis to be "an eminently
reasonable man" and "by far the most powerful of Christian apologists for the
sixty or more years following his founding of that club," he was not persuaded
by Lewis's argument from morality as found in Mere Christianity. Flew also
criticized several of the other philosophical proofs for God's existence. He
concluded that the ontological argument in particular failed because it is
based on the premise that the concept of Being can be derived from the concept
of Goodness. Only the scientific forms of the teleological argument ultimately
impressed Flew as decisive.[9]

In God and Philosophy (1966) and The Presumption of Atheism (1984), Flew
earned his fame by arguing that one should presuppose atheism until evidence
of a God surfaces. Flew was also critical of the idea of life after death and
the free will defence to the problem of evil.

### [edit] Revised views

<IMG> This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.  
On several occasions, apparently starting in 2001, rumours circulated claiming
that Flew had converted from atheism. Flew denied these rumours on the Secular
Web website.[10]

In January 2003 Flew and Gary Habermas, his friend and philosophical
adversary, conducted a dialogue on the resurrection at California Polytechnic
State University - San Luis Obispo. During a couple of telephone discussions
shortly after that dialogue, Flew explained to Habermas that he was
considering becoming a theist. While Flew did not change his position at that
time (he signed the Humanist Manifesto III), he concluded that certain
philosophical and scientific considerations were causing him to do some
serious rethinking. He characterized his position as that of atheism standing
in tension with several huge question marks.[11]

In December 2004, an interview with Flew conducted by Gary Habermas was
published in the journal Philosophia Christi (published by the Evangelical
Philosophical Society with the assistance of Biola University), with the
title, Atheist Becomes Theist - Exclusive Interview with Former Atheist Antony
Flew. Flew agreed to this title.[3] According to the introduction, Flew
informed Habermas in January 2004 that he had become a deist,[3] and the
interview took place shortly thereafter. Then the text was amended by both
participants over the following months prior to publication. In the article
Flew states that he has left his long-standing espousal of atheism by
endorsing a deism of the sort that Thomas Jefferson advocated ("While reason,
mainly in the form of arguments to design, assures us that there is a God,
there is no room either for any supernatural revelation of that God or for any
transactions between that God and individual human beings."). Flew stated that
"the most impressive arguments for Godâs existence are those that are
supported by recent scientific discoveries" and that "the argument to
Intelligent Design is enormously stronger than it was when I first met it". He
also answered in the affirmative to Habermas's question, "So of the major
theistic arguments, such as the cosmological, teleological, moral, and
ontological, the only really impressive ones that you take to be decisive are
the scientific forms of teleology?". He supported the idea of an Aristotelian
God with "the characteristics of power and also intelligence", stating that
the evidence for it was stronger than ever before. He rejects the ideas of an
afterlife, of God as the source of good (he explicitly states that God has
created "a lot of" evil), and of the resurrection of Jesus as an historical
fact though he has allowed a short chapter arguing for Christ's resurrection
to be added into his latest book.[3]

Flew is particularly hostile to Islam, and says it is "best described in a
Marxian way as the uniting and justifying ideology of Arab imperialism."[3] In
a December 2004 interview he said: "I'm thinking of a God very different from
the God of the Christian and far and away from the God of Islam, because both
are depicted as omnipotent Oriental despots, cosmic Saddam Husseins".[12]

Flew has subsequently changed his position given in the Habermas interview as
justification for his endorsing of deism. In October 2004 (before the December
publication of the Flew-Habermas interview), a letter written to Richard
Carrier of the Secular Web, stated that he was a deist and also said that "I
think we need here a fundamental distinction between the God of Aristotle or
Spinoza and the Gods of the Christian and the Islamic Revelations.".[13] Flew
also said: "My one and only piece of relevant evidence [for an Aristotelian
God] is the apparent impossibility of providing a naturalistic theory of the
origin from DNA of the first reproducing species ... [In fact] the only reason
which I have for beginning to think of believing in a First Cause god is the
impossibility of providing a naturalistic account of the origin of the first
reproducing organisms."

In another letter to Carrier of 29 December 2004 Flew went on to retract his
statement, writing "a deity or a 'super-intelligence' [is] the only good
explanation for the origin of life and the complexity of nature.", and "I now
realize that I have made a fool of myself by believing that there were no
presentable theories of the development of inanimate matter up to the first
living creature capable of reproduction.". He blames his error on being
"misled" by Richard Dawkins, claiming Dawkins "has never been reported as
referring to any promising work on the production of a theory of the
development of living matter".

The work of physicist Gerald Schroeder had been influential in Flew's new
belief, but Flew told Carrier that he had not read any of the critiques of
Schroeder that Carrier referred him to.

However, in spring 2005, when Raymond Bradley, an atheist in Editorial Board
for The Open Society journal, wrote an open letter to professor Antony Flew
accusing him of not reading the critiques of Schroeder, Flew strongly
responded to that charge in a letter published in the same journal in summer
2006, describing the content of Bradley's letter "extraordinary offensive" and
the accusation made by him as an "egregiously offensive charge"; he also
implied that Bradley was a "secularist bigot", and suggested that he should
follow Socrates's advice (as scripted in Plato's Republic) of "follow[ing] the
argument wherever it leads". [14]

When asked in December 2004 by Duncan Crary of Humanist Network News if he
still stood by the argument presented in The Presumption of Atheism, Flew
replied he did but he also restated his position as deist: "I'm quite happy to
believe in an inoffensive inactive god". When asked by Crary whether or not he
has kept up with the most recent science and theology, he responded with
"Certainly not", stating that there is simply too much to keep up with. Flew
also denied that there was any truth to the rumours of 2001 and 2003 that he
had abandoned his atheism or converted to Christianity.[15]

A letter on Darwinism and Theology which Flew published in the
August/September 2004 issue of Philosophy Now magazine left the world hanging
when it closed with, "Anyone who should happen to want to know what I myself
now believe will have to wait until the publication, promised for early 2005,
by Prometheus of Amherst, NY of the final edition of my God and Philosophy
with a new introduction of it as âan historical relicâ."[16]

The preface of God and Philosophy states that the publisher and Flew went
through a total of four versions (each extensively peer-reviewed) before
coming up with one that satisfied them both. The introduction raises ten
matters that came about since the original 1966 edition. Flew states that any
book to follow God and Philosophy will have to take into account these ideas
when considering the philosophical case for the existence of God:[17]

  1. A novel definition of "God" by Richard Swinburne
  2. The case for the existence of the Christian God by Swinburne in the book Is There a God?
  3. The Church of England's change in doctrine on the eternal punishment of Hell
  4. The question of whether there was only one big bang and if time began with it
  5. The question of multiple universes
  6. The fine-tuning argument
  7. The question of whether there is a naturalistic account for the development of living matter from non-living matter
  8. The question of whether there is a naturalistic account for non-reproducing living matter developing into a living creature capable of reproduction
  9. The concept of an Intelligent Orderer as explained in the book The Wonder of the World: A Journey from Modern Science to the Mind of God by Roy Abraham Varghese
  10. An extension of an Aristotelian/Deist concept of God that can be reached through natural theology, which was developed by David Conway.

In an interview with Joan Bakewell for BBC Radio 4 in March 2005, Flew
rejected the fine-tuning argument as a conclusive proof: "I don't think it
proves anything but that it is entirely reasonable for people who already have
a belief in a creating God to regard this as confirming evidence. And it's a
point of argument which I think is very important - to see that what is
reasonable for people to do in the face of new evidence depends on what they
previously had good reason to believe." He also said it appeared that there
had been progress made regarding the naturalistic origins of DNA. However, he
restated his deism, with the usual provisos that his God is not the God of any
of the revealed religions.[18] In the same interview, Flew was asked whether
he was retracting belief in an Aristotelian God, but answered no.

One month later, Flew told Christianity Today that although he was not on the
road to becoming a Christian convert, he reaffirmed his deism: "Since the
beginning of my philosophical life I have followed the policy of Plato's
Socrates: We must follow the argument wherever it leads.".[19]

In late 2006, Flew joined 11 other academics in urging the British government
to teach intelligent design in the state schools.[20]

In 2007, in an interview with Benjamin Wiker, Flew said again that his deism
was the result of his "growing empathy with the insight of Einstein and other
noted scientists that there had to be an Intelligence behind the integrated
complexity of the physical Universe" and "my own insight that the integrated
complexity of life itself â which is far more complex than the physical
Universe â can only be explained in terms of an Intelligent Source." He also
restated that he was not a Christian theist. [21]

### [edit] Book with Varghese

In 2007, Flew published a book titled There is a God, which was listed as
having Roy Abraham Varghese as its co-author. Shortly after the book was
released, the New York Times published an article by religious historian Mark
Oppenheimer, who stated that Varghese had been almost entirely responsible for
writing the book, and that Flew was in a serious state of mental decline,
having great difficulty remembering key figures, ideas, and events relating to
the debate covered in the book.[4] Where his book praises several
philosophers, (like Brian Leftow, John Leslie and Paul Davies), Flew failed to
remember their work during the Oppenheimer's interview. The article provoked a
public outcry, in which atheist PZ Myers called Varghese "a contemptible
manipulator."[22]

A further article by Anthony Gottlieb noted a strong difference in style
between the passages giving Flew's biography, and those laying out the case
for a god, with the latter including Americanisms such as "beverages",
"vacation" and "candy". He came to the same conclusion as Oppenheimer, and
stated that "Far from strengthening the case for the existence of God, [the
book] rather weakens the case for the existence of Antony Flew".[23] Varghese
replied with a letter disputing this view.[24] Flew released a statement
through his publisher stating that although Varghese did the actual writing,
the book belonged to him and represented his thinking.[25] An audio commentary
by William Lane Craig[26] concurs with this position, but Richard Carrier
disputes this view.[27] In June 2008, Flew stated his position once again, in
a letter to a fellow of the Universities and Colleges Christian Fellowship.[5]

Christian writer Regis Nicoll claims that "Moreover, in a signed, handwritten
letter (a copy of which I now have) sent to Roy Varghese, the legendary
philosopher reaffirmed his conversion while criticizing Oppenheimer for
drawing attention away from the bookâs central argument: the collapse of
rationalism."[28] He argues that "Even Mark Oppenheimer described the ex-
atheist âflaunt[ing] his allegiance to deismâ in May 2006 to a Christian
audience at Biola University."

## [edit] Awards

Flew was awarded the Schlarbaum Prize by the Ludwig von Mises Institute for
his "outstanding lifetime achievement in the cause of liberty."[29] Upon
acceptance of the award in Auburn, Alabama, in September 2001, Flew delivered
an address entitled "Locke versus Rawls on Equality." Of his choice of topics,
he stated "I am the first Englishman and the first professional philosopher to
receive the Schlarbaum Prize. So it seems appropriate to begin by talking
about the greatest English philosopher, John Locke."[30]

On 11 May 2006, Antony Flew accepted the second "Phillip E. Johnson Award for
Liberty and Truth" from Biola University. The award, named for its first
recipient, was given to Flew "for his lifelong commitment to free and open
inquiry and to standing fast against intolerant assaults on freedom of thought
and expression." When informed of his award, Flew remarked, "In light of my
work and publications in this area and the criticism Iâve received for
changing my position, I appreciate receiving this award."[31]

## [edit] Works

  * A New Approach to Psychical Research (1953)
  * New Essays in Philosophical Theology (1955) editor with Alasdair Macintyre
  * Essays in Conceptual Analysis (1956)
  * Hume's Philosophy of Belief (1961)
  * Logic And Language (1961) editor
  * God and Philosophy (1966)
  * Logic & Language (Second Series) (1966) editor
  * Evolutionary Ethics (1967)
  * An Introduction to Western Philosophy - Ideas and Argument from Plato to Sartre (1971)
  * Body, Mind and Death (1973)
  * Crime or Disease (1973)
  * Thinking About Thinking (1975)
  * Sociology, Equality and Education: Philosophical Essays In Defence Of A Variety Of Differences (1976)
  * Thinking Straight (1977) (ISBN 9780879750886)

  * A Dictionary of Philosophy (1979) editor, later edition with Stephen Priest

  * Philosophy, an Introduction (1979)
  * Libertarians versus Egalitarians (c.1980) pamphlet
  * The Politics of Procrustes: contradictions of enforced equality (1981)
  * Darwinian Evolution (1984)
  * God, Freedom and Immortality: A Critical Analysis. (1984)
  * The Presumption of Atheism (1984)
  * Examination not Attempted in Right Ahead, newspaper of the Conservative Monday Club, Conservative Party Conference edition, October 1985.
  * God: A Critical Inquiry (1986) - reprint of God and Philosophy (1966) with new introduction

  * Agency and Necessity (Great Debates in Philosophy) (1987) with Godfrey Norman Agmondis Vesey

  * Did Jesus Rise From the Dead? The Resurrection Debate (1987) with Gary Habermas
  * Power to the Parents: Reversing Educational Decline (1987)
  * Prophesy or Philosophy? Historicism or History? in Marx Refuted, edited by Ronald Duncan and Colin Wilson, Bath, (UK), 1987, ISBN 0-906798-71-X
  * Readings in the Philosophical Problems of Parapsychology (1987) editor
  * God, A Critical Inquiry (1988)

  * Does God Exist?: A Believer and an Atheist Debate (1991) with Terry L. Miethe

  * A Future for Anti-Racism? (Social Affairs Unit 1992) pamphlet
  * Atheistic Humanism (1993) (ISBN 978-0879758479)
  * Thinking About Social Thinking (1995)
  * Education for Citizenship (Studies in Education No. 10) (Institute of Economic Affairs, 2000)
  * Merely Mortal? (2000)
  * Equality in Liberty and Justice (2001) Transaction Publishers.
  * Does God Exist: The Craig-Flew Debate (2003) with William Lane Craig (ISBN 978-0754631903)
  * Social Life and Moral Judgment (2003)
  * God and Philosophy (2005) - another reprint of God and Philosophy (1966) with another new introduction
  * There is a God: How the World's Most Notorious Atheist Changed His Mind (2007) with Roy Abraham Varghese (ISBN 978-0061335297)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Could We Survive Our Own Deaths?. Anthony Flew, Internet Infidels, 1998.
  2. ^ Theology & Falsification: A Golden Jubilee Celebration. Anthony Flew, Internet Infidels, 2000.
  3. ^ a b c d e My Pilgrimage from Atheism to Theism: an Exclusive Interview with Former British Atheist Professor Antony Flew Gary R. Habermas, Philosophia Christi Vol. 6, No. 2 (Winter 2004).
  4. ^ a b The Turning of an Atheist,Mark Oppenheimer, New York Times Magazine, 11/4/07
  5. ^ a b Flew Speaks Out: Professor Antony Flew reviews The God Delusion
  6. ^ Smith, Michael (2000), The Emperor's Codes, Bantam, p246
  7. ^ Jan Faye (2005-08-29). "Backward Causation". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/causation-backwards/.
  8. ^ Wisconsin University website: Flew's biography
  9. ^ My Pilgrimage from Atheism to Theism An Exclusive Interview with Former British Atheist Professor Antony Flew Gary R. Habermas, Biola, 9 December 2004.
  10. ^ Sorry to Disappoint, but I'm Still an Atheist! Antony Flew. Internet Infidels, 31 August 2001
  11. ^ Atheist Becomes Theist
  12. ^ Atheist Philosopher, 81, Now Believes in God Richard N. Ostling. Associated Press, 10 December 2004.
  13. ^ Antony Flew Considers God...Sort Of Richard Carrier. SecWeb, 10 October 2004.
  14. ^ A response to Raymond Bradley
  15. ^ No longer atheist, Flew stands by "Presumption of Atheism" By Duncan Crary. Humanist Network News, 22 December 2004.
  16. ^ Letter from Antony Flew on Darwinism and Theology Philosophy Now, issue 47.
  17. ^ God and Philosophy, Antony Flew[page needed]
  18. ^ BBC interview, Professor Antony Flew22 March 2005.
  19. ^ Thinking Straighter | Christianity Today | A Magazine of Evangelical Conviction
  20. ^ Creationism gains foothold in schools, TimesOnline, The Times
  21. ^ tothesource
  22. ^ Roy Varghese and the exploitation of Antony Flew, Pharyngula
  23. ^ Iâm a Believer Anthony Gottlieb; The New York Times; 23 December 2007
  24. ^ Letter to the Editor Roy Varghese; The New York Times; 13 January 2008
  25. ^ Times Magazine Piece on Former Atheist Kicks Up Controversy
  26. ^ Dr. Craig's Current Events Audio Blog - RFMedia.org
  27. ^ Richard Carrier Blogs: Craig the Annoyed
  28. ^ From UnChristian to Christian
  29. ^ Antony G.N. Flew: 2001 Schlarbaum Laureate
  30. ^ Flew, Antony. "Locke versus Rawls on Equality" Mises.org. 24 October 2001.
  31. ^ "Former Atheist to Receive Award at Biola". Biola News. http://www.biola.edu/news/articles/060327_flew.cfm.

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or
guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate
external links.  
  * The Turning of an Atheist The Turning of an Atheist by Mark Oppenheimer, NYTimes, 4 November 2007
  * The Warren/Flew Debate on the Existence of God Debate between Thomas Bratton Warren and Antony Garrard Newton Flew, Denton, Texas 20-23 September, 1976.
  * "The Presumption of Atheism." Antony Flew, chapter in God, Freedom and Immortality: A Critical Analysis. 1984.
  * Letter from Antony Flew on Darwinism and Theology by Antony Flew, Philosophy Now, #47, August/September 2004.
  * Famous Atheist Now Believes in God Associated Press news release 2004.
  * Joan Bakewell interview with Antony Flew, conducted for BBC Radio 4 broadcast, March 2005: text or Real Audio
  * Thinking Straighter by James A. Beverley, Christianity Today, April 2005.
  * Freedom for Universities by Antony Flew, The Freedom Association (undated document).
  * My Pilgrimage from Atheism to Theism: A Discussion between Antony Flew and Gary Habermas Evangelical Philosophical Society (undated document).
  * Excerpts from Antony Flew's Thinking Straight (1977)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antony_Flew"

Categories: 1923 births | Living people | Analytic philosophers | British
philosophers | Deist thinkers | Royal Air Force officers | Academics of Keele
University | British humanists | British conservatives | 20th-century
philosophers | Old Fidelians | Old Kingswoodians (Bath) | Academics of the
University of Aberdeen | Former atheists and agnostics | Religion and science

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations | Cleanup
from March 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia external links cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Esperanto
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 13:34 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



