
# Oscar Zeta Acosta

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Oscar Zeta Acosta  
<IMG>  
  
Oscar Zeta Acosta giving a speech  
Born April 8, 1935  
El Paso, Texas, United States  
Died 1974(?)  
Unknown  
Occupation Attorney, Activist, Author  
Literary movement Chicano Movement  
Notable work(s) Autobiography of a Brown Buffalo  
Influences

    
    
    Hunter S. Thompson  
Influenced

    
    
    Hunter S. Thompson  
    "Oscar Acosta" redirects here. For the Major League Baseball pitching coach, see Oscar Carlos Acosta
Oscar Zeta Acosta (April 8, 1935 â 1974?) was an American attorney,
politician and Chicano Movement activist, perhaps best known for his
friendship with the American author Hunter S. Thompson, who included him as a
character, the Samoan Attorney, Dr. Gonzo, in his acclaimed novel Fear and
Loathing in Las Vegas.

## Contents

  * 1 Life and career
  * 2 Disappearance
  * 3 Quotes about Acosta
  * 4 Motion pictures
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Life and career

<IMG>

<IMG>

Oscar Zeta Acosta (right) and Hunter S. Thompson at Caesar's Palace in Las
Vegas, April 26, 1971: the real-life Dr. Gonzo (Acosta) with the real-life
Raoul Duke (Thompson).

Acosta was born in El Paso, Texas, and raised in a small San Joaquin Valley
rural town named Riverbank near Modesto, California. Acosta's father was
drafted during World War II, so he had to take care of the family. At times,
Acosta felt like an outsider and he presented his feelings of alienation,
mistrust, and dislocation in his works.

After finishing high school, Acosta joined the U.S. Air Force. He then worked
his way through college, becoming the first member of his family to do so. He
attended night classes at San Francisco Law School and passed the California
Bar exam in 1966 on his second try. In 1967, Acosta began working as an
antipoverty attorney for the East Oakland Legal Aid Society in Oakland,
California.

In 1968 Acosta moved to East Los Angeles and joined the Chicano Movement as an
activist attorney, defending chicano's groups and activists such as the
S.O.S., Brown Berets member Carlos Filafasofa, and other underserved members
of the East L.A. barrio. His controversial defense earned him the ire of the
LAPD, who considered the "Brown Pride" movement more dangerous than the Black
Panthers. He was often followed and harassed by the LAPD.

In 1970, Acosta ran for sheriff of Los Angeles County against Peter J.
Pitchess, and received more than 100,000 votes. During the campaign, he spent
a couple of days in jail for contempt of court, and vowed that if he were
elected, he would do away with the Sheriff's Department as it was then
constituted. Acosta, known for loud ties and a flowered attachÃ© case with a
Chicano Power sticker, didn't come close to Sheriff Pitchess' 1,300,000 votes
but did beat Everett Holladay, Monterey Park Chief of Police.

His first novel, Autobiography of a Brown Buffalo, was published in 1972,
followed in 1973 by The Revolt of the Cockroach People, a fictionalized
version of the 1970 Chicano Moratorium.

In the summer of 1967 Acosta met gonzo journalist Hunter S. Thompson, who
would in 1971 write an article on Acosta and the injustice in the barrios of
East L.A. for Rolling Stone magazine titled "Strange Rumblings in Aztlan."
This article also discusses the murder of Los Angeles Times columnist Ruben
Salazar. When working on the article, Thompson and Acosta decided a trip to
Las Vegas, Nevada was in order so that Salazar and the racial injustice of
L.A. could be discussed openly. A write-up of the trip has now been
immortalized by the book and movie, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas.

As Hunter Thompson wrote in "The Banshee Screams for Buffalo Meat", the legal
department of the publishers of Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas stated that
they could not publish the book unless clearance were given by Acosta, due to
the obvious references to the attorney. When written for permission, Acosta
refused - on the grounds that he did not want to be referred to as a
"300-pound Samoan". He did, however, understand that having this reference
substituted by his name would mean the book could not be published on time, so
he promised clearance provided that his name and picture would appear on the
dustjacket.

## [edit] Disappearance

In 1974, Acosta disappeared while traveling in Mexico. His son, Marco Acosta,
believes that he was the last person to talk to his father. In May 1974,
Acosta telephoned his son, telling him that he was "about to board a boat full
of white snow." Marco is later quoted in reference to his father's
disappearance: "The body was never found, but we surmise that probably,
knowing the people he was involved with, he ended up mouthing off, getting
into a fight, and getting killed."[1]

According to Thompson's obituary of Acosta, entitled "Fear and Loathing in the
Graveyard of the Weird: The Banshee Screams for Buffalo Meat", Acosta was a
powerful attorney and preacher but suffered from an addiction to amphetamines
as well as a predilection for LSD-25. The obituary alternates from vitriolic
to touching, but on the whole conveys the sense that Acosta was a man who felt
he was doomed to martyrdom and destined to be a messiah, but was brought down
by his inability to be either. The article was Thompson's response to rumors
that Acosta was alive somewhere around Miami.

In reference to Acosta's death, Thompson allegedly told interviewers, "...and
someone onboard shot him two or three times in the stomach, with a .45. Then
threw him over the side."[citation needed]

## [edit] Quotes about Acosta

> Oscar was not into serious street-fighting, but he was hell on wheels in a
bar brawl. Any combination of a 250 lb [113 kg] Mexican and LSD-25 is a
potentially terminal menace for anything it can reach - but when the alleged
Mexican is in fact a profoundly angry Chicano lawyer with no fear at all of
anything that walks on less than three legs and a de facto suicidal conviction
that he will die at the age of 33 - just like Jesus Christ \- you have a
serious piece of work on your hands. Especially if the bastard is already 33
1/2 years old with a head full of Sandoz acid, a loaded .357 Magnum in his
belt, a hatchet-wielding Chicano bodyguard on his elbow at all times, and a
disconcerting habit of projectile vomiting geysers of pure blood off the front
porch every 30 or 40 minutes, or whenever his malignant ulcer can't handle any
more raw tequila.

> âHunter S. Thompson, Rolling Stone #254, Dec. 15, 1977

  
"Every century a few individuals are born who are destined to lead the weak,
to hold unpopular beliefs and, most important who are willing to die for their
cause. My father's whole life was given to the fight for "the people,"" (Marco
Acosta).

## [edit] Motion pictures

Acosta has been twice portrayed in major motion pictures:

The 1980 film Where the Buffalo Roam loosely depicts Acosta's life and
relationship with Hunter S. Thompson. Peter Boyle portrayed Acosta, who is
referred to in the film as "Carl Lazlo, Esquire." Bill Murray portrayed
Thompson.

The 1998 film Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas is an adaptation of Thompson's
novel of the same name, which is an account of Thompson and Acosta's trip to
Las Vegas in 1971. Benicio del Toro portrays Acosta, referred to in the film
and novel as "Dr. Gonzo," while Johnny Depp portrayed Thompson (under the
alias of Raoul Duke).

## [edit] References

  * Autobiography of a Brown Buffalo (1972), ISBN 0-679-72213-0 (Random House)
  * The Revolt of the Cockroach People (1973), ISBN 0-679-72212-2 (Knopf)
  * Oscar "Zeta" Acosta: the uncollected works. (1996) (Arte PÃºblico Press)
  * The Great Shark Hunt: Strange Tales from a Strange Time. Hunter S. Thompson (1979), Ballantine Books, ISBN 0-345-37482-7

  1. ^ "Shermakaye Bass". http://www.gettingit.com/article/603. Retrieved on 2009-01-18.

## [edit] External links

  * "Guide to the Acosta Papers" at the California Ethnic and Multicultural Archives

  
Oscar Zeta Acosta Collection in Chicano Studies available at the University of
California at Santa Barbara-this includes letters, files, and videos

  * Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (novel)
  * Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (film)
  * Where the Buffalo Roam

v â¢ d â¢ e

Chicano and Mexican-American topics  
Terms

Chicano Â· Hispanic Â· La Raza Â· Latino Â· Mexican-American Â· Tejano  
Pre-Chicano Movement

Mexican-American history Â· Mexican-American War Â· Sleepy Lagoon trial Â·
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo Â· Zoot Suit Riots  
Chicano Movement

AztlÃ¡n Â· CatÃ³licos por La Raza Â· Chicanismo Â· Chicano Blowouts Â· Chicano
Moratorium Â· Plan Espiritual de AztlÃ¡n Â· Plan de Santa Barbara Â· Farm
workers rights campaign Â· Land grant struggle Â· Colegio CÃ©sar ChÃ¡vez  
Supreme Court cases

Botiller v. Dominguez Â· Hernandez v. Texas Â· San Antonio I.S.D. v. Rodriguez
Â· Espinoza v. Farah Mfg. Co. Â· U.S. v. Brignoni-Ponce Â· Plyler v. Doe Â·
MedellÃ­n v. Texas Â· Flores-Figueroa v. U.S.  
Culture

Chicano literature Â· Chicano rock Â· Chicano rap Â· Teatro Campesino Â·
Tortilla art Â· Chicano Park Â· Estrada Courts murals Â· Cholo Â· Pachuco Â·
Zoot suit Â· Lowrider  
Lists

CalÃ³ words and expressions Â· Chicano poets Â· U.S. communities with Hispanic
majority Â· Mexican Americans Â· Notable Hispanics  
Category:Mexican Americans Â· Category:Mexican-American organizations  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oscar_Zeta_Acosta"

Categories: 1935 births | 1974 deaths | American activists | American
novelists | California lawyers | Writers from California | Drug culture |
Hunter S. Thompson | Latino civil rights activists | Mexican American leaders
| Mexican American politicians | Mexican American writers | United States Air
Force airmen | People from Modesto, California | People from El Paso, Texas |
Disappeared people

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Polski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 March 2009, at 22:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



