
# Austin Osman Spare

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Austin Osman Spare  
Born 31 December 1886(1886-12-31)  
Snow Hill, near Smithfield Market London  
Died 15 May 1956 (aged 69)  
London  
Occupation artist, painter and magician  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Detail of a drawing from one of Spare's sketchbooks.

Austin Osman Spare (30 December 1886 \- 15 May 1956) was an English artist who
developed idiosyncratic magical techniques including automatic writing,
automatic drawing and sigilization based on his theories of the relationship
between the conscious and unconscious self. His artistic work is characterized
by skilled draughtsmanship exhibiting a complete mastery of the use of the
line, and often employs monstrous or fantastic magical and sexual imagery.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
  * 2 Spare The Artist
  * 3 Spare The Magician
    * 3.1 On Self-Love
    * 3.2 Sacred Alphabet
  * 4 Influence on Chaos Magic
  * 5 Some Known Exhibitions
  * 6 Bibliography
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

Spare was born in Snow Hill, near Smithfield Market, London on 30 December
1886, the son of Philip Newton Spare, a City of London policeman who retired
after 25 years of service, and Eliza Ann Adelaide Osman. He was the fifth of
six children.[1]

According to his mother Spare first began to show signs of his talent (and of
his well known lack of interest in selling his work) at the age of four:

> "All day long he would have a pencil in his hand, drawing anything that was
placed before him - his parents, his sisters, or brothers. Nothing seemed to
come amiss and we made up our minds that if it was at all possible he should
be allowed to follow what was evidently his vocation. Of course it has been
expensive to buy his board and paints, and all else that he requires, for,
curiously enough, he can never be persuaded to sell any of his work. He is
even averse to showing it to any one."[2]

Spare's parents enrolled him in evening classes at Lambeth Art School in 1899,
where he developed his skills under the guidance of Phillip Connard. At 14, he
won a county council scholarship for â¤10 and one of his drawings was
selected for inclusion in the British Art Section of the Paris International
Exhibition. At fifteen he left school and began to work designing posters
(briefly, at Causton's, producers of posters and other kinds of commercial
art) and stained glass (at James Powell & Sons, Whitefriars Street). A
promising stained glass design led to his being recommended for a free
scholarship at the The Royal College of Art, where he subsequently began
formal study. His designs for stained glass undertaken for fellow employee
Thomas Cowell are now in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Shortly thereafter,
his father pressured him to send two drawings to the Royal Academy for
consideration, with the result that one, an allegorical drawing was
accepted.[3] At the age of only sixteen or seventeen, Spare had his work
exhibited by the Royal Academy, creating something of a sensation. At this
young age he was already deeply involved in the development of his esoteric
ideas. In a 1904 article he is quoted as saying, regarding religion:

> "I have practically none. I go anywhere. This life is but a reasonable
development. All faiths are to me the same. I go to the Church in which I was
born - the Established - but without the slightest faith. In fact, I am
devising a religion of my own which embodies my conception of what we were,
are, and shall be in the future."[4]

In October 1907 Spare had his first major exhibition at Bruton Gallery in
London's West End. The content of this exhibition was striking, arcane and
grotesque, causing controversy. These elements appealed to avant-garde London
intellectuals, and perhaps brought him to the attention of Aleister Crowley,
the infamous English mountaineer, magician and poet.[5] However they met, the
two men certainly knew each other. Their interaction appears to have begun
some time around 1907 or 1908, as a copy of the 1907 edition of A Book of
Satyrs with an inscription (dated 1908) from Spare to Crowley is said to exist
in a private collection.[6] The two also engaged in written correspondence.[7]
Spare almost certainly became a 'probationer' in the order "Aâ´Aâ´" or
Argenteum Astrum (Latin for "Silver Star"), founded by Crowley and George
Cecil Jones. Spare also contributed four small drawings to Crowley's
periodical publication The Equinox[8], and a photograph exists which shows a
young Spare with his hands at the sides of his face in the same pose which
Crowley himself adopted in the famous 1910 photo with book, robe and hat.[9]

Whatever the nature of the relationship between Crowley and Spare it appears
to have been short-lived, and a passage in Spare's The Book of Pleasure leaves
no doubt that he did not hold a favorable view of ceremonial magic or
magicians:

> "Others praise ceremonial Magic, and are supposed to suffer much Ecstasy!
Our asylums are crowded, the stage is over-run! Is it by symbolising we become
the symbolised? Were I to crown myself King, should I be King? Rather should I
be an object of disgust or pity. These Magicians, whose insincerity is their
safety, are but the unemployed dandies of the Brothels."[10]

Spare married the actress and dancer Eily Gertrude Shaw on the 4th of
September 1911. The two had met some years before. Whatever influence she may
have had upon Spare's work the marriage was short-lived, though never formally
dissolved. The two separated around 1918-19.[11] One known work of Spare's,
inscribed, signed and dated as "Portrait of the Artist & His Wife March 26th
1912 AOS" is known. It shows the head of Spare executed in colored chalks and
pencil. To one side, executed with only a few ghostly lines, we see the face
of a woman with fine features, her head turned down and to the side, her eyes
closed.[12]

The Book of Pleasure, published by Spare himself in autumn of 1913, most
likely with the assistance of private patrons, is the most complete exposition
of his esoteric ideas. "Conceived initially as a pictorial allegory the book
quickly evolved into a much deeper work, drawing inspiration from Taoism and
Buddhism, but primarily from his experiences as an artist."[13]

In 1917, during World War I, Spare was conscripted into the British army,
serving as a medical orderly of the Royal Army Medical Corps in London
hospitals, and was commissioned as an official War Artist in 1919. In this
capacity he visited the battlefields of France to record the work of the
R.A.M.C.[14] Spare himself recalled, "When the war broke out, I joined the
Army. When I left the Forces, the world was a very different place. Lots of
things had changed. I found it very difficult to keep going on with what I had
been doing. That pushed me into the abstract world - and there I have more or
less remained."[15]

By 1927 Spare had certainly taken a public stance indicating disgust with
contemporary society. Perhaps the time he spent documenting images of the
horrors of war, followed by a period of financial instability and failing
ventures, combined with often hostile reviews of his work and ideas led to
this state of affairs. Whatever the cause, Spare's loathing was clearly
expressed in his work Anathema of Zos - Sermon To The Hypocrites, which was
published in that year. It was to be his last published book.

> "Dogs, devouring your own vomit! Cursed are ye all! Throwbacks, adulterers,
sycophants, corpse devourers, pilferers and medicine swallowers! Think ye
Heaven is an infirmary?"[16]

Hannen Swaffer, the British journalist, reports that in 1936 Spare wilfully
rejected a chance for international fame. He relates that a member of the
German Embassy, buying one of Spare's self-portraits, sent it to Hitler.
According to Swaffer, the Fuehrer was so impressed (according to this account
because the eyes and the moustache were somewhat like his own) that he invited
Spare to go to Germany to paint him. Spare, instead, made a copy of it, which
came into Swaffer's possession. Swaffer indicates that written at the top of
the portrait is the reply that Spare "sent to the man who wanted to master
Europe and dominate mankind". Swaffer reports the reply read as follows:
âOnly from negations can I wholesomely conceive you. For I know of no
courage sufficient to stomach your aspirations and ultimates. If you are
superman, let me be for ever animal.â [17] This story is not the most
incredible of the accounts which were (and are) in circulation regarding
Spare. A number of anecdotes concerning Spare and his life have been recorded,
many which include descriptions of magical occurrences, accurate divination or
foreknowledge, and sorcerous manifestations. It should be said that whatever
opinion one may hold regarding the truth of these tales, they are entirely in
keeping with claims Spare himself is known to have made.

In 1941, fire and high explosive totally obliterated Spare's studio flat,
depriving him of his home, his health and his equipment. For three years he
struggled to regain the use of his arms until finally, in 1946, in a cramped
basement in Brixton, he began to make pictures again, surrounded by stray
cats. At the time he had no bed and worked in an old army shirt and tattered
jacket. Yet he still charged only an average of Â£5 per picture. Clifford Bax,
a friend of Spare's and a one-time collaborator recalled:

> "Spare knew the taste of life as it is for people to whom a penny and a
ha'penny are very different coins, and he lived in a high bleak barrack-like
tenement block, among men and women in whose life elegance and the arts had no
place, and surrounded by their washing and their cats. He said to me once
'Don't put 'esquire' on your letters. We've only one other esquire in my
block, and they think we're giving ourselves airs.' His attractive simplicity
came out, too, when he said 'If you are ever passing my place, do drop in';
for it is seldom that anybody happens to be passing The Borough unless he
lives there."[18]

Spare was quoted as saying, âI have had a hard life, but I blame nobody but
myself. I am responsible for my own misfortunes. I am rather apt to butt at a
brick wall at times, and find, in the end, I cannot do any good about it. I
cannot change things, so I give it my best.â[19] He died in London on 15 May
1956, at the age of 69.

## [edit] Spare The Artist

Spare's work is remarkable for its variety, including paintings, a vast number
of drawings, work with pastel, a few etchings, published books combining text
with imagery, and even bizarre bookplates. He was productive from his earliest
years until his death. According to Haydn Mackay, "rhythmic ornament grew from
his hand seemingly without conscious effort."

Spare was regarded as an artist of considerable talent and good prospects, but
his style was apparently controversial. Critical reaction to his work in
period ranged from baffled but impressed, to patronizing and dismissive. An
anonymous review of The Book of Satyrs published in December 1909, which must
have appeared around the time of Spare's 23rd birthday, is by turns
condescending and grudgingly respectful, "Mr. Spare's work is evidently that
of young man of talent." However, "What is more important is the personality
lying behind these various influences. And here we must credit Mr. Spare with
a considerable fund of fancy and invention, although the activities of his
mind still find vent through somewhat tortuous channels. Like most young men
he seems to take himself somewhat too seriously". Our critic ends his review
with the observation that Spare's "drawing is often more shapeless and
confused than we trust it will be when he has assimilated better the excellent
influences upon which he has formed his style."[20]

Two years later another anonymous review (this time of The Starlit Mire, for
which Spare provided ten drawings) suggests, "When Mr. Spare was first heard
of six or seven years ago he was hailed in some quarters as the new Beardsley,
and as the work of a young man of seventeen his drawings had a certain amount
of vigour and originality. But the years have not dealt kindly with Mr. Spare,
and he must not be content with producing in his majority what passed muster
in his nonage. However, his designs are not inappropriate for the crude
paradoxes that form the text of this book. It is far easier to imitate an
epigram than to invent one."[21]

In a 1914 review of The Book of Pleasure, the critic (again anonymous) seems
resigned to bewilderment, "It is impossible for me to regard Mr. Spare's
drawings otherwise than as diagrams of ideas which I have quite failed to
unravel; I can only regret that a good draughtsman limits the scope of his
appeal".[22]

From October 1922 to July 1924 Spare edited, jointly with Clifford Bax, the
quarterly, Golden Hind for Chapman and Hall publishers. This was a short-lived
project, but during its brief career it reproduced impressive figure drawing
and lithographs by Spare and others. In 1925 Spare, Alan Odle, John Austen,
and Harry Clarke showed together at the St George's Gallery, and in 1930 at
the Godfrey Philips Galleries. The 1930 show was the last West End show Spare
would have for 17 years.

Spare's obituary printed in The Times of May 16, 1956 states:

> "Thereafter Spare was rarely found in the purlieus of Bond St. He would
teach a little from January to June, then up to the end of October, would
finish various works, and from the beginning of November to Christmas would
hang his products in the living-room, bedroom, and kitchen of his flat in the
Borough. There he kept open house; critics and purchasers would go down, ring
the bell, be admitted, and inspect the pictures, often in the company of some
of the models - working women of the neighbourhood. Spare was convinced that
there was a great potential demand for pictures at 2 or 3 guineas each, and
condemned the practice of asking â¤20 for "amateurish stuff'. He worked
chiefly in pastel or pencil, drawing rapidly, often taking no mon than two
hours over a picture. He was especially interested in delineating the old, and
had various models over 70 and one as old as 93."

But Spare did not entirely disappear. During the late 30s he developed and
exhibited a style of painting based on a logarithmic form of anamorphic
projection which he called "siderealism". This work appears to have been well
received. In 1947 he exhibited at the Archer Gallery, producing over 200 works
for the show. It was a very successful show and led to something of a post-war
renaissance of interest.

Public awareness of Spare seems to have declined somewhat in the 1960s before
the slow but steady revival of interest in his work beginning in the mid 70s.
The following passage in a discussion of an exhibit including Spare's work in
the summer of 1965 suggests some critics had hoped he would disappear into
obscurity forever. The critic writes that the curator of the exhibit

> "has resurrected an unknown English artist named Austin Osman Spare, who
imitates etchings in pen and ink in the manner of Beardsley but really harks
back to the macabre German romanticism. He tortured himself before the first
war and would have inspired the surrealist movement had he been discovered
early enough. He has come back in time to play a belated part in the revival
of taste for art nouveau."[23]

Robert Ansell summarized Spare's artistic contributions as follows:

> During his lifetime, Spare left critics unable to place his work
comfortably. Ithell Colquhoun supported his claim to have been a proto-
Surrealist and posthumously the critic Mario Amaya made the case for Spare as
a Pop Artist. Typically, he was both of these - and neither. A superb
figurative artist in the mystical tradition, Spare may be regarded as one of
the last English Symbolists, following closely his great influence George
Frederick Watts. The recurrent motifs of androgyny, death, masks, dreams,
vampires, satyrs and religious themes, so typical of the art of the French and
Belgian Symbolists, find full expression in Spare's early work, along with a
desire to shock the bourgeois.[24]

## [edit] Spare The Magician

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kiaism ideas

Regarding Spare's magical system, Kiaism, his terminology is unique and cannot
be traced back to other traditions. The introduction of original concepts like
"Kia", "Ikkah", "Sikah" appear for the first time in Spare's first book Earth
Inferno and remain conceptually consistent until The Focus of Life.

Beside the important influence of Kiaism on occultism in general, it proposes
no specific path for personal development or any set of instruction but
requires the practitioner to devise his own personal system of magic.

The supreme state in Kiaism, Kia, is sketched: "The absolute freedom which
being free is mighty enough to be "reality" and free at any time: therefore is
not potential or manifest (except as it's instant possibility) by ideas of
freedom or "means," but by the Ego being free to receive it, by being free of
ideas about it and by not believing."[25]

However, Spare continually insists in various places that Kia is undefinable
and any definition makes it more obscure.

Kiaism regards Belief and Desire as the great duality. In this system, Ego is
a part of Self belonging to one Being while Self encircles the whole Being.
Each "human" Being wills the desire. This desire imagines a new belief and
belief by means of conceptualizing new concepts forms the Ego. Spare names
these conceptions, "the ramifications of belief" which form different
personalities for corresponding Ego. But the mentioned will is a partial one.
The Will (emphasized by capitalizing) lies in the realm of Self - pertaining
to Kia.[26]

### [edit] On Self-Love

Self-Love is a mental state, mood or condition caused by the emotion of
laughter becoming the principle that allows the Ego appreciation or universal
association in permitting inclusion before conception.[27] So it is no
narcissistic self-reflection of the glamours of the ego, rather, it is the
void at the core of an identity which is freely able to move into any desired
set of social relations, without becoming trapped or identified entirely
within them. As the core of the sense of self is Self-love, rather than any
label which encapsulates any particular set of behavior, beliefs and life-
patterns, one attains a state of great freedom of movement and expression,
without the need for self-definition.[28]

### [edit] Sacred Alphabet

<IMG>

<IMG>

A sample of Sacred Alphabet by Austin Osman Spare

Sacred Alphabet or Alphabet of Desire are simplified forms of sigils that
could be composed for expressing a desire. The philosophical background to
Alphabet of Desire is extensively explained in The Book of Pleasure.

The first Sigillic formula to appear in Spare's published works can be seen in
his second volume A Book of Satyrs.[29]

Spare designed and used a pack of cards which he called the Arena of Anon,
each card bearing a magical emblem which was a variation of one of the letters
of the Alphabet of Desire.[30]

## [edit] Influence on Chaos Magic

Some of Spare's techniques, particularly the use of sigils and the creation of
an "alphabet of desire" were adopted, adapted and popularized by Peter J.
Carroll in the work Liber Null & Psychonaut.[31] Carroll and other writers
such as Ray Sherwin are seen as key figures in the emergence of some of
Spare's ideas and techniques as a part of a magical movement loosely referred
to as Chaos magic.

## [edit] Some Known Exhibitions

  * Bruton Galleries, London, October 1907
  * The Baillie Gallery, London, 11-31 October 1911
  * The Baillie Gallery, London, 10-31 October 1912
  * The Ryder Gallery, London, 17 April - 7 May 1912
  * The Baillie Gallery, London, July 1914
  * St. Georgeâs Gallery, London, March 1927
  * The Lefevre Galleries, London, April 1929
  * Godfrey Phillips Galleries, London, November 1930
  * Artist's studio, 56A Walworth Road, Elephant, London, Autumn, 1937
  * Artist's studio, 56a Walworth Road, Elephant, London, Autumn, 1938
  * Archer Gallery, London, July 3-30 November 1947
  * The Temple Bar (Doctors), 286 Walworth Rd. London, 28 October â 29 November 1949
  * The Mansion House Tavern, 12 June â 12 July 1952
  * The White Bear, London, 19 November â 1 December 1953
  * Archer Gallery, London, 25 October â 26 November 1955
  * The Greenwich Gallery, London, 23 July â 12 August 1964
  * Alpine Club Gallery (Group Exhibition), London, 22 June - 2 July, 1965
  * The Obelisk Gallery, London, 1972
  * The Taranman Gallery, London, 2-23 September 1974
  * Oliver Bradbury & James Birch Fine Art, London, 17 November â 8 December 1984
  * The Morley College Gallery, London, September 1987
  * Henry Boxer, London, November 1992
  * Arnolfini, Bristol, 2007

## [edit] Bibliography

Privately printed by Spare during his lifetime

  * Earth Inferno 1905
  * A Book of Satyrs 1907 (reissued by John Lane 1909)
  * The Book of Pleasure 1913
  * The Focus of Life 1921 (issued by The Morland Press)
  * Alphabet of Desire 1923
  * Anathema of Zos 1927

Books illustrated by Spare

  * Behind the Veil issued by David Nutt 1906
  * Songs From The Classics published by David Nutt 1907
  * The Shadow of the Ragged Stone published by Elkin Matthews 1909
  * The Equinox published by Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Co. Ltd. 1909
  * On the Oxford Circuit published by Smith, Elder & Co. 1909
  * The Starlit Mire published by John Lane 1911
  * Eight Poems published by Form at The Morland Press Ltd. 1916
  * Twelve Poems published by The Morland Press Ltd. 1916
  * The Gold Tree published by Martin Secker 1917
  * The Youth and the Sage privately printed, 1927

Magazines edited by Spare

  * Form - A Quarterly Of The Arts 1916-1922
  * Golden Hind 1922-1924

The majority of the books listed above are available as modern reprints. For a
more complete listing see Clive Harper's Revised Notes Towards A Bibliography
of Austin Osman Spare.

Significant titles published since Spare's death include Poems and Masks, A
Book of Automatic Drawings, The Collected Works of Austin Osman Spare,
Axiomata & The Witches' Sabbath, From The Inferno To Zos (3 Vol. Set), The
Book of Ugly Ecstasy, and Zos Speaks.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The most extensive source of biographical information available is Borough Satyr, The Life and Art of Austin Osman Spare, published by Fulgur Limited. In particular, the introduction by Robert Ansell contains much biographical information not available elsewhere. Much of the material in this section is taken from this source. However, it fails to mention Spare's eldest brother, one Phillip O. Spare. Birth, Marriage and Death Registers and indexes for the City of London show his birth in the third quarter of 1880. His death is registered in the second quarter of 1881 in the same registration district. Source: [1]
  2. ^ "Boy Artist At The R.A.", in The Daily Chronicle, Tuesday, May 3rd 1904
  3. ^ "Boy Artist At The R.A.", in The Daily Chronicle, Tuesday, May 3rd 1904
  4. ^ "Boy Artist At The R.A.", in The Daily Chronicle, Tuesday, May 3rd 1904
  5. ^ Keith Richmond, "Discord In The Garden Of Janus - Aleister Crowley and Austin Osman Spare", in Austin Osman Spare: Artist - Occultist - Sensualist, Beskin Press, 1999. Richmond's research is the most complete account of the relationship between Spare and Crowley of which I am aware, and it is the only one that shows a responsible effort to document claims and cross-reference sources.
  6. ^ A document entitled "Oath of Probationer" from the Gerald Yorke Collection at the Warburg Institute indicates that Spare took the oath on July 10th, 1909.
  7. ^ Spare and Crowley apparently carried on a correspondence, though its extent is uncertain. At least two letters from Spare to Crowley exist in a collection of Crowley documents held at the library of the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin. One of these concerns Spare's lack of money for the purchase of his probationer's robe. See the study by Richmond already cited
  8. ^ The Equinox, Vol. 1, No. 2, London, September 1909. Spare contributed two drawings which were placed in an article on geomancy. He is also provided two diagrams for the same issue, numbered 33 (The Garden of Eden) and 51 (The Fall).
  9. ^ I've found no certain provenance for this photo, though one web caption indicates it was taken in 1913. Spare apparently also executed a portrait sketch of Crowley from memory in 1955, reproductions of which are extant.
  10. ^ Austin Osman Spare, The Book of Pleasure (Self-Love), The Psychology of Ecstasy, 1913
  11. ^ The only other available biographical detail relating to Spare's wife is a footnote in Borough Satyr, which states "Born in Shrewsbury on May 28th 1888, her birth certificate states her name as 'Eiley,' but throughout her life she was known as 'Eily,' and occasionally 'Lily'.
  12. ^ Borough Satyr, compiled and edited by Robert Ansell, Fulgur Limited, 2005, p6
  13. ^ Borough Satyr, compiled and edited by Robert Ansell, Fulgur Limited, 2005, p6
  14. ^ It has been asserted here and there online that Spare visited or was stationed in Egypt during World War I. I have found no evidence to support this claim. The most extensive information I have been able to find concerning Spare's military service is in a reminiscence by Haydn Mackay, apparently a transcript of a radio program that was broadcast, or intended for broadcast, shortly after Spare's death in 1956: "In 1918 I found Spare in the Army, he had been placed in the Royal Army Medical Corps, and with the rank of Sergeant, was employed in making drawings for the medical history of the war. Thus was acquired a collection of somewhat perfunctory, but technically impeccable drawings, now in the possession of the authorities. He worked in the solitude of a studio provided by the army, and the only military convention to which he had to conform was the wearing of the uniform; and I have never seen a queerer figure in a soldierâs garb. He wore the most dilapidated uniform I have seen outside a refuse dump, and it was worn in the most negligent manner conceivable. It is not surprising that on occasion he was held by the police as a rogue wearing unauthorised badges and uniform, and only released by them on a statement of his authenticity by his commanding officer."
  15. ^ Hannen Swaffer, "The Mystery of An Artist", in London Mystery Magazine, Vol. 1, No. 5, 1950 or 1951
  16. ^ Austin Osman Spare, The Anathema of Zos, 1927
  17. ^ Hannen Swaffer, "The Mystery of An Artist", in London Mystery Magazine, Vol. 1, No. 5, 1950 or 1951
  18. ^ Clifford Bax, "Sex in Art", in Ideas and People, 1936
  19. ^ Hannen Swaffer, "The Mystery of An Artist", in London Mystery Magazine, Vol. 1, No. 5, 1950 or 1951
  20. ^ Review of "A Book of Satyrs" (by Austin Osman Spare) in The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs, Vol. 16, No. 81, (Dec., 1909), pp. 170-171
  21. ^ Review of "The Starlit Mire" (by James Bertram and F. Russel, with ten drawings by Austin Osman Spare), in The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs, Vol. 19, No. 99 (Jun., 1911), pp. 177-177
  22. ^ Review of " The Book of Pleasure (Self-Love), the Psychology of Ecstasy" (by Austin Osman Spare) in The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs, Vol. 26, No. 139, (Oct., 1914), pp. 38-39
  23. ^ "Current and Forthcoming Exhibitions", in The Burlington Magazine, Vol. 107, No. 747, (Jun., 1965), p. 330
  24. ^ Borough Satyr, The Life and Art of Austin Osman Spare, compiled and edited by Robert Ansell, Fulgur Limited, 2005, p19
  25. ^ Austin Osman Spare, The Book of Pleasure
  26. ^ Sepand, Collected Writings of Austin Osman Spare - Persian Translation, Translator's Forward, p 4
  27. ^ Spare, Austin Osman, The Book of Pleasure
  28. ^ Hine, Phil, Condensed Chaos, New Falcon, 1995, pp 127-128, ISBN 1-56184-117-X
  29. ^ Semple, W. Gavin, ZOS-KIA, 1995, Fulgur Limited
  30. ^ Grant, Kenneth; Magical Revival, Austin Osman Spare and the Zos Kia Cultus
  31. ^ Peter J. Carroll, Liber Null & Psychonaut, Weiser, 1987

## [edit] External links

  * AustinSpare.co.uk: Articles, Genealogy, and Bibliography
  * Fulgur Limited: Gallery, Bibliography, Biography and Articles
  * Spare's illustrations for The Starlit Mire by James Bertram and F. Russell
  * Artist and Familiar by Joseph Nechvatal
  * A psychogeographical film of Austin Spare's London (part 1)

v â¢ d â¢ e

Works by Austin Osman Spare  
Earth Inferno (1905) Â· A Book of Satyrs (1907) Â· The Book of Pleasure (1913)
Â· The Focus of Life (1921) Â· Anathema of Zos (1927)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Austin_Osman_Spare"

Categories: English artists | English occult writers | Fantastic art | War
artists | People from London | 1886 births | 1956 deaths

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * SlovenÄina

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 02:26 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



