
# Joseph Priestley

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Priestley by Ellen Sharples (1794)[1]

Joseph Priestley (13 March 1733 (Old Style) â 6 February 1804) was an 18th-
century British theologian, Dissenting clergyman, natural philosopher,
educator, and political theorist who published over 150 works. He is usually
credited with the discovery of oxygen, having isolated it in its gaseous
state, although Carl Wilhelm Scheele and Antoine Lavoisier also have a claim
to the discovery.[2]

During his lifetime, Priestley's considerable scientific reputation rested on
his invention of soda water, his writings on electricity, and his discovery of
several "airs" (gases), the most famous being what Priestley dubbed
"dephlogisticated air" (oxygen). However, Priestley's determination to defend
phlogiston theory and to reject what would become the Chemical Revolution
eventually left him isolated within the scientific community.

Priestley's science was integral to his theology, and he consistently tried to
fuse Enlightenment rationalism with Christian theism.[3] In his metaphysical
texts, Priestley attempted to combine theism, materialism, and determinism, a
project that has been called "audacious and original".[4] He believed that a
proper understanding of the natural world would promote human progress and
eventually bring about the Christian Millennium.[4] Priestley, who strongly
believed in the free and open exchange of ideas, advocated toleration and
equal rights for religious Dissenters, which also led him to help found
Unitarianism in England. The controversial nature of Priestley's publications
combined with his outspoken support of the French Revolution aroused public
and governmental suspicion; he was eventually forced to flee to the United
States after a mob burned down his home and church in 1791.

A scholar and teacher throughout his life, Priestley also made significant
contributions to pedagogy, including the publication of a seminal work on
English grammar and the invention of modern historiography. These educational
writings were some of Priestley's most popular works. It was his metaphysical
works, however, that had the most lasting influence: leading philosophers
including Jeremy Bentham, John Stuart Mill, and Herbert Spencer credit them
among the primary sources for utilitarianism.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life and education (1733â55)
    * 1.1 Daventry Academy
  * 2 Needham Market and Nantwich (1755â61)
  * 3 Warrington Academy (1761â67)
    * 3.1 Educator and historian
      * 3.1.1 History of Electricity
  * 4 Leeds (1767â73)
    * 4.1 Minister of Mill Hill Chapel
    * 4.2 Religious controversialist
    * 4.3 Defender of Dissenters and political philosopher
    * 4.4 Natural philosopher: electricity, Optics, and soda water
  * 5 Calne (1773â80)
    * 5.1 Materialist philosopher
    * 5.2 Founder of Unitarianism
    * 5.3 Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air
      * 5.3.1 Discovery of oxygen
  * 6 Birmingham (1780â91)
    * 6.1 Chemical Revolution
    * 6.2 Defender of Dissenters and French Revolutionaries
    * 6.3 Birmingham Riots of 1791
  * 7 Hackney (1791â94)
  * 8 Pennsylvania (1794â1804)
  * 9 Legacy
  * 10 Selected works
  * 11 See also
  * 12 Notes
  * 13 Bibliography
    * 13.1 Primary materials
    * 13.2 Biographies
    * 13.3 Other secondary materials
  * 14 External links
    * 14.1 Short online biographies

  
## [edit] Early life and education (1733â55)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Priestley's birthplace (since demolished) in Fieldhead, Birstall, West
Yorkshire (about six miles (10 km) southwest of Leeds)[5]

Priestley was born to an established English Dissenting family (i.e., they did
not conform to the Church of England) in Birstall, near Batley in the West
Riding of Yorkshire. He was the oldest of the six children born to Mary Swift
and Jonas Priestley, a finisher of cloth. To ease his mother's burdens,
Priestley was sent to live with his grandfather around the age of one; after
his mother died five years later, he returned home. When his father remarried
in 1741, Priestley went to live with his aunt and uncle, the wealthy and
childless Sarah and John Keighley. Because Priestley was precociousâat the
age of four he could flawlessly recite all 107 questions and answers of the
Westminster Shorter Catechismâhis aunt sought the best education for the
boy, intending him for the ministry. During his youth, Priestley attended
local schools where he learned Greek, Latin, and Hebrew.[6]

Around 1749, Priestley became seriously ill and believed he was dying. Raised
as a devout Calvinist, he believed a conversion experience was necessary for
salvation, but doubted he had had one. This emotional distress eventually led
him to question his theological upbringing, causing him to reject election and
to accept universal salvation. As a result, the elders of his home church
refused him admission as a full member.[7]

Priestley's illness left him with a permanent stutter and he gave up any
thoughts of entering the ministry at that time. In preparation for joining a
relative in trade in Lisbon, he studied French, Italian, and German in
addition to Chaldean, Syrian, and Arabic. He was tutored by the Reverend
George Haggerstone, who first introduced him to higher mathematics, natural
philosophy, logic, and metaphysics through the works of Isaac Watts, Willem 's
Gravesande, and John Locke.[8]

### [edit] Daventry Academy

Priestley eventually decided to return to his theological studies and, in
1752, matriculated at Daventry, a Dissenting academy.[9] Because he had
already read widely, Priestley was allowed to skip the first two years of
coursework. He continued his intense study; this, together with the liberal
atmosphere of the school, shifted his theology further leftward and he became
a Rational Dissenter. Abhorring dogma and religious mysticism, Rational
Dissenters emphasized the rational analysis of the natural world and the
Bible.[10]

Priestley later wrote that the book that influenced him the most, save the
Bible, was David Hartley's Observations on Man (1749). Hartley's
psychological, philosophical, and theological treatise postulated a material
theory of mind. Hartley aimed to construct a Christian philosophy in which
both religious and moral "facts" could be scientifically proven, a goal that
would occupy Priestley for his entire life. In his third year at Daventry,
Priestley committed himself to the ministry, which he described as "the
noblest of all professions".[11]

## [edit] Needham Market and Nantwich (1755â61)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Title page from Rudiments of English Grammar (1761)

Further information: Joseph Priestley and education

Robert Schofield, Priestley's major modern biographer, describes his first
"call" in 1755 to the Dissenting parish in Needham Market, Suffolk, as a
"mistake" for both Priestley and the congregation.[12] Priestley yearned for
urban life and theological debate, whereas Needham Market was a small, rural
town with a congregation wedded to tradition. Attendance and donations dropped
sharply when they discovered the extent of his heterodoxy. Although
Priestley's aunt had promised her support if he became a minister, she refused
any further assistance when she realized he was no longer a Calvinist. To earn
extra money, Priestley proposed opening a school, but local families informed
him that they would refuse to send their children. He also presented a series
of scientific lectures titled "Use of the Globes" that was more
successful.[13]

Priestley's Daventry friends helped him obtain another position and in 1758 he
moved to Nantwich, Cheshire; his time there was happier. The congregation
cared less about Priestley's heterodoxy and he successfully established a
school. Unlike many schoolmasters of the time, Priestley taught his students
natural philosophy and even bought scientific instruments for them. Appalled
at the quality of the available English grammar books, Priestley wrote his
own: The Rudiments of English Grammar (1761).[14] His innovations in the
description of English grammar, particularly his efforts to disassociate it
from Latin grammar, led 20th-century scholars to describe him as "one of the
great grammarians of his time".[15] After the publication of Rudiments and the
success of Priestley's school, Warrington Academy offered him a teaching
position in 1761.[16]

## [edit] Warrington Academy (1761â67)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mary Priestley, by Carl F. von Breda (1793);[17] daughter of ironmaster Isaac
Wilkinson, sister of industrialist John Wilkinson

In 1761, Priestley moved to Warrington and assumed the post of tutor of modern
languages and rhetoric at the town's Dissenting academy, although he would
have preferred to teach mathematics and natural philosophy. He fit in well at
Warrington and made friends quickly. On 23 June 1762, he married Mary
Wilkinson of Wrexham. Of his marriage, Priestley wrote:

> This proved a very suitable and happy connexion, my wife being a woman of an
excellent understanding, much improved by reading, of great fortitude and
strength of mind, and of a temper in the highest degree affectionate and
generous; feeling strongly for others, and little for herself. Also, greatly
excelling in every thing relating to household affairs, she entirely relieved
me of all concern of that kind, which allowed me to give all my time to the
prosecution of my studies, and the other duties of my station.[18]

On 17 April 1763, they had a daughter, whom they named Sarah after Priestley's
aunt.[19]

### [edit] Educator and historian

Further information: Joseph Priestley and education

All of the books Priestley published while at Warrington emphasized the study
of history; Priestley considered it essential for worldly success as well as
religious growth. He wrote histories of science and Christianity in an effort
to reveal the progress of humanity and, paradoxically, the loss of a pure,
"primitive Christianity".[20]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A redacted version of A Chart of Biography (1765); Priestley believed his
Charts would "impress" upon students "a just image of the rise, progress,
extent, duration, and contemporary state of all the considerable empires that
have ever existed in the world".[21]

In his Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil and Active Life
(1765),[22] Lectures on History and General Policy (1788), and other works,
Priestley argued that the education of the young should anticipate their
future practical needs. This principle of utility guided his unconventional
curricular choices for Warrington's aspiring middle-class students. He
recommended modern languages instead of classical languages and modern rather
than ancient history. Priestley's lectures on history were particularly
revolutionary; he narrated a providentialist and naturalist account of
history, arguing that the study of history furthered the comprehension of
God's natural laws. Furthermore, his millennial perspective was closely tied
to his optimism regarding scientific progress and the improvement of humanity.
He believed that each age would improve upon the previous and that the study
of history allowed people to perceive and to advance this progress. Since the
study of history was a moral imperative for Priestley, he also promoted the
education of middle-class women, which was unusual at the time.[23] Some
scholars of education have described Priestley as the most important English
writer on education between the 17th-century John Locke and the 19th-century
Herbert Spencer.[24] Lectures on History was well-received and was employed by
many educational institutions, such as New College at Hackney, Brown,
Princeton, Yale, and Cambridge.[25] Priestley designed two Charts to serve as
visual study aides for his Lectures.[26] Both were popular for decades, and
the trustees of Warrington were so impressed with Priestley's lectures and
charts that they arranged for the University of Edinburgh to grant him a
Doctor of Law degree in 1764.[27]

#### [edit] History of Electricity

<IMG>

<IMG>

Priestley's electrical machine for amateur experimentalists, illustrated in
the first edition of his Familiar Introduction to Electricity (1768), which he
unsuccessfully marketed with his brother Timothy.[28]

The intellectually stimulating atmosphere of Warrington, often called the
"Athens of the North" during the 18th century, encouraged Priestley's growing
interest in natural philosophy. He gave lectures on anatomy and performed
experiments regarding temperature with another tutor at Warrington, his friend
John Seddon.[29] Despite Priestley's busy teaching schedule, he decided to
write a history of electricity. Friends introduced him to the major
experimenters in the field in BritainâJohn Canton, William Watson, and the
visiting Benjamin Franklinâwho encouraged Priestley to perform the
experiments he wanted to include in his history. In the process of replicating
others' experiments, Priestley became intrigued by unanswered questions and
was prompted to undertake experiments of his own design.[30] (Impressed with
his Charts and the manuscript of his history of electricity, Canton, Franklin,
Watson, and Richard Price nominated Priestley for a fellowship in the Royal
Society; he was accepted in 1766.)[31]

In 1767, the 700-page The History and Present State of Electricity was
published to positive reviews.[32] The first half of the text is a history of
the study of electricity to 1766; the second and more influential half is a
description of contemporary theories about electricity and suggestions for
future research. Priestley reported some of his own discoveries in the second
section, such as the conductivity of charcoal and other substances and the
continuum between conductors and non-conductors.[33] This discovery overturned
what he described as "one of the earliest and universally received maxims of
electricity", that only water and metals could conduct electricity. This and
other experiments on the electrical properties of materials and on the
electrical effects of chemical transformations demonstrated Priestley's early
and ongoing interest in the relationship between chemical substances and
electricity.[34] Based on experiments with charged spheres, Priestley was also
the first to propose that electrical force followed an inverse-square law,
similar to Newton's law of universal gravitation. However, he did not
generalize or elaborate on this,[33] and the general law was enunciated by
French physicist Charles Augustin de Coulomb in the 1780s.

Priestley's strength as a natural philosopher was qualitative rather than
quantitative and his observation of "a current of real air" between two
electrified points would later interest Michael Faraday and James Clerk
Maxwell as they investigated electromagnetism. Priestley's text became the
standard history of electricity for over a century; Alessandro Volta (who
later invented the battery), William Herschel (who discovered infrared
radiation), and Henry Cavendish (who discovered hydrogen) all relied upon it.
Priestley wrote a popular version of the History of Electricity for the
general public titled A Familiar Introduction to the Study of Electricity
(1768).[35]

## [edit] Leeds (1767â73)

<IMG>

<IMG>

The earliest known portrait of Priestley, known as the "Leeds" portrait (c.
1763); Except for his membership on the Leeds Library Committee Priestley was
not active in the town's social life.[36]

Perhaps prompted by Mary Priestley's ill health, or financial problems, or a
desire to prove himself to the community that had rejected him in his
childhood, Priestley moved with his family from Warrington to Leeds in 1767,
and he became Mill Hill Chapel's minister. Two sons were born to the
Priestleys in Leeds: Joseph junior on 24 July 1768 and William three years
later. Theophilus Lindsey, a rector at Catterick, Yorkshire, became one of
Priestley's few friends in Leeds, of whom he wrote: "I never chose to publish
any thing of moment relating to theology, without consulting him."[37]
Although Priestley had extended family living around Leeds, it does not appear
that they communicated. Schofield conjectures that they considered him a
heretic.[38] Each year Priestley travelled to London to consult with his close
friend and publisher, Joseph Johnson, and to attend meetings of the Royal
Society.[39]

### [edit] Minister of Mill Hill Chapel

Further information: Joseph Priestley and education and Joseph Priestley and
Dissent

<IMG>

<IMG>

Priestley had been working on Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion
since his Daventry days.

When Priestley became its minister, Mill Hill Chapel was one of the oldest and
most respected Dissenting congregations in England; however, during the early
18th century the congregation had fractured along doctrinal lines, and was
losing members to the charismatic Methodist movement.[40] Priestley believed
that by educating the young, he could strengthen the bonds of the
congregation.[41]

In his magisterial three-volume Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion
(1772â74),[42] Priestley outlined his theories of religious instruction.
More importantly, he laid out his belief in Socinianism. The doctrines he
explicated would become the standards for Unitarians in Britain. This work
marked a change in Priestley's theological thinking that is critical to
understanding his later writingsâit paved the way for his materialism and
necessitarianism (the belief that a divine being acts in accordance with
necessary metaphysical laws).[43]

Priestley's major argument in the Institutes was that the only revealed
religious truths that could be accepted were those that matched one's
experience of the natural world. Because his views of religion were deeply
tied to his understanding of nature, the text's theism rested on the argument
from design.[44] The Institutes shocked and appalled many readers, primarily
because it challenged basic Christian orthodoxies, such as the divinity of
Christ and the miracle of the Virgin Birth. Methodists in Leeds penned a hymn
asking God to "the Unitarian fiend expel / And chase his doctrine back to
Hell."[45] Priestley wanted to return Christianity to its "primitive" or
"pure" form by eliminating the "corruptions" which had accumulated over the
centuries. The fourth part of the Institutes, An History of the Corruptions of
Christianity, became so long that he was forced to issue it separately in
1782. Priestley believed that the Corruptions was "the most valuable" work he
ever published. In demanding that his readers apply the logic of the emerging
sciences and comparative history to the Bible and Christianity, he alienated
religious and scientific readers alikeâscientific readers did not appreciate
seeing science used in the defence of religion and religious readers dismissed
the application of science to religion.[46]

### [edit] Religious controversialist

Priestley engaged in numerous political and religious pamphlet wars. According
to Schofield, "he entered each controversy with a cheerful conviction that he
was right, while most of his opponents were convinced, from the outset, that
he was willfully and maliciously wrong. He was able, then, to contrast his
sweet reasonableness to their personal rancor."[47] However, as Schofield
points out, Priestley rarely altered his opinion as a result of these
debates.[47] While at Leeds, he wrote controversial pamphlets on the Lord's
Supper and on Calvinist doctrine; thousands of copies were published, making
them some of Priestley's most widely-read works.[48]

Priestley founded the Theological Repository in 1768, a journal committed to
the open and rational inquiry of theological questions. Although he promised
to print any contribution, only like-minded authors submitted articles. He was
therefore obliged to provide much of the journal's content himself (this
material became the basis for many of his later theological and metaphysical
works). After only a few years, due to a lack of funds, he was forced to cease
publishing the journal.[49] He revived it in 1784 with similar results.[50]

### [edit] Defender of Dissenters and political philosopher

Further information: Joseph Priestley and Dissent

<IMG>

<IMG>

Essay on the First Principles of Government (1768) influenced early 19th-
century political philosophers, including Jeremy Bentham.[51]

Many of Priestley's political writings supported the repeal of the Test and
Corporation Acts, which restricted the rights of Dissenters. They could not
hold political office, serve in the armed forces, or attend Oxford and
Cambridge unless they subscribed to the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of
England. Dissenters repeatedly petitioned Parliament to repeal the Acts,
arguing that they were being treated as second-class citizens.[52]

Priestley's friends, particularly other Rational Dissenters, urged him to
publish a work on the injustices experienced by Dissenters; the result was his
Essay on the First Principles of Government (1768).[53] An early work of
modern liberal political theory and Priestley's most thorough treatment of the
subject, itâunusually for the timeâdistinguished political rights from
civil rights with precision and argued for expansive civil rights. Priestley
identified separate private and public spheres, contending that the government
should only have control over the public sphere. Education and religion, in
particular, he maintained, were matters of private conscience and should not
be administered by the state. Priestley's later radicalism emerged from his
belief that the British government was infringing upon these individual
freedoms.[54]

Priestley also defended the rights of Dissenters against the attacks of
William Blackstone, an eminent legal theorist, whose Commentaries on the Laws
of England (1765â69) had become the standard legal guide. Blackstone's book
stated that dissent from the Church of England was a crime and that Dissenters
could not be loyal subjects. Furious, Priestley lashed out with his Remarks on
Dr. Blackstone's Commentaries (1769), correcting Blackstone's interpretation
of the law, his grammar (a highly politicized subject at the time), and
history.[55] Blackstone, chastened, altered subsequent editions of his
Commentaries: he rephrased the offending passages and removed the sections
claiming that Dissenters could not be loyal subjects, but he retained his
description of Dissent as a crime.[56]

### [edit] Natural philosopher: electricity, Optics, and soda water

Although Priestley claimed that natural philosophy was only a hobby, he took
it seriously. In his History of Electricity, he described the scientist as
promoting the "security and happiness of mankind".[57] Priestley's science was
eminently practical and he rarely concerned himself with theoretical
questions; his model was Benjamin Franklin. When he moved to Leeds, Priestley
continued his electrical and chemical experiments (the latter aided by a
steady supply of carbon dioxide from a neighbouring brewery). Between 1767 and
1770, he presented five papers to the Royal Society from these initial
experiments; the first four papers explored coronal discharges and other
phenomena related to electrical discharge, while the fifth reported on the
conductivity of charcoals from different sources. His subsequent experimental
work focused on chemistry and pneumatics.[58]

Priestley published the first volume of his projected history of experimental
philosophy, The History and Present State of Discoveries Relating to Vision,
Light and Colours (referred to as his Optics), in 1772.[59] He paid careful
attention to the history of optics and presented excellent explanations of
early optics experiments, but his mathematical deficiencies caused him to
dismiss several important contemporary theories. Furthermore, he did not
include any of the practical sections that had made his History of Electricity
so useful to practising natural philosophers. Unlike his History of
Electricity, it was not popular and had only one edition, although it was the
only English book on the topic for 150 years. The hastily written text sold
poorly; the cost of researching, writing, and publishing the Optics convinced
Priestley to abandon his history of experimental philosophy.[60]

Priestley was considered for the position of astronomer on James Cook's second
voyage to the South Seas, but was not chosen. Still, he contributed in a small
way to the voyage: he provided the crew with a method for making soda water,
which he erroneously speculated might be a cure for scurvy. He then published
a pamphlet with Directions for Impregnating Water with Fixed Air (1772).[61]
Priestley did not exploit the commercial potential of soda water, but others
such as J. J. Schweppe made fortunes from it.[62] In 1773, the Royal Society
recognized Priestley's achievements in natural philosophy by awarding him the
Copley Medal.[63]

Priestley's friends wanted to find him a more financially secure position. In
1772, prompted by Richard Price and Benjamin Franklin, Lord Shelburne wrote to
Priestley asking him to direct the education of his children and to act as his
general assistant. Although Priestley was reluctant to sacrifice his ministry,
he accepted the position, resigning from Mill Hill Chapel on 20 December 1772,
and preaching his last sermon on 16 May 1773.[64]

## [edit] Calne (1773â80)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Engraving by Charles A. E. Turner (1836) of a Priestley portrait commissioned
by his publisher and close friend Joseph Johnson from Henry Fuseli (c.
1783)[65]

In 1773, the Priestleys moved to Calne and a year later Lord Shelburne and
Priestley took a tour of Europe. According to Priestley's close friend
Theophilus Lindsey, Priestley was "much improved by this view of mankind at
large".[66] Upon their return, Priestley easily fulfilled his duties as
librarian and tutor. The workload was intentionally light, allowing him time
to pursue his scientific investigations and theological interests. Priestley
also became a political adviser to Shelburne, gathering information on
parliamentary issues and serving as a liaison between Shelburne and the
Dissenting and American interests. When the Priestleys' third son was born on
24 May 1777, they named him Henry at the lord's request.[67]

### [edit] Materialist philosopher

Further information: Joseph Priestley and Dissent

<IMG>

<IMG>

By 1782, at least a dozen hostile refutations were published to Disquisitions
relating to Matter and Spirit and Priestley was branded an atheist.[68]

Priestley wrote his most important philosophical works during his years with
Lord Shelburne. In a series of major metaphysical texts published between 1774
and 1780âAn Examination of Dr. Reid's Inquiry into the Human Mind (1774),
Hartley's Theory of the Human Mind on the Principle of the Association of
Ideas (1775), Disquisitions relating to Matter and Spirit (1777), The Doctrine
of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated (1777), and Letters to a Philosophical
Unbeliever (1780)âhe argues for a philosophy that incorporates four
concepts: determinism, materialism, causation, and necessitarianism. By
studying the natural world, he argued, people would learn how to become more
compassionate, happy, and prosperous.[69]

Priestley strongly suggested that there is no mind-body duality, and put forth
a materialist philosophy in these works; that is, one founded on the principle
that everything in the universe is made of matter that we can perceive. He
also contended that discussing the soul is impossible because it is made of a
divine substance, and humanity cannot perceive the divine. Despite his
separation of the divine from the mortal, this position shocked and angered
many of his readers, who believed that such a duality was necessary for the
soul to exist.[70]

Responding to Baron d'Holbach's SystÃ¨me de la Nature (1770) and David Hume's
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (1779) as well as the works of the
French philosophes, Priestley maintained that materialism and determinism
could be reconciled with a belief in God. He criticized those whose faith was
shaped by books and fashion, drawing an analogy between the scepticism of
educated men and the credulity of the masses.[71]

Maintaining that humans had no free will, Priestley argued that what he called
"philosophical necessity" (akin to absolute determinism) is consonant with
Christianity, a position based on his understanding of the natural world. Like
the rest of nature, man's mind is subject to the laws of causation, Priestley
contended, but because a benevolent God created these laws, the world and the
people in it will eventually be perfected. Evil is therefore only an imperfect
understanding of the world.[72]

Although Priestley's philosophical work has been characterised as "audacious
and original",[4][73] it partakes of older philosophical traditions on the
problems of free will, determinism, and materialism.[74] For example, the
17th-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza argued for absolute determinism and
absolute materialism.[75] Like Spinoza[76] and Priestley,[77] Leibniz argued
that human will was completely determined by natural laws;[78] however, unlike
them, Leibniz argued for a "parallel universe" of immaterial objects (such as
human souls) so arranged by God that its outcomes agree exactly with those of
the material universe.[79] Leibniz[80] and Priestley[81] share an optimism
that God has chosen the chain of events benevolently; however, Priestley
believed that the events were leading to a glorious Millennial conclusion,[4]
whereas for Leibniz the entire chain of events was optimal in and of itself,
as compared with other conceivable chains of events.[82]

### [edit] Founder of Unitarianism

When Priestley's friend Theophilus Lindsey, decided to found a new Christian
denomination that would not restrict its members' beliefs, Priestley and
others hurried to his aid. On 17 April 1774, Lindsey held the first Unitarian
service in Britain; he had even designed his own liturgy, of which many were
critical. Priestley defended his friend in the pamphlet Letter to a Layman, on
the Subject of the Rev. Mr. Lindsey's Proposal for a Reformed English Church
(1774),[83] claiming that only the form of worship had been altered, not its
substance, and attacking those who followed religion as a fashion. Priestley
attended Lindsey's church regularly in the 1770s and occasionally preached
there.[84] He continued to support institutionalized Unitarianism for the rest
of his life, writing several Defenses of Unitarianism and encouraging the
foundation of new Unitarian chapels throughout Britain and the United
States.[85]

### [edit] Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air

See also: Wikisource:An Inventory of the Furniture in Dr. Priestley's Study

<IMG>

<IMG>

Priestley used a modified version of Stephen Hales's pneumatic trough to
perform the nitrous air test and other experiments.[86]

Priestley's years in Calne were the only ones in his life dominated by
scientific investigations; they were also the most scientifically fruitful.
His experiments were almost entirely confined to "airs", and out of this work
emerged his most important scientific texts: the six volumes of Experiments
and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (1774â86).[87][88] These
experiments helped repudiate the last vestiges of the theory of four elements,
which Priestley attempted to replace with his own variation of phlogiston
theory. According to that 18th century theory, the combustion or oxidation of
a substance corresponded to the release of a material substance,
phlogiston.[89]

Priestley's work on "airs" is not easily classified. As historian of science
Simon Schaffer writes, it "has been seen as a branch of physics, or chemistry,
or natural philosophy, or some highly idiosyncratic version of Priestley's own
invention".[90] Furthermore, the volumes were both a scientific and a
political enterprise for Priestley, in which he argues that science could
destroy "undue and usurped authority" and that government has "reason to
tremble even at an air pump or an electrical machine".[91]

Volume I of Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air outlined
several discoveries: "nitrous air" (nitric oxide, NO); "vapor of spirit of
salt", later called "acid air" or "marine acid air" (anhydrous hydrochloric
acid, HCl); "alkaline air" (ammonia, NH3); "diminished" or "dephlogisticated
nitrous air" (nitrous oxide, N2O); and, most famously, "dephlogisticated air"
(oxygen, O2) as well as experimental findings that would eventually lead to
the discovery of photosynthesis. Priestley also developed a "nitrous air test"
to determine the "goodness of air". Using a pneumatic trough, he would mix
nitrous air with a test sample, over water or mercury, and measure the
decrease in volumeâthe principle of eudiometry.[86] After a small history of
the study of airs, he explained his own experiments in an open and sincere
style. As an early biographer writes, "whatever he knows or thinks he tells:
doubts, perplexities, blunders are set down with the most refreshing
candour."[92] Priestley also described his cheap and easy-to-assemble
experimental apparatus; his colleagues therefore believed that they could
easily reproduce his experiments.[93] Faced with inconsistent experimental
results, Priestley employed phlogiston theory. This, however, led him to
conclude that there were only three types of "air": "fixed", "alkaline", and
"acid". Priestley dismissed the burgeoning chemistry of his day. Instead, he
focused on gases and "changes in their sensible properties", as had natural
philosophers before him. He isolated carbon monoxide (CO), but apparently did
not realize that it was a separate "air".[94]

#### [edit] Discovery of oxygen

See also: Wikisource:The Mouse's Petition

In August 1774 he isolated an "air" that appeared to be completely new, but he
did not have an opportunity to pursue the matter because he was about to tour
Europe with Shelburne. While in Paris, however, Priestley managed to replicate
the experiment for others, including French chemist Antoine Lavoisier. After
returning to Britain in January 1775, he continued his experiments and
discovered "vitriolic acid air" (sulfur dioxide, SO2).

In March he wrote to several people regarding the new "air" that he had
discovered in August. One of these letters was read aloud to the Royal
Society, and a paper outlining the discovery, titled "An Account of further
Discoveries in Air", was published in the Society's journal Philosophical
Transactions.[95] Priestley called the new substance "dephlogisticated air"
which he made in the famous experiment by focusing the sun's rays on a sample
of mercuric oxide. He first tested it on mice, who surprised him by surviving
quite a while entrapped with the air, and then on himself, writing that it was
"five or six times better than common air for the purpose of respiration,
inflammation, and, I believe, every other use of common atmospherical
air".[96] He had discovered oxygen gas (O2).

<IMG>

<IMG>

William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne, built a laboratory for Priestley at
Bowood House.

Priestley assembled his oxygen paper and several others into a second volume
of Experiments and Observations on Air, published in 1776. He did not
emphasize his discovery of "dephlogisticated air" (leaving it to Part III of
the volume) but instead argued in the preface how important such discoveries
were to rational religion. His paper narrated the discovery chronologically,
relating the long delays between experiments and his initial puzzlements;
thus, it is difficult to determine when exactly Priestley "discovered"
oxygen.[97] Such dating is significant as both Lavoisier and Swedish
pharmacist Carl Wilhelm Scheele have strong claims to the discovery of oxygen
as well, Scheele having been the first to isolate the gas (although he
published after Priestley) and Lavoisier having been the first to describe it
as purified "air itself entire without alteration" (that is, the first to
explain oxygen without phlogiston theory).[98]

In his paper "Observations on Respiration and the Use of the Blood", Priestley
was the first to suggest a connection between blood and air, although he did
so using phlogiston theory. In typical Priestley fashion, he prefaced the
paper with a history of the study of respiration. A year later, clearly
influenced by Priestley, Lavoisier was also discussing respiration at the
AcadÃ©mie des sciences. Lavoisier's work began the long train of discovery
that produced papers on oxygen respiration and culminated in the overthrow of
phlogiston theory and the establishment of modern chemistry.[99]

Around 1779 Priestley and Shelburne had a rupture, the precise reasons for
which remain unclear. Shelburne blamed Priestley's health, while Priestley
claimed Shelburne had no further use for him. Some contemporaries speculated
that Priestley's outspokenness had hurt Shelburne's political career.
Schofield argues that the most likely reason was Shelburne's recent marriage
to Louisa Fitzpatrickâapparently, she did not like the Priestleys. Although
Priestley considered moving to America, he eventually accepted Birmingham New
Meeting's offer to be their minister.[100]

## [edit] Birmingham (1780â91)

In 1780 the Priestleys moved to Birmingham and spent a happy decade surrounded
by old friends, until they were forced to flee in 1791 by religiously
motivated mob violence. Priestley accepted the ministerial position at New
Meeting on the condition that he be required to preach and teach only on
Sundays, so that he would have time for his writing and scientific
experiments. As in Leeds, Priestley established classes for the youth of his
parish and by 1781, he was teaching 150 students. Because Priestley's New
Meeting salary was only 100 guineas, friends and patrons donated money and
goods to help continue his investigations.[101]

### [edit] Chemical Revolution

See also: Chemical Revolution

Many of the friends that Priestley made in Birmingham were members of the
Lunar Society, a group of manufacturers, inventors, and natural philosophers
who assembled monthly to discuss their work. The core of the group included
men such as the manufacturer Matthew Boulton, the chemist and geologist James
Keir, the inventor and engineer James Watt, and the botanist, chemist, and
geologist William Withering. Priestley was asked to join this unique society
and contributed much to the work of its members.[102] As a result of this
stimulating intellectual environment, he published several important
scientific papers, including "Experiments relating to Phlogiston, and the
seeming Conversion of Water into Air" (1783). The first part attempts to
refute Lavoisier's challenges to his work on oxygen; the second part describes
how steam is "converted" into air. After several variations of the experiment,
with different substances as fuel and several different collecting apparatuses
(which produced different results), he concluded that air could travel through
more substances than previously surmised, a conclusion "contrary to all the
known principles of hydrostatics".[103] This discovery, along with his earlier
work on what would later be recognized as gaseous diffusion, would eventually
lead John Dalton and Thomas Graham to formulate the kinetic theory of
gases.[104]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Antoine Lavoisier and his wife by Jacques-Louis David

In 1777, Antoine Lavoisier had published RÃ©flexions sur le phlogistique pour
servir de suite Ã la thÃ©orie de la combustion et de la calcination, the first
of what proved to be a series of attacks on phlogiston theory; it was against
these attacks that Priestley responded in 1783. While Priestley accepted parts
of Lavoisier's theory, he was unprepared to assent to the major revolutions
Lavoisier proposed: the overthrow of phlogiston, a chemistry conceptualized
around elements and compounds, and a new chemical nomenclature. Priestley's
original experiments on "dephlogisticated air" (oxygen), combustion, and water
provided Lavoisier with the data he needed to construct much of his system;
yet Priestley never accepted Lavoisier's new theories and continued to defend
phlogiston theory for the rest of his life. Lavoisier's system was based
largely on the quantitative concept that mass is neither created nor destroyed
in chemical reactions (i.e., the conservation of mass). By contrast, Priestley
preferred to observe qualitative changes in heat, colour, and particularly
volume. His experiments tested "airs" for "their solubility in water, their
power of supporting or extinguishing flame, whether they were respirable, how
they behaved with acid and alkaline air, and with nitric oxide and inflammable
air, and lastly how they were affected by the electric spark."[105]

By 1789, when Lavoisier published his TraitÃ© Ã©lÃ©mentaire de chimie and
founded the Annales de Chimie, the new chemistry had come into its own.
Priestley published several more scientific papers in Birmingham, the majority
attempting to refute Lavoisier. Priestley and other Lunar Society members
argued that the new French system was too expensive, too difficult to test,
and unnecessarily complex. Priestley in particular rejected its
"establishment" aura. In the end, Lavoisier's view prevailed: his new
chemistry introduced many of the principles on which modern chemistry is
founded.[106]

Priestley's refusal to accept Lavoisier's "new chemistry" â such as the
conservation of mass â and his determination to adhere to a less
satisfactory theory has perplexed many scholars.[107] Schofield explains it
thus: "Priestley was never a chemist; in a modern, and even a Lavoisian,
sense, he was never a scientist. He was a natural philosopher, concerned with
the economy of nature and obsessed with an idea of unity, in theology and in
nature."[108] Historian of science John McEvoy largely agrees, writing that
Priestley's view of nature as coextensive with God and thus infinite, which
encouraged him to focus on facts over hypotheses and theories, prompted him to
reject Lavoisier's system.[109] McEvoy argues that "Priestley's isolated and
lonely opposition to the oxygen theory was a measure of his passionate concern
for the principles of intellectual freedom, epistemic equality and critical
inquiry."[110] Priestley himself claimed in the last volume of Experiments and
Observations that his most valuable works were his theological ones because
they were "superior [in] dignity and importance".[111]

### [edit] Defender of Dissenters and French Revolutionaries

    Further information: Joseph Priestley and Dissent; see also: Commons:Joseph Priestley Cartoons
<IMG>

<IMG>

DOCTOR PHLOGISTON,  
The PRIESTLEY politician or the Political Priest

* * *
This anti-Priestley cartoon shows him trampling on the Bible and burning
documents representing English freedom. "Essays on Matter and Spirit",
"Gunpowder", and "Revolution Toasts" bulge from his pockets.

Although Priestley was busy defending phlogiston theory from the "new
chemists", most of what he published in Birmingham was theological. In 1782 he
published the fourth volume of his Institutes, An History of the Corruptions
of Christianity, describing how he thought the teachings of the early
Christian church had been "corrupted" or distorted.[112] Schofield describes
the work as "derivative, disorganized, wordy, and repetitive, detailed,
exhaustive, and devastatingly argued".[113] The text addresses issues ranging
from the divinity of Christ to the proper form for the Lord's Supper.
Priestley followed up in 1786 with the provocatively titled book, An History
of Early Opinions concerning Jesus Christ, compiled from Original Writers,
proving that the Christian Church was at first Unitarian. Thomas Jefferson
would later write of the profound effect that these two books had on him: "I
have read his Corruptions of Christianity, and Early Opinions of Jesus, over
and over again; and I rest on them â¦ as the basis of my own faith. These
writings have never been answered."[114] Although a few readers such as
Jefferson and other Rational Dissenters approved of the work, it was harshly
reviewed because of its extreme theological positions, particularly its
rejection of the Trinity.[115]

In 1785, while Priestley was engaged in a pamphlet war over Corruptions, he
also published The Importance and Extent of Free Enquiry, claiming that the
Reformation had not really reformed the church.[116] In words that would boil
over into a national debate, he challenged his readers to enact change:

> Let us not, therefore, be discouraged, though, for the present, we should
see no great number of churches professedly unitarian â¦. We are, as it were,
laying gunpowder, grain by grain, under the old building of error and
superstition, which a single spark may hereafter inflame, so as to produce an
instantaneous explosion; in consequence of which that edifice, the erection of
which has been the work of ages, may be overturned in a moment, and so
effectually as that the same foundation can never be built upon again
â¦.[117]

Although discouraged by friends from using such inflammatory language,
Priestley refused to back down from his opinions in print and he included it,
forever branding himself as "Gunpowder Joe". After the publication of this
seeming call for revolution in the midst of the French Revolution,
pamphleteers stepped up their attacks on Priestley and he and his church were
even threatened with legal action.[118]

In 1787, 1789, and 1790, Dissenters again tried to repeal the Test and
Corporation Acts. Although initially it looked as if they might succeed, by
1790, with the fears of revolution looming in Parliament, few were swayed by
appeals to equal rights. Political cartoons, one of the most effective and
popular media of the time, skewered the Dissenters and Priestley.[119] In
Parliament, William Pitt and Edmund Burke argued against the repeal, a
betrayal that angered Priestley and his friends, who had expected the two
men's support. Priestley wrote a series of Letters to William Pitt[120] and
Letters to Burke[121] in an attempt to persuade them otherwise, but these
publications only further inflamed the populace against him.

Dissenters such as Priestley who supported the French Revolution came under
increasing suspicion as scepticism regarding the revolution grew.[122] In its
propaganda against "radicals", Pitt's administration used the "gunpowder"
statement to argue that Priestley and other Dissenters wanted to overthrow the
government. Burke, in his famous Reflections on the Revolution in France
(1790), tied natural philosophers, and specifically Priestley, to the French
Revolution, writing that radicals who supported science in Britain "considered
man in their experiments no more than they do mice in an air pump".[123] Burke
also associated republican principles with alchemy and insubstantial air,
mocking the scientific work done by both Priestley and French chemists. He
made much in his later writings of the connections between "Gunpowder Joe",
science, and Lavoisierâwho was improving gunpowder for the French in their
war against Britain.[124] Paradoxically, a secular statesman, Burke, argued
against science and maintained that religion should be the basis of civil
society, whereas a Dissenting minister, Priestley, argued that religion could
not provide the basis for civil society and should be restricted to one's
private life.[125]

### [edit] Birmingham Riots of 1791

    Main article: Priestley Riots; see also: Wikisource:To Dr. Priestley. Dec. 29, 1792
<IMG>

<IMG>

Print of the Priestley Riots

The animus that had been building against Dissenters and supporters of the
American and French Revolutions exploded in July 1791. Priestley and several
other Dissenters had arranged to have a celebratory dinner on the anniversary
of the storming of the Bastille, a provocative action in a country where many
disapproved of the French Revolution and feared that it might spread to
Britain. Fearing violence, Priestley was convinced by his friends not to
attend. Rioters gathered outside the hotel during the banquet and attacked the
attendees as they left. They moved on to the New Meeting and Old Meeting
churchesâand burned both to the ground. Priestley and his wife fled from
their home; although their son William and others stayed behind to protect
their property, the mob overcame them and torched Priestley's house,
destroying his valuable laboratory and all of the family's belongings. Other
Dissenters' homes were burned in the three-day riot. Priestley spent several
days hiding with friends until he was able to travel safely to London. The
carefully executed attacks of the "mob" and the farcical trials of only a
handful of the "leaders" convinced many at the timeâand modern historians
laterâthat the attacks were planned and condoned by local Birmingham
magistrates. When George III was eventually forced to send troops to the area,
he said: "I cannot but feel better pleased that Priestley is the sufferer for
the doctrines he and his party have instilled, and that the people see them in
their true light."[126]

## [edit] Hackney (1791â94)

... Lo! Priestley there, patriot, and saint, and sage,  
Him, full of years, from his loved native land  
Statesmen blood-stained and priests idolatrous  
By dark lies maddening the blind multitude  
Drove with vain hate ....[127]  
From "Religious Musings" (1796)  
by Samuel Taylor Coleridge  
Unable to return to Birmingham, the Priestleys eventually settled in Clapton,
near Hackney, where Priestley gave a series of lectures on history and natural
philosophy at the Dissenting academy, New College. Friends helped the couple
rebuild their lives, contributing money, books, and laboratory equipment.
Priestley tried to obtain restitution from the government for the destruction
of his Birmingham property, but he was never fully reimbursed.[128] He also
published An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the Riots in Birmingham
(1791),[129] which indicted the people of Birmingham for allowing the riots to
occur and for "violating the principles of English government".[130]

The couple's friends urged them to leave Britain and emigrate to either France
or the new United States, even though Priestley had received an appointment to
preach for the Gravel Pit Meeting congregation. The sermons he preached there,
particularly the two Fast Sermons, reflect his growing millenarianism, his
belief that the end of the world was fast approaching. After comparing
Biblical prophecies to recent history, Priestley concluded that the French
Revolution was a harbinger of the Second Coming of Christ. Priestley's works
had always had a millennial cast, but after the beginning of the French
Revolution, this strain increased.[131] He wrote to a younger friend that
while he himself would not see the Second Coming, his friend "may probably
live to see it â¦ It cannot, I think be more than twenty years [away]."[132]

Daily life became more difficult for the family: Priestley was burned in
effigy along with Thomas Paine; vicious political cartoons continued to be
published about him; letters were sent to him from across the country,
comparing him to the devil and Guy Fawkes; tradespeople feared the family's
business; and Priestley's Royal Academy friends distanced themselves. As the
penalties became harsher for those who spoke out against the government, and
despite his being elected to the French National Convention by three separate
departments in 1792, Priestley decided to move with his family to America.
Five weeks after Priestley left, William Pitt's administration began arresting
radicals for seditious libel, resulting in the famous 1794 Treason
Trials.[133]

## [edit] Pennsylvania (1794â1804)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Priestley, painted late in life by Rembrandt Peale (c. 1800);[134] Americans
knew Priestley less as a man of science and more as a defender of the freedom
of the colonies and of Dissenters.[135]

See also: Joseph Priestley House

The Priestleys arrived in New York City in 1794. They were immediately fÃªted
by various political factions vying to gain Priestley's endorsement. Priestley
declined their entreaties, hoping to avoid political discord in his new
country. As the couple travelled to their new home in Northumberland,
Pennsylvania, they stopped in Philadelphia, where Priestley gave a series of
sermons and helped found the First Unitarian Church of Philadelphia. Priestley
turned down an opportunity to teach chemistry at the University of
Pennsylvania, and the couple began building a home in the countryside.[136]

Priestley's attempts to avoid political controversy in the United States
failed. In 1795, William Cobbett published Observations on the Emigration of
Dr. Joseph Priestley, which accused him of treason against Britain and
attempted to undermine his scientific credibility. His political fortunes took
an even worse turn when Cobbett obtained a set of letters sent to Priestley by
the radical printer John Hurford Stone and the liberal novelist Helen Maria
Williams, who were both living in revolutionary France. Cobbett published the
letters in his newspaper, asserting that Priestley and his friends were
fomenting a revolution.[137] Priestley was eventually forced to defend himself
in print.[138]

Family matters also made Priestley's time in America difficult. His son Henry
died in 1795, probably of malaria. Mary Priestley died soon after in 1796; she
was already ill and never fully recovered after the shock of her son's
death.[139] After his wife's death, Priestley wrote to a friend: "I feel quite
unhinged and incapable of the exertions I used to make. Having been always
very domestic, reading and writing with my wife sitting near me, and often
reading to her, I miss her everywhere."[140] Priestley's family relations
deteriorated even further in 1800 when a local Pennsylvania newspaper
published an article accusing William Priestley, intoxicated with "French
principles", of trying to poison the entire Priestley familyâboth father and
son vigorously denied the story.[141]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Priestley's rural Pennsylvania home never became the center of a utopian
community, as the expected emigrants could not afford the journey.[142]

Priestley continued the educational projects that had always been important to
him, helping to establish the "Northumberland Academy" and donating his
library to the fledging institution. He exchanged letters regarding the proper
structure of a university with Thomas Jefferson, who used this advice when
founding the University of Virginia. Jefferson and Priestley became close and
when he had completed his General History of the Christian Church,[143] he
dedicated it to President Jefferson, writing that "it is now only that I can
say I see nothing to fear from the hand of power, the government under which I
live being for the first time truly favourable to me."[144]

Priestley tried to continue his scientific investigations in America with the
support of the American Philosophical Association. He was hampered by lack of
news from Europe; unaware of the latest scientific developments, Priestley was
no longer on the forefront of discovery. Although the majority of his
publications focused on defending phlogiston theory, he also did some original
work on spontaneous generation and dreams. Despite Priestley's reduced
scientific output, his presence stimulated American interest in
chemistry.[145]

By 1801, Priestley had become so ill that he could no longer write or
experiment. He died on the morning of 6 February 1804[146] and was buried at
Riverview Cemetery in Northumberland.[147] Priestley's epitaph reads:

    Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the
    Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee.
    I will lay me down in peace and sleep till
    I awake in the morning of the resurrection.[148]
## [edit] Legacy

<IMG>

<IMG>

To commemorate Priestley's scientific achievements, the American Chemical
Society named its highest honour the Priestley Medal in 1922.[149]

By the time he died in 1804, Priestley had been made a member of every major
scientific society in the world and he had discovered numerous
substances.[150] The 19th-century French naturalist George Cuvier, in his
eulogy of Priestley, praised his discoveries while at the same time lamenting
his refusal to abandon phlogiston theory, calling him "the father of modern
chemistry [who] never acknowledged his daughter".[151] Priestley published
more than 150 works on topics ranging from political philosophy to education
to theology to natural philosophy.[152] He led and inspired British radicals
during the 1790s, paved the way for utilitarianism,[153] and helped found
Unitarianism.[154] A wide variety of philosophers, scientists, and poets
became associationists as a result of his redaction of David Hartley's
Observations on Man, including Erasmus Darwin, Coleridge, William Wordsworth,
John Stuart Mill, Alexander Bain, and Herbert Spencer.[155] Immanuel Kant
praised Priestley in his Critique of Pure Reason (1781), writing that he "knew
how to combine his paradoxical teaching with the interests of religion".[4]
Indeed, it was Priestley's aim to "put the most 'advanced' Enlightenment ideas
into the service of a rationalized though heterodox Christianity, under the
guidance of the basic principles of scientific method".[153]

Considering the extent of Priestley's influence, relatively little scholarship
has been devoted to him. In the early 20th century, Priestley was most often
described as a conservative and dogmatic scientist who was nevertheless a
political and religious reformer.[156] In a historiographic review essay,
historian of science Simon Schaffer describes the two dominant portraits of
Priestley: the first depicts him as "a playful innocent" who stumbled across
his discoveries; the second portrays him as innocent as well as "warped" for
not understanding their implications better. Assessing Priestley's works as a
totality has been difficult for scholars because of his wide-ranging
interests. His scientific discoveries have usually been divorced from his
theological and metaphysical publications to make an analysis of his life and
writings easier, but this approach has been challenged recently by scholars
such as John McEvoy and Robert Schofield. Although early Priestley scholarship
claimed that his theological and metaphysical works were "distractions" and
"obstacles" to his scientific work, scholarship published in the 1960s, 1970s,
and 1980s maintained that Priestley's works constituted a unified theory.
However, as Schaffer explains, no convincing synthesis of his work has yet
been expounded.[157] More recently, in 2001, historian of science Dan Eshet
has argued that efforts to create a "synoptic view" have resulted only in a
rationalization of the contradictions in Priestley's thought, because they
have been "organized around philosophical categories" and have "separate[d]
the producers of scientific ideas from any social conflict".[158]

Priestley has been remembered by the towns in which he served as a reforming
educator and minister and by the scientific organizations he influenced. Two
educational institutions have been named in his honourâPriestley College in
Warrington and Joseph Priestley College in Leeds[159]âand an asteroid, 5577
Priestley, discovered in 1986 by Duncan Waldron.[160] In Birstall, the Leeds
City Square, and in Birmingham, he is memorialized through statues,[161] and
plaques commemorating him have been posted in Birmingham and Warrington.[162]
Also, since 1952 Dickinson College has presented the Priestley Award to a
scientist who makes "discoveries which contribute to the welfare of
mankind".[163]

## [edit] Selected works

<IMG>

<IMG>

Statue of Joseph Priestley in Chamberlain Square, Birmingham

See also: List of works by Joseph Priestley

for a complete bibliography of Priestley's works

  * The Rudiments of English Grammar (1761)
  * A Chart of Biography (1765)
  * Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil and Active Life (1765)
  * The History and Present State of Electricity (1767)
  * Essay on the First Principles of Government (1768)
  * A New Chart of History (1769)
  * Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion (1772â74)
  * Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (1774â77)
  * Disquisitions relating to Matter and Spirit (1777)
  * The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated (1777)
  * Letters to a Philosophical Unbeliever (1780)
  * An History of the Corruptions of Christianity (1782)
  * Lectures on History and General Policy (1788)
  * Theological Repository (1770â73, 1784â88)

## [edit] See also

  * List of liberal theorists
  * List of independent discoveries
  * Timeline of hydrogen technologies

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ McLachlan (1983), 28â30.
  2. ^ Kuhn, 53â60; Schofield (2004), 112â13. The difficulty in precisely defining the time and place of the "discovery" of oxygen, within the context of the developing Chemical Revolution, is one of Thomas Kuhn's central illustrations of the gradual nature of paradigm shifts in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
  3. ^ Tapper, 10.
  4. ^ a b c d e Tapper, 314.
  5. ^ Schofield (1997), 2.
  6. ^ Schofield (1997), 2â12; Uglow, 72; Jackson, 19â25; Gibbs, 1â4; Thorpe, 1â11; Holt, 1â6.
  7. ^ Schofield (1997), 1, 7â8; Jackson, 25â30; Gibbs, 4; Priestley, Autobiography, 71â73, 123.
  8. ^ Schofield (1997), 14, 28â29; Uglow, 72; Gibbs, 5; Thorpe, 11â12; Holt, 7â9.
  9. ^ Schofield (1997), 28â29; Jackson, 30; Gibbs, 5.
  10. ^ McEvoy (1983), 48â49.
  11. ^ Qtd. in Jackson, 33. See Schofield (1997), 40â57; Uglow, 73â74; Jackson, 30â34; Gibbs, 5â10; Thorpe, 17â22; Tapper, 314; Holt, 11â14; Garrett, 54.
  12. ^ Schofield (1997), 62â69.
  13. ^ Schofield (1997), 62â69; Jackson, 44â47; Gibbs, 10â11; Thorpe, 22â29; Holt, 15â19.
  14. ^ Priestley, Joseph. The Rudiments of English Grammar; adapted to the use of schools. With observations on style. London: Printed for R. Griffiths, 1761.
  15. ^ Qtd. in Schofield (1997), 79.
  16. ^ Schofield (1997), 77â79, 83â85; Uglow, 72; Jackson 49â52; Gibbs, 13â16; Thorpe, 30â32; Holt, 19â23.
  17. ^ McLachlan, Iconography, 24â26.
  18. ^ Priestley, Autobiography, 87.
  19. ^ See Thorpe, 33â44 for a description of life at Warrington; Schofield (1997), 89â90, 93â94; Jackson, 54â58; Uglow, 73â75; Thorpe, 47â50; Holt, 27â28.
  20. ^ Sheps, 135, 149; Holt, 29â30.
  21. ^ Qtd. in Sheps, 146.
  22. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil and Active Life. London: Printed for C. Henderson under the Royal Exchange; T. Becket and De Hondt in the Strand; and by J. Johnson and Davenport, in Pater-Noster-Row, 1765.
  23. ^ Thorpe, 52â54; Schofield (1997), 124â25; Watts, 89, 95â97; Sheps, 136.
  24. ^ Schofield (1997), 121; see also Watts, 92.
  25. ^ Schofield (2004), 254â59; McLachlan (1987â90), 255â58; Sheps, 138, 141; Kramnick, 12; Holt, 29â33.
  26. ^ Priestley, Joseph. A Chart of Biography. London: J. Johnson, St. Paul's Church Yard, 1765 and Joseph Priestley, A Description of a Chart of Biography. Warrington: Printed by William Eyres, 1765 and Joseph Priestley, A New Chart of History. London: Engraved and published for J. Johnson, 1769; A Description of a New Chart of History. London: Printed for J. Johnson, 1770.
  27. ^ Gibbs, 37; Schofield (1997), 118â19.
  28. ^ Schofield (1997), 228â30.
  29. ^ Schofield (1997), 136â37; Jackson, 57â61.
  30. ^ Schofield (1997), 141â42, 152; Jackson, 64; Uglow 75â77; Thorpe, 61â65.
  31. ^ Schofield (1997), 143â44; Jackson, 65â66; see Schofield (1997), 152 and 231â32 for an analysis of the different editions.
  32. ^ Priestley, Joseph. The History and Present State of Electricity, with original experiments. London: Printed for J. Dodsley, J. Johnson and T. Cadell, 1767.
  33. ^ a b Schofield (1997), 144â56.
  34. ^ Schofield (1997), 156â57; Gibbs 28â31; see also Thorpe, 64.
  35. ^ Priestley, Joseph. A Familiar Introduction to the Study of Electricity. London: Printed for J. Dodsley; T. Cadell; and J. Johnson, 1768.
  36. ^ Schofield (1997), 162â64.
  37. ^ Priestley, Autobiography, 98; see also Schofield (1997), 163.
  38. ^ Schofield (1997), 162, note 7.
  39. ^ Schofield, (1997), 158, 164; Gibbs, 37; Uglow, 170.
  40. ^ Schofield (1997), 165â69; Holt, 42â43.
  41. ^ Schofield (1997), 170â71; Gibbs, 37; Watts, 93â94; Holt, 44.
  42. ^ Priestley. Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion. London: Printed for J. Johnson, Vol. I, 1772, Vol. II, 1773, Vol. III, 1774.
  43. ^ Miller, xvi; Schofield (1997), 172.
  44. ^ Schofield (1997), 174; Uglow, 169; Tapper, 315; Holt, 44.
  45. ^ Qtd. in Jackson, 102.
  46. ^ McLachlan (1987â90), 261; Gibbs, 38; Jackson, 102; Uglow, 169.
  47. ^ a b Schofield (1997), 181.
  48. ^ See Schofield (1997), 181â88 for analysis of these two controversies.
  49. ^ See Schofield (1997), 193â201 for an analysis of the journal; Uglow, 169; Holt, 53â55.
  50. ^ See Schofield (2004), 202â07 for an analysis of Priestley's contributions.
  51. ^ Schofield (1997), 207.
  52. ^ Schofield (1997), 202â05; Holt, 56â64.
  53. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Essay on the First Principles of Government; and on the nature of political, civil, and religious liberty. London: Printed for J. Dodsley; T. Cadell; and J. Johnson, 1768.
  54. ^ Gibbs, 39â43; Uglow, 169; Garrett, 17; Tapper, 315; Holt, 34â37; Philip (1985); Miller, xiv.
  55. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Remarks on some paragraphs in the fourth volume of Dr. Blackstoneâs Commentaries on the laws of England, relating to the Dissenters. London: Printed for J. Johnson and J. Payne, 1769.
  56. ^ Schofield (1997), 214â16; Gibbs, 43; Holt, 48â49.
  57. ^ Qtd. in Kramnick, 8.
  58. ^ Schofield (1997), 227, 232â38; see also Gibbs, 47; Kramnick, 9â10.
  59. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Proposals for printing by subscription, The history and present state of discoveries relating to vision, light, and colours. Leeds: n.p., 1771.
  60. ^ Schofield (1997), 240â49; Gibbs, 50â55; Uglow, 134.
  61. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Directions for impregnating water with fixed air; in order to communicate to it the peculiar spirit and virtues of Pyrmont water, and other mineral waters of a similar nature. London: Printed for J. Johnson, 1772.
  62. ^ Schofield (1997), 256â57; Gibbs, 57â59; Thorpe, 76â79; Uglow, 134â36; 232â34.
  63. ^ Schofield (1997), 251â55; see Holt, 64; Gibbs, 55â56; and Thorpe, 80â81, for the traditional account of this story.
  64. ^ Schofield (1997), 270â71; Jackson, 120â22; Gibbs, 84â86: Uglow, 239â40; Holt, 64â65.
  65. ^ McLachlan, Iconography, 19â20.
  66. ^ Qtd. in Gibbs, 91.
  67. ^ Schofield (2004), 4â11; 406; Gibbs, 91â94; Jackson, 122, 124, 143â52, 158â62; Thorpe, 80â85; Watts, 96; Holt, 70â94 (includes large quotations from Priestley's letters sent from Europe to Shelburne's sons).
  68. ^ Schofield (2004), 72.
  69. ^ McEvoy and McGuire, 326â27; Tapper, 316.
  70. ^ Schofield (2004), 59â76; Gibbs, 99â100; Holt, 112â24; McEvoy and McGuire, 333â34.
  71. ^ Tapper, 320; Priestley, Autobiography, 111; Schofield (2004), 37â42; Holt, 93â94; 139â42.
  72. ^ Schofield (2004), 77â91; Garrett, 55; Tapper, 319; Sheps, 138; McEvoy (1983), 50; McEvoy and McGuire, 338â40.
  73. ^ Sheps, 138.
  74. ^ McEvoy and McGuire, 341â45.
  75. ^ Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Confessio Philosphi: Papers Concerning the Problem of Evil, 1671-1678. Trans. Robert C. Sleigh, Jr. New Haven: Yale University Press (2004), xxxviii, 109. ISBN 9780300089585. The original Latin text and an English translation of Leibniz's A Philosopher's Creed can be found on the Latin and English Wikisources, respectively.
  76. ^ Stewart, Matthew. The Courtier and the Heretic: Leibniz, Spinoza, and the Fate of God in the Modern World. New York: W. W. Norton (2006), 171. ISBN 0393058980.
  77. ^ McEvoy and McGuire, 341.
  78. ^ Adams, Robert Merrihew. Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist. New York: Oxford University Press (1998), 10â13, 1â20, 41â44. ISBN 0195084608.
  79. ^ Rutherford, 213â18.
  80. ^ Rutherford, 46.
  81. ^ Schofield (2004), 78â79.
  82. ^ Rutherford, 12â15, 22â45, 49â54.
  83. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Letter to a Layman, on the Subject of the Rev. Mr. Lindsey's Proposal for a Reformed English Church. London: Printed for J. Wilkie, 1774.
  84. ^ Schofield (2004), 26â28; Jackson, 124; Gibbs, 88â89; Holt, 56â64.
  85. ^ Schofield (2004), 225, 236â38.
  86. ^ a b Fruton, 20, 29
  87. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air. 3 vols. London W. Bowyer and J. Nichols, 1774â77. There are several different editions of these volumes, each important.
  88. ^ See Gibbs 67â83 for a description of all of Priestley's experiments during this time; Thorpe, 170ff.
  89. ^ Thorpe, 167â68; Schofield (2004), 98â101.
  90. ^ Schaffer, 152.
  91. ^ Qtd. in Kramnick, 11â12; see also Schofield (2004), 121â24.
  92. ^ Schofield (2004), 98; Thorpe, 171.
  93. ^ Schofield (1997), 259â69; Jackson, 110â14; Thorpe, 76â77, 178â79; Uglow, 229â39.
  94. ^ Schofield (2004), 93â105; Uglow, 240â41; see Gibbs 105â16 for a description of these experiments.
  95. ^ Priestley, Joseph. "An Account of Further Discoveries in Air". Philosophical Transactions 65 (1775): 384â94.
  96. ^ Qtd. in Schofield (2004), 107.
  97. ^ Schofield (2004), 105â19; see also Jackson, 126â27, 163â64, 166â74; Gibbs, 118â23; Uglow, 229â31, 241; Holt, 93.
  98. ^ Kuhn, 53â55.
  99. ^ Schofield (2004), 129â30; Gibbs, 124â25.
  100. ^ Schofield (2004), 141â43; see also Jackson, 198â99; Holt, 81â82.
  101. ^ Schofield (2004), 147â50, 196â99, 242â46. Gibbs, 134â40, 169; Uglow, 310â20, 407; Jackson, 227â28; Holt, 132â33.
  102. ^ Schofield (2004), 151â52; for an analysis of Priestley's contributions to each man's work, see Schofield's chapter "Science and the Lunar Society"; see also Jackson, 200â01; Gibbs, 141â47; Thorpe, 93â102; Holt, 127â32; Uglow, 349â50; for a history of the Lunar Society, see Uglow.
  103. ^ Qtd. in Schofield (2004), 167
  104. ^ Schofield (2004), 168; see also Jackson 203â08; Gibbs, 154â61; Uglow, 358â61.
  105. ^ Thorpe, 210; see also Schofield (2004), 169â94; Jackson 216â24.
  106. ^ Schaffer, 164; Uglow, 356; McEvoy (1983), 56â57; Donovan, 175â76, 180â81.
  107. ^ See Schaffer, 162â70 for a historiographical analysis.
  108. ^ Schofield (2004), 194.
  109. ^ McEvoy (1983), 51ff.
  110. ^ McEvoy (1983), 57; see also McEvoy and MeGuire 395ff.
  111. ^ Qtd. in Thorpe, 213.
  112. ^ Priestley, Joseph. An History of the Corruptions of Christianity. 2 vols. Birmingham: Printed by Piercy and Jones; London: Printed for J. Johnson, 1782.
  113. ^ Schofield (2004), 216.
  114. ^ Qtd. in Gibbs, 249.
  115. ^ Schofield (2004), 216â23; Thorpe, 106â08; Holt, 133â39; Philip (1985).
  116. ^ Priestley, Joseph. The importance and extent of free inquiry in matters of religion: a sermon, preached before the congregations of the Old and New Meeting of Protestant Dissenters at Birmingham. November 5, 1785. To which are added, reflections on the present state of free inquiry in this country. Birmingham: Printed by M. Swinney; for J. Johnson, London, 1785.
  117. ^ Qtd. in Gibbs, 173.
  118. ^ Gibbs, 169â76; Uglow, 408.
  119. ^ Gibbs, 176â83.
  120. ^ Priestley, Joseph. A letter to the Right Honourable William Pitt, â¦ on the subjects of toleration and church establishments; occasioned by his speech against the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts, on Wednesday the 28th of March, 1787. London: Printed for J. Johnson and J. Debrett, 1787.
  121. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Letters to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke, occasioned by his Reflections on the Revolution in France, &c. Birmingham: Printed by Thomas Pearson; sold by J. Johnson, London, 1791.
  122. ^ Schofield (2004), 269â81; Thorpe, 122â25; Uglow, 409, 435â38; Holt, 142ff; Philip (1985).
  123. ^ Qtd. in Crossland, 294.
  124. ^ Crossland, 283â87, 305.
  125. ^ Kramnick, 22.
  126. ^ Qtd. in Gibbs, 204; Schofield (2004), 264, 285, 289; Thorpe, 122â44; Uglow, 440â46; Jackson, 248â60; Rose, 68â88; Holt, 154ff.
  127. ^ Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. "Religious Musings: A Desultory Poem, Written on the Christmas Eve of 1794". Retrieved on 10 June 2007.
  128. ^ Schaffer, 160; Schofield (2004), 298â99; Thorpe, 145â46; Uglow, 446â49; Jackson, 300â05.
  129. ^ Priestley, Joseph. An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the Riots in Birmingham. To which are added, strictures on a pamphlet, intitled âThoughts on the late riot at Birmingham.â Birmingham: Printed by J. Thompson; sold by J. Johnson, London, 1791.
  130. ^ Qtd. in Schofield (2004), 295.
  131. ^ Garrett, 53, 57, 61.
  132. ^ Qtd. in Garrett, 62.
  133. ^ Gibbs, 207â22; Schofield (2004), 304â18; Thorpe, 145â55; Uglow, 446â49, 453â54; Jackson, 300â05; Holt, 177â78.
  134. ^ McLachlan (1983), 34.
  135. ^ Schofield (2004), 326.
  136. ^ Schofield (2004), 324â32; Thorpe, 155â57; Jackson, 310â14; Holt, 179ff.
  137. ^ Schofield (2004), 329â38; Gibbs, 234â37; Jackson, 317â18; Garrett, 63; Holt, 199â204.
  138. ^ Priestley, Joseph. Letters to the inhabitants of Northumberland and its neighbourhood, on subjects interesting to the author, and to them. Parts I & II. Northumberland [Pa.]: Printed for the author by Andrew Kennedy, 1799.
  139. ^ Schofield (2004), 348.
  140. ^ Qtd. in Schofield (2004), 349.
  141. ^ Gibbs, 240; Schofield (2004), 405â06; Jackson, 314â15, 319â21.
  142. ^ Schofield (2004), 329â30.
  143. ^ Priestley, Joseph. A General History of the Christian Church. Northumberland: Printed for the author by Andrew Kennedy, 1803.
  144. ^ Qtd. in Schofield (2004), 339â43.
  145. ^ Schofield (2004), 352â72; Gibbs, 244â46.
  146. ^ Schofield (2004), 400â01; Gibbs, 247â48; Thorpe, 162â65; Jackson, 324â25; Holt, 213â16.
  147. ^ For the original marker, see "Edgar Fahs Smith Collection". http://dewey.library.upenn.edu/sceti/smith/PortraitList.cfm?ScientistID=223&visited=smithScientist. Retrieved on 2006-11-17. See also page 153 of Walker, William H. (1927). "History of the Priestley house and the movement for its preservation". Journal of Chemical Education 4: 150 â 158. http://search.jce.divched.org/JCEIndex/FMPro?-db=jceindex.fp5&-lay=wwwform&combo=Priestley&-find=&-format=detail.html&-skip=18&-max=1&-token.2=18&-token.3=10. For Priestley's modern marker see "Joseph Priestley (1733 - 1804)". http://www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=gr&GRid=7041. Retrieved on 2008-11-26.
  148. ^ Qtd. in Schofield (2004), 401.
  149. ^ Schofield (2004), 372.
  150. ^ Schofield (2004), 151â52.
  151. ^ Qtd. in McLachlan (1987â90), 259â60.
  152. ^ Thorpe, 74; Kramnick, 4.
  153. ^ a b Tapper, 322.
  154. ^ Schofield (2004), 3.
  155. ^ Schofield (2004), 52â57; Holt, 111â12.
  156. ^ McEvoy (1983), 47.
  157. ^ Schaffer, 154â57.
  158. ^ Eshet, 131.
  159. ^ Joseph Priestley College. Joseph Priestley College. Retrieved on 1 March 2008.
  160. ^ Schmadel, Lutz D. Dictionary of Minor Planet Names. 5th ed. Berlin and New York: Springer (2003), 474.
  161. ^ The statue in Birmingham is a 1951 recast, in bronze, of a white marble original by A. W. Williamson, unveiled in 1874.
  162. ^ The Lunar Society Moonstones honour Priestley in Birmingham. There are Blue Plaques commemorating him on the side of the Church of St. Michael and St. Joseph, New Meeting House Lane, Birmingham (Birmingham Civic Society Retrieved on 9 November 2007), and another on the Warrington Salvation Army Citadel, once the home of Priestley (British Crystallographic Association Retrieved on 29 May 2007).
  163. ^ Joseph Priestley Celebration. Dickinson College. Retrieved on 28 September 2007.

## [edit] Bibliography

### [edit] Primary materials

For a complete bibliography of Priestley's writings, see list of works by
Joseph Priestley.

  * Lindsay, Jack, ed. Autobiography of Joseph Priestley. Teaneck: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1970. ISBN 0838678310.
  * Miller, Peter N., ed. Priestley: Political Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. ISBN 0521425611.
  * Passmore, John A., ed. Priestley's Writings on Philosophy, Science and Politics. New York: Collier Books, 1964.
  * Rutt, John T., ed. Collected Theological and Miscellaneous Works of Joseph Priestley. 2 vols. London: George Smallfield, 1832.
  * Rutt, John T., ed. Life and Correspondence of Joseph Priestley. 2 vols. London: George Smallfield, 1831.
  * Schofield, Robert E., ed. A Scientific Autobiography of Joseph Priestley (1733â1804): Selected Scientific Correspondence. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1966.

### [edit] Biographies

The most exhaustive biography of Priestley is Robert Schofield's recent two-
volume work; several one-volume treatments exist, all somewhat older: Gibbs,
Holt and Thorpe. Graham and Smith focus on Priestley's life in America and
Uglow and Jackson both discuss Priestley's life in the context of other
developments in science.

  * Gibbs, F. W. Joseph Priestley: Adventurer in Science and Champion of Truth. London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1965.
  * Graham, Jenny. Revolutionary in Exile: The Emigration of Joseph Priestley to America, 1794â1804. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 85 (1995). ISBN 0871698528.
  * Holt, Anne. A Life of Joseph Priestley. London: Oxford University Press, 1931.
  * Jackson, Joe. A World on Fire: A Heretic, an Aristocrat and the Race to Discover Oxygen. New York: Viking, 2005. ISBN 0670034347.
  * Johnson, Steven. The Invention of Air: A Story of Science, Faith, Revolution, and the Birth of America. New York: Riverhead, 2008. ISBN 1594488525.
  * Schofield, Robert E. The Enlightenment of Joseph Priestley: A Study of his Life and Work from 1733 to 1773. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997. ISBN 0271016620.
  * Schofield, Robert E. The Enlightened Joseph Priestley: A Study of His Life and Work from 1773 to 1804. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2004. ISBN 0271024593.
  * Smith, Edgar F. Priestley in America, 1794â1804. Philadelphia: P. Blakiston's Son and Co., 1920.
  * Tapper, Alan. "Joseph Priestley". Dictionary of Literary Biography 252: British Philosophers 1500â1799. Eds. Philip B. Dematteis and Peter S. Fosl. Detroit: Gale Group, 2002.
  * Thorpe, T. E. Joseph Priestley. London: J. M. Dent, 1906.
  * Uglow, Jenny. The Lunar Men: Five Friends Whose Curiosity Changed the World. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2002. ISBN 0374194408.

### [edit] Other secondary materials

  * Anderson, R. G. W. and Christopher Lawrence. Science, Medicine and Dissent: Joseph Priestley (1733â1804). London: Wellcome Trust, 1987. ISBN 0901805289.
  * Bowers, J. D. Joseph Priestley and English Unitarianism in America. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2007. ISBN 027102951X.
  * Braithwaite, Helen. Romanticism, Publishing and Dissent: Joseph Johnson and the Cause of Liberty. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. ISBN 0333983947.
  * Conant, J. B., ed. "The Overthrow of the Phlogiston Theory: The Chemical Revolution of 1775â1789". Harvard Case Histories in Experimental Science. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1950.
  * Crook, R. E. A Bibliography of Joseph Priestley. London: Library Association, 1966.
  * Crossland, Maurice. "The Image of Science as a Threat: Burke versus Priestley and the 'Philosophic Revolution'". British Journal for the History of Science 20 (1987): 277â307.
  * Donovan, Arthur. Antoine Lavoisier: Science, Administration and Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. ISBN 052156218X
  * Eshet, Dan. "Rereading Priestley". History of Science 39.2 (2001): 127â59.
  * Fitzpatrick, Martin. "Joseph Priestley and the Cause of Universal Toleration". The Price-Priestley Newsletter 1 (1977): 3â30.
  * Garrett, Clarke. "Joseph Priestley, the Millennium, and the French Revolution". Journal of the History of Ideas 34.1 (1973): 51â66.
  * Fruton, Joseph S. Methods and Styles in the Development of Chemistry. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 2002. ISBN 0871692457.
  * Kramnick, Isaac. "Eighteenth-Century Science and Radical Social Theory: The Case of Joseph Priestley's Scientific Liberalism". Journal of British Studies 25 (1986): 1â30.
  * Kuhn, Thomas. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996. ISBN 0226458083.
  * Haakonssen, Knud, ed. Enlightenment and Religion: Rational Dissent in Eighteenth-Century Britain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. ISBN 0521560608.
  * McCann, H. Chemistry Transformed: The Paradigmatic Shift from Phlogiston to Oxygen. Norwood: Alex Publishing, 1978. ISBN 089391004X.
  * McEvoy, John G. "Joseph Priestley, 'Aerial Philosopher': Metaphysics and Methodology in Priestley's Chemical Thought, from 1762 to 1781". Ambix 25 (1978): 1â55, 93â116, 153â75; 26 (1979): 16â30.
  * McEvoy, John G. "Enlightenment and Dissent in Science: Joseph Priestley and the Limits of Theoretical Reasoning". Enlightenment and Dissent 2 (1983): 47â68.
  * McEvoy, John G. "Priestley Responds to Lavoisier's Nomenclature: Language, Liberty, and Chemistry in the English Enlightenment". Lavoisier in European Context: Negotiating a New Language for Chemistry. Eds. Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent and Ferdinando Abbri. Canton, MA: Science History Publications, 1995. ISBN 088135189X.
  * McEvoy, John G. and J.E. McGuire. "God and Nature: Priestley's Way of Rational Dissent". Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 6 (1975): 325â404.
  * McLachlan, John. Joseph Priestley Man of Science 1733â1804: An Iconography of a Great Yorkshireman. Braunton and Devon: Merlin Books, 1983. ISBN 0863030521.
  * McLachlan, John. "Joseph Priestley and the Study of History". Transactions of the Unitarian Historical Society 19 (1987â90): 252â63.
  * Philip, Mark. "Rational Religion and Political Radicalism". Enlightenment and Dissent 4 (1985): 35â46.
  * Rose, R. B. "The Priestley Riots of 1791". Past and Present 18 (1960): 68â88.
  * Rutherford, Donald. Leibniz and the Rational Order of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995. ISBN 0521461553.
  * Schaffer, Simon. "Priestley Questions: An Historiographic Survey". History of Science 22.2 (1984): 151â83.
  * Sheps, Arthur. "Joseph Priestley's Time Charts: The Use and Teaching of History by Rational Dissent in late Eighteenth-Century England". Lumen 18 (1999): 135â54.
  * Watts, R. "Joseph Priestley and Education". Enlightenment and Dissent 2 (1983): 83â100.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Joseph Priestley  
  * List of Priestley's works available online
  * The Joseph Priestley Society
  * Joseph Priestley House in PA
  * Joseph Priestley Online: Comprehensive site with bibliography, links to related sites, images, information on manuscript collections, and other helpful information.
  * Radio 4 program on the discovery of oxygen by the BBC
  * Collection of Priestley images at the Schoenberg Center for Electronic Text and Image

### [edit] Short online biographies

  * "Joseph Priestley: Discoverer of Oxygen" at the American Chemical Society
  * Joseph Priestley at the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation
  * Joseph Priestley from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica
  * Joseph Priestley at the Chemical Heritage Foundation

Awards and achievements  
Preceded by  
Matthew Raper Copley Medal  
1772 Succeeded by  
John Walsh  
Featured article

Persondata  
NAME Priestley, Joseph  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Scientist  
DATE OF BIRTH 1733-03-26  
PLACE OF BIRTH Fieldhead, Birstall, West Yorkshire, England  
DATE OF DEATH 1804-02-08  
PLACE OF DEATH Joseph Priestley House, 472 Priestley Avenue, Northumberland,
Pennsylvania 17857, United States  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Priestley"

Categories: 1733 births | 1804 deaths | English chemists | Discoverers of
chemical elements | People of the Industrial Revolution | Fellows of the Royal
Society | Recipients of the Copley Medal | English philosophers | British
abolitionists | English Dissenters | English Unitarians | British theologians
| English Christian theologians | American Christian theologians | Grammarians
| Christian philosophers | Political philosophy | British pamphlet writers |
Members of the Lunar Society | People from Birstall | American scientists |
American educators | British Americans | Religion and science

Hidden categories: Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * à·à·à¶à·à¶½
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 12:52.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



