
# Henrik Ibsen

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the Norwegian playwright and poet. For other persons
named Ibsen, see Ibsen (disambiguation).

Henrik Ibsen  
<IMG>  
Ibsen in 1900  
Born Henrik Johan Ibsen  
20 March 1828(1828-03-20)  
Skien, Norway  
Died 23 May 1906 (aged 78)  
Kristiania (Oslo), Norway  
Occupation Playwright, poet, theatre director  
Nationality Norwegian  
Genres Realism  
Notable work(s) Peer Gynt (1867)  
A Doll's House (1879)  
Ghosts (1881)  
The Wild Duck (1884)  
Hedda Gabler (1890)  
Influences

    
    
    Kierkegaard, Brandes  
Influenced

    
    
    Anton Chekhov, Constantin Stanislavski, George Bernard Shaw, Georg Brandes, AndrÃ© Antoine, AurÃ©lien LugnÃ©-Poe, Sigmund Freud, James Joyce, Arthur Miller, Raymond Williams  
Henrik Johan Ibsen (pronounced [ËhÉnÉ¾Éªk ËÉªpsÉn]; 20 March 1828 â 23
May 1906) was a major 19th-century Norwegian playwright of realistic drama and
poet. He is often referred to as the "father of modern drama" and is one of
the founders of modernism in the theatre.[1] Alongside Knut Hamsun, Ibsen is
held to be the greatest of Norwegian authors, celebrated as a national symbol
by Norwegians, and one of the most important playwrights of all time.[2]

His plays were considered scandalous to many of his era, when Victorian values
of family life and propriety largely held sway in Europe and any challenge to
them was considered immoral and outrageous. Ibsen's work examined the
realities that lay behind many facades, possessing a revelatory nature that
was disquieting to many contemporaries.

Ibsen introduced a critical eye and free inquiry into the conditions of life
and issues of morality.

## Contents

  * 1 Family and youth
  * 2 Life and writings
  * 3 Death
  * 4 List of works
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Family and youth

Henrik Ibsen was born to Knud Ibsen and Marichen Altenburg, a relatively well-
to-do merchant family, in the small port town of Skien, Norway, which was
primarily noted for shipping timber. He was a descendant of some of the oldest
and most distinguished families of Norway, including the Paus family. Ibsen
later pointed out his distinguished ancestors and relatives in a letter to
Georg Brandes. Shortly after his birth his family's fortunes took a
significant turn for the worse. His mother turned to religion for solace and
his father began to suffer from severe depression. The characters in his plays
often mirror his parents, and his themes often deal with issues of financial
difficulty as well as moral conflicts stemming from dark secrets hidden from
society.[citation needed]

At fifteen, Ibsen left home. He moved to the small town of Grimstad to become
an apprentice pharmacist and began writing plays. In 1846, a liaison with a
servant produced an illegitimate child, whom he later rejected. While Ibsen
did pay some child support for fourteen years, he never met his illegitimate
son, who ended up as a poor blacksmith. Ibsen went to Christiania (later
renamed Oslo) intending to matriculate at the university. He soon rejected the
idea (his earlier attempts at entering university were blocked as he did not
pass all his entrance exams), preferring to commit himself to writing. His
first play, the tragedy Catiline (1850), was published under the pseudonym
"Brynjolf Bjarme," when he was only 22, but it was not performed. His first
play to be staged, The Burial Mound (1850), received little attention. Still,
Ibsen was determined to be a playwright, although the numerous plays he wrote
in the following years remained unsuccessful.

## [edit] Life and writings

He spent the next several years employed at the Norwegian Theater in Bergen,
where he was involved in the production of more than 145 plays as a writer,
director, and producer. During this period he did not publish any new plays of
his own. Despite Ibsen's failure to achieve success as a playwright, he gained
a great deal of practical experience at the Norwegian Theater, experience that
was to prove valuable when he continued writing.

Ibsen returned to Christiania in 1858 to become the creative director of
Christiania's National Theater. He married Suzannah Thoresen the same year and
she gave birth to their only child, Sigurd. The couple lived in very poor
financial circumstances and Ibsen became very disenchanted with life in
Norway. In 1864, he left Christiania and went to Sorrento in Italy in self-
imposed exile. He was not to return to his native land for the next 27 years,
and when he returned it was to be as a noted playwright, however
controversial.

His next play, Brand (1865), was to bring him the critical acclaim he sought,
along with a measure of financial success, as was the following play, Peer
Gynt (1867), to which Edvard Grieg famously composed incidental music and
songs. Although Ibsen read excerpts of the Danish philosopher SÃ¸ren
Kierkegaard and traces of the latter's influence are evident in Brand, it was
not until after Brand that Ibsen came to take Kierkegaard seriously. Initially
annoyed with his friend Georg Brandes for comparing Brand to Kierkegaard,
Ibsen nevertheless read Either/Or and Fear and Trembling. Subsequently,
Ibsen's next play Peer Gynt was consciously informed by Kierkegaard.[3][4]

With success, Ibsen became more confident and began to introduce more and more
of his own beliefs and judgments into the drama, exploring what he termed the
"drama of ideas." His next series of plays are often considered his Golden
Age, when he entered the height of his power and influence, becoming the
center of dramatic controversy across Europe.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Portrait from around 1870

Ibsen moved from Italy to Dresden, Germany in 1868, where he spent years
writing the play he regarded as his main work, Emperor and Galilean (1873),
dramatizing the life and times of the Roman emperor Julian the Apostate.
Although Ibsen himself always looked back on this play as the cornerstone of
his entire works, very few shared his opinion, and his next works would be
much more acclaimed. Ibsen moved to Munich in 1875 and published A Doll's
House in 1879. The play is a scathing criticism of the blind acceptance of
traditional roles of men and women in Victorian marriage.

Ibsen followed A Doll's House with Ghosts (1881), another scathing commentary
on Victorian morality, in which a widow reveals to her pastor that she had
hidden the evils of her marriage for its duration. The pastor had advised her
to marry her then fiancÃ© despite his philandering, and she did so in the
belief that her love would reform him. But she was not to receive the result
she was promised. Her husband's philandering continued right up until his
death, and the result is that her son is syphilitic. Even the mention of
venereal disease was scandalous, but to show that even a person who followed
society's ideals of morality had no protection against it, that was beyond
scandalous. Hers was not the noble life which Victorians believed would result
from fulfilling one's duty rather than following one's desires. Those
idealized beliefs were only the Ghosts of the past, haunting the present.

In An Enemy of the People (1882), Ibsen went even further. In earlier plays,
controversial elements were important and even pivotal components of the
action, but they were on the small scale of individual households. In An
Enemy, controversy became the primary focus, and the antagonist was the entire
community. One primary message of the play is that the individual, who stands
alone, is more often "right" than the mass of people, who are portrayed as
ignorant and sheeplike. The Victorian belief was that the community was a
noble institution that could be trusted, a notion Ibsen challenged. In An
Enemy of the People Ibsen chastised not only the right wing or 'Victorian'
elements of society but also the liberalism of the time. He illustrated how
people on both sides of the social spectrum could be equally self-serving. An
Enemy of the People was written as a response to the people who had rejected
his previous work, Ghosts. The plot of the play is a veiled look at the way
people reacted to the plot of Ghosts. The protagonist is a doctor, a pillar of
the community. The town is a vacation spot whose primary draw is a public
bath. The doctor discovers that the water used by the bath is being
contaminated when it seeps through the grounds of a local tannery. He expects
to be acclaimed for saving the town from the nightmare of infecting visitors
with disease, but instead he is declared an 'enemy of the people' by the
locals, who band against him and even throw stones through his windows. The
play ends with his complete ostracism. It is obvious to the reader that
disaster is in store for the town as well as for the doctor, due to the
community's unwillingness to face reality.

As audiences by now expected of him, his next play again attacked entrenched
beliefs and assumptionsâbut this time his attack was not against the
Victorians but against overeager reformers and their idealism. Always the
iconoclast, Ibsen was equally willing to tear down the ideologies of any part
of the political spectrum, including his own.

The Wild Duck (1884) is considered by many to be Ibsen's finest work, and it
is certainly the most complex. It tells the story of Gregers Werle, a young
man who returns to his hometown after an extended exile and is reunited with
his boyhood friend Hjalmar Ekdal. Over the course of the play the many secrets
that lie behind the Ekdals' apparently happy home are revealed to Gregers, who
insists on pursuing the absolute truth, or the "Summons of the Ideal". Among
these truths: Gregers' father impregnated his servant Gina, then married her
off to Hjalmar to legitimize the child. Another man has been disgraced and
imprisoned for a crime the elder Werle committed. And while Hjalmar spends his
days working on a wholly imaginary "invention", his wife is earning the
household income.

Ibsen displays masterful use of irony: despite his dogmatic insistence on
truth, Gregers never says what he thinks but only insinuates, and is never
understood until the play reaches its climax. Gregers hammers away at Hjalmar
through innuendo and coded phrases until he realizes the truth; Gina's
daughter, Hedvig, is not his child. Blinded by Gregers' insistence on absolute
truth, he disavows the child. Seeing the damage he has wrought, Gregers
determines to repair things, and suggests to Hedvig that she sacrifice the
wild duck, her wounded pet, to prove her love for Hjalmar. Hedvig, alone among
the characters, recognizes that Gregers always speaks in code, and looking for
the deeper meaning in the first important statement Gregers makes which does
not contain one, kills herself rather than the duck in order to prove her love
for him in the ultimate act of self-sacrifice. Only too late do Hjalmar and
Gregers realize that the absolute truth of the "ideal" is sometimes too much
for the human heart to bear.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Letter from Ibsen to his English reviewer and translator Edmund Gosse:
"30.8.[18]99. Dear Mr. Gosse! It was to me a hearty joy to receive your
letter. So I will finally personal meet you and your wife. I am at home every
day in the morning until 1 o'clock. I am happy and surprised of your excellent
Norwegian! Yours friendly obliged Henrik Ibsen."

Interestingly, late in his career Ibsen turned to a more introspective drama
that had much less to do with denunciations of Victorian morality. In such
later plays as Hedda Gabler (1890) and The Master Builder (1892) Ibsen
explored psychological conflicts that transcended a simple rejection of
Victorian conventions. Many modern readers, who might regard anti-Victorian
didacticism as dated, simplistic and even clichÃ©d, have found these later
works to be of absorbing interest for their hard-edged, objective
consideration of interpersonal confrontation. Hedda Gabler and The Master
Builder center on female protagonists whose almost demonic energy proves both
attractive and destructive for those around them. Hedda Gabler is probably
Ibsen's most performed play, with the title role regarded as one of the most
challenging and rewarding for an actress even in the present day. There are a
few similarities between Hedda and the character of Nora in A Doll's House,
but many of today's audiences and theater critics feel that Hedda's intensity
and drive are much more complex and much less comfortably explained than what
they view as rather routine feminism on the part of Nora.

Ibsen had completely rewritten the rules of drama with a realism which was to
be adopted by Chekhov and others and which we see in the theater to this day.
From Ibsen forward, challenging assumptions and directly speaking about issues
has been considered one of the factors that makes a play art rather than
entertainment. Ibsen returned to Norway in 1891, but it was in many ways not
the Norway he had left. Indeed, he had played a major role in the changes that
had happened across society. The Victorian Age was on its last legs, to be
replaced by the rise of Modernism not only in the theater, but across public
life.

## [edit] Death

Ibsen died in Christiania (now Oslo) on May 23, 1906 after a series of
strokes. When his nurse assured a visitor that he was a little better, Ibsen
sputtered "On the contrary" and died.

He was buried in VÃ¥r Frelsers gravlund ("The Graveyard of Our Savior") in
central Oslo. In 2006 the 100th anniversary of Ibsen's death was commemorated
in Norway and many other countries, and the year dubbed the "Ibsen year" by
Norwegian authorities. On May 23, 2006 - the occasion of the hundred-year
commemoration of Ibsen's death - the Ibsen Museum reopened a completely
restored writer's home with the original interior, original colors and decor.
Also in May 2006, a biographical puppet production of Ibsen's life named 'The
Death of Little Ibsen' debuted at New York City's Sanford Meisner Theater.

## [edit] List of works

  * 1850 Catiline (Catilina)
  * 1850 The Burial Mound also known as The Warrior's Barrow (KjÃ¦mpehÃ¸jen)
  * 1851 Norma (Norma)
  * 1852 St. John's Eve (Sancthansnatten)
  * 1854 Lady Inger of Oestraat (Fru Inger til Ãsteraad)
  * 1855 The Feast at Solhaug (Gildet paa Solhoug)
  * 1856 Olaf Liljekrans (Olaf Liljekrans)
  * 1857 The Vikings at Helgeland (HÃ¦rmÃ¦ndene paa Helgeland)
  * 1862 Digte \- only released collection of poetry, included "Terje Vigen".
  * 1862 Love's Comedy (KjÃ¦rlighedens Komedie)
  * 1863 The Pretenders (Kongs-Emnerne)
  * 1866 Brand (Brand)
  * 1867 Peer Gynt (Peer Gynt)

  * 1869 The League of Youth (De unges Forbund)
  * 1873 Emperor and Galilean (Kejser og GalilÃ¦er)
  * 1877 Pillars of Society (Samfundets StÃ¸tter)
  * 1879 A Doll's House (Et Dukkehjem)
  * 1881 Ghosts (Gengangere)
  * 1882 An Enemy of the People (En Folkefiende)
  * 1884 The Wild Duck (Vildanden)
  * 1886 Rosmersholm (Rosmersholm)
  * 1888 The Lady from the Sea (Fruen fra Havet)
  * 1890 Hedda Gabler (Hedda Gabler)
  * 1892 The Master Builder (Bygmester Solness)
  * 1894 Little Eyolf (Lille Eyolf)
  * 1896 John Gabriel Borkman (John Gabriel Borkman)
  * 1899 When We Dead Awaken (NÃ¥r vi dÃ¸de vaagner)

  
## [edit] See also

  * Problem play
  * Realism

  * Naturalism
  * Nineteenth-century theatre

  
+naturalism

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ On Ibsen's role as "father of modern drama," see "Ibsen Celebration to Spotlight 'Father of Modern Drama'". Bowdoin College. 2007-01-23. http://www.bowdoin.edu/news/events/archives/003725.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-03-27. ; on Ibsen's relationship to modernism, see Moi (2006, 1-36).
  2. ^ "Ibsen.net (English version)". National Library of Oslo with funding from the Norwegian government. http://ibsen.net/index.gan?id=83. Retrieved on 2007-03-27.
  3. ^ Shapiro, Bruce. Divine Madness and the Absurd Paradox. (1990) ISBN 9780313272905
  4. ^ Downs, Brian. Ibsen: The Intellectual Background (1946)

## [edit] References

  * Boyesen, Hjalmar Hjorth A Commentary on the Works of Henrik Ibsen (New York: Macmillan, 1894)

  * Koht, Halvdan. The Life of Ibsen translated by Ruth Lima McMahon and Hanna Astrup Larsen. W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., New York, 1931.

  * Lucas, F. L. The Drama of Ibsen and Strindberg, Cassell, London, 1962. A useful introduction, giving the biographical background to each play and detailed play-by-play summaries and discussion for the theatre-goer (including the less well-known plays).

  * Ferguson, Robert. Henrik Ibsen: A New Biography. Richard Cohen Books, London, 1996.

  * Meyer, Michael. Ibsen. History Press Ltd., Stroud, 2004.

  * Moi, Toril. 2006. Henrik Ibsen and the Birth of Modernism: Art, Theater, Philosophy. Oxford and New York: Oxford UP. ISBN 9780199202591.

  * Haugan, JÃ¸rgen. Henrik Ibsens Metode:Den Indre Utvikling Gjennem Ibsens Dramatikk ( Norwegian: Gyldendal Norsk Forlag. 1977)

## [edit] External links

<IMG> Literature portal  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Henrik
Ibsen  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Henrik Ibsen

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Henrik Ibsen  
  * Ibsen Studies The only international academic journal devoted to Ibsen
  * Online course by Ibsen scholar Brian Johnston author of The Ibsen Cycle and To the Third Empire: Ibsen's Early Drama
  * Extensive resource in several languages from the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
  * Works by or about Henrik Ibsen at Internet Archive (scanned books original editions color illustrated)
  * Works by Henrik Ibsen at Project Gutenberg (plain text and HTML)
  * Henrik Ibsen at Project Gutenberg (the biography by Edmund Gosse)
  * Henrik Ibsen - A Bibliography of Criticism and Biography, by Ina Ten Eyck Firkins, from Project Gutenberg
  * Works by or about Henrik Ibsen in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
  * "Ibsen and His Discontents" \- a critical, conservative view of Ibsen's works, written by Theodore Dalrymple

v â¢ d â¢ e

Works by Henrik Ibsen  
Catiline (1850) Â· The Burial Mound (KjÃ¦mpehÃ¸jen) (1850) Â· Norma (1851) Â·
St. John's Eve (Sancthansnatten) (1852) Â· Lady Inger of Oestraat (Fru Inger
til Ãsteraad) (1854) Â· The Feast at Solhaug (Gildet paa Solhoug) (1855) Â·
Olaf Liljekrans (1856) Â· The Vikings at Helgeland (HÃ¦rmÃ¦ndene paa
Helgeland) (1857) Â· Love's Comedy (KjÃ¦rlighedens Komedie) (1862) Â· The
Pretenders (Kongs-Emnerne) (1863) Â· Brand (1865) Â· Peer Gynt (1867) Â· The
League of Youth (De unges Forbund) (1869) Â· Emperor and Galilean (Kejser og
GalilÃ¦er) (1873) Â· The Pillars of Society (Samfundets stÃ¸tter) (1877) Â· A
Doll's House (Et dukkehjem) (1879) Â· Ghosts (Gengangere) (1881) Â· An Enemy
of the People (En Folkefiende) (1882) Â· The Wild Duck (Vildanden) (1884) Â·
Rosmersholm (Rosmersholm) (1886) Â· The Lady from the Sea (Fruen fra havet)
(1888) Â· Hedda Gabler (1890) Â· The Master Builder (Bygmester Solness) (1892)
Â· Little Eyolf (1894) Â· John Gabriel Borkman (1896) Â· When We Dead Awaken
(NÃ¥r vi dÃ¸de vÃ¥gner) (1899)  
Persondata  
NAME Ibsen, Henrik Johann  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Norwegian playwright  
DATE OF BIRTH 20 March 1828(1828-03-20)  
PLACE OF BIRTH Skien, Norway  
DATE OF DEATH 23 May 1906  
PLACE OF DEATH Kristiania  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henrik_Ibsen"

Categories: Henrik Ibsen | Norwegian dramatists and playwrights | Modernist
drama, theatre and performance | Knights Grand Cross of the Royal Norwegian
Order of St. Olav | 19th-century theatre | 1828 births | 1906 deaths | Deaths
from stroke | Paus family | People from Skien | Burials at VÃ¥r Frelsers
gravlund

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FÃ¸royskt
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Ù¾ÚØªÙ
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 04:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



