
# C. Wright Mills

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Charles Wright Mills (August 28, 1916, Waco, Texas â March 20, 1962, West
Nyack, New York) was an American sociologist. Mills is best remembered for his
1959 book The Sociological Imagination in which he lays out a view of the
proper relationship between biography and history, theory and method in
sociological scholarship. He is also known for studying the structures of
power and class in the U.S. in his book The Power Elite. Mills was concerned
with the responsibilities of intellectuals in post-World War II society, and
advocated public, political engagement over disinterested observation.

## Contents

  * 1 Life and work
  * 2 Works
  * 3 Outlook
  * 4 Personal life
  * 5 Awards
  * 6 Timeline
  * 7 Further reading
  * 8 External links
  * 9 Notes

  
## [edit] Life and work

Mills initially attended Texas A&M University but left after his first year
and subsequently graduated from the University of Texas at Austin in 1939 and
received his Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1941. After a
stint at the University of Maryland, College Park, he took a faculty position
at Columbia University in 1946, which he kept, despite controversy, until his
untimely death by heart attack. In the mid-1940s, together with Paul Goodman,
he contributed to Politics, the journal edited during the 1940s by Dwight
Macdonald.[1]

## [edit] Works

  * The New Men of Power: America's Labor Leaders (1948) studies the Labor Metaphysic and the dynamic of labor leaders cooperating with business officials. Mills concluded that labour had effectively renounced its traditional oppositional role and become reconciled to life within a capitalist system. Appeased by "bread and butter" economic policies, Mills argued labour adopted a pliantly subordinate role in the new structure of American power.

  * White Collar: The American Middle Classes (1951) contends that bureaucracies have overwhelmed the individual city worker, robbing him or her of all independent thought and turning him into a sort of a robot that is oppressed but cheerful. He or she gets a salary, but becomes alienated from the world because of his or her inability to affect or change it.

  * The Power Elite (1956) describes the relationship between the political, military, and economic elite (people at the pinnacles of these three institutions), noting that these people share a common world view:

    
    the military metaphysic: a military definition of reality;
    possess class identity: recognizing themselves separate and superior to the rest of society;
    have interchangeability: they move within and between the three institutional structures and hold interlocking directorates;
    cooptation / socialization: socialization of prospective new members is done based on how well they "clone" themselves socially after such elites.
These elites in the "big three" institutional orders have an "uneasy" alliance
based upon their "community of interests" driven by the "military metaphysic,"
which has transformed the economy into a 'permanent war economy'.

  * The Sociological Imagination (1959), Mills' most influential work, describes a mindsetâthe sociological imaginationâfor doing sociology that stresses being able to connect individual experiences and societal relationships. The three components that form the sociological imagination are 1. History: how a society came to be and how it is changing and how history is being made in it 2. Biography: the nature of "human nature" in a society; what kind of people inhabit a particular society 3. Social Structure: how the various institutional orders in a society operate, which ones are dominant, how are they held together, how they might be changing, etc. The Sociological Imagination gives the one possessing it the ability to look beyond their local environment and personality to wider social structures and a relationship between history, biography and social structure.

Other important works include: The Causes of World War Three (1958), Listen,
Yankee: The Revolution in Cuba (1960), and The Marxists (1962).

In a 1997 survey of members of the International Sociological Association
which asked them to identify the ten books published in the 20th century which
they considered to be the most influential for sociologists, The Sociological
Imagination ranked second, preceded only by Max Weber's Economy and Society.

The novel The Death of Artemio Cruz (1962), by Mexican writer Carlos Fuentes,
is dedicated "To C. Wright Mills, true voice of North America, friend and
companion in the struggle of Latin America". Dwight Macdonald had an off-
again-on-again association with Mills, and sometimes, in his capacity as
magazine editor, published Mills' material.

## [edit] Outlook

There has long been debate over Mills' overall intellectual outlook. Mills is
often seen as a closet Marxist because of his emphasis on social classes and
their roles in historical progress. Just as often, others argue that Mills
more closely identified with the work of Max Weber, whom many sociologists
interpret as an exemplar of sophisticated (and intellectually adequate) anti-
Marxism and modern liberalism.

While Mills never embraced the "Marxist" label, he nonetheless told his
closest associates that he felt much closer to what he saw as the best
currents of flexible, humanist Marxism than to its alternatives. He considered
himself as a "plain Marxist", working in the spirit of young Marx as he claims
in his collected essays: "Power, Politics and People" (Oxford university
press, 1963). In a November 1956 letter to his friends Bette and Harvey
Swados, Mills declared "[i]n the meantime, let's not forget that there's more
[that's] still useful in even the Sweezy [2] kind of Marxism than in all the
routineers of J.S. Mill [3] put together." [4]

There is an important quotation from Letters to Tovarich (autobiographical
essay) dated Fall 1957 titled "On Who I Might Be and How I Got That Way":

â You've asked me, 'What might you be?' Now I answer you: 'I am a Wobbly.' I
mean this spiritually and politically. In saying this I refer less to
political orientation that to political ethos, and I take Wobbly to mean one
thing: the opposite of bureaucrat. [â¦] I am a Wobbly, personally, down deep,
and for good. I am outside the whale, and I got that way through social
isolation and self-help. But do you know what a Wobbly is? It's a kind of
spiritual condition. Don't be afraid of the word, Tovarich. A Wobbly is not
only a man who takes orders from himself. He's also a man who's often in the
situation where there are no regulations to fall back upon that he hasn't made
up himself. He doesn't like bosses âcapitalistic or communistic â they are
all the same to him. He wants to be, and he wants everyone else to be, his own
boss at all times under all conditions and for any purposes they may want to
follow up. This kind of spiritual condition, and only this, is Wobbly
freedom.[5] â  
These two quotations are the ones chosen by Kathryn Mills for the better
acknowledgement of the nuanced thinking of C.W.Mills.

It appears that Mills understood his position as being much closer to Marx
than to Weber, albeit influenced by both, as Stanley Aronowitz argued in A
Mills Revival?. [6] Mills argues that micro and macro levels of analysis can
be linked together by the sociological imagination, which enables its
possessor to understand the large historical sense in terms of its meaning for
the inner life and the external career of a variety of individuals.
Individuals can only understand their own experiences fully if they locate
themselves within their period of history. The key factor is the combination
of private problems with public issues: the combination of troubles that occur
within the individualâs immediate milieu and relations with other people
with matters that have to do with institutions of an historical society as a
whole. Mills shares with Marxist sociology and other "conflict theorists" the
view that American society is sharply divided and systematically shaped by the
ongoing interactions between the powerful and powerless. He also shares their
concerns for alienation, the effects of social structure on the personality,
and the manipulation of people by elites and the mass media. Mills combined
such conventional Marxian concerns with careful attention to the dynamics of
personal meaning and small-group motivations, topics for which Weberian
scholars are more noted.

Above all, Mills understood sociology, when properly approached, as an
inherently political endeavor and a servant of the democratic process. In The
Sociological Imagination, Mills wrote:

â It is the political task of the social scientist -- as of any liberal
educator -- continually to translate personal troubles into public issues, and
public issues into the terms of their human meaning for a variety of
individuals. It is his task to display in his work -- and, as an educator, in
his life as well -- this kind of sociological imagination. And it is his
purpose to cultivate such habits of mind among the men and women who are
publicly exposed to him. To secure these ends is to secure reason and
individuality, and to make these the predominant values of a democratic
society. â  
[citation needed]

## [edit] Personal life

When studying at the University of Texas, Mills met his first wife, Dorothy
Helen Smith, who was also a student there. After they were married in 1937,
Dorothy Helen, who became known as "Freya," worked to support the couple while
Mills did graduate work, in addition to copyediting and typing many of the
texts he wrote during this period, including his Ph.D. dissertation. They
separated in New York City in 1945 and were divorced in 1947. Mills' second
wife was Ruth Harper, a statistician who worked with Mills on White Collar,
published in 1951 and The Power Elite, published in 1956. Mills and Ruth were
married in 1947, separated in 1957, and divorced in 1959. Mills' third wife
was Yaroslava Surmach, an American artist of Ukrainian descent whose varied
work included glass paintings, book illustrations, and stained glass window
designs. They were married in 1959, about three years before Mills' death in
1962. By a strange coincidence, all three women died within a period of less
than three months, Ruth on July 1, 2008, Freya on August 19, 2008, and
Yaroslava on September 17, 2008. Mills had one child with each wife: Pamela
(with Freya), Kathryn (with Ruth), and Nikolas (with Yaroslava).

## [edit] Awards

The Society for the Study of Social Problems established the C. Wright Mills
Award in 1964 for the book that "best exemplifies outstanding social science
research and an understanding the individual and society in the tradition of
the distinguished sociologist, C. Wright Mills."

## [edit] Timeline

<IMG>

A timeline of C. Wright Mills' life and the important military, political, and
economic events of his time.  
## [edit] Further reading

  * Irving Louis Horowitz, C. Wright Mills, an American Utopian (1983).
  * Rick Tilman, C. Wright Mills, A Native Radical and his American Roots (1984). ISBN 0-02-915010-8.
  * John Eldridge, C. Wright Mills, Key sociologist (1983).
  * Kathryn Mills, ed., with Pamela Mills, C. Wright Mills: Letters and Autobiographical Writings, introduction by Dan Wakefield (University of California Press, 2000). ISBN 0-520-23209-7.
  * Tom Hayden with Contemporary Reflections by Stanley Aronowitz, Richard Flacks, and Charles Lemert, Radical Nomad: C. Wright Mills and His Times (2006). ISBN 1-59451-202-7.
  * Kevin Mattson, Intellectuals in Action: The Origins of the New Left and Radical Liberalism, 1945-1970 (2002). ISBN 027102206X.
  * G. William Domhoff, "Mills's The Power Elite 50 Years Later" in Contemporary Sociology, November 2006.
  * Stanley Aronowitz, "A Mills Revival?", in Logos Journal, Summer 2003.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: C. Wright
Mills  
  * Official website
  * Contemporary Analysis
  * Frank Elwell's page at Rogers State
  * An interview with Mills's daughters, Kathryn and Pamela
  * C.Wright Mills, The Power Elite
  * C.W Mills,Structure of Power in American Society,British Journal of Sociology,Vol.9.No.1 1958
  * A Mills Revival?
  * C.Wright Mills,The Causes of World War Three
  * C.Wright Mills, Letter to the New Left
  * C.Wright Mills, The Sociological Imagination
  * C.Wright Mills, On intellectual Craftsmanship
  * Sociology-Congress in KÃ¶ln 2000 workshop: C. Wright Mills and his Power Elite: Actuality today?

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ TIME April 4, 1994 Volume 143, No. 14 - "Biographical sketch of Dwight Macdonald" by John Elson (Accessed 4 December 2008)
  2. ^ Paul M. Sweezy, founder of Monthly Review magazine, "an independent socialist magazine".
  3. ^ I.e., liberal intellectuals.
  4. ^ 7-nov-2007 17.07 library.umass.edu Remo, I just reviewed the Mills correspondence in the Swados Papers, and, yes, that is an accurate quote. In a letter dated Nov. 3rd [1956] Mills writes, "What these jokers -- all of them -- don't they realize that way down deep and systematically I'm a goddamned anarchist. I'm really quite serious and I'm going over the next few years to work out the position in a positive and clean-cut way. In the meantime, let's not forget that there's more still useful in even the Sweezy kind of Marxism than in all the routineers of JS Mills put together." I'm happy to send you a photocopy of the entire letter if you like. Please let me know if you have any questions, or if I can be of further assistance. Best regards, Danielle -- Danielle Kovacs Curator of Manuscripts Special Collections and University Archives W.E.B. Du Bois Library University of Massachusetts 154 Hicks Way Amherst, MA 01003 (413) 545-2784 [1].
  5. ^ From C. Wright Mills: Letters and Autobiographical Writings, edited by Kathryn Mills with Pamela Mills, introduction by Dan Wakefield (University of California Press, 2000.), pag.252. Wobblies were members of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), and the direct action they favored included passive resistance, strikes, and boycotts. They wanted to build a new society according to general socialist principles but they refused to endorse any socialist party or any other kind of political party. Site of IWW.
  6. ^ "These perspectives owed as much to the methodological precepts of Emile Durkheim as they did to the critical theory of Karl Marx and Max Weber. Using many of the tools of conventional social inquiry: surveys, interviews, data analysisâcharts includedâMills takes pains to stay close to the âdataâ until the concluding chapters. But what distinguishes Mills from mainstream sociology, and from Weber, with whom he shares a considerable portion of his intellectual outlook, is the standpoint of radical social change, not of fashionable sociological neutrality." A Mills Revival?.

  

Persondata  
NAME Mills, C. Wright  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Mills, Charles Wright  
SHORT DESCRIPTION American sociologist  
DATE OF BIRTH 28 August 1916  
PLACE OF BIRTH Waco, Texas, United States  
DATE OF DEATH 20 March 1962  
PLACE OF DEATH West Nyack, New York, United States  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C._Wright_Mills"

Categories: 1916 births | 1962 deaths | American sociologists | University of
Wisconsin-Madison alumni | Columbia University alumni | Guggenheim Fellows |
Military-industrial complex | People from Waco, Texas | Labor historians

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 January 2009, at 18:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



