
# Indiana Jones

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the fictional character. For the media franchise, see
Indiana Jones franchise.

Indiana Jones  
Indiana Jones character  
<IMG>  
Indiana Jones in Raiders  
First appearance Raiders of the Lost Ark  
Created by George Lucas  
Portrayed by Films:  
Harrison Ford (ages 36-58)  
River Phoenix (age 13)  
TV Series:  
Corey Carrier (ages 8-10)  
Sean Patrick Flanery (ages 16-21)  
George Hall (age 93)  
Video games:  
Doug Lee (voice)  
David Esch (voice)  
Information  
Nickname(s) Indy  
Date of birth July 1, 1899  
Princeton, New Jersey  
Occupation Archaeologist  
Associate dean  
College professor  
Soldier  
Spy  
Family Henry Jones, Sr. (father, deceased)  
Anna Jones (mother, deceased)  
Spouse(s) Marion Ravenwood  
Children Henry "Mutt Williams" Jones III  
Nationality Scottish American  
Dr. Henry Walton "Indiana" Jones, Jr.[1] is a fictional adventurer, soldier,
professor of archaeology, and the main protagonist of the Indiana Jones
franchise. George Lucas created the character in homage to the action heroes
of 1930s film serials. The character first appeared in the 1981 film Raiders
of the Lost Ark, to be followed by Temple of Doom in 1984, The Last Crusade in
1989, The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles from 1992 to 1996, and Kingdom of the
Crystal Skull in 2008. As well as film and television appearances, the
character has been featured in novels, comics, video games, and other media.
Jones is also featured in the theme park attraction Indiana Jones Adventure,
which exists in similar forms at Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea.

Jones is most famously played by Harrison Ford; he has also been portrayed by
River Phoenix (as the young Jones in The Last Crusade), and in the television
series The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles by Corey Carrier, Sean Patrick
Flanery, and George Hall. Doug Lee has supplied Jones's voice to two LucasArts
video games, Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis and Indiana Jones and the
Infernal Machine, while David Esch supplied his voice to Indiana Jones and the
Emperor's Tomb.

Tom Selleck was originally cast in the role in Raiders of the Lost Ark;
however, due to Selleck's commitment to Magnum PI, he was replaced by Ford.
The character's iconic outfit was designed by Jim Steranko. Jones is notable
for his bullwhip, fedora, leather jacket, and fear of snakes.

## Contents

  * 1 Appearances
    * 1.1 Feature films
    * 1.2 Television
    * 1.3 Video games
    * 1.4 Theme parks
  * 2 Characterization
  * 3 Concept and creation
    * 3.1 Wardrobe and equipment
    * 3.2 Casting
    * 3.3 Models
  * 4 Influence
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Appearances

Since his introduction in 1981's Raiders of the Lost Ark (later retitled on
VHS and DVD box covers as Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark), Indy
has made appearances in three more feature films, a three-season TV series
entitled The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, novels, comic books, video games,
role-playing games, and even his own theme park rides.

### [edit] Feature films

<IMG>

<IMG>

An older Indiana Jones in Kingdom of the Crystal Skull

Indiana Jones, played by Harrison Ford, was first introduced in the 1981 film
Raiders of the Lost Ark, set in 1936. He is portrayed as an adventurous
throwback to the 1930s film serial treasure hunters and pulp action heroes,
with an alter ego of Doctor Jones, a respected archaeologist at Marshall
College (named after producer Frank Marshall) [1] \- a fictional college in
Connecticut. In this first adventure, he is pitted against the Nazis,
traveling the world to prevent them from recovering the Ark of the Covenant
(see also Biblical archaeology). He is aided by Marion Ravenwood and Sallah.
The Nazis are led by Jones's archrival, a Nazi-sympathizing French
archaeologist named RenÃ© Belloq, and Arnold Toht, a sinister Gestapo agent.

The 1984 prequel Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, set in 1935, took the
character into a more horror-oriented story, skipping his legitimate teaching
job and globe trotting, and taking place almost entirely in India. This time,
Jones attempts to recover children and the Sankara Stones from the
bloodthirsty Thuggee cult.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Young Indiana Jones in The Last Crusade

The third film, 1989's Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, set in 1938,
returned to the formula of the original, reintroducing characters such as
Sallah and Marcus Brody, a scene from Professor Jones's classroom (he now
teaches at Barnett College), the globe trotting element of multiple locations,
and the return of the infamous Nazi mystics, this time trying to find the Holy
Grail. The film's introduction, set in 1912, provided some back story to the
character, specifically the origin of his fear of snakes, his use of a
bullwhip, the scar on his chin, and his fedora hat; the film's epilogue also
reveals that "Indiana" is not Jones's first name, but a nickname he took from
the family dog. The film was a buddy movie of sorts, teaming Jones with his
father, often to comical effect. Although Lucas intended at the time to do
five films, this ended up being the last for over eighteen years, as Lucas
could not think of a good MacGuffin to drive the next installment.[2]

The 2008 film, Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, became the
latest film in the series. Set in 1957, 19 years after the third film, it pits
an older, wiser Indiana Jones against Soviet agents bent on harnessing the
power of a crystal skull discovered in South America by his former colleague
Harold Oxley (John Hurt). He is aided in his adventure by an old lover, Marion
Ravenwood (Karen Allen), and her son â a young greaser named Mutt Williams
(Shia LaBeouf), later revealed to be his biological child Henry Jones III.
This film also reveals that Jones was recruited by the Office of Strategic
Services (a predecessor department to the CIA) during WWII, attaining the rank
of Colonel and running covert operations with MI6 agent George McHale on the
"Reds", which could mean the Soviet Union and/or allied nations aligned with
the Soviets.

### [edit] Television

<IMG>

<IMG>

Young Indiana Jones in The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles

From 1992 to 1996, George Lucas executive produced a television series named
The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, which was designed as an educational
program for children, spotlighting historical figures and important events,
using the concept of a prequel to the films as a draw. The show featured a
standard formula of a 93-year-old Jones (George Hall), wearing an eye patch,
introducing a story, and then an adventure with either a 17-year-old Jones
(Sean Patrick Flanery) or a 10-year-old Jones (Corey Carrier), and even a baby
Indy (Neil Boulane). Historical figures featured on the show include Leo
Tolstoy, Pancho Villa, Charles de Gaulle, Elliot Ness, Ernest Hemingway, and
John Ford, in such diverse locations as Egypt, Austria-Hungary, India, China,
and the whole of Europe.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Old Indiana Jones in The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles

One episode, "Young Indiana Jones and the Mystery of the Blues", is bookended
by Harrison Ford, reprising his role as the character. Indiana loses one of
his eyes sometime between 1957 and when the "Old Indy" segments take place.

The show provided some backstory for the films, as well as new information
regarding the character. He was born July 1, 1899, and his middle name is
Walton, Lucas's middle name. It is also mentioned that he had a sister called
Suzie who died as an infant of fever. His relationship with his father, first
introduced in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, was further fleshed out with
stories about his travels with his father as a young boy. A large portion of
the series centered around his activities during World War I.

In 1999, Lucas removed the episode introductions and epilogues by George Hall
for the VHS and DVD releases, as he re-edited the episodes into
chronologically ordered feature-length stories. The series title was also
changed to The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones.

### [edit] Video games

The character has appeared in several officially licensed video games,
beginning with adaptations of Raiders of the Lost Ark, Temple of Doom, and two
adaptations of The Last Crusade (one with purely action mechanics, one with an
adventure and puzzle based structure).

Following this, the games branched off into original storylines with Indiana
Jones and the Fate of Atlantis, Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine, and
Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb, which sets up Jones's companion Wu Han
and the search for Nurhaci's ashes seen at the beginning of Temple of Doom.
The first two games were developed by Hal Barwood and starred Doug Lee as the
voice of Indiana Jones, while Emperor's Tomb had David Esch fill the role.
There is also a small game from Lucas Arts Indiana Jones and His Desktop
Adventures. A video game was made for young Indy called Young Indiana Jones
and the Instruments of Chaos, as well as a video game version of The Young
Indiana Jones Chronicles. Indy also stars in the new Wii Lego Indiana Jones,
where gamers can play as Indy through the movies Lego style.

Lego Indiana Jones: The Original Adventures was released on June 3, 2008 in
the US.[3]

A new Indiana Jones video game, Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings, is in
development by LucasArts.[4]

Indiana Jones has also made cameo appearances as an unlockable character in
the games Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction and Lego Star Wars: The
Complete Saga.

### [edit] Theme parks

Main article: Indiana Jones Adventure

The Indiana Jones Adventure attractions at Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea
("Temple of the Forbidden Eye" and "Temple of the Crystal Skull",
respectively) place Indy at the forefront of two similar archaeological
discoveries. These two temples each contain a wrathful deity who threatens the
guests who ride through in World War II troop transports. They opened in 1995
and 2001, respectively, and each was an expensive project by Walt Disney
Imagineering. Disney ended up not gaining rights to Harrison Ford's likeness,
but the Indiana Jones character does appear in audio-animatronic form at three
points in both attractions.

Disneyland Resort Paris also features an Indiana Jones ride where people speed
off through ancient ruins in a runaway wagon similar to that found in Indiana
Jones and the Temple of Doom. This roller-coaster is known as Indiana Jones
and the Temple of Peril.

The Indiana Jones Epic Stunt Spectacular! is an amusement show in Disney's
Hollywood Studios in Walt Disney World Resort. The show has various different
stunts, and recruits members of the audience to partake in the show. The show
is 25 minutes long. In the show, the stunt artists reveal some of the secrets
of the stunts behind Raiders of the Lost Ark, including the well-known
running-from-the-boulder scene from early in the film.

## [edit] Characterization

In his role as a college professor of archaeology, Henry Jones Jr. is
scholarly and learned in a tweed suit, lecturing on ancient civilizations. But
at the opportunity to recover important artifacts, he transforms into
"Indiana", a near superhero image he has concocted for himself.[5] Producer
Frank Marshall said, "Indy [is] a fallible character. He makes mistakes and
gets hurt. [...] That's the other thing people like: He's a real character,
not a character with superpowers."[6] Spielberg said there "was the
willingness to allow our leading man to get hurt and to express his pain and
to get his mad out and to take pratfalls and sometimes be the butt of his own
jokes. I mean, Indiana Jones is not a perfect hero, and his imperfections, I
think, make the audience feel that, with a little more exercise and a little
more courage, they could be just like him."[7] According to Spielberg
biographer Douglas Brode, Indiana is a childish man who created his heroic
figure so to escape the dullness of teaching at a school. Both of Indiana's
personas reject one another in philosophy, creating a duality.[5] Harrison
Ford said the fun of playing the character was because Indiana is both a
romantic and a cynic,[8] while scholars have analyzed Indiana as having traits
of a lone wolf; a man on a quest; a noble treasure hunter; a hardboiled
detective; a human superhero; and an American patriot.[9]

Like many characters in his films, Jones has some autobiographical elements of
Spielberg. Indiana lacks a proper father figure because of his strained
relationship with his father, Henry Senior. His own contained anger is
misdirected at the likes of Professor Abner Ravenwood, his mentor at the
University of Chicago, leading to a strained relationship with Marion
Ravenwood.[5] The teenage Indiana bases his own look on a figure from the
prologue of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, after being given his hat.[10]
Marcus Brody acts as Indiana's positive role model at the college.[10]
Indiana's own insecurities are made worse by the absence of his mother.[11] In
Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, the character becomes the father in a
temporary family unit with Willie Scott and Short Round to survive. Indiana is
rescued from the evil of Kali by Short Round's dedication. Indiana also saves
many children from slavery.[11]

Because of Indiana's strained relationship with his father, a Christian
searching for the Holy Grail, the character rejects the spiritual side of the
profession he has followed. The inconsistency of the three films is that after
appearing to become a believer in Judaism (in Raiders), Hinduism (in Doom) and
Christianity (Crusade), Indiana reverts back in the next film, Kingdom of the
Crystal Skull.[citation needed] Temple of Doom, chronologically the earliest
of the films, has Indiana as a mercenary, searching for "fortune and glory".
Indiana uses his knowledge of Shiva to ultimately defeat Mola Ram.[11] In
Raiders, the cynical Indiana chooses to close his eyes in the presence of the
spirits who have been disturbed from their slumber in the Ark of the Covenant.
By contrast, his rival Rene Belloq is killed for trying to communicate
directly with God.[5]

In Crusade's prologue, Indiana's intentions are revealed as social, as he
believes artifacts "belong in a museum". In the film's climax, Indiana
undergoes "literal" tests of faith to retrieve the Grail and save his father's
life. He also recognizes Jesus as a humble carpenter when he recognizes the
simple nature and tarnished appearance of the real Grail amongst a large
assortment of much more ornately decorated ones. Henry Senior rescues his son
from falling to his death when reaching for the fallen Grail, telling him to
"let it go", overcoming his mercenary nature.[10] The Young Indiana Jones
Chronicles explains how Indiana becomes solitary and less idealistic after
fighting in World War I.[12] In Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal
Skull, Jones is older and wiser, whereas his sidekicks Mutt and Mac are
youthfully arrogant and greedy, respectively.[13]

## [edit] Concept and creation

Indiana Jones is modeled after the strong-jawed heroes of the matinÃ©e serials
and pulp magazines that George Lucas and Steven Spielberg enjoyed in their
childhoods (such as the Republic Pictures serials, and the Doc Savage series).
The two friends first discussed the project in Hawaii around the time of the
release of the first Star Wars film.[14] Spielberg told Lucas how he wanted
his next project to be something fun, like perhaps a James Bond film.
According to sources, Lucas responded to the effect that he had something
"even better",[14] or that he "got that beat".[15]

The character was originally named Indiana Smith, after an Alaskan Malamute
Lucas owned in the 1970s ("Indiana"); however, Spielberg disliked the name
"Smith", and Lucas casually suggested "Jones" as an alternative.[14]

### [edit] Wardrobe and equipment

<IMG>

<IMG>

Original Indiana Jones concept, produced by Jim Steranko in 1973.

Indiana Jones was designed by comic book artist Jim Steranko. George Lucas
suggested the flight jacket (which reminded Steranko of Lucas), the fedora
(which reminded him of Humphrey Bogart in The Treasure of the Sierra Madre)
and a whip (reminiscent of Zorro). Steranko added the Sam Browne belt, a belt
with a holster, and the khaki shirt and trousers.[16] Costume designer Deborah
Nadoolman Landis said the inspiration for Indiana's outfit was Charlton
Heston's Harry Steele in Secret of the Incas: "We did watch this film together
as a crew several times, and I always thought it strange that the filmmakers
did not credit it later as the inspiration for the series."[17]

Upon requests by Spielberg and Lucas, the costume designer gave the character
a distinctive silhouette through the styling of the hat; after examining many
hats, the designers chose a tall-crowned, wide-brimmed fedora. As a
documentary of Raiders pointed out, the hat served a practical purpose.
Following the lead of the old "B"-movies that inspired the Indiana Jones
series, the fedora hid the actor's face sufficiently to allow doubles to
perform the more dangerous stunts seamlessly. Examples in Raiders include the
wider-angle shot of Indy and Marion crashing a statue through a wall, and Indy
sliding under a fast-moving vehicle from front to back. Thus it was necessary
for the hat to stay in place much of the time.

The hat became so iconic that the filmmakers could only come up with very good
reasons or jokes to remove it. If it ever fell off during a take, filming
would have to stop to put it back on. In jest, Ford put a stapler against his
head when a documentary crew visited during shooting of The Last Crusade. This
created the urban legend that Ford stapled the hat to his head.[18] Although
other hats were also used throughout the movies, the general style and profile
remained the same. Elements of the outfit include:

  * The fedora â made by Herbert Johnson Hatters in England for the first three films. Indy's fedoras for Crystal Skull were made by Steve Delk and Marc Kitter of the Adventurebilt Hat Company. The hat style is the "Australian" or the "Poet", fitted with a Petersham bow.
  * The leather jacket â a hybrid of the "Type 440" and the A-2 jacket, were made by Leather Concessionaires (now known as Wested Leather Co). Raiders of the Lost Ark and The Last Crusade. For Temple of Doom, jackets were made in house at Bermans&Nathans in London based on a stunt jacket they provided for Raiders of The Lost Ark, while Tony Nowak made the jacket in Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.
  * The bag â a modified Mark VII British gas mask bag
  * The whip â a 10-foot bullwhip crafted by David Morgan for the first three films. The whips for Indy 4 were crafted by a variety of people, including Terry Jacka, Joe Strain and David (different lengths and styles were likely used in specific stunts).
  * The pistol â usually a World War I-era revolver, examples include the Webley Green (Last Crusade and Crystal Skull), or a .45 ACP Smith & Wesson Hand Ejector 2nd model revolver (Raiders). He has also been seen using an M1917 revolver, and a 9 mm Browning Hi-Power.[19]
  * The shoes - "Indy Boots" made by Alden Shoes, which are still sold today (though in a lighter shade of brown than seen in the movies)[20]

Jones's fedora and leather jacket (as used in The Last Crusade) are on display
at the Smithsonian's American History Museum in Washington, D.C.[21] The
collection of props and clothing from the films has become a thriving hobby
for some aficionados of the franchise.[22] Jones's whip was the third most
popular film weapon, as shown by a 2008 poll held by 20th Century Fox, which
surveyed approximately two thousand film fans.[23]

### [edit] Casting

Originally, Spielberg suggested Harrison Ford; Lucas resisted the idea, since
he had already cast the actor in three of his movies (American Graffiti, Star
Wars, and The Empire Strikes Back), and did not want Ford to become known as
his "Bobby De Niro" (in reference to the fact that fellow director Martin
Scorsese regularly cast Robert De Niro in his films).[14] During an intensive
casting process, Lucas and Spielberg auditioned many actors, and finally cast
then little-known actor Tom Selleck as Indiana Jones. Shortly afterward pre-
production began in earnest on Raiders of the Lost Ark.[14]

However, CBS refused to release Selleck from his contractual commitment to
Magnum, P.I. (which was gradually gaining momentum in the ratings), forcing
him to turn down the role.[14] After Spielberg suggested Ford again, Lucas
finally gave in, and he was cast in the role â less than 3 weeks before
filming of Raiders began.[14]

### [edit] Models

Many people are said to be the real-life inspiration of the Indiana Jones
character â although none of the following have been confirmed as
inspirations by Lucas or Spielberg. In alphabetical order by last name:

  * Paleontologist Roy Chapman Andrews.[24]
  * Italian archaeologist and circus strongman Giovanni Battista Belzoni (1778â1823).[25]
  * Yale University professor, historian, and explorer Hiram Bingham III, who rediscovered and excavated the lost city of Machu Picchu,[26] and chronicled his find in the bestselling book The Lost City of the Incas in 1948.[27]
  * The University of Chicago archaeologist Robert Braidwood.[28]
  * Fellow University of Chicago archaeologist James Henry Breasted[29]
  * British archaeologist and soldier T. E. Lawrence[30]
  * William Montgomery McGovern[31]
  * Frederick Albert Mitchell-Hedges[32]
  * German archaeologist Otto Rahn[33]

George Lucas has said on various occasions that Sean Connery's portrayal of
British secret agent James Bond was one of the primary inspirations for Jones,
a reason Connery was chosen for the role of Indiana's father in the third
film, Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade.[34][35]

## [edit] Influence

Though some archaeologists criticize Indy's methods as befitting a "looter"
rather more than a careful worker of precious sites, many have adopted the
popular figure as something of a standard-bearer for their profession.[36] The
industry magazine Archaeology, believing that Jones, as one editor said, was
"a horrible archaeologist but a great diplomat for archeology,"[36] named
eight past and current archaeologists who they felt "embodied [Jones'] spirit"
as recipients of the "Indy Spirit Awards" in 2008.[37] That same year Ford
himself was elected to the Board of Directors of the Archaeological Institute
of America. Commenting that "understanding the past can only help us in
dealing with the present and the future", Ford was praised by the
association's president for his character's "significant role in stimulating
the public's interest in archaeological exploration."[38]

While himself a homage to various prior adventurers, aspects of Indiana Jones
also directly influenced some subsequent characterizations:

  * Lara Croft, the self-styled female archaeologist of the Tomb Raider franchise, was originally designed as a man, but was changed to a woman, partly because the developers felt that the original design was too similar to Indiana Jones.[39] Paramount Pictures, which distributed the Indiana Jones film series, would later make two films based on the Tomb Raider games.
  * Malcolm Reynolds, spaceship captain in television series Firefly and its feature film continuation Serenity (Nathan Fillion reflects many of Harrison Ford's mannerisms)[40].
  * Prince of Persia producer Ben Mattes explained that their "inspiration was anything Harrison Ford has ever done: Indiana Jones, Han Solo."[41]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The character's full name is stated in the Corey Carrier narration of the feature-length episode My First Adventure from the The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles.
  2. ^ Nick de Semlyen, Ian Freer, Chris Hewitt, Ian Nathan, Sam Toy (2006-09-29). "A Race Against Time: Indiana Jones IV". Empire. pp. 100.
  3. ^ "LEGO Indiana Jones". Lucas Arts. http://lucasarts.com/games/legoindianajones/. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  4. ^ "Indiana Jones". Lucas Arts. http://lucasarts.com/games/indianajones/. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  5. ^ a b c d Douglas Brode (1995). The Films of Steven Spielberg. Citadel. pp. 90â98. ISBN 0-8065-1540-6.
  6. ^ Anthony Breznican (2007-12-09). "First look: Whip cracks over new 'Indiana Jones' movie". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/life/movies/news/2007-12-09-indiana-jones_N.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-10.
  7. ^ Jim Windolf (2007-12-02). "Q&A: Steven Spielberg". Vanity Fair. http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2008/02/spielberg_qanda200802?currentPage=3. Retrieved on 2007-12-02.
  8. ^ Shinji Hata (interviewer). (1994). From Star Wars to Indiana Jones: The Best of the LucasFilm Archives. LucasFilm.
  9. ^ Maria Puente (2008-05-22). "Indiana Jones: He's Everyman, with wit and a whip". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/life/movies/news/2008-05-22-indiana-jones-cover_N.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-23.
  10. ^ a b c Douglas Brode (1995). The Films of Steven Spielberg. Citadel. pp. 174, 176â187. ISBN 0-8065-1540-6.
  11. ^ a b c Douglas Brode (1995). The Films of Steven Spielberg. Citadel. pp. 141â43. ISBN 0-8065-1540-6.
  12. ^ Travis Fickett (2008-05-22). "Indiana Jones and the Small Screen". IGN. http://uk.tv.ign.com/articles/875/875720p3.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-22.
  13. ^ "News, Etc.". Empire. March 2008. pp. 17.
  14. ^ a b c d e f g "Making Raiders of the Lost Ark". IndianaJones.com. 2003-09-23. http://web.archive.org/web/20031207015023/http://www.indianajones.com/raiders/bts/news/news20030923.html.
  15. ^ Nashawaty, Chris; "National Treasure"; Entertainment Weekly; March 14, 2008.
  16. ^ Ian Freer (May 2008). "The Indiana Jones Diaries". Empire. pp. 15.
  17. ^ Mike French & Gilles Verschuere (2005-09-14). "Debora Nadoolman interview". TheRaider.net. http://www.theraider.net/features/interviews/deborah_nadoolman.php. Retrieved on 2008-04-07.
  18. ^ "Hat and Jacket featurette". Official site. 2008-02-08. http://www.indianajones.com/site/?deeplink=videos/1/v28. Retrieved on 2008-02-08.
  19. ^ "Indiana Jones Guns". IndyGear.com. http://www.indygear.com/igguns.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-02.
  20. ^ "Indiana Jones Boots". IndyGear.com. http://www.indygear.com/igboots.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  21. ^ "Shrine to the Famous: Indiana Jones's hat and jacket, 1980s". Smithsonian Institute. http://smithsonianlegacies.si.edu/objectdescription.cfm?ID=125. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  22. ^ "IndyGear.com". http://www.indygear.com/. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  23. ^ Sophie Borland (2008-01-21). "Lightsabre wins the battle of movie weapons". The Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2008/01/21/nweapon121.xml. Retrieved on 2008-01-26.
  24. ^ Preston, Douglas J. (1993). Dinosaurs in the Attic: An Excursion Into the American Museum of Natural History. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-10456-1. , pp. 97â98, "Andrews is allegedly the real person that the movie character of Indiana Jones was patterned after... crack shot, fighter of Mongolian brigands, the man who created the metaphor of 'Outer Mongolia' as denoting any exceedingly remote place."
  25. ^ "Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981)". Filmsite.org. http://www.filmsite.org/raid.html. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  26. ^ Gene Sloan (2005-09-22). "The trail less trampled on". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/travel/destinations/2005-09-22-peru_x.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  27. ^ "Lost City of the Incas". United States Senate. http://www.senate.gov/reference/reference_item/LostCity.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  28. ^ Molly Schranz (2003-12-21). "Obituary: Robert and Linda Braidwood". Chicago Maroon. http://maroon.uchicago.edu/news/articles/2003/01/21/obituary_robert_and_.php. Retrieved on 2006-09-21. "Some say he was the real life inspiration for Indiana Jones."
  29. ^ http://phoenix.uchicago.edu/HTMLVirtualTour/oriental.html
  30. ^ http://www.theraider.net/information/influences/lawrence_of_arabia.php
  31. ^ "Keeper of the Past". 1999-09-21. http://www.northwestern.edu/magazine/northwestern/fall1999/quinn.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-06.
  32. ^ "Nazi treasure, giant scorpions... and a crystal skull: The adventures of the REAL Indiana Jones". 2008-04-28. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in_article_id=562487&in_page_id=1770. Retrieved on 2008-05-14.
  33. ^ "The original Indiana Jones: Otto Rahn and the temple of doom". 2008-05-22. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/arts/main.jhtml?xml=/arts/2008/05/22/sv_rahn125.xml. Retrieved on 2008-06-02.
  34. ^ Bond Inspiration For Indiana Jones
  35. ^ Fleurier, Nicolas (2006). James Bond & Indiana Jones. Action figures. Histoire & Collections. ISBN 2-35250-005-2.
  36. ^ a b Mike Peed (2008-06-09). "Digging". The New Yorker. http://www.newyorker.com/talk/2008/06/09/080609ta_talk_peed. Retrieved on 2008-07-17.
  37. ^ Eti Bonn-Muller and Eric A. Powell (May / June], 2008). "Indy Spirit Awards". Archaeology. http://www.archaeology.org/0805/trenches/indy.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-17.
  38. ^ Archaeological Institute of America (2008-06-09). Harrison Ford Elected to AIA Board. Press release. http://www.archaeological.org/webinfo.php?page=10477. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  39. ^ Toby Gard, Jeremy Heath Smith, Ian Livingston (interviews); Keeley Hawes (narrator). (2007). Ten Years of Tomb Raider: A GameTap Retrospective. Eidos Interactive / GameTap.
  40. ^ "A Filmmaker's Journey" featurette, from the Serenity Collector's Edition DVD
  41. ^ As quoted in Gary Steinman, "Prince of Persia: Anatomy of a Prince," PlayStation: The Official Magazine 13 (December 2008): 50.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Indiana
Jones  
  * IndianaJones.com â the official Indiana Jones site
  * Indiana Jones at the Internet Movie Database
  * A tribute site to the Raiders of the Lost Ark movie, specifically the Kenner playset depicting the scene at the Well of Souls \- The complete parts list, history, and information about the highly sought-after 1982 playset from Kenner.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Indiana Jones franchise  
Films

Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981) Â· Temple of Doom (1984) Â· The Last Crusade
(1989) Â· Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008)  
Television

The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles (1992â1996) (list of episodes)  
Video games

Raiders of the Lost Ark (1982) Â· Temple of Doom (1985) Â· Revenge of the
Ancients (1987) Â· The Last Crusade (1990) Â· The Fate of Atlantis (1992) Â·
The Iron Phoenix (canceled) Â· The Pinball Adventure (1993) Â· Greatest
Adventures (1994) Â· Desktop Adventures (1996) Â· The Infernal Machine (1999)
Â· The Emperor's Tomb (2003) Â· Lego Indiana Jones: The Original Adventures
(2008) Â· Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings (2009)  
Soundtracks

Raiders of the Lost Ark Â· Temple of Doom Â· The Last Crusade Â· Kingdom of
the Crystal Skull  
Other media

Role-playing game Â· Comics Â· Other literature Â· Disneyland and Tokyo
DisneySea attraction Â· Disneyland Paris attraction Â· Stunt show Â· Lego
Indiana Jones Â· Nuking the fridge  
Characters

Indiana Jones Â· Marion Ravenwood Â· Sallah Â· Henry Jones, Sr. Â· Mutt
Williams  
Cast

Harrison Ford Â· Karen Allen Â· Kate Capshaw Â· Alison Doody Â· Cate Blanchett
Â· Jonathan Ke Quan Â· Shia LaBeouf Â· Ray Winstone Â· John Hurt Â· Sean
Connery Â· Corey Carrier Â· Sean Patrick Flanery Â· George Hall Â· River
Phoenix Â· John Rhys-Davies Â· Denholm Elliott Â· Julian Glover Â· Amrish Puri
Â· Paul Freeman Â· Wolf Kahler Â· Igor Jijikine Â· Ronald Lacey Â· Pat Roach
Â· Michael Byrne Â· David Yip Â· Dan Aykroyd Â· Alfred Molina Â· Philip Stone
Â· Jim Broadbent  
Crew

George Lucas Â· Steven Spielberg Â· Frank Marshall Â· Kathleen Kennedy Â·
Robert Watts Â· Rick McCallum Â· Philip Kaufman Â· Lawrence Kasdan Â· Willard
Huyck Â· Gloria Katz Â· Menno Meyjes Â· Jeffrey Boam Â· Frank Darabont Â· Jeff
Nathanson Â· David Koepp Â· Douglas Slocombe Â· Janusz KamiÅski Â· Vic
Armstrong Â· Michael Kahn Â· John Williams Â· Ben Burtt Â· Drew Struzan Â· Dan
Bradley Â· Jim Steranko Â· Deborah Nadoolman Landis Â· Norman Reynolds Â· Guy
Hendrix Dyas Â· Richard Edlund Â· Dennis Muren  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indiana_Jones"

Categories: Fictional archaeologists | Fictional characters from New Jersey |
Fictional professors | Fictional World War II veterans | Indiana Jones
characters | Fictional Scottish-Americans | Characters in pulp fiction |
Fictional secret agents and spies | Fictional colonels | Child characters in
television

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 22:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



