
# Bertrand Russell

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Bertrand Russell Western Philosophy  
20th century philosophy  
<IMG>  
Russell in 1907  
Full name Bertrand Arthur William Russell, 3rd Earl Russell  
School/tradition Analytic philosophy  
Nobel Prize in Literature  
1950  
  
Main interests Ethics, epistemology, logic, mathematics, philosophy of
language, philosophy of science, religion  
Notable ideas Logical atomism, theory of descriptions, knowledge by
acquaintance and knowledge by description, Russell's paradox, Russell's
teapot.  
Influenced by

Euclid Â· Plato Â· Leibniz Â·  
Hume Â· Moore Â·  
Mill Â· Frege Â·  
Wittgenstein Â·  
Santayana Â· A.N. Whitehead Â·  
Paine Â· Peano Â·  
Influenced

Wittgenstein Â· Ayer Â·  
Carnap Â· GÃ¶del Â·  
Popper Â· Quine Â·  
Chomsky Â· Austin Â· Kripke Â· Schlick Â· Tarski Â· Waismann Â· Davidson Â·
Eddington Â· Turing Â· Arendt Â· Vuillemin Â· McDowell Â· Kumar Â·  
Evans Â· Chisholm  
Bertrand Arthur William Russell, 3rd Earl Russell, OM, FRS (18 May 1872 â 2
February 1970), was a British philosopher, logician, mathematician, historian,
advocate for social reform, and pacifist. Although he spent the majority of
his life in England, he was born in Wales, where he also died.[1]

Russell was an influential philosopher and mathematician. He led the British
"revolt against Idealism" in the early 1900s and is considered one of the
founders of analytic philosophy along with his protÃ©gÃ© Wittgenstein and his
German elder Frege. He co-authored, with A. N. Whitehead, Principia
Mathematica, an attempt to ground mathematics on logic. His philosophical
essay "On Denoting" has been considered a "paradigm of philosophy."[2] Both
works have had a considerable influence on logic, mathematics, set theory,
linguistics and analytic philosophy.

He was a prominent anti-war activist, championing free trade between nations
and anti-imperialism.[3][4] Russell was imprisoned for his pacifist activism
during World War I, campaigned against Adolf Hitler, for nuclear disarmament,
criticised Soviet totalitarianism and the United States of America's
involvement in the Vietnam War.[5]

In 1950, Russell was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, "in recognition of
his varied and significant writings in which he champions humanitarian ideals
and freedom of thought."[6]

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Ancestry
    * 1.2 Childhood and adolescence
    * 1.3 University and first marriage
    * 1.4 Early career
    * 1.5 First World War
    * 1.6 Between the wars, and second marriage
    * 1.7 Second World War
    * 1.8 Later life
    * 1.9 Political causes
    * 1.10 Final years and death
  * 2 Philosophical work
    * 2.1 Analytic philosophy
    * 2.2 Logic and philosophy of mathematics
    * 2.3 Philosophy of language
    * 2.4 Logical Atomism
    * 2.5 Epistemology
    * 2.6 Philosophy of science
    * 2.7 Ethics
    * 2.8 Religion and theology
  * 3 Influence on philosophy
  * 4 Politics
    * 4.1 Pacifism, war and nuclear weapons
    * 4.2 Communism and socialism
    * 4.3 Women's suffrage
    * 4.4 Sexuality
    * 4.5 Race
  * 5 Further reading
    * 5.1 Selected bibliography of Russell's books
    * 5.2 Additional references
      * 5.2.1 Russell
      * 5.2.2 Secondary references
    * 5.3 Books about Russell's philosophy
    * 5.4 Biographical books
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

### [edit] Ancestry

Bertrand Russell was born on 18 May 1872 at Ravenscroft (now Cleddon Hall),
Trellech, Monmouthshire.

His paternal grandfather, John Russell, 1st Earl Russell, was the second son
of John Russell, 6th Duke of Bedford, and had twice been asked by Queen
Victoria to form a government, serving her as Prime Minister in the 1840s and
1860s.[7]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bertrand Russell's father, John Russell, Viscount Amberley

The Russells had been prominent in Britain for several centuries before this,
coming to power and the peerage with the rise of the Tudor dynasty. They
established themselves as one of Britain's leading Whig (Liberal) families,
and participated in every great political event from the Dissolution of the
Monasteries in 1536-40 to the Glorious Revolution in 1688-89 to the Great
Reform Act in 1832.[7][8]

Russell's mother Katherine Louisa (1844 - 1874) was the daughter of Edward
Stanley, 2nd Baron Stanley of Alderley, and was the sister of Rosalind Howard,
Countess of Carlisle.[5]

Russell's parents were quite radical for their timesâRussell's father,
Viscount Amberley, was an atheist and consented to his wife's affair with
their children's tutor, the biologist Douglas Spalding. Both were early
advocates of birth control at a time when this was considered scandalous.[9]

John Stuart Mill, the Utilitarian philosopher, stood as Russell's godfather.
Mill died the following year, but his writings had a great effect upon
Russell's life.

### [edit] Childhood and adolescence

Russell had two siblings: Frank (nearly seven years older than Bertrand), and
Rachel (four years older). In June 1874 Russell's mother died of diphtheria,
followed shortly by Rachel, and in January 1876 his father also died of
bronchitis following a long period of depression. Frank and Bertrand were
placed in the care of their staunchly Victorian grandparents, who lived at
Pembroke Lodge in Richmond Park. John Russell, 1st Earl Russell, his
grandfather, died in 1878, and was remembered by Russell as a kindly old man
in a wheelchair. As a result, his widow, the Countess Russell (nÃ©e Lady
Frances Elliot), was the dominant family figure for the rest of Russell's
childhood and youth.[5][9]

The countess was from a Scottish Presbyterian family, and successfully
petitioned a British court to set aside a provision in Amberley's will
requiring the children to be raised as agnostics. Despite her religious
conservatism, she held progressive views in other areas (accepting Darwinism
and supporting Irish Home Rule), and her influence on Bertrand Russell's
outlook on social justice and standing up for principle remained with him
throughout his life â her favourite Bible verse, 'Thou shalt not follow a
multitude to do evil' (Exodus 23:2), became his mantra. However, the
atmosphere at Pembroke Lodge was one of frequent prayer, emotional repression
and formality; Frank reacted to this with open rebellion, but the young
Bertrand learned to hide his feelings.

Russell's adolescence was thus very lonely, and he often contemplated suicide.
He remarked in his autobiography that his keenest interests were in sex,
religion and mathematics, and that only the wish to know more mathematics kept
him from suicide.[10] He was educated at home by a series of tutors.[6]

His brother Frank introduced him to the work of Euclid, which transformed
Russell's life.[9][11]

### [edit] University and first marriage

Russell won a scholarship to read for the Mathematics Tripos at Trinity
College, Cambridge, and commenced his studies there in 1890. He became
acquainted with the younger G.E. Moore and came under the influence of Alfred
North Whitehead, who recommended him to the Cambridge Apostles. He quickly
distinguished himself in mathematics and philosophy, graduating with a B.A. in
the former subject in 1893 and adding a fellowship in the latter in
1895.[12][13]

Russell first met the American Quaker Alys Pearsall Smith when he was
seventeen years old. He became a friend of the Pearsall Smith familyâthey
knew him primarily as 'Lord John's grandson' and enjoyed showing him offâand
travelled with them to the continent; it was in their company that Russell
visited the Paris Exhibition of 1889 and was able to climb the Eiffel Tower
soon after it was completed.[14]

He soon fell in love with the puritanical, high-minded Alys, who was a
graduate of Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, and, contrary to his
grandmother's wishes, he married her on 13 December 1894. Their marriage began
to fall apart in 1901 when it occurred to Russell, while he was out on his
bicycle, that he no longer loved her. She asked him if he loved her and he
replied that he didn't. Russell also disliked Alys's mother, finding her
controlling and cruel. It was to be a hollow shell of a marriage and they
finally divorced in 1921, after a lengthy period of separation.[15] During
this period, Russell had passionate (and often simultaneous) affairs with a
number of women, including Lady Ottoline Morrell and the actress Lady
Constance Malleson.[16]

### [edit] Early career

Russell began his published work in 1896 with German Social Democracy, a study
in politics that was an early indication of a lifelong interest in political
and social theory. In 1896, he taught German social democracy at the London
School of Economics, where he also lectured on the science of power in the
autumn of 1937.[17] He was also a member of the Coefficients dining club of
social reformers set up in 1902 by the Fabian campaigners Sidney and Beatrice
Webb.[18]

In 1905 he wrote the essay "On Denoting", which was published in the
philosophical journal Mind. Russell became a fellow of the Royal Society in
1908.[5] The first of three volumes of Principia Mathematica, written with
Whitehead, was published in 1910, which, along with the earlier The Principles
of Mathematics, soon made Russell world famous in his field. In 1911, he
became acquainted with the Austrian engineering student Ludwig Wittgenstein,
whom he viewed as a genius and a successor who would continue his work on
logic. He spent hours dealing with Wittgenstein's various phobias and his
frequent bouts of despair. The latter was often a drain on Russell's energy,
but he continued to be fascinated by him and encouraged his academic
development, including the publication of Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-
Philosophicus in 1922.[19]

### [edit] First World War

During the First World War, Russell engaged in pacifist activities, and, in
1916, he was dismissed from Trinity College following his conviction under the
Defence of the Realm Act. A later conviction resulted in six months'
imprisonment in Brixton prison (see Activism below).[20] Russell was released
from prison in September 1918.

### [edit] Between the wars, and second marriage

In August 1920, Russell traveled to Russia as part of an official delegation
sent by the British government to investigate the effects of the Russian
Revolution.[21] He met Lenin and had an hour-long conversation with him. In
his autobiography, he mentions that he found Lenin rather disappointing, and
that he sensed an "impish cruelty" in him. He also cruised down the Volga on a
steam-ship. Russell's lover Dora Black also visited Russia independently at
the same time â she was enthusiastic about the revolution, but Russell's
experiences destroyed his previous tentative support for it.

Russell subsequently lectured in Beijing on philosophy for one year,
accompanied by Dora.[6] While in China, Russell became gravely ill with
pneumonia, and incorrect reports of his death were published in the Japanese
press.[22] When the couple visited Japan on their return journey, Dora
notified the world that "Mr. Bertrand Russell, having died according to the
Japanese press, is unable to give interviews to Japanese journalists." The
press were not amused and did not appreciate the sarcasm.[23]

On the couple's return to England on 26 August 1921, Dora was six months
pregnant, and Russell arranged a hasty divorce from Alys, marrying Dora six
days after the divorce was finalised, on 27 September 1921. Their children
were John Conrad Russell, 4th Earl Russell, born on 16 November 1921 and
Katharine Jane Russell (now Lady Katharine Tait) born on 29 December 1923.
Russell supported himself during this time by writing popular books explaining
matters of physics, ethics, and education to the layman. Some scholars have
suggested that at this point he had an affair with Vivien Eliot, wife of T. S.
Eliot.[24]

Together with Dora, he also founded the experimental Beacon Hill School in
1927. After he left the school in 1932, Dora continued it until 1943.[25][26]

Upon the death of his elder brother Frank, in 1931, Russell became the 3rd
Earl Russell. He once said that his title was primarily useful for securing
hotel rooms.

Russell's marriage to Dora grew increasingly tenuous, and it reached a
breaking point over her having two children with an American journalist,
Griffin Barry.[26] They separated in 1932 and finally divorced. On 18 January
1936, Russell married his third wife, an Oxford undergraduate named Patricia
("Peter") Spence, who had been his children's governess since the summer of
1930. Russell and Peter had one son, Conrad Sebastian Robert Russell, 5th Earl
Russell, who became a prominent historian and one of the leading figures in
the Liberal Democrat party.[5]

### [edit] Second World War

After the Second World War, Russell taught at the University of Chicago, later
moving on to Los Angeles to lecture at the University of California, Los
Angeles. He was appointed professor at the City College of New York in 1940,
but after a public outcry, the appointment was annulled by a court judgement:
his opinions (especially those relating to sexual morality, detailed in
Marriage and Morals ten years earlier) made him "morally unfit" to teach at
the college. The protest was started by the mother of a student who would not
have been eligible for his graduate-level course in mathematical logic. Many
intellectuals, led by John Dewey, protested his treatment.[27] Dewey and
Horace M. Kallen edited a collection of articles on the CCNY affair in The
Bertrand Russell Case. He soon joined the Barnes Foundation, lecturing to a
varied audience on the history of philosophy; these lectures formed the basis
of History of Western Philosophy. His relationship with the eccentric Albert
C. Barnes soon soured, and he returned to Britain in 1944 to rejoin the
faculty of Trinity College.[28]

### [edit] Later life

During the 1940s and 1950s, Russell participated in many broadcasts over the
BBC, particularly the Third Programme, on various topical and philosophical
subjects. By this time Russell was world famous outside of academic circles,
frequently the subject or author of magazine and newspaper articles, and was
called upon to offer up opinions on a wide variety of subjects, even mundane
ones. En route to one of his lectures in Trondheim, Russell was one of 24
survivors (among a total of 43 passengers) in a plane crash in Hommelvik in
October 1948.[29] History of Western Philosophy (1945) became a best-seller,
and provided Russell with a steady income for the remainder of his life.

In a speech in 1948 [30] Russell said that if the USSR's aggression continued,
it would be morally worse to go to war after the USSR possessed an atomic bomb
than before they possessed one, because if the USSR had no bomb the West's
victory would come more swiftly and with fewer casualties than if there were
atom bombs on both sides. At that time, only the USA possessed an atomic bomb,
and the USSR was pursuing an extremely aggressive policy towards the countries
in Eastern Europe which it was absorbing into its sphere of influence. Many
understood Russell's comments to mean that Russell approved of a first strike
in a war with the USSR, including Lawson, who was present when Russell spoke.
Others, including Griffin who obtained a transcript of the speech, have argued
that he was merely explaining the usefulness of America's atomic arsenal in
deterring the USSR from continuing its domination of Eastern Europe.

In the King's Birthday Honours of 9 June 1949, Russell was awarded the Order
of Merit,[31] and the following year he was awarded the Nobel Prize in
Literature.[5][6] When he was given the Order of Merit, King George VI was
affable but slightly embarrassed at decorating a former jailbird, saying that
"You have sometimes behaved in a manner that would not do if generally
adopted." [32] Russell merely smiled, but afterwards claimed that the reply
"That's right, just like your brother" immediately came to mind.

In 1952, Russell was divorced by Peter, with whom he had been very unhappy.
Conrad, Russell's son by Peter, did not see his father between the time of the
divorce and 1968 (at which time his decision to meet his father caused a
permanent breach with his mother).

Russell married his fourth wife, Edith Finch, soon after the divorce, on 15
December 1952. They had known each other since 1925, and Edith had taught
English at Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, sharing a house
for twenty years with Russell's old friend Lucy Donnelly. Edith remained with
him until his death, and, by all accounts, their marriage was a happy, close,
and loving one. Russell's eldest son, John, suffered from serious mental
illness, which was the source of ongoing disputes between Russell and John's
mother, Russell's former wife, Dora. John's wife Susan was also mentally ill,
and eventually Russell and Edith became the legal guardians of their three
daughters (two of whom were later diagnosed with schizophrenia).

### [edit] Political causes

Russell spent the 1950s and 1960s engaged in various political causes,
primarily related to nuclear disarmament and opposing the Vietnam war (see
also Russell Vietnam War Crimes Tribunal). The 1955 Russell-Einstein Manifesto
was a document calling for nuclear disarmament and was signed by 11 of the
prominent nuclear physicists and intellectuals of the time.[33] He wrote a
great many letters to world leaders during this period. He was in contact with
Lionel Rogosin while the latter was filming his anti-war film Good Times,
Wonderful Times in the 1960s. He also became a hero to many of the youthful
members of the New Left. During the 1960s, in particular, Russell became
increasingly vocal about his disapproval of what he felt to be the USA
government's near-genocidal policies. In 1963 he became the inaugural
recipient of the Jerusalem Prize, an award for writers concerned with the
freedom of the individual in society.[34] In October 1965 he tore up his
Labour Party card because he feared the party was going to send soldiers to
support the USA in the Vietnam War.[5]

### [edit] Final years and death

Russell published his three-volume autobiography in 1967, 1968, and 1969.
Although he became frail, he remained lucid and clear-thinking up to the day
of his death. On 23 November 1969 he wrote to The Times newspaper saying that
the preparation for show trials in Czechoslovakia was "highly alarming". The
same month he appealed to Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to
support an international war crimes commission to investigate alleged torture
and genocide by the USA in South Vietnam. The following month, he protested to
Alexei Kosygin over the expulsion of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn from the Writers
Union.

On 31 January 1970, Russell issued a statement which condemned Israeli
aggression in the Middle East and called for Israeli withdrawal from territory
occupied in 1967. The statement said that:

> The tragedy of the people of Palestine is that their country was "given" by
a foreign power to another people for the creation of a new state. The result
was that many hundreds of thousands of innocent people were made permanently
homeless. With every new conflict their numbers increased. How much longer is
the world willing to endure this spectacle of wanton cruelty? It is abundantly
clear that the refugees have every right to the homeland from which they were
driven, and the denial of this right is at the heart of the continuing
conflict. No people anywhere in the world would accept being expelled en masse
from their own country; how can anyone require the people of Palestine to
accept a punishment which nobody else would tolerate? A permanent just
settlement of the refugees in their homeland is an essential ingredient of any
genuine settlement in the Middle East. We are frequently told that we must
sympathise with Israel because of the suffering of the Jews in Europe at the
hands of the Nazis. [...] What Israel is doing today cannot be condoned, and
to invoke the horrors of the past to justify those of the present is gross
hypocrisy.[35]

> âBertrand Russell, 31 January 1970

This was Russell's final ever political statement or act. It was read out at
the International Conference of Parliamentarians in Cairo on 3 February 1970,
the day after his death.[36]

Russell died of influenza on 2 February 1970 at his home, Plas Penrhyn, in
Penrhyndeudraeth, Merionethshire, Wales. He was cremated at Colwyn Bay on 5
February 1970. In accordance with his will there was no religious ceremony;
his ashes were scattered over the Welsh mountains later that year.

## [edit] Philosophical work

Russell produced a body of work that covers logic, the philosophy of
mathematics, metaphysics, ethics and epistemology.

### [edit] Analytic philosophy

Russell is one of the founders of what later became called analytic
philosophy. At the beginning of the 20th century, alongside G. E. Moore,
Russell was largely responsible for the British "revolt against Idealism," a
philosophy greatly influenced by G. W. F. Hegel and his British apostle, F. H.
Bradley.[37] This revolt was echoed 30 years later in Vienna by the logical
positivists' "revolt against metaphysics". Russell was particularly critical
of a doctrine he ascribed to idealism and coherentism, which he dubbed the
doctrine of internal relations; this, Russell suggested, held that in order to
know any particular thing, we must know all of its relations. Russell argued
that this would make space, time, science and the concept of number not fully
intelligible. Russell's logical work with Whitehead continued this
project.[38]

Russell and Moore strove to eliminate what they saw as meaningless and
incoherent assertions in philosophy. They sought clarity and precision in
argument by the use of exact language and by breaking down philosophical
propositions into their simplest grammatical components. Russell, in
particular, saw formal logic and science as the principal tools of the
philosopher. Indeed, unlike most philosophers who preceded him and his early
contemporaries, Russell did not believe there was a separate method for
philosophy. He believed that the main task of the philosopher was to
illuminate the most general propositions about the world and to eliminate
confusion. In particular, he wanted to end what he saw as the excesses of
metaphysics. Russell adopted William of Ockham's principle against multiplying
unnecessary entities, Occam's Razor, as a central part of the method of
analysis.[39][40]

### [edit] Logic and philosophy of mathematics

Russell had great influence on modern mathematical logic. The American
philosopher and logician Willard Quine said Russell's work represented the
greatest influence on his own work.[41][42]

Russell's first mathematical book, An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry,
was published in 1897. This work was heavily influenced by Immanuel Kant.
Russell later realized that the conception it laid out would make Albert
Einstein's schema of space-time impossible. Thenceforth, he rejected the
entire Kantian program as it related to mathematics and geometry, and rejected
his own earliest work on the subject.[43]

Interested in the definition of number, Russell studied the work of George
Boole, Georg Cantor, and Augustus De Morgan. Materials in the Bertrand Russell
Archives at McMaster University include notes of his reading in algebraic
logic by Charles S. Peirce and Ernst SchrÃ¶der.[44] In 1900 he attended the
first International Congress of Philosophy in Paris, where he became familiar
with the work of the Italian mathematician, Giuseppe Peano. He mastered
Peano's new symbolism and his set of axioms for arithmetic. Peano defined
logically all of the terms of these axioms with the exception of 0, number,
successor, and the singular term, the, which were the primitives of his
system. Russell took it upon himself to find logical definitions for each of
these. Between 1897 and 1903 he published several articles applying Peano's
notation to the classical Boole-SchrÃ¶der algebra of relations, among them On
the Notion of Order, Sur la logique des relations avec les applications Ã la
thÃ©orie des sÃ©ries, and On Cardinal Numbers. He became convinced that the
foundations of mathematics could be derived within what has since come to be
called second-order logic which in turn he believed to include some form of
unrestricted comprehension axiom.

Russell then discovered that Gottlob Frege had independently arrived at
equivalent definitions for 0, successor, and number, and the definition of
number is now usually referred to as the Frege-Russell definition.[citation
needed] Russell drew attention to Frege's priority in 1903, when he published
The Principles of Mathematics (see below).[45] The appendix to this work,
however, described a paradox arising from Frege's application of second- and
higher-order functions which took first-order functions as their arguments,
and Russell offered his first effort to resolve what would henceforth come to
be known as the Russell Paradox. Before writing Principles, Russell became
aware of Cantor's proof that there was no greatest cardinal number, which
Russell believed was mistaken. The Cantor Paradox in turn was shown (for
example by Crossley) to be a special case of the Russell Paradox. This caused
Russell to analyze classes, for it was known that given any number of
elements, the number of classes they result in is greater than their number.
This in turn led to the discovery of a very interesting class, namely, the
class of all classes. It contains two kinds of classes: those classes that
contain themselves, and those that do not. Consideration of this class led him
to find a fatal flaw in the so-called principle of comprehension, which had
been taken for granted by logicians of the time. He showed that it resulted in
a contradiction, whereby Y is a member of Y, if and only if, Y is not a member
of Y. This has become known as Russell's paradox, the solution to which he
outlined in an appendix to Principles, and which he later developed into a
complete theory, the Theory of types. Aside from exposing a major
inconsistency in naive set theory, Russell's work led directly to the creation
of modern axiomatic set theory. It also crippled Frege's project of reducing
arithmetic to logic. The Theory of Types and much of Russell's subsequent work
have also found practical applications with computer science and information
technology.[45]

Russell continued to defend logicism, the view that mathematics is in some
important sense reducible to logic, and along with his former teacher, Alfred
North Whitehead, wrote the monumental Principia Mathematica, an axiomatic
system on which all of mathematics can be built. The first volume of the
Principia was published in 1910, and is largely ascribed to Russell. More than
any other single work, it established the specialty of mathematical or
symbolic logic. Two more volumes were published, but their original plan to
incorporate geometry in a fourth volume was never realized, and Russell never
felt up to improving the original works, though he referenced new developments
and problems in his preface to the second edition. Upon completing the
Principia, three volumes of extraordinarily abstract and complex reasoning,
Russell was exhausted, and he felt his intellectual faculties never fully
recovered from the effort.[46] Although the Principia did not fall prey to the
paradoxes in Frege's approach, it was later proven by Kurt GÃ¶del that neither
Principia Mathematica, nor any other consistent system of primitive recursive
arithmetic, could, within that system, determine that every proposition that
could be formulated within that system was decidable, i.e. could decide
whether that proposition or its negation was provable within the system (See:
GÃ¶del's incompleteness theorem).

Russell's last significant work in mathematics and logic, Introduction to
Mathematical Philosophy, was written while he was in jail for his anti-war
activities during World War I. This was largely an explication of his previous
work and its philosophical significance.

### [edit] Philosophy of language

Russell made language, or more specifically, how we use language, a central
part of philosophy, and this influenced Ludwig Wittgenstein, Gilbert Ryle, J.
L. Austin, and P. F. Strawson, among others, who used many of the techniques
that Russell originally developed. Russell, and GE Moore, argued that clarity
of expression is a virtue.

A significant contribution to philosophy of language is Russell's theory of
definite descriptions, On Denoting Mind (1905).

Wittgenstein, Russell's student, achieved considerable prominence in the
philosophy of language after the posthumous publication of the Philosophical
Investigations. In Russell's opinion, Wittgenstein's later work was misguided,
and he decried its influence and that of its followers (especially members of
the so-called "Oxford school" of ordinary language philosophy, whom he
believed were promoting a kind of mysticism). However, Russell still held
Wittgenstein and his early work in high regard, he thought of him as, "perhaps
the most perfect example I have ever known of genius as traditionally
conceived, passionate, profound, intense, and dominating."[47] Russell's
belief that philosophy's task is not limited to examining ordinary language is
once again widely accepted in philosophy.

### [edit] Logical Atomism

Perhaps Russell's most systematic, metaphysical treatment of philosophical
analysis and his empiricist-centric logicism is evident in what he called
Logical Atomism, which is explicated in a set of lectures, "The Philosophy of
Logical Atomism," which he gave in 1918.[48] In these lectures, Russell sets
forth his concept of an ideal, isomorphic language, one that would mirror the
world, whereby our knowledge can be reduced to terms of atomic propositions
and their truth-functional compounds. Logical Atomism is a form of radical
empiricism, for Russell believed the most important requirement for such an
ideal language is that every meaningful proposition must consist of terms
referring directly to the objects with which we are acquainted, or that they
are defined by other terms referring to objects with which we are acquainted.
Russell excluded certain formal, logical terms such as all, the, is, and so
forth, from his isomorphic requirement, but he was never entirely satisfied
with our understanding of such terms. One of the central themes of Russell's
atomism is that the world consists of logically independent facts, a plurality
of facts, and that our knowledge depends on the data of our direct experience
of them.[48] In his later life, Russell came to doubt aspects of Logical
Atomism, especially his principle of isomorphism, though he continued to
believe that the process of philosophy ought to consist of breaking things
down into their simplest components, even though we might not ever fully
arrive at an ultimate atomic fact.

### [edit] Epistemology

Russell's epistemology went through many phases. Once he shed neo-Hegelianism
in his early years, Russell remained a philosophical realist for the remainder
of his life, believing that our direct experiences have primacy in the
acquisition of knowledge.[38] While some of his views have lost favour, his
influence remains strong in the distinction between two ways in which we can
be familiar with objects: "knowledge by acquaintance" and "knowledge by
description". For a time, Russell thought that we could only be acquainted
with our own sense dataâmomentary perceptions of colors, sounds, and the
likeâand that everything else, including the physical objects that these
were sense data of, could only be inferred, or reasoned toâi.e. known by
descriptionâand not known directly. This distinction has gained much wider
application, though Russell eventually rejected the idea of an intermediate
sense datum.[49]

In his later philosophy, Russell subscribed to a kind of neutral monism,
maintaining that the distinctions between the material and mental worlds, in
the final analysis, were arbitrary, and that both can be reduced to a neutral
propertyâa view similar to one held by the American
philosopher/psychologist, William James, and one that was first formulated by
Baruch Spinoza, whom Russell greatly admired.[50] Instead of James' "pure
experience," however, Russell characterised the stuff of our initial states of
perception as "events," a stance which is curiously akin to his old teacher
Whitehead's process philosophy.

### [edit] Philosophy of science

Russell claimed that he was more convinced of his method of doing philosophy
than of his philosophical conclusions. Science was one of the principal
components of analysis. Russell was a believer in the scientific method, that
science reaches only tentative answers, that scientific progress is piecemeal,
and attempts to find organic unities were largely futile.[51] He believed the
same was true of philosophy. Russell held that the ultimate objective of both
science and philosophy was to understand reality, not simply to make
predictions.

Russell's work contributed to philosophy of science's development into a
separate branch of philosophy. Much of Russell's thinking about science is
expressed in his 1914 book, Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for
Scientific Method in Philosophy.[51] which influenced the logical positivists.

Russell held that of the physical world we know only its abstract structure
except for the intrinsic character of our own brain with which we have direct
acquaintance (Russell, 1948). Russell said [52] that he had always assumed
copunctuality between percepts and non-percepts, and percepts were also part
of the physical world, a part of which we knew its intrinsic character
directly, knowledge which goes beyond structure.

Russell wrote several popular science books, including The ABC of Atoms (1923)
and The ABC of Relativity (1925).

### [edit] Ethics

While Russell wrote a great deal on ethical subject matters, he did not
believe that the subject belonged to philosophy or that when he wrote on
ethics that he did so in his capacity as a philosopher. In his earlier years,
Russell was greatly influenced by G.E. Moore's Principia Ethica. Along with
Moore, he then believed that moral facts were objective, but known only
through intuition; that they were simple properties of objects, not equivalent
(e.g., pleasure is good) to the natural objects to which they are often
ascribed (see Naturalistic fallacy); and that these simple, undefinable moral
properties cannot be analyzed using the non-moral properties with which they
are associated. In time, however, he came to agree with his philosophical
hero, David Hume, who believed that ethical terms dealt with subjective values
that cannot be verified in the same way as matters of fact.

Coupled with Russell's other doctrines, this influenced the logical
positivists, who formulated the theory of emotivism or non-cognitivism, which
states that ethical propositions (along with those of metaphysics) were
essentially meaningless and nonsensical or, at best, little more than
expressions of attitudes and preferences. Notwithstanding his influence on
them, Russell himself did not construe ethical propositions as narrowly as the
positivists, for he believed that ethical considerations are not only
meaningful, but that they are a vital subject matter for civil discourse.
Indeed, though Russell was often characterised as the patron saint of
rationality, he agreed with Hume, who said that reason ought to be subordinate
to ethical considerations.

### [edit] Religion and theology

For most of his adult life Russell maintained that religion is little more
than superstition and, despite any positive effects that religion might have,
it is largely harmful to people. He believed religion and the religious
outlook (he considered communism and other systematic ideologies to be forms
of religion) serve to impede knowledge, foster fear and dependency, and are
responsible for much of the war, oppression, and misery that have beset the
world.

In his 1949 speech, "Am I an Atheist or an Agnostic?", Russell expressed his
difficulty over whether to call himself an atheist or an agnostic:

> As a philosopher, if I were speaking to a purely philosophic audience I
should say that I ought to describe myself as an Agnostic, because I do not
think that there is a conclusive argument by which one can prove that there is
not a God. On the other hand, if I am to convey the right impression to the
ordinary man in the street I think that I ought to say that I am an Atheist,
because, when I say that I cannot prove that there is not a God, I ought to
add equally that I cannot prove that there are not the Homeric gods.

> âBertrand Russell, Collected Papers, vol. 11, p. 91

Though he would later question God's existence, he fully accepted the
ontological argument during his undergraduate years:

> For two or three years...I was a Hegelian. I remember the exact moment
during my fourth year [in 1894] when I became one. I had gone out to buy a tin
of tobacco, and was going back with it along Trinity Lane, when I suddenly
threw it up in the air and exclaimed: "Great God in Boots! â the ontological
argument is sound!"

> âBertrand Russell, Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, pg. 60

This quote has been used by many theologians over the years, such as by Louis
Pojman in his Philosophy of Religion, who wish for readers to believe that
even a well-known atheist-philosopher supported this particular argument for
God's existence. However, elsewhere in his autobiography, Russell also
mentions:

> About two years later, I became convinced that there is no life after death,
but I still believed in God, because the "First Cause" argument appeared to be
irrefutable. At the age of eighteen, however, shortly before I went to
Cambridge, I read Mill's Autobiography, where I found a sentence to the effect
that his father taught him the question "Who made me?" cannot be answered,
since it immediately suggests the further question "Who made God?" This led me
to abandon the "First Cause" argument, and to become an atheist.

> âBertrand Russell, Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, pg. 36

Russell made an influential analysis of the omphalos hypothesis enunciated by
Philip Henry Gosseâthat any argument suggesting that the world was created
as if it were already in motion could just as easily make it a few minutes old
as a few thousand years:

> There is no logical impossibility in the hypothesis that the world sprang
into being five minutes ago, exactly as it then was, with a population that
"remembered" a wholly unreal past. There is no logically necessary connection
between events at different times; therefore nothing that is happening now or
will happen in the future can disprove the hypothesis that the world began
five minutes ago.

> âBertrand Russell, The Analysis of Mind, 1921, pp. 159â60; cf.
Philosophy, Norton, 1927, p. 7, where Russell acknowledges Gosse's paternity
of this anti-evolutionary argument.

As a young man, Russell had a decidedly religious bent, himself, as is evident
in his early Platonism. He longed for eternal truths, as he makes clear in his
famous essay, "A Free Man's Worship", widely regarded as a masterpiece of
prose, but a work that Russell came to dislike. While he rejected the
supernatural, he freely admitted that he yearned for a deeper meaning to life.

Russell's views on religion can be found in his popular book, Why I Am Not a
Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects. Its title essay
was a talk given on 6 March 1927 at Battersea Town Hall, under the auspices of
the South London Branch of the National Secular Society, UK, and published
later that year as a pamphlet. The book also contains other essays in which
Russell considers a number of logical arguments for the existence of God,
including the first cause argument, the natural-law argument, the argument
from design, and moral arguments. He also discusses specifics about Christian
theology.

His conclusion:

> Religion is based, I think, primarily and mainly upon fear. It is partly the
terror of the unknown and partly, as I have said, the wish to feel that you
have a kind of elder brother who will stand by you in all your troubles and
disputes. [...] A good world needs knowledge, kindliness, and courage; it does
not need a regretful hankering after the past or a fettering of the free
intelligence by the words uttered long ago by ignorant men.

> âBertrand Russell, Why I Am Not a Christian and Other Essays on Religion
and Related Subjects

## [edit] Influence on philosophy

Russell had a major influence on modern philosophy, especially in the English-
speaking world. While others were also influential, notably Frege, Moore, and
Wittgenstein, Russell made analysis the dominant methodology of professional
philosophy. The various analytic movements throughout the last century all owe
something to Russell's earlier works.

Russell's influence on individual philosophers is singular, perhaps most
notably in the case of Ludwig Wittgenstein, who was his student between 1911
and 1914.[53]

Wittgenstein's own influence on Russell, for example, in leading him to
conclude, much to his regret, that mathematical truths were purely
tautological truths, is a matter of debate. What is certain is that in 1901
Russell's own reflections on the issues raised by the paradox that takes his
name Russell's Paradox, formalised 30 years later by Kurt GÃ¶del's
'Undecidability' Theorems, led him to doubt the certainty of mathematics. This
doubt was perhaps Russell's most important 'influence' on mathematics, and was
spread throughout the European universities, even as Russell himself laboured
(with Alfred North Whitehead) in a futile attempt to solve the Paradox.

Russell wrote (in Portraits from Memory, 1956) of his reaction to GÃ¶del's
'Theorems of Undecidability':

> I wanted certainty in the kind of way in which people want religious faith.
I thought that certainty is more likely to be found in mathematics than
elsewhere. But I discovered that many mathematical demonstrations, which my
teachers wanted me to accept, were full of fallacies ... I was continually
reminded of the fable about the elephant and the tortoise. Having constructed
an elephant upon which the mathematical world could rest, I found the elephant
tottering, and proceeded to construct a tortoise to keep the elephant from
falling. But the tortoise was no more secure than the elephant, and after some
twenty years of arduous toil, I came to the conclusion that there was nothing
more that I could do in the way of making mathematical knowledge indubitable.

Evidence of Russell's influence on Wittgenstein can be seen throughout the
Tractatus, which Russell was instrumental in having published. Russell also
helped to secure Wittgenstein's doctorate[54] and a faculty position at
Cambridge, along with several fellowships along the way.[55] However, as
previously stated, he came to disagree with Wittgenstein's later linguistic
and analytic approach to philosophy dismissing it as "trivial," while
Wittgenstein came to think of Russell as "superficial and glib," particularly
in his popular writings. Russell's influence is also evident in the work of
Alfred J. Ayer, Rudolf Carnap, Alonzo Church, Kurt GÃ¶del, David Kaplan, Saul
Kripke, Karl Popper, W. V. Quine, John R. Searle, and a number of other
philosophers and logicians.

Some see Russell's influence as mostly negative,[citation needed] primarily
those who have criticized Russell's emphasis on science and logic. Russell
often characterized his moral and political writings as lying outside the
scope of philosophy, but Russell's admirers and detractors are often more
acquainted with his pronouncements on social and political matters, or what
some (e.g., biographer Ray Monk) have called his "journalism," than they are
with his technical, philosophical work. There is a marked tendency to conflate
these matters, and to judge Russell the philosopher on what he himself would
certainly consider to be his non-philosophical opinions. Russell often
cautioned people to make this distinction. Beginning in the 1920s, Russell
wrote frequently for The Nation on changing morals, disarmament and
literature. In 1965, he wrote that the magazine "...has been one of the few
voices which has been heard on behalf of individual liberty and social justice
consistently throughout its existence."[56]

Russell left a large assortment of writing. From his adolescent years, he
wrote about 3,000 words a day, with relatively few corrections; his first
draft nearly always was his last, even on the most complex, technical matters.
His previously unpublished work is an immense treasure trove, and scholars
continue to gain new insights into Russell's thought.

## [edit] Politics

Political and social activism occupied much of Russell's time for most of his
life.

### [edit] Pacifism, war and nuclear weapons

Russell was never a complete pacifist. He resisted specific wars on the
grounds that they were contrary to the interests of civilization, and thus
immoral. On the other hand, his 1915 article on "The Ethics of War," he
defended wars of colonization on the same utilitarian grounds: he felt
conquest was justified if the side with the more advanced civilization could
put the land to better use.

Russell's activism against British participation in World War I led to fines,
a loss of freedom of travel within Britain, and the non-renewal of his
fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge. and he was eventually sentenced to
prison in 1918 on the tenuous grounds that he had interfered in British
Foreign Policy â he had argued that British workers should be wary of the
United States Army, for it had experience in strike-breaking. He was released
after serving six months, but was still closely supervised until the end of
the war.[20]

In 1943 Russell called his stance towards warfare "relative political
pacifism"âhe held that war was always a great evil, but in some particularly
extreme circumstances (such as when Adolf Hitler threatened to take over
Europe) it might be a lesser of multiple evils. In the years leading to World
War II, he supported the policy of appeasement; but by 1940 he acknowledged
that in order to preserve democracy, Hitler had to be defeated. This same
reluctant value compromise was shared by his acquaintance A.A. Milne.[57]

Russell was fairly consistently opposed to the continued existence of nuclear
weapons from the time of their first use. However, on 20 November 1948, in a
public speech[58] at Westminster School, addressing a gathering arranged by
the New Commonwealth, Russell shocked some observers with comments that seemed
to suggest a preemptive nuclear strike on the Soviet Union might be justified.
Russell apparently argued that the threat of war between the United States and
the Soviet Union would enable the United States to force the Soviet Union to
accept the Baruch Plan for international atomic energy control. (Earlier in
the year he had written in the same vein to Walter W. Marseille.) Russell felt
this plan "had very great merits and showed considerable generosity, when it
is remembered that America still had an unbroken nuclear monopoly." (Has Man a
Future?, 1961). However Nicholas Griffin of McMaster University, in his book
The Selected Letters of Bertrand Russell: The Public Years, 1914-1970, has
claimed (after obtaining a transcript of the speech) that Russell's wording
implies he didn't advocate the actual use of the atom bomb, but merely its
diplomatic use as a massive source of leverage over the actions of the
Soviets. Griffin's interpretation was disputed by Nigel Lawson, the former
British Chancellor, who was present at the speech, claims it was quite clear
that Russell was advocating an actual First Strike. Whichever interpretation
is correct, Russell later relented, instead arguing for mutual disarmament by
the nuclear powers, possibly linked to some form of world government.

In 1955, Russell released the Russell-Einstein Manifesto, co-signed by Albert
Einstein and nine other leading scientists and intellectuals, a document which
led to the first of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs in
1957. In 1958, Russell became the first president of the Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament. He resigned two years later when the CND would not support civil
disobedience, and formed the Committee of 100. In September 1961 he was
imprisoned for a week for inciting civil disobedience, when he took part in a
huge ban-the-bomb demonstration at the Ministry of Defence but the sentence
was quashed on account of his age.

During the Cuban Missile Crisis, Russell sent telegrams to U.S. President John
F. Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, the UN Secretary-General U Thant and British
Prime Minister Harold Macmillan. His telegrams were greatly critical of
Kennedy, who he had already singled out earlier as "more dangerous than
Hitler", and tolerant of Khrushchev. Khrushchev replied with a long letter,
published by the Russian news agency ITAR-TASS, which was mainly addressed to
Kennedy and the Western world.[59]

Increasingly concerned about the potential danger to humanity arising from
nuclear weapons and other scientific discoveries, he also joined with
Einstein, Robert Oppenheimer, Joseph Rotblat and other eminent scientists of
the day to establish the World Academy of Art and Science which was formally
constituted in 1960.

The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation and its publishing imprint Spokesman
Books[60] began work in 1963 to carry forward Russell's work for peace, human
rights and social justice. He began public opposition to US policy in Vietnam
with a letter to The New York Times dated 28 March 1963. By the autumn of
1966, he had completed the manuscript War Crimes in Vietnam. Then, using the
American justifications for the Nuremberg Trials, Russell, along with Jean-
Paul Sartre, organised what he called an international War Crimes Tribunal,
the Russell Tribunal.

Russell criticized the official account of the assassination of John F.
Kennedy in "16 Questions on the Assassination," 1964.

Russell made a cameo appearance playing himself in the anti-war Bollywood film
Aman which was released in India in 1967. It was Russell's only appearance in
a feature film.

### [edit] Communism and socialism

Russell initially expressed great hope in "the Communist experiment." However,
when he visited the Soviet Union and met Vladimir Lenin in 1920, he was
unimpressed with the system in place. On his return he wrote a critical tract,
The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism. He was "infinitely unhappy in this
atmosphereâstifled by its utilitarianism, its indifference to love and
beauty and the life of impulse." He believed Lenin to be similar to a
religious zealot, cold and possessing "no love of liberty."[21][23]

In the 1922 and 1923 general elections Russell stood as a Labour Party
candidate in the Chelsea constituency, but only on the basis that he knew he
was extremely unlikely to be elected in such a safe Conservative seat, and he
was not on either occasion.

He was strongly critical of Stalin's regime, and referred to Marxism as a
"system of dogma."[61] Between 1945 and 1947, together with A. J. Ayer and
George Orwell, he contributed a series of articles to Polemic, a short-lived
British "Magazine of Philosophy, Psychology, and Aesthetics" edited by the ex-
Communist Humphrey Slater.[62][63]

Russell was a consistent enthusiast for democracy and world government, and he
advocated the establishment of a democratic international government in some
of the essays collected in In Praise of Idleness (1935), and also in Has Man a
Future? (1961).

> One who believes as I do, that free intellect is the chief engine of human
progress, cannot but be fundamentally opposed to Bolshevism as much as to the
Church of Rome. The hopes which inspire communism are, in the main, as
admirable as those instilled by the Sermon on the Mount, but they are held as
fanatically and are as likely to do as much harm.

> âBertrand Russell, The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism, 1920, pg. 118

> For my part, while I am as convinced a Socialist as the most ardent Marxian,
I do not regard Socialism as a gospel of proletarian revenge, nor even,
primarily, as a means of securing economic justice. I regard it primarily as
an adjustment to machine production demanded by considerations of common
sense, and calculated to increase the happiness, not only of proletarians, but
of all except a tiny minority of the human race.

> âBertrand Russell, "The Case for Socialism" (In Praise of Idleness, 1935,
pg. 81)

> Modern methods of production have given us the possibility of ease and
security for all; we have chosen, instead, to have overwork for some and
starvation for the others. Hitherto we have continued to be as energetic as we
were before there were machines; in this we have been foolish, but there is no
reason to go on being foolish for ever.

> âBertrand Russell, In Praise of Idleness, 1935, pg. 15

### [edit] Women's suffrage

As a young man, Russell was a member of the Liberal Party and wrote in favor
of women's suffrage. In his 1910 pamphlet, Anti-Suffragist Anxieties, Russell
wrote that some men opposed suffrage because they "fear that their liberty to
act in ways that are injurious to women will be curtailed." In May 1907
Russell stood for Parliament as a Woman's suffrage candidate in Wimbledon, but
was not elected.[64]

### [edit] Sexuality

Russell wrote against Victorian notions of morality. Marriage and Morals
(1929) expressed his opinion that sex between a man and woman who are not
married to each other is not necessarily immoral if they truly love one
another, and advocated "trial marriages" or "companionate marriage,"
formalized relationships whereby young people could legitimately have sexual
intercourse without being expected to remain married in the long term or to
have children (an idea first proposed by Judge Ben Lindsey).[65][66] This was
enough to raise vigorous protests and denunciations against him during his
visit to the United States shortly after the book's publication. Russell was
also one of the first intellectuals to advocate open sex education and
widespread access to contraception. He also advocated easy divorce, but only
if the marriage had produced no children â Russell's view was that parents
should remain married but tolerant of each others' sexual infidelity, if they
had children. This reflected his life at the time â his second wife Dora was
openly having an affair, and would soon become pregnant by another man, but
Russell was keen for their children John and Kate to have a "normal" family
life.[66]

Russell was also active within the Homosexual Law Reform Society, being one of
the signatories of Anthony Edward Dyson's letter calling for a change in the
law regarding homosexual practices, which were legalized in 1967, when Russell
was still alive.[67]

### [edit] Race

As with his views on religion, which developed considerably throughout his
long life, Russell's views on the matter of race did not remain fixed. By
1951, Russell was a vocal advocate of racial equality and intermarriage; he
penned a chapter on "Racial Antagonism" in New Hopes for a Changing World
(1951), which read:

> It is sometimes maintained that racial mixture is biologically undesirable.
There is no evidence whatever for this view. Nor is there, apparently, any
reason to think that Negroes are congenitally less intelligent than white
people, but as to that it will be difficult to judge until they have equal
scope and equally good social conditions.

> âBertrand Russell, New Hopes for a Changing World (London: Allen & Unwin,
1951, p. 108)

Passages in some of his early writings support birth control. On 16 November
1922, for instance, he gave a lecture to the General Meeting of Dr. Marie
Stopes's Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress on "Birth
Control and International Relations," in which he described the importance of
extending Western birth control worldwide; his remarks anticipated the
population control movement of the 1960s and the role of the United Nations.

> This policy may last some time, but in the end under it we shall have to
give wayâwe are only putting off the evil day; the one real remedy is birth
control, that is getting the people of the world to limit themselves to those
numbers which they can keep upon their own soil... I do not see how we can
hope permanently to be strong enough to keep the coloured races out; sooner or
later they are bound to overflow, so the best we can do is to hope that those
nations will see the wisdom of Birth Control.... We need a strong
international authority.

> â"Lecture by the Hon. Bertrand Russell", Birth Control News, vol 1, no. 8
(December 1922), p.2

Another passage from early editions of his book Marriage and Morals (1929),
which Russell later claimed to be referring only to environmental
conditioning, and which he significantly modified in later editions, reads:

> In extreme cases there can be little doubt of the superiority of one race to
another[...] It seems on the whole fair to regard Negroes as on the average
inferior to white men, although for work in the tropics they are
indispensable, so that their extermination (apart from the question of
humanity) would be highly undesirable.[68]

> âBertrand Russell, Marriage and Morals, pg. 266 (1929)

Russell later criticized eugenic programs for their vulnerability to
corruption, and, in 1932, he condemned the "unwarranted assumption" that
"Negroes are congenitally inferior to white men" (Education and the Social
Order, Chap. 3).

Responding in 1964 to a correspondent's inquiry, "Do you still consider the
Negroes an inferior race, as you did when you wrote Marriage and Morals?",
Russell replied:

> I never held Negroes to be inherently inferior. The statement in Marriage
and Morals refers to environmental conditioning. I have had it withdrawn from
subsequent editions because it is clearly ambiguous.

> âBertrand Russell, letter dated 17 March 1964 in Dear Bertrand Russell...
a selection of his correspondence with the general public, 1950-1968. edited
by Barry Feinberg and Ronald Kasrils.(London: Allen & Unwin, 1969, p. 146)

<IMG> Logic portal  
## [edit] Further reading

### [edit] Selected bibliography of Russell's books

This is a selected bibliography of Russell's books in English sorted by year
of first publication.

  * 1896, German Social Democracy, London: Longmans, Green.
  * 1897, An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry, Cambridge: At the University Press.
  * 1900, A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz, Cambridge: At the University Press.
  * 1903, The Principles of Mathematics The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge: At the University Press.
  * 1905 On Denoting, Mind vol. 14, NS, ISSN: 00264425, Basil Blackwell
  * 1910, Philosophical Essays, London: Longmans, Green.
  * 1910â1913, Principia Mathematica (with Alfred North Whitehead), 3 vols., Cambridge: At the University Press.
  * 1912, The Problems of Philosophy, London: Williams and Norgate.
  * 1914, Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method in Philosophy, Chicago and London: Open CPublishing.
  * 1916, Principles of Social Reconstruction, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1916, Justice in War-time, Chicago: Open Court.
  * 1917, Political Ideals, New York: The Century Co.
  * 1918, Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays, London: Longmans, Green.
  * 1918, Proposed Roads to Freedom: Socialism, Anarchism, and Syndicalism, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1919, Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, London: George Allen & Unwin, (ISBN 0-415-09604-9 for Routledge paperback) (Copy at Archive.org).
  * 1920, The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism,London: George Allen & Unwin
  * 1921, The Analysis of Mind, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1922, The Problem of China, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1923, The Prospects of Industrial Civilization (in collaboration with Dora Russell), London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1923, The ABC of Atoms, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.
  * 1924, Icarus, or the Future of Science, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.
  * 1925, The ABC of Relativity, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.
  * 1925, What I Believe, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.
  * 1926, On Education, Especially in Early Childhood, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1927, The Analysis of Matter, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.
  * 1927, An Outline of Philosophy, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1927, Why I Am Not a Christian, London: Watts.
  * 1927, Selected Papers of Bertrand Russell, New York: Modern Library.
  * 1928, Sceptical Essays, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1929, Marriage and Morals, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1930, The Conquest of Happiness, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1931, The Scientific Outlook, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1932, Education and the Social Order, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1934, Freedom and Organization, 1814â1914, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1935, In Praise of Idleness, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1935, Religion and Science, London: Thornton Butterworth.
  * 1936, Which Way to Peace?, London: Jonathan Cape.
  * 1937, The Amberley Papers: The Letters and Diaries of Lord and Lady Amberley (with Patricia Russell), 2 vols., London: Leonard & Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press.
  * 1938, Power: A New Social Analysis, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1940, An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
  * 1946, History of Western Philosophy and Its Connection with Political and Social Circumstances from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, New York: Simon and Schuster.
  * 1948, Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1949, Authority and the Individual, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1950, Unpopular Essays, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1951, New Hopes for a Changing World, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1952, The Impact of Science on Society, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1953, Satan in the Suburbs and Other Stories, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1954, Human Society in Ethics and Politics, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1954, Nightmares of Eminent Persons and Other Stories, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1956, Portraits from Memory and Other Essays, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1956, Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901â1950 (edited by Robert C. Marsh), London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1957, Why I Am Not A Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects (edited by Paul Edwards), London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1958, Understanding History and Other Essays, New York: Philosophical Library.
  * 1959, Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1959, My Philosophical Development, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1959, Wisdom of the West ("editor", Paul Foulkes), London: Macdonald.
  * 1960, Bertrand Russell Speaks His Mind, Cleveland and New York: World Publishing Company.
  * 1961, The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell (edited by R.E. Egner and L.E. Denonn), London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1961, Fact and Fiction, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1961, Has Man a Future?, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1963, Essays in Skepticism, New York: Philosophical Library.
  * 1963, Unarmed Victory, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1965, On the Philosophy of Science (edited by Charles A. Fritz, Jr.), Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company.
  * 1967, Russell's Peace Appeals (edited by Tsutomu Makino and Kazuteru Hitaka), Japan: Eichosha's New Current Books.
  * 1967, War Crimes in Vietnam, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1967â1969, The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 vols., London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * 1969, Dear Bertrand Russell... A Selection of his Correspondence with the General Public 1950â1968 (edited by Barry Feinberg and Ronald Kasrils), London: George Allen and Unwin.

Note: This is a mere sampling, for Russell also wrote many pamphlets,
introductions, articles and letters to the editor. His works also can be found
in any number of anthologies and collections, perhaps most notably The
Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, which McMaster University began
publishing in 1983. This collection of his shorter and previously unpublished
works is now up to 16 volumes, and many more are forthcoming. An additional
three volumes catalogue just his bibliography. The Russell Archives at
McMaster University also have more than 30,000 letters that he wrote.

### [edit] Additional references

#### [edit] Russell

  * 1900, Sur la logique des relations avec des applications Ã la thÃ©orie des sÃ©ries, Rivista di matematica 7: 115-148.
  * 1901, On the Notion of Order, Mind (n.s.) 10: 35-51.
  * 1902, (with Alfred North Whitehead), On Cardinal Numbers, American Journal of Mathematics 23: 367-384.

#### [edit] Secondary references

  * John Newsome Crossley. A Note on Cantor's Theorem and Russell's Paradox, Australian Journal of Philosophy 51: 70-71.
  * Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton University Press.

### [edit] Books about Russell's philosophy

  * Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, edited by A. D. Irvine, 4 volumes, London: Routledge, 1999. Consists of essays on Russell's work by many distinguished philosophers.
  * Bertrand Russell, by John Slater, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1994.
  * Bertrand Russell's Ethics. by Michael K. Potter, Bristol: Thoemmes Continuum, 2006. A clear and accessible explanation of Russell's moral philosophy.
  * The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, edited by P.A. Schilpp, Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University, 1944.
  * Russell, by A. J. Ayer, London: Fontana, 1972. ISBN 0-00-632965-9. A lucid summary exposition of Russell's thought.
  * The Lost Cause: Causation and the Mind-Body Problem, by Celia Green. Oxford: Oxford Forum, 2003. ISBN 0-9536772-1-4 Contains a sympathetic analysis of Russell's views on causality.
  * The Ethical Philosophy of Bertrand Russell by Dr. Ramendra, New York: Vantage Press,1993. ISBN 0-533-09424-0
  * Some Reflections on Ethics by Dr. Ramendra

### [edit] Biographical books

  * Bertrand Russell: Philosopher and Humanist, by John Lewis (1968)
  * Bertrand Russell, by A. J. Ayer (1972), reprint ed. 1988: ISBN 0-226-03343-0
  * The Life of Bertrand Russell, by Ronald W. Clark (1975) ISBN 0-394-49059-2
  * Bertrand Russell and His World, by Ronald W. Clark (1981) ISBN 0-500-13070-1
  * Bertrand Russell: Mathematics: Dreams and Nightmares by Ray Monk (1997) ISBN 0-75380-190-6
  * Bertrand Russell: 1872â1920 The Spirit of Solitude by Ray Monk (1997) ISBN 0-09-973131-2
  * Bertrand Russell: 1921â1970 The Ghost of Madness by Ray Monk (2001) ISBN 0-09-927275-X

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Hestler, Anna (2001). Wales. Marshall Cavendish. pp. 53\. ISBN 076141195X.
  2. ^ Ludlow, Peter, "Descriptions", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2008 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = [1].
  3. ^ Richard Rempel (1979). "From Imperialism to Free Trade: Couturat, Halevy and Russell's First Crusade". Journal of the History of Ideas 40 (3): 423â443. doi:10.2307/2709246.
  4. ^ Bertrand Russell (1988) [1917]. Political Ideals. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-10907-8.
  5. ^ a b c d e f g The Bertrand Russell Gallery
  6. ^ a b c d The Nobel Foundation (1950). Bertrand Russell: The Nobel Prize in Literature 1950. Retrieved on 11 June 2007.
  7. ^ a b Bloy, Marjie, Ph.D.. "Lord John Russell (1792-1878)". http://www.victorianweb.org/history/pms/russell.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-28.
  8. ^ Cokayne, G.E.; Vicary Gibbs, H.A. Doubleday, Geoffrey H. White, Duncan Warrand and Lord Howard de Walden, editors. The Complete Peerage of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom, Extant, Extinct or Dormant, new ed. 13 volumes in 14. 1910-1959. Reprint in 6 volumes, Gloucester, UK: Alan Sutton Publishing, 2000.
  9. ^ a b c Paul, Ashley. "Bertrand Russell: The Man and His Ideas.". http://www.geocities.com/vu3ash/index.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-28.
  10. ^ The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, p.38
  11. ^ Lenz, John R. (date unknown) (PDF). Bertrand Russell and the Greeks. http://digitalcommons.mcmaster.ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1443&context=russelljournal. Retrieved on 2007-10-27.
  12. ^ O'Connor, J. J.; E. F. Robertson (October 2003). "Alfred North Whitehead". School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland. http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Whitehead.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-08.
  13. ^ Griffin, Nicholas; Albert C. Lewis. "Bertrand Russell's Mathematical Education". Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 44, No. 1.. 51-71. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0035-9149%28199001%2944%3A1%3C51%3ABRME%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z. Retrieved on 2007-11-08.
  14. ^ Wallenchinsky et al. (1981), "Famous Marriages Bertrand...Part 1".
  15. ^ Wallenchinsky et al. (1981), "Famous Marriages Bertrand...Part 3".
  16. ^ Kimball, Roger. "Love, logic & unbearable pity: The private Bertrand Russell". The New Criterion Vol. 11, No. 1, September 1992. The New Criterion. http://newcriterion.com:81/archive/11/sept92/brussell.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-15.
  17. ^ Simkin, John. "London School of Economics". http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/EDlse.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  18. ^ Russell, Bertrand (2001). Ray Perkins. ed. Yours Faithfully, Bertrand Russell: Letters to the Editor 1904-1969. Chicago: Open Court Publishing. pp. 16\. ISBN 0-8126-9449-X. http://books.google.com/books?id=EayyTTpXL-QC&pg=PA16&lpg=PA16. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  19. ^ Russell on Wittgenstein
  20. ^ a b Vellacott, Jo (1980). Bertrand Russell and the Pacifists in the First World War. Brighton: Harvester Press. ISBN 0855274549.
  21. ^ a b "Bertrand Russell (1872-1970)". Farlex, Inc.. http://russell.thefreelibrary.com/. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  22. ^ ""Bertrand Russell Reported Dead"" (PDF). The New York Times. 21 April 1921. http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-free/pdf?_r=1&res=9B01E7DB1739E133A25752C2A9629C946095D6CF&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.
  23. ^ a b Russell, Bertrand (2000). Richard A . Rempel. ed. "Uncertain Paths to Freedom: Russia and China, 1919-22". 15. Routledge. lxviii. ISBN 0415094119. http://books.google.com/books?id=qnaqY4gUyrAC&dq=mr+bertrand+russell+having+died+according+to+the+japanese+press.
  24. ^ Monk, Ray (2004; online edition, January 2008). "âRussell, Bertrand Arthur William, third Earl Russell (1872â1970)â". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. Oxford University Pressmonth=September. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/35875. http://www.oxforddnb.com/view/article/35875. Retrieved on 2008-03-14.
  25. ^ Inside Beacon Hill: Bertrand Russell as Schoolmaster. Jespersen, Shirley ERIC# EJ360344, published 1987
  26. ^ a b ""Dora Russell"". 2007-05-12. http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/TUrussellD.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-17.
  27. ^ Leberstein, Stephen (November/December 2001). ""Appointment Denied: The Inquisition of Bertrand Russell"". Academe. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3860/is_200111/ai_n9008065. Retrieved on 2008-02-17.
  28. ^ ""Bertrand Russell"". 2006. http://www.philosophyprofessor.com/philosophers/bertrand-russell.php. Retrieved on 2008-02-17.
  29. ^ Griffin, Nicholas (ed.) (2002). "The Selected Letters of Bertrand Russell". Routledge. pp. 660\. ISBN 0415260124.
  30. ^ A philosopherâs letters | Love, Bertie | Economist.com
  31. ^ London Gazette: (Supplement) no. 38628, p. 2796, 3 June 1949. Retrieved on 2008-03-11.
  32. ^ Ronald W. Clark, Bertrand Russell and His World, p94. (1981) ISBN 0-500-13070-1
  33. ^ Russell, Bertrand; Albert Einstein (1955-07-09). ""Russell Einstein Manifesto"". http://www.ppu.org.uk/learn/texts/doc_russelleinstein_manif.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-17.
  34. ^ Jerusalem International Book Fair
  35. ^ Russell, Bertrand; Perkins, Ray (2002). Yours faithfully, Bertrand Russell: a lifelong fight for peace, justice, and truth in letters to the editor. Chicago: Open Court. ISBN 0-8126-9450-3.
  36. ^ Russell's last political speech
  37. ^ Copleston, Frederick Charles (1975). "History of Philosophy". Paulist Press. 577. http://books.google.com/books?id=Di_Thwi7xM8C. Retrieved on 2008-02-20.
  38. ^ a b Irvine, A. D. (2003-05-01). "Bertrand Russell". Stanford University. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/russell/. Retrieved on 2008-02-20.
  39. ^ Russell, Bertrand (1992). The Analysis of Matter. London: Routledge. pp. 424\. ISBN 0-415-08297-8.
  40. ^ Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008). From Plato to Derrida. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-158591-6.
  41. ^ Parsons, Charles (November 2001). "Willard Van Orman Quine, 1908-2000". Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association 75 (2): 121â124. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0065-972X(200111)75%3A2%3C121%3AWVOQ1%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3.
  42. ^ "Quine, Willard Van Orman." EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica. 2008. EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica Online. Accessed 23 February 2008.
  43. ^ Monk, Ray (January 1999). "Cambridge Philosophers IX: Bertrand Russell". Philosophy (Cambridge University Press) 74 (01): 105â117. doi:10.1017/S0031819199001072.
  44. ^ Bertrand Russell Archives at McMaster University
  45. ^ a b Russell's The Principles of Mathematics
  46. ^ The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, the Early Years, p. 202.
  47. ^ The Autobio. of B. Russell, pg. 329.
  48. ^ a b Klement, Kevin (2005-10-24). "Russell's Logical Atomism". Stanford University. http://www.science.uva.nl/~seop/entries/logical-atomism/. Retrieved on 2008-02-23.
  49. ^ Fumerton, Richard (2004-01-19). "Knowledge by Acquaintance vs. Description". Stanford University. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/knowledge-acquaindescrip/. Retrieved on 2008-02-23.
  50. ^ Stubenberg, Leopold (2005-02-03). "Neutral Monism". Stanford University. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/neutral-monism/. Retrieved on 2008-02-23.
  51. ^ a b Russell, Bertrand (1993). Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method in Philosophy. Routledge. pp. 251\. ISBN 0415096057. http://books.google.com/books?id=SsY9g_DDA9MC.
  52. ^ in a lettera letter to Newman which has been reprinted in Russell's autobiography)
  53. ^ Biletzki, Anat (2006-11-17). "Ludwig Wittgenstein". Metaphysics Research Lab, CSLI, Stanford University. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/wittgenstein/. Retrieved on 2008-02-27.
  54. ^ The Autobio. of B. Russell, pgs. 435-440.
  55. ^ The Autobio. of B. Russell, pgs. 351-353.
  56. ^ Katrina Vanden Heuvel The Nation 1865-1990, p. 136, Thunder's Mouth Press, 1990 ISBN 1-56025-001`-1
  57. ^ Rempel, Richard A. (December 1978). "The Dilemmas of British Pacifists During World War II". The Journal of Modern History 50 (4): D1213âD1229. doi:10.1086/241842. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2801%28197812%2950%3A4%3CD1213%3ATDOBPD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4.
  58. ^ [2]
  59. ^ Horst-Eberhard Richter (2006). Die Krise der MÃ¤nnlichkeit in der unerwachsenen Gesellschaft. Psychosozial-Verlag. ISBN 3898065707.
  60. ^ http://www.spokesmanbooks.com
  61. ^ Bertrand Russell, Unpopular Essays (1950), p.19, Simon and Schuster
  62. ^ [3]Art-Historical Notes: "Where are the Hirsts of the 1930s now?" The Independent, Nov 13, 1998 by David Buckman
  63. ^ [4] Absent Minds: Intellectuals in Britain by Stefan Collini Oxford University Press, 2006 ISBN 0199291055, 9780199291052
  64. ^ Crawford, Elizabeth (2001). The Women's Suffrage Movement: A Reference Guide, 1866-1928. Routledge. pp. 785\. ISBN 0415239265. http://books.google.com/books?id=eIzLissZmscC.
  65. ^ Hauerwas, Stanley (1978-04-19). ""Sex and Politics: Bertrand Russell and Human Sexuality'"". Christian Century. http://www.religion-online.org/showarticle.asp?title=1797. Retrieved on 2008-02-17.
  66. ^ a b Haeberle, Erwin J. (1983). ""Pioneers of Sex Education"". The Continuum Publishing Company. http://www2.hu-berlin.de/sexology/ATLAS_EN/html/pioneers_of_sex_education.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-17.
  67. ^ Gay and Lesbian Humanist Association (1997-11-02). "Lesbian and Gay Rights: The Humanist and Religious Stances". http://www.galha.org/briefing/lgb_rights.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-17.
  68. ^ See Proctor, Robert. Racial Hygiene: Medicine Under the Nazis (Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University Press, 1988): page 179.

## [edit] References

  * Bertrand Russell. 1967â1969, The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 volumes, London: George Allen & Unwin.
  * Wallechinsky, David & Irving Wallace. 1975-1981, "Famous Marriages Bertrand Russell & Alla Pearsall Smith, Part 1" & "Part 3", on "Alys" Pearsall Smith, webpage content from The People's Almanac, webpages: Part 1 & Part 3 (accessed 2008-11-08).
  * Russell B, (1944) "My Mental Development", in Schilpp, Paul Arturn "The Philosophy of Betrand Russell", New York, Tudorm 1951, pp 3â20

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Bertrand
Russell  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Bertrand Russell

Writings available online

  * Works by Bertrand Russell at Project Gutenberg
  * "Mysticism" (1961)
  * "A Free Man's Worship" (1903)
  * "Am I an Atheist or an Agnostic?" (1947)
  * "Has Religion Made Useful Contributions to Civilization?" 1930
  * "Ideas that Have Harmed Mankind" (1950)
  * "In Praise of Idleness" (1932)
  * "What Desires Are Politically Important?" (1950)
  * Political Ideals (1917)
  * The Problems of Philosophy
  * Proposed Roads to Freedom (1918)
  * "16 Questions on the Assassination" (of President Kennedy)
  * The Analysis Of Mind
  * What is an Agnostic?
  * Why I am not a Christian
  * The War and Non-ResistanceâA Rejoinder to Professor Perry
  * War and Non-Resistance (1915)
  * The Ethics of War (1915)
  * Principia Mathematica (1910)
  * "The Elements of Ethics" (1910)
  * The Principles of Mathematics (1903)
  * An essay on the foundations of geometry
  * From: www.archive.org
    * History of Western Philosophy (1946)
    * My Philosophical Development (1959)
    * Portraits from Memory and Other Essays (1956)
    * Unpopular Essays (1950)
    * Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1920)
    * The Scientific Outlook (1954)
    * An Outline of Philosophy (1951)
    * Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare (1959)
    * Our Knowledge of the External World (1914)
    * Legitimacy Versus Industrialism 1814-1848 (1935)
    * Authority and the Individual (1949)
    * Education and the Social Order (1932)
    * Nightmares of Eminent Persons and Other Stories (1954)
    * Why Men Fight: A Method of Abolishing the International Duel (1917)
    * Justice in Wartime (1917)
    * Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays (1917)
    * The Autobiography Of Bertrand Russell 1872-1914 (1951)
    * The Autobiography Of Bertrand Russell 1914-1944 (1956)
    * Is There a God? (1952)

Audio

  * Works by Bertrand Russell in audio format from LibriVox
  * Bertrand Russell Audio Archive
  * In Praise of Idleness free mp3 recitation of Russell's essay of the same name, from the Audio Anarchy project

Other

  * Pembroke Lodge â childhood home and museum
  * The Bertrand Russell Society â a member organisation of the International Humanist and Ethical Union
  * The Bertrand Russell Society Quarterly
  * The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation
  * Bertrand Russell in Japan
  * O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Bertrand Russell", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive
  * Biography and quotes of Bertrand Russell
  * Russell Photo Gallery
  * Photographs at the National Portrait Gallery
  * Bertrand Russell entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy by A.D. Irvine, 2003-05-01
  * The Bertrand Russell Archives
  * Resource list
  * The First Reith Lecture given by Russell (Real Audio)
  * Encyclopaedia Britannica
  * Nobel Prize
  * Russell immediate family
  * Lecture about 1905, the philosophical landscale of Einstein in which Russell was central
  * Bertrand Russell at 100 Welsh Heroes

Peerage of the United Kingdom  
Preceded by  
Frank Russell Earl Russell  
1931â1970 Succeeded by  
John Russell  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Nobel Laureates in Literature  
Grazia Deledda (1926) Â· Henri Bergson (1927) Â· Sigrid Undset (1928) Â·
Thomas Mann (1929) Â· Sinclair Lewis (1930) Â· Erik Axel Karlfeldt (1931) Â·
John Galsworthy (1932) Â· Ivan Bunin (1933) Â· Luigi Pirandello (1934) Â·
Eugene O'Neill (1936) Â· Roger Martin du Gard (1937) Â· Pearl S. Buck (1938)
Â· Frans Eemil SillanpÃ¤Ã¤ (1939) Â· Johannes Vilhelm Jensen (1944) Â·
Gabriela Mistral (1945) Â· Hermann Hesse (1946) Â· AndrÃ© Gide (1947) Â· T. S.
Eliot (1948) Â· William Faulkner (1949) Â· Bertrand Russell (1950)  
Complete roster Â· 1901â1925 Â· 1926â1950 Â· 1951â1975 Â· 1976â2000 Â·
2001âpresent  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Logic  
History and core topics  
History

General Â· Chinese Â· Greek Â· Indian Â· Islamic  
Core topics

Reason Â· Philosophical logic Â· Philosophy of logic Â· Mathematical logic Â·
Metalogic Â· Logic in computer science  
Key concepts and logics  
Reasoning

Deduction Â· Induction Â· Abduction  
Informal

Proposition Â· Inference Â· Argument Â· Validity Â· Cogency Â· Term logic Â·
Critical thinking Â· Fallacies Â· Syllogism Â· Argumentation theory  
Philosophy  
of logic

Platonic realism Â· Logical atomism Â· Logicism Â· Formalism Â· Nominalism Â·
Fictionalism Â· Realism Â· Intuitionism Â· Constructivism Â· Finitism  
Mathematical

Formal language Â· Formal system Â· Deductive system Â· Formal proof Â· Formal
interpretation Â· Formal semantics Â· Well-formed formula Â· Set Â· Element Â·
Class Â· Axiom Â· Rule of inference Â· Relation Â· Theorem Â· Logical
consequence Â· Consistency Â· Soundness Â· Completeness Â· Decidability Â·
Satisfiability Â· Independence Â· Set theory Â· Axiomatic system Â· Proof
theory Â· Model theory Â· Recursion theory Â· Type theory Â· Syntax  
Propositional

Boolean functions Â· Monadic predicate calculus Â· Propositional calculus Â·
Logical connectives Â· Quantifiers Â· Truth tables  
Predicate

First-order Â· Quantifiers Â· Predicate Â· Second-order  
Modal

Alethic Â· Axiologic Â· Deontic Â· Doxastic Â· Epistemic Â· Temporal  
Other non  
classical

Computability Â· Fuzzy Â· Linear Â· Relevance Â· Non-monotonic  
Controversies  
Paraconsistent logic Â· Dialetheism Â· Intuitionistic logic Â· Paradoxes Â·
Antinomies Â· Is logic empirical?  
Key figures  
Alfarabi Â· Algazel Â· Alkindus Â· Al-Razi Â· Aristotle Â· Averroes Â·
Avicenna Â· Boole Â· Cantor Â· Carnap Â· Church Â· Dharmakirti Â· DignÄga Â·
Frege Â· Gentzen Â· Kanada Â· GÃ¶del Â· Gotama Â· Hilbert Â· Ibn al-Nafis Â·
Ibn Hazm Â· Ibn Taymiyyah Â· Kripke Â· Leibniz Â· Mozi Â· Nagarjuna Â·
PÄá¹ini Â· Peano Â· Peirce Â· Putnam Â· Quine Â· Russell Â· Skolem Â·
Suhrawardi Â· Tarski Â· Turing Â· Whitehead Â· Zadeh  
Lists  
Topics

General Â· Basic Â· Mathematical logic Â· Boolean algebra Â· Set theory  
Other

Logicians Â· Rules of inference Â· Paradoxes Â· Fallacies Â· Logic symbols  
Portal Â· Category Â· WikiProject Â· Logic stubs Â· Mathlogic stubs Â· Cleanup
Â· Noticeboard  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Metaphysics  
Topics

Time Â· Experience Â· Causality Â· Principle Â· Will Â· Quality Â· Value Â·
Self Â· Action Â· Intention Â· Matter Â· Meaning Â· Essence Â· Subject Â·
Object Â· Unity Â· Truth Â· Mind Â· Necessity Â· Pattern Â· Type Â· Motion Â·
Freedom Â· Form Â· Idea Â· Modality Â· Substance Â· Properties Â· more... Â·  
Ontology

Being Â· Category of being Â· Change Â· Cogito ergo sum Â· Dualism Â· Embodied
philosophy Â· Entity Â· Existence Â· Existentialism Â· Identity Â· Physical
object Â· Properties Â· Reality Â· Relativism Â· Scientific realism Â·
Subjectivism Â· Substance theory Â· Universal Â· Unobservables Â· Teleology  
Big Questions

What is the nature of the universe? Â· What is the meaning of life? Â· What is
being? Â· What is time? Â· What is experience? Â· What is causality? Â· What
are principles? Â· What is value? Â· What is the self? Â· What is action? Â·
What is will? Â· Whats is matter? Â· What is meaning? Â· What are types? Â·  
Metaphysical theories

Platonic idealism Â· Hindu idealism Â· Scientific materialism Â· Cartesian
dualism Â· Phenomenalism Â· Existentialism Â· Nihilism Â· Realism Â· Anti-
realism Â· Determinism Â· Solipsism Â· Physicalism Â· MOQ  
Metaphysicians

Aristotle Â· Thomas Aquinas Â· George Berkeley Â· Donald Davidson Â· RenÃ©
Descartes Â· Georg W. F. Hegel Â· Martin Heidegger Â· Immanuel Kant Â· Saul
Kripke Â· Gottfried Leibniz Â· John Locke Â· George Edward Moore Â· Isaac
Newton Â· Plato Â· Plotinus Â· Hilary Putnam Â· Willard V. O. Quine Â·
Bertrand Russell Â· Parmenides Â· Jean-Paul Sartre Â· Arthur Schopenhauer Â·
John Duns Scotus Â· Baruch Spinoza Â· Alfred N. Whitehead Â· Ludwig
Wittgenstein Â·  
Portal Â· Category Â· Task Force Â· Stubs Â· Discussion  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Epistemology  
Topics

Outline of epistemology Â· Knowledge Â· Justification Â· Belief Â· Perception
Â· A priori knowledge Â· Induction Â· Other minds Â· more... Â·  
Epistemological theories

Empiricism Â· Rationalism Â· NaÃ¯ve realism Â· Skepticism Â· Foundationalism
Â· Coherentism Â· Internalism and Externalism Â· Representative realism Â·
Phenomenalism Â· Reliabilism Â· Fallibilism Â· Naturalism Â·  
Epistemologists

Robert Audi Â· A.J. Ayer Â· George Berkeley Â· Laurence Bonjour Â· Rene
Descartes Â· Edmund Gettier Â· Alvin Goldman Â· Nelson Goodman Â· Paul Grice
Â· David Hume Â· Immanuel Kant Â· SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard Â· John Locke Â· George
Edward Moore Â· Robert Nozick Â· Alvin Plantinga Â· Plato Â· Louis Pojman Â·
Peter Strawson Â· W.V.O. Quine Â· Bertrand Russell Â· Ludwig Wittgenstein Â·  
Related articles

Analytic-synthetic distinction Â· Causality Â· Common sense Â· Constructivist
epistemology Â· Contextualism Â· Descriptive knowledge Â· Determinism Â· Faith
and rationality Â· Gettier problem Â· Holism Â· Infinitism Â· Innatism Â·
Objectivity Â· Analysis Â· Positivism Â· Proposition Â· Reductionism Â·
Regress argument Â· Simplicity Â· Speculative reason Â· Theaetetus (dialogue)
Â· Theory of Forms Â· Transcendental idealism Â· Truth Â· Uniformitarianism Â·
Vienna Circle Â·  
Portal Â· Category Â· Task Force Â· Stubs Â· Discussion  
Persondata  
NAME Russel, Bertrand Arthur William, 3rd Earl Russell  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION philosopher, logician, and mathematician  
DATE OF BIRTH 18 May 1872(1872-05-18)  
PLACE OF BIRTH Trellech, Monmouthshire, United Kingdom  
DATE OF DEATH 2 February 1970  
PLACE OF DEATH Penrhyndeudraeth, Wales, United Kingdom  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bertrand_Russell"

Categories: 1872 births | 1970 deaths | Bertrand Russell | 20th-century
mathematicians | 20th-century philosophers | Analytic philosophers | Anti-
Vietnam War activists | British anti-war activists | British humanists | Welsh
atheists | English agnostics | British agnostics | Welsh essayists | Welsh
humanists | British logicians | Welsh mathematicians | Welsh scientists |
Welsh non-fiction writers | Welsh philosophers | Welsh socialists | Campaign
for Nuclear Disarmament | English philosophers | Atheist philosophers |
Epistemologists | Philosophers of language | Philosophers of mathematics |
Metaphysicians | Atheist thinkers and activists | World federalists |
Academics of the London School of Economics | University of California, Los
Angeles faculty | University of Chicago faculty | Alumni of Trinity College,
Cambridge | Members of the Order of Merit | Nobel laureates in Literature |
British Nobel laureates | Kalinga Prize recipients | Fellows of the Royal
Society | People from Monmouthshire | Earls in the Peerage of the United
Kingdom | Deaths from influenza | Set theorists | British anti-nuclear weapons
activists | English atheists | English humanists | House of Russell |
Infectious disease deaths in Wales

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since August 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * VÃµro
  * Zazaki
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 08:08.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



