
# Reyner Banham

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Peter Reyner Banham (1922-1988) was a prolific architectural critic and writer
best known for his 1960 theoretical treatise "Theory and Design in the First
Machine Age", and his 1971 book "Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four
Ecologies" in which he categorized the Angelean experience into four
ecological models (Surfurbia, Foothills, The Plains of Id, and Autopia) and
explored the distinct architectural cultures of each ecology.

He was based in London, moving to the USA from 1976. He studied under Anthony
Blunt, then Siegfried Giedion and Nikolaus Pevsner. Pevsner invited him to
study the history of modern architecture, giving up his work Pioneers of the
Modern Movement. In Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (1960), Banham
cut across Pevsner's main theories, linking modernism to built structures
where the 'functionalism' was actually subject to formal strictures. He wrote
a Guide to Modern Architecture (1962, later titled Age of the Masters, a
Personal View of Modern Architecture).

He had connections with the Independent Group, the This is Tomorrow show of
1956 (the birth of pop art) and the thinking of the Smithsons, and of James
Stirling, on the new brutalism (which he documented in The New Brutalism:
Ethic or Aesthetic?, 1966). He predicted a "second age" of the machine and
mass consumption. The Architecture of Well-Tempered Environment (1969) follows
Giedion's Mechanization Takes Command (1948), putting the development of
technologies (electricity, air conditioning) even ahead of the classic account
of structures. This was the area found absorbing in the 1960s by Cedric Price,
Peter Cook (architect) and the Archigram group.

Green thinking (Los Angeles, the Architecture of Four Ecologies, 1971) and
then the oil shock of 1973 affected him. The 'postmodern' was for him unease,
and he evolved as the conscience of post-war British architecture. He broke
with the utopian and technical formality. Scenes in America Deserta (1982) and
A Concrete Atlantis (1986) talk of open spaces and his anticipation of a
'modern' future.

As a Professor, Banham taught at the University of London, the State
University of New York (SUNY) Buffalo, and the University of California, Santa
Cruz. He also was the Sheldon H. Solow Professor of the History of
Architecture at the Institute of Fine Arts, New York University. He also
starred in the short documentary Reyner Banham loves Los Angeles.

Banham said that he learned to drive so he could read Los Angeles in the
original.

## [edit] External links

  * Reyner Banham Loves Los Angeles BBC documentary
  * Reyner Banham Loves Los Angeles bus tour
  * Reyner Banham papers, 1930-1990 (bulk 1970-1988). Research Library at the Getty Research Institute. Los Angeles, California. The collection contains draft manuscripts, printed material and research notes for eight of Banham's published books, for unpublished projects, and many articles and reviews related to the history of architecture and design. Included are the notes and manuscripts for his public lectures and his teaching. Other files document his participation on design juries and his consultation work.[1]
    1. ^ Gibbs, J. INVENTORY OF THE REYNER BANHAM PAPERS, 1930-1990, bulk 1970-1988. Los Angeles, Calif.: Research Library, Getty Research Institute. 2002, rev. 2004.

## [edit] Footnotes

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reyner_Banham"

Categories: English architecture writers | University of California, Santa
Cruz faculty | 1922 births | 1988 deaths | Alumni of the Central Saint Martins
College of Art and Design

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 18:42 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



