
# God Is Not Great

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (August 2007)  
God is not Great  
<IMG>  
Author Christopher Hitchens  
Country United States  
Language English  
Subject(s) Religion  
Publisher Twelve Books  
Publication date May 1, 2007  
Media type hardcover, paperback, audio book  
Pages 307  
ISBN 978-0-446-57980-3  
God is not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything (2007) is a book-length
critique of religion by author and journalist Christopher Hitchens. It was
published in the United Kingdom as God is Not Great: The Case Against
Religion.

In the book, Hitchens contends that religion is "violent, irrational,
intolerant, allied to racism, tribalism, and bigotry, invested in ignorance
and hostile to free inquiry, contemptuous of women and coercive toward
children." Hitchens supports his position with a mixture of personal stories,
documented historical anecdotes and critical analysis of religious texts. His
commentary focuses mainly on the Abrahamic religions, although he also touches
on other religions such as Hinduism and Buddhism.

## Contents

  * 1 Synopsis
    * 1.1 Specific criticisms of religion
    * 1.2 Chapter One: Putting It Mildly
    * 1.3 Chapter Two: Religion Kills
    * 1.4 Chapter Three: A Short Digression On The Pig
    * 1.5 Chapter Four: A Note On Health, To Which Religion May Be Hazardous
    * 1.6 Chapter Five: The Metaphysical Claims of Religion Are False
    * 1.7 Chapter Six: Arguments From Design
    * 1.8 Chapter Seven: The Nightmare Of The Old Testament
    * 1.9 Chapter Eight: The "New" Testament Exceeds The Evil Of The "Old" One
    * 1.10 Remaining chapters
  * 2 Critical reception
  * 3 Sales history
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Synopsis

### [edit] Specific criticisms of religion

<IMG>

Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further
information might be found on the talk page. (June 2007)  
Hitchens' critique of religion comes down to four main points:

  * Religion misrepresents the origins of humankind and the cosmos
  * Religion demands unreasonable suppression of human nature
  * Religion inclines people to violence and blind submission to authority
  * Religion expresses hostility to free inquiry

### [edit] Chapter One: Putting It Mildly

Hitchens writes that, at the age of nine, he began to question the teachings
of his Bible instructor and began to see critical flaws in apologetic
arguments, most notably the argument from design.[1] He then goes on to
discuss people who become atheists, saying that some are people who have never
believed, whereas others are those who have separately discarded religious
traditions; he also asserts that atheists who disagree with each other will
eventually side together on whatever the evidence most strongly supports.[2]
He briefly discusses why human beings have a tendency towards being "faithful"
and argues that religion will remain entrenched in the human consciousness as
long as human beings cannot overcome their primitive fears. He ends by saying
that he does not want to eradicate religion if those who are religious will
"leave him alone", but ultimately, he writes, they are incapable of this.[3]

### [edit] Chapter Two: Religion Kills

In this chapter, Hitchens addresses a hypothetical question he was asked on a
panel with radio host Dennis Prager: if he were alone in an unfamiliar city at
night, and a group of strangers began to approach him, would he feel safer, or
less safe, knowing that these men had just come from a prayer meeting?
Hitchens answers by listing some "unfamiliar cities" where he may indeed feel
threatened if in that particular situation. Citing only cities starting with
the letter B, he lists Belfast, Beirut, Bombay, Belgrade, Bethlehem, and
Baghdad[4], giving detailed descriptions of the tense social and political
situations within these particular cities, which he attributes to religion.
From this, he writes that he has "not found it a prudent rule to seek help as
the prayer meeting breaks up." [5]

Next, he discusses the 1989 fatwa issued on author and friend Salman Rushdie
by the Ayatollah Khomeini because of the contents of his book The Satanic
Verses[6]; he goes on to criticize several public figures for laying the blame
for the incident on Rushdie himself. He also writes about the events following
the September 11, 2001 attacks, describing how religion, particularly major
religious figures, allowed matters to "deteriorate in the interval between the
removal of the Taliban and the overthrow of Saddam Hussein."[7]

### [edit] Chapter Three: A Short Digression On The Pig

Chapter three's full title is "A Short Digression On The Pig; or, Why Heaven
Hates Ham". Hitchens discusses the prohibition on eating pigs ("porcophobia"
as Hitchens jokingly calls it) in Judaism, also adopted by Islam.(pp. 37-41)
Hitchens writes that this proscription is not just Biblical; even today, he
says, Muslim zealots demand that the Three Little Pigs, Miss Piggy, Piglet
from Winnie-the-Pooh, and other traditional pets and characters should be
"removed from the innocent gaze of their children."(p.41)

### [edit] Chapter Four: A Note On Health, To Which Religion May Be Hazardous

In this chapter, Hitchens declares that religions are hostile to treating
diseases. He writes that many Muslims saw the polio vaccine as a conspiracy
and thus allowed polio to spread.[8] He then goes on to discuss the Catholic
Church's response to the spread of HIV in Africa by telling people condoms are
ineffective, which he argues contributed to the death toll[9]. He opines that
both Catholic and Muslim communities believe that HIV and HPV are punishment
for sexual sin â particularly homosexuality[10]. He calls religious leaders
"faith healers", and says they are hostile to medicine because it undermines
their own position.[11]

He then criticizes the Jewish ritual of circumcision and denounces the
traditional African practice of female genital mutilation. He finishes this
chapter writing of the religious believers' "wish for obliteration" - for a
death in the form of the day of the Apocalypse.

### [edit] Chapter Five: The Metaphysical Claims of Religion Are False

Hitchens begins this chapter by saying that the strong faith that could stand
up to any form of reason is long gone. He compares the popular knowledge of
the world in Thomas Aquinas' time to what we now know about the world. He uses
the example of Laplace ("It works well enough without that hypothesis
[God]")[12] to demonstrate that Laplace didn't need God to explain things, and
neither do we. He claims that religion becomes obsolete as an explanation when
it becomes optional or one among many different beliefs. He concludes by
saying that the leap of faith is not one leap; it is a leap that is repeatedly
made, and people find it difficult to rely on faith, instead attempting to
"prove" God's existence.

### [edit] Chapter Six: Arguments From Design

In this chapter, Hitchens writes that Abrahamic religion is used to make
people feel like lowly sinners and yet at the same time makes them feel like a
creator cares about them, inflating their sense of self-importance. He says
that superstition to some extent has a "natural advantage" and discusses a few
examples as well as so-called miracles.

He then discusses the design arguments, using examples such as the human body
wearing out in old age as bad design. He writes that if evolution had taken a
slightly different course, there would be no guarantee at all that organisms
remotely like us would ever have existed.

### [edit] Chapter Seven: The Nightmare Of The Old Testament

Here Hitchens lists anachronisms and inconsistencies in the Old Testament, and
writes that many of the "gruesome, disordered events [...] never took
place."(p.102) He writes that the Pentateuch was an "ill-carpentered fiction,
bolted into place well after the nonevents that it fails to describe
convincingly or even plausibly."(p.104) He points out, for instance, that when
Moses orders parents to have their children stoned to death for indiscipline
(citing Deuteronomy but no chapter in particular[13]) it is probably a
violation of at least one of the very commandments Moses brought down from
God, and that Moses "continually makes demented pronouncements."(p.106)

### [edit] Chapter Eight: The "New" Testament Exceeds The Evil Of The "Old"
One

Hitchens first connects the story of Abraham in the Old Testament with its
prediction that "a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son," pointing out where
the stories converge, Old Testament to New. Comparing the Testaments, he
considers the New Testament "also a work of crude carpentry, hammered together
long after its purported events, and full of attempts to make things come out
right." He points out that, while H. L. Mencken considered some of the New
Testament events to be historically verifiable, Mencken maintained that "most
of them [...] show unmistakable signs of having been tampered
with."(p.109-110)

Hitchens also outlines the inaccuracy in Luke's attempt to triangulate three
world events of the time with Jesus' birth (viz, the census ordered by Caesar
of the entire Roman world, the reign of King Herod in Judea and that of
Quirinius as governor of Syria). He further states that there is no record of
any Augustan census by any Roman historian (only by Josephus, which was six
years after Jesus' birth was supposed to have taken place). In addition
Hitchens states that Herod died in 4 B.C., and that Quirinius was not governor
of Syria during his tenure.

Hitchens refers to the Mel Gibson film The Passion of the Christ as a "soap-
opera film," saying that Gibson "adheres to a crackpot and schismatic Catholic
sect" (Traditionalist Catholicism) and that his film tirelessly attempted to
blame the death of Jesus on the Jews. Hitchens claims that Gibson did not
realize that the four Gospels were not at all historical records, and that
they had multiple authors, all being written many decades after the
Crucifixion \- and moreover, that they do not agree on anything "of
importance" (e.g., on the Virgin birth, the genealogy of Jesus). He claims
many contradictions in this area.(pp.110-112)

The author contends that the many "contradictions and illiteracies" of the New
Testament, while written about at great lengths in other books, have never
been explained except to excuse them as "metaphor" and "a Christ of faith." He
states that the "feebleness" of the Bible is a result of the fact that until
recently, Christians faced with arguments against the logic or factualness of
the Bible could simply burn or silence those posing such "inconvenient
questions."(p.115)

Hitchens points out the problematic implications of the scriptural
proclamation "he that is without sin among you, let him cast a first stone"
with regard to the practical legislation of retributive justice: "if only the
non-sinners have the right to punish, then how could an imperfect society ever
determine how to prosecute offenders?" Of the woman whom Jesus saved from the
stoning (she having been charged with adultery), the author posits that Jesus
thus forgives her of sheer sexual promiscuity, and if this be the case, the
lesson has ever since been completely misunderstood.(p.121) Closing the
chapter(p.122) he suggests that advocates of religion have faith alone to rely
on â nothing else â and calls on them to "be brave enough" to admit they
have nothing more to support their case.

### [edit] Remaining chapters

Chapters 9-19:

  * Chapter Nine: The Koran Is Borrowed From Both Jewish and Christian Myths
  * Chapter Ten: The Tawdriness Of The Miraculous And The Decline Of Hell
  * Chapter Eleven: Religion's Corrupt Beginnings
  * Chapter Twelve: A Coda: How Religions End
  * Chapter Thirteen: Does Religion Make People Behave Better?
  * Chapter Fourteen: There Is No "Eastern" Solution
  * Chapter Fifteen: Religion As An Original Sin
  * Chapter Sixteen: Is Religion Child Abuse?
  * Chapter Seventeen: An Objection Anticipated
  * Chapter Eighteen: A Finer Tradition: The Resistance Of The Rational
  * Chapter Nineteen: In Conclusion: The Need for a New Enlightenment

## [edit] Critical reception

Liberal critic Michael Kinsley, in the New York Times Book Review, lauded
Hitchens' "... logical flourishes and conundrums, many of them entertaining to
the nonbeliever." He concluded that "Hitchens has outfoxed the Hitchens
watchers by writing a serious and deeply felt book, totally consistent with
his beliefs of a lifetime."[14]

Bruce DeSilva of the Associated Press says: "This time he's outdone himself
... A spate of atheist screeds has arrived in the bookstores lately, but
Hitchens' may be the best since Bertrand Russell's Why I Am Not a Christian
(1927), laying out the essential arguments with force and precision ... He
makes his case in the elegant yet biting prose we have come to expect from him
... Hitchens is the reincarnation of H. L. Mencken, the penultimate social
critic of the first half of the 20th century, who used words like gunshots and
considered most Americans 'boobs'." DeSilva goes on to say "Hitchens has
nothing new to say, although it must be acknowledged that he says it
exceptionally well."[15][16]

God Is Not Great was not without detractors, however. Michael Medved called
the book "a maddening combination of stimulation and sloppiness, erudition and
ignorance, provocation and puerility". He concluded that the "sly distortions
and grotesque errors that appear in every chapter of his work demonstrate the
authorâs carelessness and arrogance" and that, "Beyond its factual errors
and obvious misstatements," Hitchens' book "provides a frequently primitive
and juvenile characterization of religious belief."[17] Dennis Prager,
meanwhile, said that Hitchens misrepresented his argument about "Bible class"
in favor of the Christian faith.[18]

Responding to Hitchens' statement that "all attempts to reconcile faith with
science and reason are consigned to failure and ridicule", Peter Berkowitz of
the Hoover Institution quotes a paleontologist that Hitchens himself commended
â Stephen Jay Gould. After a survey showed half of all scientists are
religious, Gould said that "Either half my colleagues are enormously stupid,
or else the science of Darwinism is fully compatible with conventional
religious beliefs â and equally compatible with atheism."[19] For his part,
Ross Douthat remarked that "Hitchens's argument proceeds principally by
anecdote, and at his best he is as convincing as that particular style allows,
which is to say not terribly."[20]

The religious conservative critic Frank Brennan described the book as an
affirmation of Hitchens' Marxist origins in contrast to his labeling by some
critics as a neoconservative:

> For all of the claims that Christopher Hitchens has abandoned his earlier
Leftist proclivities, there is at least one point at which he remains an
orthodox Marxist. Some would argue that his book is a straightforward
reiteration of Marxâs own critique of religion, albeit in a more bombastic
fashion."[21]

The book was announced as a nominee for the National Book Award on October 10,
2007.[22]

## [edit] Sales history

The book was published on May 1, 2007, and within a week had reached #2 on the
Amazon.com bestsellers list[23] (behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows),
and reached #1 on the New York Times Bestseller list in its third week.[24]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Christopher Hitchens, God Is Not Great, page 3
  2. ^ God Is Not Great, page 5
  3. ^ God Is Not Great, page 13
  4. ^ God Is Not Great, page 18
  5. ^ God Is Not Great, page 28
  6. ^ God Is Not Great, page 28
  7. ^ God Is Not Great, page 31
  8. ^ God Is Not Great, pages 44-45
  9. ^ God Is Not Great, pages 45-6
  10. ^ God Is Not Great, page 49
  11. ^ God Is Not Great, page 47
  12. ^ God Is Not Great, pages 66-67
  13. ^ See Deuteronomy 21:18-21, "If a man have a stubborn and unruly son [...] the people of the city shall stone him"
  14. ^ Michael Kinsley, The New York Times Review of Books
  15. ^ "Dallas News, "Hitchens blames religion for -- well, you name it"". http://religion.beloblog.com/archives/2007/04/hitchens_blames_religion_for_w_1.html.
  16. ^ "Critical Praise, God Is Not Great (Hardcover)". http://www.hachettebookgroupusa.com/authors/69/3732/critical_praise.html.
  17. ^ Hitchens vs. God by Michael Medved
  18. ^ You're in a Bad Neighborhood and 10 Men Approach You... by Dennis Prager
  19. ^ The New New Atheism by Peter Berkowitz
  20. ^ Lord Have Mercy: A review of God is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything by Ross Douthat
  21. ^ Frank Brennan answers atheist manifestos, retrieved June 01, 2007.
  22. ^ Associated Press
  23. ^ Amazon.com book page - search for sales rank for current position
  24. ^ New York Times Bestseller list

## [edit] External links

  * Exclusive Excerpts from God Is Not Great \- Slate

v â¢ d â¢ e

The works of Christopher Hitchens  
Authored

The Missionary Position Â· Letters to a Young Contrarian Â· The Trial of Henry
Kissinger Â· Why Orwell Matters Â· A Long Short War: The Postponed Liberation
of Iraq Â· Love, Poverty, and War: Journeys and Essays Â· Thomas Jefferson:
Author of America Â· Thomas Paine's "Rights of Man": A Biography Â· God Is Not
Great  
Edited

Blaming the Victims (with Edward Said) Â· The Portable Atheist: Essential
Readings for the Non-Believer  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/God_Is_Not_Great"

Categories: 2007 books | Books about atheism | Books by Christopher Hitchens |
Books critical of Christianity | Books critical of religion | Criticism of
religion

Hidden categories: Cleanup from August 2007 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles to be expanded since June 2007 | All articles to be expanded

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * Suomi
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 17:04 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



