
# Raymond Loewy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Raymond Loewy standing on one of his designs, the Pennsylvania Railroad's S1
steam locomotive.

Raymond Fernand Loewy (5 November, 1893 â 14 July, 1986) was one of the best
known industrial designers of the 20th century. Born in France, he spent most
of his professional career in the United States where he influenced countless
aspects of North American culture. Among his many iconic contributions to
modern life were the Shell logo, the Greyhound bus, the S-1 locomotive, the
Lucky Strike package, Coldspot refrigerators and the Studebaker Avanti. His
career spanned seven decades.

## Contents

  * 1 Life and work
    * 1.1 Early work
    * 1.2 Pennsylvania Railroad
    * 1.3 Studebaker
      * 1.3.1 Avanti
  * 2 Death and legacy
  * 3 Loewy designs
    * 3.1 1910s
    * 3.2 1920s
    * 3.3 1930s
    * 3.4 1940s
    * 3.5 1950s
    * 3.6 1960s
    * 3.7 1970s
    * 3.8 Year or model not given
  * 4 Publications
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Life and work

Loewy was born in Paris in 1893, the son of Maximilian Loewy, a Viennese
journalist, and Marie Labalme. An early accomplishment was the design of a
successful model aircraft which then won the James Gordon Bennett Cup in 1908.
By the following year he was selling the plane, named the Ayrel. He served in
the French Army during World War I, attaining the rank of captain. Loewy was
wounded in combat and received the Croix de Guerre. He boarded a ship to
America in 1919, with only his French officer's uniform and fifty dollars in
his pocket.

### [edit] Early work

In Loewy's early years in the U.S., he lived in New York and found work as a
window designer for department stores, including Macy's, Wanamaker's and Saks
in addition to working as a fashion illustrator for Vogue and Harper's Bazaar.
In 1929 he received his first industrial design commission to modernize the
appearance of a duplicating machine by Gestetner. Further commissions
followed, including work for Westinghouse, the Hupp Motor Company (the
Hupmobile styling), and styling the Coldspot refrigerator[1] for Sears-
Roebuck. It was this product that established his reputation as an industrial
designer. His design firm opened a London office in the mid 1930s. It still
operates.[2]

### [edit] Pennsylvania Railroad

In 1937 Loewy established a relationship with the Pennsylvania Railroad, and
his most notable designs for the firm were their passenger locomotives. He
designed a streamlined shroud for K4s Pacific #3768 to haul the newly
redesigned 1938 Broadway Limited (also by Loewy). He followed by styling the
experimental S1 locomotive, as well as the T1 class. Later, at the PRR's
request, he restyled Baldwin's diesels with a distinctive "sharknose"
reminiscent of the T1. While he did not design the famous GG1 electric
locomotives, he improved its appearance by recommending welded construction,
rather than riveted, and a pinstriped paint scheme to highlight its smooth
contours.

In addition to locomotive design, Loewy's studios performed many kinds of
design work for the Pennsylvania Railroad including stations, passenger car
interiors and advertising materials. By 1949, Loewy employed 143 designers,
architects and draftsmen. His business partners were A. Baker Barnhart,
William Snaith and John Breen.[3]

### [edit] Studebaker

<IMG>

<IMG>

Raymond Loewy's 1930s era Studebaker logo

Loewy had a long and fruitful relationship with the American car maker
Studebaker. Studebaker first retained Loewy and Associates and Helen Dryden as
design consultants in 1936[4] :[p.247] and in 1939 Loewy began work with the
principal designer Virgil M Exner.[4] [5] Their designs first began appearing
on late-1930s Studebakers. Loewy also designed a new logo which replaced the
"turning wheel" which had been the trademark since 1912.[4]

During World War II, American government restrictions on in-house design
departments at Ford, General Motors, and Chrysler prevented official work on
civilian automobiles. Because Loewy's firm was independent of the fourth-
largest automobile producer in America, no such restrictions applied. This
permitted Studebaker to launch the first all-new postwar automobile in 1947,
two years ahead of the "Big Three". His team developed an advanced design
featuring flush front fenders and clean rearward lines. They also created the
Starlight body which featured a rear window system wrapping 180 degrees around
the rear seat.

<IMG>

<IMG>

1953 Studebaker Commander Starlight coupe

In addition to the iconic bullet-nosed Studebakers of 1950 and 1951, the team
created the 1953 Studebaker line, highlighted by the Starliner and Starlight
coupes (publicly credited to Loewy, they were actually the work Virgil
Exner[6]). The Starlight has consistently ranked as one of the best-designed
cars of the 1950s in lists compiled since by Collectible Automobile, Car and
Driver, and Motor Trend. At the time, however, the Starlight was ridiculed as
bizarre (very similar from front or back). The '53 Starliner, recognized today
as "one of the most beautiful cars ever made",[7] was radical in appearance,
as radical in its way as the 1934 Airflow. However, it was beset by production
problems.[7]

To brand the new line, Loewy also modernized Studebaker's logo again by
applying the "Lazy S" element. His final commission of the 1950s for
Studebaker was the transformation of the Starlight and Starliner coupes into
the Hawk series for the 1956 model year.

#### [edit] Avanti

<IMG>

<IMG>

Concept sketch of the 1963 Avanti by Loewy

In the spring of 1961, Loewy was called back to Studebaker by the company's
new president, Sherwood Egbert, to design the Avanti. Egbert hired him to help
energize Studebaker's soon-to-be-released line of 1963 passenger cars to
attract younger buyers.

Despite the short 40-day schedule allowed to produce a finished design and
scale model, Loewy agreed to take the job. He recruited a team consisting of
experienced designers including former Loewy employees John Ebstein, Bob
Andrews, and Tom Kellogg, a young student from Art Center College of Design in
Pasadena. The team was sequestered in a house leased for the purpose in Palm
Springs, California. Each team member had a role: Andrews and Kellogg handled
sketching, Ebstein oversaw the project, and Loewy was the creative director
and offered advice.

<IMG>

<IMG>

1963 Studebaker Avanti

The Avanti became an instant classic when it hit the market and has many
devotees today; others consider its front end styling peculiar. Versions have
been produced in limited quantities over the years by a succession of small
independent companies, though never with real commercial success.

## [edit] Death and legacy

Loewy became a U.S. citizen in 1938. He died in 1986 at the age of 93. In
1991, the Raymond Loewy Foundation was established in Germany to further
promote the discipline of design internationally and preserve the memory of
Raymond Loewy. An annual award of 50,000 Euros is granted to outstanding
designers in recognition of their lifetime achievements. Grantees have
included Phillippe Starck and Dieter Rams. He was married twice. His marriage
to Jean Thomson ended in amicable divorce in 1945. He married Viola Erickson
in 1948. Their daughter, Laurence, managed her father's interests in the
United States after his death. She died October 15, 2008, in Marietta,
Georgia.[8]

## [edit] Loewy designs

Following is a list of Loewy designs presented chronologically.

### [edit] 1910s

  * Ayrel aircraft, 1908

### [edit] 1920s

  * Gestetner mimeograph duplicating machine shell, 1929

### [edit] 1930s

  * Farmall tractor letter series, 1939-1954
  * Pennsylvania Railroad: 
    * PRR K4s steam locomotive
    * PRR S1 steam locomotive
    * PRR T1 steam locomotive
    * PRR GG1 electric locomotive, 1936
  * Sears products, including 1935 Sears Coldspot refrigerator

### [edit] 1940s

  * Filben Maestro jukebox of 1947
  * Baldwin Locomotive Works Model DR-4-4-15 "Sharknose" diesel locomotives
  * The O. Winston Link Museum in Roanoke, Virginia, 1947 (renovation)
  * Fairbanks-Morse "Erie-built" and "C-liner" models, Model H-10-44 and H-20-44, and early Model H-12-44, H-12-46, H-15-44, H-16-44, and H-16-66 diesel locomotives
  * Hallicrafters Model S-38 shortwave radio, 1946 [2]
  * IBM 026 key punch, 1949
  * Lucky Strike, white package, 1942
  * 1947 Studebaker Champion, 1947
  * Schick electric razor[3]
  * Harley Davidson components of the 1941 74FL Knucklehead

### [edit] 1950s

<IMG>

<IMG>

Union News restaurants coffee shop, at the TWA Flight Center, Idlewild

  * Coca-Cola Redesign of the original contour bottle, eliminating Coca-Cola embossing & adding vivid white Coke & Coca-Cola lettering, designed & introduced first king-size or slenderized bottles, that is, 10, 12, 16 and 26 oz. (1955) Later, in 1960, he designed the first Coke steel can with diamond design.
  * Greyhound Lines two-level Scenicruiser, 1954
  * Northern Pacific Railway, Vista-Dome North Coast Limited (exterior color scheme and interiors), 1954.
  * Studebaker Commander, 1953
  * Hillman Minx automobile, Series One onward, 1956-1959.
  * Leisurama homes, 1959

### [edit] 1960s

  * Chubb logo, 1968
  * Air Force One's blue, white and chrome livery, 1962. (Also applied in 2006 to Union Pacific diesel locomotive #4141 to honor George H. W. Bush)
  * New York City Transit Authority R40 car, whose slant-front design raised safety concerns and had to be retrofitted with guide rails.
  * Union News restaurants coffee shop, at the TWA Flight Center, Idlewild, circa 1962
  * United States Coast Guard "racing stripe" logo, 1964

<IMG>

<IMG>

USCG Racing Stripe logo (1964)

  * Five cents John Kennedy postage stamp, 1964
  * Studebaker Avanti, 1963
  * Exxon logo, 1966 (introduced in 1972)[9]
  * SPAR logo, 1968[10]

### [edit] 1970s

  * Shell logo, 1971
  * Air France Concorde interior, 1975
  * NASA's Skylab space station, first interior design standards for space travel including a porthole to allow a view of earth from space, interior designs and color schemes, a private area for each crew member to relax and sleep, food table and trays, coveralls, garment storage modules, designs for waste management

### [edit] Year or model not given

  * Frigidaire refrigerators, ranges, and freezers
  * Coop logo
  * Panama Line: Loewy designed the interiors for a trio of American-built passenger-cargo liners named the SS Ancon, SS Cristobal and SS Panama.
  * the Wahl-Eversharp Symphony fountain pen.
  * The International Harvester "IH" "Man on a tractor" logo.
  * Dorsett "Catalina", a popular early fiberglass pleasure boat.
  * Zippo Lighter[citation needed]

## [edit] Publications

  * The Locomotive: Its Aesthetics (1937)
  * Never Leave Well Enough Alone (1951) ISBN 0-8018-7211-1 autobiography
  * Industrial Design (1979) ISBN 0-87951-260-1

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Coldspot Refrigerator
  2. ^ Loewy Group marketing agency
  3. ^ a b Up from the Egg, TIME Magazine, October 31, 1949
  4. ^ a b c Hendry, Maurice M. Studebaker: One can do a lot of remembering in South Bend. New Albany: Automobile Quarterly. pp. 228â275. Vol X, 3rd Q, 1972.
  5. ^ Setright, L.J.K., "Loewy: When styling became industrial design", in Northey, Tom, ed. World of Automobiles (London: Orbis, 1974), Volume 11, p.1211.
  6. ^ Ludvigsen, Karl, "Studebaker: Money--the Root of all Evil", in Northey, Tom, ed. World of Automobiles (London: Orbis, 1974), Volume 19, p.2227.
  7. ^ a b Ludvigsen, p.2227.
  8. ^ [1]Laurence Loewy obituary in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
  9. ^ American Treasures of the Library of Congress, Design drawing for Exxon logo by Raymond Loewy
  10. ^ http://www.raymondloewyfoundation.com/de/raymond-loewy/loewys-arbeiten/spar.html

## [edit] External links

  * RaymondLoewy.com \- official site by his estate
  * RaymondLoewy.org \- official site of Loewy Design, LLC
  * The Raymond Loewy Foundation
  * Designs for a Consumer Culture \- the Hagley Museum and Library online exhibit
  * The Loewy archive and Audio-visual collection at the Hagley Museum and Library
  * Art Directors Club biography, portrait and images of work
  * 1er Raymond Loewy Club, biography Raymond Loewy, School Design
  * Raymond Loewy, The Man Who Streamlined the Sales-Curve, RL tribute page (English / German)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond_Loewy"

Categories: 1893 births | 1986 deaths | Industrial designers | People in the
automobile industry | French military personnel of World War I | American
automobile designers | People in rail transport | Stamp designers | Logo
designers | Naturalized citizens of the United States

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 01:08.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



