
# Timothy Treadwell

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (September 2008)  
<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2008)  
Timothy Treadwell (born Timothy Dexter, April 29, 1957 â October 5, 2003)
was an American bear enthusiast, environmentalist, amateur naturalist and
documentary film maker. He lived among the coastal Grizzly bears of Katmai
National Park in Alaska, USA, for approximately 13 seasons. At the end of his
13th season in the park in 2003, he and his girlfriend Amie Huguenard were
killed and partially devoured by one or possibly two grizzly bears.[1]
Treadwell's life, work and death were the subject of the 2005 documentary film
by Werner Herzog titled Grizzly Man.[2] An audio recording of the attack
survived, but has not been released to the public.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 Early life and career
  * 2 Interest in bears
  * 3 Conflicts with the National Park Service
  * 4 Death
  * 5 Media attention
  * 6 See also
  * 7 Literature
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Early life and career

Treadwell was born on Long Island, New York, USA, where he attended Connetquot
High School and was an average student who was the swimming team's star diver.
He claimed to the public however that he was a British orphan who was born in
Australia. Treadwell described himself as an aspiring actor, recovering
alcoholic and drug addict and eco-warrior. According to his account, he became
involved with drugs after failing to gain the role won by Woody Harrelson in
the sitcom Cheers. Treadwell's claim to his parents that he was the second
choice for the role has not been independently verified. (Associated Press,
2003)

## [edit] Interest in bears

Timothy Treadwell lived among grizzly bears during summer seasons for over 13
years. According to his book, Among Grizzlies: Living with Wild Bears in
Alaska, Treadwell overdosed on heroin and cocaine in the late 1980s. After his
release from the hospital, and at the urging of a friend, he traveled to
Alaska to watch bears. Treadwell attributed his recovery from drug and alcohol
addictions entirely to his relationship with bears. Timothy spent the early
part of each season camping on the "Big Green," an open area of bear grass in
Hallo Bay on the Katmai Coast. During the later part of the season he would
move to Kaflia Bay and camp in an area of especially thick brush he called the
"Grizzly Maze." Here the chances of crossing paths with grizzlies were much
higher, since the location intersected bear trails. Treadwell was known for
getting extremely close to the bears he observed, sometimes even touching them
and playing with bear cubs. National Park Service Rangers said what he was
really doing was harassing wildlife. Treadwell recorded over 100 hours of
video footage (some of which was later used to create the documentary Grizzly
Man) and a large collection of still photographs.

Treadwell claimed to be alone with the wildlife on several occasions in his
videos. However his girlfriend Amie was with him at the time of his death and
the documentary on him indicated she was there for his final two summers.
Furthurmore there was evidence that far from being the lone human warrior in
the face of nature nature, that Treadwell had several girlfriends during his
time there and was perhaps rarely on his own.

By 2001, Treadwell became notable enough to receive extensive media attention
both on television and in environmental circles. He frequently made public
appearances as an environmental activist. He traveled throughout the United
States to educate school children about bears and appeared on the Discovery
Channel, the Late Show with David Letterman, and Dateline NBC to discuss his
experiences. He was also a co-author, with Jewel Palovak, of the book Among
Grizzlies: Living with Wild Bears in Alaska, in which he described his
adventures on the Alaska Peninsula.

Treadwell, along with his friends Palovak and former American Gladiator
Jonathan Byrne, founded Grizzly People, a grassroots organization devoted to
protecting bears and preserving their wilderness habitat.[4]

Charlie Russell, who has studied bears for 42 years and raised them and lived
with them in Kamchatka, Russia for a decade, wrote a lengthy response in which
he criticized both Treadwell's lack of basic safety precautions such as pepper
spray and electric fences (but not his close contact with bears) as well as
the predictable, knee-jerk reaction to his death. He is also critical of the
film Grizzly Man.[5]

According to the organization Treadwell founded, Grizzly People, five bears
were poached in the year following his death, while none had been poached
while he was present in Katmai. However, according to court records as
reported by the Anchorage Daily News [1] the guilty parties were charged with
poaching wildlife along Funnel Creek in the Preserve, an area open to hunting
that borders the National Park. According to several sources including Nick
Jans' book, The Grizzly Maze,[6] Treadwell only camped near the Katmai Coast,
mainly in areas around Hallo Bay and Kaflia Bay, and never in or near the
Preserve. The only effective way to patrol all 6,000 square miles (16,000 km2)
of Katmai National Park is by airplane which is the method used by authorities
to control poaching.

## [edit] Conflicts with the National Park Service

Treadwell's years with the grizzlies weren't without disruption. Almost from
the start, the National Park Service expressed their worries about his
behavior. According to the file kept on Treadwell by the Park Service, rangers
reported he had at least six violations from 1994 to 2003. Included among
these violations are: guiding tourists without a license, camping in the same
area longer than the Parks Service's seven-day limit, improper food storage,
wildlife harassment, and conflicts with visitors and their guides. He also
frustrated authorities by refusing to install an electric fence around his
camp and refusing to carry bear spray to use as a deterrent.

  * In 1998, park rangers issued Treadwell a citation for storing an ice chest filled with food in his tent.
  * A separate incident involved rangers ordering him to remove a prohibited portable generator.
  * When the Park Service imposed a new rule â often referred to as the "Treadwell Rule" â requiring all campers to move their camps at least one mile (1.6 km) every seven days, Tim initially tried to obey the order by using a small motor boat to move his camp up and down the coast. Finding this method impractical, he later hid his camp from the Park Service in stands of trees with heavy brush. Eventually, he was cited at least once for this violation.

## [edit] Death

In October 2003, Treadwell and his girlfriend, a physician's assistant, Amie
Huguenard, visited Katmai National Park in Alaska. In the film Grizzly Man,
Werner Herzog states that Amie has a fear of bears and felt deeply
uncomfortable in their presence. Treadwell chose to set his campsite near a
salmon stream where grizzlies commonly feed in the fall. Treadwell was in the
park later in the year than usual[7], at a time when bears fight to gain as
much fat as possible before winter and limited food supplies cause them to be
more aggressive than in other months. Food was scarce that fall, so the
grizzly bears were even more aggressive than usual.[8]

Treadwell was supposed to leave the park at his usual time of year, but he had
a disagreement with the airline about his ticket and decided to stay longer in
the park. The bears he had been used to during the summer had already gone
into hibernation, and bears that Treadwell did not know from other parts of
the park were moving into the area. The very last footage that shows Treadwell
alive also shows a bear behind him; the bear had been diving into the river
over and over for a piece of dead salmon. Treadwell mentions in the footage
that he does not feel altogether comfortable with that bear.

Around noon on Sunday, October 5, 2003, Treadwell spoke with an associate in
Malibu, California by satellite phone. Treadwell mentioned no problems with
any bears. The next day, October 6, the bodies of Treadwell and Huguenard were
discovered by Willy Fulton, the Kodiak air taxi pilot who arrived at their
campsite to pick them up. Treadwell's disfigured head, partial backbone, and
right forearm/hand still wearing his wrist watch were recovered at the scene.
Huguenard's partial remains were found near the encampment, somewhat buried in
a mound of twigs and dirt. A large male grizzly (tagged Bear 141) protecting
the campsite was killed by park rangers while they attempted to retrieve the
bodies. A second adolescent bear was killed a short time later after it
charged the park rangers. A necropsy revealed human body parts such as fingers
and limbs. It is not clear from any evidence or the audio recording if either
of these two bears killed the couple. In the 85-year history of Katmai
National Park, this was the first incident of a person being killed by a
bear.[1]

A video camera was recovered at the site. According to Alaska State Trooper
spokesman Greg Wilkinson, no pictures were found on the tape. This fact led
troopers to believe the attack might have happened while the camera was
stuffed in a duffel bag or during the dark of night. The camera had been
turned on at some point before the attack, presumably by Huguenard, but the
camera recorded only six minutes of audio before running out of tape. The tape
is now the property of Jewel Palovak and has not been released to the public.
In the documentary Grizzly Man, filmmaker Werner Herzog urged Palovak to
destroy the recording.

## [edit] Media attention

  * In 2004, news sites reported that Leonardo DiCaprio's production company, Appian Way, had teamed with Columbia Pictures to develop a film titled The Man Who Loved Grizzlies, covering the life and death story of Treadwell. The film was to be scripted by Ned Zeman, based on his Vanity Fair article, and DiCaprio was expected to play the role of Treadwell.[9]
  * In 2005, director Werner Herzog made Grizzly Man, a documentary about Treadwell's work with wildlife in Alaska. Released theatrically by Lions Gate Films, it later was telecast on the Discovery Channel. Treadwell's own footage is featured, along with interviews with people who knew him. Although Herzog praises Treadwell's video footage and photographs, he states his belief that Treadwell himself was a disturbed individual with a deathwish.
  * The Grizzly Man Diaries is an eight-episode mini-series that premiered on August 22, 2008 on Animal Planet and is a spin-off of Grizzly Man. Produced by Creative Differences, the series chronicles the last ten years of Treadwell's life with diary entries and archived footage.

## [edit] See also

  * List of unusual deaths
  * List of fatal bear attacks in North America by decade
  * Vitaly Nikolayenko
  * Sloth bear of Mysore

## [edit] Literature

  * Treadwell, Timothy and Palovak, Jewel. Among Grizzlies: Living With Wild Bears in Alaska. HarperCollins, 1997. ISBN 0-06-017393-9
  * Lapinski, Mike. Death in the Grizzly Maze: The Timothy Treadwell Story. Falcon, 2005. ISBN 0-7627-3677-1

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Sanders, Kevin (2006). "Night of the Grizzly, A True Story Of Love And Death In The Wilderness". Yellowstone Outdoor Adventures. http://www.yellowstone-bearman.com/Tim_Jamal.html. Retrieved on January 8. [dead link]
  2. ^ Grizzly Man (DVD). Directed by Werner Herzog. Lions Gate, 2005.
  3. ^ Grizzly Man (DVD). Directed by Werner Herzog. Lions Gate, 2005.
  4. ^ Grizzly People
  5. ^ Criticism of the film "Grizzly Man": Cloudline.org website. Retrieved on January 20, 2008.
  6. ^ Jans, Nick. The Grizzly Maze: Timothy Treadwell's Fatal Obsession with Alaskan Bears, New York, N.Y.: Penguin Group, 2005. ISBN 0-5259488-6-4.
  7. ^ Grizzly Man (DVD). Directed by Werner Herzog. Lions Gate, 2005.
  8. ^ Jans, Nick (2005). The Grizzly Obsession. City: Dutton Adult. ISBN 0525948864.
  9. ^ Papamichael, Stella (June 15, 2004). "High Noon - 15th June 2004 - DiCaprio Bears All". BBC. http://www.bbc.co.uk/films/2004/06/15/high_noon_june_15_2004_news_article.shtml. Retrieved on January 8.

Dewberry, Eric ; Conceiving Grizzly Man through the "Powers of the False";
2008 Associated Press: Grizzly mauls, kills a bear 'expert' Alaska attack also
takes life of female companion in park: 2003

  * Conesa-Sevilla, J. (2008). Walking With Bears: An Ecopsychological Study of Timothy (Dexter) Treadwell. The Trumpeter, 24, 1, 136-150.

## [edit] External links

  * Timothy Treadwell at the Internet Movie Database
  * Timothy Treadwell's Biography
  * Timothy Treadwell's Journals
  * Timothy Treadwell's Wildlife Photography
  * "Wildlife author killed, eaten by bears he loved" at Anchorage Daily News, October 8, 2003
  * "Treadwell: 'Get out here. I'm getting killed'" at Anchorage Daily News, October 9, 2003
  * "Biologist believes errors led to attack" at Anchorage Daily News, October 10, 2003
  * "Woman Who Died with 'Bear Guru' was Duped" Anchorage Daily News, January 16, 2005
  * The Myth of Timothy Treadwell at Coastal Bears of Katmai National Park: First-hand account of encounters with Timothy Treadwell in Katmai, by John Rogers
  * "Bear Activist and Companion Mauled to Death in Alaska" â Associated Press story giving detailed factual debunking of the whole Treadwell myth, dated May 8 2004, quoted by respected wild life organization.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timothy_Treadwell"

Categories: 1957 births | 2003 deaths | American environmentalists | Deaths
due to animal attacks in the United States | People from Long Island |
Accidental human deaths in Alaska | Filmed deaths | People with bipolar
disorder

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since March 2009 | Articles lacking in-text citations |
Articles needing additional references from September 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 23:05.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



