
# Khalil Gibran

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Khalil Gibran  
<IMG>  
  
Born GibrÄn KhalÄ«l GibrÄn bin MikhÄ'Ä«l bin Sa'ad  
January 6, 1883(1883-01-06)  
Bsharri, Ottoman Syria  
Died April 10, 1931 (aged 48)  
New York City, United States  
Occupation Poet, Painter, Sculptor, Writer, Philosopher, Theologian, Visual
Artist  
Nationality Lebanese-American  
Genres Poetry, Parable, Short Story  
Literary movement Mahjar, New York Pen League  
Notable work(s) The Prophet  
Khalil Gibran (born GibrÄn KhalÄ«l GibrÄn bin MikhÄ'Ä«l bin Sa'ad; Arabic
Ø¬Ø¨Ø±Ø§Ù Ø®ÙÙÙ Ø¬Ø¨Ø±Ø§Ù Ø¨Ù Ù ÙÚ©Ø§Ø¦ÙÙ Ø¨Ù Ø³Ø¹Ø¯), (January 6,
1883 â April 10, 1931) was a Lebanese American artist, poet, and writer.
Born in the town of Bsharri in modern-day Lebanon (then part of Ottoman
Syria), as a young man he emigrated with his family to the United States where
he studied art and began his literary career. He is chiefly known for his 1923
book The Prophet, a series of philosophical essays written in English prose.
An early example of inspirational literature, the book sold well despite a
cool critical reception, and became extremely popular in 1960s
counterculture.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Youth
    * 1.1 In Lebanon
    * 1.2 In the United States
  * 2 Art and poetry
  * 3 Political thought
  * 4 Death and legacy
  * 5 Works
  * 6 Memorials and honors
  * 7 Mentions in popular culture
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Youth

### [edit] In Lebanon

Gibran was born in the Christian Maronite town of Bsharri in modern day
northern Lebanon. His maternal grandfather was a Maronite Catholic priest.[2]
His mother Kamila was thirty when Gibran was born; his father, also named
Khalil, was her third husband.[3] As a result of his family's poverty, Gibran
did not receive any formal schooling during his youth. However, priests
visited him regularly and taught him about the Bible, as well as the Arabic
and Syriac languages.

Gibran's father initially worked in an apothecary but with gambling debt he
was unable to pay he came to work for a local Ottoman-appointed
administrator[4] or local warlord.[5] Because of extensive complaints by angry
subjects, the administrator was removed and his staff came under investigation
circa 1891[6]. The elder Gibran went to prison for alleged embezzlement,[1]
and Ottoman authorities confiscated his family's property. Without a home,
Gibran's mother decided to follow her brother and emigrate to the United
States. Though the authorities released Gibran's father in 1894, Kamila Gibran
remained resolved and, along with Khalil, his younger sisters Mariana and
Sultana, and his elder half-brother Peter(/Bhutros/Butrus) all left for New
York on June 25, 1895.[4]

### [edit] In the United States

<IMG>

<IMG>

Khalil Gibran, Photograph by Fred Holland Day, c. 1898

The Gibrans settled in Boston's South End, at the time the second largest
Syrian/Lebanese-American community[7] in the United States. His mother began
working as a seamstress[6] peddler, selling lace and linens that she carried
from door to door. Gibran started school on September 30, 1895. School
officials placed him in a special class for immigrants to learn English.
Gibran also enrolled in an art school at a nearby settlement house. Through
his teachers there, he was introduced to the avant-garde Boston artist,
photographer, and publisher Fred Holland Day,[1] who encouraged and supported
Gibran in his creative endeavors. A publisher used some of Gibran's drawings
for book covers in 1898.

Gibranâs mother along with his elder brother Peter wanted him to absorb more
of his own heritage rather than just the Western aesthetic culture he was
attracted to.[6] So at the age of fifteen, Gibran went back to Lebanon to
study at a Maronite-run preparatory school and higher-education institute in
Beirut. He started a student literary magazine with a classmate, and was
elected "college poet". He stayed there for several years before returning to
Boston in 1902 coming through Ellis Island on May 10th.[8] Two weeks before he
got back, his sister Sultana died of tuberculosis at the age of 14. The next
year, his brother Bhutros died of the same disease, and his mother died of
cancer. His sister Marianna supported Gibran and herself by working at a
dressmaker's shop.[1]

## [edit] Art and poetry

Gibran held his first art exhibition of his drawings in 1904 in Boston, at
Day's studio.[1] During this exhibition, Gibran met Mary Elizabeth Haskell, a
respected headmistress ten years his senior. The two formed an important
friendship that lasted the rest of Gibran's life. Though publicly discreet,
their correspondence reveals an exalted intimacy. Haskell influenced not only
Gibran's personal life, but also his career. In 1908, Gibran went to study art
with Auguste Rodin in Paris for two years. This is where he met his art study
partner and lifelong friend Youssef Howayek. He later studied art in Boston.

Juliet Thompson, one of Gibran's acquaintances, reported several anecdotes of
Gibran.[9] She recalls Gibran met `Abdu'l-BahÃ¡, the leader of the BahÃ¡'Ã­
Faith at the time of his visit to the United States circa 1911[4]-1912.[9]
Barbara Young, in This Man from Lebanon: A Study of Kahlil Gibran, records
Gibran was unable to sleep the night before meeting `Abdu'l-BahÃ¡ who sat for
a pair of portraits. Thompson reports Gibran saying that all the way through
writing of Jesus, The Son of Man, he thought of `Abdu'l-BahÃ¡. Years later,
after the death of `Abdu'l-BahÃ¡, there was a viewing of the movie recording
of `Abdu'l-BahÃ¡ - Gibran rose to talk and in tears, proclaimed an exalted
station of `Abdu'l-BahÃ¡ and left the event in tears.

While most of Gibran's early writings were in Arabic, most of his work
published after 1918 was in English. His first book for the publishing company
Alfred Knopf, in 1918, was The Madman, a slim volume of aphorisms and parables
written in biblical cadence somewhere between poetry and prose. Gibran also
took part in the New York Pen League, also known as the "immigrant poets" (al-
mahjar), alongside important Lebanese-American authors such as Ameen Rihani,
Elia Abu Madi and Mikhail Naimy, a close friend and distinguished master of
Arabic literature, whose descendants Gibran declared to be his own children,
and whose nephew, Samir, is a godson of Gibran.

Much of Gibran's writings deal with Christianity, especially on the topic of
spiritual love. His poetry is notable for its use of formal language, as well
as insights on topics of life using spiritual terms. Gibran's best-known work
is The Prophet, a book composed of twenty-six poetic essays. The book became
especially popular during the 1960s with the American counterculture and New
Age movements. Since it was first published in 1923, The Prophet has never
been out of print. Having been translated into more than twenty languages, it
was one of the bestselling books of the twentieth century in the United
States.

One of his most notable lines of poetry in the English-speaking world is from
"Sand and Foam" (1926), which reads : "Half of what I say is meaningless, but
I say it so that the other half may reach you". This was plagiarised by John
Lennon and placed, though in a slightly altered form, into the song Julia from
The Beatles' 1968 album The Beatles (a.k.a. The White Album).

## [edit] Political thought

Gibran was a prominent Syrian nationalist. In a political statement he drafted
in 1911,[10] he expresses his loyalty to Greater Syria and to the safeguarding
of Syria's national territorial integrity. He also called for the adoption of
Arabic as a national language of Syria and the application of Arabic at all
school levels. When Gibran met `Abdu'l-BahÃ¡ in 1911-12, who traveled to the
United States partly to promote peace, Gibran admired the teachings on peace
but argued that Syrian lands should be freed from Ottoman control.[4]

When the Ottomans were finally driven out of Syria during World War I,
Gibran's exhilaration was manifested in a sketch called "Free Syria" which
appeared on the front page of al-Sa'ih's special "victory" edition. Moreover,
in a draft of a play, still kept among his papers, Gibran expressed great hope
for national independence and progress. This play, according to Kahlil
Hawi,[11] "defines Gibran's belief in Syrian nationalism with great clarity,
distinguishing it from both Lebanese and Arab nationalism, and showing us that
nationalism lived in his mind, even at this late stage, side by side with
internationalism."[12]

## [edit] Death and legacy

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kahlil Gibran memorial in Washington, D.C.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kahlil Gibran memorial in Boston, MA

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kahlil Gibran memorial in Boston, MA

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Gibran Museum and Gibran's final resting place, located in Bsharri,
Lebanon

Gibran died in New York City on April 10, 1931: the cause was determined to be
cirrhosis of the liver and tuberculosis. Before his death, Gibran expressed
the wish that he be buried in Lebanon. This wish was fulfilled in 1932, when
Mary Haskell and his sister Mariana purchased the Mar Sarkis Monastery in
Lebanon which has since become the Gibran Museum. The words written next to
Gibran's grave are "a word I want to see written on my grave: I am alive like
you and I am now at your side. Closed your eyes, look around you, and going to
see me .... "[citation needed]

Gibran willed the contents of his studio to Mary Haskell. There she discovered
her letters to him spanning twenty-three years. She initially agreed to burn
them because of their intimacy, but recognizing their historical value she
saved them. She gave them, along with his letters to her which she had also
saved, to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Library before she
died in 1964. Excerpts of the over six hundred letters were published in
"Beloved Prophet" in 1972.

Mary Haskell Minis (she wed Jacob Florance Minis in 1923) donated her personal
collection of nearly one hundred original works of art by Gibran to the
Telfair Museum of Art in Savannah, Georgia in 1950. Haskell had been thinking
of placing her collection at the Telfair as early as 1914. In a letter to
Gibran, she explained, "...I am thinking of other museums...the unique little
Telfair Gallery in Savannah, Ga., that Gari Melchers chooses pictures for.
There when I was a visiting child, form burst upon my astonished little soul."
Haskell's gift to the Telfair is the largest public collection of Gibranâs
visual art in the country, consisting of five oils and numerous works on paper
rendered in the artistâs lyrical style, which reflects the influence of
symbolism. The future American royalties to his books were willed to his
hometown of Bsharri, to be "used for good causes", however, this led to years
of controversy and violence over the distribution of the money;[1] eventually,
the Lebanese government became the overseer.

## [edit] Works

In Arabic:

  * Nubthah fi Fan Al-Musiqa (1905)
  * Ara'is al-Muruj (Nymphs of the Valley, also translated as Spirit Brides, 1906)
  * al-Arwah al-Mutamarrida (Spirits Rebellious, 1908)
  * al-Ajniha al-Mutakassira (Broken Wings, 1912)
  * Dam'a wa Ibtisama (A Tear and A Smile, 1914)
  * al-Mawakib (The Processions, 1919)
  * al-âAwÄsif (The Tempests, 1920)
  * al-Bada'i' waal-Tara'if (The New and the Marvellous,1923)

In English, prior to his death:

  * The Madman (1918) (downloadable free version)
  * Twenty Drawings (1919)
  * The Forerunner (1920)
  * The Prophet, (1923)
  * Sand and Foam (1926)
  * Kingdom Of The Imagination (1927)
  * Jesus, The Son of Man (1928)
  * The Earth Gods (1931)

Posthumous, in English:

  * The Wanderer (1932)
  * The Garden of the Prophet(1933)
  * Lazarus and his Beloved (1933)
  * Prose and Poems (1934)
  * A Self-Portrait (1959)
  * Thought and Meditations (1960)
  * Spiritual sayings (1962)
  * Voice of the master (1963)
  * Mirrors of the Soul (1965)
  * Death Of The Prophet (1979)
  * The Vision (1994)
  * Eye of the Prophet (1995)

Other:

  * Beloved Prophet, The love letters of Kahlil Gibran and Mary Haskell, and her private journal (1972, edited by Virginia Hilu)

## [edit] Memorials and honors

  * Lebanese Ministry of Post and Telecommunications published a stamp in his honor in 1971.
  * Gibran Museum in Bsharri, Lebanon
  * Gibran Khalil Gibran Garden, Beirut, Lebanon
  * Khalil Gibran Street, Ville Saint-Laurent, Quebec, Canada inaugurated on 27 Sept. 2008 on occasion of the 125th anniversary of his birth.
  * Gibran Khalil Gibran Skiing Piste, The Cedars Ski Resort, Lebanon
  * Kahlil Gibran Memorial Garden in Washington, D.C.,[13] dedicated in 1990[14]
  * Pavilion K. Gibran at Ãcole Pasteur in MontrÃ©al, Quebec, Canada
  * Gibran Memorial Plaque in Copley Square, Boston, Massachusetts
  * Khalil Gibran International Academy, a public high school in Brooklyn, NY, opened in September 2007
  * Khalil Gibran Park (Parcul Khalil Gibran) in Bucharest, Romania
  * Gibran Kalil Gibran sculpture on a marble pedestal indoors at Arab Memorial building at Curitiba, ParanÃ¡, Brazil

## [edit] Mentions in popular culture

<IMG>

Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any
relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (May 2008)  
Movies

  * A phrase from The Prophet is read aloud by Norma Shearer's character in The Women (1939 film) just before her daughter gives her the information that sends her to get her husband back.
  * The Prophet is seen in the Johnny Cash biopic Walk the Line when June Carter hands it to J.R. to read in the motel.
  * Gibran is quoted in South Central (film), "You may tie my hands with chains and my feet with shackles, and put me in the dark prison, but you shall not enslave my thinking, for it is free, like the breeze in the spacious sky."
  * Gibran's poem, For What is it to Die, is read during a funeral in Todd Field's 2001 film, In the Bedroom.

Music

  * The Egyptian Singer Tony Kaldas Presented in 2008 Big Concerts celebrating the Jubilee 125 years of Gibran khalil Gibran Birth in The Egyptian Opera House and in Bibliotheca Alexandrina in Egypt. Also , he releases his 2 news songs from Gibran Words.
  * Jazz saxophonist Jackie McLean's "Kahlil the Prophet" is on his album Destination...Out! (1963) (Blue Note BLP 4165)
  * Brisbane based improvisational Jazz Quintet, The Neighbourhood Groove Collective, name 2 songs "The Firefly & the Stars" and "Love Crowns" on their second release titled "Pieces" inspired by imagery from the Prophet.
  * Jason Mraz's song "God Rests In Reason" on the album Selections For Friends features words from the poem "The Prophet"
  * The lyrics to David Bowie's "The Width of a Circle", off his album The Man Who Sold the World (1970), relates a surrealist scene in which the narrator and his doppelgÃ¤nger seek the help of a blackbird, who just "laughed insane and quipped 'Kahlil Gibran'".
  * Michigan experimental screamo outfit Men As Trees quote Gibran in the liner notes to their 2008 album, Weltschmerz: "We wanderers, ever seeking the lonelier way, begin no day where we have ended another day; and no sunrise finds us where sunset has left us."
  * Tyrannosaurus Rex's second album, Prophets, Seers & Sages â The Angels of the Ages, released in October 1968, was dedicated in Gibran's memory.
  * Guitarist Derek Trucks named his son Charles Khalil Trucks for saxophonist Charlie Parker, guitarist Charlie Christian, and Gibran.
  * His book The Prophet is mentioned in the Mad Season's song, "River of deceit". "My pain is self-chosen. At least, so The Prophet says".
  * The Chicago-based metal band Minsk's second album The Ritual Fires of Abandonment's lyrics are inspired by Gibran, who also is credited as an author of the lyrics in the CD booklet.
  * Khalil Gibran is briefly mentioned in the Common Market song; "Connect For".

Other

  * Syrian mini-series titled "Gibran Khalil Gibran", broadcast on the Syrian state television in November 2008.
  * In the popular video game Deus Ex, one of the three possible ending quotes is Gibran's quote: "Yesterday we obeyed kings and bent our necks before emperors. But today we kneel only to truth..." The western spelling of his name, Kahlil Gibran, was used to credit him.
  * Gibran is referenced briefly in the episode Wingmen of the show The Boondocks. When Huey (the central character) is asked by his grandfather to say something "deep", he recites part of the poem "On Pain" from The Prophet.
  * In the hit TV show "One Tree Hill", Lucas Scott (Chad Michael Murray) quotes Gibran.
  * Gibran is referenced in the popular American sitcom "Friends". Richard, played by Tom Selleck, quotes from the friendship passage of "The Prophet" during a meal with Chandler and Monica. (Season 6)
  * San Diego Padres shortstop Khalil Greene was named after Gibran.
  * The Egyptian singer Tony Kaldas, who did especially for him in 2008 big concerts celebration for his Jubilee 125 years of his birth and released 2 songs from Gibran Khalil Gibran Words in Arabic
  * In the 2000 TV Series "The Invisible Man", main character Darien Fawkes quotes Gibran on the subject of parents and children in the season 2 episode "The Camp."
  * At the end of an episode of Criminal Minds, entitled "Perfect Storm", Gibran is quoted as saying "Out of suffering have emerged the strongest souls. The most massive characters are seared with scars."

## [edit] References

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Khalil Gibran  
  1. ^ a b c d e f Acocella, Joan (January 7, 2008). "Prophet Motive". The New Yorker. Retrieved March 9, 2009.
  2. ^ Jagadisan, S. "Called by Life", The Hindu, January 5, 2003, accessed July 11, 2007
  3. ^ "Kahlil Gibran (1883-1931)", biography at Cornell University library on-line site, retrieved February 4, 2008
  4. ^ a b c d Cole, Juan. "Chronology of his Life". Juan Cole's Kahlil Gibran Page - Writings, Paintings, Hotlinks, New Translations. Professor Juan R.I. Cole. http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jrcole/gibran/chrono.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-02.
  5. ^ Walbridge, John. "Gibran, his Aesthetic, and his Moral Universe". Juan Cole's Kahlil Gibran Page - Writings, Paintings, Hotlinks, New Translations. Professor Juan R.I. Cole. http://www-personal.umich.edu/~jrcole/gibran/papers/gibwal1.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-02.
  6. ^ a b c Mcharek, Sana (2006-03-03) (pdf). Kahlil Gibran and other Arab American Prophets. approved thesis. Florida State University. http://etd.lib.fsu.edu/theses/available/etd-04102006-114344/unrestricted/Mcharek2006.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-01-02.
  7. ^ Khalil Gibran (1883-1931) Cornell University Library
  8. ^ "Passenger Record". Records of Ellis Island. The Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation, Inc. http://www.ellisisland.org/search/passRecord.asp?MID=19582761730245745888&LNM=GIBRAN&PLNM=GIBRAN&bSYR=1878&bEYR=1888&first_kind=1&last_kind=0&TOWN=null&SHIP=null&RF=8&pID=102754150222. Retrieved on 2009-01-02.
  9. ^ a b Thompson, Juliet (Summer 1978), "Juliet Remembers Gibran as told to Marzieh Gail", World Order, A Baha'i Magazine 12 (04): pp. 29-31, http://bahai-library.com/file.php?file=gail_thompson_remembers_gibran
  10. ^ Hawi, Kahlil Gibran: His Background, Character and Works, 1972, p155
  11. ^ Hawi, Kahlil Gibran: His Background, Character and Works, 1972, p219
  12. ^ Gibran and the national idea
  13. ^ Gibran Memorial in Washington, DC
  14. ^ Elmaz Abinader, Children of Al-Mahjar: Arab American Literature Spans a Century", U.S. Society & Values, February 2000

  * Kahlil Gibran and Ameen Rihani: Prophets of Lebanese-American Literature. Ed. by Naji B. Oueijan, et al. Louaize: Notre Dame Press, 1999.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Khalil
Gibran  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Khalil Gibran

  * The Gibran Archive: Biography, Timeline, Drawings/Paintings and many Full Text books
  * Online copies of texts by Gibran
  * Kahlil Gibran --a retrospective at YouTube, documentary, May 31, 2007
  * Works by Khalil Gibran
  * Gibran paintings and love letters
  * History page links Gibran to W.B Yeats
  * The Prophet by Gibran Parts of the Prophet in English, French, Czech and Arabic
  * Short commentary on The Prophet
  * Music inspired by Khalil Gibran's immortal work, The Prophet

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khalil_Gibran"

Categories: 1883 births | 1931 deaths | Deaths from cirrhosis | Deaths from
tuberculosis | Lebanese Americans | Arab American writers | American poets |
Lebanese poets | Lebanese writers | Cultural history of Boston, Massachusetts
| Lebanese Maronites | Syrian nationalists | American Maronites | Mystics |
Infectious disease deaths in New York

Hidden categories: Articles containing Arabic language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March
2009 | Articles with trivia sections from May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 17:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



