
# Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow  
<IMG>  
Longfellow in 1868 by Julia Margaret Cameron  
Born February 27, 1807(1807-02-27)  
Portland, Maine, United States  
Died March 24, 1882 (aged 75)  
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States  
Occupation Poet  
Professor  
Literary movement Romanticism  
Signature <IMG>  
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (February 27, 1807 â March 24, 1882) was an
American educator and poet whose works include "Paul Revere's Ride", The Song
of Hiawatha, and "Evangeline". He was also the first American to translate
Dante Alighieri's The Divine Comedy and was one of the five members of the
group known as the Fireside Poets.

Longfellow was born in Portland, Maine, and studied at Bowdoin College. After
spending time in Europe he became a professor at Bowdoin and, later, at
Harvard College. His first major poetry collections were Voices of the Night
(1839) and Ballads and Other Poems (1841). Longfellow retired from teaching in
1854 to focus on his writing, living the remainder of his life in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, in a former headquarters of George Washington. His first wife,
Mary Potter, died in 1835 after a miscarriage. His second wife, Frances
Appleton, died in 1861 after sustaining burns from her dress catching fire.
After her death, Longfellow had difficulty writing poetry for a time and
focused on his translation. He died in 1882.

Longfellow predominantly wrote lyric poems which are known for their
musicality and which often presented stories of mythology and legend. He
became the most popular American poet of his day and also had success
overseas. He has been criticized, however, for imitating European styles and
writing specifically for the masses.

## Contents

  * 1 Life and work
    * 1.1 Early life and education
    * 1.2 European tours and professorships
    * 1.3 Courtship of Frances Appleton
    * 1.4 Death of Frances
    * 1.5 Later life and death
  * 2 Writing
    * 2.1 Style
    * 2.2 Critical response
  * 3 Legacy
  * 4 List of works
  * 5 References
    * 5.1 Sources
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Life and work

### [edit] Early life and education

<IMG>

<IMG>

Birthplace in c. 1910

Longfellow was born on February 27, 1807, to Stephen Longfellow and Zilpah
(Wadsworth) Longfellow in Portland, Maine,[1] and he grew up in what is now
known as the Wadsworth-Longfellow House. His father was a lawyer, and his
maternal grandfather, Peleg Wadsworth, was a general in the American
Revolutionary War and a Member of Congress.[2] He was named after his mother's
brother Henry Wadsworth, a Navy lieutenant who died only three years earlier
at the Battle of Tripoli.[3] Young Longfellow was the second of eight
children;[4] his siblings were Stephen (1805), Elizabeth (1808), Anne (1810),
Alexander (1814), Mary (1816), Ellen (1818), and Samuel (1819).

Henry was enrolled in a dame school at the age of three and by age six was
enrolled at the private Portland Academy. In his years there, he earned a
reputation as being very studious and became fluent in Latin.[5] He printed
his first poem â a patriotic and historical four stanza poem called "The
Battle of Lovell's Pond" â in the Portland Gazette on November 17, 1820.[6]
He stayed at the Portland Academy until the age of fourteen. He spent much of
his summers as a child at his grandfather Peleg's farm in the western Maine
town of Hiram.

In the fall of 1822, the 15-year old Longfellow enrolled at Bowdoin College in
Brunswick, Maine, alongside his brother Stephen.[5] His grandfather was a
founder of the college[7] and his father was a trustee.[5] There, Longfellow
met Nathaniel Hawthorne, who would later become his lifelong friend.[8] He
boarded with a clergyman for a time before rooming on the third floor of what
is now Maine Hall in 1823.[9] He joined the Peucinian Society, a group of
students with Federalist leanings.[10] In his senior year, Longfellow wrote to
his father about his aspirations:

> "I will not disguise it in the least... the fact is, I most eagerly aspire
after future eminence in literature, my whole soul burns most ardently after
it, and every earthly thought centres in it... I am almost confident in
believing, that if I can ever rise in the world it must be by the exercise of
my talents in the wide field of literature".[11]

He pursued his literary goals by submitting poetry and prose to various
newspapers and magazines. Between January 1824 and his graduation in 1825, he
had published nearly 40 minor poems.[12] About 24 of them appeared in the
short-lived Boston periodical The United States Literary Gazette.[10] When
Longfellow graduated from Bowdoin, he was ranked fourth in the class and gave
the student commencement address.[13]

### [edit] European tours and professorships

After graduating in 1825, he was offered a job as professor of modern
languages at his alma mater. The story, possibly apocryphal, is that an
influential trustee, Benjamin Orr, had been so impressed by Longfellow's
translation of Horace that he was hired under the condition that he travel to
Europe to study French, Spanish, and Italian.[14] Whatever the motivation, he
began his tour of Europe in May 1826 aboard the ship Cadmus.[15] His time
abroad would last three years and cost his father $2,604.24.[16] He traveled
to France, Spain, Italy, Germany, back to France, then England before
returning to the United States in mid-August 1829.[17] In Madrid, he spent
time with Washington Irving and was particularly impressed by the author's
work ethic.[18] Irving encouraged the young Longfellow to pursue writing.[19]
While in Spain, Longfellow was saddened to learn his favorite sister,
Elizabeth, had died of tuberculosis at the age of 20 that May while he was
abroad.[20]

On August 27, 1829, he wrote to the president of Bowdoin that he was turning
down the professorship because he considered the $600 salary "disproportionate
to the duties required". The trustees raised his salary to $800 with an
additional $100 to serve as the college's librarian, a post which required one
hour of work per day.[21] During his years teaching at the college, he wrote
textbooks in French, Italian, and Spanish;[22] his first published book was in
1833, a translation of the poetry of medieval Spanish poet Jorge Manrique.[23]
He also published a travel book, Outre-Mer: A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea, first
published in serial form before a book edition was released in 1835.[22]
Shortly after the book's publication, Longfellow attempted to join the
literary circle in New York and asked George Pope Morris for an editorial role
at one of Morris's publications. Longfellow was considering moving to New York
after New York University considered offering him a newly-created
professorship of modern languages, though there would be no salary. The
professorship was not created and Longfellow agreed to continue teaching at
Bowdoin.[24]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mary Storer Potter became Longfellow's first wife in 1831 and died four years
later.

On September 14, 1831, Longfellow married Mary Storer Potter, a childhood
friend from Portland.[25] The couple settled in Brunswick, though the two were
not happy there.[26] Longfellow published several nonfiction and fiction prose
pieces inspired by Irving, including "The Indian Summer" and "The Bald Eagle"
in 1833.[27]

In December 1834, Longfellow received a letter from Josiah Quincy III,
president of Harvard College, offering him the Smith Professorship of Modern
Languages position with the stipulation that he spend a year or so abroad.[28]
In October 1835, during the trip, his wife Mary had a miscarriage about six
months into her pregnancy.[29] She did not recover and died after several
weeks of illness at the age of 22 on November 29, 1835. Longfellow had her
body embalmed immediately and placed into a lead coffin inside an oak coffin
which was then shipped to Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston.[30] Three years
later, he was inspired to write the poem "Footsteps of Angels" about her.
Several years later, he wrote the poem "Mezzo Cammin" to express his sorrow
over her death.[31]

When he returned to the United States in 1836, Longfellow took up the
professorship at Harvard. He was required to live in Cambridge to be close to
the campus and moved in to the Craigie House in the spring of 1837,[32] now
preserved as the Longfellow National Historic Site. The home, built in 1759,
had once been the headquarters of George Washington during the Siege of Boston
beginning in July 1775.[33] Previous occupants also included Jared Sparks,
Edward Everett, and Joseph Emerson Worcester.[34] Longfellow began publishing
his poetry, including Voices of the Night in 1839[35] and Ballads and Other
Poems in 1841.[36] The latter included "The Village Blacksmith" and "The Wreck
of the Hesperus", which were instantly popular.[37] Longfellow also became
part of the local social scene, creating a group of friends who called
themselves the Five of Clubs. Members included Cornelius Conway Felton, George
Stillman Hillard, and Charles Sumner, the latter of whom would become
Longfellow's closest friend over the next 30 years.[38]

### [edit] Courtship of Frances Appleton

<IMG>

<IMG>

After a seven-year courtship, Longfellow married Frances Appleton in 1843.

Longfellow began courting Frances "Fanny" Appleton, the daughter of a wealthy
Boston industrialist, Nathan Appleton[39] and sister of Thomas Gold Appleton.
At first, she was not interested but Longfellow was determined. In July 1839,
he wrote to a friend: "[V]ictory hangs doubtful. The lady says she will not! I
say she shall! It is not pride, but the madness of passion".[40] His friend
George Stillman Hillard encouraged Longfellow in the pursuit: "I delight to
see you keeping up so stout a heart for the resolve to conquer is half the
battle in love as well as war".[41] During the courtship, Longfellow
frequently walked from Cambridge to the Appleton home in Beacon Hill in Boston
by crossing the Boston Bridge. That bridge was subsequently demolished and
replaced in 1906 by a new bridge, which was eventually renamed the Longfellow
Bridge.

During his courtship, Longfellow continued writing and, in the fall of 1839,
published Hyperion, a book in prose inspired by his trips abroad.[40] A small
collection, Poems on Slavery, was published in 1842 as his first public
support of abolitionism. However, as Longfellow himself wrote, the poems were
"so mild that even a Slaveholder might read them without losing his appetite
for breakfast".[42] A critic for The Dial agreed, calling it "the thinnest of
all Mr. Longfellow's thin books; spirited and polished like its forerunners;
but the topic would warrant a deeper tone".[43] The New England Anti-Slavery
Association, however, was satisfied with the collection enough to reprint it
for further distribution.[44]

In 1843, Longfellow also published a play, The Spanish Student, reflecting his
memories from his time in Spain in the 1820s.[45] There was some confusion
over its original manuscript. After being printed in Graham's Magazine, its
editor Rufus Wilmot Griswold saved the manuscript from the trash. Longfellow
was surprised to hear that it had been saved, unusual for a printing office,
and asked to borrow it so that he could revise it, forgetting to return it to
Griswold. The often vindictive Griswold wrote an angry letter in response.[46]

On May 10, 1843, after seven years, Longfellow received a letter from Fanny
agreeing to marry him and, too restless to take a carriage, walked 90 minutes
to meet her at her house.[47] They were married shortly thereafter. Nathan
Appleton bought the Craigie House as a wedding present to the pair. Longfellow
would live there for the remainder of his life.[48] His love for Fanny is
evident in the following lines from Longfellow's only love poem, the sonnet
"The Evening Star",[49] which he wrote in October 1845: "O my beloved, my
sweet Hesperus! My morning and my evening star of love!"

He and Fanny had six children: Charles Appleton (1844â1893), Ernest
Wadsworth (1845â1921), Fanny (1847â1848), Alice Mary (1850â1928), Edith
(1853â1915), and Anne Allegra (1855â1934). Their second-youngest daughter,
Edith, married Richard Henry Dana III, son of the popular writer Richard Henry
Dana, Jr., author of Two Years Before the Mast.[50] When the younger Fanny was
born on April 7, 1847, Dr. Nathan Cooley Keep administered ether as the first
obstetric anesthetic in the United States to Fanny Longfellow.[51] A few
months later, on November 1, 1847, the poem "Evangeline" was published for the
first time.[51] His literary income was increasing considerably: in 1840, he
had made $219 from his work but the year 1850 brought him $1,900.[52]

On June 14, 1853, Longfellow held a farewell dinner party at his Cambridge
home for his friend Nathaniel Hawthorne, who was preparing to move
overseas.[53] Shortly thereafter in 1854, Longfellow retired from Harvard,[54]
devoting himself entirely to writing. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of
Laws from Harvard in 1859.[55]

### [edit] Death of Frances

On July 9, 1861,[56] a hot day, Fanny was putting locks of her children's hair
into an envelope and attempting to seal it with hot sealing wax while
Longfellow took a nap.[57] Her dress suddenly caught fire, though it is
unclear exactly how;[58] it may have been burning wax or a lighted candle
which fell on her dress.[59] Longfellow, awoken from his nap, rushed to help
her and threw a rug over her, though it was too small. He stifled the flames
with his body as best he could, but she was already badly burned.[58] Over a
half a century later, Longfellow's youngest daughter Annie explained the story
differently, claiming that there was no candle or wax but that the fire
started from a self-lighting match that had fallen on the floor.[50] In both
versions of the story, however, Fanny was taken to her room to recover and a
doctor was called. She was in and out of consciousness throughout the night
and was administered ether. The next morning, July 10, 1861, she died shortly
after 10 o'clock after requesting a cup of coffee.[60] Longfellow, in trying
to save her, had burned himself badly enough that he was unable to attend her
funeral.[61] His facial injuries caused him to stop shaving, thereafter
wearing the beard which has become his trademark.[60]

Devastated by her death, he never fully recovered and occasionally resorted to
laudanum and ether to deal with it.[62] He expressed his grief in the sonnet
"The Cross of Snow" (1879), which he wrote eighteen years later to commemorate
her death:[31]

    Such is the cross I wear upon my breast
    These eighteen years, through all the changing scenes
    And seasons, changeless since the day she died.
### [edit] Later life and death

<IMG>

<IMG>

Grave of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Longfellow spent several years translating Dante Alighieri's Divine Comedy. To
aid him in perfecting the translation and reviewing proofs, he invited friends
to weekly meetings every Wednesday starting in 1864.[63] The "Dante Club", as
it was called, regularly included William Dean Howells, James Russell Lowell,
Charles Eliot Norton and other occasional guests.[64] The full three-volume
translation was published in the spring of 1867, though Longfellow would
continue to revise it,[65] and it went through four printings in its first
year.[66] By 1868, Longfellow's annual income was over $48,000.[67]

During the 1860s, Longfellow supported abolitionism and especially hoped for
reconciliation between the northern and southern states after the American
Civil War. He wrote in his journal in 1878: "I have only one desire; and that
is for harmony, and a frank and honest understanding between North and
South".[68] Longfellow, despite his aversion to public speaking, accepted an
offer from Joshua Chamberlain to speak at his fiftieth reunion at Bowdoin
College; he read the poem "Morituri Salutamus" so quietly that few could hear
him.[69] The next year, 1876, he declined an offer to be nominated for the
Board of Overseers at Harvard "for reasons very conclusive to my own
mind".[70]

On August 22, 1879, a female admirer traveled to Longfellow's house in
Cambridge and, unaware to whom she was speaking, asked Longfellow: "Is this
the house where Longfellow was born?" Longfellow told her it was not. The
visitor then asked if he had died here. "Not yet", he replied.[71] In March
1882, Longfellow went to bed with severe stomach pain. He endured the pain for
several days with the help of opium before he died surrounded by family on
Friday, March 24, 1882.[72] He had been suffering from peritonitis.[73] At the
time of his death, his estate was worth an estimated $356,320.[67] He is
buried with both of his wives at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge,
Massachusetts. His last few years were spent translating the poetry of
Michelangelo; though Longfellow never considered it complete enough to be
published during his lifetime, a posthumous edition was collected in 1883.
Scholars generally regard the work as autobiographical, reflecting the
translator as an aging artist facing his impending death.[74]

## [edit] Writing

### [edit] Style

<IMG>

<IMG>

Longfellow from a posthumous edition of his poetry

Though much of his work is categorized as lyric poetry, Longfellow
experimented with many forms, including hexameter and free verse.[75] His
published poetry shows great versatility, using anapestic and trochaic forms,
blank verse, heroic couplets, ballads and sonnets.[76] Typically, Longfellow
would carefully consider the subject of his poetic ideas for a long time
before deciding on the right metrical form for it.[77] Much of his work is
recognized for its melody-like musicality.[78] As he says, "what a writer asks
of his reader is not so much to like as to listen".[79]

As a very private man, Longfellow did not believe in adding autobiographical
elements to his poetry. Two exceptions are dedicated to the death of members
of his family. "Resignation", written as a response to the death of his
daughter Fanny in 1848, does not use first-person pronouns and is instead a
generalized poem of mourning.[80] The death of his second wife Frances, as
biographer Charles Calhoun wrote, deeply affected Longfellow personally but
"seemed not to touch his poetry, at least directly".[81] His memorial poem to
her, a sonnet called "The Cross of Snow", was not published in his
lifetime.[80]

Longfellow often used allegory in his work. In "Nature", for example, death is
depicted as bedtime for a cranky child.[82] Though he often used didacticism
in his poetry, he focused on it less in his later years.[83] Many of the
metaphors he used in his poetry as well as subject matter came from legends,
mythology, and literature.[84] He was inspired, for example, by Norse
mythology for "The Skeleton in Armor" and by Finnish legends for The Song of
Hiawatha.[85] In fact, Longfellow rarely wrote on current subjects and seemed
detached from contemporary American concerns.[86] Even so, Longfellow, like
many during this period, called for the development of high quality American
literature. In Kavanagh, a character says:

> We want a national literature commensurate with our mountains and rivers...
We want a national epic that shall correspond to the size of the country... We
want a national drama in which scope shall be given to our gigantic ideas and
to the unparalleled activity of our people... In a word, we want a national
literature altogether shaggy and unshorn, that shall shake the earth, like a
herd of buffaloes thundering over the prairies.[87]

He was also important as a translator; his translation of Dante became a
required possession for those who wanted to be a part of high culture.[88] He
also encouraged and supported other translators. In 1845, he published The
Poets and Poetry of Europe, an 800-page compilation of translations made by
other writers, including many by his friend and colleague Cornelius Conway
Felton. Longfellow intended the anthology "to bring together, into a compact
and convenient form, as large an amount as possible of those English
translations which are scattered through many volumes, and are not accessible
to the general reader".[89] In honor of Longfellow's role with translations,
Harvard established the Longfellow Institute in 1994, dedicated to literature
written in the United States in languages other than English.[90]

In 1874, Longfellow oversaw a 31-volume anthology called Poems of Places,
which collected poems representing several geographical locations, including
European, Asian, and Arabian countries.[91] Emerson was disappointed and
reportedly told Longfellow: "The world is expecting better things of you than
this... You are wasting time that should be bestowed upon original
production".[92] In preparing the volume, Longfellow hired Katherine Sherwood
Bonner as an amanuensis.[93]

### [edit] Critical response

<IMG>

<IMG>

Longfellow and his good friend Senator Charles Sumner

Longfellow's early collections, Voices of the Night and Ballads and Other
Poems, made him instantly popular. The New-Yorker called him "one of the very
few in our time who has successfully aimed in putting poetry to its best and
sweetest uses".[37] The Southern Literary Messenger immediately put Longfellow
"among the first of our American poets".[37] Poet John Greenleaf Whittier said
that Longfellow's poetry illustrated "the careful moulding by which art
attains the graceful ease and chaste simplicity of nature".[94] The rapidity
with which American readers embraced Longfellow was unparalleled in publishing
history in the United States;[95] by 1874, he was earning $3,000 per poem.[96]
His popularity spread throughout Europe as well and his poetry was translated
during his lifetime into Italian, French, German, and other languages.[97] In
the last two decades of his life, he often received requests for autographs
from strangers, which he always sent.[98] John Greenleaf Whittier suggested it
was this massive correspondence that lead to Longfellow's death, writing: "My
friend Longfellow was driven to death by these incessant demands".[99]

Contemporary writer Edgar Allan Poe wrote to Longfellow in May 1841 of his
"fervent admiration which [your] genius has inspired in me" and later called
him "unquestionably the best poet in America".[100] However, after Poe's
reputation as a critic increased, he publicly accused Longfellow of plagiarism
in what has been since termed by Poe biographers as "The Longfellow War".[101]
His assessment was that Longfellow was "a determined imitator and a dextrous
adapter of the ideas of other people",[100] specifically Alfred, Lord
Tennyson.[102] His accusations may have been a publicity stunt to boost
readership of the Broadway Journal, for which he was the editor at the
time.[103] Longfellow did not respond publicly, but, after Poe's death, he
wrote: "The harshness of his criticisms I have never attributed to anything
but the irritation of a sensitive nature chafed by some indefinite sense of
wrong".[104]

Margaret Fuller judged him "artificial and imitative" and lacking force.[105]
Poet Walt Whitman also considered Longfellow an imitator of European forms,
though he praised his ability to reach a popular audience as "the expressor of
common themes â of the little songs of the masses".[106] Lewis Mumford said
that Longfellow could be completely removed from the history of literature
without much effect.[86] Towards the end of his life, contemporaries
considered him more of a children's poet[107] as many of his readers were
children.[108] A contemporary reviewer noted in 1848 that Longfellow was
creating a "Goody two-shoes kind of literature... slipshod, sentimental
stories told in the style of the nursery, beginning in nothing and ending in
nothing".[109] A more modern critic said, "Who, except wretched
schoolchildren, now reads Longfellow?"[86] A London critic in the London
Quarterly Review, however, condemned all American poetry, saying, "with two or
three exceptions, there is not a poet of mark in the whole union" but singled
out Longfellow as one of those exceptions.[110] As an editor of the Boston
Evening Transcript wrote in 1846, "Whatever the miserable envy of trashy
criticism may write against Longfellow, one thing is most certain, no American
poet is more read".[111]

## [edit] Legacy

<IMG>

<IMG>

National Endowment for the Arts Chairman Dana Gioia and Katherine C. Tobin,
member of the USPS Board of Governors, unveil the new U.S. postage stamp in
honor of poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in 2007.

Longfellow was the most popular poet of his day.[112] He was such an admired
figure in the United States during his life that his 70th birthday in 1877
took on the air of a national holiday, with parades, speeches, and the reading
of his poetry. He had become one of the first American celebrities and was
also popular in Europe. It was reported that 10,000 copies of The Courtship of
Miles Standish sold in London in a single day.[113] In 1884 he was the first
non-British writer for whom a commemorative sculpted bust was placed in Poet's
Corner of Westminster Abbey in London; he remains the only American poet
represented with a bust.[114]

Over the years, Longfellow's personality has become part of his reputation. He
has been presented as a gentle, placid, poetic soul: an image perpetuated by
his brother Samuel Longfellow, who wrote an early biography which specifically
emphasized these points.[115] As James Russell Lowell said, Longfellow had an
"absolute sweetness, simplicity, and modesty".[104] At Longfellow's funeral,
his friend Ralph Waldo Emerson called him "a sweet and beautiful soul".[116]
In reality, Longfellow's life was much more difficult than was assumed. He
suffered from neuralgia, causing constant pain, and he also had poor eyesight.
He wrote to friend Charles Sumner: "I do not believe anyone can be perfectly
well, who has a brain and a heart".[117] He had difficulty coping with the
death of his second wife.[62] Longfellow was very quiet, reserved, and
private; in later years, he was known for being unsocial and avoided leaving
home.[118]

Over time, Longfellow's popularity rapidly declined, beginning shortly after
his death and into the 20th century as academics began to appreciate poets
like Walt Whitman, Edwin Arlington Robinson, and Robert Frost.[119] More
recently, he was honored in March 2007 when the United States Postal Service
made a stamp commemorating him. A number of schools are named after him in
various states as well. Neil Diamond's 1974 hit song, "Longfellow Serenade",
is a reference to the poet.[120] He is a protagonist in Matthew Pearl's murder
mystery The Dante Club (2003).[121]

## [edit] List of works

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Village Blacksmith (manuscript page 1)

  * Outre-Mer: A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea (Travelogue) (1835)
  * Hyperion, a Romance (1839)
  * The Spanish Student. A Play in Three Acts (1843)[45]
  * Evangeline: A Tale of Acadie (epic poem) (1847)
  * "Kavanagh: A Tale" (1849)
  * "The Golden Legend" (poem) (1851)
  * The Song of Hiawatha (epic poem) (1855)
  * The Children's Hour (1860)
  * Household Poems (1865)
  * The New England Tragedies (1868)
  * The Divine Tragedy (1871)
  * Christus: A Mystery (1872)
  * "Aftermath" (poem) (1873)
  * The Reaper and the Flowers (1839)
  * The Bell of Atri (from The Sicilian's Tale) (1863â72)

Poetry collections

  * Birds of Passage
  * Voices of the Night (1839)
  * Ballads and Other Poems (1841)
  * Poems on Slavery (1842)
  * The Belfry of Bruges and Other Poems (1845)
  * The Seaside and the Fireside (1850)
  * The Courtship of Miles Standish and Other Poems (1858)
  * Tales of a Wayside Inn (1863)
  * Flower-de-Luce (1867)
  * Three Books of Song (1872)[91]
  * The Masque of Pandora and Other Poems (1875)[91]
  * KÃ©ramos and Other Poems (1878)[91]
  * Ultima Thule (1880)[91]
  * In the Harbor (1882)[91]
  * Michel Angelo: A Fragment (incomplete; published posthumously)[91]

Translations

  * Coplas de Don Jorge Manrique (Translation from Spanish) (1833)
  * Dante's Divine Comedy (Translation) (1867)

Anthologies

  * Poets and Poetry of Europe (Translations) (1844)[45]
  * The Waif (1845)[45]
  * Poems of Places (1874)[91]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Calhoun, 5
  2. ^ Wadsworth-Longfellow Genealogy at Henry Wadsworth Longfellow - A Maine Historical Society Web Site
  3. ^ Arvin, 7
  4. ^ Thompson, 16
  5. ^ a b c Arvin, 11
  6. ^ Calhoun, 24
  7. ^ Calhoun, 16
  8. ^ McFarland, 58-59
  9. ^ Calhoun, 33
  10. ^ a b Calhoun, 37
  11. ^ Arvin, 13
  12. ^ Arvin, 14
  13. ^ Sullivan, Wilson. New England Men of Letters. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1972: 184. ISBN 0027886808
  14. ^ Calhoun, 40
  15. ^ Arvin, 22
  16. ^ Calhoun, 42
  17. ^ Arvin, 26
  18. ^ Jones, Brian Jay. Washington Irving: An American Original. New York: Arcade Publishing, 2008: 242. ISBN 978-1-55970836-4
  19. ^ Burstein, Andrew. The Original Knickerbocker: The Life of Washington Irving. New York: Basic Books, 2007: 195. ISBN 9780465008537.
  20. ^ Calhoun, 67
  21. ^ Calhoun, 69
  22. ^ a b Williams, 66
  23. ^ Irmscher, 225
  24. ^ Thompson, 199
  25. ^ Calhoun, 90
  26. ^ Arvin, 28
  27. ^ Williams, 108
  28. ^ Arvin, 30
  29. ^ Calhoun, 114â115
  30. ^ Calhoun, 118
  31. ^ a b Arvin, 305
  32. ^ Calhoun, 124
  33. ^ Calhoun, 124â125
  34. ^ Brooks, 153
  35. ^ Calhoun, 137
  36. ^ Williams, 75
  37. ^ a b c Calhoun, 138
  38. ^ Calhoun, 135
  39. ^ Calhoun, 119
  40. ^ a b McFarland, 59
  41. ^ Thompson, 258
  42. ^ Irmscher, 60
  43. ^ Thompson, 332
  44. ^ Wagenknecht, 56
  45. ^ a b c d Calhoun, 179
  46. ^ Bayless, 130â131
  47. ^ Calhoun, 164â165
  48. ^ Arvin, 51
  49. ^ Arvin, 304
  50. ^ a b Calhoun, 217
  51. ^ a b Calhoun, 189
  52. ^ Williams, 19
  53. ^ McFarland, 198
  54. ^ Brooks, 453
  55. ^ Calhoun, 198
  56. ^ Miller, 91
  57. ^ McFarland, 243
  58. ^ a b Calhoun, 215
  59. ^ Arvin, 138
  60. ^ a b McFarland, 244
  61. ^ Arvin, 139
  62. ^ a b Calhoun, 218
  63. ^ Arvin, 140
  64. ^ Calhoun, 236
  65. ^ Irmscher, 263
  66. ^ Irmscher, 268
  67. ^ a b Williams, 100
  68. ^ Irmscher, 205
  69. ^ Calhoun, 240â241
  70. ^ Wagenknecht, 40
  71. ^ Irmscher, 7
  72. ^ Calhoun, 248
  73. ^ Wagenknecht, 11
  74. ^ Irmscher, 137â139
  75. ^ Arvin, 182
  76. ^ Williams, 130
  77. ^ Williams, 156
  78. ^ Brooks, 174
  79. ^ Wagenknecht, 145
  80. ^ a b Irmscher, 46
  81. ^ Calhoun, 229
  82. ^ Loving, Jerome. Walt Whitman: The Song of Himself. University of California Press, 1999: 52. ISBN 0520226879.
  83. ^ Arvin, 183
  84. ^ Arvin, 186
  85. ^ Brooks, 175â176
  86. ^ a b c Arvin, 321
  87. ^ Lewis, R. W. B. The American Adam: Innocence, Tragedy, and Tradition in the Nineteenth Century. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1955: 79.
  88. ^ Calhoun, 237
  89. ^ Irmscher, 231
  90. ^ Irmscher, 21
  91. ^ a b c d e f g h Calhoun, 242
  92. ^ Irmscher, 200
  93. ^ Wagenknecht, 185
  94. ^ Wagenknecht, Edward. John Greenleaf Whittier: A Portrait in Paradox. New York: Oxford University Press, 1967: 113.
  95. ^ Calhoun, 139
  96. ^ Levine, Miriam. A Guide to Writers' Homes in New England. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Apple-wood Books, 1984: 127. ISBN 0-918222-51-6
  97. ^ Irmscher, 218
  98. ^ Calhoun, 245
  99. ^ Irmscher, 36
  100. ^ a b Meyers, Jeffrey. Edgar Allan Poe: His Life and Legacy. New York: Cooper Square Press, 1992: 171. ISBN 0815410387.
  101. ^ Silverman, 250
  102. ^ Silverman, 251
  103. ^ Calhoun, 160
  104. ^ a b Wagenknecht, 144
  105. ^ McFarland, 170
  106. ^ Reynolds, David S. Walt Whitman's America: A Cultural Biography. New York: Vintage Books, 1995: 353. ISBN 0679767096.
  107. ^ Calhoun, 246
  108. ^ Brooks, 455
  109. ^ Douglas, Ann. The Feminization of American Culture. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1977: 235. ISBN 0-394-40532-3
  110. ^ Silverman, 199
  111. ^ Irmscher, 20
  112. ^ Bayless, 40
  113. ^ Brooks, 523
  114. ^ Williams, 21
  115. ^ Williams, 18
  116. ^ Williams, 197
  117. ^ Wagenknecht, 16â17
  118. ^ Wagenknecht, 34
  119. ^ Williams, 23
  120. ^ Hyatt, Wesley (1999). The Billboard Book of #1 Adult Contemporary Hits (Billboard Publications), page 150.
  121. ^ Calhoun, 258

### [edit] Sources

  * Arvin, Newton. Longfellow: His Life and Work. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1963.
  * Bayless, Joy. Rufus Wilmot Griswold: Poe's Literary Executor. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 1943.
  * Brooks, Van Wyck. The Flowering of New England. New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, Inc., 1952.
  * Calhoun, Charles C. Longfellow: A Rediscovered Life. Boston: Beacon Press, 2004. ISBN 0807070262.
  * Irmscher, Christoph. Longfellow Redux. University of Illinois, 2006. ISBN 9780252030635.
  * McFarland, Philip. Hawthorne in Concord. New York: Grove Press, 2004. ISBN 0802117767.
  * Silverman, Kenneth. Edgar A. Poe: Mournful and Never-ending Remembrance. New York: Harper Perennial, 1991. ISBN 0060923318.
  * Thompson, Lawrance. Young Longfellow (1807â1843). New York: The Macmillan Company, 1938.
  * Wagenknecht, Edward. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: Portrait of an American Humanist. New York: Oxford University Press, 1966.
  * Williams, Cecil B. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. New York: Twayne Publishers, Inc., 1964.

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow  
Sources

  * Works by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow at Project Gutenberg \- Plain text and HTML
  * Works by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow at Internet Archive \- Scanned books, many illustrated and original editions.
  * Audio - Hear the Village Blacksmith
  * Maine Historical Society Searchable poem text database, biographical data, lesson plans.

Other

  * Longfellow National Historic Site in Cambridge, Massachusetts
  * Wadsworth-Longfellow House in Portland, Maine
  * Longfellow's Translation of Dante rendered side by side with that of Cary and Norton
  * Famous Quotations by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

  

Persondata  
NAME Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION American poet  
DATE OF BIRTH February 27, 1807  
PLACE OF BIRTH Portland, Maine, United States  
DATE OF DEATH March 24, 1882  
PLACE OF DEATH Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Wadsworth_Longfellow"

Categories: 1807 births | 1882 deaths | American poets | Spanish-English
translators | Bowdoin College alumni | Harvard University faculty | Writers
from Maine | Writers from Massachusetts | People from Cambridge, Massachusetts
| People from Portland, Maine | Recipients of the Pour le MÃ©rite (civil
class) | Deaths from peritonitis

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 18:32.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



