
# Stevie Ray Vaughan

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2008)  
<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (December 2008)  
Stevie Ray Vaughan  
<IMG>  
  
Background information  
Also known as SRV  
Born October 3, 1954(1954-10-03)  
Dallas, Texas, United States  
Died August 27, 1990 (aged 35)  
East Troy, Wisconsin  
Genre(s) Electric blues, blues-rock, Texas blues  
Occupation(s) Musician, singer-songwriter  
Instrument(s) Guitar, vocals  
Years active 1970â1990  
Label(s) Epic  
Associated acts Double Trouble, Jimmie Vaughan, David Bowie  
Notable instrument(s)  
Fender Stratocaster (See SRV guitars)  
Stephen "Stevie" Ray Vaughan (October 3, 1954 â August 27, 1990) was an
American blues-rock guitarist, whose broad appeal made him an influential
electric blues guitarist. To date, a total of 18 albums of Vaughan's work have
been released.[1] In 2003, Rolling Stone magazine ranked Stevie Ray Vaughan #7
in its list of the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time,[2] and Classic Rock
Magazine ranked him #3 in their list of the 100 Wildest Guitar Heroes in 2007.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Early career
    * 2.1 1970s
    * 2.2 1980s
  * 3 Fame and success
    * 3.1 Texas Flood
    * 3.2 Couldn't Stand the Weather
    * 3.3 Soul to Soul
    * 3.4 Live Alive
    * 3.5 Rehabilitation
    * 3.6 Recovery
    * 3.7 In Step
  * 4 Death
  * 5 Legacy
  * 6 Personal life
  * 7 Musical influences and style
  * 8 Musical equipment
    * 8.1 Guitars
    * 8.2 Amplifiers
  * 9 Effects
  * 10 Strings
  * 11 Picks
  * 12 Grammy Awards
  * 13 Discography
    * 13.1 Studio albums
    * 13.2 Live albums
    * 13.3 Compilations
    * 13.4 Contributions
  * 14 References
  * 15 See also
  * 16 External links

  
## [edit] Early life

Stephen Ray Vaughan was born to Martha and Jimmie Lee Vaughan at Methodist
Hospital in Dallas, Texas on October 3, 1954, three years after his brother,
Jimmie Vaughan. Stevie's father, whose nickname became "Big Jim", was an
asbestos worker whose job carried the family to cities across Texas. Wherever
there was an opening, the family would pack up and move to another city.

The Vaughan family finally moved into a small house in Dallas. The tension in
the house was high, however, as Big Jim had a temper when he drank alcohol.[3]

Big Jim and Martha loved to dance to Western Swing, and it was the boys' first
exposure to music. The Texas Playboys, a country band, would hang out at the
Vaughan's house often, and would play dominoes with Big Jim. The Playboys
would bring alcoholic beverages to the house and soon led Stevie to sneak sips
when nobody was looking. It was at this young age where he started his
addiction to alcohol.

When Jimmie was 12, after a broken shoulder from playing football, a family
friend, Michael Quinn, gave him his first guitar. Soon after, Stevie got one
of his own: a plastic Roy Rogers toy guitar from Sears, with only three
strings. Stevie recalls that it also came with a set of blankets.

The boys taught themselves to play by listening to records, as they weren't
interested in guitar lessons. It was the late 60s at the time, the era of Jimi
Hendrix, The Yardbirds, and The Beatles, and Jimmie would bring home records
of all these new bands to play and listen to. The Vaughan brothers were also
drawn to blues music. The boys taught themselves the guitar techniques of
blues guitarists like Albert and B.B. King, Otis Rush, and Buddy Guy.

At the age of 15, Jimmie was the lead guitarist in a local cover band called
The Chessmen, and played gigs all over Texas.

One of the first to take notice was Jimmie's band mate in The Chessmen,
singer, Doyle Bramhall. When he was picking up Jimmie at the house to go to a
gig, he opened a room door and saw young Stevie playing along to Jeff's Boogie
by The Yardbirds. He was the first to tell him that he was actually good.

When he was 17, Vaughan got a tattoo of a peacock on his chest.[4] He later
learned the tattoo was meant to go on his arm.[4] It was initially supposed to
be a much bigger chest tattoo but while getting it, Stevie decided he couldn't
go through the pain of getting it full size and shrunk it down to what it
ended up being.

## [edit] Early career

Stevie was playing in rock bands by age 12. His first recording was for a
garage rock band called "A Cast of Thousands", and his style stood out. He had
paying gigs when he entered high school: first with Jimmie's new band, Texas
Storm, and then with his own group, Blackbird. Stevie would play late night
sets at local bars.

After focusing on music, Stevie's and Jimmie's grades began to drop. Alarmed
by their boys' behavior, Big Jim and Martha tried to stop Jimmie and Stevie's
music careers and make them focus on school. It was too late, however, when in
1967, Jimmie moved out of the house and into Doyle's, leaving his brother
failing in school, and miserable at home. Stevie decided to take a job washing
dishes at the local Dairy Mart. Part of his job was to clean out the trash
bin, which required standing on top of 55 gallon barrels with wooden lids that
were used for storing grease. One day while cleaning the trash bin, the wooden
lid broke on one of the barrels causing him to fall up to his chest in grease.
He was then fired from the job for breaking the wooden lid and decided he
instead wanted to pursue his dream of being a guitar player like Albert King
in the records he was listening to at the time rather than having any other
job.

### [edit] 1970s

In early 1971, both Jimmie and Doyle grew tired of the fading music scene in
Dallas and moved to Austin to give it another try. A year later, Stevie
followed with his band Blackbird. At 17 years old, he dropped out of high
school during Christmas break and hit the road.

When he first came to Austin, Stevie and his band didn't have much money, so
he would sleep on a barroom pool table, but he fit in with the more
appreciative music scene on the east side of town. With blues clubs like the
Soap Creek Saloon, Vulcan Gas Company, and Antone's, Stevie could trade licks
with the blues masters he grew up listening to. Clifford Antone was one of the
club owners to take notice and practically begged Albert King to let 17 year
old Stevie play guitar with him. After much convincing, he finally agreed, and
King was impressed when he heard Stevie play the licks that he made up
himself.

It was a dream for Stevie to play and share riffs with these masters, day and
night, but making a career in Austin turned out to be tougher than he thought.

In 1973, he joined a promising rock group called Krackerjack, which included
future bassist Tommy Shannon, whom he met after a stint at a club in Dallas
called "The Fog". Stevie quit when the leader decided they should wear makeup
on stage.

The next year, he was asked to join Marc Benno and the Nightcrawlers, a blues
band that included singer Doyle Bramhall. The Nightcrawlers drove from Texas
to Los Angeles to record an album, but Benno's record label rejected the
tapes, and Stevie traveled back to Texas.

In 1975, he hooked up with another popular Austin group, Paul Ray and the
Cobras, a two-guitar band with Stevie in the background. After two years, they
only had one single recorded, and Stevie grew frustrated and quit.

He was still in the shadow of his big brother. Jimmie's new group, The
Fabulous Thunderbirds, were the talk of Austin, and became the house band at
Antone's.

In late 1977, Stevie decided it was time to put together a band of his own
called "Triple Threat", which included bass player, W.C. Clark, Freddie
"Pharoah" Walden on drums, and singer Lou Ann Barton.

On December 23, 1979, Stevie Vaughan married a tough-minded, Lebanese woman
named Lenora "Lenny" Bailey between sets at the Rome Inn in Austin, TX.

W.C. Clark left Triple Threat in mid-1978, and Stevie renamed the band "Double
Trouble." He then asked drummer Chris Layton to join the band. After an
embarrassing incident with drunken Lou Ann Barton post show, Stevie was angry
and fired her, as he became the new lead singer and guitar player. Around this
time, he hired a management company called "Classic Management" that consisted
of manager Chesley Milikin, and financial assistant, Frances Carr.

### [edit] 1980s

Stevie's drummer at the time, Chris Layton, stayed with Stevie. After almost
four years, Jackie Newhouse was dropped from the band in the spring of 1981,
and bass player Tommy Shannon decided he wanted in. In turn, he was asked to
join Double Trouble.

The first show with the new trio format band was at Joe Ely's annual Texas
Tornado Jam, a music festival featuring a host of local bands held at the
Manor Downs Racetrack, just outside of Austin. The Fabulous Thunderbirds were
after Stevie and Double Trouble. The whole show was broadcast on TV.

Mick Jagger from The Rolling Stones saw a tape of the show and liked what he
saw. He asked Stevie and his band to play a private party hosted by The
Rolling Stones at the Danceteria club in New York. After the show, Mick and
guitar player Keith Richards talked to the band about getting them a record
deal. It never went through, however, and they went back to Texas.

Jerry Wexler, record executive from Atlantic Records, saw the band playing at
a record release party for Lou Ann Barton's new position as singer for Roomful
of Blues. He recommended that the band play the Montreux International Jazz
Festival in Switzerland. Manager Chesley Milikin put in a call to Claude Nobs,
the host of the Montreux Jazz Festival and would be the first unsigned act to
perform at the festival.

The band was booked on a jazz acoustic night, a setup that involved an upright
bass, piano, and generally soft music. With the loud and powerful sound that
Stevie and Double Trouble had, it shocked the staid crowd. After a few songs,
the gig seemed headed for disaster, as some of the audience members booed.
Larry Graham, from Sly & The Family Stone was looking forward to an encore
with the band, but unfortunately, it never happened.

As the band was backstage, devastated and disappointed, the performance was
appreciated by two celebrities in the audience: David Bowie and Jackson
Browne. Browne offered the band 72 hours of free studio time at his own studio
in downtown Los Angeles. David Bowie also offered Stevie to play on his
upcoming album, Let's Dance, co-produced by Nile Rodgers.

To be able to afford the gasoline to at least drive to Los Angeles all the way
from Texas, the band booked a small tour at various clubs like Fitzgerald's in
Houston and The Continental Club in Austin. When they finally traveled to Los
Angeles during Thanksgiving weekend in 1982, they recorded an album's worth of
songs: eight songs the first day, and two the second day. Stevie and the band
then went back to Texas and he recorded the vocals at Riverside Sound in
Austin.

## [edit] Fame and success

### [edit] Texas Flood

The band sent the tapes to legendary talent scout, John Hammond, Sr., a
veteran of the record business who discovered Aretha Franklin, Billie Holiday,
and Bob Dylan. He liked what he heard and got the band a major contract with
Epic Records. The mixed and mastered tapes were morphed into an album called
Texas Flood. On June 3, 1983, the album made it to #38 on the Billboard 200
charts, received positive reviews, and sold over 500,000 units. Stevie Ray
Vaughan and Double Trouble were an overnight success. The band then embarked
on a successful tour for the album. On March 3, 2009, Harmonix released Texas
Flood in its entirety as downloadable content for the game Rock Band via XBox
Live. The Playstation Network was set to receive it on March 5, 2009.

### [edit] Couldn't Stand the Weather

In mid-December 1983, the band took two weeks off to write new material for a
new album. They went to The Power Station in New York City to record in
January 1984. The new album took two weeks to record, but finally finished and
released the album as Couldn't Stand the Weather. They went on another
successful tour and played many TV shows including Solid Gold and Rockpalast.

On October 4, 1984, Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble played a show at
Carnegie Hall in New York City to celebrate his 30th birthday. The whole
eleven-piece band wore custom-tailored mariachi suits. The band rehearsed for
two weeks to prepare for the show. After the show, MTV invited all the guests
to a local club where the new TV network would throw an after-party.

With several more shows after Carnegie Hall, the band flew to Australia and
played two sold-out shows at the Sydney Opera House. Then it was off to New
Zealand, with a several concert halls and stadiums on the itinerary. While in
New Zealand, Stevie received word that he won two W.C. Handy Blues Awards: one
for Entertainer of the Year and one Instrumentalist of the Year. He was the
first white person to win both awards. He was presented the awards on November
18, 1984, and played with B.B. King, Rufus Thomas, Robert Cray, and Albert
King. The ceremony was held at the Orpheum Theatre in Memphis on Beale Street.

### [edit] Soul to Soul

By early 1985, Stevie's performance contract required a fifth of Scotch in his
dressing room each night and his cocaine habit rose to 4 grams/day. He would
dissolve the cocaine in a glass of Scotch or Crown Royal every morning as a
morning pick-me-up. This morning ritual lasted for 9 years.

Stevie and Double Trouble went to the Dallas Sound Labs in March 1985. After a
couple of weeks of trying to come up with new material, it became evident that
Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble needed a stronger rhythm section.
Desperate, he got in touch with, Reese Wynans, an ace keyboard player who was
playing with Delbert McClinton at the time.

On April 10, 1985, Stevie Ray was asked to play The Star Spangled Banner on
opening day at the Houston Astrodome. Unfortunately, he didn't get a good
audience response, as he played his rendition with slide guitar work.

The new quartet finished the album in May 1985 and was named Soul to Soul. The
album was released on September 30, 1985, but lacked the fire and bite of
previous albums.

By 1986, the band was touring the world non-stop, and Stevie's cocaine habit
rose to 7 grams a day. Sometimes they'd share the bill with The Fabulous
Thunderbirds.

Both bands were on tour in New Zealand when Stevie saw a group of schoolgirls
walking back to a nearby hotel. He honed in on one girl in particular: model
Janna Lapidus. Strikingly beautiful with dark hair and olive skin, her parents
flew from Russia when she was a child. Stevie met Janna when she was 17 and
took her with him on tour in Australia.

### [edit] Live Alive

In mid-1986, Stevie and Double Trouble were told that they'd have to record
another album. As this was the last thing that the band wanted to do, they
decided to record a live album. It would be simple: they would record shows at
the Austin Opera House and the Starfest in Dallas.

It didn't prove to be easy, however, as many of the recordings were flooded
with technical difficulties and touch-ups or errors that needed to be
corrected. The band started booking studio time to overdub drums or vocals.

Stevie's marriage to Lenny was also on the verge of collapse. His fame,
fortune, success and attention pushed her to the sidelines, and she reacted
bitterly. One night after a long stretch on the road, he came home to find
their house in Austin padlocked, electricity shut off, their dog gone, and
Lenny nowhere to be found. She had left with the money Stevie was sending her
frequently. As a result, it escalated Stevie's cocaine and alcohol abuse.

Stevie then moved to Los Angeles where he moved in with an old Austin
acquaintance, Timothy Duckworth, who later became Stevie's personal assistant.

"Live Alive" was released on November 30, 1986.

On August 27, 1986, after years of suffering from Parkinson's disease, Stevie
and Jimmie's father died from heart failure. The boys rushed home to comfort
their mother, but there was little time to mourn over the death of their
father. A funeral was held three days later, and when it was done, a jet
rushed Stevie back on the road with Double Trouble.

A month later on tour in Europe, the addictive lifestyle finally caught up
with Stevie. Drummer Chris Layton recalls being out in the street with Stevie
when he suddenly dropped to his knees and acted confused, then began retching
blood and bile. He said he needed a drink, but no drug stores were open.
Composing himself, the two walked back to their hotel in Ludwigshafen. Then
Stevie began shaking, sweating and his eyes "were like the eyes of a dead
animal." When the animation came back into his eyes, he sat up and quietly
said, "I need help." Chris called an ambulance; the paramedics later described
the trip to the hospital as a near death dehydration. Stevie was admitted
under the care of Dr. Victor Bloom in London, the same doctor who helped Eric
Clapton, and Pete Townshend kick their addiction to heroin. Bloom monitored
Stevie overnight to see his stomach reactions; it turned out that the whiskey
was eating away his stomach lining, and the cocaine was crystallizing again
and eating into his intestines.

### [edit] Rehabilitation

After a failed attempt to get sober in London, he asked his mother to fly the
band to Atlanta, Georgia, where Stevie checked into Peachford Hospital, and
Tommy checked into a hospital in Austin; both men spent a month in the Charter
treatment program.

Stevie made a phone call to his wife Lenny, asking her to visit him in rehab
and rework their marriage but she refused. In turn, he filed for a divorce
which wasn't finalized until June 1988 due to a delay in an agreement between
Stevie and Lenny.

### [edit] Recovery

By late 1986, Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble went back on the road with
confidence and energy as Stevie and Tommy now played clean and sober.

On February 28, 1987, the band played MTV Mardi Gras in New Orleans with The
Fabulous Thunderbirds.

Stevie also made an appearance with B.B. King for an HBO special that was
broadcast at the Ebony Showcase Theater in Los Angeles, California on April
15, 1987. It was a lineup that included B.B. King, Albert King, Eric Clapton,
Paul Butterfield (who died only a few weeks later), Phil Collins, Gladys
Knight, and Etta James.

Stevie Wonder hosted a TV special called "Characters", in which a number of
musical guests came to perform various hits of Wonder's. Stevie Ray played
with Wonder on "Superstition" and "Come Let Me Make Your Love Come Down" and
was broadcast in April 1988.

Stevie wanted to help others recover and overcome their problems with alcohol
or drugs, as during the song "Life Without You", he would often speak to the
audience about recovering and being there for others when they need love.

On the road, he would attend Alcoholics Anonymous (A.A.) meetings regularly,
sharing the lessons of his ordeal.

### [edit] In Step

By 1988, the band was ready to return to the recording studio. For the new
record, they traveled to Memphis to record in Ardent Studios, a pro recording
studio that has such clientele as ZZ Top, Tina Turner, and Led Zeppelin.
Together, old friend Doyle Bramhall and Stevie began writing songs about
walking the tightrope to recovery, including "Tightrope", "Wall of Denial",
and "Crossfire".

The album was named appropriately, "In Step", released on June 6, 1989.
"Crossfire" reached the #1 position on the Mainstream Rock Charts. It was the
only hit single that they ever had.

In the spring of 1990, Stevie and his brother recorded an album together, one
that would feature the music they had grown up with. They recorded at Ardent
Studios in Memphis and was produced by Nile Rodgers. Both brothers decided to
name it "Family Style".

In the summer of 1990, Stevie and Double Trouble went on tour with British
soul singer Joe Cocker, touring places like Alaska and the Benson & Hedges
Blues Festival.

## [edit] Death

<IMG>

This article's tone or style may not be appropriate for Wikipedia. Specific
concerns may be found on the talk page. See Wikipedia's guide to writing
better articles for suggestions. (February 2009)  
To complete the summer portion of the "In Step" tour, Stevie Ray Vaughan and
Double Trouble played two shows on August 25 & 26 at Alpine Valley Music
Theatre in East Troy, WI. The shows also featured Eric Clapton, Buddy Guy, and
Robert Cray with The Memphis Horns.

After Double Trouble's set at the final show, Vaughan originally planned to
return to Chicago by automobile. Bass player Tommy Shannon and keyboardist
Reese Wynans had already departed. The venue was difficult to reach via
highway and Vaughan wanted to get back to Chicago so he could talk to his
girlfriend, model Janna Lapidus, who was staying with him at the time.

Tour manager Skip Rickert had hired helicopters from Omni Flights to
circumvent congested highway traffic. Most of the seats had already been
reserved, but one was available, which Vaughan took.

The helicopters departed at 12:44 a.m. in thick fog. Just past the landing
zone was a 200-foot hill. Vaughan's helicopter was piloted by Jeffrey Browne,
who was unfamiliar with the flight pattern for exiting the area. He guided the
helicopter to about half of the altitude needed to clear the hill before
crashing into it. The force of the impact scattered the aircraft over a
200-foot area. The coroner's report stated that Vaughan died of severe loss of
blood due to a rupture of the aorta, resulting from the force of impact.

On August 31, 1990, funeral services were held for Vaughan in his hometown of
Oak Cliff. Thousands of friends, musicians, family members who knew him
gathered to say goodbye. Among the mourners were all three members of ZZ Top,
Bonnie Raitt, Stevie Wonder, Jackson Browne, Janna Lapidus, mother Martha
Vaughan, and Jimmie Vaughan. Vaughan was interred at Laurel Land Cemetery in
Dallas, Texas.

## [edit] Legacy

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vaughan memorial at Lady Bird Lake, in Austin, Texas.

September 1990 saw the release of Family Style.

The 1991 album The Sky Is Crying was the first of several posthumous Vaughan
releases to achieve chart success. Jimmie Vaughan later co-wrote and recorded
a song in tribute to his brother and other deceased blues guitarists, titled
"Six Strings Down".

The 1991 album of Bonnie Raitt, Luck of the Draw, was dedicated to him.

Many other artists recorded songs in remembrance of Vaughan, including Eric
Johnson,[5], Tommy Emmanuel (the song Stevie's Blues), Buddy Guy and Steve Vai
("Jibboom" on the album The Ultra Zone, 1999).

In 1991, Texas governor Ann Richards proclaimed October 3, Vaughan's birthday,
to be "Stevie Ray Vaughan Day." An annual motorcycle ride and concert in
Central Texas benefits the Stevie Ray Vaughan Memorial Scholarship Fund.[6]

In 1992, the Fender Musical Instruments Corporation released the Stevie Ray
Vaughan Signature Stratocaster, which Vaughan had helped design. As of 2007,
the model is still in production. In 2004, Fender also released a limited
edition exact replica of "Number One".[7]

Stevie Wonder included a song on his 1995 live album Natural Wonder titled
"Stevie Ray Blues". On the album, Wonder refers to the song as "Stevie Ray
Vaughan Blues".

Stephen King's short story "You Know They Got a Hell of a Band" concerns a
small town called Rock and Roll Heaven that's populated by late rock
musicians, one of whom is Vaughan.

In 1994, the city of Austin erected the Stevie Ray Vaughan Memorial Statue at
Auditorium Shores on Lady Bird Lake,(30Â°15â²47.1774â³N
97Â°45â²2.4228â³Wï»¿ / ï»¿30.263104833Â°N 97.750673Â°Wï»¿ / 30.263104833;
-97.750673) the site of a number of Vaughan's concerts. It has become one of
the city's most popular tourist attractions.

In 2000, Stevie Ray Vaughan was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame.

The last guitar that Vaughan played before his death is on display in the Hard
Rock Cafe in Gatlinburg, Tennessee.

In November 2007, Fender Musical Instruments Corporation released a second
tribute to Vaughan, an exact replica of his second beloved guitar: Lenny. This
guitar was given to him by his wife Lennora ("Lenny") on his 26th birthday and
Vaughan was very fond of it. According to Fender, the original Lenny was a
1965 Strat that he saw in the window of a pawn shop that he was unable to
afford. The guitar is sold with a strap, a case with Vaughan's name
embroidered in the fabric lining, a number of brochures and memorabilia and a
leather bound certificate of authenticity.

    
> "A little over four years ago on June 24, 2004 Lenny was put up for auction
and was sold to Guitar Center for $629,500. "[1]

Also in November 2007, Sony BMG, Epic Records, and Legacy Records released the
CD Stevie Ray Vaughan & Friends: Solos, Sessions & Encores.

Stevie Ray Vaughan became eligible for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in
2008.[8]

In 2008, residents voted to rename Dallas' Industrial Boulevard, with
Vaughan's name being one of the finalists alongside Stanley Marcus, Eddie
Bernice Johnson, and Cesar Chavez. [2]

His music has been used in the popular rhythm-based video game series Guitar
Hero, featuring Texas Flood and Pride And Joy. The entire Texas Flood album
has also been released for download for Rock Band 2.[9]

## [edit] Personal life

Not much is known about Stevie's personal life. However, he did have several
girlfriends in his early career, one of them being Lindi Bethel. "Pride and
Joy" was influenced by Lindi when he wrote it.

Stevie married Lenora "Lenny" Bailey on December 23, 1979 between sets at the
Rome Inn in Austin, TX. They divorced in 1988.

Stevie and model Janna Lapidus met each other in New Zealand in March 1986.
They remained a couple until his death.

He did not have any children.

## [edit] Musical influences and style

<IMG>

This section may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(February 2008)  
Vaughan's blues style was strongly influenced by many blues guitarists.
Foremost among them were Albert King, who dubbed himself Stevie's "godfather,"
Otis Rush, Eric Clapton, Buddy Guy, and Jimi Hendrix. The song "Rude Mood" is
a direct derivative (according to Vaughan himself) of a Lightnin' Hopkins tune
called "Lightning Sky Hop." He was also strongly influenced by early blues-
rock guitarist Lonnie Mack, who, according to Vaughan, "really taught me to
play guitar from the heart" (Davis, History of the Blues, DaCapo 2003, p.
246). Vaughan, who had idolized Mack since childhood, produced and played on
Mack's 1985 Alligator Records album Strike Like Lightning[10] and covered
"Wham!" which was written by Mack, as well as playing on a Mack tune from the
1980s, "If You Have To Know." "Scuttle Buttin'" was influenced by one of
Mack's songs "Chicken Pickin'". Vaughan's brother Jimmie Vaughan has stated
that Johnny "Guitar" Watson was the guitarist he and Stevie studied the most.

Vaughan's sound and playing style, which often incorporated simultaneous lead
and rhythm parts, drew comparisons to Hendrix; Vaughan covered several Hendrix
tunes on his studio albums and in performance, such as "Little Wing," "Voodoo
Child (Slight Return)," and "Third Stone from the Sun." He was also heavily
influenced by Freddie King, another Texas bluesman, mainly in the use of tone
and attack; King's heavy vibrato can clearly be heard in Vaughan's playing.
Another stylistic influence was Albert Collins. By utilizing his index finger
as a pick a la Albert Collins, he was able to coax various tonal nuances from
his amplifiers.

Known for his warm blues-rock tone, Vaughan characteristically used very heavy
strings on his guitar ranging from 13 to 58-gauge sets to give a fuller sound
which he tuned down a half-step to the key of E flat.

Musicians such as John Mayer, Robert Randolph, Kenny Wayne Shepherd, Colin
James, Jonny Lang, Los Lonely Boys, Mike McCready, Eric Johnson, John
Petrucci, and Doyle Bramhall II have cited Vaughan as an influence.

## [edit] Musical equipment

<IMG>

<IMG>

Stevie Ray Vaughan playing his customized Stratocaster with his initials
emblazoned on the pickguard.

See also: SRV guitars

Vaughan is recognized mainly for using Fender Stratocasters that were strung
with heavy strings, and for tuning his guitars a half-step down from standard
pitch (also known as E-flat).

### [edit] Guitars

In his estate, Vaughan had a total of 34 guitars that he used throughout his
career. For more information, see SRV guitars.

### [edit] Amplifiers

Stevie always used vacuum tube amplifiers that he set at loud volumes, which
allowed the amps to go into "power amp distortion", for his well-known clean,
but loud tone. For more information on his configurations and customizations
to his amps, see SRV amps.

## [edit] Effects

Vaughan's primary effects were an Ibanez Tube Screamer and a Vox wah-wah,
which had been given to his brother Jimmie by Jimi Hendrix. It was
subsequently stolen on a tour.

He usually set the Tube Screamer with the "Drive" knob low, but tone and level
high as a "boost" for leads.

Stevie used a Leslie-style speaker cabinet called a Fender Vibratone, which
had a rotating styrofoam cone with 2 slots in the sides around a stationary
speaker. This made the guitar sound like an organ, and can be heard on "Cold
Shot" from Couldn't Stand the Weather.

Vaughan briefly used a Univox Univibe in 1986, but preferred the effect given
by the Vibratone.

He also had a Dunlop Cry Baby wah-wah pedal before he got the Vox wah-wah.

Stevie started using Octavia in 1989. First he had a Roger Mayer Octavia and
then Cesar Diaz found some NOS Tycobrahe Octavia pedals and Stevie started
using those. Stevie used one from then on on live shows (he never recorded
with one). Stevie used Octavia mostly in "Voodoo Chile (slight return)", but
also on "Mary Had A Little Lamb", "Wall Of Denial", "Going Down", "IÂ´m
Leaving You (commit a crime)" and "Riviera Paradise".

You can see (and hear on Voodoo Chile) the Roger Mayer Octavia on the DVD that
comes with the SRV Box. It is the grey rocket shape pedal far left from
Stevie.

In late -89 Stevie added Fuzz Face (first Roger Mayer Classic Fuzz, then
vintage Fuzz Face and later Diaz modified Fuzz) to his pedal board that stayed
there until the end.

## [edit] Strings

The strings Stevie used didn't necessarily have to be a particular brand name,
but he is known for using GHS Nickel Rockers. He changed gauges around often,
depending on the condition of his fingers, but usually played the following:

1st (plain steel): .011", .012", .013"

2nd (plain steel): .015", .016"

3rd (plain steel): .019", .024"

4th (nickel-wound steel): .028"

5th (nickel-wound steel): .038"

6th (nickel-wound steel): .054", .056", .058"

## [edit] Picks

In the early 1980s, he would pick up Fender Mediums as "freebies" whenever he
could. However, Stevie's picks were custom-made "multi-color" equivalents of
Fender Mediums. He did try D'Addario Delrin Heavies (1.10 mm) in 1987. Stevie
played with the "rounded" edge of the pick.[citation needed]

## [edit] Grammy Awards

  * 1984 Best Traditional Blues Album for Blues Explosion (Various Artists)
  * 1989 Best Contemporary Blues Album for In Step (Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble)
  * 1990 Best Contemporary Blues Album for Family Style (The Vaughan Brothers)
  * 1990 Best Rock Instrumental Performance for "D/Fw" (The Vaughan Brothers)
  * 1992 Best Contemporary Blues Album for The Sky Is Crying (Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble)
  * 1992 Best Rock Instrumental Performance for "Little Wing" (Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble)[11]

## [edit] Discography

### [edit] Studio albums

  * 1983 Texas Flood
  * 1983 In Session (with Albert King)
  * 1984 Couldn't Stand the Weather
  * 1985 Soul to Soul
  * 1989 In Step
  * 1990 Family Style (with brother Jimmie Vaughan as The Vaughan Brothers)

### [edit] Live albums

  * from 1980 In the Beginning
  * from 1982 and 1985 Live at Montreux 1982 and 1985
  * from 1983 Live at the El Mocambo (video release)
  * from 1983 and 1989 Live from Austin, Texas (video release)
  * from 1984 Live at Carnegie Hall
  * from 1984 Triple Trouble US tour (Archivio, 1991)
  * from 1985 Live in Tokyo (video import release)
  * from 1985 and 1986 Live Alive
  * from 1987 The Forgotten Show Daytona Beach (Flashback World Productions, Flash 01.93.0196)

### [edit] Compilations

  * 1991 The Sky Is Crying (posthumous compilation)
  * 1995 Greatest Hits
  * 1999 The Real Deal: Greatest Hits Volume 2
  * 2000 Blues at Sunrise
  * 2000 SRV (box set, with early recordings, rarities, hits, and live material)
  * 2002 The Essential Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble
  * 2003 G-Ray
  * 2003 Martin Scorsese Presents the Blues â Stevie Ray Vaughan
  * 2006 The Real Deal: Greatest Hits Volume 1
  * 2007 Solos, Sessions and Encores

### [edit] Contributions

  * 1971 A Cast Of Thousands, A New Hi
  * 1983 Let's Dance (David Bowie)
  * 1983 Johnny Copeland, Texas Twister
  * 1984 Soulful Dress (Marcia Ball)
  * 1985 Roy Head, Living For A Song
  * 1985 Bennie Wallace, Twilight Time
  * 1986 Heartbeat (Don Johnson)
  * 1986 Teena Marie Emerald City
  * 1986 James Brown Gravity
  * 1987 "First We Take Manhattan" from Famous Blue Raincoat (Jennifer Warnes)
  * 1987 Stevie Wonder, Characters
  * 1987 AC Reed, I'm In The Wrong Business
  * 1988 Brian Slawson, Distant Drums
  * 1988 Bill Carter, Loaded Diced
  * 1990 Strike Like Lightning (Lonnie Mack)
  * 1990 Bob Dylan, Under The Red Sky
  * 1994 Bird Nest On The Ground, Doyle Bramhall
  * 1998 Lou Ann Barton with Rock Ola (Lou Ann Barton album) Sugar Coated Love

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Bluepower.com, Retrieved February 1, 2008
  2. ^ "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time". Rolling Stone Issue 931. Rolling Stone. http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/5937559/the_100_greatest_guitarists_of_all_time.
  3. ^ "Legends TV Broadcast". SRV Interviews. willmot.com. http://www.willmot.com/SRV/interviews/legends.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-15.
  4. ^ a b The Arsenio Hall Show interview
  5. ^ Entitled "SRV", from the album Venus Isle
  6. ^ Stevie Ray Vaughan Remembrance Ride & Concert
  7. ^ StevieRay.com - Fender
  8. ^ Future Rock Hall entry for Stevie Ray Vaughan
  9. ^ Press release on RockBand.com
  10. ^ "Strike Like Lightning". http://www.answers.com/topic/strike-like-lightning.
  11. ^ Awards - Tommy Shannon

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Texas portal  
  * SRV guitars
  * Music of Austin
  * Chicago Blues Festival

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Stevie Ray
Vaughan  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Stevie Ray Vaughan
Memorial Statue  
  * Stevie Ray Vaughan at the Open Directory Project
  * Stevie Ray Vaughan at Sony Music
  * Official NTSB report about the crash in which Vaughan died.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Stevie Ray Vaughan and Double Trouble  
Stevie Ray Vaughan â¢ Tommy Shannon â¢ Chris Layton â¢ Reese Wynans  
Studio albums

Texas Flood â¢ Couldn't Stand the Weather â¢ Soul to Soul â¢ In Step â¢
Family Style (w/ Jimmie Vaughan) â¢ The Sky Is Crying  
Live albums

Live Alive â¢ In the Beginning â¢ Live at Carnegie Hall  
Compilations

The Real Deal: Greatest Hits Volume 2 â¢ The Essential Stevie Ray Vaughan and
Double Trouble  
Tours

Texas Flood Tour â¢ Couldn't Stand the Weather Tour â¢ Fall Foliage Tour â¢
First Tour of Australia â¢ Japan Tour 1985 â¢ Soul to Soul Tour â¢ European
Tour 1986 â¢ Live Alive Tour â¢ In Step Tour  
Original songs

"Crossfire" â¢ "Lenny" â¢ "Love Struck Baby" â¢ "Pride and Joy" â¢ "Rude
Mood" â¢ "Say What!" â¢ "Texas Flood"  
Cover songs

"Come On, Pt. 3" â¢ "Little Wing" â¢ "Testify" â¢ "Superstition" â¢ "The
Things (That) I Used to Do" â¢ "Voodoo Child (Slight Return)"  
Related articles

Stevie Ray Vaughan Signature Stratocaster â¢ SRV guitars â¢ Jimmie Vaughan  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stevie_Ray_Vaughan"

Categories: Stevie Ray Vaughan | American blues guitarists | American blues
singers | American rock guitarists | Blues Hall of Fame inductees | Blues-rock
musicians | Electric blues musicians | Victims of helicopter accidents or
incidents in the United States | Musicians from Dallas, Texas | Texas blues
musicians | People from Texas | Musicians from Texas | Grammy Award winners |
1954 births | 1990 deaths | Lead guitarists

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2008 |
Cleanup from December 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | All articles needing
style editing | Wikipedia articles needing style editing from February 2009 |
Articles that may contain original research since February 2008 | All articles
that may contain original research | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 05:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



