
# Milton H. Erickson

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Hypnosis Applications  
Hypnotherapy  
Stage hypnosis  
Self-hypnosis  
Origins  
History of Mesmerism  
Franz Mesmer  
History of hypnosis  
James Braid  
  
Key figures  
Marquis de PuysÃ©gur  
James Esdaile  
John Elliotson  
Jean-Martin Charcot  
A. LiÃ©beault  
Hippolyte Bernheim  
Pierre Janet  
Sigmund Freud  
Ãmile CouÃ©  
Morton Prince  
Clark L. Hull  
Andrew Salter  
Theodore R. Sarbin  
Milton H. Erickson  
Ernest R. Hilgard  
Martin T. Orne  
AndrÃ© Weitzenhoffer  
Nicholas Spanos  
Related topics  
Hypnotic susceptibility  
Hypnotic suggestion  
Post-hypnotic suggestion  
Mesmerism  
Regression  
NLP  
view Â· talk  
Milton Hyland Erickson  
Born 5 December 1901 (1901-12-05)  
Aurum, Nevada  
Died 25 March 1980 (1980-03-26)  
Phoenix, Arizona  
Occupation psychiatrist and psychotherapist  
Spouse(s) Elizabeth  
Milton Hyland Erickson, MD (5 December 1901 in Aurum, Nevada â 25 March 1980
in Phoenix, Arizona) was an American psychiatrist specializing in medical
hypnosis and family therapy. He was founding president of the American Society
for Clinical Hypnosis and a fellow of the American Psychiatric Association,
the American Psychological Association, and the American Psychopathological
Association. He is noted for his approach to the unconscious mind as creative
and solution-generating. He is also noted for influencing brief therapy,
strategic family therapy, family systems therapy, solution focused brief
therapy, and Neuro-linguistic programming.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Approach
  * 2 Personal History
  * 3 Trance and The Unconscious Mind
  * 4 Indirect Techniques
  * 5 Confusion Technique
  * 6 The Handshake Induction
  * 7 Resistance
  * 8 Ericksonian Therapy
  * 9 Shocks and ordeals
  * 10 Influenced
  * 11 Books
  * 12 See also
  * 13 References
  * 14 External links

  
## [edit] Approach

Erickson is noted for his often unconventional approach to psychotherapy, such
as described in the book Uncommon Therapy, by Jay Haley, and the book
Hypnotherapy: An Exploratory Casebook, by Milton H. Erickson and Ernest L.
Rossi (1979, New York: Irvington Publishers, Inc.). He developed an extensive
use of therapeutic metaphor and story as well as hypnosis and coined the term
Brief Therapy for his approach of addressing therapeutic changes in relatively
few sessions.

Erickson's use of interventions influenced the strategic therapy and family
systems therapy practitioners beginning in the 1950s among them, Virginia
Satir and Jay Haley. He was noted for his ability to "utilize" anything about
a patient to help them change, including their beliefs, favorite words,
cultural background, personal history, or even their neurotic habits.

Through conceptualizing the unconscious as highly separate from the conscious
mind, with its own awareness, interests, responses, and learnings, he taught
that the unconscious mind was creative, solution-generating, and often
positive.

He was an important influence on Neuro-linguistic Programming (NLP), which was
in part based upon his working methods [2].

## [edit] Personal History

NLP  
TOPICS  
History  
NLP and science  
Positive/Negative  
METHODS  
Meta model  
Milton model  
Metaphor  
Reframing  
Rep. systems  
Meta-programs  
Submodalities  
  
USES  
Therapy  
  
DEVELOPERS  
Richard Bandler  
John Grinder  
Robert Dilts  
Judith DeLozier  
Stephen Gilligan  
  
INFLUENCES  
Fritz Perls  
Milton H. Erickson  
Virginia Satir  
Syntax  
Gregory Bateson  
Alfred Korzybski  
Noam Chomsky  
  
LISTS  
Topics  
Bibliography  
Studies

view Â· talk  
Erickson frequently drew upon his own experiences to provide examples of the
power of the unconscious mind. He was largely self-taught and a great many of
his anecdotal and autobiographical teaching stories are collected by Sidney
Rosen in the book My Voice Will Go With You. Erickson identified many of even
his earliest personal experiences as hypnotic or autohypnotic.

Erickson grew up in Lowell, Wisconsin in a modest farming family, and intended
to become a farmer like his father. He was a late developer, and was both
dyslexic and color blind. He overcame his dyslexia, and had many other
inspirations via a series of spontaneous autohypnotic "flashes of light" or
"creative moments", as described in the paper Autohypnotic Experiences of
Milton H. Erickson[3]

At age 17, he contracted polio, and was so severely paralysed that the doctors
believed he would die. On the critical night where he was at his worst, he had
another formative "autohypnotic experience".

> E: As I lay in bed that night, I overheard the three doctors tell my parents
in the other room that their boy would be dead in the morning. I felt intense
anger that anyone should tell a mother her boy would be dead by morning. My
mother then came in with as serene a face as can be. I asked her to arrange
the dresser, push it up against the side of the bed at an angle. She did not
understand why, she thought I was delirious. My speech was difficult. But at
that angle by virtue of the mirror on the dresser I could see through the
doorway, through the west window of the other room. I was damned if I would
die without seeing one more sunset. If I had any skill in drawing, I could
still sketch that sunset.  
>  R: Your anger and wanting to see another sunset was a way you kept yourself
alive through that critical day in spite of the doctors' predictions. But why
do you call that an autohypnotic experience?  
>  E: I saw that vast sunset covering the whole sky. But I know there was also
a tree there outside the window, but I blocked it out.  
>  R: You blocked it out? It was that selective perception that enables you to
say you were in an altered state?  
>  E: Yes, I did not do it consciously. I saw all the sunset, but I didn't see
the fence and large boulder that were there. I blocked out everything except
the sunset. After I saw the sunset, I lost consciousness for three days. When
I finally awakened, I asked my father why they had taken out that fence, tree,
and boulder. I did not realize I had blotted them out when I fixed my
attention so intensely on the sunset. Then, as I recovered and became aware of
my lack of abilities, I wondered how I was going to earn a living. I had
already published a paper in a national agricultural journal. "Why Young Folks
Leave the Farm." I no longer had the strength to be a farmer, but maybe I
could make it as a doctor.[4]

Recovering, still almost entirely lame in bed, and unable to speak, he became
strongly aware of the significance of non-verbal communication - body
language, tone of voice and the way that these non-verbal expressions often
directly contradicted the verbal ones.

> I had polio, and I was totally paralyzed, and the inflammation was so great
that I had a sensory paralysis too. I could move my eyes and my hearing was
undisturbed. I got very lonesome lying in bed, unable to move anything except
my eyeballs. I was quarantined on the farm with seven sisters, one brother,
two parents, and a practical nurse. And how could I entertain myself? I
started watching people and my environment. I soon learned that my sisters
could say "no" when they meant "yes." And they could say "yes" and mean "no"
at the same time. They could offer another sister an apple and hold it back.
And I began studying nonverbal language and body language. I had a baby sister
who had begun to learn to creep. I would have to learn to stand up and walk.
And you can imagine the intensity with which I watched as my baby sister grew
from creeping to learning how to stand up.[5]

He began to recall "body memories" of the muscular activity of his own body.
By concentrating on these memories, he slowly began to regain control of parts
of his body to the point where he was eventually again able to talk and use
his arms. Still unable to walk, he decided to train his body further, by
embarking - alone - on a thousand mile canoe trip with only a few dollars.
After this grueling trip, he was able to walk with a cane. This experience may
have contributed to Erickson's technique of using "ordeals" in a therapeutic
context. (See below).

Erickson was an avid medical student, and was so curious about and engaged
with psychiatry that he got a psychology degree while he was still studying
medicine.

Much later, in his fifties he developed post-polio syndrome, characterized by
pain and muscle weakness caused by the chronic over-use of partially paralyzed
muscles. The condition left him even more severely paralysed, but having been
through the experience once before, he now had a strategy for recovering some
use of his muscles, which he employed again. After this second recovery, he
was obliged to use a wheelchair, and suffered chronic pain, which he
controlled with self-hypnosis:

> It usually takes me an hour after I awaken to get all the pain out. It used
to be easier when I was younger. I have more muscle and joint difficulties
now... Recently the only way I could get control over the pain was by sitting
in bed, pulling a chair close, and pressing my larynx against the back of the
chair. That was very uncomfortable: But it was discomfort I was deliberately
creating.

In the early 1950s, anthropologist/cyberneticist Gregory Bateson involved
Erickson as a consultant as part of his extensive research on communication.
The two had met earlier, after Bateson and Margaret Mead had called upon him
to analyse the films Mead had made of trance states in Bali. Through Bateson,
Erickson met Jay Haley, Richard Bandler and John Grinder, amongst others, and
had a profound influence on them all. They went on to write several books
about him.

In 1973, Jay Haley published Uncommon Therapy, which for the first time
brought Erickson and his approaches to the attention of those outside the
clinical hypnosis community. His fame and reputation spread rapidly, and so
many people wished to meet him that he began holding teaching seminars, which
continued until his death.

Milton H. Erickson died in March 1980, aged 78, leaving four sons, four
daughters, and a lasting legacy to the worlds of psychology, psychiatry,
psychotherapy, pedagogics and communications.

## [edit] Trance and The Unconscious Mind

Erickson believed that the unconscious mind was always listening, and that,
whether or not the patient was in trance, suggestions could be made which
would have a hypnotic influence, as long as those suggestions found some
resonance at the unconscious level. The patient can be aware of this, or can
be completely oblivious that something is happening. Erickson would see if the
patient would respond to one or another kind of indirect suggestion, and allow
the unconscious mind to actively participate in the therapeutic process. In
this way, what seemed like a normal conversation might induce a hypnotic
trance, or a therapeutic change in the subject. It should be noted that
"[Erickson's] conception of the unconscious is definitely not the one held by
Freud."[6]

Erickson was an irrepressible practical joker, and it was not uncommon for him
to slip indirect suggestions into all kinds of situations, including in his
own books, papers, lectures and seminars.

Erickson also believed that it was even appropriate for the therapist to go
into trance.

> I go into trances so that I will be more sensitive to the intonations and
inflections of my patients' speech. And to enable me to hear better, see
better.

Erickson maintained that trance is a common, everyday occurrence. For example,
when waiting for buses and trains, reading or listening, or even being
involved in strenuous physical exercise, it's quite normal to become immersed
in the activity and go into a trance state, removed from any other irrelevant
stimuli. These states are so common and familiar that most people do not
consciously recognise them as hypnotic phenomena.

> The same situation is in evidence in everyday life, however, whenever
attention is fixated with a question or an experience of the amazing, the
unusual, or anything that holds a person's interest. At such moments people
experience the common everyday trance; they tend to gaze off to the right or
left, depending upon which cerebral hemisphere is most dominant (Baleen, 1969)
and get that faraway or blank look. Their eyes may actually close, their
bodies tend to become immobile (a form of catalepsy), certain reflexes (e.g.,
swallowing, respiration, etc.) may be suppressed, and they seem momentarily
oblivious to their surroundings until they have completed their inner search
on the unconscious level for the new idea, response, or frames of reference
that will restabilize their general reality orientation. We hypothesize that
in everyday life consciousness is in a continual state of flux between the
general reality orientation and the momentary microdynamics of trance...[7]

Because Erickson expected trance states to occur naturally and frequently, he
was prepared to exploit them therapeutically, even when the patient was not
present with him in the consulting room. He also discovered many techniques
for how to increase the likelihood that a trance state would occur. He
developed both verbal and non-verbal techniques, and pioneered the idea that
the common experiences of wonderment, engrossment and confusion are, in
reality, just kinds of trance. (These phenomena are of course central to many
spiritual and religious disciplines, and are regularly employed by
evangelists, cult leaders and holy men of all kinds).

Clearly there are a great many kinds of trance. Many people are familiar with
the idea of a "deep" trance, and earlier in his career Erickson was a pioneer
in researching the unique and remarkable phenomena that are associated with
that state, spending many hours at a time with individual test subjects,
deepening the trance.

That a trance may be "light" or "deep" suggest a one dimensional continuum of
trance depth, but Erickson would often work with multiple trances in the same
patient, for example suggesting that the hypnotised patient behave "as if
awake", blurring the line between the hypnotic and awake state.

Erickson believed there are multiple states that may be utilized. This
resonates with Charles Tart's idea (put forward in the book Waking Up) that
all states of consciousness are trances, and that what we call "normal" waking
consciousness is just a "consensus trance". NLP also makes central use of the
idea of changing state, without it explicitly being a hypnotic phenomenon.

## [edit] Indirect Techniques

Where classical hypnosis is authoritative and direct, and often encounters
resistance in the subject, Erickson's approach is permissive, accommodating
and indirect.[8] For example, where a classical hypnotist might say "You are
going into a trance", an Ericksonian hypnotist would be more likely to say
"you can comfortably learn how to go into a trance". In this way, he provides
an opportunity for the subject to accept the suggestions they are most
comfortable with, at their own pace, and with an awareness of the benefits.
The subject knows they are not being hustled, and takes full ownership of, and
participation in their transformation. Because the induction takes place
during the course of a normal conversation, Ericksonian hypnosis is often
known as Covert or Conversational Hypnosis.

Erickson maintained that it was not possible to consciously instruct the
unconscious mind, and that authoritarian suggestions were likely to be met
with resistance. The unconscious mind responds to openings, opportunities,
metaphors, symbols and contradictions. Effective hypnotic suggestion, then,
should be "artfully vague", leaving space for the subject to fill in the gaps
with their own unconscious understandings - even if they do not consciously
grasp what is happening. The skilled hypnotherapist constructs these gaps of
meaning in a way most suited to the individual subject - in a way which is
most likely to produce the desired change.

For example the authoritative "you will stop smoking" is likely to find less
leverage on the unconscious level than "you can become a non-smoker". The
first is a direct command, to be obeyed or ignored (and notice that it draws
attention to the act of smoking), the second is an opening, an invitation to
possible lasting change, without pressure, and which is less likely to raise
resistance.

Richard Bandler and John Grinder identified this kind of "artful vagueness" as
a central characteristic of their 'Milton Model', a systematic attempt to
codify Erickson's hypnotic language patterns.

## [edit] Confusion Technique

> In all my techniques, almost all, there is a confusion.[9]

A confused person has their conscious mind busy and occupied, and is very much
inclined to draw upon unconscious learnings to make sense of things. A
confused person is in a trance of their own making - and therefore goes
readily into that trance without resistance. Confusion might be created by
ambiguous words, complex or endless sentences, pattern interruption or a
myriad of other techniques to incite transderivational searches.

Scottish surgeon James Braid, who coined the term "hypnotism", claimed that
focused attention was essential for creating hypnotic trances; indeed, his
thesis was that hypnosis was in essence a state of extreme focus. But it can
be difficult for people racked by pain, angst or suspicion to focus on
anything at all. Thus other techniques for inducing trance become important,
or as Erickson explained:

> ... long and frequent use of the confusion technique has many times effected
exceedingly rapid hypnotic inductions under unfavourable conditions such as
acute pain of terminal malignant disease and in persons interested but
hostile, aggressive, and resistant...

## [edit] The Handshake Induction

Confusion is the basis of Erickson's famous hypnotic handshake. Many actions
are learned and operate as a single "chunk" of behavior: shaking hands and
tying shoelaces being two classic examples. If the behavior is diverted or
frozen midway, the person literally has no mental space for this - he is
stopped in the middle of unconsciously executing a behavior that hasn't got a
"middle". The mind responds by suspending itself in trance until either
something happens to give a new direction, or it "snaps out". A skilled
hypnotist can often use that momentary confusion and suspension of normal
processes to induce trance quickly and easily.

By interrupting the pattern of a "normal" handshake in some way, the hypnotist
causes the subject to wonder what is going on. If the handshake continues to
develop in a way which is out-of-keeping with expectations, a simple, non-
verbal trance is created, which may then be reinforced or utilized by the
hypnotist. All these responses happen naturally and automatically without
telling the subject to consciously focus on an idea.

The various descriptions of Erickson's hypnotic handshake, including his own
very detailed accounts, indicate that a certain amount of improvisation is
involved, and that watching and acting upon the subject's responses is key to
a successful outcome. The most important thing is that the "normal" handshake
is subverted in such a way to cause puzzlement, which may then be built upon.

    
  * Initiation: When I begin by shaking hands, I do so normally. The "hypnotic touch" then begins when I let loose. The letting loose becomes transformed from a firm grip into a gentle touch by the thumb, a lingering drawing away of the little finger, a faint brushing of the subject's hand with the middle finger - just enough vague sensation to attract the attention. As the subject gives attention to the touch of your thumb, you shift to a touch with your little finger. As your subject's attention follows that, you shift to a touch with your middle finger and then again to the thumb.
  * This arousal of attention is merely an arousal without constituting a stimulus for a response.
  * The subject's withdrawal from the handshake is arrested by this attention arousal, which establishes a waiting set, and expectancy.
  * Then almost, but not quite simultaneously (to ensure separate neural recognition), you touch the undersurface of the hand (wrist) so gently that it barely suggests an upward push. This is followed by a similar utterly slight downward touch, and then I sever contact so gently that the subject does not know exactly when - and the subject's hand is left going neither up nor down, but cataleptic.
  * Termination: If you don't want your subject to know what you are doing, you simply distract their attention, usually by some appropriate remark, and casually terminate. Sometimes they remark, "What did you say? I got absentminded there for a moment and wasn't paying attention to anything." This is slightly distressing to the subjects and indicative of the fact that their attention was so focused and fixated on the peculiar hand stimuli that they were momentarily entranced so they did not hear what was said.
  * Utilisation: Any utilisation leads to increasing trance depth. All utilisation should proceed as a continuation of extension of the initial procedure. Much can be done nonverbally; for example, if any subjects are just looking blankly at me, I may slowly shift my gaze downward, causing them to look at their hand, which I touch and say "look at this spot.". This intensifies the trance state. Then, whether the subjects are looking at you or at their hand or just staring blankly, you can use your left hand to touch their elevated right hand from above or the side - so long as you merely give the suggestion of downward movement. Occasionally a downward nudge or push is required. If a strong push or nudge is required, check for anaesthesia.[10]

Richard Bandler was a keen proponent of the handshake induction, and developed
his own variant, which is commonly taught in NLP workshops.

Any habitual pattern which is interrupted unexpectedly will cause sudden and
light trance. The handshake is a particularly good pattern to interrupt
because the formality of a handshake is a widely understood set of social
rules. Since everyone knows that it would be impolite to comment on the
quality of a handshake, regardless of how strange it may be, the subject is
obliged to embark on an inner search (known as a transderivational search, a
universal and compelling type of trance) to identify the meaning or purpose of
the subverted pattern.

## [edit] Resistance

Erickson recognised that many people were intimidated by hypnosis and the
therapeutic process, and took care to respect the special resistances of the
individual patient. In the therapeutic process he said that "you always give
the patient every opportunity to resist". Here are some more relevant quotes
pertaining to resistance:

    Whatever the behaviour offered by the subjects, it should be accepted and utilized to develop further responsive behaviour. Any attempt to "correct" or alter the subjects' behaviour, or to force them to do things they are not interested in, militates against trance induction and certainly deep trance experience.
If the patient can be led to accept one suggestion, they will more readily
accept others. With resistant patients, it becomes necessary to find a
suggestion that they can accept. Resistance is always important, and should
always be respected, so if the resistance itself is encouraged, the patient is
made to feel more comfortable, because they know that they are allowed to
respond however they wish.

    Many times, the apparently active resistance encountered in subjects is no more than an unconscious measure of testing the hypnotist's willingness to meet them halfway instead of trying to force them to act entirely in accord with his ideas.
Although the idea of working with resistance is essentially a hypnotic one, it
goes beyond hypnosis and trance. In a typical example, a girl that bit her
nails was told that she was cheating herself of really enjoying the nail
biting. He encouraged her to let some of her nails grow a little longer before
biting them, so that she really could derive the fullest pleasure from the
activity. She decided to grow all of her nails long enough that she might
really enjoy biting them, and then, after some days, she realised that she
didn't want to bite them anyway.

## [edit] Ericksonian Therapy

Erickson is most famous as a hypnotherapist, but his extensive research into
and experience with hypnosis led him to develop an effective therapeutic
technique. Many of these techniques are not explicitly hypnotic, but they are
extensions of hypnotic strategies and language patterns. Erickson recognised
that resistance to trance resembles resistance to change, and developed his
therapeutic approach with that awareness.

Jay Haley identified several strategies, which appeared repeatedly in
Erickson's therapeutic approach.

  * Encouraging Resistance - For Erickson, the classic therapeutic request to "tell me everything about..." was both aggressive and disrespectful, instead he would ask the resistant patient to withhold information and only to tell what they were really ready to reveal:

> I usually say, "There are a number of things that you don't want me to know
about, that you don't want to tell me. There are a lot of things about
yourself that you don't want to discuss, therefore let's discuss those that
you are willing to discuss." She has blanket permission to withhold anything
and everything. But she did come to discuss things. And therefore she starts
discussing this, discussing that. And it's always "Well, this is all right to
talk about." And before she's finished, she has mentioned everything. And each
new item - "Well, this really isn't so important that I have to withhold it. I
can use the withholding permission for more important matters." Simply a
hypnotic technique. To make them respond to the idea of withholding, and to
respond to the idea of communicating.[11]

Many people's reaction to a direction is to think "why should I?" or "You
can't make me", called a polarity response because it motivates the subject to
consider the polar opposite of the suggestion. The conscious mind recognizes
negation in speech ("Don't do X") however the unconscious mind pays more
attention to the "X" than the injunction "Don't do". Erickson used this as the
basis for suggestions that deliberately played on negation and tonally marked
the important wording, to provide that whatever the client did, it was
beneficial: "You don't have to go into a trance, so you can easily wonder
about what you notice no faster than you feel ready to become aware that your
hand is slowly rising....."

  * Providing a Worse Alternative (The 'Double Bind') - Example: "Do you want to go into a trance now, or later?" The 'double bind' is a way of overloading the subject with two options, the acceptance of either of which represents acceptance of a therapeutic suggestion.

> My first well-remembered intentional use of the double bind occurred in
early boyhood. One winter day, with the weather below zero, my father led a
calf out of the barn to the water trough. After the calf had satisfied its
thirst, they turned back to the barn, but at the doorway the calf stubbornly
braced its feet, and despite my father's desperate pulling on the halter, he
could not budge the animal. I was outside playing in the snow and, observing
the impasse, began laughing heartily. My father challenged me to pull the calf
into the barn. Recognizing the situation as one of unreasoning stubborn
resistance on the part of the calf, I decided to let the calf have full
opportunity to resist, since that was what it apparently wished to do.
Accordingly I presented the calf with a double bind by seizing it by the tail
and pulling it away from the barn, while my father continued to pull it
inward. The calf promptly chose to resist the weaker of the two forces and
dragged me into the barn.[12]

  * Communicating by Metaphor - This is explored extensively in Sydney Rosen's My Voice Will Go With You, but a beautiful example is given in the first chapter of David Gordon's book Phoenix:

> I was returning from high school one day and a runaway horse with a bridle
on sped past a group of us into a farmer's yard looking for a drink of water.
The horse was perspiring heavily. And the farmer didn't recognize it so we
cornered it. I hopped on the horse's back. Since it had a bridle on, I took
hold of the tick rein and said, "Giddy-up." Headed for the highway, I knew the
horse would turn in the right direction. I didn't know what the right
direction was. And the horse trotted and galloped along. Now and then he would
forget he was on the highway and start into a field. So I would pull on him a
bit and call his attention to the fact the highway was where he was supposed
to be. And finally, about four miles from where I had boarded him, he turned
into a farm yard and the farmer said, "So that's how that critter came back.
Where did you find him?" I said, "About four miles from here." "How did you
know you should come here?" I said, "I didn't know. The horse knew. All I did
was keep his attention on the road."

Compare Erickson's metaphorical strategies with the teaching tales of the
Sufis (those of for example the Nasreddin) and the Zen tradition of Koans,
each also designed to act on the unconscious mind.

  * Encouraging a Relapse - To bypass simple short-lived "obedience" which tends to lead to lapses in the absence of the therapist, Erickson would occasionally arrange for his patients to fail in their attempts to improve, for example by overreaching. Failure is part of life, and in that fragile time where the patient is learning to live, think and behave differently, a random failure can be catastrophic. Deliberately causing a relapse allowed Erickson to control the variables of that failure, and to cast it in a positive therapeutic light for the patient.

  * Encouraging a Response by Frustrating It - This paradoxical approach acts directly on the patient's own resistance to change. Obese patients are asked to gain weight, or in a family therapy session, a stubbornly silent family member is ignored until the frustration obliges them to blurt out some desperate truth. Once again, this approach has its roots in Erickson's hypnotic language patterns of the form "I don't want you to go into a trance yet".

Compare this with "Prescribing the Symptom" (below).

  * Utilizing Space and Position - Hypnosis and therapy are experienced subjectively by the patient, and any part of their total experience can be used to reinforce an idea. The physical position or even the posture of the patient can be a significant part of the subjective experience. Manipulating these factors can contribute to a therapeutic transformation.

> If I send someone out of the room - for example, the mother and child - I
carefully move father from his chair and put him into mother's chair. Or if I
send the child out, I might put mother in the child's chair, at least
temporarily. Sometimes I comment on this by saying, 'As you sit where your son
was sitting, you can think more clearly about him.' Or, 'If you sit where your
husband sat, maybe it will give you somewhat of his view about me'. Over a
series of interviews with an entire family, I shuffle them about, so that what
was originally mother's chair is now where father is sitting. The family
grouping remains, and yet that family grouping is being rearranged, which is
what you are after when changing a family."[13]

This may be directly compared with Fritz Perls' use of an "empty chair" as a
context for imagined interactions (where the client was often invited to
occupy the chair and thus take on the role of the person imagined to be
sitting there); Bert Hellinger's approach, which requires the client to
arrange family members (played by volunteers) in a row or pattern which
matches the client's internal understanding, and then to reorganise the row;
and Virginia Satir's work with tableaux and posture.

  * Emphasizing the Positive - Erickson claimed that his sensory "disabilities" (dyslexia, colour blindness, being tone-deaf) helped him to focus on aspects of communication and behavior which most other people overlooked. This is a typical example of emphasizing the positive.

Erickson would often compliment the patient for a symptom, and would even
encourage it, in very specific ways. In one amusing example, a woman whose in-
laws caused her nauseous feelings in the gut every time they visited
unexpectedly was "taught" to puke spectacularly whenever the visits were
especially inconvenient. Naturally the in-laws would always sympathetically
help her clean up the vomit. Fairly soon, the annoying relatives started
calling in advance before turning up, to see if she were "well enough" to see
them.

The subject of dozens of songs, "emphasizing the positive" is a well known
self-help strategy, and can be compared with "positive reformulation" in
Gestalt Therapy.

  * Prescribing the Symptom and Amplifying a Deviation - Very typically, Erickson would instruct his patients to actively and consciously perform the symptom that was bothering them (see the nailbiting example under #Resistance), usually with some minor or trivial deviation from the original symptom. In many cases, the deviation could be amplified and used as a "wedge" to transform the whole behaviour.

> INTERVIEWER: Suppose someone called you and said there was a kid, nineteen
or twenty years old, who has been a very good boy, but all of a sudden this
week he started walking around the neighborhood carrying a large cross. The
neighbors are upset and the family's upset, and would you do something about
it. How would you think about that as a problem? Some kind of bizarre behavior
like that.  
>  ERICKSON: Well, if the kid came in to see me, the first thing I would do
would be to want to examine the cross. And I would want to improve it in a
very minor way. As soon as I got the slightest minor change in it, the way
would be open for a larger change. And pretty soon I could deal with the
advantages of a different cross - he ought to have at least two. He ought to
have at least three so he could make a choice each day of which one. It's
pretty hard to express a psychotic pattern of behavior over an ever-increasing
number of crosses.[14]

  * Seeding Ideas - Erickson would often ensure that the patients had been exposed to an idea, often in a metaphorical form (hidden from the conscious mind) in advance of utilizing it for a therapeutic purpose. He called this "seeding ideas", and it can be observed to occur at many levels both coarse and fine grained, in many of his case histories. In a simple example, the question "Have you ever been in a trance before?" seeds the idea that a trance is imminent - the presupposition inherent in the word before is "not now, but later".

  * Avoiding Self-Exploration - In common with most brief therapy practitioners, Erickson was entirely uninterested in analysing the patient's early psychological development. Occasionally in his case histories, he will briefly discuss the patient's background, but only as much as it pertains to the resources available to the patient in the present.

> INTERVIEWER: You don't feel that exploring the past is particularly
relevant? I'm always trying to get clear in my mind how much of the past I
need to consider when doing brief therapy.  
>  ERICKSON: You know, I had one patient this last July who had four or five
years of psychoanalysis and got nowhere with it. And someone who knows her
said, "How much attention did you give to the past?" I said, "You know, I
completely forgot about that." That patient is, I think, a reasonably cured
person. It was a severe washing compulsion, as much as twenty hours a day. I
didn't go in to the cause or the etiology; the only searching question I asked
was "When you get in the shower to scrub yourself for hours, tell me, do you
start at the top of your head, or the soles of your feet, or in the middle? Do
you wash from the neck down, or do you start with your feet and wash up? Or do
you start with your head and wash down?"  
>  INTERVIEWER: Why did you ask that?  
>  ERICKSON: So that she knew I was really interested.  
>  INTERVIEWER: So that you could join her in this?  
>  ERICKSON: No, so that she knew I was really interested.[15]

## [edit] Shocks and ordeals

Erickson is famous for pioneering indirect techniques, but his shock therapy
tends to get less attention, perhaps because it is uncomfortable for us to
hear such uncharacteristic stories about an inspirational and gentle healer.
Nonetheless, Erickson was prepared to use psychological shocks and ordeals in
order to achieve given results:

> When the old gentleman asked if he could be helped for his fear of riding in
an elevator, I told him I could probably scare the pants off him in another
direction. He told me that nothing could be worse than his fear of an
elevator.  
>  The elevators in that particular building were operated by young girls, and
I made special arrangements with one in advance. She agreed to cooperate and
thought it would be fun. I went with the gentleman to the elevator. He wasn't
afraid of walking into an elevator, but when it started to move it became an
unbearable experience. So I chose an unbusy time and I had him walk in and out
of the elevator, back in and out. Then at a point when we walked in, I told
the girl to close the door and said, "Let's go up."  
>  She went up one story and stopped in between floors. The gentleman started
to yell, "What's wrong!" I said, "The elevator operator wants to kiss you."
Shocked, the gentleman said, "But I'm a married man!" The girl said, "I don't
mind that." She walked toward him, and he stepped back and said, "You start
the elevator." So she started it. She went up to about the fourth floor and
stopped it again between floors. She said, "I just have a craving for a kiss."
He said, "You go about your business." He wanted that elevator moving, not
standing still. She replied, "Well, let's go down and start all over again,"
and she began to take the elevator down. He said, "Not down, up!" since he
didn't want to go through that all over again.  
>  She started up and then stopped the elevator between floors and said, "Do
you promise you'll ride down in my elevator with me when you're through work?"
He said, "I'll promise anything if you promise not to kiss me." He went up in
the elevator, relieved and without fear - of the elevator - and could ride one
from then on.[16]

## [edit] Influenced

One of his first students and developers of his work was Jay Haley. Other
important followers include Stephen Gilligan, Jeffrey K. Zeig, and Stephen R.
Lankton.

Erickson was modeled (see Milton model) by Richard Bandler and John Grinder,
the co-founders of Neuro-linguistic programming (NLP).

In the sphere of business coaching and training, he influenced the methods
that behaviour training companies, such as Krauthammer, Gustav KÃ¤ser Training
International or Dynargie used in communicating with coachees and training
participants.

## [edit] Books

Erickson was a prolific writer, often working in collaboration with others.
His chief collaborator was Ernest L. Rossi. His books include:

  * Hypnotic Realities ISBN 0-8290-0112-3 (With Ernest L. Rossi)
  * Hypnotherapy - An Exploratory Casebook ISBN 0-8290-0244-8 (With Ernest L. Rossi)
  * Experiencing Hypnosis ISBN 0-8290-0246-4 (With Ernest L. Rossi)
  * The Practical Application of Medical and Dental Hypnosis ISBN 0-87630-570-2 (with Seymour Hershman and Irving I. Secter) (out of print)
  * Time Distortion in Hypnosis ISBN 1-899836-95-0 (With Linn F. Cooper)

His clinical papers have been collected into a four volume work:

  * Collected Papers on Hypnosis: Volume 1 - Nature of Hypnosis and Suggestion ISBN 0-8290-1206-0 (Ernest L. Rossi, Editor)
  * Collected Papers on Hypnosis: Volume 2 - Sensory, Perceptual and Psychophysiological Processes ISBN 0-8290-1207-9 (Ernest L. Rossi, Editor)
  * Collected Papers on Hypnosis: Volume 3 - Hypnotic Investigation of Psychodynamic Processes ISBN 0-8290-1208-7 (Ernest L. Rossi, Editor)
  * Collected Papers on Hypnosis: Volume 4 - Innovative Hypnotherapy ISBN 0-8290-1209-5 (Ernest L. Rossi, Editor)

\- note, these four volumes are sometimes made available digitally under the
misleading (and erroneous) name 'Complete Works'.

Some books collecting transcriptions of his lectures and seminars:

  * My Voice Will Go With You - The Teaching Tales of Milton H. Erickson ISBN 0-393-30135-4 (Sidney Rosen, Editor)
  * Seminars, Workshops and Lectures of Milton H. Erickson Volume 1 - Healing in Hypnosis ISBN 1-85343-405-1 (Margaret O. Ryan & Florence Sharp, Editors)
  * Seminars, Workshops and Lectures of Milton H. Erickson Volume 2 - Life Reframing in Hypnosis ISBN 0-8290-1581-7 (Florence Sharp, Editor)
  * Seminars, Workshops and Lectures of Milton H. Erickson Volume 3 - Mind-Body Communication in Hypnosis ISBN 0-8290-1805-0 (Ernest L. Rossi, Editor)

Other Works which collect specific parts of Erickson's output

  * The Wisdom of Milton H Erickson: The Complete Volume ISBN 1-904424-17-1 (Ronald A.Havens, Editor)
  * An Uncommon Casebook: Complete Clinical Work of Milton H.Erickson, M.D. ISBN 0-393-70101-8 (William Hudson O'Hanlon & Angela L. Hexum)

Many books have been written about Erickson and his techniques, which
typically include extended citations from his papers, lectures and workshops,
including:

  * Patterns of the Hypnotic Techniques of Milton H.Erickson: Volume 1 ISBN 1-55552-052-9, John Grinder & Richard Bandler
  * Patterns of the Hypnotic Techniques of Milton H.Erickson: Volume 2 ISBN 1-55552-053-7, John Grinder, Richard Bandler & Judith DeLozier
  * Milton H.Erickson (Key Figures in Counselling & Psychotherapy Series) ISBN 0-8039-7575-9 (Jeffrey K. Zeig & W. Michael Munion)
  * Uncommon Therapy: Psychiatric Techniques of Milton H.Erickson, M.D. ISBN 0-393-31031-0 (Jay Haley)
  * The Answer Within: A Clinical Framework of Ericksonian Hypnotherapy ISBN 978-184590121-9 (Stephen Lankton & Carol Hicks Lankton)
  * Assembling Ericksonian Therapy ISBN 1-932462-10-4 (Stephen Lankton)
  * Phoenix: Therapeutic Patterns of Milton H.Erickson ISBN 0-916990-10-9 (David Gordon, Maribeth Meyers-Anderson)
  * Taproots: Underlying Principles of Milton Erickson's Therapy and Hypnosis ISBN 0-393-70031-3 (William Hudson O'Hanlon)
  * Enchantment and Intervention in Family Therapy: Using Metaphors in Family Therapy ISBN 978-184590083-9 (Stephen Lankton & Carol Hicks Lankton)

## [edit] See also

  * Neuro-linguistic programming
  * List of NLP topics
  * Hypnosis
  * Hypnotherapy
  * Transderivational search
  * Double bind
  * George Lakoff (one of America's foremost linguists, also (like Erickson) a strong believer in the significance of metaphor)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Gregg E. Gorton, M.D. (2005) "Milton Hyland Erickson, 1901â1980." American Journal of Psychiatry 162:1255
  2. ^ Gorton, Gregg E (2005). Milton Hyland Erickson The American Journal of Psychiatry. Washington. Vol.162, Iss. 7; pg. 1255, 1 pgs
  3. ^ "Autohypnotic Experiences of Milton H. Erickson'" (Milton H. Erickson and Ernest L. Rossi), The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, July. 1977 20, 36-54, reprinted in Collected Papers Volume 1.
  4. ^ Autohypnotic Experiences of Milton H. Erickson (Milton H. Erickson and Ernest L. Rossi), The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, July. 1977 20, 36-54, reprinted in Collected Papers Volume 1.
  5. ^ Rosen, S. My Voice Will Go With You
  6. ^ Andre M. Weitzenhoffer (1976) Introduction/forward in Hypnotic Realities Erickson & Rossi
  7. ^ Erickson & Rossi: Two-Level Communication and the Microdynamics of Trance and Suggestion, The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, 1976 Reprinted in Collected Papers Vol.1
  8. ^ Lankton & Lankton, The Answer Withing 1983/2008, Crown Publishers
  9. ^ Erickson & Rossi - Hypnotic Realities
  10. ^ Erickson & Rossi - Hypnotic Realities
  11. ^ Transcription of Interview with Erickson quoted in Uncommon Therapy by Jay Haley.
  12. ^ Varieties of Double Bind Erickson & Rossi, The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, January 1975.  
Reprinted in Collected Papers Volume 3.

  13. ^ Erickson quoted in Uncommon Therapy by Jay Haley.
  14. ^ Erickson quoted in Uncommon Therapy by Jay Haley.
  15. ^ Interview with Erickson transcribed in Uncommon Therapy by Jay Haley.
  16. ^ Erickson quoted in Uncommon Therapy by Jay Haley.

## [edit] External links

  * The Erickson Foundation is part of an international organization that carries on his work and promotes the Erickson approach to therapy.
  * Study Of Ericksonian Hypnosis Information, articles and transcripts of Ericksonian Hypnosis.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Psychology  
History Â· Portal Â· Psychologist  
Research

Affective Â· Biological Â· Clinical Â· Cognitive Â· Cognitive neuroscience Â·
Comparative Â· Developmental Â· Emotion Â· Evolutionary Â· Experimental Â·
Mathematical Â· Neuropsychology Â· Personality Â· Physiological Â· Positive Â·
Psycholinguistics Â· Psychopathology Â· Psychophysics Â· Psychophysiology Â·
Qualitative research Â· Quantitative research Â· Social Â· Theoretical

Psi  
Applied

Assessment Â· Clinical Â· Counseling Â· Educational Â· Forensic Â· Health Â·
Industrial/organizational Â· Legal Â· Media Â· Military Â· Occupational health
Â· Psychometrics Â· Relationship counseling Â· School Â· Sport Â· Systems  
Orientations

Analytical Â· Behaviorism Â· Cognitive behavioral therapy Â· Cognitivism Â·
Descriptive Â· Ecological Systems Theory Â· Existential therapy Â· Family
therapy Â· Feminist therapy Â· Gestalt psychology Â· Humanistic Â· Narrative
therapy Â· Psychoanalysis Â· Psychodynamic psychotherapy Â· Rational emotive
behavior therapy Â· Transpersonal  
Eminent  
psychologists

Gordon Allport Â· Albert Bandura Â· Raymond Cattell Â· Kenneth and Mamie Clark
Â· Erik Erikson Â· Hans Eysenck Â· Leon Festinger Â· Sigmund Freud Â· Donald
O. Hebb Â· Clark L. Hull Â· William James Â· Carl Jung Â· Jerome Kagan Â· Kurt
Lewin Â· Abraham Maslow Â· David McClelland Â· George A. Miller Â· Neal E.
Miller Â· Walter Mischel Â· Ivan Pavlov Â· Jean Piaget Â· Carl Rogers Â·
Stanley Schachter Â· B. F. Skinner Â· Edward Thorndike Â· John B. Watson  
Lists

Counseling topics Â· Important publications in psychology Â· Psychological
research methods Â· Psychological schools Â· Psychologists Â· Psychology
disciplines Â· Psychology organizations Â· Psychology topics Â·
Psychotherapies Â· Timeline of psychology  
Wiktionary definition Â· Wikisource Â· Wikimedia Commons Â· Wikiquote Â·
Wikinews Â· Wikibooks  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milton_H._Erickson"

Categories: 1901 births | 1980 deaths | Hypnosis | American psychiatrists |
American psychologists | American psychology writers | Family therapists |
Hypnotists | Neuro-Linguistic Programming predecessors | Swedish-Americans

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 March 2009, at 04:38.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



