
# Syncretism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the linguistic term, see syncretism (linguistics).

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2007)  
Syncretism consists of the attempt to reconcile disparate or contrary beliefs,
often while melding practices of various schools of thought. The term may
refer to attempts to merge and analogise several originally discrete
traditions, especially in the theology and mythology of religion, and thus
assert an underlying unity allowing for an inclusive approach to other faiths.

Syncretism also occurs commonly in literature, music, the representational
arts and other expressions of culture. (Compare the concept of eclecticism.)
Syncretism may occur in architecture as well. There also exist syncretic
politics, although in political classification the term has a somewhat
different meaning.

## Contents

  * 1 Nomenclature, orthography and etymology
  * 2 Social and political roles
  * 3 Religious syncretism
    * 3.1 Ancient Greece
    * 3.2 Judaism
    * 3.3 Roman world
    * 3.4 Christianity
      * 3.4.1 Syncretistic Controversy
    * 3.5 Islam
    * 3.6 Druze religion
    * 3.7 Barghawata
    * 3.8 Christianity
    * 3.9 BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith
    * 3.10 Caribbean religions and cultures
    * 3.11 Indian traditions
    * 3.12 Other modern syncretic religions
  * 4 Cultures and societies
    * 4.1 Enlightenment
    * 4.2 Modern syncretic social and cultural movements
  * 5 Fiction
  * 6 New media art
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References

  
## [edit] Nomenclature, orthography and etymology

The Oxford English Dictionary first attests the word syncretism in English in
1618. It derives from modern Latin syncretismus, drawing on Greek ÏÏ
Î³ÎºÏÎ·ÏÎ¹ÏÎ¼ÏÏ (synkretismos), meaning "Synchronization with Crete."

The Greek word occurs in Plutarch's (1st century AD) essay on "Fraternal Love"
in his Moralia (2.490b). He cites the example of the Cretans, who reconciled
their differences and came together in alliance when faced with external
dangers. "And that is their so-called Syncretism."

Erasmus probably coined the modern usage of the Latin word (in his Adagia
("Adages"), published in the winter of 1517â1518) to designate the coherence
of dissenters in spite of their differences in theological opinions. In a
letter to Melanchthon of April 22, 1519, Erasmus specifically adduced the
Cretans of Plutarch as an example of his adage "Concord is a mighty rampart".

## [edit] Social and political roles

Overt syncretism in folk belief may show cultural acceptance of an alien or
previous tradition, but the "other" cult may survive or infiltrate without
authorized syncresis nevertheless. For example, some Conversos developed a
sort of cult for martyr-victims of the Spanish Inquisition, thus incorporating
elements of Catholicism while resisting it.

Some religious movements have embraced overt syncretism, such as the case of
the adoption of ShintÅ elements into Buddhism as well as the adoption of
Germanic and Celtic pagan elements into Catholicism during Christianity's
spread into Gaul, the British Isles and Germany. Others have strongly rejected
it as devaluing precious and genuine distinctions; examples of this include
post-Exile Judaism and Islam.

Syncretism tends to facilitate coexistence and constructive interaction
between different cultures (intercultural competence), a factor that has
recommended it to rulers of multi-ethnic realms. Conversely the rejection of
syncretism, usually in the name of "piety" and "orthodoxy," may help to
generate, bolster or authorize a sense of cultural unity in a well-defined
minority or majority.

## [edit] Religious syncretism

Religious syncretism exhibits blending of two or more religious belief systems
into a new system, or the incorporation into a religious tradition of beliefs
from unrelated traditions. This can occur for many reasons, and the latter
scenario happens quite commonly in areas where multiple religious traditions
exist in proximity and function actively in the culture, or when a culture is
conquered, and the conquerors bring their religious beliefs with them, but do
not succeed in entirely eradicating the old beliefs or, especially, practices.

Religions may have syncretic elements to their beliefs or history, but
adherents of so-labeled systems often frown on applying the label, especially
adherents who belong to "revealed" religious systems, such as the Abrahamic
religions, or any system that exhibits an exclusivist approach. Such adherents
sometimes see syncretism as a betrayal of their pure truth. By this reasoning,
adding an incompatible belief corrupts the original religion, rendering it no
longer true. Indeed, critics of a specific syncretistic trend may sometimes
use the word "syncretism" as a disparaging epithet, as a charge implying that
those who seek to incorporate a new view, belief, or practice into a religious
system actually distort the original faith. Non-exclusivist systems of belief,
on the other hand, may feel quite free to incorporate other traditions into
their own.

In modern secular society, religious innovators sometimes create new religions
syncretically as a mechanism to reduce inter-religious tension and enmity,
often with the effect of offending the original religions in question. Such
religions, however, do maintain some appeal to a less exclusivist audience.
Discussions of some of these blended religions appear in the individual
sections below.

### [edit] Ancient Greece

Syncretism functioned as an essential feature of Ancient Greek religion.
Overall, Hellenistic culture in the age that followed Alexander the Great
itself showed syncretist features, essentially blending of Persian, Anatolian,
Egyptian (and eventually Etruscan-Roman) elements within an Hellenic formula.
The Egyptian god Amun developed as the Hellenized Zeus Ammon after Alexander
the Great went into the desert to seek out Amun's oracle at Siwa.

Such identifications derive from interpretatio graeca, the Hellenic habit of
identifying gods of disparate mythologies with their own. When the proto-
Greeks (peoples whose language would evolve into Greek proper) first arrived
in the Aegean and on the mainland of modern-day Greece early in the 2nd
millennium BCE, they found localized nymphs and divinities already connected
with every important feature of the landscape: mountain, cave, grove and
spring all had their own locally-venerated deity. The countless epithets of
the Olympian gods reflect their syncretic identification with these various
figures. One defines "Zeus Molossos" (worshipped only at Dodona) as "the god
identical to Zeus as worshipped by the Molossians at Dodona". Much of the
apparently arbitrary and trivial mythic fabling results from later
mythographers' attempts to explain these obscure epithets.

### [edit] Judaism

In Moses and Monotheism, Sigmund Freud made a case for Judaism arising out of
the pre-existing monotheism that was briefly imposed upon Egypt during the
rule of Akhenaten. Aten, the disk of the sun in ancient Egyptian mythology,
and originally an aspect of Ra, was chosen as the sole deity for Akhenaten's
new religion. The "Code of Hammurabi" is also cited as a likely starting point
for the Jewish Ten Commandments. Hammurabi was from the Mesopotamian culture
that revered Marduk, among others. Judaism fought lengthy battles against
syncretist tendencies: note the case of the golden calf and the railing of
prophets against temple prostitution, witchcraft and local fertility cults, as
told in the Tanakh. On the other hand, some scholars hold that Judaism refined
its concept of monotheism and adopted features such as its eschatology,
angelology and demonology through contacts with Zoroastrianism.[1][2][3]

In spite of the Jewish halakhic prohibitions on polytheism, idolatry, and
associated practices (avodah zarah), several combinations of Judaism with
other religions have sprung up: Jewish Buddhism, Nazarenism, Judeo-Paganism,
Messianic Judaism, Jewish Mormonism, Crypto-Judaism (in which Jews publicly
profess another faith and privately celebrate Judaism), and others. Until
relatively recently, China had a Jewish community which had adopted some
Confucian practices.[citation needed]

Several of the Jewish Messiah claimants (such as Jacob Frank) and the
Sabbateans came to mix Cabalistic Judaism with Christianity and Islam.

### [edit] Roman world

The Romans, identifying themselves as common heirs to a very similar
civilization, identified Greek deities with similar figures in the Etruscan-
Roman tradition, though without usually copying cult practices. (For details,
see Interpretatio graeca.) Syncretic gods of the Hellenistic period found also
wide favor in Rome: Serapis, Isis and Mithras, for example. Cybele as
worshipped in Rome essentially represented a syncretic East Mediterranean
goddess. The Romans imported the Greek god Dionysus into Rome, where he merged
with the Latin mead god Liber, and converted the Anatolian Sabazios into the
Roman Sabazius.

The degree of correspondence varied: Jupiter makes perhaps a better match for
Zeus than the rural huntress Diana does for the feared Artemis. Ares does not
quite match Mars. The Romans physically imported the Anatolian goddess Cybele
into Rome from her Anatolian cult-center Pessinos in the form of her original
aniconic archaic stone idol; they identified her as Magna Mater and gave her a
matronly, iconic image developed in Hellenistic Pergamum.

Likewise, when the Romans encountered Celts and Teutons, they mingled these
peoples' Northern gods with their own, creating Apollo Sucellos (Apollo the
Good Smiter) and Mars Thingsus (Mars of the war-assembly), among many others.
In the Germania, the Roman historian Tacitus speaks of Teutonic worshippers of
Hercules and Mercury; most modern scholars tentatively identify Hercules as
Thor and Mercury as Odin.

### [edit] Christianity

See also: Ecumenism and sobornost

Nascent Christianity appears to have emerged from many Jewish and pagan
cultural elements, at least partially, whilst discarding theologically or
morally incompatible elements. Note for example the strong connection between
the thought of St. Augustine and Neoplatonic thought; and St. Thomas Aquinas'
many citations of "The Philosopher" (Aristotle). Most scholars agree with this
syncretism in principle. Medieval scholasticism engaged in prolonged and
bitter debate over the place of pre-Christian classicism within the official
Church teachings. Open Theists (a subset of Protestant Evangelicals) assert
that Christianity by the 3rd and 4th centuries had incorporated Greek
Philosophy into its understanding of God.

Syncretism did not play a role when Christianity split into eastern and
western rites during the Great Schism. It became involved however with the
rifts of the Protestant Reformation, with Desiderius Erasmus's readings of
Plutarch. In 1615 David Pareus of Heidelberg urged Christians to a "pious
syncretism"[citation needed] in opposing the Antichrist, but few 17th-century
Protestants discussed the compromises that might affect a reconciliation with
the Catholic Church: Johann HÃ¼lsemann, Johann Georg Dorsche and Abraham
Calovius (1612â1685) opposed the Lutheran Georg Calisen "Calixtus"
(1586â1656) of the University of Helmstedt for his "syncretism". (See:
Syncretistic Strife.)

<IMG>

This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this section if you can. (November 2008)  
The modern celebrations of Christmas (as celebrated in the northern European
tradition, originating from pagan Yule holidays), Easter (as celebrated in the
eastern European tradition, with the incorporation of spring fertility rites)
and Halloween exemplify details of Christian/pagan syncretism. Earlier, the
elevation of Christmas as an important holiday largely grew out of a need to
replace the Saturnalia, a popular December festival of the Roman Empire.

Roman Catholicism in Central and South America has integrated a number of
elements derived from indigenous and slave cultures in those areas (see the
Caribbean and modern sections); while many African Initiated Churches
demonstrate an integration of Christian and traditional African beliefs. In
Asia the revolutionary movements of Taiping (19th-century China) and God's
Army (Karen in the 1990s) have blended Christianity and traditional beliefs.
Traditional Catholics nonetheless often argue against "cafeteria Catholicism",
or the act of "picking and choosing" what one wants to believe or practice.

One can contrast Christian syncretism with contextualization or inculturation,
the practice of making Christianity relevant to a culture.

#### [edit] Syncretistic Controversy

The "Syncretistic Controversy" was the theological debate provoked by the
efforts of Georg Calixt and his supporters to secure a basis on which the
Lutherans could make overtures to the Roman Catholic and the Reformed
Churches. It lasted from 1640 to 1686. Calixt, a professor at Helmstedt, had
through his travels in England, the Netherlands, Italy, and France, through
his acquaintance with the different Churches and their representatives, and
through his extensive study, developed a more friendly attitude towards the
different religious bodies than the majority of his contemporary Lutheran
theologians. While the latter firmly adhered to the "pure doctrine," Calixt
tended not to regard doctrine as the one thing necessary for a Christian,
while in doctrine itself he did not regard everything as equally certain and
important. Consequently, he advocated unity between those who agreed on the
fundamental minimum, with liberty as to all less fundamental points. In regard
to Catholicism, he would have (as Melanchthon once would have) conceded to the
pope a primacy human in origin, and he also admitted that one might call the
Mass a sacrifice.

On the side of Calixt stood the theological faculties of Helmstedt, Rinteln,
and KÃ¶nigsberg; opposed to him stood those of Leipzig, Jena, Strasburg,
Giessen, Marburg, and Greifswald. Abraham Calov in especial opposed Calixt.
The Elector of Saxony, for political reasons, opposed the Reformed Church,
because the other two secular electors (Palatine and Brandenburg) were
"reformed," and were getting more and more the advantage of him. In 1649 he
sent to the three dukes of Brunswick, who maintained Helmstedt as their common
university, a communication in which he voiced all the objections of his
Lutheran professors, and complained that Calixt wished to extract the elements
of truth from all religions, fuse all into an entirely new religion, and so
provoke a violent schism. In 1650 Calov became a professor at Wittenberg, and
he signalized his entrance into office with a vehement attack on the
Syncretists in Helmstedt. An outburst of polemical writings followed. In 1650
the dukes of Brunswick answered the Elector of Saxony that the discord should
not be allowed to increase, and proposed a meeting of the political
councillors. Saxony, however, did not favour this suggestion. An attempt to
convene a meeting of theologians was not more successful. The theologians of
Wittenberg and Leipzig now elaborated a new formula, condemning ninety-eight
heresies of the Helmstedt theologians. This formula (consensus) was to be
signed by everyone who wished to remain in the Lutheran Church. Outside
Wittenberg and Leipzig, however, it was not accepted, and Calixt's death in
1656 ushered in five years of almost undisturbed peace.

The strife broke out afresh in Hesse-Kassel, where Landgrave William VI sought
to effect a union between his Lutheran and Reformed subjects, or at least to
lessen their mutual hatred. In 1661 he had a colloquy held in Kassel between
the Lutheran theologians of the University of Rinteln and the Reformed
theologians of the University of Marburg. Enraged at this revival of the
syncretism of Calixt, the Wittenberg theologians in vehement terms called on
the Rinteln professors to make their submission, whereupon the latter answered
with a detailed defence. Another long series of polemical treatises followed.

In Brandenburg-Prussia the Great Elector (Frederick William I) forbade (1663)
preachers to speak of the disputes between the Evangelical bodies. A long
colloquy in Berlin (September 1662 to May 1663) led only to fresh discord. The
Elector, however, was growing impatient with a lack of success at his
conferences. He put an end to them in 1664 and published another
"syncretistic" edict. Since the edict disallowed the Formula of Concord, one
of the Lutheran Confessions as contained in the Book of Concord, many Lutheran
clergy could not bring themselves to comply with the edict. Whoever refused to
sign the form declaring his intention to observe this regulation was deprived
of his position, including Paul Gerhardt, a pastor and noted hymnwriter. The
citizens of Berlin petitioned to have him restored, and owing to their
repeated requests an exception to the edict was made for Gerhardt, although
his conscience did not allow him to retain a post which, appeared to him,
could only be held on condition of a tacit repudiation of the Formula of
Concord. For over a year he lived in Berlin without fixed employment. During
this time his wife also died, leaving him with only one surviving child.
Ironically, the edict was withdrawn a few months later, although by this time
his patroness, Electress Louisa Henrietta had died and so he was still without
a position.

The attempts of the Wittenberg theologians to declare Calixt and his school
un-Lutheran and heretical were now met by Calixt's son, Friedrich Ulrich
Calixt, The latter defended the theology of his father, but also tried to show
that his doctrine did not so very much differ from that of his opponents.
Wittenberg found its new champion in Ãgidius Strauch, who attacked Calixt
with all the resources of learning, polemics, sophistry, wit, cynicism, and
abuse. The Helmstedt side was defended by the celebrated scholar and
statesman, Hermann Conring. The Saxon princes now recognized the danger that
the attempt to carry through the "Consensus" as a formula of belief might lead
to a fresh schism in the Lutheran Church, and might thus render its position
difficult in the face of the Catholics. The proposals of Calov and his party
to continue the refutation and to compel the Brunswick theologians to bind
themselves under obligation to the old Lutheran confession therefore remained
unimplemented. On the contrary, the Saxon theologians were forbidden to
continue the strife in writing. Negotiations for peace then resulted, with
Duke Ernst the Pious of Saxe-Gotha especially active towards this end, and the
project of establishing a permanent college of theologians to decide
theological disputes was entertained. However, the negotiations with the
courts of Brunswick, Mecklenburg, Denmark, and Sweden remained as fruitless as
those with the theological faculties, except that peace was maintained until
1675. Calov then renewed hostilities. He now attacked not only Calixt, but
also and particularly the moderate John MusÃ¦us of Jena. Calov succeeded in
having the whole University of Jena (and after a long resistance MusÃ¦us
himself) compelled to renounce syncretism. But this was his last victory. The
elector renewed his prohibition against polemical writings. Calov seemed to
give way, since in 1683 he asked whether, in the view of the danger which
France then constituted for Germany, a Calixtinic Syncretism with "Papists"
and the Reformed were still condemnable, and whether in deference to the
Elector of Brandenburg and the dukes of Brunswick, the strife should not be
buried by an amnesty, or whether, on the contrary, the war against syncretism
should be continued. He later returned to his attack on the syncretists, but
died in 1686, and with his death the strife ended.

The Syncretist Strife had the result of lessening religious hatred and of
promoting mutual forbearance. Catholicism thus benefited, as Protestants came
to better understand and appreciate it. In Protestant theology it prepared the
way for the sentimental theology of Pietism to become more popular than
orthodoxy.

This article incorporates text from the public-domain Catholic Encyclopedia of
1913.

### [edit] Islam

Some scholars[who?] regard Islam as incorporating syncretically from other
religions, particularly Judaism, Christianity, and Zoroastrianism. Muslims do
not regard this as syncretism, as they see Islam as a completion of divine
revelations from Jewish and Christian prophets. It is a fundamental tenet of
Islamic faith to believe in the consistency of message in the revelations from
one God through many messengers to their people (Quran 2:285) and claims to be
the revitalization of the original pure teaching of Allah. In traditional
Islamic belief, the revelations in the Bible and Torah, over time, eventually
became corrupted because of the lack of written manuscripts, serial
translations from one language to another, or simply forgotten.[citation
needed]

### [edit] Druze religion

The Druzes integrated elements of Ismaili Islam with Gnosticism and Platonism.
Their practice of disguising themselves as followers of the dominant religion
around them makes it difficult to distinguish belief from simulated belief.

### [edit] Barghawata

The Barghawata kingdom followed a syncretic religion inspired by Islam
(perhaps influenced by Judaism)with elements of Sunni, Shi'ite and Kharijite
Islam, mixed with astrological and heathen traditions. Supposedly, they had
their own Qur'an in the Berber language comprising 80 suras under the
leadership of the second ruler of the dynasty Salih ibn Tarif who had taken
part in the Maysara uprising. He proclaimed himself a prophet. He also claimed
to be the final Mahdi, and that Isa (Jesus) would be his companion and pray
behind him.

### [edit] Christianity

The Christian origination from the teaching of a Jewish-born and raised
individual, Jesus of Nazareth, may be considered a form of syncretism.
Christianity, like all major world religions, has adopted doctrinal stances,
practices and observances which are derived from other, sometimes earlier
religious traditions. The Greek Dionysys, for example, was considered a twice-
born god, and many Greek heroes such as Hercules were said to have been born
from the supreme god (in this case Zeus) and a human woman.

### [edit] BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith

The BahÃ¡'Ã­s follow BahÃ¡'u'llÃ¡h, a prophet whom they consider a successor
to Muhammad, Jesus, Moses, Buddha, Zoroaster and others. This acceptance of
other religious founders has encouraged some to regard the BahÃ¡'Ã­ religion
as a syncretic faith. However, BahÃ¡'Ã­s and the BahÃ¡'Ã­ writings explicitly
reject this view. BahÃ¡'Ã­s consider BahÃ¡'u'llÃ¡h's revelation an
independent, though related, revelation from God. Its relationship to previous
dispensations is seen as analogous to the relationship of Christianity to
Judaism. They regard beliefs held in common as evidence of truth,
progressively revealed by God throughout human history, and culminating in (at
present) the BahÃ¡'Ã­ revelation. BahÃ¡'Ã­s have their own sacred scripture,
interpretations, laws and practices that, for BahÃ¡'Ã­s, supersede those of
other faiths. [4]

### [edit] Caribbean religions and cultures

The process of syncretism in the Caribbean region often forms a part of
cultural creolization. (The technical term "Creole" may apply to anyone
(regardless of race or ethnicity) born and raised in the region.) The shared
histories of the Caribbean islands include long periods of European
Imperialism (mainly by Spain, France, and the United Kingdom) and the
importation of African slaves (primarily from Central and Western Africa). The
influences of each of the above interacted in varying degrees on the islands,
producing the fabric of society that exists today in the Caribbean.

The Rastafari movement, founded in Jamaica, syncretizes vigorously, mixing
elements from the Bible, Marcus Garvey's Pan Africanism movement, Hinduism,
and Caribbean culture.

Another highly syncretic religion of the area, vodou, combines elements of
Western African, native Caribbean, and Christian (especially Roman Catholic)
beliefs.

See the modern section for other Caribbean syncretisms.

### [edit] Indian traditions

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008)  
Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism in ancient India have made many adaptations
over the millennia, assimilating elements of various diverse religious
traditions.[citation needed]

The Mughal emperor Akbar, who wanted to consolidate the diverse religious
communities in his empire, propounded Din-i-Ilahi, a syncretic religion
intended to merge the best elements of the religions of his empire.

Sikhism blends many elements of Hinduism and Islam.

The Hindu teaching of Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar as embodied in the socio-spiritual
organization Ananda Marga brings together the disparate branches of yoga for
inner development, an ancient theory of social motivity and change, a theory
of human and non-human welfare and intuitive insights into science with the
aim to increase welfare on the planet.

### [edit] Other modern syncretic religions

Recently-developed religious systems that exhibit marked syncretism include
the New World religions CandomblÃ©, Vodou, and SanterÃ­a, which analogize
various YorÃ¹bÃ¡ and other African gods to the Roman Catholic saints. However,
the Catholic Church condemns such syncretism. Some sects of CandomblÃ© have
incorporated also Native American gods, and Umbanda combined African deities
with Kardecist spiritualism.

Unitarian Universalism also provides an example of a modern syncretic
religion. It traces its roots to Universalist and Unitarian Christian
congregations. However, modern Unitarian Universalism freely incorporates
elements from other religious and non-religious traditions, so that it no
longer identifies itself as "Christian."

Universal Sufism seeks the unity of all people and religions, as well as the
ability to find beauty in all things. Universal Sufis strive to "realize and
spread the knowledge of Unity, the religion of Love, and Wisdom, so that the
biases and prejudices of faiths and beliefs may, of themselves, fall away, the
human heart overflow with love, and all hatred caused by distinctions and
differences be rooted out."[5]

In Vietnam, Caodaism blends elements of Buddhism, Catholicism and Kardecism.
Japanese syncretists founded several new Japanese religions (such as Konkokyo
and Seicho-No-Ie) from the latter half of the 19th century onwards.

The Nigerian religion Chrislam combines Christian and Islamic doctrines.

Thelema is a mixture of many different schools of belief and practice,
including Hermeticism, Eastern Mysticism, Yoga, 19th century libertarian
philosophies (e.g. Nietzsche), occultism, and the Kaballah, as well as ancient
Egyptian and Greek religion.

Examples of strongly syncretist Romantic and modern movements with some
religious elements include mysticism, occultism, theosophy, modern astrology,
Neopaganism, and the New Age movement.

## [edit] Cultures and societies

Main article: Moral syncretism

### [edit] Enlightenment

The modern, rational non-pejorative connotations of syncretism date from Denis
Diderot's EncyclopÃ©die articles: Eclecticisme and SyncrÃ©tistes, HÃ©notiques,
ou Conciliateurs. Diderot portrayed syncretism as the concordance of eclectic
sources.

### [edit] Modern syncretic social and cultural movements

Other forms of syncretism not directly related to religion appear in the
modern world as well: thus one can sometimes speak of cultural and/or social
syncretism. Japanese culture after World War II and the moderate tendencies
within Neo-Tribalism may serve as examples. The eclectic aspects of
postmodernism represent an important contemporary example of cultural
syncretism observable in much of the Western world. The socio-spiritual
movement Ananda Marga, which originated in India in 1955, stems from a
syncretic approach to the different strands of yoga, as propounded by its
founder P.R. Sarkar. It has as its stated purpose "to help individuals achieve
complete self-realization and to build a social structure in which the
physical, mental and spiritual needs of all people can be fulfilled."

## [edit] Fiction

  * Orange Catholic Bible
  * Zensunni
  * Zensufi
  * Life of Pi

## [edit] New media art

  * Roy Ascott
  * The Syncretic Imperative
  * Syncretic Reality: art, process, and potentiality

## [edit] See also

  * Syncretism (linguistics)
  * Hermeneutics

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Boyce, Mary (1987). Zoroastrianism: A Shadowy but Powerful Presence in the Judaeo-Christian World. London: William's Trust.
  2. ^ Black, Matthew and Rowley, H. H. (eds.) (1982). Peake's Commentary on the Bible. New York: Nelson. ISBN 0-415-05147-9.
  3. ^ Duchesne-Guillemin, Jacques (1988). "Zoroastrianism". Encyclopedia Americana. 29. Danbury: Grolier. pp. 813-815.
  4. ^ Smith, P. (1999). A Concise Encyclopedia of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith. Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publications. pp. 276â277 & p.291. ISBN 1851681841.
  5. ^ The 3 Objects of the Sufi Movement, Hazrat Pir-o-Murshid Inayat Khan, Sufi Ruhaniat International (1956â2006).

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syncretism"

Categories: Religious pluralism | Religion

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2007 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
June 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Cleanup
from November 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles
incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia | Articles with
specifically-marked weasel-worded phrases since December 2008 | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2008 | Articles needing additional
references from July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 03:30.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



