
# Christian mysticism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Christian mysticism is traditionally practised through the disciplines of:

  * prayer (including oratio, meditation,contemplation, and, in some forms of esoteric Christianity, invocation of the Holy Spirit as a means of manifestation;);
  * fasting, broadly understood as self-denial in general; and
  * service to others, broadly called almsgiving.

In the tradition of Mystical Theology, Biblical texts are typically
interpreted metaphorically, for example in Jesus' "Sermon on the Mount"
(Matthew 5â7) the text, in its totality, is held to contain the way for
direct union with God. Also, in the contemplative and eremitic tradition of
the Carmelite "Book of the First Monks", 1 Kgs. 17:3-4 is the central Biblical
text around which the work is written.

Whereas Christian doctrine generally maintains that God dwells in all
Christians and that they can experience God directly through belief in
Jesus,[1] Christian mysticism aspires to apprehend spiritual truths
inaccessible through intellectual means, typically by learning how to think
like Christ. William Inge divides this scala perfectionis into three stages:
the "purgative" or ascetic stage, the "illuminative" or contemplative stage,
and the "unitive" stage, in which God may be beheld "face to face."[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Biblical foundations
  * 2 Practice
  * 3 Christian mystics
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes and references
  * 6 Bibliography
    * 6.1 Classics
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Biblical foundations

The tradition of Christian Mysticism is as old as Christianity itself. At
least three texts from the New Testament set up themes that recur throughout
the recorded thought of the Christian mystics. The first, Galatians 2:20, says
that:

> I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ
liveth in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith
of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. (KJV)

Another important scriptural text for Christian mysticism is 1 John 3:2:

> Beloved, now we are the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we
shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is.

The third such text, especially important for Eastern Christian mysticism, is
found in 2 Peter 1:4:

> ...[E]xceedingly great and precious promises [are given unto us]; that by
these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust. (emphasis added)

Two major themes of Christian mysticism are (1) a complete identification
with, or imitation of Christ, to achieve a unity of the human spirit with the
spirit of God; and (2) the perfect vision of God, in which the mystic seeks to
experience God "as he is," and no more "through a glass, darkly." (1
Corinthians 13:12)

Other mystical experiences are described in other passages. In 2 Corinthians
12:2â4, Paul sets forth an example of a possible out-of-body experience by
someone who was taken up to the "third heaven", and taught unutterable
mysteries:

> I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I
cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such an
one caught up to the third heaven. And I knew such a man, (whether in the
body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) how that he was caught
up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a
man to utter.

Perhaps a similar experience occurred at the Transfiguration of Jesus, an
incident confirmed in each of the Synoptic Gospels. Here Jesus led three of
his apostles, Peter, John, and James, to pray at the top of a mountain, where
he became transfigured. Jesus's face shone like the sun, and he was clad in
brilliant white clothes. Elijah and Moses appeared with Jesus, and talked with
him, and then a bright cloud appeared overhead, and a voice from the cloud
proclaimed, "This is my beloved Son: hear him."

## [edit] Practice

For Christians the major emphasis of mysticism concerns a spiritual
transformation of the egoic self, the following of a path designed to produce
more fully realized human persons, "created in the Image and Likeness of God"
and as such, living in harmonious communion with God, the Church, the rest of
humanity, and all creation, including oneself. For Christians, this human
potential is realized most perfectly in Jesus, precisely because he is both
God and human, and is manifested in others through their association with him,
whether conscious, as in the case of Christian mystics, or unconscious, with
regard to spiritual persons who follow other traditions, such as Gandhi. The
Eastern Christian tradition speaks of this transformation in terms of theosis
or divinization, perhaps best summed up by an ancient aphorism usually
attributed to Athanasius of Alexandria: "God became human so that man might
become God."

Going back at least to Evagrius Ponticus and Pseudo-Dionysius, Christian
mystics have pursued a threefold path in their pursuit of holiness. While the
three aspects have different names in the different Christian traditions, they
can be characterized as purgative, illuminative, and unitive, corresponding to
body, soul (or mind), and spirit. The first, the way of purification, is where
aspiring Christian mystics start. This aspect focuses on discipline,
particularly in terms of the human body; thus, it emphasizes prayer at certain
times, either alone or with others, and in certain postures, often standing or
kneeling. It also emphasizes the other disciplines of fasting and alms-giving,
the latter including those activities called "the works of mercy," both
spiritual and corporal, such as feeding the hungry and sheltering the
homeless.

Purification, which grounds Christian spirituality in general, is primarily
focused on efforts to, in the words of St. Paul, "put to death the deeds of
the flesh by the Holy Spirit" (Romans 8:13). The "deeds of the flesh" here
include not only external behavior, but also those habits, attitudes,
compulsions, addictions, etc. (sometimes called egoic passions) which oppose
themselves to true being and living as a Christian not only exteriorly, but
interiorly as well. Evelyn Underhill describes purification as an awareness of
one's own imperfections and finiteness, followed by self-discipline and
mortification. Because of its physical, disciplinary aspect, this phase, as
well as the entire Christian spiritual path, is often referred to as
"ascetic," a term which is derived from a Greek word which connotes athletic
training. Because of this, in ancient Christian literature, prominent mystics
are often called "spiritual athletes," an image which is also used several
times in the New Testament to describe the Christian life. What is sought here
is salvation in the original sense of the word, referring not only to one's
eternal fate, but also to healing in all areas of life, including the
restoration of spiritual, psychological, and physical health.

> It remains a paradox of the mystics that the passivity at which they appear
to aim is really a state of the most intense activity: more, that where it is
wholly absent no great creative action can take place. In it, the superficial
self compels itself to be still, in order that it may liberate another more
deep-seated power which is, in the ecstasy of the contemplative genius, raised
to the highest pitch of efficiency. Mysticism: A Study in Nature and
Development of Spiritual Consciousness by Evelyn Underhill (Public Domain)

The second phase, the path of illumination, has to do with the activity of the
Holy Spirit enlightening the mind, giving insights into truths not only
explicit in scripture and the rest of the Christian tradition, but also those
implicit in nature, not in the scientific sense, but rather in terms of an
illumination of the "depth" aspects of reality and natural happenings, such
that the working of God is perceived in all that one experiences. Underhill
describes it as marked by a consciousness of a transcendent order and a vision
of a new heaven and a new earth.

The third phase, usually called contemplation in the Western tradition, refers
to the experience of oneself as in some way united with God. The experience of
union varies, but it is first and foremost always associated with a reuniting
with Divine love, the underlying theme being that God, the perfect
goodness,[3] is known or experienced at least as much by the heart as by the
intellect since, in the words 1 John 4:16: "God is love, and he who abides in
love abides in God and God in him." Some approaches to classical mysticism
would consider the first two phases as preparatory to the third, explicitly
mystical experience, but others state that these three phases overlap and
intertwine.

Author and mystic Evelyn Underhill recognizes two additional phases to the
mystical path. First comes the awakening, the stage in which one begins to
have some consciousness of absolute or divine reality. Purgation and
illumination are followed by a fourth stage which Underhill, borrowing the
language of St. John of the Cross, calls the dark night of the soul. This
stage, experienced by the few, is one of final and complete purification and
is marked by confusion, helplessness, stagnation of the will, and a sense of
the withdrawal of God's presence. It is the period of final "unselfing" and
the surrender to the hidden purposes of the divine will. Her fifth and final
stage is union with the object of love, the one Reality, God. Here the self
has been permanently established on a transcendental level and liberated for a
new purpose.[4]

Another aspect of traditional Christian spirituality, or mysticism, has to do
with its communal basis. Even for hermits, the Christian life is always lived
in communion with the Church, the community of believers. Thus, participation
in corporate worship, especially the Eucharist, is an essential part of
Christian mysticism. Connected with this is the practice of having a spiritual
director, confessor, or "soul friend" with which to discuss one's spiritual
progress. This person, who may be clerical or lay, acts as a spiritual mentor.

## [edit] Christian mystics

Main article: List of Christian mystics

Some examples of Christian mystics:

  * St. Paul (? âc. 66)
  * St. John the Baptist
  * St. John the Apostle (? âc.100)
  * St. Peter
  * Valentinus (c.100âc.153)
  * St. Clement of Alexandria (? â216)
  * St. Athanasius (c293â373)
  * Evagrius Ponticus (345â399)
  * St. Augustine of Hippo (354â430)
  * Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (5th century)
  * St. John Climacus (525â606)
  * St. Gregory I (590â604)
  * St. Isaac the Syrian (c.700)
  * St. Anastasius Sinaita (?âpost 700)
  * St. Symeon the New Theologian (949â1022)
  * St. Anselm (1033â1109)
  * Hugh of Saint Victor (1096â1141)
  * Richard of St. Victor (?â1173)
  * Hildegard of Bingen (1098â1179)
  * St. Francis of Assisi (1181â1226)
  * St. Clare of Assisi (1194â1253)
  * St. Anthony of Padua (1195â1231)
  * Beatrice of Nazareth (1200â1268)
  * Mechthild of Magdeburg (1210â1279)
  * St. Bonaventure of Bagnoregio (1221â1274)
  * Angela of Foligno (1248â1309)
  * Gertrude the Great (1256â1301)
  * Marguerite Porete (?â1310)
  * Meister Eckhart (c. 1260â1327/8)
  * John of Ruysbroeck (1293â1381)
  * St. Gregory Palamas (1296â1359)
  * Johannes Tauler (1300â1361)
  * Henry Suso (1300â1366)
  * St. Bridget of Sweden (1302â1373)
  * St. Julian of Norwich (1342âc.1416)
  * St. Catherine of Sienna (1347â1380)
  * William Langland (?â1385/6)
  * Margery Kempe (c.1373â1438)
  * Thomas Ã Kempis (1380â1471)
  * St. Ignatius of Loyola (1491â1556)
  * St. Teresa of Avila (1515â1582)
  * St. John of the Cross (1542â1591)
  * St. Francis de Sales (1567â1622)
  * Jakob BÃ¶hme (1575â1624)
  * Maria de Agreda (1602â1665)
  * Sir Thomas Browne (1605â1682)
  * Brother Lawrence (1614â1691)

  * Blaise Pascal (1623â1662)
  * Angelus Silesius (1624â1677)
  * George Fox (1624â1691)
  * Jane Leade (1624â1704)
  * Miguel de Molinos (c. 1628â1697)
  * Sarah Wight (1632â?)
  * Madame Guyon (1648â1717)
  * Johannes Kelpius (1667â1708)
  * Emanuel Swedenborg (1688â1772)
  * John Woolman (1720â1772)
  * William Blake (1757â1827)
  * George Rapp (1757â1847)
  * St. Seraphim of Sarov (1759â1833)
  * Anne Catherine Emmerich (1774â1824)
  * Jakob Lorber (1800â1864)
  * Phineas Parkhurst Quimby (1802â1866)
  * St. John of Kronstadt (1829â1908)
  * St. Bernadette Soubirous (1844â1879)
  * Max Heindel (1865â1919)
  * Sergei Bulgakov (1871â1944)
  * St. Therese of Lisieux (1873â1897)
  * Evelyn Underhill (1875â1941)
  * Pope Pius XII (1876â1958)
  * Antonin Gadal (1877â1962)
  * Gemma Galgani (1878â1903)
  * Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1881â1955)
  * St. Pio of Pietrelcina (1887â1968)
  * T. S. Eliot (1888â1965)
  * Sadhu Sundar Singh (1889â1929)
  * St. Theresa-Benedicta of the Cross (Edith Stein) (1891â1942)
  * St. John Maximovitch (1896â1966)
  * Jan van Rijckenborgh (1896â1968)
  * Maria Valtorta (1897â1961)
  * Aiden Wilson Tozer (1897â1963)
  * Adrienne von Speyr (1902â1967)
  * Catharose de Petri (1902â1990)
  * St. Faustina Kowalska (1905â1938)
  * Dag HammarskjÃ¶ld (1905â1961)
  * Eugenia Ravasio (1907â1990)
  * Simone Weil (1909â1943)
  * Thomas Merton (1915â1968)
  * Vernon Howard (1918â1992)
  * Thomas Keating (b. 1923)
  * Henri Nouwen (1932â1996)
  * Vassula Ryden (b. 1942)
  * Guy Finley (b. 1949)
  * Erwin McManus (b. 1958)
  * Amanda Loraine Corbett (b. 1984)
  * Richard Foster

  
## [edit] See also

<IMG> Christianity portal  
<IMG> Spirituality portal  
  * Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ
  * Behmenism
  * Catharism, Cathar Perfect
  * Christian Kabbalah
  * Christian meditation
  * Christian Mysticism in Ancient Africa
  * Christian mythology
  * Church of Christian Mysticism
  * Esoteric Christianity
  * Flying Saints
  * German mysticism
  * Gnosticism
  * Harmony Society
  * Hesychasm
  * Jesus Prayer
  * Love of God
  * Mystical marriage
  * Mystical theology
  * Mysticism
  * Pietism
  * Prayer in Christianity
  * Quietism (Christian philosophy)
  * Radical Pietism
  * Rosicrucianism, Rosicrucian Manifestos, Lectorium Rosicrucianum
  * Sister Catherine Treatise
  * Sophia (wisdom)
  * Spanish mystics
  * Starets
  * The Order of Christ Sophia

## [edit] Notes and references

  1. ^ John 7:16â39
  2. ^ Christian Mysticism (1899 Bampton Lectures)
  3. ^ Theologia Germanica, public domain
  4. ^ Greene, Dana, "Adhering to God: The Message of Evelyn Underhill for Our Times", Spirituality Today, Spring 1987, Vol. 39, pp. 22â38

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Anderson, Robert A. : Church of God? or the Temples of Satan (A Reference Book of Mysticism & Gnosis), TGS Publishers, 2006, ISBN 0-9786249-6-3
  * Bernard McGinn: The Foundations of Mysticism: Origins to the Fifth Century, 1991, reprint 1994, ISBN 0-8245-1404-1
  * Bernard McGinn: The Growth of Mysticism: Gregory the Great through the 12th Century, 1994, paperback ed. 1996, ISBN 0-8245-1628-1
  * Evelyn Underhill: Mysticism: A Study in Nature and Development of Spiritual Consciousness, 1911, reprint 1999, ISBN 1-85168-196-5 online edition
  * Tito Colliander: Way of the Ascetics, 1981, ISBN 0-06-061526-5
  * Thomas E. Powers: Invitation to a Great Experiment: Exploring the Possibility that God can be Known, 1979, ISBN 0-385-14187-4
  * Richard Foster: Celebration of Discipline: The Path to Spiritual Growth, 1978, ISBN 0-06-062831-6

### [edit] Classics

  * St. John of the Cross: Ascent of Mount Carmel, Dark Night of the Soul
  * St. Teresa of Avila: Interior Castle, The Way of Perfection, Autobiography
  * St. Bonaventure: The Soul's Journey into God, The Tree of Life
  * Meister Eckhart: German and Latin sermons
  * Jan van Ruysbroeck: The Adornment of Spiritual Marriage
  * Anon.: Cloud of Unknowing
  * Anon.: Theologia Germanica
  * St.Ignatius of Loyola: Spiritual Exercises
  * William Law: Works
  * George Fox: The Journal
  * Heinrich Suso: The Book of Eternal Wisdom
  * Thomas Ã Kempis: On the Imitation of Christ
  * Jakob Lorber: The Great Gospel of John
  * Pseudo-Dionysius: Divine Names, Celestial Hierarchy, Mystical Theology
  * Philokalia
  * Anon.: The Way of a Pilgrim

## [edit] External links

  * Philippine Christian Mysticism & the Aquarian Gospel
  * The Alexandrian Gnostic Church
  * The Mysticism of Catherine of Siena
  * Christian Mystics Both Traditional & Contemporary
  * <IMG> "Mysticism" in the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia.

  * Underhill's "Historical Sketch" of Christian Mysticism from Mysticism (1911)
  * An overview of Christian Mysticism by Harold Raley,Ph.D
  * Christian Mysticism Contemporary

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christian_mysticism"

Categories: Christian mysticism | Christian prayer | Hesychasm

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * SlovenÄina
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 23:42 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



