
# Armageddon

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Armageddon (disambiguation).

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to
improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate.
(August 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Evangelist John of Patmos writes the Book of Revelation. Painting by
Hieronymus Bosch (1505).

Armageddon (Greek ÎÏÎ¼Î±Î³ÎµÎ´ÏÎ½; [armagedÃ´n] also spelled Har-Magedon,
came from Hebrew [Har-Megiddo] or, in some modern English translations, the
Mount of Megiddo), is the site of the final battle (or campaign) between God
and Satan (whose name means 'adversary'), also known as the Devil. Satan will
operate through the person known as the "Beast" or the Antichrist, written
about in the Book of Revelation in the New Testament. More generally, it can
also refer to an apocalyptic catastrophe.

The word Armageddon in scripture is known only from a single verse in the
Greek New Testament,[1] where it is said to be Hebrew and is thought to
represent the Hebrew words Har Megido (××¨ ×××××), meaning "Mountain of
Megiddo" in Israel. Megiddo was the location of many decisive battles in
ancient times (see Battle of Megiddo).

## Contents

  * 1 Christianity
    * 1.1 Dispensationalism
    * 1.2 Jehovah's Witnesses
    * 1.3 Seventh-day Adventist
  * 2 Islam
  * 3 BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith
  * 4 Rastafari movement
  * 5 Literature and film
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References

  
## [edit] Christianity

See also: Christian eschatology

### [edit] Dispensationalism

The Dispensational viewpoint interprets biblical prophecy literally and
expects that the fulfillment of prophecy will also be literal, depending upon
the context of scripture.

In his discussion of Armageddon, J. Dwight Pentecost has devoted an entire
chapter to the subject, titled "The Campaign of Armageddon", in which he
discusses Armageddon as a campaign and not a specific battle, which will be
fought in the Middle East. Pentecost writes:

> It has been held commonly that the battle of Armageddon is an isolated event
transpiring just prior to the second advent of Christ to the earth. The extent
of this great movement in which God deals with "the kings of the earth and of
the whole world" (Rev. 16:14) will not be seen unless it is realized that the
"battle of that great day of God Almighty" (Rev. 16:14)[2] is not an isolated
battle, but rather a campaign that extends over the last half of the
tribulation period. The Greek word "polemo", translated "battle" in Revelation
16:14, signifies a war or campaign, while "machÄ" signifies a battle, and
sometimes even single combat. This distinction is observed by Trench, (see
Richard C. Trench, New Testament Synonyms, pp.301-2) and is followed by Thayer
(see Joseph Henry Thayer, Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament, p. 528)
and Vincent (see Marvin R. Vincent, Word Studies in the New Testament, II,
541). The use of the word polemos (campaign) in Revelation 16:14 would signify
that the events that culminate in the gathering at Armageddon at the second
advent are viewed by God as one connected campaign.[3]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Present-day highway sign indicating the approach to Megiddo Junction, nearby
Har Megiddo

Dr. Pentecost then discusses the location of this campaign, and mentions the
"hill of Megiddo" and other geographic locations such as "the valley of
Jehoshaphat"[4] and "the valley of the passengers"[5], "Lord coming from Edom
or Idumea, south of Jerusalem, when He returns from the judgment"; and
Jerusalem itself.[6][7]

Pentecost then continues in his writing to further describe the area involved:

    
    "This wide area would cover the entire land of Palestine and this campaign, with all its parts, would confirm what Ezekiel pictures when he says the invaders will 'cover the land'.[8] This area would conform to the extent pictured by John in Revelation 14:20."[9]
In mentioning the "participants in the campaign", Dr. Pentecost lists the
following:

    
    1) The ten kingdom federation of nations under the Beast
    2) The northern federation consisting of Russia (see also Gog and Magog) and her allies
    3) The kings of the East, the Asiatic peoples from beyond the Euphrates
    4) The King of the South, a north African power[10]
Pentecost then outlines the biblical time period for this campaign to occur
and with further arguments concludes that it must take place with the 70th
week of Daniel. The invasion of Palestine by the Northern Confederacy "will
bring the Beast and his armies to the defense of Israel as her protector". He
then uses Daniel to further clarify his thinking: (Dan. 11:40b-45).[11]

Again, events are listed by Pentecost in his book:

    
    1) "The movement of the campaign begins when the King of the South moves against the Beast-False Prophet coalition, which takes place 'at the time of the end.'"[12]
    2) "The King of the South is joined by the Northern Confederacy, who attacks the Wilful King by a great force over land and sea (11:40). Jerusalem is destroyed as a result of this attack,[13] and, in turn, the armies of the Northern Confederacy are destroyed"[14]
    3) "The full armies of the Beast move into Palestine (11:41) and shall conquer all that territory (11:41-42). Edom, Moab, and Ammon alone escape. . . ."
    4) ". . . a report that causes alarm is brought to the Beast"[15]
    5) "The Beast moves his headquarters into the land of Palestine and assembles his armies there."[16]
    6) "It is there that his destruction will come. (11:45)."[17]
After the destruction of the Beast at the Second Coming of Jesus, the promised
Kingdom is set up, in which Jesus and the Saints will rule for a thousand
years. Satan is then loosed "for a season" and goes out to deceive the
nations, specifically, Gog and Magog.[18] The army mentioned attacks the
Saints in the New Jerusalem, they are defeated by a judgment of fire coming
down from Heaven, and then comes the Great White Throne judgment, which
includes all of those through the ages[19] and these are cast into the Lake of
Fire, which event is also known as the "second death", not to be confused with
Hell, which is Satan's domain. Pentecost describes this thusly:

> The destiny of the lost is a place in the lake of fire (Rev. 19:20; 20:10,
14-15; 21:8). This lake of fire is described as everlasting fire (Matt.
25:41)[20] (Matt. 18:8)[21] and as unquenchable fire (Mark 9:43-44[22],
46-48,[23] emphasizing the eternal character of retribution of the lost.[24]

### [edit] Jehovah's Witnesses

See also: Eschatology of Jehovah's Witnesses

Jehovah's Witnesses believe that Armageddon is a battle where Satan unites the
kings of the Earth against God's appointed King, Christ. In the Bible it is
called "the battle of that great day of God Almighty." Unlike many Christian
groups, Jehovah's Witnesses do not believe that an individual 'Antichrist'
will be involved. Satan himself will move the kingdoms of the world to wage
war on God's chosen people. Revelation says that "expressions inspired by
demons" cause the kings of the entire inhabited Earth to gather together for
the war of the great day of God the Almighty (Revelation 16:14). But then, the
"King of Kings and Lord of Lords" because of his righteousness will defeat
them for the glory of the Almighty God. (Revelation 17:12-14)

The Witnesses believe it is evident from this text that this war is not one of
nations fighting against one another with nuclear, biological, or other
weapons of mass destruction, since it says that the kings of the Earth "gather
together" against Christ.[25] It is also evident that there is no way that all
of the armies of the world could gather around the relatively small area that
is Megiddo in modern-day Israel.[26] Finally, Revelation 16:16 calls Har-
Mageddon (Mountain of Megiddo) (mountain of the assembly of troops), "the
place" where these kings are gathered for this final showdown.

Since the Mountain of Megiddo is not a literal place, they feel the Bible uses
Megiddo as the "symbolic" place of gathering of all the kings of the Earth,
where they will try to do battle against God and his forces. This action on
the part of the kings of the Earth is provoked by expressions and signs
inspired by demons.[27]

Jehovah's Witnesses believe the collective action to persecute God's chosen
people on earth is what finally triggers this war. Ezekiel 38 prophesies that
Gog, king of Magog will collect an army of many nations to attack God's
people, believing them to be vulnerable and unprotected.[28] God responds by
causing them to fall one against another's swords; he strikes them with
pestilence, floods, hailstones, fire and sulphur. The chapter ends with God
declaring that the nations "will have to know that I am Jehovah".

Armageddon is followed by the establishment of God's kingdom over the
earth[29] â a period commonly referred to as "Christ's Millennial Reign",
when "Satan is bound for a thousand years" (See Rev. 20:1,2). The final
judgment and purification of the earth's sin occurs at the end of the
Millennium, when Satan is "loosed for a little season" (20:3, 7-9) and allowed
to "go out to deceive the nations ... and gather them to battle" against "the
camp of the saints and the beloved city". When Satan loses this battle he is
finally cast into the "lake of fire and brimstone" (representing complete,
eternal destruction, Rev 20:14). Those who join him in this battle will,
likewise, be eternally destroyed. The Jehovah's Witnesses believe a prelude to
Armageddon will be the attack on all religions by the Prominent World Powers
very soon under their own laws and statutes left to be put into
effect.[30][31][32]

### [edit] Seventh-day Adventist

<IMG>

<IMG>

Seventh-day Adventist understanding of Revelation 13-22

Seventh-day Adventists believe that the terms "Armageddon", "Day of the Lord"
and "The Second Coming of Christ" all describe the same event.[33] They teach
that John the Apostle borrowed what was local and literal in the Old Testament
and gave it a global and spiritual application in the New Testament. The
historical event John borrowed to explain Armageddon is Cyrus the Great's
conquest of Babylon. The historical Cyrus came from the East, dried up the
river Euphrates to conquer Babylon and thus enabled the Jewish people to
return from exile. Literal Cyrus represents Christ, literal Israel represents
spiritual Israel (God's commandment keeping church) and literal Babylon
becomes an end-time spiritual coalition. The water of the river Euphrates
represents "peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues"[34] or the
inhabitants of the entire earth. The "three unclean spirits" represents the
method used to persuade the earth's inhabitants ("miracle working") and is
countered by the messages of the three angels of Revelation 14. Seventh-day
Adventists further teach that the current religious movements taking place in
the world are setting the stage for Armageddon. They believe that the end-time
spiritual coalition will threaten religious liberty, and are particularly
concerned about the growing unity between spiritualism, American Protestantism
and Roman Catholicism. A further significant difference in Seventh-day
Adventist theology is their teaching that the events of Armageddon will leave
the earth desolate for the duration of the millennium.[35] They teach that the
righteous will be taken to heaven while the rest of humanity will be
destroyed, leaving Satan with no one to tempt and effectively "bound."[36] The
final re-creation of a "new heaven and a new earth."[37] then follows the
millennium.

## [edit] Islam

Main articles: Islamic view of the Last Judgment, Islamic eschatology, and
Jesus in Islam

The Islamic Prophet Muhammad has prophesied about several events that will
occur just before the advent of the Day of Judgment (Qiyamah). A false
claimant to divinity (the Dajjal) will attempt to misguide humanity into
worshiping him and will perform miracles.The people that doubt their religion
will follow him and people that have faith will not. That is the biggest sign
of judgment day for Muslims. Jesus will descend from the sky . Jesus (Isa) and
his followers will bring peace and brotherhood to the world. Christians will
recognize the truth and accept him only as a Messenger of God, the religion of
God (Islam) will rule the world justly.

## [edit] BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith

As part of the overall theology of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith, BahÃ¡'Ã­ literature and
research interprets the fulfillment of the expectations surrounding the Battle
of Armageddon in three ways, all of which have happened.[38]

The first interpretation deals with a series of tablets written by
BahÃ¡'u'llÃ¡h, founder of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith, to be sent to various kings and
rulers.

The second interpretation relates to the detailed events near the end of World
War I of the Battle of Megiddo (1918) \- a kind of literal fulfillment wherein
World Powers were in battle. Specifically, General Allenby's victory at
Megiddo, which prevented the Ottoman Empire from crucifying `Abdu'l-BahÃ¡,
then the head of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith, is viewed by BahÃ¡'Ã­s as having been the
literal Battle of Megiddo.

The third interpretation reviews the whole progress of the World Wars (though
these can be viewed as one process in two phases), and their derangement of
the means and norms of the world before and after.[38]

## [edit] Rastafari movement

Main article: Rastafari movement

According to the Rastafari it is Haile Selassie who appears in the Book of
Revelation. Armageddon (or rather "Amagideon") is a slightly different
theological concept, meaning not so much a specific battle, but rather the
general state the entire world is in now, and has been getting progressively
deeper in since 1930, and especially since 1974. However, Selassie's role in
the Second Italo-Abyssinian War is in many ways seen as a fulfillment of some
prophecies.

## [edit] Literature and film

  * Armageddon (1998 film) â NASA sends a team of oil drillers to deflect an asteroid.
  * Armageddon (Left Behind)

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Armageddon  
Sister project Look up Armageddon in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * 1 Maccabees
  * 2300 day prophecy
  * Abomination of Desolation
  * Antichrist
  * Antiochus Epiphanes
  * Apocalypse
  * Book of Daniel
  * Bible Prophecy
  * Daniel's Vision of Chapter 8
  * Daniel Chapter 11
  * Day-year principle
  * Dispensationalism
  * Eschatology
  * End times
  * Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse
  * Gog and Magog
  * Last Judgment
  * Millenialism
  * Millenarianism
  * Olivet discourse
  * Oracle of Damascus
  * Premillenialism
  * Prewrath
  * Post Tribulation
  * Progressive dispensationalism
  * Prophecy of Seventy Weeks
  * RagnarÃ¶k
  * The Rapture
  * Siege of Jerusalem (70)
  * Summary of Christian eschatological differences
  * The Beast (Bible)
  * The Two Witnesses
  * Whore of Babylon

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Revelation 16:16
  2. ^ Revelation 16:14
  3. ^ Pentacost, p.340
  4. ^ Joel 3:2
  5. ^ Ezekiel 39:11
  6. ^ Zech. 12:2-11; 14:2
  7. ^ Pentacost, p. 341
  8. ^ Ezekiel 38:9-16
  9. ^ Revelation 14:20
  10. ^ Pentecost, p. 342
  11. ^ "Daniel 11:40-45 (King James Version)". BibleGateway.com. http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Dan.%2011:40-45;&version=9;. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  12. ^ "Daniel 11:40 (King James Version)". BibleGateway.com. http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Dan.%2011:40;&version=9;. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  13. ^ Zechariah 12:2
  14. ^ Ezekiel 39, Zeckariah 12:4
  15. ^ Revelation 11:44, Revelation 16:12
  16. ^ Daniel 11:45
  17. ^ Pentacost, p. 356
  18. ^ Revelation 20:8
  19. ^ Revelation 20:11-15
  20. ^ "Matthew 25:41 (King James Version)". http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matt.%2025:41;&version=9;. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  21. ^ "Matthew 18:8 (King James Version)". http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matt.%2018:8;&version=9;. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  22. ^ "Mark 9:43-44 (King James Version)". http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mark%209:43-44;&version=9;. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  23. ^ "Mark 9:46-48 (King James Version)". http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mark%209:46-48;&version=9;. Retrieved on 2007-11-16.
  24. ^ Pentacost, p. 555
  25. ^ Watchtower 12/1/05 p. 4 "ArmageddonâA Happy Beginning" Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania "Armageddon cannot be just a conflict among earthly nations, since Revelation 16:14 states that "the kings of the entire inhabited earth" form a united front at "the war of the great day of God the Almighty."
  26. ^ Watchtower 12/1/05 p. 4 "ArmageddonâA Happy Beginning" Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania "In his inspired prophecy, Jeremiah stated that "those slain by Jehovah" will be scattered "from one end of the earth clear to the other end of the earth." (Jeremiah 25:33) Thus, Armageddon is not a human war confined to a particular location in the Middle East. It is Jehovahâs war, and it is global."
  27. ^ watchtower.org Armageddon - A Happy Beginning Revelation 16:13
  28. ^ RevelationâIts Grand Climax at Hand!. Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania| chap. 39 pp. 279-280 par. 2 The Warrior-King Triumphs at Armageddon "The Devilâs vicious assault is vividly described in Ezekiel chapter 38. There, the debased Satan is called "Gog of the land of Magog." Jehovah puts figurative hooks in Gogâs jaws, drawing him and his numerous military force to the attack. How does he do this? By causing Gog to see His Witnesses as a defenseless people "gathered together out of the nations, one that is accumulating wealth and property, those who are dwelling in the center of the earth." These hold the center stage on earth as the one people to have refused to worship the wild beast and its image. Their spiritual strength and prosperity enrage Gog. So Gog and his numerous military force, including the wild beast out of the sea with its ten horns, swarm in for the kill. â¦ âEzekiel 38:1, 4, 11, 12, 15; Revelation 13:1."
  29. ^ The Marvelous New World of God's Making watchtower.org
  30. ^ The End of False Religion is Near watchtower.org
  31. ^ Watchtower 9/15/05 p. 19 par. 13 "Walk by Faith, Not by Sight!" Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania "Bible prophecy indicates that militarized powers within the United Nations will see religion as a disturbing element and will act to destroy modern-day Jerusalem â Christendom â as well as the rest of Babylon the Great. (Revelation 17:12-17) Yes, the entire world empire of false religion stands on the brink of destruction."
  32. ^ Watchtower 6/1/96 p. 18 par. 20 "Flight to Safety Before the "Great Tribulation"" Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania "The religions of Babylon the Great continue to be a violently disruptive force in the world. News headlines frequently identify warring factions and terrorist groups by naming the religion that they espouse. Riot police and soldiers have had to force their way into temples to stop violence between rival religious factions. Religious bodies have financed political revolution. Religious hatred has frustrated efforts by the United Nations to maintain stable relations between ethnic groups. In pursuing the goal of peace and security, elements within the United Nations would like to see the elimination of any religious influence that stands in their way."
  33. ^ "Seventh-day Adventists believe" 1988 by the Ministerial Association General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists
  34. ^ Revelation 17:15
  35. ^ "Handbook of Seventh-day Adventist Theology" 2000 Review and Herald Publishing Association and the General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists
  36. ^ Revelation 20:1
  37. ^ Revelation 21:1
  38. ^ a b Lambden, Stephen. "Catastrophe, Armageddon and Millennium: some aspects of the BÃ¡bÃ­-BahÃ¡'Ã­ exegesis of apocalyptic symbolism". BahÃ¡'Ã­ Studies Review Volume 9. http://bahai-library.com/bsr/bsr09/9B3_lambden_armageddon.htm. Retrieved on 2007-06-10.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Doomsday  
Apocalypse Â· Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction Â· Armageddon Â· Big
Crunch Â· Big Rip Â· Doomsday argument Â· Doomsday cult Â· Doomsday Clock Â·
Doomsday device Â· Doomsday event Â· Doomsday film Â· End of planet Earth Â·
End time Â· Eschatology Â· Human extinction Â· Last Judgement Â· Planetary
Phase of Civilization Â· RagnarÃ¶k Â· Risks to civilization, humans and planet
Earth Â· Societal collapse Â· Ten Threats Â· World War III  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armageddon"

Categories: Apocalypticism | Beliefs and practices of Jehovah's Witnesses |
Biblical phrases | Book of Revelation | Christian eschatology | Christian
fundamentalism | Greek loanwords | Prophecy | Rastafari | Seventh-day
Adventist theology | War in mythology

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Furlan
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Wolof
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 15:31.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



