
# Amusing Ourselves to Death

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business
(1985), is a book by Neil Postman in which he argues that media of
communication inherently influence the conversations carried out over them.
Postman posits that television is the primary means of communication for our
culture and it has the property of converting a culture's conversations with
itself into entertainment, so much so that public discourse on important
issues has disappeared. Since the treatment of serious issues as entertainment
inherently prevents them from being treated as serious issues and indeed since
serious issues have been treated as entertainment for so many decades now, the
public is no longer aware of these issues in their original sense, but only as
entertainment.

The book originated with Postman's delivering a talk to the Frankfurt Book
Fair in 1984. He was participating in a panel on Orwell's 1984 and the
contemporary world. In the introduction to his book Postman said that reality
was reflected more by Aldous Huxley's Brave New World where the public was
oppressed by pleasure than Orwell's 1984 where they were oppressed by pain.

It has been translated into eight languages and sold some 200,000 copies
worldwide. In 2005, Postman's son Andrew reissued the book in a 20th
anniversary edition. It is regarded as one of the most important texts of the
Media Ecology school of criticism. [1]

## Contents

  * 1 Medium is The Metaphor
  * 2 Summary
  * 3 Cultural references
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Medium is The Metaphor

Postman argues that communication media inherently shape the conversations
that can be carried out. To take an extreme example, it is not possible to
conduct a discussion of philosophy using smoke signals; the conversation is
too complex and long to be conducted over a medium of such low bandwidth.
Postman in particular describes two forms of mass media, print and television,
and the ways they influence the content carried across them.

  
Television as a medium is inherently assertionless; a video of an event makes
no assertions whatsoever. It merely displays something that occurred. For
example, an advertisement for McDonald's often says nothing about the burgers,
their nutritional value, their cost or position in the market compared to the
competition; instead, it shows happy, smiling children eating McDonald's
burgers, followed by a happy clown. A viewer can like or dislike a McDonald's
advertisement, but he or she cannot accept or refute it, because there is
nothing to accept or refute.

## [edit] Summary

Postman distinguishes the Orwellian vision of the future, in which
totalitarian governments seize individual rights, from the vision offered by
Aldous Huxley in Brave New World, where people medicate themselves into bliss
and voluntarily sacrifice their rights. Postman sees television's
entertainment value as a "soma" for the contemporary world, and he sees
contemporary mankind surrendering its rights in exchange for entertainment.
(Note that there is no contradiction between an intentional "Orwellian"
conspiracy using "Huxleyan" means, which is an argument advanced in the later
book The Unreality Industry: the deliberate manufacturing of falsehood and
what it is doing to our lives by Ian Mitroff and Warren Bennis [New York:
Carol Pub. Group, 1989]. Postman evidently did not disagree, since he provided
a blurb for this book.)

The essential premise of the book, which Postman extends to the rest of his
argument(s), is that "form excludes the content," that is, a particular medium
can only sustain a particular level of ideas. Rational argument, an integral
component of print typography, cannot be conveyed through the medium of
television because "its form excludes the content." Because of this
shortcoming, politics and religion get diluted, and "news of the day" is
turned into a commodity. The presentation most often de-emphasizes quality;
all data becomes burdened to the far-reaching need for entertainment.

Postman objects to the presentation of television news as it is conveyed in
the form of entertainment programming. He cites the inclusion of theme music,
the interruption of commercials, and "talking hairdos" as the basis for his
argument that televised news is presented so that it cannot readily be taken
seriously. Postman further examines the differences between written speech,
which he argues reached its prime in the early to mid-nineteenth century, and
the forms of televisual communication, which rely mostly on visual images to
"sell" lifestyles. He argues that politics has ceased to be about whatever
ideas or solutions a particular candidate may possess, but instead whether or
not they come across in a favorable way on television. Television, he notes,
has introduced the phrase "now this", which indicates a complete absence of
any connection between one topic and the next. Larry Gonick used this phrase
to conclude his Cartoon Guide to (Non)Communication, instead of the
traditional "the end".

Postman draws from the ideas of the media scholar Marshall McLuhanâ slightly
altering McLuhan's aphorism "the medium is the message" into "the medium is
the metaphor"âto describe how oral, literate, and televisual cultures
radically differ in how information is processed and prioritized. He also
argues that different media are appropriate for different kinds of knowledge.
The faculties necessary to sustain rational inquiry simply are not normally
encouraged by televised viewing. Reading, a prime example cited by Postman, is
a subject of intense intellectual involvement, at once interactive and
dialectical, unlike television which limits involvement to passivity.
Moreover, as television is programmed for maximum ratings, its content is
determined by commercial feasibility, not critical acumen. Television in its
present state, he says, cannot sustain any of the conditions needed for honest
intellectual involvement and rational argument.

He also repeatedly states that the eighteenth century was the pinnacle for
rational argument, truly being the Age of Reason. Only in the printed word, he
states, could complicated truths be rationally conveyed. A striking example
Postman gives: that the first fifteen U.S. presidents could probably have
walked down the street without being recognized by the average citizen, yet
all these men would have been quickly known by their written words. However,
the reverse is true today. The names of presidents or even famous preachers,
lawyers, and scientists call up visual images, typically television images,
but few, if any, words come to mind. The few that do almost exclusively
consist of carefully-chosen soundbites.

## [edit] Cultural references

  * Roger Waters' 1992 album "Amused to Death" was, in part, inspired by and deals with some of the same subject matter as Postman's book. In The End of Education Postman remarks that the album had "elevated my prestige among undergraduates", and notes that he has no "inclination [to repudiate Roger Waters or his kind of music] for any [...] reason". However, he describes that "[t]he level of education required to appreciate the music of Roger Waters is both different and lower than what is required to appreciate, let us say, a Chopin Ã©tude... Most American students are well tuned to respond with feeling, critical intelligence, and considerable attention to forms of popular music, but are not prepared to feel or even experience the music of Haydn, Bach, or Mozart; that is to say, their hearts are closed, or partially closed, to the canon of Western music... There is in short something missing in the aesthetic experience of our young."

## [edit] See also

  * Media criticism
  * Videodrome
  * The Global Trap

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://www.media-ecology.org/media_ecology

## [edit] Further reading

  * Neil Postman. Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business. Penguin USA, 1985. ISBN 0-670-80454-1

## [edit] External links

  * The Neil Postman Information Page
  * Neil Postman: Collected Online Articles

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amusing_Ourselves_to_Death"

Categories: 1985 books | 2005 books | Books about the media

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ×¢××¨××ª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 April 2009, at 05:40 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



