
# Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu <IMG>  
Two practitioners in the half guard position.  
Also known as Jiu-Jitsu (only in Brazil), Gracie Jiu-Jitsu, BJJ  
Focus Grappling  
Country of origin Flag of Brazil Brazil  
Creator Mitsuyo Maeda, Carlos Gracie & Helio Gracie  
Parenthood Kodokan Judo[1]  
Famous practitioners Gracie family, Machado brothers,Alexandre Dantas,Demian
Maia,Eddie Bravo, Pedro Sauer, Vinicius Magalhaes, Eduardo de Lima, B.J. Penn  
Olympic sport No  
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu is a martial art and combat sport that focuses on
grappling and especially ground fighting. It is a derivative of early 20th
century Kodokan Judo,[2][1] which was itself then a recently-developed system
(founded in 1882), based on multiple schools (or Ryu) of Japanese jujutsu.

Like judo, it promotes the principle that smaller, weaker person can
successfully defend themselves against a bigger, stronger assailant using
leverage and proper technique; applying joint-locks and chokeholds to defeat
them. BJJ can be trained for self defense, sport grappling tournaments (gi and
no-gi) and mixed martial arts (MMA) competition.[3] Sparring (commonly
referred to as 'rolling') and live drilling play a major role in training, and
a premium is placed on performance, especially in competition.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Origin
    * 1.2 Name
    * 1.3 Development
    * 1.4 Prominence
  * 2 Style of fighting
    * 2.1 Submission
      * 2.1.1 Joint locks
      * 2.1.2 Chokes and strangles
    * 2.2 Training methods
  * 3 Grading
    * 3.1 Belt promotion
  * 4 Comparison with judo
    * 4.1 Divergence from Kodokan rules
    * 4.2 Ground fighting
    * 4.3 The Keiko-Gi
  * 5 World Jiu-Jitsu Championship
  * 6 See also
  * 7 Footnotes
  * 8 Sources
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History

### [edit] Origin

The art began with Mitsuyo Maeda (aka Conde Koma, or Count Combat in English),
an expert Japanese judoka and member of the Kodokan. Maeda was one of five of
the Kodokan's top groundwork experts that Judo's founder Kano Jigoro sent
overseas to spread his art to the world. Maeda left Japan in 1904 and visited
a number of countries[2] giving "jiu-do" demonstrations and accepting
challenges from wrestlers, boxers, savate fighters and various other martial
artists before eventually arriving in Brazil on November 14, 1914.[4]

Since its inception, judo was separated from jujutsu in its goals, philosophy,
and training regime. Although there was great rivalry among jujutsu teachers,
this was more than just Kano's ambition to clearly individualize his art. To
Kano, judo wasn't solely a martial art: it was also a sport, a method for
promoting physical fitness and building character in young people, and,
ultimately, a way (Do) of life.[5][6] To a very large extent, Brazilian Jiu-
Jitsu has also encompassed these philosophies.

It is often claimed that BJJ is a development of traditional Japanese jujutsu,
and that Maeda was a jujutsuka. However, Maeda never trained in jujutsu. He
first trained in sumo as a teenager, and after the interest generated by
stories about the success of judo at contests between judo and jujutsu that
were occurring at the time, he changed from sumo to judo, becoming a student
of Kano's Kodokan judo.[2] He was promoted to 7th dan in Kodokan judo the day
before he died in 1941.

HÃ©lio Gracie himself had already risen to the rank of 6th dan in judo by the
time of his fight against Kimura in 1951. According to Masahiko Kimura in his
book "My Judo" (see extract at [2]). Kodokan records have HÃ©lio Gracie
recorded as a 3rd dan in judo, but it is not unusual for a foreign judoka's
grade to be higher than granted by the Kodokan.

### [edit] Name

When Maeda left Japan, Judo was still often referred to as "Kano Jiu-
Jitsu",[7] or, even more generically, simply as "Jiu-Jitsu."[8][9]

Kigashi, the co-author of "Kano Jiu-Jitsu"[7] wrote in the foreword

> "Some confusion has arisen over the employment of the term 'jiudo'. To make
the matter clear I will state that jiudo is the term selected by Professor
Kano as describing his system more accurately than jiu-jitsu does. Professor
Kano is one of the leading educators of Japan, and it is natural that he
should cast about for the technical word that would most accurately describe
his system. But the Japanese people generally still cling to the more popular
nomenclature and call it jiu-jitsu."[7]

Outside Japan, however, this distinction was noted even less. The distinction
between a jutsu and a do is subtle, and is still used somewhat arbitrarily to
this day.

Thus, when Maeda and Satake arrived in Brazil in 1914, every newspaper
announced "jiu-jitsu" despite both men being Kodokan Judoka.[5]

The Japanese government itself did not officially mandate until 1925 that the
correct name for the martial art taught in the Japanese public schools should
be "judo" rather than "jujutsu".[10] In Brazil, the art is still called "Jiu-
Jitsu". When the Gracies went to the United States to spread their art, the
system became known as "Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu" and "Gracie Jiu-Jitsu."

"Jiu-jitsu" is an older romanization that was the original spelling of the art
in the West, and it is still in common use, whereas the modern Hepburn
romanization is "jÅ«jutsu." Other common spellings are jujitsu and ju-jitsu.

The art is sometimes referred to as Gracie Jiu-Jitsu (GJJ), but this name is
trademarked by Rorion Gracie and specifically refers to the style taught by
him and his selected teachers. Other members of the Gracie family often call
their style by personalized names, such as Charles Gracie Jiu-Jitsu or Renzo
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu, and similarly, the Machado brothers call their style Machado
Jiu-Jitsu (MJJ). While each style and its instructors have their own unique
aspects, they are all basic variations of Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu.

Today there are four major branches of BJJ from Brazil: Gracie Humaita, Gracie
Barra, Alliance Jiu-Jitsu, and Carlson Gracie Jiu-Jitsu. Each branch can trace
its roots back to HÃ©lio Gracie, and Mitsuyo Maeda.

### [edit] Development

Maeda met an influential businessman named GastÃ£o Gracie who helped him get
established. In 1916, his son Carlos Gracie, still a 14 year-old boy, watched
a demonstration by Maeda at the Teatro da Paz(Theatre of Peace) and decided to
learn the art. Maeda accepted Carlos as a student,[2] and Carlos went on to
become a great exponent of the art and ultimately, with his younger brother
HÃ©lio Gracie became the founder of Gracie Jiu-Jitsu, modern Brazilian Jiu-
Jitsu.[11]

In 1921, GastÃ£o Gracie and his family moved to Rio de Janeiro. Carlos, then
17 years old, passed Maeda's teachings on to his brothers Osvaldo, GastÃ£o and
Jorge. HÃ©lio was too young and sick at that time to learn the art, and due to
medical imposition was prohibited to take part in the training sessions.
Despite that, HÃ©lio learned from watching his brothers. He eventually
overcame his health problems and is now considered by many as the founder of
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu (though others, such as Carlson Gracie, have pointed to
Carlos as the founder of the art).[11]

HÃ©lio competed in several submission judo competitions which mostly ended in
a draw. One defeat (in Brazil in 1951) was by visiting Japanese judoka
Masahiko Kimura, whose surname the Gracies gave to the arm lock used to defeat
HÃ©lio .[12]

The Gracie family continued to develop the system throughout the 20th century,
often fighting vale tudo matches (precursors to modern MMA), during which it
increased its focus on ground fighting and refined its techniques.[13]

Today, the main differences between the BJJ styles is between traditional
Gracie Jiu-Jitsu's emphasis on self-defense, and Sport Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu's
orientation towards point competition. There is a large commonality of
techniques between the two. Also, there is a wide variety of ideals in
training in different schools in terms of the utilization of technique versus
how much to attempt to overpower an opponent.

### [edit] Prominence

Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu came to international prominence in the martial arts
community in the 1990s, when Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu expert Royce Gracie won the
first, second and fourth Ultimate Fighting Championships, which at the time
were single elimination martial arts tournaments.[3] Royce fought against
often much-larger opponents who were practicing other styles, including
boxing, shoot-fighting, karate, judo, tae kwon do and wrestling. It has since
become a staple art for many MMA fighters and is largely credited for bringing
widespread attention to the importance of ground fighting. Sport BJJ
tournaments continue to grow in popularity worldwide and have given rise to
no-gi submission grappling tournaments, such as the ADCC Submission Wrestling
World Championship.

## [edit] Style of fighting

Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu emphasizes ground fighting techniques and submission holds
involving joint-locks and chokeholds also found in numerous other arts with or
without ground fighting emphasis. The premise is that most of the advantage of
a larger, stronger opponent comes from superior reach and more powerful
strikes, both of which are somewhat negated when grappling on the ground.

BJJ permits a wide variety of techniques to take the fight to the ground after
taking a grip. Once the opponent is on the ground, a number of maneuvers (and
counter-maneuvers) are available to manipulate the opponent into a suitable
position for the application of a submission technique. Achieving a dominant
position on the ground is one of the hallmarks of the BJJ style, and includes
effective use of the guard position to defend oneself from bottom, and passing
the guard to dominate from top position with side control, mount, and back
mount positions. This system of maneuvering and manipulation can be likened to
a form of kinetic chess when utilized by two experienced practitioners. A
submission hold is the equivalent of checkmate in the sport. However, it is
possible for a combat situation to continue even after a proper submission is
performed.

Renzo Gracie wrote in his book Mastering Jujitsu:

> "The classical jujutsu of old Japan appeared to have no common strategy to
guide a combatant over the course of a fight. Indeed, this was one of Kano's
most fundamental and perceptive criticisms of the classical program." Maeda
not only taught the art of judo to Carlos Gracie, but also taught a particular
philosophy about the nature of combat developed by Kano, and further refined
by Maeda based on his worldwide travels competing against fighters skilled in
a wide variety of martial arts.[14]

The book details Maeda's theory as arguing that physical combat could be
broken down into distinct phases, such as the striking phase, the grappling
phase, the ground phase, etc. Thus, it was a smart fighter's task to keep the
fight located in the phase of combat that best suited to his own strengths.
Renzo Gracie stated that this was a fundamental influence on the Gracie
approach to combat, these strategies were further perfected over time by the
Gracies and others, and became prominent in contemporary MMA.

### [edit] Submission

The majority of submission holds can be grouped into two broad categories:
joint locks and chokes. Joint locks typically involve isolating an opponent's
limb and creating a lever with the body position which will force the joint to
move past its normal range of motion.[3] Pressure is increased in a controlled
manner and released if the opponent cannot escape the hold and signals defeat
by submitting. Opponents can indicate submission verbally or they can tap out
(i.e. tap the opponent, the mat, or even themselves, several times.) A choke
hold, disrupting the blood supply to the brain, can cause unconsciousness if
the opponent does not submit soon enough.

A less common type of submission hold is a compression lock, where the muscle
of an opponent is compressed against a hard, large bone (commonly the shin or
wrist), causing significant pain to the opponent. These types of locks are not
usually allowed in competition due to the high risk of tearing muscle tissue.
This type of lock often also hyper-extends the joint in the opposite
direction, pulling it apart.

#### [edit] Joint locks

While many joint locks are permitted, most competitions ban or restrict some
or all joint locks involving the knees, ankles, and spine. The reason for this
is that the angles of manipulation required to cause pain are nearly the same
as those that would cause serious injury. Joint locks that require a twisting
motion of the knee (called twisting knee locks or twisting knee bars, or
techniques such as heel hooks, and toe holds) are usually banned in
competitions because successfully completing the move nearly always results in
permanent damage that requires surgery. Similarly, joint manipulations of the
spine are typically barred due to the inherent danger of crushing or mis-
aligning cervical vertebrae. Leglocks are allowed in varying degrees depending
on skill level, with straight ankle locks being the only leglocks allowed in
the beginner division, or white belt level, straight kneebars being allowed in
the intermediate division, or blue belt level and toeholds with the pressure
applied inwards are allowed in the advanced division (purple, brown, black).

However, most joint locks involving the wrist, elbow, shoulder or ankle are
permitted as there is a great deal more flexibility in those joints and those
locks are safe to use under tournament conditions. Also, some fighters
practice moves whose sole purpose is to inflict pain upon their opponent, in
the hope that they will tap out. This includes driving knuckles into pressure
points, holding their opponent's head in order to tire out the neck (called
the "can opener" or kubi-hishigi) and putting body weight on top of the
sternum, floating ribs, or similarly sensitive bones. These moves are not true
submission moves - they are generally only used as distractions mostly in
lower levels of competition. They are avoided or aggressively countered in
middle to upper levels of competition.

#### [edit] Chokes and strangles

Chokes and strangles (commonly but somewhat incorrectly referred to as "air
chokes" and "blood chokes" respectively) are a common form of submission.
Chokes involve constriction of the windpipe (causing asphyxia.) Strangles
involve constriction of the carotid artery (causing ischemia.)[15]

Air chokes are less efficient than strangles and may result in damage to the
opponent's trachea, sometimes even resulting in death. By contrast, blood
chokes (strangulations) cut the flow of blood to the opponent's brain, causing
a rapid loss of consciousness without damaging any internal structures. Being
"choked-out" in this way is relatively safe as long as the choke is released
soon enough after unconsciousness, letting blood back into the brain before
oxygen deprivation damage begins.[16] However, it should not be practiced
unsupervised.

The prevalence of the more dangerous "air" chokes has led to the banning of
choke holds by some United States police departments.[citation needed]

### [edit] Training methods

Sport Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu's focus on submissions without the use of strikes
while training allows practitioners to practice at full speed and with full
power, resembling the effort used in a real competition. Training methods
include technique drills in which techniques are practised against a non-
resisting partner; isolation sparring where only a certain technique or sets
of techniques are used against full resistance; and full sparring in which
each opponent tries to submit their opponent using any legal technique.
Physical conditioning is also an important part of training at many clubs.

## [edit] Grading

The standards for grading and belt promotions vary between schools, but the
widely accepted measures of a person's skill and rank in Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu
are:

  1. The amount of technical knowledge they can demonstrate, and
  2. Their performance in sparring and competition.

Technical knowledge is judged by the number of techniques a person can
perform, and the level of skill with which he performs them in sparring and
competition. This allows for smaller and older practitioners to be recognized
for their knowledge though they may not be the strongest fighters in the
school. It is a distinctly individual sport, and practitioners are encouraged
to adapt the techniques to make them work for their body type, strategic
preferences, and level of athleticism. The ultimate criterion is the ability
to execute the techniques successfully, rather than strict stylistic
compliance.

Competitions play an important role in Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu gradings, as they
allow an instructor to compare the level of his students against those of the
same rank from other schools. A belt promotion may be given after success in a
competition, particularly at the lower belt levels. A promotion might also be
awarded when a person can submit most people in his school of the same rank,
e.g. a white belt who consistently submits most other white belts in sparring
and is starting to catch blue belts.

The high level of competition between schools - and its importance for belt
promotion - is also considered to be one of the key factors preventing
instructors from lowering standards or allowing people to buy their way up the
belts. Instructors may also take the personality of the person and their
behavior outside of class into account, and may refuse to promote someone if
they exhibit antisocial or destructive tendencies. It is by these and other
criteria that most instructors promote their students. Some schools may also
have formal testing which might include oral or written exams.

Some schools use a stripe system for each belt level, indicating progress
through that belt.

Adult belt colors (16 and over) White <IMG>  
Blue <IMG>  
Purple <IMG>  
Brown <IMG>  
Black <IMG>  
Red <IMG>  
Junior belt colors (15 and under) White <IMG>  
Yellow <IMG>  
Orange <IMG>  
Green <IMG>  
Age categories[17] 4-6 prÃ©-mirim  
7-9 mirim  
10-12 infantil  
13-15 infanto-juvenil  
16-17 juvenil  
18-29 adulto  
30-35 master  
36-40 senhor I  
41-45 senhor II  
46-50 senhor III  
51-55 senhor IV  
56+ senhor V  
Some schools use slightly different belt systems, such as having more colored
belts before blue belt, but the above are the only widely accepted ranks as
they are the standards for tournaments. There are minimum age requirements for
belt promotions. Blue belts are never awarded to anyone under the age of 16.
For promotion to black belt the minimum age is 19 years old according to the
main regulating body of Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, the International Brazilian Jiu-
Jitsu Federation.

Stripes may be awarded to any rank below black belt, but like the belts
themselves, they tend to be given at the instructor's discretion, and may be
in recognition of accomplishments like noticeable improvement or tournament
victories. However, not all schools award stripes, or award them consistently,
so the number of stripes a person has is not necessarily a good measure of
their accomplishments or time in training. When they are used, it is standard
for a student to receive four stripes before being promoted to the next rank.

Black belts can receive degrees, up to 9th degree, for as long as they train
or teach the art. At 7th degree, the black belt is replaced by an alternately
red and black belt. At 9th and 10th degree, the belt becomes solid red. Only
the founding Gracie Brothers Helio, Carlos, and their brothers will ever have
the 10th degree red belt.[18] The Gracie family members who are 9th degrees
belt holders are Carlson Gracie, Reylson Gracie, Relson Gracie, Reyson Gracie,
and Rorion Gracie.

BJJ differs in some aspects from other martial arts in the criteria for grade
promotion, which is almost exclusively based on practical expertise in randori
(free sparring, or rolling) and championship results. It is expected, although
not always the case, that any BJJ black belt is extremely proficient in every
applied aspect of BJJ and also perform well in competition. Less emphasis is
given to theoretical and background knowledge. Rarely is any formal test
undertaken for the grading, which is based mainly in observation at every-day
practice sessions. By contrast, in Judo, practical knowledge and expertise in
shiai (competition) and/or randori alone would not normally give an athlete
the black-belt grade, as knowledge of technique names and Kata demonstration
are necessary (the exception is promotion by Batsugun.)

There is a vast difference in how often belt progression takes place, and the
requirements for the progression.[citation needed] More traditional schools
and especially Gracie-affiliated schools believe that black belt cannot be
achieved in under 8 to 10 years, while some schools allow students to achieve
black belt more quickly.[citation needed]

A blue belt will typically take 1-3 years to earn, depending on the amount of
time the student puts in, and how quickly they learn. A purple belt can take
3-6 years to earn. Again, this depends largely on the individual student, and
the frequency of training. A purple belt is generally accepted as being the
lowest teaching grade.

### [edit] Belt promotion

A custom amongst some clubs on promotion is running the gauntlet which is said
to have originated in Brazil. The student will endure one of the following
gauntlets:

  * Is thrown by his instructors, and sometimes also by each of the students with equal or higher grade in the academy;

  * Is hit on their back with beltsâonce by each of their fellow practitionersâas they walk or run past.[19]

## [edit] Comparison with judo

Originally having been developed from judo, and while still recognizable as
closely related and even as a style of judo, there are some differences from
modern Olympic judo. For example BJJ encourages free sparring without striking
(also known as "rolling"), against a live, resisting opponent very similar to
Randori in judo, however the rules related to this sparring have key
differences.

### [edit] Divergence from Kodokan rules

Since judo was introduced to Brazil there have been changes in the rules of
sport judoâsome to enhance it as a spectator sport, and some for improved
safety. Several of these rule changes have greatly de-emphasised the
groundwork aspects of judo, and others have reduced the range of joint locks
allowed and when they can be applied. Many of the banned techniques are
preserved in the judo kata, and are practised to varying extents in different
clubs. Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu did not follow many of these changes to judo rules,
and this divergence[20] has given it a distinct identity as a martial art,
while still being recognizable as a sub-style of judo. Other factors that have
contributed towards the stylistic divergence of BJJ from sport judo include
the Gracies' desire to create a national martial art, the influence of
Brazilian culture, and the Gracies' emphasis on full-contact fighting and
self-defense.

BJJ permits all the techniques that judo allows to take the fight to the
ground, these include judo's scoring throws as well as judo's non-scoring
techniques that it refers to as 'skillful takedowns' (such as the flying
armbar). However, BJJ differs in that it also allows a competitor to drag his
opponent to the ground, and also even to drop to the ground himself provided
he has first taken a grip.[21] Early Kodokan judo not only allowed all that
BJJ now allows, it even allowed a fighter to drop straight to the ground
without first taking a grip.

BJJ's different rules set and point scoring mechanisms are designed to give
BJJ an arguably more practical emphasis, by rewarding positions of control
from which the grappler could strike their opponent (if it weren't for the
sport's restrictions against striking).

### [edit] Ground fighting

BJJ is most strongly differentiated by its greater emphasis on groundwork, in
contrast with judo's greater emphasis on throws, due to both its radically
different point-scoring system, and the absence of most of the judo rules that
cause the competitors to have to recommence in a standing position. This has
led to greater time dedicated to training on the ground, resulting in
enhancement of judo's groundwork techniques by BJJ practitioners.

There are also many techniques that are allegedly created by BJJ, though they
already existed in Kodokan judo. This misconception is often the result of
incorrect assumptions by BJJ practitioners who simply assume that the
techniques they learned in BJJ classes originated there. It is also due in
some instances to BJJ practitioners genuinely rediscovering techniques that
they did not know existed in judo, such as the Gogoplata.

Along with BJJ's great strengths on the ground comes its relative weakness
with standing techniques. There is an increasing amount of cross-training
between the two sports.

### [edit] The Keiko-Gi

The Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu practitioner's keikogi is similar to a judogi, but
with tighter cuffs on the pants and jacket. This allows the practitioner to
benefit from a closer fit, providing less material for an opponent to
manipulate. As is the case with judo, the term kimono is sometimes used to
describe the outfit, especially in Brazil.

## [edit] World Jiu-Jitsu Championship

Main article: World Jiu-Jitsu Championship

One of the most prestigious and recognized Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu tournament in
the world is the World Jiu-Jitsu Championship (known as the Mundials), hosted
annually by the International Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Federation.[citation needed]

It must be noted that when speaking of the world championship it most often
specifies championships held by International Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Federation.
There have been other organizations claiming to have mundials of their own in
parallel, like the CBJJE. Therefore BJJ practitioners could claim to have won
a world championship more than once per year.

## [edit] See also

  * Other arts extensively utilizing leverage, chokes, and/or joint-locks: 
    * Judo
    * Jujutsu
    * Sambo

## [edit] Footnotes

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2007)  
  1. ^ a b VirgÃ­lio, Stanlei (2002) (in Portuguese). Conde Koma - O invencÃ­vel yondan da histÃ³ria. Editora Ãtomo. pp. 93\. ISBN 85-87585-24-X.
  2. ^ a b c d VirgÃ­lio, Stanlei (2002) (in Portuguese). Conde Koma invencÃ­vel yondan da histÃ³ria. Editora Ãtomo. pp. 22â25. ISBN 858758524X.
  3. ^ a b c Untangling a sport that transcends style Chad Edward The Cincinnati Enquirer Oct. 30, 2007 12:05 PM
  4. ^ Eros, Rildo. "HistÃ³ria do JudÃ´". http://www.judodaunicamp.hpg.ig.com.br/historia.htm.
  5. ^ a b VirgÃ­lio, Stanlei (2002) (in Portuguese). Conde Koma - O invencÃ­vel yondan da histÃ³ria. Editora Ãtomo. pp. 72â73. ISBN 85-87585-24-X.
  6. ^ For more on this, see Judo and Kano Jigoro.
  7. ^ a b c As evidenced by the title of the book Hancock, H. Irving; Higashi, Katsukuma (1905). The Complete Kano Jiu-Jitsu (Judo). New York: G. P. Putnam & Sons. pp. 544. See details, including the original book cover here.
  8. ^ As evidenced by the title of the book Kano, Jigoro (1937). Jiu-Jitsu (Judo). Tokyo, Japan: Board of Tourist Industry, Japanese Government Railways. pp. 59. See details, including the original book cover here.
  9. ^ As also evidenced by the title of the book Gregory, O.H.; Tomita, Tsunejiro (circa 1907). Judo: The Modern School of Jiu-Jitsu. Chicago, USA.
  10. ^ Motomura, Kiyoto. "BudÅ in the Physical Education Curriculum of Japanese Schools." In Alexander Bennett, ed., Budo Perspectives. Auckland: Kendo World, 2005, pp. 233-238.
  11. ^ a b VirgÃ­lio, Stanlei (2002) (in Portuguese). Conde Koma - O invencÃ­vel yondan da histÃ³ria. Editora Ãtomo. pp. 93â104. ISBN 85-87585-24-X.
  12. ^ championskempo.com [1]. www.championskempo.com. URL last accessed September 14, 2008.
  13. ^ Peligro, Kid (2003). The Gracie Way: Illustrated History of the World's Greatest Martial Arts Family. Invisible Cities Press Llc. ISBN 1-931229-28-7.
  14. ^ Gracie, Renzo (2003). Mastering Jujitsu. Human Kinetics. pp. 1â233. ISBN 0736044043.
  15. ^ Ohlenkamp, Neil. Principles of Judo Choking Techniques. judoinfo.com. URL last accessed October 23, 2007.
  16. ^ Koiwai, E.K. (MD). How Safe is Choking in Judo?. judoinfo.com. URL last accessed October 23, 2007.
  17. ^ http://www.ibjjf.org/rules.htm
  18. ^ According to the Third Chapter, 10. of the IBJJF Graduation System, http://www.ibjjf.org/graduation.htm
  19. ^ Jorge Gurgel is one practitioner who has confirmed the tradition and the origins of running the gauntlet upon rank promotion in BJJ.
  20. ^ IBJJF rules(International Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Federation) - URL last accessed April 3, 2008
  21. ^ Article 5.2.2.A of the IBJJF rules states "The athlete will only be allowed to kneel after having taken hold of his opponents kimono."

## [edit] Sources

  * Official IBJJF rules. URL last accessed October 24, 2008
  * GastÃ£o and HÃ©lio Gracie talk about Gracie Jiu-Jitsu \- interviewed in 1997 for Gracie Jiu-Jitsu Videos
  * IFBJJ Graduation System. URL last accessed September 19, 2007

## [edit] External links

History

  * "Gracie Brazilian Jiu Jitsu History". http://www.jiujitsuforums.com/jiujitsuhistory.php.

Examples of techniques

  * No-Gi Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Technique Videos
  * Videos of Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Techniques
  * BJJ wiki Techniques

School directories

  * SubFighter School Directory
  * BJJZone.com School Directory

Competition results

  * BJJ/Grappling Tournament Results
  * IBJJF/CBJJ Tournament Results
  * CBJJO Tournament Results

v â¢ d â¢ e

Martial arts by focus  
Martial arts are listed by area of primary focus. Note that they may include
training in the other areas.  
Striking

BÄjÃ­quÃ¡n Â· Boxing Â· Capoeira Â· Dambe Â· Fistfight Â· Fujian White Crane
Â· Karate Â· KenpÅ Â· Kickboxing Â· Lethwei Â· Muay Thai Â· Pradal Serey Â·
Savate Â· Silat Â· Subak Â· Shaolin Kung Fu Â· Taekwondo Â· Tangsoodo Â· Wing
Chun  
Grappling

Aikido Â· Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Â· Glima Â· Judo Â· Jujutsu Â· Kinomichi Â·
Malla-yuddha Â· Varzesh-e Pahlavani Â· Pehlwani Â· Sambo Â· Shuai Jiao Â·
Ssireum Â· Sumo Â· Wrestling  
Weaponry

BattÅjutsu Â· Eskrima Â· Egyptian stick fencing Â· Fencing Â· Gatka Â· IaidÅ
Â· Iaijutsu Â· JÅdÅ Â· Kendo Â· Kenjutsu Â· KyÅ«dÅ Â· KyÅ«jutsu Â·
Shurikenjutsu Â· Silambam Â· SÅjutsu  
Mixed, hybrid,  
and multi-discipline

Baguazhang Â· Bando Â· Bartitsu Â· Hapkido Â· Hung Ga Â· Hwa Rang Do Â· Jeet
Kune Do Â· Kuk Sool Won Â· Kalarippayattu Â· Krav Maga Â· MCMAP Â· Northern
Praying Mantis Â· Ninjutsu Â· Oom Yung Doe Â· Pankration Â· Pencak Silat Â·
San Shou Â· Shootfighting Â· Systema Â· Tai chi chuan Â· Vajra Mushti Â·
Xingyiquan  
For a full list of articles see the List of martial arts  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Martial arts by country of origin  
â¢ The Martial Arts Portal â¢  
Brazil:  
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu â¢ Capoeira

Burma (Myanmar):  
Bando â¢ Lethwei

Cambodia:  
Bokator â¢ Pradal Serey

Canada:  
Okichitaw

China:  
Baguazhang â¢ BÄjÃ­quÃ¡n â¢ Liuhebafa â¢ Northern Praying Mantis â¢
Southern Praying Mantis â¢ Sanshou â¢ Shaolin Kung Fu â¢ Shuai Jiao â¢ Tai
chi chuan â¢ Wing Chun â¢ Wudang Kung Fu â¢ Xingyiquan â¢ Zui Quan

Egypt:  
Egyptian stick fencing

France:  
Canne de combat â¢ Kinomichi â¢ Savate

Greece:  
Pankration

Iceland:  
Glima

Indonesia:  
Pencak Silat

India:  
Dravidian martial arts â¢ Gatka â¢ Kalarippayattu â¢ Malla-yuddha â¢
Silambam â¢ Vajra Mushti

Iran:  
Varzesh-e Pahlavani

Israel:  
Krav Maga

Italy:  
Italian school of swordsmanship

Japan:  
Aikido â¢ BattÅjutsu â¢ HojÅjutsu â¢ IaidÅ â¢ Iaijutsu â¢ JÅdÅ â¢
Judo â¢ Jujutsu â¢ JÅ«kendÅ â¢ Juttejutsu â¢ Kendo â¢ KenpÅ â¢
Kenjutsu â¢ KyÅ«dÅ â¢ KyÅ«jutsu â¢ Naginatajutsu â¢ Ninjutsu â¢
Shurikenjutsu â¢ SÅjutsu â¢ Sumo

Korea:  
Hapkido â¢ Hankumdo â¢ Hwa Rang Do â¢ Subak â¢ Ssireum â¢ Taekkyeon â¢
Taekwondo â¢ Tang Soo Do

Nigeria:  
Dambe

Pakistan:  
Pehlwani â¢ Kabbadi

Philippines:  
Eskrima â¢ Modern Arnis â¢ Sikaran â¢ Yawyan â¢ Panantukan

Portugal:  
Jogo do Pau

Russia:  
Fistfight â¢ Sambo â¢ Systema

RyÅ«kyÅ« Kingdom:  
Karate â¢ Okinawan kobudÅ

Sri Lanka:  
Dravidian martial arts

Switzerland:  
Schwingen

Thailand:  
Muay Thai

Turkey:  
YaÄlÄ± GÃ¼reÅ â¢ Sayokan

United Kingdom  
Bartitsu

United States of America: Jeet Kune Do â¢ Kajukenbo â¢ Marine Corps Martial
Arts Program â¢ Modern Army Combatives

Uzbekistan  
Kurash

Vietnam:  
Vovinam  
No single origin:  
Boxing â¢ Fencing â¢ Kickboxing â¢ Silat â¢ Stick fighting â¢ Wrestling  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Grappling  
Grappling Based Martial Arts

Aikido Â· Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Â· Catch wrestling Â· Chin Na Â· Glima Â· Judo
Â· Jujutsu Â· Kinomichi Â· Kurash Â· Malla-yuddha Â· Mongolian wrestling Â·
Pahlavani Â· Pehlwani Â· Sambo Â· Shuai Jiao Â· Ssireum Â· Sumo Â· Wrestling
Â· YaÄlÄ± GÃ¼reÅ  
General Techniques

Bridge Â· Collar tie Â· Holds Â· Hooks Â· Ippon Seoinage Â· Muay Thai clinch
Â· Nelson hold Â· Overhook Â· Small joint manipulation Â· Stacking Â· Sprawl
Â· Sweep Â· Takedown Â· Transition Â· Underhook  
Grappling positions

Back mount Â· Clinch fighting Â· Collar-and-elbow position Â· Cradle Â·
Crucifix position Â· Guard Â· Half guard Â· Harness Â· Knee-on-stomach Â·
Mount Â· North-south position Â· Over-under position Â· Pinch grip tie Â· Side
control  
Submissions

Chokeholds Â· Joint locks Â· Compression locks  
Organisations

ADCC Submission Wrestling World Championship Â· North American Grappling
Association Â· Grapplers Quest  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazilian_Jiu-Jitsu"

Categories: Combat sports | Brazilian martial arts | Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since October 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008 |
Articles needing additional references from October 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 08:03.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



