
# Arianism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about various theological concepts associated with Arius. For
other uses, see Arian.

Not to be confused with Aryanism.

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)  
Part of a series of articles on  
Arianism  
Arianism  
History and Theology  
Arius Â· Acacians Â· Anomoeanism Â· Arian controversy Â· First Council of
Nicaea Â· Lucian of Antioch Â· Gothic Christianity  

Arian leaders  
Acacius of Caesarea Â· AÃ«tius Â· Demophilus of Constantinople Â· Eudoxius of
Antioch Â· Eunomius of Cyzicus Â· Eusebius of Caesarea Â· Eusebius of
Nicomedia Â· Eustathius of Sebaste Â· George of Laodicea Â· Ulfilas  

Other Arians  
Asterius the Sophist Â· Auxentius of Milan Â· Auxentius of Durostorum Â·
Constantius II Â· Wereka and Batwin Â· Fritigern Â· Alaric I Â· Artemius Â·
Odoacer Â· Theodoric the Great  

Modern semi-Arians  
Samuel Clarke Â· Isaac Newton Â· William Whiston  

Opponents of Arianism  
Peter of Alexandria Â· Achillas of Alexandria Â· Alexander of Alexandria Â·
Hosius of Cordoba Â· Athanasius of Alexandria Â· Paul I of Constantinople Â·

Modern Arianism  
Arian Catholic Church

<IMG> Christianity portal  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Arianism is the theological teaching of Arius (ca. AD 250â336), a Christian
priest, who was first ruled a heretic at the First Council of Nicea, later
exonerated and then pronounced a heretic again after his death.[citation
needed]

Arius lived and taught in Alexandria, Egypt. The most controversial of his
teachings dealt with the relationship between God the Father and the person of
Jesus, saying that Jesus was not of one substance with the Father and that
there had been a time before he existed. This teaching of Arius conflicts with
other christological positions held by Church theologians (and subsequently
maintained by the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Churches and
most Protestant Churches).

The term "Arianism" is also used to refer to other nontrinitarian theological
systems of the 4th century, which regarded the Son of God, the Logos, as a
created being (as in Arianism proper and Anomoeanism) or as neither uncreated
nor created in the sense other beings are created (as in "Semi-Arianism").

## Contents

  * 1 Origin
  * 2 Beliefs
  * 3 The First Council of Nicaea and its aftermath
  * 4 The theological debates reopen
  * 5 Theodosius and the Council of Constantinople
  * 6 Arianism in the early medieval Germanic kingdoms
  * 7 Remnants of Arianism in the West
  * 8 "Arian" as a polemical epithet
  * 9 References
  * 10 Sources
  * 11 See also
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Origin

Main article: Arian controversy

Arius posed the question, "Is Jesus unbegotten?" In other words, he taught
that God the Father and the Son did not exist together eternally. Further,
Arius taught that the pre-incarnate Jesus was a divine being created by (and
possibly inferior to) the Father at some point, before which the Son did not
exist. In English-language works, it is sometimes said that Arians believe
that Jesus is or was a "creature"; in this context, the word is being used in
its original sense of "created being." That doctrine that Arius wrote was
based on Scriptures such as John 14:28 where Jesus says that the father is
"greater than I" to John 17:20-26 where Jesus asks that the Apostles become
"one as we are one" so that all of them including Jesus and God become one.
This is interpreted as indicating that the oneness refers to thought and will,
and not a unity in a Trinity.

Of all the various disagreements within the Christian Church, the Arian
controversy has held the greatest force and power of theological and political
conflict, with the possible exception of the Protestant Reformation. The
conflict between Arianism and Trinitarian beliefs was the first major
doctrinal confrontation in the Church after the legalization of Christianity
by the Roman Emperor Constantine I.

The controversy over Arianism began to rise in the late 3rd century and
extended over the greater part of the 4th century and involved most church
members, simple believers, priests and monks as well as bishops, emperors and
members of Rome's imperial family. Yet, such a deep controversy within the
Church could not have materialized in the 3rd and 4th centuries without some
significant historical influences providing the basis for the Arian doctrines.
Most orthodox or mainstream Christian historians define and minimize the Arian
conflict as the exclusive construct of Arius and a handful of rogue bishops
engaging in heresy. Of the roughly three hundred bishops in attendance at the
Council of Nicea, only three bishops did not sign the Nicene Creed. However to
minimize the extent of Arianism ignores the fact that extremely prominent
Emperors such as Constantius II, the first Christian Emperor, and Valens were
Arians, as well as prominent Gothic, Vandal and Lombard warlords both before
and after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, and that none of these groups
were out of the mainstream of the Roman Empire in the 4th century.

After the dispute over Arius politicized the debate and a catholic or general
solution to the debate was sought, with a great majority holding to the
Trinitarian position, the Arian position was declared officially to be
heterodox. There is some irony in that the Roman Catholic Church canonized
Lucian of Antioch as a brilliant and talented early Christian leader and
martyr, although Lucian taught a very similar form of what would later be
called Arianism. Arius was a student of Lucian's private academy in Antioch.
The Ebionites, among other early Christian groups, also may have maintained
similar doctrines that can be associated with formal Lucian and Arian
Christology.

While Arianism continued to dominate for several decades even within the
family of the Emperor, the Imperial nobility and higher-ranking clergy, in the
end it was Trinitarianism which prevailed politically and thus theologically
in the Roman Empire at the end of the 4th century. Arianism, which had been
taught by the Arian missionary Ulfilas to the Germanic tribes, was dominant
for some centuries among several Germanic tribes in western Europe, especially
Goths and Lombards (and significantly for the late Empire, the Vandals), but
ceased to be the mainstream belief by the 8th century. Trinitarianism remained
the dominant doctrine in all major branches of the Eastern and Western Church
and within Protestantism, although there have been several anti-Trinitarian
movements, some of which acknowledge various similarities to classical
Arianism.

## [edit] Beliefs

Because most extant written material on Arianism was written by its opponents,
the nature of Arian teachings is difficult to define precisely today. The
letter of Auxentius,[1] a 4th-century Arian bishop of Milan, regarding the
missionary Ulfilas, gives the clearest picture of Arian beliefs on the nature
of the Trinity: God the Father ("unbegotten"), always existing, was separate
from the lesser Jesus Christ ("only-begotten"), born before time began and
creator of the world. The Father, working through the Son, created the Holy
Spirit, who was subservient to the Son as the Son was to the Father. The
Father was seen as "the only true God." 1 Corinthians 8:5-6 was cited as proof
text:

> Indeed, even though there may be so-called gods in heaven or on earth â as
in fact there are many gods and many lords â yet for us there is one God
(Gk. theos \- Î¸ÎµÎ¿Ï), the Father, from whom are all things and for whom we
exist, and one Lord (kyrios \- ÎºÏ ÏÎ¹Î¿Ï), Jesus Christ, through whom are
all things and through whom we exist. (NRSV)

A letter from Arius to the Arian Eusebius of Nicomedia succinctly states the
core beliefs of the Arians:

> Some of them say that the Son is an eructation, others that he is a
production, others that he is also unbegotten. These are impieties to which we
cannot listen, even though the heretics threaten us with a thousand deaths.
But we say and believe and have taught, and do teach, that the Son is not
unbegotten, nor in any way part of the unbegotten; and that he does not derive
his subsistence from any matter; but that by his own will and counsel he has
subsisted before time and before ages as perfect God, only begotten and
unchangeable, and that before he was begotten, or created, or purposed, or
established, he was not. For he was not unbegotten. We are persecuted, because
we say that the Son has a beginning, but that God is without beginning."
(Peters, Heresy and Authority in Medieval Europe, p. 41)

## [edit] The First Council of Nicaea and its aftermath

See also: First Council of Nicaea

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 4th-century miniature of the Council of Nicaea, which condemned Arius's
teaching.

In 321, Arius was denounced by a synod at Alexandria for teaching a heterodox
view of the relationship of Jesus to God the Father. Because Arius and his
followers had great influence in the schools of Alexandriaâcounterparts to
modern universities or seminariesâtheir theological views spread, especially
in the eastern Mediterranean.

By 325, the controversy had become significant enough that the Emperor
Constantine called an assembly of bishops, the First Council of Nicaea, which
condemned Arius' doctrine and formulated the Original Nicene Creed[2], forms
of which are still recited in Catholic, Orthodox, Anglican, and some
Protestant services. The Nicene Creed's central term, used to describe the
relationship between the Father and the Son, is Homoousios, or
Consubstantiality, meaning "of the same substance" or "of one being". (The
Athanasian Creed is less often used but is a more overtly anti-Arian statement
on the Trinity.)

The focus of the Council of Nicaea was the divinity of Christ (see Paul of
Samosata and the Synods of Antioch). Arius taught that Jesus Christ was divine
and was sent to earth for the salvation of mankind but that Jesus Christ was
not equal to the Father (infinite, primordial origin) and to the Holy Spirit
(giver of life). Under Arianism, Christ was instead not consubstantial with
God the Father [3] since both the Father and the Son under Arius were made of
"like" essence or being (see homoiousia) but not of the same essence or being
(see homoousia).[4] Ousia is essence or being, in Eastern Christianity, and is
the aspect of God that is completely incomprehensible to mankind and human
perception. It is all that subsists by itself and which has not its being in
another.[5] God the Father and God the Son and God the Holy Spirit all being
uncreated.[6] According to the teaching of Arius, the preexistent Logos and
thus the incarnate Jesus Christ was a created being, of a distinct, though
similar, essence or substance to the Creator; his opponents argued that this
would make Jesus less than God, and that this was heretical.[7] Much of the
distinction between the differing factions was over the phrasing that Christ
expressed in the New Testament to express submission to God the Father.[8] The
theological term for this submission is kenosis.[9] This Ecumenical council
declared that Jesus Christ was a distinct being of God in existence or reality
(hypostasis), which the Latin fathers translated as persona. Jesus was God in
essence, being and or nature (ousia), which the Latin fathers translated as
substantia.

Constantine is believed to have exiled those who refused to accept the Nicean
creedâArius himself, the deacon Euzoios, and the Libyan bishops Theonas of
Marmarica and Secundus of Ptolemaisâand also the bishops who signed the
creed but refused to join in condemnation of Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia and
Theognis of Nicaea. The Emperor also ordered all copies of the Thalia, the
book in which Arius had expressed his teachings, to be burned. However, there
is no evidence that his son and ultimate successor, Constantius II was exiled,
who was an Arian Christian.

Although he was committed to maintaining what the church had defined at
Nicaea, Constantine was also bent on pacifying the situation and eventually
became more lenient toward those condemned and exiled at the council. First he
allowed Eusebius of Nicomedia, who was a protÃ©gÃ© of his sister, and Theognis
to return once they had signed an ambiguous statement of faith. The two, and
other friends of Arius, worked for Arius' rehabilitation. At the First Synod
of Tyre in AD 335, they brought accusations against Athanasius, bishop of
Alexandria, the primary opponent of Arius; after this, Constantine had
Athanasius banished, since he considered him an impediment to reconciliation.
In the same year, the Synod of Jerusalem under Constantine's direction
readmitted Arius to communion in AD 336. Arius, however, died on the way to
this event in Constantinople. This was the same day Arius' own bishop prayed
that if his heresy was to be propagated, the Lord take him in death that
night- or better, Arius. Some scholars also suggest that Arius may have been
poisoned by his opponents. [10] Eusebius and Theognis remained in the
Emperor's favour, and when Constantine, who had been a catechumen much of his
adult life, accepted baptism on his deathbed, it was from Eusebius of
Nicomedia.

## [edit] The theological debates reopen

The Council of Nicaea did not end the controversy, as many bishops of the
Eastern provinces disputed the homoousios, the central term of the Nicene
creed, as it had been used by Paul of Samosata, who had advocated a
monarchianist Christology. Both the man and his teaching, including the term
homoousios, had been condemned by the Synods of Antioch in 269.

Hence, after Constantine's death in 337, open dispute resumed again.
Constantine's son Constantius II, who had become Emperor of the eastern part
of the Empire, actually encouraged the Arians and set out to reverse the
Nicene creed. His advisor in these affairs was Eusebius of Nicomedia, who had
already at the Council of Nicea been the head of the Arian party, who also was
made bishop of Constantinople.

Constantius used his power to exile bishops adhering to the Nicene creed,
especially Athanasius of Alexandria, who fled to Rome. In 355 Constantius
became the sole Emperor and extended his pro-Arian policy toward the western
provinces, frequently using force to push through his creed, even exiling Pope
Liberius and installing Antipope Felix II.

As debates raged in an attempt to come up with a new formula, three camps
evolved among the opponents of the Nicene creed. The first group mainly
opposed the Nicene terminology and preferred the term homoiousios (alike in
substance) to the Nicene homoousios, while they rejected Arius and his
teaching and accepted the equality and coeternality of the persons of the
Trinity. Because of this centrist position, and despite their rejection of
Arius, they were called "semi-Arians" by their opponents. The second group
also avoided invoking the name of Arius, but in large part followed Arius'
teachings and, in another attempted compromise wording, described the Son as
being like (homoios) the Father. A third group explicitly called upon Arius
and described the Son as unlike (anhomoios) the Father. Constantius wavered in
his support between the first and the second party, while harshly persecuting
the third.

The debates between these groups resulted in numerous synods, among them the
Council of Sardica in 343, the Council of Sirmium in 358 and the double
Council of Rimini and Seleucia in 359, and no less than fourteen further creed
formulas between 340 and 360, leading the pagan observer Ammianus Marcellinus
to comment sarcastically: "The highways were covered with galloping bishops."
None of these attempts was acceptable to the defenders of Nicene orthodoxy:
writing about the latter councils, Saint Jerome remarked that the world "awoke
with a groan to find itself Arian."

After Constantius' death in 361, his successor Julian, a devotee of Rome's
pagan gods, declared that he would no longer attempt to favor one church
faction over another, and allowed all exiled bishops to return; this had the
objective of further increasing dissension among Christians. The Emperor
Valens, however, revived Constantius' policy and supported the "Homoian"
party, exiling bishops and often using force. During this persecution many
bishops were exiled to the other ends of the Empire, (e.g., Hilarius of
Poitiers to the Eastern provinces). These contacts and the common plight
subsequently led to a rapprochement between the Western supporters of the
Nicene creed and the homoousios and the Eastern semi-Arians.

## [edit] Theodosius and the Council of Constantinople

Main article: Theodosius I

It was not until the co-reigns of Gratian and Theodosius that Arianism was
effectively wiped out among the ruling class and elite of the Eastern Empire.
Theodosius' wife St Flacilla was instrumental in his campaign to end Arianism.
Valens died in the Battle of Adrianople in 378 and was succeeded by Theodosius
I, who adhered to the Nicene creed. This allowed for settling the dispute.

Two days after Theodosius arrived in Constantinople, November 24, 380, he
expelled the Homoian bishop, Demophilus of Constantinople, and surrendered the
churches of that city to Gregory Nazianzus, the leader of the rather small
Nicene community there, an act which provoked rioting. Theodosius had just
been baptized, by bishop Acholius of Thessalonica, during a severe illness, as
was common in the early Christian world. In February he and Gratian published
an edict[11] that all their subjects should profess the faith of the bishops
of Rome and Alexandria (i.e., the Nicene faith), or be handed over for
punishment for not doing so.

Although much of the church hierarchy in the East had opposed the Nicene creed
in the decades leading up to Theodosius' accession, he managed to achieve
unity on the basis of the Nicene creed. In 381, at the Second Ecumenical
Council in Constantinople, a group of mainly Eastern bishops assembled and
accepted the Nicene Creed of 381,[12] which was supplemented in regard to the
Holy Spirit, as well as some other changes: see Comparison between Creed of
325 and Creed of 381. This is generally considered the end of the dispute
about the Trinity and the end of Arianism among the Roman, non-Germanic
peoples.

## [edit] Arianism in the early medieval Germanic kingdoms

Main articles: Gothic Christianity and Germanic Christianity

However, during the time of Arianism's flowering in Constantinople, the Gothic
convert Ulfilas (later the subject of the letter of Auxentius cited above) was
sent as a missionary to the Gothic barbarians across the Danube, a mission
favored for political reasons by emperor Constantius II. Ulfilas' initial
success in converting this Germanic people to an Arian form of Christianity
was strengthened by later events. When the Germanic peoples entered the Roman
Empire and founded successor-kingdoms in the western part, most had been Arian
Christians for more than a century.[citation needed]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ceiling Mosaic of the Arian Baptistry

The conflict in the 4th century had seen Arian and Nicene factions struggling
for control of the Church. In contrast, in the Arian German kingdoms
established on the wreckage of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century,
there were entirely separate Arian and Nicene Churches with parallel
hierarchies, each serving different sets of believers. The Germanic elites
were Arians, and the majority population Nicene.[citation needed] Many
scholars see the persistence of the Germanic Arianism as a strategy to
differentiate the Germanic elite from the local inhabitants and culture and to
maintain their group identity.[citation needed]

Most Germanic tribes were generally tolerant of the Nicene beliefs of their
subjects. However, the Vandals tried for several decades to force their Arian
belief on their North African Nicene subjects, exiling Nicene clergy,
dissolving monasteries, and exercising heavy pressure on non-conforming
Christians.

By the beginning of the 8th century, these kingdoms had either been conquered
by Nicene neighbors (Ostrogoths, Vandals, Burgundians) or their rulers had
accepted Nicene Christianity (Visigoths, Lombards).

The Franks were unique among the Germanic peoples in that they entered the
empire as pagans and converted to Nicene Christianity directly, guided by
their king Clovis.[citation needed]

## [edit] Remnants of Arianism in the West

However, much of southeastern Europe and central Europe, including many of the
Goths and Vandals respectively, had embraced Arianism (the Visigoths converted
to Arian Christianity in 376), which led to Arianism being a religious factor
in various wars in the Roman Empire.[13] In the west, organized Arianism
survived in North Africa, in Hispania, and parts of Italy until it was finally
suppressed in the 6th and 7th centuries. Later, during the Protestant
reformation, a religious sect in Poland known as the Polish Brethren were
commonly referred to as Arians due to their rejection of the Trinity.

## [edit] "Arian" as a polemical epithet

In many ways, the conflict around Arian beliefs in the fourth, fifth and sixth
centuries helped firmly define the centrality of the Trinity in Nicene
Christian theology. As the first major intra-Christian conflict after
Christianity's legalization, the struggle between Nicenes and Arians left a
deep impression on the institutional memory of Nicene churches.

Archbishop Dmitri of the Orthodox Church in America said Islam is the largest
descendant of Arianism today. There is some superficial similarity in Islam's
teaching that Jesus was a great prophet, but very distinct from God, although
Islam sees Jesus as a human messenger of God without the divine properties
that Arianism attributes to Christ. Islam sees itself as a continuation of the
Jewish and Christian traditions and reveres many of the same prophets, though
Islam denies the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus and historical Arians
claimed it.[citation needed]

Thus, over the past 1,500 years, some Christians have used the term Arian to
refer to those groups that see themselves as worshiping Jesus Christ or
respecting his teachings, but do not hold to the Nicene creed. Despite the
frequency with which this name is used as a polemical label, there has been no
historically continuous survival of Arianism into the modern era.

There have been religious movements holding beliefs that either they, or their
opponents, have considered Arian. To quote the Encyclopaedia Britannica's
article on Arianism: "In modern times some Unitarians are virtually Arians in
that they are unwilling either to reduce Christ to a mere human being or to
attribute to him a divine nature identical with that of the Father."[14]
However, their doctrines cannot be considered representative of traditional
Arian doctrines or vice-versa. Another religious movement with a strong Arian
belief are the Jehovah's Witnesses. Jesus Christ is considered divine but not
equal to the one God.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The letter can be found at http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/jod/texts/auxentius.trans.html.
  2. ^ NPNF2-14. The Seven Ecumenical Councils | Christian Classics Ethereal Library
  3. ^ "The oneness of Essence, the Equality of Divinity, and the Equality of Honor of God the Son with the God the Father." Orthodox Dogmatic Theology: A Concise Exposition Protopresbyter Michael Pomazansky pages 92â95
  4. ^ Orthodox Dogmatic Theology: A Concise Exposition Protopresbyter Michael Pomazansky pages 92â95: "This heretical teaching of Arius disrupted the whole Christian world, since it drew after it very many people. In 325 the First Ecumenical Council was called against this teaching, and at this council 318 of the chief hierarchs of the church unanimously expressed the ancient teaching of Orthodoxy and condemned the false teaching of Arius. The Council triumphantly pronounced anathema against those who say that there was a time the Son of God did not exist, against those who affirm that he was created, or that he is of a different essence from God the Father. The Council composed of a Symbol of Faith, which was confirmed and completed later at the Second Ecumenical Council. The unity and equality of honor of the Son of God with God the Father was expressed by this Council in the Symbol of Faith by there words: 'of One Essence with the Father.'"
  5. ^ The Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church, SVS Press, 1997. (ISBN 0-913836-31-1) James Clarke & Co Ltd, 1991. (ISBN 0-227-67919-9) V Lossky pg50-51
  6. ^ Orthodox Dogmatic Theology: A Concise Exposition Protopresbyter Michael Pomazansky pages 57 As quote by John Damascene: God is unoriginate, unending, eternal, constant, uncreated, unchanging, unalterable, simple, incomplex, bodiless, invisible, intangible, indescribable, without bounds, inaccessible to the mind, uncontainable, incomprehensible, good, righteous, that Creator of all creatures, the almighty Pantocrator.
  7. ^ Orthodox Dogmatic Theology: A Concise Exposition Protopresbyter Michael Pomazansky pages 92-95: "Finally, following the authoritative example of St Basil the Great, it became accepted to understand by the hypostasis the personal attributes in the Triune Divinity. But apart from this, there were heretics in the ancient Christian period who consciously denied or lessened the Divinity of the Son of God. Heresies of this type were numerous and from time to time caused strong disturbances in the Church. Such, for example, were the following heretics: 1. In the Apostolic Age- the Ebonites (after the name of the heretic Ebion). The Holy Fathers testify that the holy Evangelist John the Theologian wrote his Gospel against them. 2. In the 3rd century, Paul of Samosata, who was accused by two councils of Antioch in the same century. 3. The most dangerous of all the heretics was Arius, the presbyter of Alexandria, in the 4th century. Arius taught that the Word, or Son of God, received the beginning of His existence in time, although before anything else, that he was created by God, although subsequently God created everything through him; that he is called the Son of God only because He is the most perfect of all the created spirits, and has a nature which, being different from the Father's is not divine. This heretical teaching of Arius disturbed the whole Christian World, since it drew after it very many people. In 325 the First Ecumenical Council was called against this teaching, and at this council 318 of the chief hierarchs of the church unanimously expressed the ancient teaching of Orthodoxy and condemned the false teaching of Arius. The Council triumphantly pronounced anathema against those who say that there was a time the Son of God did not exist, against those who affirm that he was created, or that he is of a different essence from God the Father. The Council composed of a Symbol of Faith, which was confirmed and completed later at the Second Ecumenical Council. The unity and equality of honor of the Son of God with God the Father was expressed by this Council in the Symbol of Faith by there words: "of One Essence with the Father." After the council, the Arian heresy was divided into three branches and continued to exist from some decades. It was subject to further refutation in its details at several local councils and in the works of the great Fathers of the Church of the 4th century and part of the 5th century (Sts. Athanasius the Great, Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, John Chrysostom, Gregory of Nyssa, Epiphanius, Ambrose of Milan, Cyril of Alexandria, and others). However, the spirit of this heresy even later found a place for itself in various false teachings both of the middle and modern times."
  8. ^ Orthodox Dogmatic Theology: A Concise Exposition Protopresbyter Michael Pomazansky pages 92-95: "After the council, the Arian heresy was divided into three branches and continued to exist from some decades. It was subject to further refutation in its details at several local councils and in the works of the great Fathers of the Church of the 4th century and part of the 5th century (Sts.Athanasius the Great, Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, John Chrysostom, Gregory of Nyssa, Epiphanius, Ambrose of Milan, Cyril of Alexandria, and others). However, the spirit of this heresy even later found a place for itself in various false teachings both of the middle and modern times. In answering the opinions of the Arians, the Fathers of the Church did not overlook a single one of the passages in Holy Scripture which had been cited by the heretics in justification of their idea of the inequality of the Son with the Father. Concerning the expressions in Sacred Scripture which seem to speak of the inequality of the Son with the Father, one should bear in mind the following: a) that the Lord Jesus Christ is not only God, but also became Man, and such expressions can be referred to His humanity; b) that in addition, He, as our Redeemer, during the days of His earthly life was in a condition of voluntary belittlement, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death (phil. 2:7-8). In keeping with these words of the Apostle, the Fathers of the Church express this condition by the words ekkenosis, kenosis, which mean a pouring out, a lessening, a belittlement. "Foreseeing Thy divine self-emptying upon the cross, Habakkuk cried out marvelling" (Canon for the matins of Great Saturday). Even when the Lord speaks of His own Divinity, He, being sent by the Father and having come to fulfill upon the earth the will of the Father, places Himself in obedience to the Father, being One in Essence and equal in honor with Him as the Son, giving us an example of obedience. This relationship of submission refers not to the Essence (ousia) of the Divinity, but to the activity of the Persons in the World: the Father is He Who Sends; the Son is He Who is Sent. This the obedience of love."
  9. ^ Orthodox Dogmatic Theology: A Concise Exposition Protopresbyter Michael Pomazansky pages 92-95: "After the council, the Arian heresy was divided into three branches and continued to exist from some decades. It was subject to further refutation in its details at several local councils and in the works of the great Fathers of the Church of the 4th century and part of the 5th century (Sts.Athanasius the Great, Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, John Chrysostom, Gregory of Nyssa, Epiphanius, Ambrose of Milan, Cyril of Alexandria, and others). However, the spirit of this heresy even later found a place for itself in various false teachings both of the middle and modern times. In answering the opinions of the Arians, the Fathers of the Church did not overlook a single one of the passages in Holy Scripture which had been cited by the heretics in justification of their idea of the inequality of the Son with the Father. Concerning the expressions in Sacred Scripture which seem to speak of the inequality of the Son with the Father, one should bear in mind the following: a) that the Lord Jesus Christ is not only God, but also became Man, and such expressions can be referred to His humanity; b) that in addition, He, as our Redeemer, during the days of His earthly life was in a condition of voluntary belittlement, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death (Phil. 2:7-8). In keeping with these words of the Apostle, the Fathers of the Church express this condition by the words ekkenosis, kenosis, which mean a pouring out, a lessening, a belittlement. "Foreseeing Thy divine self-emptying upon the cross, Habakkuk cried out marvelling" (Canon for the matins of Great Saturday). Even when the Lord speaks of His own Divinity, He, being sent by the Father and having come to fulfill upon the earth the will of the Father, places Himself in obedience to the Father, being One in Essence and equal in honor with Him as the Son, giving us an example of obedience. This relationship of submission refers not to the Essence (ousia) of the Divinity, but to the activity of the Persons in the World: the Father is He Who Sends; the Son is He Who is Sent. This the obedience of love."
  10. ^ Edward Gibbons "The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire", Chapter 21, (1776-88), Jonathan Kirsch, "God Against the Gods: The History of the War Between Monotheism and Polytheism", 2004, and Charles Freeman, "The Closing of the Western Mind: The Rise of Faith and the Fall of Reason", 2002.
  11. ^ Sozomen's Church History VII.4
  12. ^ The text of this version of the Nicene creed is available at http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf214.ix.iii.html.
  13. ^ St Gregory of Tours The inhibiting and paralyzing force of superstitious beliefs penetrated to every department of life, and the most primary and elementary activities of society were influenced. War, for example, was not a simple matter of a test of strength and courage, but supernatural matters had to be taken carefully into consideration. When Clovis said of the Goths in southern Gaul, "I take it hard that these Arians should hold a part of the Gauls; let us go with God's aid and conquer them and bring the land under our dominion", [note: see p. 45 (Book II:37)] he was not speaking in a hypocritical or arrogant manner but in real accordance with the religious sentiment of the time. What he meant was that the Goths, being heretics, were at once enemies of the true God and inferior to the orthodox Franks in their supernatural backing. Considerations of duty, strategy, and self-interest all reinforced one another in Clovis's mind. However, it was not always the orthodox side that won. We hear of a battle fought a few years before Gregory became bishop of Tours between king Sigibert and the Huns, [note: Book IV:29] in which the Huns " by the use of magic arts caused various false appearances to arise before their enemies and overcame them decisively. Medieval Study Guide to Gregory of Tours History of the Franks. http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/basis/gregory-hist.html
  14. ^ "Arianism." EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica. EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica 2007 Deluxe Edition. Chicago: EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, 2007.

## [edit] Sources

  * Athanasius of Alexandria, History of the Arians Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part V Part VI Part VII Part VIII
  * Lewis Ayres, Nicaea and its Legacy: An Approach to Fourth-Century Trinitarian Theology (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
  * Mark Belletini, Arius in the Mirror: The Alexandrian Dissent And How It Is Reflected in Modern Unitarian Universalist Practice and Discourse http://firstuucolumbus.org/sermons/ariuspaper.htm
  * Ivor J. Davidson, A Public Faith, Volume 2 of Baker History of the Church, 2005, ISBN 0-8010-1275-9
  * R.P.C. Hanson, The Search for the Christian Doctrine of God: The Arian Controversy, 318-381 (T&T Clark, 1988).
  * J.N.D. Kelly, Early Christian Doctrines, 1978, ISBN 0-06-064334-X
  * Sarah Parvis, Marcellus of Ancyra And the Lost Years of the Arian Controversy 325-345 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006).
  * William C. Rusch, The Trinitarian Controversy, (Sources of Early Christian Thought), 1980, ISBN 0-8006-1410-0
  * John Henry Newman, Arians of the Fourth Century, 1833
  * Schaff, Philip Theological Controversies and the Development of Orthodoxy, History of the Christian Church, Vol III, Ch. IX
  * Williams, Rowan, Arius: Heresy and Tradition, rev. edn. 2001, ISBN 0-8028-4969-5
  * Documents of the Arian Controversy (2007, German and original languages only, Berlin and New York: Walter De Gruyter, 2007)

## [edit] See also

  * Arian controversy
  * Arius
  * Semi-Arianism
  * Subordinationist
  * Christology
  * Unitarianism
  * Unitarian Christianity
  * Biblical Unitarianism
  * Germanic Christianity
  * Arian Catholicism
  * Nontrinitarianism
  * Non-Trinitarian churches
  * Shituf

## [edit] External links

  * THE ARIANS OF THE FOURTH CENTURY by JOHN HENRY âCARDINALâ NEWMAN in "btm" format
  * Catholic Encyclopeia: Arianism
  * Christian Cyclopedia: Arianism
  * Concordia Cyclopedia: Arianism (page 1) (page 2) (page 3)
  * Arian Catholic Church and Theological Society (Arian Catholic viewpoint)
  * Believe: Arianism
  * Jewish Encyclopedia: Arianism
  * Concise Summary of the Arian Controversy
  * English translations of all extant letters relating to early Arianism
  * A map of early sympathizers with Arius

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arianism"

Categories: Arianism | Ancient Christian denominations | Antitrinitarianism |
Late Antiquity

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2009 |
Christianity Portal pages | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles
with unsourced statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced
statements since September 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since
January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 09:55.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



