
# Penguin diagram

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

In quantum field theory, penguin diagrams are a class of Feynman diagrams
which are important for understanding CP violating processes in the standard
model.

They were first isolated and studied by Arkady Vainshtein, and the processes
which they describe were first observed in 1991 and 1994 by the CLEO
collaboration.

## [edit] Origin of the name

<IMG>

<IMG>

Example of a penguin diagram

John Ellis was the first to refer to a certain class of Feynman diagrams as
penguin diagrams, due in part to their shape, and in part to a legendary bar-
room bet with Melissa Franklin. According to John Ellis:[1]

â

Mary K. [Gaillard], Dimitri [Nanopoulos] and I first got interested in what
are now called penguin diagrams while we were studying CP violation in the
Standard Model in 1976... The penguin name came in 1977, as follows.

In the spring of 1977, Mike Chanowitz, Mary K and I wrote a paper on GUTs
predicting the b quark mass before it was found. When it was found a few weeks
later, Mary K, Dimitri, Serge Rudaz and I immediately started working on its
phenomenology. That summer, there was a student at CERN, Melissa Franklin who
is now an experimentalist at Harvard. One evening, she, I, and Serge went to a
pub, and she and I started a game of darts. We made a bet that if I lost I had
to put the word penguin into my next paper. She actually left the darts game
before the end, and was replaced by Serge, who beat me. Nevertheless, I felt
obligated to carry out the conditions of the bet.

For some time, it was not clear to me how to get the word into this b quark
paper that we were writing at the time. Then, one evening, after working at
CERN, I stopped on my way back to my apartment to visit some friends living in
Meyrin where I smoked some illegal substance. Later, when I got back to my
apartment and continued working on our paper, I had a sudden flash that the
famous diagrams look like penguins. So we put the name into our paper, and the
rest, as they say, is history.

â  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ [hep-ph/9510397] ITEP Lectures in Particle Physics

<IMG> This physics-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by
expanding it.  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penguin_diagram"

Categories: Quantum field theory | Physics stubs

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 April 2009, at 11:57 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



