
# Scientific Revolution

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

History of science  
<IMG>  
Background  
Theories/sociology  
Historiography  
Pseudoscience  
By era  
In early cultures  
in Classical Antiquity  
In the Middle Ages  
In the Renaissance  
Scientific Revolution  
By topic  
Natural sciences  
Astronomy  
Biology  
Chemistry  
Ecology  
Geography  
Geology  
Paleontology  
Physics  
Social sciences  
Anthropology  
Economics  
Linguistics  
Political science  
Psychology  
Sociology  
Technology  
Agricultural science  
Computer science  
Materials science  
Medicine  
Navigational pages  
Timelines  
Portal  
Categories  
This article is about the period in history. For the process of scientific
progress via revolution, proposed by Thomas Kuhn, see Paradigm shift.

The period which many historians of science call the Scientific Revolution is
commonly viewed as the foundation and origin of modern science.[1] It was a
time roughly coinciding with the later part of the Middle Ages and through the
Renaissance in which scientific ideas in physics, astronomy, and biology
evolved rapidly. The Scientific Revolution was also a period during which new
organizations and institutions, such as the Royal Society, were established
for the study of the natural world. The "Continuity Thesis" is the opposing
view that there was no radical discontinuity between the development of
science in the Middle Ages and later developments in the Renaissance and early
modern period.

## Contents

  * 1 Emergence of the revolution
  * 2 Significance of the Revolution
  * 3 New Ideas
  * 4 Ancient and medieval background
  * 5 New approaches to nature
    * 5.1 The mechanical philosophy
    * 5.2 The Chemical philosophy
    * 5.3 Empiricism
    * 5.4 Failification
  * 6 Scientific developments
  * 7 Theoretical developments
  * 8 Contrary views
  * 9 See also
    * 9.1 Revolutions
  * 10 Notes

  
## [edit] Emergence of the revolution

The Scientific Revolution can be roughly dated as having begun in 1543, the
year in which Nicolaus Copernicus published his De revolutionibus orbium
coelestium (On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres) and Andreas Vesalius
published his De humani corporis fabrica (On the Fabric of the Human body).[2]
Since the time of Voltaire, some observers have considered that a
revolutionary change in thought, called in recent times a scientific
revolution, took place around the year 1600; that is, that there were dramatic
and historically rapid changes in the ways in which scholars thought about the
physical world and studied it. As with many historical demarcations,
historians of science disagree about its boundaries. Although the period is
commonly dated to the 16th and 17th centuries, some see elements contributing
to the revolution as early as the middle ages,[3] and finding its last stages
--in chemistry and biology\--in the 18th and 19th centuries.[4] There is
general agreement however, that the intervening period saw a fundamental
transformation in scientific ideas in physics, astronomy, and biology, in
institutions supporting scientific investigation, and in the more widely held
picture of the universe.

Science, as it is treated in this account, is essentially understood and
practiced in the modern world; with various "other narratives" or alternate
ways of knowing omitted.

Alexandre KoyrÃ© coined the term and definition of 'The Scientific Revolution'
in 1939, which later influenced the work of traditional historian A. Rupert
Hall and scientist J.D. Bernal and subsequent historiography on the subject
(Steven Shapin, The Scientific Revolution, 1996). To some extent, this arises
from different conceptions of what the revolution was; some of the rancor and
cross-purposes in such debates may arise from lack of recognition of these
fundamental differences. But it also and more crucially arises from
disagreements over the historical facts about different theories and their
logical analysis, e.g. Did Aristotle's dynamics deny the principle of inertia
or not? Did science become mechanistic?

## [edit] Significance of the Revolution

The science of the late Renaissance was significant in establishing a base for
many modern sciences. The scientist J. D. Bernal believed that âthe
renaissance enabled a scientific revolution which let scholars look at the
world in a different light. Religion, superstition, and fear were replaced by
reason and knowledgeâ. Despite some challenges to Roman Catholic dogma,
however, many notable figures of time known today as the Scientific Revolution
- Copernicus, Kepler, Newton, and even Galileo \- remained devout in their
faith.

This period saw a fundamental transformation in scientific ideas across
physics, astronomy, and biology, in institutions supporting scientific
investigation, and in the more widely held picture of the universe. Brilliant
minds started to question all manners of things and it was this questioning
that led to the Scientific Revolution, which in turn formed the foundations of
all modern sciences. The Scientific Revolution led to the establishment of
several modern sciences.

Many contemporary writers and modern historians claim that there was a
revolutionary change in world view. In 1611 the English poet, John Donne,
wrote:

â

[The] new Philosophy calls all in doubt,  
The Element of fire is quite put out;  
The Sun is lost, and th'earth, and no man's wit  
Can well direct him where to look for it [5]

â  
Mid-twentieth century historian Herbert Butterfield was less disconcerted, but
nevertheless saw the change as fundamental:

â Since that revolution turned the authority in English not only of the
Middle Ages but of the ancient world â since it started not only in the
eclipse of scholastic philosophy but in the destruction of Aristotelian
physics â it outshines everything since the rise of Christianity and reduces
the Renaissance and Reformation to the rank of mere episodes, mere internal
displacements within the system of medieval Christendom.... [It] looms so
large as the real origin both of the modern world and of the modern mentality
that our customary periodization of European history has become an anachronism
and an encumbrance.[6] â  
More recently, sociologist and historian of science Steven Shapin opened his
book, The Scientific Revolution, with the paradoxical statement: "There was no
such thing as the Scientific Revolution, and this is a book about it."[7]
Although historians of science continue to debate the exact meaning of the
term, and even its validity, the Scientific Revolution still remains a useful
concept to interpret the many changes in science.

## [edit] New Ideas

<IMG>

<IMG>

Galileo Galilei. Portrait in crayon by Leoni

The Scientific Revolution was not marked by any single change. The following
new ideas contributed to what is called the Scientific Revolution:

  * The replacement of the Earth by the Sun as the center of the solar system
  * The replacement of the Aristotelian theory that matter was continuous and made up of the elements Earth, Water, Air, Fire, and Aether by rival ideas that matter was atomistic or corpuscular[8] or that its chemical composition was even more complex[9]
  * The replacement of the Aristotelian idea that by their nature, heavy bodies moved straight down toward their natural places; that by their nature, light bodies moved naturally straight up toward their natural place; and that by their nature, ethereal bodies moved in unchanging circular motions[10] by the idea that all bodies are heavy and move according to the same physical laws
  * The replacement of the Aristotelian concept that all motions require the continued action of a cause by the inertial concept that motion is a state that, once started, continues indefinitely without further cause[11]
  * The replacement of Galen's treatment of the venous and arterial systems as two separate systems with William Harvey's concept that blood circulated from the arteries to the veins "impelled in a circle, and is in a state of ceaseless motion"[12]

However, many of the important figures of the scientific revolution shared in
the Renaissance respect for ancient learning and cited ancient pedigrees for
their innovations. Copernicus (1473â1543),[13] Kepler (1571â1630),[14]
Newton (1643â1727)[15] and Galileo Galilei (1564â1642)[16][17][18][19] all
traced different ancient and medieval ancestries for the heliocentric system.
In the Axioms Scholium of his Principia Newton said its axiomatic three laws
of motion were already accepted by mathematicians such as Huygens
(1629â1695), Wallace, Wren and others, and also in memos in his draft
preparations of the second edition of the Principia he attributed its first
law of motion and its law of gravity to a range of historical figures.[20]
According to Newton himself and other historians of science [21], his
Principia's first law of motion was the same as Aristotle's counterfactual
principle of interminable locomotion in a void stated in Physics 4.8.215a19--
22 and was also endorsed by ancient Greek atomists and others. As Newton
expressed himself:

    
    "All those ancients knew the first law [of motion] who attributed to atoms in an infinite vacuum a motion which was rectilinear, extremely swift and perpetual because of the lack of resistance...Aristotle was of the same mind, since he expresses his opinion thus...[in Physics 4.8.215a19-22], speaking of motion in the void [in which bodies have no gravity and] where there is no impediment he writes: 'Why a body once moved should come to rest anywhere no one can say. For why should it rest here rather than there ? Hence either it will not be moved, or it must be moved indefinitely, unless something stronger impedes it.' " [p310-11, Unpublished Scientific Papers of Isaac Newton, (Eds) Hall & Hall, Cambridge University Press 1962.]
If correct, Newton's view that the Principia's first law of motion had been
accepted at least since antiquity and by Aristotle refutes the traditional
thesis of a scientific revolution in dynamics by Newton's because the law was
denied by Aristotle. The ancestor to Newton's laws of inertia[22] and
momentum[23] was the theory of impetus developed by the medieval scholars John
Philoponus, Avicenna and Jean Buridan. The concepts of acceleration[24][25]
and reaction[26][27] were also hypothesized by the medieval Arabic physicists,
Hibat Allah Abu'l-Barakat al-Baghdaadi and Avempace.

The geocentric model remained a widely accepted model until around 1543 when a
Polish astronomer by the name of Nicolaus Copernicus published his book
entitled On the Revolutions of Heavenly Spheres. At around the same time, the
findings of Vesalius corrected the previous anatomical teachings of Galen,
which were based upon the dissection of animals even though they were supposed
to be a guide to the human body.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, the first person to use a microscope to view
bacteria.

Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564) was an author of one of the most influential
books on human anatomy, De humani corporis fabrica.[28] French surgeon
Ambroise ParÃ© (c.1510â1590) is considered as one of the fathers of surgery.
He was leader in surgical techniques and battlefield medicine, especially the
treatment of wounds. Partly based on the works by the Italian surgeon and
anatomist Matteo Realdo Colombo (c. 1516 - 1559) the Anatomist William Harvey
(1578â1657) described the circulatory system.[29] Herman Boerhaave
(1668â1738) is sometimes referred to as a "father of physiology" due to his
exemplary teaching in Leiden and textbook 'Institutiones medicae' (1708).

It was between 1650 and 1800 that the science of modern dentistry developed.
It is said that the 17th century French physician Pierre Fauchard
(1678â1761) started dentistry science as we know it today, and he has been
named "the father of modern dentistry".[30]

Wilhelm Schickard (1592â1635) built one of the first calculating machines in
1623.[31] Pierre Vernier (1580â1637) was inventor and eponym of the vernier
scale used in measuring devices.[32] Evangelista Torricelli (1607â1647) was
best known for his invention of the barometer. Although John Napier
(1550â1617) invented logarithms, and Edmund Gunter (1581â1626) created the
logarithmic scales (lines, or rules) upon which slide rules are based, it was
William Oughtred (1575â1660) who first used two such scales sliding by one
another to perform direct multiplication and division; and thus is credited as
the inventor of the slide rule in 1622.

Blaise Pascal (1623â1662) made important contributions to the construction
of mechanical calculators, the study of fluids, and clarified the concepts of
pressure and vacuum by generalizing the work of Evangelista Torricelli. He
wrote a significant treatise on the subject of projective geometry at the age
of sixteen, and later corresponded with Pierre de Fermat (1601â1665) on
probability theory, strongly influencing the development of modern economics
and social science.[33] John Hadley (1682â1744) was mathematician inventor
of the octant, the precursor to the sextant. Hadley also improved the
reflecting telescope, building the first Gregorian telescope.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Denis Papin, best known for his pioneering invention of the steam digester,
the forerunner of the steam engine.

Denis Papin (1647â1712) was best known for his pioneering invention of the
steam digester, the forerunner of the steam engine.[34] Abraham Darby I
(1678â1717) was the first, and most famous, of three generations with that
name in an Abraham Darby family that played an important role in the
Industrial Revolution. He developed a method of producing high-grade iron in a
blast furnace fuelled by coke rather than charcoal. This was a major step
forward in the production of iron as a raw material for the Industrial
Revolution. Thomas Newcomen (1664â1729) perfected a practical steam engine
for pumping water, the Newcomen steam engine. Consequently, he can be regarded
as a forefather of the Industrial Revolution.[35]

In 1672, Otto von Guericke (1602â1686), was the first human to knowingly
generate electricity using a machine, and in 1729, Stephen Gray (1666-1736)
demonstrated that electricity could be "transmitted" through metal filaments.
The first electrical storage device was invented in 1745, the so-called
"Leyden jar," and in 1749, Benjamin Franklin (1706â1790) demonstrated that
lightning was electricity. In 1698 Thomas Savery (c.1650-1715) patented an
early steam engine.[36]

German scientist Georg Agricola (1494â1555), known as "the father of
mineralogy", published his great work De re metallica.[37] Robert Boyle
(1627â1691) was credited with the discovery of Boyle's Law. He is also
credited for his landmark publication The Sceptical Chymist, where he attempts
to develop an atomic theory of matter. The person celebrated as the "father of
modern chemistry" is Antoine Lavoisier (1743â1794) who developed his law of
Conservation of mass in 1789, also called Lavoisier's Law.[38] Antoine
Lavoisier proved that burning was caused by oxidation, that is, the mixing of
a substance with oxygen. He also proved that diamonds were made of carbon and
argued that all living processes were at their heart chemical reactions. In
1766, Henry Cavendish (1731-1810) discovered hydrogen. In 1774, Joseph
Priestley (1733â1804) discovered oxygen.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gottfried Leibniz (1646-1716) invented the binary system, foundation of
virtually all modern computer architectures.

German physician Leonhart Fuchs (1501â1566) was one of the three founding
fathers of botany, along with Otto Brunfels (1489- 1534) and Hieronymus Bock
(1498-1554) (also called Hieronymus Tragus).[39] Valerius Cordus (1515â1554)
authored one of the greatest pharmacopoeias and one of the most celebrated
herbals in history, Dispensatorium (1546).[40]

In his Systema Naturae, published in 1767, Carl von LinnÃ© (1707â1778)
catalogued all the living creatures into a single system that defined their
morphological relations to one another: the Linnean classification system. He
is often called the "Father of Taxonomy".[41] Georges Buffon (1707-1788), was
perhaps the most important of Charles Darwinâs predecessors. From 1744 to
1788, he wrote his monumental Histoire naturelle, gÃ©nÃ©rale et particuliÃ¨re,
which included everything known about the natural world up until that
date.[42]

Along with the inventor and microscopist Robert Hooke (1635â1703), Sir
Christopher Wren (1632â1723) and Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727)[43], English
scientist and astronomer Edmond Halley (1656-1742) was trying to develop a
mechanical explanation for planetary motion. Halley's star catalogue of 1678
was the first to contain telescopically determined locations of southern
stars.[44]

Many historians of science have seen other ancient and medieval antecedents of
these ideas.[45] It is widely accepted that Copernicus's De revolutionibus
followed the outline and method set by Ptolemy in his Almagest[46] and adapted
the geocentric model of the Maragheh school in a heliocentric context,[47] and
that Galileo's mathematical treatment of acceleration and his concept of
impetus[16] grew out of earlier medieval analyses of motion,[17] especially
those of Avicenna,[18] Avempace,[19] Jean Buridan,[18] and the Oxford
Calculators (see Theory of impetus). The first experimental refutations of
Galen's theory of four humours and Aristotle's theory of four classical
elements also dates back to Rhazes,[48] while human blood circulation and
pulmonary circulation were first described by Ibn al-Nafis several centuries
before the scientific revolution.[49]

The standard theory of the history of the scientific revolution claims the
17th century was a period of revolutionary scientific changes. It is claimed
that not only were there revolutionary theoretical and experimental
developments, but that even more importantly, the way in which scientists
worked was radically changed. An alternative anti-revolutionist view is that
science as exemplified by Newton's Principia was anti-mechanist and highly
Aristotelian, being specifically directed at the refutation of anti-
Aristotelian Cartesian mechanism, as evidenced in the Principia quotations
below, and not more empirical than it already was at the beginning of the
century or earlier in the works of scientists such as Ibn al-Haytham,[50]
Benedetti, Galileo Galilei, or Johannes Kepler.

## [edit] Ancient and medieval background

Further information: Science in the Middle Ages

The scientific revolution was built upon the foundation of ancient Greek and
Hellenistic learning, as it had been elaborated and further developed by
Roman/Byzantine science followed by medieval Islamic science and the schools
and universities of medieval Europe.[51] Though it had evolved considerably
over the centuries, this "Aristotelian tradition" was still the dominant
intellectual framework in 16th and 17th century Europe.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ptolemaic model of the spheres for Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Georg von
Peuerbach, Theoricae novae planetarum, 1474.

Key ideas from this period, which would be transformed fundamentally during
the scientific revolution, include:

  * Aristotle's cosmology which placed the Earth at the center of a spherical cosmos, with a hierarchical order to the Universe. The terrestrial and celestial regions were made up of different elements which had different kinds of natural movement. 
    * The terrestrial region, according to Aristotle, consisted of concentric spheres of the four elementsâearth, water, air, and fire. All bodies naturally moved in straight lines until they reached the sphere appropriate to their elemental compositionâtheir natural place. All other terrestrial motions were non-natural, or violent.[52]
    * The celestial region was made up of the fifth element, Aether, which was unchanging and moved naturally with circular motion.[53] In the Aristotelian tradition, astronomical theories sought to explain the observed irregular motion of celestial objects through the combined effects of multiple uniform circular motions.[54]

  * The Ptolemaic model of planetary motion: Ptolemy's Almagest demonstrated that geometrical calculations could compute the exact positions of the Sun, Moon, stars, and planets in the future and in the past, and showed how these computational models were derived from astronomical observations. As such they formed the model for later astronomical developments. The physical basis for Ptolemaic models invoked layers of spherical shells, though the most complex models were inconsistent with this physical explanation.[55]

## [edit] New approaches to nature

Historians of the Scientific Revolution traditionally maintain that its most
important changes were in the way in which scientific investigation was
conducted, as well as the philosophy underlying scientific developments. Among
the main changes are the mechanical philosophy, the chemical philosophy,
empiricism, and the increasing role of mathematics.[56]

### [edit] The mechanical philosophy

Aristotle recognized four kinds of causes, of which the most important was the
"final cause". The final cause was the aim, goal, or purpose of something. For
example, the final cause of rain was to let plants grow. Until the scientific
revolution, it was very natural to see such goals in nature. The world was
inhabited by angels and demons, spirits and souls, occult powers and mystical
principles. Scientists spoke about the 'soul of a magnet' as easily as they
spoke about its velocity.

The rise of the so-called "mechanical philosophy" put a stop to this.[citation
needed] The mechanists, of whom the most important one was RenÃ© Descartes,
rejected all goals, emotion and intelligence in nature.[citation needed] In
this view the world consisted of particles of matter -- which lacked all
active powers and were fundamentally inert -- with motion being caused by
direct physical contact. Where nature had previously been imagined to be like
an active entity, the mechanical philosophers viewed nature as following
natural, physical laws.[57] But so did the anti-mechanist scientists such as
Newton, and Descartes held the teleological principle that God conserved the
amount of motion in the universe. As the American historian and philosopher of
science Thomas Kuhn pointed out in 1962: "Gravity, interpreted as an innate
attraction between every pair of particles of matter, was an occult quality in
the same sense as the scholastics' "tendency to fall" had been....By the mid
eighteenth century that interpretation had been almost universally accepted,
and the result was a genuine reversion (which is not the same as a
retrogression) to a scholastic standard. Innate attractions and repulsions
joined size, shape, position and motion as physically irreducible primary
properties of matter.â [58] And Newton had also specifically attributed the
inherent power of inertia to matter, against the mechanist thesis that matter
has no inherent powers. But whereas Newton vehemently denied gravity was an
inherent power of matter, his collaborator Roger Cotes made gravity also an
inherent power of matter, as set out in his famous Preface to the Principia's
1713 second edition which he edited, and contra Newton himself. And it was
Cotes's interpretation of gravity rather than Newton's that came to be
accepted. Thus on this analysis mechanism was roundly overthrown by the
Newtonian restoration of scholastic and Aristotelian metaphysics.

### [edit] The Chemical philosophy

<IMG>

<IMG>

Newton in a 1702 portrait by Godfrey Kneller.

Chemistry, and its antecedent alchemy, became an increasingly important aspect
of scientific thought in the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. The importance of chemistry is indicated by the range of important
scholars who actively engaged in chemical research. Among them were the
astronomer Tycho Brahe,[59] the chemical physician Paracelsus, and the English
philosophers Robert Boyle and Isaac Newton.

Unlike the mechanical philosophy, the chemical philosophy stressed the active
powers of matter, which alchemists frequently expressed in terms of vital or
active principles â of spirits operating in nature.[60]

### [edit] Empiricism

The Aristotelian scientific tradition's primary mode of interacting with the
world was through observation and searching for "natural" circumstances. It
saw what we would today consider "experiments" to be contrivances which at
best revealed only contingent and un-universal facts about nature in an
artificial state. Coupled with this approach was the belief that rare events
which seemed to contradict theoretical models were "monsters", telling nothing
about nature as it "naturally" was. During the scientific revolution, changing
perceptions about the role of the scientist in respect to nature, the value of
evidence, experimental or observed, led towards a scientific methodology in
which empiricism played a large, but not absolute, role.

Under the influence of scientists and philosophers like Ibn al-Haytham
(Alhacen)[50] and Francis Bacon, an empirical tradition was developed by the
16th century. The Aristotelian belief of natural and artificial circumstances
was abandoned, and a research tradition of systematic experimentation was
slowly accepted throughout the scientific community. Bacon's philosophy of
using an inductive approach to nature â to abandon assumption and to attempt
to simply observe with an open mind â was in strict contrast with the
earlier, Aristotelian approach of deduction, by which analysis of "known
facts" produced further understanding. In practice, of course, many scientists
(and philosophers) believed that a healthy mix of both was neededâthe
willingness to question assumptions, yet also interpret observations assumed
to have some degree of validity.

At the end of the scientific revolution the organic, qualitative world of
book-reading philosophers had been changed into a mechanical, mathematical
world to be known through experimental research. Though it is certainly not
true that Newtonian science was like modern science in all respects, it
conceptually resembled ours in many waysâmuch more so than the Aristotelian
science of a century earlier. Many of the hallmarks of modern science,
especially in respect to the institution and profession of science, would not
become standard until the mid-19th century.

### [edit] Failification

Scientific knowledge, according to the Aristotelians, was concerned with
establishing true and necessary causes of things.[61] To the extent that
medieval natural philosophers used mathematical techniques, they limited
mathematics to theoretical analyses of local motion and other aspects of
change.[62] The actual measurement of a physical quantity, and the comparison
of that measurement to a value computed on the basis of theory, was largely
limited to the mathematical disciplines of astronomy and optics in
Europe,[63][64].

In the 16th and 17th centuries, European scientists began increasingly
applying quantitative measurements to the measurement of physical phenomena on
the Earth. Galileo maintained strongly that mathematics provided a kind of
necessary certainty that could be compared to God's: "with regard to those few
[mathematical propositions] which the human intellect does understand, I
believe its knowledge equals the Divine in objective certainty."[65]

## [edit] Scientific developments

Key ideas and people that emerged from the 16th and 17th centuries:

  * Nicolaus Copernicus (1473â1543) published On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres in 1543, which advanced the heliocentric theory of cosmology.
  * Andreas Vesalius (1514â1564) published De Humani Corporis Fabrica (On the Fabric of the Human Body) (1543), which discredited Galen's views. He found that the circulation of blood resolved from pumping of the heart. He also assembled the first human skeleton from cutting open cadavers.
  * William Gilbert (1544â1603) published On the Magnet and Magnetic Bodies, and on the Great Magnet the Earth in 1600, which laid the foundations of a theory of magnetism and electricity.
  * Tycho Brahe (1546â1601) made extensive and more accurate naked eye observations of the planets in the late 1500s. These became the basic data for Kepler's studies.
  * Sir Francis Bacon (1561â1626) published Novum Organum in 1620, which outlined a new system of logic based on the process of reduction, which he offered as an improvement over Aristotle's philosophical process of syllogism. This contributed to the development of what became known as the scientific method.
  * Galileo Galilei (1564â1642) improved the telescope, with which he made several important astronomical discoveries, including the four largest moons of Jupiter, the phases of Venus, and the rings of Saturn, and made detailed observations of sunspots. He developed the laws for falling bodies based on pioneering quantitative experiments which he analyzed mathematically.
  * Johannes Kepler (1571â1630) published the first two of his three laws of planetary motion in 1609.
  * William Harvey (1578â1657) demonstrated that blood circulates, using dissections and other experimental techniques.
  * RenÃ© Descartes (1596â1650) published his Discourse on the Method in 1637, which helped to establish the scientific method.
  * Antony van Leeuwenhoek (1632â1723) constructed powerful single lens microscopes and made extensive observations that he published around 1660, opening up the micro-world of biology.
  * Isaac Newton (1643â1727) built upon the work of Kepler and Galileo. He showed that an inverse square law for gravity explained the elliptical orbits of the planets, and advanced the law of universal gravitation. His development of calculus opened up new applications of the methods of mathematics to science. Newton taught that scientific theory should be coupled with rigorous experimentation, which became the keystone of modern science.

## [edit] Theoretical developments

In 1543 Copernicus' work on the heliocentric model of the solar system was
published, in which he tried to prove that the sun was the center of the
universe. This was at the behest of the Roman Catholic Church, as part of the
Catholic Reformation's efforts to create a more accurate calendar to govern
its activities. For almost two millennia, the geocentric model had been
accepted by all but a few astronomers. The idea that the earth moved around
the sun, as advocated by Copernicus, was to most of his contemporaries
preposterous. It contradicted not only the virtually unquestioned Aristotelian
philosophy, but also common sense.

Johannes Kepler and Galileo gave the theory credibility. Kepler was an
astronomer who, using the accurate observations of Tycho Brahe, proposed that
the planets move around the sun not in circular orbits, but in elliptical
ones. Together with his other laws of planetary motion, this allowed him to
create a model of the solar system that was an improvement over Copernicus'
original system. Galileo's main contributions to the acceptance of the
heliocentric system were his mechanics, the observations he made with his
telescope, as well as his detailed presentation of the case for the system.
Using an early theory of inertia, Galileo could explain why rocks dropped from
a tower fall straight down even if the earth rotates. His observations of the
moons of Jupiter, the phases of Venus, the spots on the sun, and mountains on
the moon all helped to discredit the Aristotelian philosophy and the Ptolemaic
theory of the solar system. Through their combined discoveries, the
heliocentric system gained support, and at the end of the 17th century it was
generally accepted by astronomers.

Kepler's laws of planetary motion and Galileo's mechanics culminated in the
work of Isaac Newton. His laws of motion were to be the solid foundation of
mechanics; his law of universal gravitation combined terrestrial and celestial
mechanics into one great system that seemed to be able to describe the whole
world in mathematical formulae.

Not only astronomy and mechanics were greatly changed. Optics, for instance,
was revolutionized by people like Robert Hooke, Christiaan Huygens, RenÃ©
Descartes and, once again, Isaac Newton, who developed mathematical theories
of light as either waves (Huygens) or particles (Newton). Similar developments
could be seen in chemistry, biology and other sciences, although their full
development into modern science was delayed for a century or more.

## [edit] Contrary views

Main articles: Continuity thesis and Revisionism

Not all historians of science are agreed that there was any revolution in the
sixteenth or seventeenth century.

Another contrary view has been recently proposed by Arun Bala in his
dialogical history of the birth of modern science. Bala argues that the
changes involved in the Scientific Revolution â the mathematical realist
turn, the mechanical philosophy, the corpuscular (atomic) philosophy, the
central role assigned to the Sun in Copernican heliocentrism \- have to be
seen as rooted in multicultural influences on Europe. Islamic science gave the
first exemplar of a mathematical realist theory with Alhazen's Book of Optics
in which physical light rays traveled along mathematical straight lines. The
swift transfer of Chinese mechanical technologies in the medieval era shifted
European sensibilities to perceive the world in the image of a machine. The
Indian number system, which developed in close association with atomism in
India, carried implicitly a new mode of mathematical atomic thinking. And the
heliocentric theory which assigned central status to the sun, as well as
Newtonâs concept of force acting at a distance, were rooted in ancient
Egyptian religious ideas associated with Hermeticism. Bala argues that by
ignoring such multicultural impacts we have been led to a Eurocentric
conception of the Scientific Revolution .[66] During the 17th century,
however, Western Europeans overtook everyone and went much further.[67]

## [edit] See also

  * History of science in the Renaissance
  * Medical Renaissance
  * Merton Thesis
  * Natural philosophy
  * Age of Reason
  * Science in the Middle Ages
  * Scientific method
  * Rationalism

### [edit] Revolutions

  * Revolution
    * British Agricultural Revolution/Neolithic Revolution
    * Scientific law
    * Industrial Revolution
    * Commercial Revolution
    * Digital Revolution
    * Chemical Revolution

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ âScientific Revolutionâ MSN Encarta. 2007. MSN Encarta. 15 August 2007 http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_701509067/Scientific_Revolution.html
  2. ^ Modern Western Civ. 7: The Scientific Revolution of the 17 Cent.
  3. ^ Grant, Edward. The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious, Institutional, and Intellectual Contexts. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1996.
  4. ^ Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science, 1300-1800.
  5. ^ John Donne, An Anatomy of the World, quoted in Thomas S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the Development of Western Thought, (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Pr., 1957), p. 194.
  6. ^ Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science, 1300-1800, p. viii.
  7. ^ Steven Shapin, The Scientific Revolution, (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1996), p. 1.
  8. ^ Richard S. Westfall, The Construction FART of Modern Science, (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1971), pp. 34-5, 41.
  9. ^ Allen G. Debus, Man and Nature in the Renaissance, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1978), pp. 23-25.
  10. ^ E. Grant, The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious, Institutional, and Intellectual Contexts, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1996), pp. 59-61, 64.
  11. ^ Richard S. Westfall, The Construction of Modern Science, (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1971), pp. 17-21.
  12. ^ William Harvey, De motu cordis, cited in Allen G. Debus, Man and Nature in the Renaissance, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1978), p. 69.
  13. ^ Thomas Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution, (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Pr., 1957), p. 142.
  14. ^ Bruce S. Eastwood, "Kepler as Historian of Science: Precursors of Copernican Heliocentrism according to De revolutionibus, I, 10," Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 126(1982): 367-394; reprinted in B. S. Eastwood, Astronomy and Optics from Pliny to Descartes, (London: Variorum Reprints, 1989).
  15. ^ J. E. McGuire and P. M. Rattansi, "Newton and the 'Pipes of Pan'," Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 21, No. 2. (Dec., 1966), p. 110.
  16. ^ a b Galileo Galilei, Two New Sciences, trans. Stillman Drake, (Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Pr., 1974), pp 217, 225, 296-7.
  17. ^ a b Marshall Clagett, The Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, (Madison, Univ. of Wisconsin Pr., 1961), pp. 218-19, 252-5, 346, 409-16, 547, 576-8, 673-82; Anneliese Maier, "Galileo and the Scholastic Theory of Impetus," pp. 103-123 in On the Threshold of Exact Science: Selected Writings of Anneliese Maier on Late Medieval Natural Philosophy, (Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Pr., 1982).
  18. ^ a b c Fernando Espinoza (2005). "An analysis of the historical development of ideas about motion and its implications for teaching", Physics Education 40 (2), p. 141.
  19. ^ a b Ernest A. Moody (1951). "Galileo and Avempace: The Dynamics of the Leaning Tower Experiment (I)", Journal of the History of Ideas 12 (2), p. 163-193.
  20. ^ A. R. Hall and M. B. Hall Unpublished Scientific Papers of Isaac Newton (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1962), pp.309-11; J. E. McGuire and P. M. Rattansi, "Newton and the 'Pipes of Pan'," Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 21, No. 2. (Dec., 1966), pp. 108-143
  21. ^ Sir Thomas L. Heath, Mathematics in Aristotle (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1949), pp. 115-6.
  22. ^ Aydin Sayili (1987), "Ibn SÄ«nÄ and Buridan on the Motion of the Projectile", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 500 (1): 477â482
  23. ^ Aydin Sayili (1987), "Ibn SÄ«nÄ and Buridan on the Motion of the Projectile", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 500 (1): 477â482: 
> "Thus [Avicenna] considered impetus as proportional to weight times
velocity. In other words, his conception of impetus comes very close to the
concept of momentum of Newtonian mechanics."

  24. ^ A. C. Crombie, Augustine to Galileo 2, p. 67
  25. ^ Pines, Shlomo (1970). "Abu'l-BarakÄt al-BaghdÄdÄ« , Hibat Allah". Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 26-28. ISBN 0684101149. (cf. Abel B. Franco (October 2003). "Avempace, Projectile Motion, and Impetus Theory", Journal of the History of Ideas 64 (4), p. 521-546 [528].)
  26. ^ Shlomo Pines (1964), "La dynamique dâIbn Bajja", in MÃ©langes Alexandre KoyrÃ©, I, 442-468 [462, 468], Paris (cf. Abel B. Franco (October 2003), "Avempace, Projectile Motion, and Impetus Theory", Journal of the History of Ideas 64 (4): 521-546 [543])
  27. ^ Abel B. Franco (October 2003), "Avempace, Projectile Motion, and Impetus Theory", Journal of the History of Ideas 64 (4):521-546 [543])
  28. ^ Page through a virtual copy of Vesalius's De Humanis Corporis Fabrica
  29. ^ Zimmer, Carl. 2004. Soul Made Flesh: The Discovery of the Brain - and How It Changed the World. New York: Free Press.
  30. ^ History of Dentistry Articles
  31. ^ Schickard biography
  32. ^ Vernier biography
  33. ^ Pascal biography
  34. ^ Denis Papin
  35. ^ Thomas Newcomen (1663 - 1729), BBC - History
  36. ^ Jenkins, Rhys (1936). Links in the History of Engineering and Technology from Tudor Times. Ayer Publishing. pp. 66\. ISBN 0836921674.
  37. ^ AGRICOLA, GEORG (1494 â 1555)
  38. ^ Lavoisier, Antoine (1743-1794) -- from Eric Weisstein's World of Scientific Biography, ScienceWorld
  39. ^ Early herbals â The German fathers of botany
  40. ^ Valerius Cordus | Science and Its Times: 1450-1699 Summary
  41. ^ Carl Linnaeus
  42. ^ Buffon and the Histoire naturelle :All Nature is so full, King's College London
  43. ^ Isaac Newton (1643 - 1727), BBC - History
  44. ^ Halley biography
  45. ^ A survey of the debate over the significance of these antecedents is in D. C. Lindberg, The Beginnings of Western Science: The European Scientific Tradition in Philosophical, Religious, and Institutional Context, 600 B.C. to A.D. 1450, (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1992), pp. 355-68.
  46. ^ Otto Neugebauer, "On the Planetary Theory of Copernicus," Vistas in Astronomy, 10(1968):89-103; reprinted in Otto Neugebauer, Astronomy and History: Selected Essays (New York: Springer, 1983), pp. 491-505.
  47. ^ George Saliba (1999). Whose Science is Arabic Science in Renaissance Europe? Columbia University. The relationship between Copernicus and the Maragheh school is detailed in Toby Huff, The Rise of Early Modern Science, Cambridge University Press.
  48. ^ G. Stolyarov II (2002), "Rhazes: The Thinking Western Physician", The Rational Argumentator, Issue VI.
  49. ^ S. A. Al-Dabbagh (1978). "Ibn Al-Nafis and the pulmonary circulation", The Lancet 1, p. 1148.
  50. ^ a b Bradley Steffens (2006). Ibn al-Haytham: First Scientist, Morgan Reynolds Publishing, ISBN 1599350246.
  51. ^ E. Grant, The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious, Institutional, and Intellectual Contexts, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1996), pp. 29-30, 42-7.
  52. ^ E. Grant, The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious, Institutional, and Intellectual Contexts, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1996), pp. 55-63, 87-104; Olaf Pederson, Early Physics and Astronomy: A Historical Introduction, 2nd. ed., (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1993), pp. 106-110.
  53. ^ E. Grant, The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious, Institutional, and Intellectual Contexts, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1996), pp. 63-8, 104-16.
  54. ^ Olaf Pederson, Early Physics and Astronomy: A Historical Introduction, 2nd. ed., (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1993), p. 25
  55. ^ Olaf Pedersen, Early Physics and Astronomy: A Historical Introduction, 2nd. ed., (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1993), pp. 86-89.
  56. ^ An introduction to the influence of the mechanical and chemical philosophies and of mathematization appears in Richard S. Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1980), pp. 1-39.
  57. ^ Richard S. Westfall, The Construction of Modern Science, (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1971), pp. 30-33.
  58. ^ See pp105-6 of Kuhnâs 1970 edition of The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.
  59. ^ Owen Hannaway, "Laboratory Design and the Aim of Science: Andreas Libavius versus Tycho Brahe," Isis 77(1986): 585-610
  60. ^ Richard S. Westfall, Never at Rest, pp. 18-23.
  61. ^ Peter Dear, Revolutionizing the Sciences, pp 65-7, 134-8.
  62. ^ Edward Grant, The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages, pp. 101-3, 148-50
  63. ^ Olaf Pedersen, Early Physics and Astronomy: A Historical Introduction, 2nd. rev. ed., (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1993), p. 231
  64. ^ Stephen C. McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures in Early Medieval Europe, (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1998), pp. 180-4, 198-202
  65. ^ Galileo Galilei, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, trans. Stillman Drake, 2nd. ed., (Berkeley: Univ. of California Pr., 1967), p. 103
  66. ^ Bala, Dialogue of Civilizations in the Birth of Modern Science, 2006
  67. ^ Scientific Revolution

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_Revolution"

Hidden categories: Articles containing French language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 16:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



