
# History of astronomy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

History of science  
<IMG>  
Background  
Theories/sociology  
Historiography  
Pseudoscience  
By era  
In early cultures  
in Classical Antiquity  
In the Middle Ages  
In the Renaissance  
Scientific Revolution  
By topic  
Natural sciences  
Astronomy  
Biology  
Chemistry  
Ecology  
Geography  
Geology  
Paleontology  
Physics  
Social sciences  
Anthropology  
Economics  
Linguistics  
Political science  
Psychology  
Sociology  
Technology  
Agricultural science  
Computer science  
Materials science  
Medicine  
Navigational pages  
Timelines  
Portal  
Categories  
Astronomy is the oldest of the natural sciences, dating back to antiquity,
with its origins in the religious, mythological, and astrological practices of
pre-history: vestiges of these are still found in astrology, a discipline long
interwoven with public and governmental astronomy, and not completely
disentangled from it until a few centuries ago in the Western World (see
astrology and astronomy). Early astronomy involved observing the regular
patterns of the motions of visible celestial objects, especially the Sun,
Moon, stars and naked eye planets. An example of this early astronomy might
involve a study of the changing position of the Sun along the horizon or the
changing appearances of stars in the course of the year, which could be used
to establish an agricultural or ritual calendar. In some cultures astronomical
data was used for astrological prognostication.

Ancient astronomers were able to differentiate between stars and planets, as
stars remain relatively fixed over the centuries while planets will move an
appreciable amount during a comparatively short time.

## Contents

  * 1 Early history
  * 2 Mesopotamia
  * 3 Egypt
  * 4 China
  * 5 Greece and Hellenistic world
  * 6 India
  * 7 Mesoamerica
  * 8 Islamic astronomy
  * 9 Medieval Western Europe
  * 10 Copernican revolution
  * 11 Uniting physics and astronomy
  * 12 Modern astronomy
  * 13 Cosmology and the expansion of the universe
  * 14 New windows into the Cosmos open
  * 15 Notes
  * 16 See also
  * 17 Historians of astronomy
  * 18 References
  * 19 Refereed Journals
  * 20 External links

  
## [edit] Early history

Early cultures identified celestial objects with gods and spirits. They
related these objects (and their movements) to phenomena such as rain,
drought, seasons, and tides. It is generally believed that the first
"professional" astronomers were priests (such as the Magi), and that their
understanding of the "heavens" was seen as "divine", hence astronomy's ancient
connection to what is now called astrology. Ancient structures with possibly
astronomical alignments (such as Stonehenge) probably fulfilled both
astronomical and religious functions.

Calendars of the world have usually been set by the Sun and Moon (measuring
the day, month and year), and were of importance to agricultural societies, in
which the harvest depended on planting at the correct time of year. The most
common modern calendar is based on the Roman calendar, which divided the year
into twelve months of alternating thirty and thirty-one days apiece. In 46 BC
Julius Caesar instigated calendar reform and adopted a calendar based upon the
365 1/4 day year length originally proposed by 4th century BC Greek astronomer
Callippus.

The Bible contains a number of unsophisticated statements on the position of
the Earth in to the universe and the nature of the stars and planets; see
Biblical cosmology.

## [edit] Mesopotamia

Main article: Babylonian astronomy

Further information: Babylonian astrology and Babylonian calendar

The origins of Western astronomy can be found in Mesopotamia, the "land
between the rivers" Tigris and Euphrates, where the ancient kingdoms of Sumer,
Assyria, and Babylonia were located. A form of writing known as cuneiform
emerged among the Sumerians around 3500-3000 BC. The Sumerians only practiced
a basic form of astronomy, but they had an important influence on the
sophisticated astronomy of the Babylonians. Astral theology, which gave
planetary gods an important role in Mesopotamian mythology and religion, began
with the Sumerians. They also used a sexagesimal (base 60) place-value number
system, which simplified the task of recording very large and very small
numbers. The modern practice of dividing a circle into 360 degrees, of 60
minutes each, began with the Sumerians. For more information, see the articles
on Babylonian numerals and mathematics.

Classical sources frequently use the term Chaldeans for the astronomers of
Mesopotamia, who were, in reality, priest-scribes specializing in astrology
and other forms of divination.

The first evidence of recognition that astronomical phenomena are periodic and
of the application of mathematics to their prediction is Babylonian. Tablets
dating back to the Old Babylonian period document the application of
mathematics to the variation in the length of daylight over a solar year.
Centuries of Babylonian observations of celestial phenomena are recorded in
the series of cuneiform tablets known as the EnÅ«ma Anu Enlil. The oldest
significant astronomical text that we possess is Tablet 63 of the EnÅ«ma Anu
Enlil, the Venus tablet of Ammi-saduqa, which lists the first and last visible
risings of Venus over a period of about 21 years and is the earliest evidence
that the phenomena of a planet were recognized as periodic. The MUL.APIN,
contains catalogues of stars and constellations as well as schemes for
predicting heliacal risings and the settings of the planets, lengths of
daylight measured by a water-clock, gnomon, shadows, and intercalations. The
Babylonian GU text arranges stars in 'strings' that lie along declination
circles and thus measure right-ascensions or time-intervals, and also employs
the stars of the zenith, which are also separated by given right-ascensional
differences.[1]

A significant increase in the quality and frequency of Babylonian observations
appeared during the reign of Nabonassar (747-733 BC). The systematic records
of ominous phenomena in astronomical diaries that began at this time allowed
for the discovery of a repeating 18-year cycle of lunar eclipses, for example.
The Greek astronomer Ptolemy later used Nabonassar's reign to fix the
beginning of an era, since he felt that the earliest usable observations began
at this time.

The last stages in the development of Babylonian astronomy took place during
the time of the Seleucid Empire (323-60 BC). In the third century BC,
astronomers began to use "goal-year texts" to predict the motions of the
planets. These texts compiled records of past observations to find repeating
occurrences of ominous phenomena for each planet. About the same time, or
shortly afterwards, astronomers created mathematical models that allowed them
to predict these phenomena directly, without consulting past records. A
notable Babylonian astronomer from this time was Seleucus of Seleucia, who was
a supporter of the heliocentric model.

Babylonian astronomy was the basis for much of what was done in Greek and
Hellenistic astronomy, in classical Indian astronomy, in Sassanian Iran, in
Byzantium, in Syria, in Islamic astronomy, in Central Asia, and in Western
Europe.[2]

## [edit] Egypt

Main article: Egyptian astronomy

The precise orientation of the Egyptian pyramids affords a lasting
demonstration of the high degree of technical skill in watching the heavens
attained in the 3rd millennium BC. It has been shown the Pyramids were aligned
towards the pole star, which, because of the precession of the equinoxes, was
at that time Thuban, a faint star in the constellation of Draco.[3] Evaluation
of the site of the temple of Amun-Re at Karnak, taking into account the change
over time of the obliquity of the ecliptic, has shown that the Great Temple
was aligned on the rising of the midwinter sun.[4] The length of the corridor
down which sunlight would travel would have limited illumination at other
times of the year.

Astronomy played a considerable part in religious matters for fixing the dates
of festivals and determining the hours of the night. The titles of several
temple books are preserved recording the movements and phases of the sun, moon
and stars. The rising of Sirius (Egyptian: Sopdet, Greek: Sothis) at the
beginning of the inundation was a particularly important point to fix in the
yearly calendar.

Writing in the Roman era, Clement of Alexandria gives some idea of the
importance of astronomical observations to the sacred rites:

> And after the Singer advances the Astrologer (á½¡ÏÎ¿ÏÎºÏÏÎ¿Ï), with a
horologium (á½¡ÏÎ¿Î»ÏÎ³Î¹Î¿Î½) in his hand, and a palm (ÏÎ¿Î¯Î½Î¹Î¾), the
symbols of astrology. He must know by heart the Hermetic astrological books,
which are four in number. Of these, one is about the arrangement of the fixed
stars that are visible; one on the positions of the sun and moon and five
planets; one on the conjunctions and phases of the sun and moon; and one
concerns their risings.[5]

The Astrologer's instruments (horologium and palm) are a plumb line and
sighting instrument. They have been identified with two inscribed objects in
the Berlin Museum; a short handle from which a plumb line was hung, and a palm
branch with a sight-slit in the broader end. The latter was held close to the
eye, the former in the other hand, perhaps at arms length. The "Hermetic"
books which Clement refers to are the Egyptian theological texts, which
probably have nothing to do with Hellenistic Hermetism.[6]

From the tables of stars on the ceiling of the tombs of Rameses VI and Rameses
IX it seems that for fixing the hours of the night a man seated on the ground
faced the Astrologer in such a position that the line of observation of the
pole star passed over the middle of his head. On the different days of the
year each hour was determined by a fixed star culminating or nearly
culminating in it, and the position of these stars at the time is given in the
tables as in the centre, on the left eye, on the right shoulder, etc.
According to the texts, in founding or rebuilding temples the north axis was
determined by the same apparatus, and we may conclude that it was the usual
one for astronomical observations. In careful hands it might give results of a
high degree of accuracy.

## [edit] China

Main article: Chinese astronomy

See also: Book of Silk, Chinese astrology, and Timeline of Chinese astronomy

The astronomy of East Asia began in China. Solar term was completed in Warring
States Period. The knowledge of Chinese astronomy was introduced into East
Asia.

Astronomy in China has a long history. Detailed records of astronomical
observations were kept from about the 6th century BCE, until the introduction
of Western astronomy and the telescope in the 17th century. Chinese
astronomers were able to precisely predict comets and eclipses.

Much of early Chinese astronomy was for the purpose of timekeeping. The
Chinese used a lunisolar calendar, but because the cycles of the Sun and the
Moon are different, astronomers often prepared new calendars and made
observations for that purpose.

Astrological divination was also an important part of astronomy. Astronomers
took careful note of "guest stars" which suddenly appeared among the fixed
stars. They were the first to record a supernova, in the Astrological Annals
of the Houhanshu in 185 A.D. Also, the supernova that created the Crab Nebula
in 1054 is an example of a "guest star" observed by Chinese astronomers,
although it was not recorded by their European contemporaries. Ancient
astronomical records of phenomena like supernovae and comets are sometimes
used in modern astronomical studies.

The world's first star catalogue was made by Gan De, a Chinese astronomer, in
4th century BC.

## [edit] Greece and Hellenistic world

Main article: Greek astronomy

The Ancient Greeks developed astronomy, which they treated as a branch of
mathematics, to a highly sophisticated level. The first geometrical, three-
dimensional models to explain the apparent motion of the planets were
developed in the 4th century BC by Eudoxus of Cnidus and Callippus of Cyzicus
. Their models were based on nested homocentric spheres centered upon the
Earth. Their younger contemporary Heraclides Ponticus proposed that the Earth
rotates around its axis.

A different approach to celestial phenomena was taken by natural philosophers
such as Plato and Aristotle. They were less concerned with developing
mathematical predictive models than with developing an explanation of the
reasons for the motions of the Cosmos. In his Timaeus Plato described the
universe as a spherical body divided into circles carrying the planets and
governed according to harmonic intervals by a world soul.[7] Aristotle,
drawing on the mathematical model of Eudoxus, proposed that the universe was
made of a complex system of concentric spheres, whose circular motions
combined to carry the planets around the earth.[8] This basic cosmological
model prevailed, in various forms, until the Sixteenth century.

Greek geometrical astronomy developed away from the model of concentric
spheres to employ more complex models in which an eccentric circle would carry
around a smaller circle, called an epicycle which in turn carried around a
planet. The first such model is attributed to Apollonius of Perga and further
developments in it were carried out in the 2nd century BC by Hipparchus of
Nicea. Hipparchus made a number of other contributions, including the first
measurement of precession and the compilation of the first star catalog in
which he proposed our modern system of apparent magnitudes.

The study of astronomy by the ancient Greeks was not limited to Greece itself
but was further developed in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC, in the Hellenistic
states and in particular in Alexandria. However, the work was still done by
ethnic Greeks. In the 3rd century BC Aristarchus of Samos was the first to
suggest a heliocentric system, although only fragmentary descriptions of his
idea survive.[9] Eratosthenes, using the angles of shadows created at widely-
separated regions, estimated the circumference of the Earth with great
accuracy.[10]

The Antikythera mechanism, an ancient Greek device for calculating the
movements of planets, dates from about 80 B.C., and was the first ancestor of
an astronomical computer. It was discovered in an ancient shipwreck off the
Greek island of Antikythera, between Kythera and Crete. The device became
famous for its use of a differential gear, previously believed to have been
invented in the 16th century, and the miniaturization and complexity of its
parts, comparable to a clock made in the 18th century. The original mechanism
is displayed in the Bronze collection of the National Archaeological Museum of
Athens, accompanied by a replica.

Depending on the historian's viewpoint, the acme or corruption of physical
Greek astronomy is seen with Ptolemy of Alexandria, who wrote the classic
comprehensive presentation of geocentric astronomy, the Megale Syntaxis (Great
Synthesis), better known by its Arabic title Almagest, which had a lasting
effect on astronomy up to the Renaissance. In his Planetary Hypotheses Ptolemy
ventured into the realm of cosmology, developing a physical model of his
geometric system, in a universe many times smaller than the more realistic
conception of Aristarchus of Samos four centuries earlier.

## [edit] India

Main article: Indian astronomy

Further information: Jyotisha

Ancient Indian astrology is based upon sidereal calculation. The sidereal
astronomy is based upon the stars and the sidereal period is the time that it
takes the object to make one full orbit around the Sun, relative to the stars.
It can be traced to the final centuries BC with the Vedanga Jyotisha
attributed to Lagadha, one of the circum-Vedic texts, which describes rules
for tracking the motions of the Sun and the Moon for the purposes of ritual.
After formation of Indo-Greek kingdoms, Indian astronomy was influenced by
Hellenistic astronomy (adopting the zodiacal signs or rÄÅis). Identical
numerical computations for lunar cycles have been found to be used in India
and in early Babylonian texts.[11]

Around 500 AD, Aryabhata presented a mathematical system that took the Earth
to spin on its axis and considered the motions of the planets with respect to
the Sun. He also made an accurate approximation of the Earth's circumference
and diameter, and also discovered how the lunar eclipse and solar eclipse
happen. He gives the radius of the planetary orbits in terms of the radius of
the Earth/Sun orbit as essentially their periods of rotation around the Sun.
He was also the earliest to discover that the orbits of the planets around the
Sun are ellipses. [1]

Astronomy was advanced during the Sunga Empire and many star catalogues were
produced during this time. The Sunga period is known as the "Golden age of
astronomy in India".

Brahmagupta (598-668) was the head of the astronomical observatory at Ujjain
and during his tenure there wrote a text on astronomy, the
Brahmasphutasiddhanta in 628. He was the earliest to use algebra to solve
astronomical problems. He also developed methods for calculations of the
motions and places of various planets, their rising and setting, conjunctions,
and the calculation of eclipses.

Bhaskara (1114-1185) was the head of the astronomical observatory at Ujjain,
continuing the mathematical tradition of Brahmagupta. He wrote the
Siddhantasiromani which consists of two parts: Goladhyaya (sphere) and
Grahaganita (mathematics of the planets). He also calculated the time taken
for the Earth to orbit the sun to 9 decimal places. The Buddhist University of
Nalanda at the time offered formal courses in astronomical studies.

Other important astronomers from India include Madhava of Sangamagrama,
Nilakantha Somayaji and Jyeshtadeva, who were members of the Kerala school of
astronomy and mathematics from the 14th century to the 16th century.
Nilakantha Somayaji, in his Aryabhatiyabhasya, a commentary on Aryabhata's
Aryabhatiya, developed his own computational system for a partially
heliocentric planetary model, in which Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and
Saturn orbit the Sun, which in turn orbits the Earth, similar to the Tychonic
system later proposed by Tycho Brahe in the late 16th century. Nilakantha's
system, however, was mathematically more effient than the Tychonic system, due
to correctly taking into account the equation of the centre and latitudinal
motion of Mercury and Venus. Most astronomers of the Kerala school of
astronomy and mathematics who followed him accepted his planetary
model.[12][13]

## [edit] Mesoamerica

Main articles: Maya calendar and Aztec calendar

Maya astronomical codices include detailed tables for calculating phases of
the Moon, the recurrence of eclipses, and the appearance and disappearance of
Venus as morning and evening star. The Maya based their calendrics in the
carefully calculated cycles of the Pleiades, the Sun, the Moon, Venus,
Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, and also they had a precise description of the eclipses
as depicted in the Dresden Codex, as well as the ecliptic or zodiac, and the
Milky Way was crucial in their Cosmology. [14]. A number of important Maya
structures are believed to have been oriented toward the extreme risings and
settings of Venus. To the ancient Maya, Venus was the patron of war and many
recorded battles are believed to have been timed to the motions of this
planet. Mars is also mentioned in preserved astronomical codices and early
mythology.[15]

Although the Maya calendar was not tied to the Sun, John Teeple has proposed
that the Maya calculated the solar year to somewhat greater accuracy than the
Gregorian calendar.[16] Both astronomy and an intricate numerological scheme
for the measurement of time were vitally important components of Maya
religion.

## [edit] Islamic astronomy

Main article: Islamic astronomy

See also: Maragheh observatory and Istanbul observatory of al-Din

The Arabic world under Islam had become highly cultured, and many important
works of knowledge from Greek astronomy and Indian astronomy were translated
into Arabic, used and stored in libraries throughout the area. The late 9th
century Persian astronomer Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn KathÄ«r al-FarghÄnÄ« wrote
extensively on the motion of celestial bodies. His work was translated into
Latin during the Latin translations of the 12th century.

In the 9th century, Ja'far ibn Muhammad Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi (Albumasar)
developed a planetary model which has been interpreted as a heliocentric
model. This is due to his orbital revolutions of the planets being given as
heliocentric revolutions rather than geocentric revolutions, and the only
known planetary theory in which this occurs is in the heliocentric theory. His
work on planetary theory has not survived, but his astronomical data was later
recorded by al-Hashimi and al-Biruni.[17]

In the 10th century, Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi (Azophi) carried out observations
on the stars and described their positions, magnitudes, brightness, and colour
and drawings for each constellation in his Book of Fixed Stars. He also gave
the first descriptions and pictures of "A Little Cloud" now known as the
Andromeda Galaxy. He mentions it as lying before the mouth of a Big Fish, an
Arabic constellation. This "cloud" was apparently commonly known to the
Isfahan astronomers, very probably before 905 AD.[18] The first recorded
mention of the Large Magellanic Cloud was also given by al-Sufi.[19][20] In
1006, Ali ibn Ridwan observed SN 1006, the brightest supernova in recorded
history, and left a detailed description of the temporary star.

In the late 10th century, a huge observatory was built near Tehran, Iran, by
the astronomer Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi who observed a series of meridian
transits of the Sun, which allowed him to calculate the obliquity of the
ecliptic, also known as the tilt of the Earth's axis relative to the Sun. In
11th-century Persia, Omar KhayyÃ¡m compiled many tables and performed a
reformation of the calendar that was more accurate than the Julian and came
close to the Gregorian. An amazing feat was his calculation of the year to be
365.24219858156 days long, which is accurate to the 6th decimal place.

In the early 11th century, Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) wrote the Maqala fi daw
al-qamar (On the Light of the Moon) some time before 1021. This was the
earliest attempt at applying the experimental method to astronomy and
astrophysics, and thus the first successful at combining mathematical
astronomy with "physics" (which then referred to Aristotelian physics) for
several of his astronomical hypotheses. He disproved the universally held
opinion that the moon reflects sunlight like a mirror and correctly concluded
that it "emits light from those portions of its surface which the sun's light
strikes." In order to prove that "light is emitted from every point of the
moon's illuminated surface," he built an "ingenious experimental device." Ibn
al-Haytham had "formulated a clear conception of the relationship between an
ideal mathematical model and the complex of observable phenomena; in
particular, he was the first to make a systematic use of the method of varying
the experimental conditions in a constant and uniform manner, in an experiment
showing that the intensity of the light-spot formed by the projection of the
moonlight through two small apertures onto a screen diminishes constantly as
one of the apertures is gradually blocked up."[21]

Other Muslim advances in astronomy included the construction of the first
observatory as a research institute in Baghdad during the reign of Caliph al-
Ma'mun,[22] the collection and correction of previous astronomical data,
resolving significant problems in the Ptolemaic model, the development of the
universal latitude-independent astrolabe by Arzachel,[23] the invention of
numerous other astronomical instruments, the beginning of astrophysics and
celestial mechanics after Ja'far Muhammad ibn MÅ«sÄ ibn ShÄkir theorized
that the heavenly bodies and celestial spheres were subject to the same
physical laws as Earth,[24] the first elaborate experiments related to
astronomical phenomena and the first semantic distinction between astronomy
and astrology by AbÅ« al-RayhÄn al-BÄ«rÅ«nÄ«,[25] introduction of exacting
empirical observations and experimental techniques,[26] and the introduction
of empirical testing by Ibn al-Shatir, who produced the first model of lunar
motion which matched physical observations.[27]

The Earth's rotation and heliocentrism were also discussed by several Muslim
astronomers, such as AbÅ« al-RayhÄn al-BÄ«rÅ«nÄ«, Al-Sijzi and Qutb al-Din
al-Shirazi,[28] while the first empirical observational evidence of the
Earth's rotation was given by NasÄ«r al-DÄ«n al-TÅ«sÄ« and Ali al-Qushji, and
al-Birjandi developed an early hypothesis on "circular inertia."[29] Natural
philosophy was also separated from astronomy by Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen), Ibn
al-Shatir,[30] and al-Qushji.[29]

It is known that the Copernican heliocentric model in Nicolaus Copernicus' De
revolutionibus was adapted from the geocentric model of Ibn al-Shatir and the
Maragha school (including the Tusi-couple) in a heliocentric context,[31] and
that his arguments for the Earth's rotation were similar to those of NasÄ«r
al-DÄ«n al-TÅ«sÄ« and Ali al-Qushji.[29] Some have referred to the
achievements of the Maragha school as a "Maragha Revolution", "Maragha School
Revolution", or "Scientific Revolution before the Renaissance".[32]

## [edit] Medieval Western Europe

Further information: Science in Medieval Western Europe

After the significant contributions of Greek scholars to the development of
astronomy, it entered a relatively static era in Western Europe from the Roman
era through the Twelfth century. This lack of progress has led some
astronomers to assert that nothing happened in Western European astronomy
during the Middle Ages.[33] Recent investigations, however, have revealed a
more complex picture of the study and teaching of astronomy in the period from
the Fourth to the Sixteenth centuries.[34]

Western Europe entered the Middle Ages with great difficulties that affected
the continent's intellectual production. The advanced astronomical treatises
of classical antiquity were written in Greek, and with the decline of
knowledge of that language, only simplified summaries and practical texts were
available for study. The most influential writers to pass on this ancient
tradition in Latin were Macrobius, Pliny, Martianus Capella, and
Calcidius.[35] In the Sixth Century Bishop Gregory of Tours noted that he had
learned his astronomy from reading Martianus Capella, and went on to employ
this rudimentary astronomy to describe a method by which monks could determine
the time of prayer at night by watching the stars.[36]

In the Seventh Century the English monk Bede of Jarrow published an
influential text, On the Reckoning of Time, providing churchmen with the
practical astronomical knowledge needed to compute the proper date of Easter
using a procedure called computus. This text remained an important element of
the education of Clergy from the Seventh Century until well after the rise of
the Universities in the Twelfth Century.[37]

The range of surviving ancient Roman writings on astronomy and the teachings
of Bede and his followers began to be studied in earnest during the revival of
learning sponsored by the emperor Charlemagne.[38] By the Ninth Century
rudimentary techniques for calculating the position of the planets were
circulating in Western Europe; medieval scholars recognized their technical
flaws, but texts describing these techniques continued to be copied,
reflecting an interest in the motions of the planets and in their astrological
significance.[39]

Building on this astronomical background, in the Tenth Century European
scholars such as Gerbert of Aurillac began to travel to the Spain and Sicily
to seek out learning which they had heard existed in the Arabic-speaking
world. There they first encountered various practical astronomical techniques
concerning the calendar and timekeeping, most notably those dealing with the
astrolabe. Soon scholars such as Hermann of Reichenau were writing texts in
Latin on the uses and construction of the astrolabe and others, such as
Walcher of Malvern, were using the astrolabe to observe the time of eclipses
in order to test the validity of computistical tables.[40]

By the Twelfth century, scholars were traveling to Spain and Sicily to seek
out more advanced astronomical and astrological texts, which they translated
into Latin from Arabic and Greek to further enrich the astronomical knowledge
of Western Europe. The arrival of these new texts coincided with the rise of
the universities in medieval Europe, in which they soon found a home.[41]
Reflecting the introduction of astronomy into the universities, John of
Sacrobosco wrote a series of influential introductory astronomy textbooks: the
Sphere, a Computus, a text on the Quadrant, and another on Calculation.[42]

In the 14th century, Nicole Oresme, later bishop of Liseux, showed that
neither the scriptural texts nor the physical arguments advanced against the
movement of the Earth were demonstrative and adduced the argument of
simplicity for the theory that the earth moves, and not the heavens. However,
he concluded "everyone maintains, and I think myself, that the heavens do move
and not the earth: For God hath established the world which shall not be
moved."[43] In the 15th century, cardinal Nicholas of Cusa suggested in some
of his scientific writings that the Earth revolved around the Sun, and that
each star is itself a distant sun. He was not, however, describing a
scientifically verifiable theory of the universe.

## [edit] Copernican revolution

<IMG>

<IMG>

Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) crafted his own telescope and discovered that our
Moon had craters, that Jupiter had moons, that the Sun had spots, and that
Venus had phases like our Moon.

The renaissance came to astronomy with the work of Nicolaus Copernicus, who
proposed a heliocentric system, in which the planets revolved around the Sun
and not the Earth. His De revolutionibus provided a full mathematical
discussion of his system, using the geometrical techniques that had been
traditional in astronomy since before the time of Ptolemy. His work was later
defended, expanded upon and modified by Galileo Galilei and Johannes Kepler.

Galileo was among the first to use a telescope to observe the sky, and after
constructing a 20x refractor telescope he discovered the four largest moons of
Jupiter in 1610. This was the first observation of satellites orbiting another
planet. He also found that our Moon had craters and observed (and correctly
explained) sunspots. Galileo noted that Venus exhibited a full set of phases
resembling lunar phases. Galileo argued that these observations supported the
Copernican system and were, to some extent, incompatible with the favored
model of the Earth at the center of the universe.

## [edit] Uniting physics and astronomy

<IMG>

<IMG>

Table of astronomy, from the 1728 Cyclopaedia

Although the motions of celestial bodies had been qualitatively explained in
physical terms since Aristotle introduced celestial movers in his Metaphysics
and a fifth element in his On the Heavens, Johannes Kepler was the first to
attempt to derive mathematical predictions of celestial motions from assumed
physical causes.[44][45] Combining his physical insights with the
unprecedentedly accurate naked-eye observations made by Tycho
Brahe,[46][47][48] Kepler discovered the three laws of planetary motion that
now carry his name.[49]

Isaac Newton developed further ties between physics and astronomy through his
law of universal gravitation. Realising that the same force that attracted
objects to the surface of the Earth held the moon in orbit around the Earth,
Newton was able to explain - in one theoretical framework - all known
gravitational phenomena. In his Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica,
he derived Kepler's laws from first principles. Newton's theoretical
developments lay many of the foundations of modern physics.

## [edit] Modern astronomy

At the end of the 19th century it was discovered that, when decomposing the
light from the Sun, a multitude of spectral lines were observed (regions where
there was less or no light). Experiments with hot gases showed that the same
lines could be observed in the spectra of gases, specific lines corresponding
to unique elements. It was proved that the chemical elements found in the Sun
(chiefly hydrogen and helium) were also found on Earth. During the 20th
century spectrometry (the study of these lines) advanced, especially because
of the advent of quantum physics, that was necessary to understand the
observations.

Although in previous centuries noted astronomers were exclusively male, at the
turn of the 20th century women began to play a role in the great discoveries.
In this period prior to modern computers, women at the United States Naval
Observatory (USNO), Harvard University, and other astronomy research
institutions often served as human "computers," who performed the tedious
calculations while scientists performed research requiring more background
knowledge. [2] A number of discoveries in this period were originally noted by
the women "computers" and reported to their supervisors. For example,
Henrietta Swan Leavitt discovered the cepheid variable star period-luminosity
relation, Annie Jump Cannon organized the stellar spectral types according to
stellar temperature, and Maria Mitchell discovered a comet using a telescope.
(See [3] for more women astronomers.) Some of these women received little or
no recognition during their lives due to their lower professional standing in
the field of astronomy. Although their discoveries are taught in classrooms
around the world, few students of astronomy can attribute the works to their
authors.

## [edit] Cosmology and the expansion of the universe

Main article: Physical cosmology#History of physical cosmology

Most of our current knowledge was gained during the 20th century. With the
help of the use of photography, fainter objects were observed. Our sun was
found to be part of a galaxy made up of more than 1010 stars (10 billion
stars). The existence of other galaxies, one of the matters of the great
debate, was settled by Edwin Hubble, who identified the Andromeda nebula as a
different galaxy, and many others at large distances and receding, moving away
from our galaxy.

Physical cosmology, a discipline that has a large intersection with astronomy,
made huge advances during the 20th century, with the model of the hot big bang
heavily supported by the evidence provided by astronomy and physics, such as
the redshifts of very distant galaxies and radio sources, the cosmic microwave
background radiation, Hubble's law and cosmological abundances of elements.

## [edit] New windows into the Cosmos open

Late in the 19th century, scientists began discovering forms of light which
were invisible to the naked eye: X-Rays, gamma rays, radio waves, microwaves,
ultraviolet radiation, and infrared radiation. This had a major impact on
astronomy, spawning the fields of infrared astronomy, radio astronomy, x-ray
astronomy and finally gamma-ray astronomy. With the advent of spectroscopy it
was proven that other stars were similar to our own sun, but with a range of
temperatures, masses and sizes. The existence of our galaxy, the Milky Way, as
a separate group of stars was only proven in the 20th century, along with the
existence of "external" galaxies, and soon after, the expansion of the
universe seen in the recession of most galaxies from us.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Pingree (1998)  
Rochberg (2004)  
Evans (1998)

  2. ^ Pingree (1998)
  3. ^ Ruggles, C.L.N. (2005), Ancient Astronomy, pages 354-355. ABC-Clio. ISBN 1-85109-477-6.
  4. ^ Krupp, E.C. (1988). "Light in the Temples", in C.L.N. Ruggles: Records in Stone: Papers in Memory of Alexander Thom. CUP, 473-499. ISBN 0-521-33381-4.
  5. ^ Clement of Alexandria, Stromata, vi. 4
  6. ^ O Neugebauer, Egyptian Planetary Texts, Transactions, American Philosophical Society, Vol. 32, Part 2, 1942, Page 237.
  7. ^ Plato, Timaeus, 33B-36D
  8. ^ Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1072a18-1074a32
  9. ^ Pedersen, Early Physics and Astronomy, pp. 55-6
  10. ^ Pedersen, Early Physics and Astronomy, pp. 45-7
  11. ^ Neugebauer, O. (1952) Tamil Astronomy: A Study in the History of Astronomy in India. Osiris, 10:252-276.
  12. ^ George G. Joseph (2000), The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European Roots of Mathematics, 2nd edition, p. 408, Penguin Books, London, ISBN 0691006598
  13. ^ K. Ramasubramanian, M. D. Srinivas, M. S. Sriram (1994). "Modification of the earlier Indian planetary theory by the Kerala astronomers (c. 1500 AD) and the implied heliocentric picture of planetary motion", Current Science 66, p. 784-790.
  14. ^ http://www.authenticmaya.com/maya_astronomy.htm Maya Astronomy
  15. ^ A. F. Aveni, Skywatchers of Ancient Mexico, (Austin: Univ. of Texas Pr., 1980), pp. 173-99.
  16. ^ A. F. Aveni, Skywatchers of Ancient Mexico, (Austin: Univ. of Texas Pr., 1980), pp. 170-3.
  17. ^ Bartel Leendert van der Waerden (1987). "The Heliocentric System in Greek, Persian and Hindu Astronomy", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 500 (1), 525â545 [534-537].
  18. ^ Kepple, George Robert; Glen W. Sanner (1998). The Night Sky Observer's Guide, Volume 1. Willmann-Bell, Inc.. pp. 18\. ISBN 0-943396-58-1.
  19. ^ "Observatoire de Paris (Abd-al-Rahman Al Sufi)". http://messier.obspm.fr/xtra/Bios/alsufi.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19.
  20. ^ "Observatoire de Paris (LMC)". http://messier.obspm.fr/xtra/ngc/lmc.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-19.
  21. ^ Toomer, G. J. (December 1964), "Review: Ibn al-Haythams Weg zur Physik by Matthias Schramm", Isis 55 (4): 463â465 [463â4], doi:10.1086/349914
  22. ^ Nas, Peter J (1993). Urban Symbolism. Brill Academic Publishers. pp. 350\. ISBN 9-0040-9855-0.
  23. ^ Krebs, Robert E. (2004). Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions, and Discoveries of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Greenwood Press. pp. 196\. ISBN 0-3133-2433-6.
  24. ^ George Saliba (1994). "Early Arabic Critique of Ptolemaic Cosmology: A Ninth-Century Text on the Motion of the Celestial Spheres", Journal for the History of Astronomy 25, p. 115-141 [116].
  25. ^ S. Pines (September 1964). "The Semantic Distinction between the Terms Astronomy and Astrology according to al-Biruni", Isis 55 (3), p. 343-349.
  26. ^ Toby Huff, The Rise of Early Modern Science, p. 326. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521529948.
  27. ^ Y. M. Faruqi (2006). "Contributions of Islamic scholars to the scientific enterprise", International Education Journal 7 (4), p. 395-396.
  28. ^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr (1964), An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, (Cambridge: Belknap Press of the Harvard University Press), p. 135-136
  29. ^ a b c F. Jamil Ragep (2001), "Tusi and Copernicus: The Earth's Motion in Context", Science in Context 14 (1-2), p. 145â163. Cambridge University Press.
  30. ^ Roshdi Rashed (2007). "The Celestial Kinematics of Ibn al-Haytham", Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 17, p. 7-55. Cambridge University Press.
  31. ^ George Saliba (1999). Whose Science is Arabic Science in Renaissance Europe? Columbia University.  
The relationship between Copernicus and the Maragha school is detailed in Toby
Huff, The Rise of Early Modern Science, Cambridge University Press.

  32. ^ George Saliba (1994), A History of Arabic Astronomy: Planetary Theories During the Golden Age of Islam, p. 245, 250, 256-257. New York University Press, ISBN 0814780237.
  33. ^ Henry Smith Williams, The Great Astronomers (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1930), pp. 99-102 describes "the record of astronomical progress" from the Council of Nicea (325 AD) to the time of Copernicus (1543 AD) on four blank pages.
  34. ^ Stephen C. McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures in Early Medieval Europe, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999) ISBN 0-521-77852-2.
  35. ^ Bruce S. Eastwood, Ordering the Heavens: Roman Astronomy and Cosmology in the Carolingian Renaissance, (Leiden: Brill, 2007) ISBN 979-90-04-16186-3.
  36. ^ Stephen C. McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures in Early Medieval Europe, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 101-110 ISBN 0-521-77852-2.
  37. ^ Faith Wallis, ed. and trans., Bede: The Reckoning of Time, (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2004), pp. xviii-xxxiv ISBN 0-85323-693-3
  38. ^ Stephen C. McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures in Early Medieval Europe, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 131-164 ISBN 0-521-77852-2.
  39. ^ David Juste, "Neither Observation nor Astronomical Tables: An Alternative Way of Computing the Planetary Longitudes in the Early Western Middle Ages," pp. 181-222 in Charles Burnett, Jan P. Hogendijk, Kim Plofker, and Michio Yano, Studies in the Exact Sciences in Honour of David Pingree, (Leiden: Brill, 2004)
  40. ^ Stephen C. McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures in Early Medieval Europe, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 171-187 ISBN 0-521-77852-2.
  41. ^ Stephen C. McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures in Early Medieval Europe, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 188-192 ISBN 0-521-77852-2.
  42. ^ Olaf Pedersen, "In Quest of Sacrobosco", Journal for the History of Astronomy, 16(1985): 175-221
  43. ^ Nicole Oresme, Le Livre du ciel et du monde, xxv, ed. A. D. Menut and A. J. Denomy, trans. A. D. Menut, (Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Pr., 1968), quotation at pp. 536-7.
  44. ^ Bruce Stephenson, Kepler's physical astronomy, (New York: Springer, 1987), pp. 67-75.
  45. ^ "[Kepler's] revolutionary role lay in his successful attempt to solve the problem of uniting astronomy and natural philosophy which had been sought for two thousand years." P. 484 in Wilbur Applebaum, "Keplerian Astronomy after Kepler: Researches and Problems," History of Science, 34 (1996): 451-504.
  46. ^ "We have found Tycho's mature planetary observations to be consistently accurate to within about 1'." P. 30, n. 2 in Owen Gingerich and James R. Voelkel, "Tycho Brahe's Copernican Campaign," Journal for the History of Astronomy, 29(1998): 2-34
  47. ^ The average error of Tycho's stellar observations, as recorded in his observational logs, varied from 32.3" to 48.8" for different instruments. Table 4 in Walter G. Wesley, "The Accuracy of Tycho Brahe's Instruments," Journal for the History of Astronomy, 9(1978): 42-53.
  48. ^ An error of as much as 3' was introduced into some of the stellar positions published in Tycho's star catalog due to Tycho's application of an erroneous ancient value of parallax and his neglect of refraction. See Dennis Rawlins, "Tycho's 1004 Star Catalog", DIO 3 (1993), p. 20.
  49. ^ Holmes, John, Astronomy Ancient and Modern (1751)

## [edit] See also

  * Archaeoastronomy
  * History of astrology
  * History of astronomical interferometry
  * History of supernova observation
  * List of Astronomical Instrument Makers
  * List of Observatories
  * History of telescopes
  * Hebrew astronomy

## [edit] Historians of astronomy

  * Scholars Past. Willy Hartner, Otto Neugebauer, B. L. van der Waerden
  * Scholars Present. Stephen G. Brush, Stephen J. Dick, Owen Gingerich, Bruce Stephenson, Michael Hoskin, Alexander R. Jones, Curtis A. Wilson
  * Astronomer-historians. J. B. J. Delambre, J. L. E. Dreyer, Donald Osterbrock, Carl Sagan, F. Richard Stephenson

## [edit] References

  * Aaboe, Asger. Episodes from the Early History of Astronomy. Springer-Verlag 2001 ISBN 0-387-95136-9
  * Aveni, Anthony F. Skywatchers of Ancient Mexico. University of Texas Press 1980 ISBN 0-292-77557-1
  * Dreyer, J. L. E. History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler, 2nd edition. Dover Publications 1953 (revised reprint of History of the Planetary Systems from Thales to Kepler, 1906)
  * Eastwood, Bruce. The Revival of Planetary Astronomy in Carolingian and Post-Carolingian Europe, Variorum Collected Studies Series CS 279 Ashgate 2002 ISBN 0-86078-868-7
  * Evans, James (1998), The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0195095391 .
  * Antoine Gautier, L'Ã¢ge d'or de l'astronomie ottomane, in L'Astronomie, (Monthly magazine created by Camille Flammarion in 1882), December 2005, volume 119.
  * Hodson, F. R. (ed.). The Place of Astronomy in the Ancient World: A Joint Symposium of the Royal Society and the British Academy. Oxford University Press, 1974 ISBN 0-19-725944-8
  * Hoskin, Michael. The History of Astronomy: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-280306-9
  * McCluskey, Stephen C. Astronomies and Cultures in Early Medieval Europe. Cambridge University Press 1998 ISBN 0-521-77852-2
  * Neugebauer, Otto. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity, 2nd edition. Dover Publications 1969
  * Pannekoek, Anton. A History of Astronomy. Dover Publications 1989
  * Pedersen, Olaf. Early Physics and Astronomy: A Historical Introduction, revised edition. Cambridge University Press 1993 ISBN 0-521-40899-7
  * Pingree, David (1998), "Legacies in Astronomy and Celestial Omens", in Dalley, Stephanie, The Legacy of Mesopotamia, Oxford University Press, pp. 125 â 137, ISBN 0198149468 .
  * Rochberg, Francesca (2004), The Heavenly Writing: Divination, Horoscopy, and Astronomy in Mesopotamian Culture, Cambridge University Press .
  * Stephenson, Bruce. Kepler's Physical Astronomy, Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, 13. New York: Springer, 1987 ISBN 0-387-96541-6
  * Walker, Christopher (ed.). Astronomy before the telescope. British Museum Press 1996 ISBN 0-7141-1746-3

## [edit] Refereed Journals

  * DIO: The International Journal of Scientific History
  * Journal for the History of Astronomy
  * Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage

## [edit] External links

  * Astronomiae Historia / History of Astronomy at the Astronomical Institutes of Bonn University.
  * Commission 41 (History of Astronomy) of the International Astronomical Union (IAU)
  * Society for the History of Astronomy
  * Mayan Astronomy
  * Caelum Antiquum: Ancient Astronomy and Astrology at LacusCurtius
  * The Antikythera Calculator (Italian and English versions) - Ing. Giovanni Pastore

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_astronomy"

Categories: History of astronomy | History of earth science | History of
astrology

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 00:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



