
# Samael

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the archangel. For other uses, see Samael
(disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sammael, also called "the Grim Reaper" in modern pop culture, sits enrobed
with scythe in hand on top the world

  

## Contents

  * 1 In Judaism and Christianity
  * 2 In Gnosticism
  * 3 In Anthroposophism
  * 4 Literary references
  * 5 References
  * 6 Popular culture
  * 7 Further reading
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] In Judaism and Christianity

In Jewish lore, Sammael is said to be the Angel of Death, the chief ruler of
the Fifth Heaven and one of the seven regents of the world served by two
million angels; he resides in the Seventh Heaven. Yalkut I, 110 of the Talmud
speaks of Samael as Esau's guardian angel. In Sotah 10b, Samael is Esau's
guardian angel, and in the Sayings of Rabbi Eliezer, he is charged with being
the one who tempted Eve, then seduced and impregnated her with Cain. Though
some sources identify Gadreel as the angel that seduced Eve, other Hebrew
scholars say that it was Samael who tempted Eve in the guise of the Serpent.
Samael is also sometimes identified as being the angelic antagonist who
wrestled with Jacob, and also the angel who held back the arm of Abraham as he
was about to sacrifice his son.

  
In The Holy Kabbalah (Arthur Edward Waite, 255), Samael is described as the
"severity of God", and is listed as fifth of the archangels of the world of
Briah. Samael is said to have taken Lilith as his bride after she left Adam.
According to Zoharistic cabala, Samael was also mated with Eisheth Zenunim,
Na'amah, and Agrat Bat Mahlat \- all angels of prostitution.

Samael is sometimes confused in some books with Camael, an archangel of God,
whose name means "He who sees God".

## [edit] In Gnosticism

In the Apocryphon of John, found in the Nag Hammadi library, Samael is the
third name of the demiurge, whose other names are Yaldabaoth and Saklas. In
this context, Samael means "the blind god", the theme of blindness running
throughout gnostic works. He is born out of the error of Sophia, who desires
to create offspring of her own without the Spirit. His appearance is that of a
lion-faced serpent. In On the Origin of the World in the Nag Hammadi library
texts, he is also referred to as Ariael.

## [edit] In Anthroposophism

To anthroposophists, Samael is known as one of the seven archangels: Saint
Gregory gives the seven archangels as Anael, Gabriel , Michael, Oriphiel,
Raphael, Samael and Zachariel. They are all imagined to have a special
assignment to act as a global Zeitgeist ('time spirit'), each for periods of
about 380 years. Since 1879, anthroposophists posit, Michael has been the
leading time spirit. Four important archangels are also supposed to display
periodic spiritual activity over the seasons: Raphael during the spring, Uriel
during the summer, Michael during the autumn, and Gabriel during the winter.
In anthroposophy, archangels may be good or evil; in particular, some of their
rank are collaborators of Ahriman, whose purpose (anthroposophists believe) is
to alienate humanity from the spiritual world and promote materialism and
heartless technical control.

## [edit] Literary references

  * John Le CarrÃ©, "The Spy Who Came in from the Cold": The protagonist of this short novel is Alec Leamas, "Leamas" being Samael spelled backwards. The character of Leamas has the dual good and evil qualities variously assigned to the angel Samael.

## [edit] References

  * Bunson, Matthew, (1996). Angels A to Z : A Who's Who of the Heavenly Host. Three Rivers Press. ISBN 0-517-88537-9.
  * Davidson, Gustav. A Dictionary of Angels: Including the Fallen Angels. Free Press. ISBN 0-02-907052-X

## [edit] Popular culture

  * In The Wheel Of Time series by Robert Jordan, Sammael is also the name of one of the Forsaken, a group of men and women who have chosen to follow the Dark One and are adept at using the One Power.
  * Samael is shown as a reoccuring recruitable character in the Megami Tensei video game series. The archangel is depicted in the game series in the form of a blood-red serpent. He is a member of the Vile Clan and is a persona of the Death Arcana.
  * In the Silent Hill video games, Samael is the name of one of the town's gods.
  * In the film Hellboy, one of the antagonists is a giant hell-hound called Sammael, that Hellboy nicknames "Sammy".
  * In the film Gabriel, Sammael is the main antagonist who leads the fallen against the arcs.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Bamberger, Bernard Jacob, (March 15, 2006). Fallen Angels: Soldiers of Satan's Realm. Jewish Publication Society of America. ISBN 0-8276-0797-0
  * Cruz, Joan C. (1999). Angels and Devils. Tan Books & Publishers. ISBN 0-89555-638-3.
  * Jung, Leo (1925). "Fallen Angels in Jewish, Christian and Mohammedan Literature. A Study in Comparative Folk-Lore", published in four parts in The Jewish Quarterly Review, New Ser. 
    * Vol. 15, No. 4 (Apr., 1925), pp. 467-502, doi:10.2307/1451739
    * Vol. 16, No. 1 (Jul., 1925), pp. 45-88, doi:10.2307/1451748
    * Vol. 16, No. 2 (Oct., 1925), pp. 171-205, doi:10.2307/1451789
    * Vol. 16, No. 3 (Jan., 1926), pp. 287-336, doi:10.2307/1451485

## [edit] External links

  * Jewish Encyclopedia

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samael"

Categories: Angels in Judaism | Individual angels | Demons in Judaism |
Qliphoth

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 March 2009, at 04:35.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



