
# Ouija

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the photographer, see Weegee. For the 2007 Philippine film, see Ouija
(film).

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2008)  
Part of a series on  
Spiritualistic topics  
<IMG>  
Spirit Â· Spiritualism  

Spiritualism (religious movement)  

Spiritism Â· Psychic  
Related practices  
Mediumship Â· Reincarnation  

Channelling (mediumistic) Â· Spirit world  

Spirit possession Â· Seance  
Obsession Â· Spiritualist Church  
Faith healing Â· Fortune-telling  
Related topics  
Mediumship Â· Animism  
Paranormal Â· Shamanism  
Parapsychology Â· Occult  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
A ouija board (correctly pronounced "weejah" /wiÊ¤É/ although often
pronounced "wee-gee" /wiÊ¤i/, also known as spirit board or talking board) is
any flat board with letters, numbers, and other symbols, used to supposedly
communicate with spirits. It uses a planchette (small heart-shaped piece of
wood) or movable indicator to indicate the message by spelling it out on the
board during a sÃ©ance. The fingers of the participants are placed on the
planchette that then moves about the board to spell out messages. Ouija is a
trademark for a talking board currently sold by Parker Brothers.[1] While the
word is not considered a genericized trademark, it has become a trademark that
is often used generically to refer to any talking board.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Etymology
  * 2 Explanations
    * 2.1 Scientific explanation
    * 2.2 Spiritualist explanation
    * 2.3 Skeptical explanation
  * 3 Literature
  * 4 Criticism of ouija boards
  * 5 Crowley and modern occultism
  * 6 Other notable users
  * 7 Other types of boards
  * 8 Popular culture
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
    * 10.1 Footnotes
    * 10.2 Books
  * 11 External links
    * 11.1 Information on talking boards
    * 11.2 Skeptics
    * 11.3 Others

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

U.S. Patent D056,449 . Design patent for toys (D21/813) which was filed May
26, 1920. Issued Oct 26, 1920. Patentee was H. McGlasson.

The first historical mention of something resembling a Ouija board is found in
China around 1200 B.C., a divination method known as fuji æ¶ä¹© "planchette
writing".[citation needed] Other sources claim that according to a Greek
historical account of the philosopher Pythagoras, in 540 B.C. his sect would
conduct sÃ©ances at "a mystic table, moving on wheels, moved towards signs,
which the philosopher and his pupil, Philolaus, interpreted to the audience as
being revelations supposedly from an unseen world."[2] However, other sources
call both claims into dispute, claiming that fuji is spirit writing, not the
use of a spirit board, and that there is no record of Pythagoras or his
students actually having used this method of achieving oracles or
divinations.[3] In addition, the claim of Pythagorian use is called into doubt
by questions of historical accuracy, as Philolaus was never the pupil of
Pythagoras, and indeed was born roughly twenty-five years after Pythagoras's
death. The first undisputed use of the talking boards came with the Modern
Spiritualist Movement in The United States in the mid-19th century. Methods of
divination at that time used various ways to spell out messages, including
swinging a pendulum over a plate that had letters around the edge or using an
entire table to indicate letters drawn on the floor. Often used was a small
wooden tablet supported on casters. This tablet, called a planchette, was
affixed with a pencil that would write out messages in a fashion similar to
automatic writing. These methods may predate modern Spiritualism.

During the late 1800s, planchettes were widely sold as a novelty. The
businessmen Elijah Bond and Charles Kennard had the idea to patent a
planchette sold with a board on which the alphabet was printed. The patentees
filed on May 28, 1890 for patent protection and thus had invented the first
Ouija board. Issue date on the patent was February 10, 1891. They received
U.S. Patent 446,054 . Bond was an attorney and was an inventor of other
objects in addition to this device. An employee of Kennard, William Fuld took
over the talking board production and in 1901, he started production of his
own boards under the name "Ouija".[3] The Fuld name would become synonymous
with the Ouija board, as Fuld reinvented its history, claiming that he himself
had invented it. Countless talking boards from Fuld's competitors flooded the
market and all these boards enjoyed a heyday from the 1920s through the 1960s.
Fuld sued many companies over the "Ouija" name and concept right up until his
death in 1927. In 1966, Fuld's estate sold the entire business to Parker
Brothers, who continues to hold all trademarks and patents. About ten brands
of talking boards are sold today under various names.[3]

### [edit] Etymology

There are several theories about the origin of the term "Ouija". The Oxford
English Dictionary states that the origin is unknown, but mentions three
possibilities. According to one of these, the word is derived from the French
"oui" (for "yes") and the German "ja" (also for "yes"). An alternative story
suggests that the name was revealed to inventor Charles Kennard during a Ouija
sÃ©ance and was claimed to be an Ancient Egyptian word meaning "good luck". It
has also been suggested that the word was inspired by the name of the Moroccan
city Oujda.[4]

Despite its common usage, "Ouija" is a registered trademark (but the term
"Ouija Board" has been abandoned as a registered trademark).[5]

## [edit] Explanations

### [edit] Scientific explanation

Users subconsciously direct the path of the triangle to produce a word that is
in that person's subconscious thought process. This subconscious behavior is
known as ideomotor action, a term coined by William Carpenter in 1882. It is
also known as automatism.[6] Some people may be convinced that the "powers" of
the ouija board are real because they are unaware that they are in fact moving
the piece and therefore assume that the piece must be moving due to some other
"spiritual force". The subconscious thought process may produce an answer that
is different from what the user expected in their conscious thought
processâthus perpetuating the idea that the board has "mystical powers". The
Penn & Teller: Bullshit! episode on Ouija Boards, ran an experiment using
unbiased participants. Questions were being asked to the late William Frawley
with very strong answers. The participants were then blindfolded and the board
was turned 180 degrees without their knowledge. With continued questioning,
the planchette then traveled to bare areas of the board where the participants
believed the "Yes" and "No" marks were located.

### [edit] Spiritualist explanation

Spiritualists who believe Ouija boards can be used to make actual contact with
the spirit world feel that the act of hindering a mediumâs ability to use
his or her own eyes while the board is in use effectively places too great of
a handicap on the whole exercise. This argument stems from the belief that
contacted spirits actually utilize the eyes of the medium during a Ouija
session in order to point to the letters and words needed to form a message.
Most believers of this notion believe that the board has no intrinsic power in
and of itself, but rather, is used simply as a tool to aid a medium while in
communication with the spirit world.[7]

### [edit] Skeptical explanation

A skeptical view of the Ouija board is that it is frequently used as a prank
game by persons who are fully conscious that they are guiding the
planchette.[8] Considering that the boards are sold by a game company, and are
widely used by children, they can be used in a game similar to the popular
"snipe hunt" trick, in which one or more participants are in on the joke, and
at least one participant is not. When one or more players deliberately but
discreetly moves the planchette, it is indistinguishable (to other players)
from the sensation of the planchette "moving on its own". Players moving the
planchette may either maintain a deadpan expression, or act out shock and
surprise. Players who are fooled but eventually figure out what happened, can
go on to become one of the pranksters in a future session with other new
players.

## [edit] Literature

Talking boards have become an iconic part of culture, demonstrated by their
appearances in many books and movies. Their roles in such vary from being a
benign object to an evil entity. A more peculiar role of talking boards in
literature stems from authors using the board to channel complete written
works from the deceased.

In the early 1900s, St. Louis housewife Pearl Curran used her Ouija board
communications with the ubiquitous spirit Patience Worth to publish a number
of poems and prose. Pearl claimed that all of the writings came to her through
sÃ©ances, which she allowed the public to attend. In 1917 writer Emily G.
Hutchings, a friend of Pearl Curran's, believed she had communicated with and
written a book dictated by Mark Twain from her Ouija board. Twain's living
descendants went to court to halt publication of the book that was later
determined to be so poorly written that it could not have been written by
Twain dead or alive.

Sylvia Plath's poem Ouija was influenced by the experiments she and Ted Hughes
made with a board. Her Dialogue over a Ouija Board, written in 1957,
incorporates the text of one of the sessions.

Author John G. Fuller used a Ouija board in his research for his 1976 book The
Ghost of Flight 401. As he was skeptical of its effectiveness, he worked with
a medium and claimed they both contacted Don Repo, the flight engineer on the
flight which crashed into the Everglades en route to Miami. According to
Fuller, the information divined described facts that neither he nor the medium
previously knew.

More recently, Pulitzer Prize winning poet James Merrill used a Ouija board
and recorded what he claimed were messages from a number of deceased persons.
He combined these messages with his own poetry in The Changing Light at
Sandover (1982).

## [edit] Criticism of ouija boards

Although ouija boards are viewed by some to be a simple toy, there are people
who believe they can be harmful, including Edgar Cayce, who called them
"dangerous."[9] Critics warn that "evil demons" pretend to be cooperative
ghosts in order to trick players into becoming spiritually possessed.

Some practitioners claim to have had bad experiences related to the use of
talking boards by being haunted by "demons," seeing apparitions of spirits,
and hearing voices after using them. A few paranormal researchers, such as
John Zaffis, claim that the majority of the worst cases of so-called demon
harassment and possession are caused by the use of Ouija boards. The American
demonologists Ed and Lorraine Warren stated that "Ouija boards are just as
dangerous as drugs."[10] They further state that "sÃ©ances and Ouija boards
and other occult paraphernalia are dangerous because 'evil spirits' often
disguise themselves as your loved onesâand take over your life."[10]

In 1944, occultist Manly P. Hall, the founder of the Philosophical Research
Society and an early authority on the occult in the 20th century, stated in
Horizon magazine that, "during the last 20-25 years I have had considerable
personal experience with persons who have complicated their lives through
dabbling with the Ouija board. Out of every hundred such cases, at least 95
are worse off for the experience." He went on to say that, "I know of broken
homes, estranged families, and even suicides that can be traced directly to
this source."[11]

Many Christians hold the belief that using a Ouija board allows communication
with demons, which they say is Biblically forbidden as a form of
divination.[12] Some people who claim to have been oppressed by evil spirits
after using a board say that they could only get rid of these problems after
Christian deliverance.[13] Many Christians believe that no dead person's soul
can be summoned, and that the only summoned spirits are demons who are trying
to harm humans.[14]

As early as 1924, Harry Houdini wrote that five people from Carrito,
California were driven insane by using a board.[15] That same year, Dr. Carl
Wickland in his book stated that "the serious problem of alienation and mental
derangement attending ignorant psychic experiments was first brought to my
attention by cases of several persons whose seemingly harmless experiences
with automatic writing and the Ouija board resulted in such wild insanity that
commitment to asylums was necessitated."[16]

The former medical director of the State Insane Asylum of New Jersey, Dr.
Curry, stated that the Ouija board was a "dangerous factor" in unbalancing the
mind and believed that if their popularity persisted insane asylums would be
filled with people who used them.[17]

Decades later, in 1965, parapsychologist Martin Ebon in his book Satan Trap:
Dangers of the Occult, states that "it all may start harmlessly enough,
perhaps with a Ouija board," which will, "bring startling information...
establishing credibility or identifying itself as someone who is dead. It is
common that people... as having been 'chosen' for a special task." He
continues, "Quite often the Ouija turns vulgar, abusive or threatening. It
grows demanding and hostile, and sitters may find themselves using the board
compulsively, as if 'possessed' by a spirit, or hearing voices that control or
command them."[18]

In her 1971 autobiography, the psychic Susy Smith said, "Warn people away from
Ouija and automatic writing. I experienced many of the worst problems of such
involvement. Had I been forewarned by reading that such efforts might cause
one to run the risk of being mentally disturbed, I might have been more
wary."[19]Only recently, well known psychic Sylvia Brown made her appearance
on the Montel William's show stating that Ouija boards were dangerous.
Additionally, the late Roman Catholic priest Malachi Martin believed talking
boards are dangerous and claimed that by using these devices a person opens
themselves to demonic oppression or possession, topics upon which Martin spoke
and wrote extensively for many years.[20]

## [edit] Crowley and modern occultism

Little is published regarding Aleister Crowley's advocacy of the ouija board.
Yet, he had great admiration for the use of one and the Ouija board played a
passing role in his magical workings.[21][22] PHOEBE WAS ERE 09 =]

Jane Wolfe, who lived with Crowley at his infamous Abbey of Thelema, also used
the Ouija board. She credits some of her greatest spiritual communications to
use of this implement. Crowley also discussed the Ouija board with another of
hs students, and the most ardent of them, Frater Achad (Charles Stansfeld
Jones): it is frequently mentioned in their unpublished letters.

in 1917 Achad experimented with the board as a means of summoning Angels, as
opposed to Elementals. In one letter Crowley told Jones: "Your Ouija board
experiment is rather fun. You see how very satisfactory it is, but I believe
things improve greatly with practice. I think you should keep to one angel,
and make the magical preparations more elaborate."

Over the years, both became so fascinated by the board that they discussed
marketing their own design. Their discourse culminated in a letter, dated
February 21, 1919, in which Crowley tells Jones, "Re: Ouija Board. I offer you
the basis of ten percent of my net profit. You are, if you accept this,
responsible for the legal protection of the ideas, and the marketing of the
copyright designs. I trust that this may be satisfactory to you. I hope to let
you have the material in the course of a week." In March, Crowley wrote to
Achad to inform him, "I'll think up another name for Ouija." But their
business venture never came to fruition and Crowley's new design, along with
his name for the board, has not survived.

Crowley has stated, of the Ouija Board that, "There is, however, a good way of
using this instrument to get what you want, and that is to perform the whole
operation in a consecrated circle, so that undesirable aliens cannot interfere
with it. You should then employ the proper magical invocation in order to get
into your circle just the one spirit you want. It is comparatively easy to do
this. A few simple instructions are all that is necessary, and I shall be
pleased to give these, free of charge, to any one who cares to apply."[21]

## [edit] Other notable users

  * G. K. Chesterton used a Ouija board. Around 1893 he had gone through a crisis of skepticism and depression, and during this period Chesterton experimented with the Ouija board and grew fascinated with the occult.[23]

  * Poet James Merrill used a Ouija board for years, and even encouraged entrance of spirits into his body. He wrote the poem "The Changing Light at Sandover" with the help of a Ouija board. Before he died, he recommended that people not use Ouija boards.[24]

  * Former Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi claimed under oath that, in a sÃ©ance held in 1978 with other professors at the University of Bologna, the "ghost" of Giorgio La Pira spelled the name of the street where Aldo Moro was being held by the Red Brigades in a Ouija. According to Peter Popham of The Independent: "Everybody here has long believed that Prodi's ouija board tale was no more than an ill-advised and bizarre way to conceal the identity of his true source, probably a person from Bologna's seething far-left underground whom he was pledged to protect."[25]

  * Bill Wilson the co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous used the Ouija Board to contact spirits.[26] His wife said that he would get messages directly without even using the board.[27] For a while, his participation in AA was deeply affected by his involvement with the Ouija board. Wilson claimed that he received the twelve step method directly from a spirit without the board and wrote it down.[28]

  * Art Bell, the former host of the paranormal-themed radio show Coast To Coast AM (which on Halloween became Ghost To Ghost AM) had once used a Ouija board, and experienced something he's been wanting to forget ever since. He refused to tell any of the callers/listeners about the actual experience and he always advised not to use a Ouija board - ever.[citation needed]

  * The Fiery Furnaces said that they used a Ouija board to write lyrics for their album Widow City.[29]

  * On the July 25, 2007, edition of the paranormal radio show Coast to Coast AM, host George Noory attempted to carry out a live Ouija board experiment on national radio despite the strong objections of one of his guests, Jordan Maxwell, and with the encouragement of his other guests, Dr. Bruce Goldberg, Rosemary Ellen Guiley and Jerry Edward Cornelius.[citation needed] In the days and hours leading up to the show, unfortunate events kept occurring to Noory's friends and family as well as some of his guests, but these events would likely be considered coincidences by skeptics. After recounting a near-death experience in 2000 and noting bizarre events taking place, Noory canceled the experiment. [30]

  * The Mars Volta wrote their album Bedlam in Goliath based on their alleged experiences with an Ouija board. According to their story (written for them by a fiction author, Jeremy Robert Johnson), they purchased an Ouija bored while on tour in Jerusalem. At first the board provided a story which became the theme for the album. Strange events allegedly related to this activity occurred during the recording of the album: the studio flooded, one of the album's main engineers had a nervous breakdown, equipment began to malfunction, and Cedric Bixler-Zavala's foot was injured. Following these bad experiences the band buried the Ouija board.[31]

  * Brandon Flowers, the lead singer of The Killers (band) says that an Ouija board was the cause of his phobia of the number '621' which happens to coincide with his birth date (21st June)

## [edit] Other types of boards

Other iterations of the board exist in Asia.[citation needed] The Japanese
version is known as "Kokkuri san," eponymous of the entity who is said to
communicate with the user. (The horror film Kokkuri-san is based on this.)
These are all home-made, with words written on paper in local languages. The
planchette is replaced by other items, most commonly a pen, a dish (Chinese
condiment saucer) or a coin.[citation needed] It is often played by
inquisitive teenagers.[citation needed] Sinister consequences of using such
'Angel' boards appear in episodes of the television anime series XXXholic,
Great Teacher Onizuka, and Ghost Hunt.

Various horror movies have been made about the consequences of playing with
these incarnations of the board, most notably by the Hong Kong and South Korea
movie industry. One of the more well-known movies to date is the 2004 South
Korean film Bunshinsaba.

## [edit] Popular culture

<IMG>

Lists of miscellaneous information should be avoided. Please relocate any
relevant information into appropriate sections or articles. (January 2009)  
  * In an episode of The Drew Carey Show, Drew and his friends use a Ouija board for guidance regarding what Drew is supposed to do with his life. This experiment fails however, when Lewis pushes their hands to the letters he wants, spelling out "beer" and "ch" for chips.

  * In the television series House, a group of boys play with a Ouija board at the beginning of an episode. When one of the names of the boys is revealed, he ends up hospitalized.

  * The Twiztid and Insane Clown Posse music video for the song "We Don't Die" features Twiztid standing on a life size Ouija board.

  * In the 2000 film What Lies Beneath starring Michelle Pfeiffer and Harrison Ford, Pfeiffer's character uses an Ouija board in hopes to contact a deceased young woman.

  * The title of the 1986 film Witchboard and its two sequels refers to Ouija boards, the use of which figures heavily in the plots.

  * Rap group Bone Thugs-N-Harmony often mention the Ouija board and what it tells them to do.

  * The singer Morrissey has a song titled "Ouija Board, Ouija Board".

  * Sheryl Crow makes a reference to the Ouija board in a text passage of "A Change Would Do You Good".

  * Metal group Slipknot used a slightly altered Ouija board design for a backdrop during their 2008 Rockstar Mayhemfest set, and for their late 2008 tour dates in Europe.

  * Metallica guitarist Kirk Hammett has a signature guitar model with a Ouija board motif, actually spelled wrong, which he used live.

  * Lauren Myracle references the Ouija board in the book Rhymes with Witches. The "Bitches" contacted a spirit that gave them their popularity.

  * In an episode of Yu-Gi-Oh, Ryo Bakura uses a card that resembles a ouija board (described in the Japanese version as a board used in Western spiritualism), called "Destiny Board". In the Japanese version of the anime, the board spells out "Death" whereas in the English version it spells out "Final."

## [edit] See also

  * Ka-Bala: Other type of board
  * Planchette
  * Fuji (planchette writing)

## [edit] References

### [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ United States Patent and Trademark Office retrieved 22/08/07
  2. ^ Melton, J. Gordon (1996). Encyclopedia of Occultism & Parapsychology (4th ed.). Gale Research. ISBN 0-8103-9487-1
  3. ^ a b c Museum of Talking Boards: Ancient Ouija Boards, Fact or Fiction?
  4. ^ "Oxford English Dictionary: Ouija. Draft Revision Dec. 2007". http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/entry/00335257.
  5. ^ http://www.uspto.gov/main/trademarks.htm United States Patent and Trademark Office
  6. ^ Is there a scientific explanation for how the Ouija board works?
  7. ^ Museum of Talking Boards
  8. ^ Article from Skeptical Enqirer Magazine
  9. ^ An American Prophet, Sidney D. Kirkpatrick, Riverhead Books, 2000
  10. ^ a b Graveyard Ed and Lorraine Warren, 1992, pages 137-138
  11. ^ Horizon Magazine, Manly P. Hall, October-December 1944, pages 76-77
  12. ^ Contemporary Christian Divination, by Bob DeWaay
  13. ^ Dialog with a Demon, by Lona Kay
  14. ^ The Ouija Board:A Doorway to the Occult, Edmund C. Gruss, P & R Publishing, Chapter 3, 1994.
  15. ^ A Magician Among the Spirits, Harry Houdini, Harper, 1924
  16. ^ Thirty years Among the Dead, Dr. Carl Wickland, 1934
  17. ^ Edmund The Ouija Board: Doorway to the Occult, Edmund C. Gruss, Moody Press, Chicago, Illinois 1995 page 75.
  18. ^ Satan Trap: Dangers of the Occult, Martin Ebon
  19. ^ Confessions of a Psychic, Susy Smith, 1971
  20. ^ Hostage to the Devil: The Possession and Exorcism of Five Americans, Malachi Martin, 1976
  21. ^ a b Cornelious, J. Edward Aleister Crowley and the Ouija Board. 2005 ISBN 978-1-932595-10-9
  22. ^ Mini site for Cornelious, J. Edwardâs book, Aleister Crowley and the Ouija Board, http://feralhouse.com/press/mini_sites/ouija/
  23. ^ BBC - Radio 4 - Great Lives - Richard Ingrams on GK Chesterton - 9 May 2003
  24. ^ Ouija: The Most Dangerous Game, Stoker Hunt, Chapter 6, pages 44-50.
  25. ^ Popham, Peter (2005-12-02). "The seance that came back to haunt Romano Prodi". The Independent. http://news.independent.co.uk/europe/article330676.ece. Retrieved on 2007-11-28.
  26. ^ Pass It On, New York A. A., 1984, page 278.
  27. ^ Pass It On, New York A. A., 1984, pages 278-279.
  28. ^ Pass It On, New York A. A., 1984, pages 196-197.
  29. ^ Thrill Jockey Records
  30. ^ Wednesday July 25th, 2007 Coast to Coast AM Show Summary
  31. ^ The Bedlam in Goliath Offers Weird Ouija Tale of The Mars Volta>

### [edit] Books

  * Cornelious, J. Edward Aleister Crowley and the Ouija Board. 2005 ISBN 1-932595-10-4 [1]
  * Gruss, Edmond C. The Ouija Board: A Doorway to the Occult 1994 ISBN 0-87552-247-5
  * Hunt, Stoker. Ouija: The Most Dangerous Game. 1992 ISBN 0-06-092350-4

## [edit] External links

### [edit] Information on talking boards

  * Museum Of Talking Boards
  * Related Names for Talking Board
  * Witchboard World
  * Paranormality A-Z Paranormal Phenomena
  * User anecdotes
  * The Official Website of William Fuld and home of the Ouija board
  * The History of the Copper Tube Ouija which design has been transmitted by Spirit Guides to Maryse and John Locke, researchers in ITC/EVP

### [edit] Skeptics

  * The Skeptics' Dictionary: Ouija
  * An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural
  * How does a Ouija board work? from The Straight Dope

### [edit] Others

  * Ouija Board Patent
  * Ouija board stories
  * 'Ouija board' appeal dismissed
  * BBC video on Ouija Board
  * Clare Randall haunted castle
  * Ouija at the Open Directory Project

v â¢ d â¢ e

Spiritualism and Spiritism  
Beliefs

Core beliefs : Theism Â· Survivalism Â· Mediumship Â· SÃ©ances Â· Spiritual
Healing Â· Variant beliefs : Reincarnation Â· Christianity Â· New Age  
Important Figures

Emanuel Swedenborg Â· Franz Mesmer Â· Fox sisters Â· Eva CarriÃ¨re Â· Andrew
Jackson Davis Â· Cora L. V. Scott Â· Achsa W. Sprague Â· Paschal Beverly
Randolph Â· Emma Hardinge Britten Â· Allan Kardec Â· Camille Flammarion Â·
William Stainton Moses Â· Robert Owen Â· Arthur Conan Doyle Â· W. T. Stead Â·
Chico Xavier Â· Helen Duncan Â· Doris Stokes Â· Colin Fry Â· Danielle Egnew Â·
Derek Acorah Â· "Margery" Â· Harry Houdini Â· Jane Roberts Â· Arthur Findlay  
Other

History of Spiritism Â· Spiritist doctrine Â· Spiritualist Church Â· List of
Spiritualist organizations Â· National Spiritualist Association of Churches Â·
Spiritualists' National Union Â· Spiritualist Association of Great Britain Â·
Spiritualism in fiction Â· Theatrical SÃ©ances Â· Arthur Findlay College  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Divination  
Methods

Abacomancy Â· Acultomancy Â· Aeromancy Â· agalmatomancy Â· Aichmomancy Â·
Theriomancy (Ailuromancy Â· Alectryomancy Â· augur Â· Myomancy Â· Myrmomancy
Â· Ornithomancy Â· NggÃ m) Â· Aleuromancy Â· Alomancy Â· Alphitomancy Â·
alveromancy Â· amathomancy Â· ambulomancy Â· amniomancy Â· anthomancy Â·
Anthropomancy Â· anthroposcopy Â· anthracomancy Â· Apantomancy Â·
anthroposcopy Â· anthracomancy Â· Apantomancy Â· arachnomancy Â· archeomancy
Â· arithmancy Â· ariolation Â· armomancy Â· aspidomancy Â· Astragalomancy Â·
astrapomancy Â· Astrology Â· Astromancy Â· auramancy Â· Axiomancy Â· Belomancy
Â· biorhythmic divination Â· bletonomancy Â· Pyromancy Â· brontomancy Â·
bumpology Â· Carromancy Â· Catoptromancy Â· cattabomancy Â· cineromancy Â·
chalcomancy Â· Cartomancy Â· Bibliomancy (I Ching divination) Â· choriomancy
Â· chresmomancy Â· Chronomancy Â· clamancy Â· cledonism Â· cleidomancy Â·
Cleromancy (Astragalomancy Â· Favomancy Â· IfÃ¡ Â· Runic magic) Â· colormancy
Â· conchomancy Â· Coscinomancy Â· Crithomancy Â· Cromniomancy Â· cryptomancy
Â· scrying (Crystal gazing Â· Oculomancy Â· Catoptromancy Â· Hydromancy) Â·
Cybermancy Â· Cyclomancy Â· dactyliomancy Â· Dactylomancy Â· DÅbutsu uranai
Â· Dowsing Â· dream question Â· Enochian chess Â· eromancy Â· Extispicy Â·
Fal-GÃ»sh Â· Floriomancy Â· Geomancy Â· Geloscopy Â· Gematria Â· Graphology Â·
Gyromancy Â· haruspex Â· horoscope Â· Ichnomancy Â· Isopsephy Â· Kabbalah Â·
Kau cim Â· Lampadomancy Â· Lecanomancy Â· Libanomancy Â· Literomancy Â·
Lithomancy Â· Macharomancy Â· Margaritomancy Â· Megapolisomancy Â· Metoposcopy
Â· Moleosophy Â· Molybdomancy Â· Necromancy (nigromancy) Â· Onomancy Â·
Numerology Â· Oinomancy Â· Omphalomancy Â· Oneiromancy Â· Onomancy Â·
Onychomancy Â· Oomancy Â· ouija Â· Phrenology Â· Tasseography Â· Physiognomy
Â· Plastromancy Â· Somatomancy (Cephalomancy Â· Chiromancy Â· Podomancy Â·
Rumpology) Â· Psychognomy Â· Rhabdomancy Â· Rhapsodomancy Â· Scapulimancy Â·
Slinneanachd Â· Sortes Â· Spodomancy Â· Sternomancy Â· Uromancy  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ouija"

Categories: Spiritualism | Paranormal | Divination | Occult | Parker Brothers
games | Talking board games

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2008 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since August 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 |
Articles with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with trivia
sections from January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 10:48 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



