
# Garuda

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Garuda (disambiguation).

Garuda  
Garuda, the Vahana of Lord Vishnu  
Garuda, the Vahana of Lord Vishnu  
Devanagari à¤à¤°à¥à¤¡  
This box: view â¢ talk  
The Garuda (Sanskrit: Garuá¸a à¤à¤°à¥à¤¡, eagle; PÄli Garuá¸·a) is a large
mythical bird or bird-like creature that appears in both Hindu and Buddhist
mythology.

Garuda is the Hindu name for the constellation Aquila and the Brahminy kite is
considered to be the contemporary representation of Garuda[1]

## Contents

  * 1 In Hinduism
  * 2 In the Mahabharata
    * 2.1 Birth and deeds
    * 2.2 Descendents
    * 2.3 As a Symbol
  * 3 In Buddhism
  * 4 As a cultural and national symbol
  * 5 Gallery
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] In Hinduism

In Hindu mythology, a Garuda is a lesser Hindu divinity, usually the mount
(vahanam) of Vishnu. Garuda is depicted as having a golden body, white face,
red wings, and an eagle's beak, but with a strong man's body. He wears a crown
on his head. He is ancient and has size enough to block out the sun.

His stature in Hindu religion can be gauged by the fact that an independent
Upanishad, the Garudopanidad, and a Purana, the Garuda Purana, is devoted to
him. Various names have been attributed to Garuda \- Chirada, Gaganeshvara,
Kamayusha, Kashyapi, Khageshvara, Nagantaka, Sitanana, Sudhahara, Suparna,
Tarkshya, Vainateya, Vishnuratha and others. The Vedas provide the earliest
reference of Garuda, though by the name of Åyena, where this mighty bird is
said to have brought nectar to earth from heaven. The Puranas, which came into
existence much later, mention Garuda as doing the same thing, which indicates
that Åyena (Sanskrit for Eagle) and Garuda are the same. One of the faces of
ÅrÄ« PaÃ±camukha Hanuman is Mahavira Garuda. This face points towards the
west. Worship of Garuda is believed to remove the effects of poisons from
one's body. In Tamil Vaishnavism Garuda and Hanuman are known as "Periya
Thiruvadi" and "Siriya Thiruvadi" respectively.

In the Bhagavad-Gita (Ch.10, Verse 30), in the middle of the battlefield
"Kurukshetra", Krishna explaining his omnipresence, says - "Of birds, I am the
son of Vinata (Garuda)" indicating the importance of Garuda.

Garuda plays an important role in Krishna Avatar in which Krishna and
Satyabhama ride on Garuda to kill Narakasura. On another occasion, Lord Hari
rides on Garuda to save the devotee Elephant Gajendra. It is also said that
Garuda's wings when flying will chant the Vedas.

## [edit] In the Mahabharata

### [edit] Birth and deeds

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vishnu and Lakshmi riding on the Garuda - Painting in LACMA from Rajasthan,
Bundi, c.1730

<IMG>

<IMG>

Balinese wooden statue of Garuda battling NÄga serpent, Museum Indonesia,
Jakarta.

The story of Garuda's birth and deeds is told in the first book of the great
epic Mahabharata.[2] According to the epic, when Garuda first burst forth from
his egg, he appeared as a raging inferno equal to the cosmic conflagration
that consumes the world at the end of every age. Frightened, the gods begged
him for mercy. Garuda, hearing their plea, reduced himself in size and energy.

Garuda's father was the creator-rishi Kasyapa. His mother was Vinata, whose
sister was Kadru, the mother of serpents. One day, Vinata entered into and
lost a foolish bet, as a result of which she became enslaved to her sister.
Resolving to release his mother from this state of bondage, Garuda approached
the serpents and asked them what it would take to purchase her freedom. Their
reply was that Garuda would have to bring them the elixir of immortality, also
called amrita. It was a tall order. The amrita at that time found itself in
the possession of the gods, who guarded it jealously, since it was the source
of their immortality. They had ringed the elixir with a massive fire that
covered the sky. They had blocked the way to the elixir with a fierce
mechanical contraption of sharp rotating blades. And finally, they had
stationed two gigantic poisonous snakes next to the elixir as deadly
guardians.

Undaunted, Garuda hastened toward the abode of the gods intent on robbing them
of their treasure. Knowing of his design, the gods met him in full battle-
array. Garuda, however, defeated the entire host and scattered them in all
directions. Taking the water of many rivers into his mouth, he extinguished
the protective fire the gods had thrown up. Reducing his size, he crept past
the rotating blades of their murderous machine. And finally, he mangled the
two gigantic serpents they had posted as guards. Taking the elixir into his
mouth without swallowing it, he launched again into the air and headed toward
the eagerly waiting serpents. En route, he encountered Vishnu. Rather than
fight, the two exchanged promises. Vishnu promised Garuda the gift of
immortality even without drinking from the elixir, and Garuda promised to
become Vishnu's mount. Flying onward, he met Indra the god of the sky. Another
exchange of promises occurred. Garuda promised that once he had delivered the
elixir, thus fulfilling the request of the serpents, he would make it possible
for Indra to regain possession of the elixir and to take it back to the gods.
Indra in turn promised Garuda the serpents as food.

At long last, Garuda alighted in front of the waiting serpents. Placing the
elixir on the grass, and thereby liberating his mother Vinata from her
servitude, he urged the serpents to perform their religious ablutions before
consuming it. As they hurried off to do so, Indra swooped in to make off with
the elixir. From that day onward, Garuda was the ally of the gods and the
trusty mount of Vishnu, as well as the implacable enemy of snakes, upon whom
he preyed at every opportunity.

### [edit] Descendents

Also according to the Mahabharata, Garuda had six sons from whom were
descended the race of birds. The members of this race were of great might and
without compassion, subsisting as they did on their relatives the snakes.
Vishnu was their protector.[3]

### [edit] As a Symbol

<IMG>

<IMG>

Garuda Azhwar in front of the Sri VarahaSwamy Temple, Thiruvananthapuram

<IMG>

<IMG>

Garuda in the way to Tirumala, Tirupathi

Throughout the Mahabharata, Garuda is invoked as a symbol of impetuous violent
force, of speed, and of martial prowess. Powerful warriors advancing rapidly
on doomed foes are likened to Garuda swooping down on a serpent.[4] Defeated
warriors are like snakes beaten down by Garuda.[5] The field marshall Drona
uses a military formation named after Garuda.[6] Krishna even carries the
image of Garuda on his banner.[7]

## [edit] In Buddhism

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Mongolian Buddhist adaptation of the Hindu God, Garuda (Sanskrit), the
Khangarid may be a servant of the Yama (God of Death).

In Buddhist mythology, the garuá¸as (PÄli: garuá¸·Ä) are enormous predatory
birds with intelligence and social organization. Another name for the garuá¸a
is supará¹a (PÄli: supaá¹á¹a), meaning "well-winged, having good wings".
Like the NÄgas, they combine the characteristics of animals and divine
beings, and may be considered to be among the lowest devas.

The exact size of the garuá¸a is uncertain, but its wings are said to have a
span of many miles. This may be a poetic exaggeration, but it is also said
that when a garuá¸a's wings flap, they create hurricane-like winds that
darken the sky and blow down houses. A human being is so small compared to a
garuá¸a that a man can hide in the plumage of one without being noticed
(KÄkÄtÄ« JÄtaka, J.327). They are also capable of tearing up entire banyan
trees from their roots and carrying them off.

The garuá¸as have kings and cities, and at least some of them have the
magical power of changing into human form when they wish to have dealings with
people. On some occasions Garuá¸a kings have had romances with human women in
this form. Their dwellings are in groves of the simbalÄ«, or silk-cotton tree.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Garuda according to Ida Made Tlaga, a 19th century Balinese artist.

The garuá¸as are enemies to the NÄgas, a race of intelligent serpent- or
dragon-like beings, whom they hunt. The garuá¸as at one time caught the
nÄgas by seizing them by their heads; but the nÄgas learned that by
swallowing large stones, they could make themselves too heavy to be carried by
the garuá¸as, wearing them out and killing them from exhaustion. This secret
was divulged to one of the garuá¸as by the ascetic Karambiya, who taught him
how to seize a nÄga by the tail and force him to vomit up his stone (Pandara
JÄtaka, J.518).

The garuá¸as were among the beings appointed by Åakra to guard Mount Sumeru
and the TrÄyastriá¹Åa heaven from the attacks of the asuras.

In the Mahasamyatta Sutta, the Buddha is shown making temporary peace between
the Nagas and the garuá¸as.

The Sanskrit word garuá¸a has been borrowed and modified in the languages of
several Buddhist countries. In Thai the word for a garuá¸a is Krut
(à¸à¸£à¸¸à¸). In Burmese, garuá¸as are called ga-lon. In Kapampangan the
native word for eagle is Galura. In Japanese a garuá¸a is called Karura
(however, the form Garuda ã¬ã«ã¼ã is used in recent Japanese fiction -
see below).

For the Mongols, the garuá¸a is called Khan Garuda or Khangarid (Mongolian:
Ð¥Ð°Ð½Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐ´). Before and after each round of Mongolian wrestling, groups
performs the Garuá¸a Dance, a stylised imitation of the Khangarid and a
hawk.[citation needed]

In the Qing Dynasty fiction The Story of Yue Fei, Garuda sits at the head of
the Buddha. But when a celestial bat (an embodiment of the Aquarius
constellation) farts during the Buddhaâs expounding of the Lotus Sutra,
Garuda kills her and is exiled from paradise. He is later reborn as Song
Dynasty General Yue Fei. The bat is reborn as Lady Wang, wife of the traitor
Prime Minister Qin Hui, and is instrumental in formulating the "Eastern
Window" plot that leads to Yue's political execution.[8]

## [edit] As a cultural and national symbol

  * Thailand uses the garuá¸a (Thai: à¸à¸£à¸¸à¸ krut) as its national symbol. One form of the garuá¸a used in Thailand as a sign of the royal family is called Krut Pha, meaning "garuá¸a acting as the vehicle (of Vishnu)."

  * Indonesia also uses the garuá¸a as its national symbol. The Indonesian national airline is Garuda Indonesia.

  * The garuá¸a, known as Khangarid, is the symbol of the capital city of Mongolia, Ulan Bator.[9] According to popular Mongolian belief, Khangarid is the mountain spirit of the Bogd Khan Uul range who became a follower of Buddhist faith. Today he is considered the guardian of that mountain range and a symbol of courage and honesty. The bird also gives its name to Hangard Aviation and Khangarid (Ð¥Ð°Ð½Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐ´), a football (soccer) team in the Mongolia Premier League.

  * The elite bodyguards of the medieval Hoysala kings in Karnataka, India, were called Garudas, because they served the king in the way that Garuda served Vishnu.

  * The US Navy's Electronic Attack Squadron 134 is nicknamed the Garudas.

## [edit] Gallery

<IMG>

Garuda as national symbol of Indonesia

<IMG>

Garuda as national symbol of Thailand

<IMG>

Garuda (Khangarid) as the symbol of Ulan Bator, Mongolia

<IMG>

Garuda murthi in West Bengal, India  
<IMG>

A 13th century Cham sculpture depicts Garuda devouring a serpent.

<IMG>

A 12th century Cham sculpture in the Thap Mam style depicts Garuda serving as
an atlas.

<IMG>

Garuda figure, gilt bronze, Khmer Empire, 12th-13th century, John Young
Museum, University of Hawaii at Manoa

<IMG>

A 12th century bas relief at Angkor Wat in Cambodia showing Vishnu in battle
mounted on Garuda  
## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Russel, RV & Lal, H. 1916 The tribes and castes of the central provinces of India. Published Under the Orders of the Central Provinces Administration In Four Volumes Vol. I. Macmillan and Co., Limited St. Martinâs Street, London. pp. 2231
  2. ^ Mahabharata, Book I: Adi Parva, Sections 23 ff.
  3. ^ Mahabharata, Book V: Udyoga Parva, Section 101.
  4. ^ "Loud was the noise with which Arjuna faced his foes, like that made by Garuda in days of yore when swooping down for snakes." (Mahabharata, Book VIII: Karna Parva, Section 77.) "The impetuosity of Ashvatthama, as he rushed towards his foe, resembled that of Garuda swooping down for seizing a large snake." (Mahabharata, Book VIII: Karna Parva, Section 59.) Arjuna "seized Drupada as Garuda seizeth a huge snake after agitating the waters of the ocean." (Book I: Adi Parva, Section 140.)
  5. ^ Mahabharata, Book VIII: Karna Parva, Section 85.
  6. ^ Mahabharata, Book VII: Drona Parva, Section 20.
  7. ^ Mahabharata, Book VIII: Karna Parva, Section 94.
  8. ^ Hsia, C.T. C. T. Hsia on Chinese Literature. Columbia University Press, 2004 (ISBN 0231129904), 154
  9. ^ Michael Kohn. Mongolia. Lonely Planet, 2005. p. 52.

## [edit] See also

  * Garuda in the Architecture of Cambodia
  * Karura
  * Vishnu
  * Garuda Purana

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Garuda  
  * Photos of Garuda as represented in stone bas reliefs at the temples of Preah Khan and Angkor Wat in Cambodia.
  * Garuda Purana
  * Gauruda, arch-enemy of the naga

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Hindu deities and texts  
Goddesses

Devi Â· Saraswati Â· Lakshmi Â· Sati Â· Parvati Â· Durga Â· Shakti Â· Kali Â·
Sita Â· Radha Â· Mahavidya Â· Navadurga Â· Matrikas Â· more

Hindu swastika  
Gods

Deva Â· Brahma Â· Vishnu Â· Shiva Â· Rama Â· Krishna Â· Ganesha Â· Murugan Â·
Hanuman Â· Indra Â· Surya Â· more  
Texts

Vedas Â· Upanishads Â· Puranas Â· Ramayana Â· Mahabharata Â· Bhagavad Gita  
Hinduism Â· Hindu mythology Â· Indian epic poetry  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garuda"

Categories: Buddhist deities, bodhisattvas, and demons | Characters in
Ramayana | Dharmapalas | Heraldic charges | Hindu gods | Hindu legendary
creatures | Legendary birds | National symbols of Indonesia | National symbols
of Thailand | Sanskrit words and phrases | Tibetan Buddhist mythology

Hidden categories: Articles containing Mongolian language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008
| Articles containing Thai language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Myanmasa
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 04:38.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



