
# Arne Jacobsen

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Arne Emil Jacobsen (11 February 1902 â 24 March 1971) was a Danish architect
and designer, exemplar of the 'Danish Modern' style. In addition to his
architectural work he created a number of highly original chairs and other
furniture. He received several international distinctions and medals.

## Contents

  * 1 Education and training
  * 2 Furniture designs
  * 3 St Catherine's College, Oxford
  * 4 Principal architectural works
  * 5 Gallery of works
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Education and training

Jacobsen was a student at the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen.
He was awarded a degree in 1927

## [edit] Furniture designs

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bellavista apartments, Klampenborg, view-1.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bellavista apartments, Klampenborg, view-2.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bellavista apartments, Klampenborg, view-3.

<IMG>

<IMG>

St Catherine's College, Oxford-view from west.

<IMG>

<IMG>

St Catherine's College, Oxford-undergraduate rooms and bell-tower-view from
east.

Many of Jacobsen's furniture designs [1] have become classics. A selection of
these would include:

  * The Ant Chair. (1952)
  * The Seven series. (1955)
  * The Swan, a chair. (1958)
  * The Egg, a chair. (1958)
  * The Pot Chair. (1959)
  * The Giraffe Chair. (1959)
  * The Seagull Chair.

The third and fourth were both designed for the Radisson SAS Hotel in
Copenhagen.

Jacobsen is, perhaps, best known for the Model 3107 chair (1955), also
referred to as the 'Number 7' chair. It is said to have sold over 5 million
copies. This chair is, itself, probably best known for being the prop used to
hide Christine Keeler's nakedness in the 'iconic' photograph of her taken by
Lewis Morley in 1963. [2] Morley just happened to use a chair that he had in
the studio, which turned out to have been a copy of Jacobsen's design. Since
then 'Number 7' chairs have been used for many similar portraits imitating the
pose.

His other visible contribution to pop culture in the media is his flatware
design, with right and left-handed spoons, in the movie 2001: A Space Odyssey.
It was selected for the film because of its 'futuristic' appearance.

## [edit] St Catherine's College, Oxford

St Catherine's College is Jacobsen's interpretation of a university college.
It has a large number of elements among which are to be found:

  * A quadrangle centered on a lawn (a circle with one or two Cedar of Lebanon trees).
  * Undergraduate rooms (laid out in two long rows).
  * A garden.
  * A dining hall on a very substatial scale.
  * A senior common room.
  * A junior common room.
  * Master's lodgings.
  * A 'feature' (in this case, a lily pond).

His creativity did not end there, however. A perfectionist, he also designed
the flatware, all of the furniture in the rooms, the locks and keys, the door
handles, the sinks, the taps, and all the lights. Though only staircases 1 and
2 have the original and completed design, the metal shower stalls and
bathrooms are intact.

Many of the furnishings and fixtures Jacobsen designed for St Catherine's are
considered classics of modern design, represented in galleries around the
world. The part of the College designed by him is now a Grade 1 Listed
Building, the highest designation available for architecture in England or
Wales.

In 1956 Jacobsen was appointed to a professorship of architecture at the
R.D.A.F.A. in Copenhagen.

## [edit] Principal architectural works

  1. Order is according to date, earliest first.
  2. All locations named are in Denmark, unless stated otherwise.

  * Bellevue Strandbad, Klampenborg. (1933-34)
  * Bellavista apartments, Strandvejen 419-451, Klampenborg. (1933-34)
  * Bellevue Theater and restaurant, Klampenborg. (1935-36)
  * The City Hall, SÃ¸llerÃ¸d, Copenhagen. (Together with Flemming Lassen). (1938-42)
  * The City Hall, Ã rhus. (Together with Erik MÃ¸ller). (1939-42)
  * SÃ¸holm I and II, housing estates, Klampenborg. (1946-51)

* * *
  * SÃ¸holm townhouse, Klampenborg.(1950-54) (Owned by Jacobsen)
  * The Town Hall, RÃ¸dovre, Copenhagen. (1956-57)
  * The Town Hall, Glostrup, Copenhagen. (1958)
  * The MunkegÃ¥rd School, Copenhagen. (1955-59)
  * SAS Royal Hotel, Copenhagen. (1958-60)

* * *
  * Toms Chocolate Factory, Ballerup. (1961)
  * The National Bank of Denmark, Copenhagen. (1965-70)
  * Landskrona Sports-Hall, Landskrona, Sweden. (1965)
  * St Catherine's College, Oxford, UK. (1964-66)
  * The City Hall, Mainz, Germany. (1966-70)[3]

* * *
  * The Christianeum (a school), Hamburg, Germany. (1970-71)
  * HEW (Vattenfall Europe), (north) Hamburg, Germany. (1970)
  * The Royal Danish Embassy, London, UK. (1976-77)[4]

## [edit] Gallery of works

<IMG>

Bespoke furniture and lighting at St Catherine's College.

<IMG>

SAS Royal Hotel in Copenhagen.

<IMG>

HEW (Vattenfall Europe) headquarters, Hamburg.

<IMG>

SÃ¸holm I settlement, Klampenborg, 1946-1950.  
<IMG>

The Danish National Bank, Copenhagen.

<IMG>

Texaco gas station, Kystvejen, Skovshoved, 1936.

<IMG>

City hall of Mainz.

<IMG>

The Egg chair, designed for the SAS Royal Hotel, 1958.  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ View images of his design work
  2. ^ Christine Keeler Photograph: A Modern Icon - Victoria and Albert Museum
  3. ^ Construction of this building was not completed until 1973.
  4. ^ The dates here represent the period of construction only.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Arne Jacobsen  
  * Arne Jacobsen portrait and photos of his most important furniture designs
  * Photos and description of Jacobsen's major work in the UK, St Catherine's College, Oxford

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arne_Jacobsen"

Categories: Danish designers | Danish architects | Danish furniture designers
| Modernist architects | Architects who worked in Oxford | Danish Jews | 1902
births | 1971 deaths

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 01:45.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



