
# James the Just

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

James the Just  
<IMG>

  
Icon of James  
Martyr, Adelphotheos  
Born unknown  
Died 62, Jerusalem  
Venerated in All Christianity  
Canonized pre-congregation  
Feast May 3 (Roman Catholic), May 1 (Anglican), October 23 (Lutheran)  
Attributes fuller's club; man holding a book  
Controversy James is sometimes identified with James, son of Alphaeus and
James the Less. There is disagreement about the exact relationship to Jesus.  
Saint James the Just (Hebrew: ××¢×§× or Jacob) (Greek IÎ¬ÎºÏÎ²Î¿Ï), (died
62AD), also known as James of Jerusalem, James Adelphotheos, James, the
Brother of the Lord,[1] was an important figure in Early Christianity. He is
also generally identified by Roman Catholics with James, son of Alphaeus and
James the Less.[2]

According to Christian tradition, he was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, the
author of the Epistle of James in the New Testament, the first of the Seventy
of Luke 10:1â20, and originator of the Apostolic Decree of Acts 15:19-29. In
Galatians Paul of Tarsus describes his first visit to Jerusalem where he
stayed with Cephas. Paul says "I did not see any other apostle except James
the Lord's brother" 1:10 (NRSV). At Galatians 2:9, Paul characterized James as
such: "â¦James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars [of the Church]
(NRSV) â¦" He is described by Josephus and the New Testament as being the
brother of Jesus and in the Liturgy of St James as "the brother of God"
(Adelphotheos)[3].

## Contents

  * 1 Name
  * 2 Life
  * 3 Death
  * 4 Influence
  * 5 Relationship to Jesus
    * 5.1 Stepbrother
    * 5.2 Full brother
    * 5.3 Half-brother
    * 5.4 Other relationships
      * 5.4.1 Spiritual brother
      * 5.4.2 Cousin
      * 5.4.3 Vaguely related
  * 6 The ossuary
  * 7 Notes
  * 8 External links
  * 9 Bibliography

  
## [edit] Name

James was called "the Just" because of his righteousness and piety.[4][5] The
name also helps distinguish him from other important figures in early
Christianity of the same name, such as James, son of Zebedee.

He is sometimes referred in Eastern Christianity as "James Adelphotheos", i.e.
"James the Brother of God" (Greek: IÎ¬ÎºÏÎ²Î¿Ï Î¿ ÎÎ´ÎµÎ»ÏÏÎ¸ÎµÎ¿Ï),
based on New Testament descriptions, though different interpretations of his
precise relationship to Jesus developed based on Christian beliefs about Mary,
the mother of Jesus, who was designated Theotokos by the 431 Council of
Ephesus. Although, beliefs and opinions aside, he may simply have been Jesus's
literal brother, i.e. a child of Mary and Joseph.

The English name "James" comes from the same root as the name "Jacob": the
Hebrew name "Ya'akov" (××¢×§×). Ya'akov was first translated into Greek as
"Îakobos" (IÎ¬ÎºÏÎ²Î¿Ï), then Latinized as "Jacobu, which became Jacomus,
and later James. Equivalent names derived from the same Hebrew root assumed
remarkably divergent forms in European languages: "Iago", "Tiago"
(Portuguese), "Diego" (Spanish) and "Giacomo" (Italian) are
equivalent.[citation needed]

## [edit] Life

The canonical writings of the New Testament, as well as other written sources
from the Early Church, provide some insights into James' life and his role in
the early church. The Gospel of John and the early portions of the Acts of the
Apostles contain no mention of him. The Synoptics mention his name, but no
further information. The later chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, however,
provide evidence that James was an important figure in the Christian community
of Jerusalem.

Jerome quotes the non-canonical Gospel according to the Hebrews thus: â'Now
the Lord, after he had given his grave clothes to the servant of the priest,
appeared to James, for James had sworn that he would not eat bread from that
hour in which he had drunk the Lordâs cup until he should see him risen from
the dead.' And a little further on the Lord says, âbring a table and
bread.â And immediately it is added, 'He took bread and blessed and broke
and gave it to James the Just and said to him, "My brother, eat your bread,
for the Son of Man is risen from the dead."ââ [6]

Paul further describes James as being one of the persons to whom the risen
Christ showed himself (1 Corinthians 15:3â8); later in 1 Corinthians, Paul
mentions James in a way that suggests James had been married (9:5); and in
Galatians, Paul lists James with Cephas (better known as Peter) and John as
the three "pillars" of the Church (2:9), and who will minister to the
"circumcised" (in general Jews and Jewish Proselytes) in Jerusalem, while Paul
and his fellows will minister to the "uncircumcised" (in general
Gentiles)(2:12). These terms (circumcised/uncircumcised) are generally
interpreted to mean Jews and Greeks, who were predominant; however, this is an
oversimplification as 1st century Iudaea Province also had some Jews who no
longer circumcised, and some Greeks (called Proselytes or Judaizers) and
others such as Egyptians, Ethiopians, and Arabs who did.

When Peter, having miraculously escaped from prison, must flee Jerusalem due
to Herod Agrippa's persecution, he asks that James be informed (Acts 12:17).

When the Christians of Antioch are concerned over whether Gentile Christians
need be circumcised to be saved, and they send Paul and Barnabas to confer
with the Jerusalem church. James plays a prominent role in the formulation of
the council's decision (Acts 15:13ff). James is the last named figure to
speak, after Peter, Paul and Barnabas; he delivers what he calls his
"judgment" (Acts 15:19 NIV)â the original sense is closer to "opinion".[7]
He supports them all in being against the requirement (Peter had cited his
earlier revelation from God regarding Gentiles), and suggests prohibitions
about eating blood as well as meat sacrificed to idols and fornication. This
becomes the ruling of the Council, agreed upon by all the apostles and elders,
and sent to the other churches by letter.

When Paul arrives in Jerusalem to deliver the money he raised for the faithful
there, it is to James that he speaks, and it is James who insists that Paul
ritually cleanse himself at Herod's Temple to prove his faith and deny rumors
of teaching rebellion against the Torah (Acts 21:18ff) (a charge of
antinomianism). Tradition, supported by inferences in Scripture, holds that
James led the Jerusalem group as its first bishop or patriarch. This is not
necessarily a point against the primacy of Peter in the early Church, and
subsequently Roman Catholicism. Though James and not Peter was the first
bishop of that group, Roman Catholics believe the bishop of Jerusalem was not
by that fact the head of the Christian church, since the leadership rested in
Peter as the "Rock" and "Chief Shepherd".[8] John Chrysostom opined: "If
anyone should say, 'Why then was it James who received the See of Jerusalem?'
I should reply that he [Christ] made Peter the teacher not of that See, but of
the world."[9] It has been suggested that Peter entrusted the Jerusalem
community to James when he was forced to leave Jerusalem.[10] According to the
Church historian Eusebius, Clement of Alexandria in the late second century
stated the following concerning the appointment of James to the Jerusalem
episcopacy:

> "For they say that Peter and James and John after the ascension of our
Saviour, as if also preferred by our Lord, strove not after honor, but chose
James the Just bishop of Jerusalem."[11]

In describing James' ascetic lifestyle, Jerome, De Viris Illustribus, quotes
Hegesippus' account of James from the fifth book of Hegesippus' lost
Commentaries:

> "After the apostles, James the brother of the Lord surnamed the Just was
made head of the Church at Jerusalem. Many indeed are called James. This one
was holy from his mother's womb. He drank neither wine nor strong drink, ate
no flesh, never shaved or anointed himself with ointment or bathed. He alone
had the privilege of entering the Holy of Holies, since indeed he did not use
woolen vestments but linen and went alone into the temple and prayed in behalf
of the people, insomuch that his knees were reputed to have acquired the
hardness of camels' knees."[12]

Since it was unlawful for any but the high priest of the temple to enter the
Holy of Holies once a year on Yom Kippur, Jerome's quotation from Hegesippus
indicates that James was considered a high priest. The Pseudo-Clementine
Recognitions suggest this.[13]

## [edit] Death

According to a passage in Josephus's Jewish Antiquities, (xx.9) "the brother
of Jesus, who was called Christ, whose name was James" met his death after the
death of the procurator Porcius Festus, yet before Lucceius Albinus took
office (Antiquities 20,9) â which has thus been dated to 62. The High Priest
Ananus ben Ananus took advantage of this lack of imperial oversight to
assemble a Sanhedrin who condemned James "on the charge of breaking the law,"
then had him executed by stoning. Josephus reports that Ananus' act was widely
viewed as little more than judicial murder, and offended a number of "those
who were considered the most fair-minded people in the City, and strict in
their observance of the Law," who went as far as meeting Albinus as he entered
the province to petition him about the matter. In response, King Agrippa
replaced Ananus with Jesus, the son of Damneus.

Though the passage in general is almost universally accepted as original to
Josephus, some challenge the identification of the James whom Ananus had
executed with James the Just, considering the words, "who was called Christ,"
a later interpolation. (See Josephus on Jesus.)

Eusebius, while quoting Josephus' account, also records otherwise lost
passages from Hegesippus (see links below), and Clement of Alexandria
(Historia Ecclesiae, 2.23). Hegesippus' account varies somewhat from what
Josephus reports, and may have been an attempt to reconcile the various
accounts by combining them. According to Hegesippus, the scribes and Pharisees
came to James for help in putting down Christian beliefs. The record says:

â

They came, therefore, in a body to James, and said: "We entreat thee, restrain
the people: for they are gone astray in their opinions about Jesus, as if he
were the Christ. We entreat thee to persuade all who have come hither for the
day of the passover, concerning Jesus. For we all listen to thy persuasion;
since we, as well as all the people, bear thee testimony that thou art just,
and showest partiality to none. Do thou, therefore, persuade the people not to
entertain erroneous opinions concerning Jesus: for all the people, and we
also, listen to thy persuasion. Take thy stand, then, upon the summit of the
temple, that from that elevated spot thou mayest be clearly seen, and thy
words may be plainly audible to all the people. For, in order to attend the
passover, all the tribes have congregated hither, and some of the Gentiles
also.[14]

To the scribes' and Pharisees' dismay, James boldly testified that Christ
"Himself sitteth in heaven, at the right hand of the Great Power, and shall
come on the clouds of heaven." The scribes and pharisees then said to
themselves, "We have not done well in procuring this testimony to Jesus. But
let us go up and throw him down, that they may be afraid, and not believe
him."

â  
Accordingly, the scribes and Pharisees

â

â¦threw down the just manâ¦ [and] began to stone him: for he was not killed
by the fall; but he turned, and kneeled down, and said: "I beseech Thee, Lord
God our Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."

And, while they were thus stoning him to death, one of the priests, the sons
of Rechab, the son of Rechabim, to whom testimony is borne by Jeremiah the
prophet, began to cry aloud, saying: "Cease, what do ye? The just man is
praying for us." But one among them, one of the fullers, took the staff with
which he was accustomed to wring out the garments he dyed, and hurled it at
the head of the just man.

And so he suffered martyrdom; and they buried him on the spot, and the pillar
erected to his memory still remains, close by the temple. This man was a true
witness to both Jews and Greeks that Jesus is the Christ.

â  
Vespasian's siege and capture of Jerusalem delayed the selection of Simeon of
Jerusalem to succeed James.

Josephus' account of James' death is more credible because the Acts of
Apostles doesn't mention anything about James after the year 60. Josephus,
however, does not mention in his writings how James was buried, which makes it
hard for scholars to determine what happened to James after his death.

Robert Eisenman argues that the popularity of James and the illegality of his
death may have triggered the First Jewish-Roman War from 66 to 73 C.E.[15]

## [edit] Influence

<IMG>

This section is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(November 2007)  
The Epistle of James has been traditionally attributed to James the Just. A
number of modern Biblical scholars, such as Raymond E. Brown, while admitting
the Greek of this epistle is too fluent for someone whose mother tongue is
Aramaic, argue that it expresses a number of his ideas, as rewritten either by
a scribe or by a follower of James the Just. Other scholars, such as Luke
Timothy Johnson and James Adamson, argue that the historical James could have
had such fluency in Greek, and could conceivably have authored the Epistle
himself.

Modern historians of the early Christian churches tend to place James in the
tradition of Jewish Christianity; where Paul emphasized faith over observance
of Mosaic Law, which he considered a burden, an antinomian disposition, James
is thought to have espoused the opposite position which is derogatively called
Judaizing. One corpus commonly cited as proof of this are the Recognitions and
Homilies of Clement (also known as the Clementine literature), versions of a
novel that has been dated to as early as the 2nd century, where James appears
as a saintly figure who is assaulted by an unnamed enemy some modern critics
think may be Paul. Scholar James D. G. Dunn has proposed that Peter was the
bridge-man (i.e. the pontifex maximus) between the two other "prominent
leading figures": Paul and James the Just.[16]

Robert Eisenman and James Tabor[17] have set forth a thesis that James and the
Nazorean Jews were marginalized by Paul and the Gentile Christians who
followed him, a thesis that has been widely criticized for his recreation of
the hostile skirmishes between Judaism and Pauline Christianity, relating his
reconstruction to "proto-Christian" elements of the Essenes, as represented in
the Dead Sea scrolls. Some of the criticism deconstructs as Pauline
apologetics, but Eisenman is equally harsh on the Nazorean Jews at Jerusalem,
whom he portrays as a nationalistic, priestly and xenophobic sect of ultra-
legal pietists.[15]

Some scholars, such as Ben Witherington, believe that the conflict between
these two positions has been overemphasized and that the two actually held
quite similar beliefs.

Some apocryphal gospels testify to the reverence Jewish followers of Jesus
(like the Ebionites) had for James. The Gospel of the Hebrews fragment 21
relates the risen Jesus' appearance to James. The Gospel of Thomas (one of the
works included in the Nag Hammadi library), saying 12, relates that the
disciples asked Jesus, "We are aware that you will depart from us. Who will be
our leader?" Jesus said to him, "No matter where you come [from] it is to
James the Just that you shall go, for whose sake heaven and earth have come to
exist."

Fragment X of Papias refers to "James the bishop and apostle". Epiphanius'
Panarion 29.4 describes James as a Nazirite.

The pseudepigraphical First Apocalypse of James associated with James's name
mentions many details, some of which may reflect early traditions: he is said
to have authority over the twelve Apostles and the early church; this work
also adds, somewhat puzzlingly, that James left Jerusalem and fled to Pella
before the Roman siege of that city in 70 CE. (Ben Witherington suggests what
is meant by this was that James' bones were taken by the early Christians who
had fled Jerusalem).

The Apocryphon of James, the sole copy of which was found in the Nag Hammadi
library, and which may have been written in Egypt in the third century [18],
recounts a post-resurrection appearance of the risen Christ to James and Peter
which James is said to have recorded in Hebrew. In the dialogue, Peter speaks
twice (3:12; 9:1) but misunderstands Jesus. Only James is addressed by name
(6:20) and James is the more dominant of the two.

The Protevangelion of James (or "Infancy Gospel of James"), a work of the 2nd
century, also presents itself as written by James â a sign that his
authorship would lend authority â and so do several tractates in the codices
found at Nag Hammadi.

## [edit] Relationship to Jesus

Jesus' "brothers" â James as well as Jude, Simon and Joses â are mentioned
in Matthew 13:55, Mark 6:3 and by Paul in Galatians 1:19. Since James' name
always appears first in lists, this suggests he was the eldest among them.[17]
Even in the passage in Josephus' Jewish Antiquities (20.9.1) the Jewish
historian describes James as "the brother of Jesus who is called Christ,".

Paul refers to James, at that time the only prominent Christian James in
Jerusalem, as an Apostle, hence his identification by some with James, son of
Alphaeus. In Galatians 1:18â19, Paul, recounting his conversion, recalls
"Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas, and tarried
with him fifteen days. But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the
Lord's brother."

While Christians believe that Jesus was, as the Son of God, born of a virgin,
defining the relationship of James the Just to Jesus requires some further
discussion in accordance with the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox belief in the
Perpetual Virginity of Mary, the belief that Mary's virginity continued even
after Jesus' birth.

### [edit] Stepbrother

The most commonly held belief by Eastern Orthodox and Catholics alike is that
James was the stepbrother of Jesus. The Protevangelium of James assumes the
Greek nature of Jewish practices during this period in history and says that
Mary was betrothed to an older relative in order to preserve her virginity (he
could not have had sex with her, it would have been incest); that Joseph
already had children - James was already a boy when Jesus was born. The
Protevangelium of James is one of the earliest documents (AD 150) and although
it was not included in scripture, its traditional testimony was accepted by
the early church.[citation needed]

### [edit] Full brother

It is believed by some that the Jews living in Jerusalem in Christ's time
still adhered to the Mosaic Law, which advised married couples to be fruitful
and have many children and that this would indicate, assuming Mary and Joseph
were average Jews, that they would have had more children after Mary gave
birth to Jesus, thus making James a full brother of Jesus assuming Jesus was
the biological son of Joseph, and not miraculously incarnated.

### [edit] Half-brother

For proponents of the doctrine of Jesus' virgin birth, the claim that James
may have been a full brother of Jesus is unacceptable; at most James and the
other brethren of Jesus would have been co-uterine half-brothers. This is the
view of most Protestants, who believe Mary and Joseph lived as a sexually
active married couple after the birth of Jesus, as they believe is stated in
Matthew 1:25.

A variant on this is presented by James Tabor[17], argues that, after the
early and childless death of Joseph, Mary married Clopas, whom he accepts as a
younger brother of Joseph, according to the Levirate law. According to this
view Clopas fathered James and the later siblings but not Jesus, who whilst
legally adopted by Joseph, is presumed to be the product of an earlier pre-
marital coupling, possibly with Panthera.

Crossan suggested that he was probably Jesus' older brother.[19]

### [edit] Other relationships

Those who assert that James and his brethren are not full or half-siblings of
Jesus (the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and some Protestant churches)
point out that Aramaic and Hebrew tended to use circumlocutions to point out
blood relationships; it is asserted that just calling some people "brothers of
Jesus" would not have necessarily implied the same mother.[20][21] Rather,
something like "sons of the mother of Jesus" would have been used to indicate
a common mother. Scholars and theologians who assert this point out that Jesus
was called "the son of Mary" rather than "a son of Mary" in his hometown (Mark
6:3).[20]

#### [edit] Spiritual brother

According to the apocryphal First Apocalypse of James, James is not the
earthly brother of Jesus, but a spiritual brother.

#### [edit] Cousin

James could also have been cousin to Jesus, along with the other named
"brethren". This is justified by the claim that cousins were also called
"brothers" and "sisters" in Jesus' postulated native language, Aramaic; it and
Hebrew do not contain a word for "cousin". Furthermore, the Greek words
adelphos and adelphe were not restricted to their literal meaning of a full
brother or sister in the Bible; nor were their plurals.[20][21] This use is
still common in Greece and other Balkan cultures. This assumes, naturally that
the Middle Eastern authors' usage of Greek reflects their way of speaking. The
tradition of considering cousins as brothers or sisters is still evident in
most Eastern cultures; in some languages the term "cousin" does not even
exist.

Eusebius of Caesarea (c. 275 â 339) reports the tradition that James the
Just was the son of Joseph's brother Clopas, and therefore was of the
"brethren" (which he interprets as "cousin") of Jesus described in the New
Testament.

This is echoed by Jerome (c. 342 â 419) in De Viris Illustribus ("On
Illustrious Men") - James is said to be the son of another Mary \- the wife of
Clopas, and the "sister" of Mary, the mother of Jesus \- in the following
manner:

> "James, who is called the brother of the Lord, surnamed the Just, the son of
Joseph by another wife, as some think, but, as appears to me, the son of Mary,
sister of the mother of our Lord of whom John makes mention in his book..."

Jerome refers to the scene of the Crucifixion in John 19:25, where three Marys
- the mother of Jesus, Mary of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene - are said to be
witnesses. John also mentions the "sister" of the mother of Jesus, often
identified with Mary of Clopas due to grammar. Mary "of Clopas" is often
interpreted as Mary "wife of Clopas". Mary of Nazareth and Mary of Clopas also
need not be literally sisters, in light of the usage of the said words in
Greek, Hebrew and Aramaic.[20]

Mary of Clopas is suggested to be the same as "Mary, the mother of James the
younger and Joses", "Mary the mother of James and Joseph" and the "other Mary"
in Jesus' crucifixion and post-resurrection accounts in the Synoptic Gospels.
Proponents of this identification argue that the writers of the Synoptics
would just have called this Mary "the mother of Jesus" if she was indeed meant
to be the mother of Jesus, given the importance of her son's crucifixion and
resurrection: they also note that the mother of James and Joses is called
"Maria" whereas the mother of Jesus is "Mariam" or "Marias" in Greek. These
proponents find it unlikely that Mary would be referred to by her biological
children other than Jesus at such a significant time (James happens to be the
brother of one Joses, as spelled in Mark, or Joseph, as in
Matthew).[20][21][22]

Jerome's opinion suggests an identification of James the Just with the Apostle
James, son of Alphaeus; Clopas and Alphaeus are thought to be different Greek
renderings of the Aramaic name Halpai.[21] Despite this, some biblical
scholars tend to distinguish them; this is also not Roman Catholic dogma,
though a traditional teaching.

Since this Clopas is, according to Eusebius, Joseph of Nazareth's brother (see
above) and this Mary is said to be Mary of Nazareth's sister, James could be
related to Jesus by blood and law.[20]

This view of James-as-cousin gained prominence in the Roman Catholic Church,
displacing the "stepbrother" view to an extent. Roman Catholics may choose for
themselves[20] whether James was a stepbrother or cousin of Jesus, since
either could be true.

#### [edit] Vaguely related

Also, Jesus and James could be related in some other way, not strictly
"cousins", following the non-literal application of the term adelphos and the
Aramaic term for "brother".[20][21] Being close blood relatives, James and his
kin could have been treated as brothers to Jesus anyway.

## [edit] The ossuary

Main article: James Ossuary

In the November 2002 issue of Biblical Archaeology Review, AndrÃ© Lemaire of
the Sorbonne University in Paris, published the report that an ossuary bearing
the inscription Ya`aqov bar Yosef akhui Yeshua` ("James son of Joseph brother
of Jesus") had been identified belonging to a collector, who quickly turned
out to be Oded Golan. If authentic it would have been the first archaeological
evidence that Jesus existed aside from the manuscript tradition. There is no
mention of Jesus' and James' mother. The ossuary was exhibited at the Royal
Ontario Museum in Toronto, Canada, late that year; however, on June 18, 2003,
the Israeli Antiquities Authority published a report concluding that the
inscription is a modern forgery based on their analysis of the patina.
Specifically, it appears that the inscription was added recently and made to
look old by addition of a chalk solution. Oded Golan has since been arrested
and his forgery equipment and partially completed forgeries have been
recovered. On December 29, 2004, Golan was indicted in an Israeli court along
with three other men â Robert Deutsch, an inscriptions expert who teaches at
Haifa University; collector Shlomo Cohen; and antiquities dealer Faiz al-
Amaleh. They are accused of being part of a forgery ring that had been
operating for more than 20 years. Golan denies the charges against him.

In summary Myllykoski wrote "The authenticity and significance of the ossuary
has been defended by Shanks (2003), while many scholars â relying on
convincing evidence, to say the least â strongly suspect that it is a modern
forgery." [23]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ James as well as Jude, Simon and Joses â are mentioned in Matthew 13:55, Mark 6:3, and referred to in Acts 12:17. James alone is mentioned as a brother of Jesus by Paul in Epistle to the Galatians 1:19.
  2. ^ Catholic Encyclopedia: Saint James the Less
  3. ^ Philip Schaff: History of the Christian Church, chapter 4, Â§ 27. James the Brother of the Lord: "And in the Liturgy of St. James, the brother of Jesus is raised to the dignity of "the brother of the very God" (ajdelfovqeo")."
  4. ^ Eisenman,R. (1996) James the Brother of Jesus Viking. ISBN 0-670-86932-5
  5. ^ In the Gospel of Thomas, 12, 
> The disciples said to Jesus, "We know that you are going to leave us. Who
will be our leader?"

> Jesus said to them, "No matter where you are, you are to go to James the
Just, for whose sake heaven and earth came into being."

Miller, Robert J., ed. (1994) The Complete Gospels Polebridge Press. ISBN
0-06-065587-9

  6. ^ Jerome, On Illustrious Men,2
  7. ^ Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, Vol. 3 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1993); See also Strong's G2919
  8. ^ Mckenzie, John L. The Dictionary of the Bible. "Peter". (Roman Catholic)
  9. ^ Ryland,Ray. "Peter and the Orthodox: A Reprise." Originally published in This Rock, Vol. 7, No. 10, October 1996. Retrieved September 10, 2007 (Roman Catholic)
  10. ^ The Navarre Bible, footnotes (Roman Catholic)
  11. ^ Eusebius Church History Book 2:1 quoting Clement of Alexandria's Sixth Hypotyposes
  12. ^ Jerome, Letters.
  13. ^ James Priest, Wheaton.
  14. ^ a b Fragments from the Acts of the Church; Concerning the Martyrdom of James, the Brother of the Lord, from Book 5.
  15. ^ a b Eisenman, Robert (1997). James the Brother of Jesus: The Key to Unlocking the Secrets of Early Christianity and the Dead Sea Scrolls. Viking. ISBN 1842930265.
  16. ^ The Canon Debate, McDonald & Sanders editors, 2002, chapter 32, page 577, by James D. G. Dunn: "For Peter was probably in fact and effect the bridge-man (pontifex maximus!) who did more than any other to hold together the diversity of first-century Christianity. James the brother of Jesus and Paul, the two other most prominent leading figures in first-century Christianity, were too much identified with their respective "brands" of Christianity, at least in the eyes of Christians at the opposite ends of this particular spectrum. But Peter, as shown particularly by the Antioch episode in Gal 2, had both a care to hold firm to his Jewish heritage, which Paul lacked, and an openness to the demands of developing Christianity, which James lacked. John might have served as such a figure of the center holding together the extremes, but if the writings linked with his name are at all indicative of his own stance he was too much of an individualist to provide such a rallying point. Others could link the developing new religion more firmly to its founding events and to Jesus himself. But none of them, including the rest of the twelve, seem to have played any role of continuing significance for the whole sweep of Christianityâthough James the brother of John might have proved an exception had he been spared." [Italics original]
  17. ^ a b c Tabor, James D. (2006). The Jesus Dynasty: A New Historical Investigation of Jesus, His Royal Family, and the Birth of Christianity. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0743287231.
  18. ^ Robinson, James M., ed. (1978) The Nag Hammadi Library Harper & Row. ISBN 0-06-066933-0
  19. ^ John Dominic Crossan. Jesus: A Revolutionary Biography, 1994, ISBN 0-06-061662-8
  20. ^ a b c d e f g h Brethren of the Lord, Roman Catholic.
  21. ^ a b c d e \- Catholic Encyclopedia, "The Brethren of the Lord"
  22. ^ This position is articulated in footnotes of the Christian Community Bible, published by Claretian Communications (Roman Catholic) Amazon.com link
  23. ^ Myllykoski, Matti (2007), James the Just in History and Tradition: Perspectives of Past and Present Scholarship (Part II), Currents in Biblical Research; 6; 11,p.84, DOI: 10.1177/1476993X07080242

## [edit] External links

  * James the Just, Cleopas'companion
  * "The martyrdom of James, the brother of the Lord" Quotes from lost writings of Hegesippus in Eusebius.
  * Flavius Josephus Antiquities of the Jews Book 20, Chapter 9
  * Jerome, De Viris Illustribus ch.2, the second chapter, directly following Simon Peter.
  * Fragments of Papias
  * Catholic Answers: The Brethren of the Lord
  * Catholic Encyclopedia: St. James the Less, whom this article identifies as James the Just
  * Catholic Encyclopedia: The Brethren of the Lord
  * Jewish Encyclopedia: James
  * Schaff's History of the Christian Churchon James, section 27
  * Robert M. Price's extended review of Eisenman, 1997
  * James in the 1911 EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica
  * Traditional site of the Martyrdom of St. James in the Armenian church of St. James in Jerusalem (photo)

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Raymond E. Brown. An Introduction to the New Testament. New York: Doubleday, 1997. ISBN 0-385-24767-2
  * Robert Eisenman. James the Brother of Jesus: The Key to Unlocking the Secrets of Early Christianity and the Dead Sea Scrolls. New York: VikingPenguin, 1997. ISBN 0-670-86932-5
  * John Painter. Just James. Columbia: University of South Carolina, 1997 ISBN 1-57003-174-6
  * Hershel Shanks and Ben Witherington, The Brother of Jesus. New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 2003. ISBN 0-06-055660-9
  * Francis Watson. Paul, Judaism and the Gentiles. Cultural background.
  * Biblical Archaeology Review Articles in various issues in 2004 and 2005 concerning the ossuary.

v â¢ d â¢ e

New Testament people  
Gospels:  
Jesus Christ,  
views: Christian,  
Historical,  
New Testament

Individuals

Alphaeus Â· Anna Â· Annas Â· Barabbas Â· Bartimaeus Â· blind man, Bethsaida Â·
Caiaphas Â· Cleopas Â· Devil Â· Dismas Â· Elizabeth Â· Gabriel Â· Gestas Â·
Jairus' Daughter Â· Joachim Â· Joanna Â· John the Baptist Â· Joseph Â· Joseph
of Arimathea Â· Joses Â· Lazarus Â· Legion Â· Longinus Â· Luke Â· Malchus Â·
Mark Â· Martha Â· Mary Magdalene Â· Mary mother of James Â· Mary mother of
Jesus Â· Mary of Bethany Â· Mary of Clopas Â· Widow's son of Nain Â· Nathanael
Â· Nicodemus ben Gurion Â· Salome Â· Simeon Â· Simon of Cyrene Â· Simon the
Leper Â· Susanna Â· Theophilus Â· Zacchaeus Â· Zechariah  
  
Groups

Angels Â· Disciples Â· Evangelists Â· Godfearers Â· Herodians Â· Magi Â·
Myrrhbearers Â· Pharisees Â· Proselytes Â· Sadducees Â· Samaritans Â·
Sanhedrin Â· 70 Disciples Â· Scribes Â· Zealots  
Apostles

The Twelve

Andrew Â· Bartholomew Â· James of Alphaeus Â· James of Zebedee Â· John
(Beloved, Evangelist, Patmos) Â· Judas Iscariot Â· Jude Thaddeus Â· Matthew Â·
Peter Â· Philip Â· Simon the Zealot, (Judas) Â· Thomas  
After Jesus

Matthias Â· Paul of Tarsus  
Acts:  
Peter Â· Paul

Agabus Â· Ananias (Judaea) Â· Ananias (Damascus) Â· Apollos Â· Aquila Â·
Aristarchus Â· Bar-jesus Â· Barnabas Â· Cornelius Â· Demetrius Â· Dionysius Â·
Dorcas Â· Eutychus Â· Gamaliel Â· James the Just Â· Jason Â· Joseph Barsabas,
Â· Judas of Galilee Â· Lucius Â· Luke Â· Lydia Â· Manahen Â· (John) Mark Â·
Mary mother of J. Mark Â· Nicholas Â· Paul Â· Philip Â· Priscilla Â· Publius
Â· Sapphira Â· Sceva Â· Seven Deacons Â· Silas/Silvanus Â· Simeon of Jerusalem
Â· Simon the Sorcerer Â· Sopater Â· Stephen Â· Theudas Â· Timothy Â· Titus Â·
Trophimus Â· Tychicus  
Roman Officials

Gospels

Aretas IV Â· Cornelius Â· Herod Antipas Â· Herod Archelaus Â· Herod Philip II
Â· Herod the Great Â· Longinus Â· Lysanias Â· Pontius Pilate Â· Pilate's Wife
Â· Quirinius Â· Salome Â· Tiberius  
  
Acts

Agrippa I Â· Agrippa II Â· Felix Â· Claudius Lysias Â· Junius A. Gallio Â·
Festus Â· Sergius Paulus  
Epistles

Nonapocalyptic

Achaichus Â· Alexander Â· Archippus Â· Crescens Â· Diotrephes Â· Epaphroditus
Â· Erastus Â· Hymenaeus Â· Jesus Justus Â· Junia Â· Mary Â· Angel Michael Â·
Nymphas Â· Philemon Â· Philetus Â· Phoebe Â· Syntyche  
  
Revelation

Antipas Â· Four Horsemen Â· Apollyon Â· Two Witnesses Â· Woman Â· Beast Â·
Three Angels Â· Whore of Babylon  
Full List Â· Jesus: (Ministry, Miracles, Parables, Timeline)  Â· New Testament
Â· NT Canon Â· Gospels (Synoptic) Â· Epistles (Pauline, General) Â· Apostolic
Age  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_the_Just"

Categories: 62 deaths | Christian martyrs of the Roman era | People in
Messianic Judaism | Patriarchs of Jerusalem | Saints from the Holy Land |
Palestinian Roman Catholic saints | Letter writers | Followers of Jesus | 1st-
century bishops | Judeo-Christian topics | Burials at the Cathedral of St.
James, Jerusalem

Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek language text | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 |
Articles with unsourced statements since November 2007 | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 20 March 2009, at 06:43.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



