
# Battle of the Teutoburg Forest

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Battle of the Teutoburg Forest  
Part of the Roman-Germanic wars  
<IMG>  
View from the Hermannsdenkmal (not the site of the battle)  
Date September 9 to September 11 , AD 9  
Location OsnabrÃ¼ck County, Lower Saxony  
Result Decisive Germanic victory.  
Roman Empire's strategic withdrawal from Magna Germania.  
Belligerents  
Germanic tribes (Cherusci, Marsi, Chatti, Bructeri, Chauci and Sicambri).
Roman Empire  
Commanders  
Arminius Publius Quinctilius Varus â  
Strength  
unknown, probably between 10.00 and 15.000 3 Roman legions,  
3 alae and  
6 auxiliary cohorts, probably 20,000 - 25,000  
Casualties and losses  
Unknown; but far less than Roman losses over 20,000  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Roman-Germanic Wars  
Cimbrian War  
Noreia \- Arausio \- Aquae Sextiae \- Vercellae  
Attempted conquest of Germania  
Lupia River \- Teutoburg Forest \- Weser River  
Marcomannic Wars  
Roman-Alamannic Wars  
Mediolanum \- Lake Benacus \- Placentia \- Fano \- Pavia \- Lingones \-
Vindonissa \- Durocortorum \- Argentoratum \- Solicinium  
Gothic War  
Ad Salices \- Adrianople  
Roman-Visigothic Wars  
Pollentia \- Verona \- Rome \- Narbonne  
The Battle of the Teutoburg Forest (described as clades Variana by Roman
historians) took place in A.D. 9 (probably lasting from September 9 to
September 11) when an alliance of Germanic tribes led by Arminius, the son of
Segimer of the Cherusci, ambushed and destroyed three Roman legions led by
Publius Quinctilius Varus.

The battle began a seven-year war which established the Rhine as the boundary
of the Roman Empire for the next four hundred years, until the decline of the
Roman influence in the West. The Roman Empire made no further concerted
attempts to conquer Germania beyond the Rhine.

The battle (which is called Schlacht im Teutoburger Wald, Varusschlacht or
Hermannsschlacht in German) had a profound effect on 19th century German
nationalism along with the histories of Tacitus; the Germans, at that time
still divided into many German states, identified with the Germanic tribes as
shared ancestors of one "German people".

In 1808, the German author Heinrich von Kleist's play Die Hermannsschlacht
aroused anti-Napoleonic sentiment, even though it could not be performed under
occupation. Later, the figure of Arminius was used to represent the ideals of
freedom and unification â as supported by German liberals, and opposed by
reactionary rulers. A memorial â the Hermannsdenkmal â was begun during
this period, and Arminius became a symbol of Pan-Germanism. The monument
remained unfinished for decades, until after the Franco-Prussian War of
1870-71 unified the country. The completed monument was then a symbol of
conservative German nationalism. The battle and the Hermannsdenkmal monument
are also commemorated by the similar Hermann Heights Monument in New Ulm, MN,
U.S.A.

## Contents

  * 1 Background
  * 2 The battle
  * 3 Aftermath
    * 3.1 Roman retaliation
    * 3.2 The impact on Roman expansion
  * 4 The Detmold Memorial
  * 5 Site of the battle
  * 6 Alternate theories on the battle
  * 7 Ancient sources
  * 8 Portrayal in fiction
  * 9 Sources
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Background

The Roman force was led by Publius Quinctilius Varus, a noble from an old
family, an administrative official who was assigned to establish the new
province of Germania in 7 AD.

Varus' opponent, Arminius (also known as Hermann), had lived in Rome as a
hostage in his youth, where he had received a military education and had even
been given the rank of Equestrian. After his return, he was a trusted advisor
to Varus.[1] In secret, he forged an alliance of Germanic tribes that had
traditionally been enemies (the Cherusci, Marsi, Chatti, Bructeri, Chauci and
Sicambri), but which he was able to unite due to outrage over Varus' measures.

While Varus was on his way from his summer camp somewhere west of the Weser
river (despite recent finds indicating a Roman presence near the modern city
of Minden, its location remains disputed;[1] other sites near Minden or
Rinteln have been suggested by the historian DelbrÃ¼ck and the military writer
Pastenaci, respectively) to the winter headquarters near the Rhine, he heard
reports of a local rebellion, fabricated by Arminius. Varus decided to quell
this uprising immediately and take a detour through territory unfamiliar to
the Romans. Arminius, who accompanied Varus, probably directed him along a
route that would facilitate an ambush. Another Cheruscan nobleman, Segestes,
father of Arminius' wife, and opposed to the marriage, warned Varus the night
before the departure of the Roman forces, allegedly even suggesting that Varus
apprehend him along with several Germanic leaders whom he identified as covert
participants in the planned uprising. But his warning was dismissed as the
result of a personal feud. Arminius then left under the pretext of drumming up
Germanic forces to support the Roman campaign, but instead led his troops, who
must have been waiting in the vicinity, in attacks on surrounding Roman
garrisons. Recent archaeological finds place the battle in OsnabrÃ¼ck County,
Lower Saxony. On the basis of Roman accounts, the Romans must at this time
have been marching northwestward from the area that is now the city of
Detmold, passing east of OsnabrÃ¼ck; they must then have camped in this area
prior to being attacked.

## [edit] The battle

Varus's forces included three legions (Legio XVII, Legio XVIII, and Legio
XIX), six cohorts of auxiliary troops (non-Roman allies) and three squadrons
of cavalry (alae), most of which lacked combat experience with Germanic
fighters under local conditions. The Roman forces were not marching in combat
formation, and were interspersed with large numbers of camp-followers. As they
entered the forest (probably just northeast of OsnabrÃ¼ck 52Â°24â²38â³N
8Â°07â²46â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿52.41056Â°N 8.12944Â°Eï»¿ / 52.41056; 8.12944), they
found the track narrow and muddy; according to Dio Cassius a violent storm had
also arisen. He also writes that Varus neglected to send out advance
reconnaissance parties[citation needed].

The line of march was now stretched out perilously long â estimates are that
it surpassed 15 km (9 miles), and was perhaps as long as 20 km (12 miles).[1]
It was then suddenly attacked by Germanic warriors. Arminius knew Roman
tactics very well and could direct his troops to counter them effectively,
using locally superior numbers against the spread-out Roman legions. The
Romans managed to set up a fortified night camp, and the next morning broke
out into the open country north of the Wiehen mountains, near the modern town
of Osterkappeln. The break-out cost them heavy losses, as did a further
attempt to escape by marching through another forested area, with the
torrential rains continuing, preventing them from using their bows, and
rendering them virtually defenseless, as their shields too became waterlogged.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Reconstruction of the improvised fortifications prepared by the Germanic
tribes for the final phase of the Varus battle near Kalkriese

They then undertook a night march to escape, but marched straight into another
trap that Arminius had set, at the foot of Kalkriese Hill (near OsnabrÃ¼ck).
There, the sandy, open strip on which the Romans could march easily was
constricted by the hill, so that there was a gap of only about 100 m between
the woods and the swampland at the edge of the Great Bog. Moreover, the road
was blocked by a trench, and, towards the forest, an earthen wall had been
built along the roadside, permitting the Germanic tribesmen to attack the
Romans from cover. The Romans made a desperate attempt to storm the wall, but
failed, and the highest-ranking officer next to Varus, Numonius Vala,
abandoned the troops by riding off with the cavalry; however, he too was
overtaken by the Germanic cavalry and killed, according to Velleius
Paterculus. The Germanic warriors then stormed the field and slaughtered the
disintegrating Roman forces; Varus committed suicide.[1] Velleius reports that
one commander, Ceionus, "shamefully" surrendered, while his colleague Eggius
"heroically" died leading his doomed troops.

Around 15,000â20,000 Roman soldiers must have died; not only Varus, but also
many of his officers are said to have taken their own lives by falling on
their swords in the approved manner.[1] Tacitus wrote that many officers were
sacrificed by the Germanic forces as part of their indigenous religious
ceremonies, cooked in pots and their bones used for rituals. However, others
were ransomed, and the common soldiers appear to have been enslaved.

All Roman accounts stress the completeness of the Roman defeat, the extremely
heavy Roman casualties, and the minimal Germanic losses. That account is
confirmed by the finds at Kalkriese, where, along with 6000 pieces (largely
scraps) of Roman equipment, there is only one single item â part of a spur
â that is clearly Germanic. Even allowing for the fact that several thousand
Germanic soldiers were deserting militiamen who wore Roman armour (which would
thus show up as "Roman" in the archaeological digs), and for the fact that the
Germanic tribes wore less metal and more perishable organic material, this
indicates surprisingly slight Germanic losses. The Germanic practice of
burying dead Germanic warriors' battle gear with them may have contributed to
the lack of Germanic relics, given the victors' ability to gather such at
their leisure.

The victory over the legions was followed by a clean sweep of all Roman forts,
garrisons and cities â of which there were at least two â east of the
Rhine; the remaining two Roman legions, commanded by Varus' nephew Lucius
Nonius Asprenas, were content to try to hold that river. One fort (or possibly
city), Aliso, fended off the Germanic tribes for many weeks, perhaps a few
months, before the garrison, which included survivors of the Teutoburg Forest,
successfully broke out under their commander Lucius Caeditius and reached the
Rhine.

## [edit] Aftermath

Upon hearing of the defeat, the Emperor Augustus, according to the Roman
historian Suetonius in his Lives of the Twelve Caesars, showed signs of near-
insanity, banging his head against the walls of his palace and repeatedly
shouting Quintili Vare, legiones redde! ('Quintilius Varus, give me back my
legions!').

The three legion numbers were never used again by the Romans after this
defeat, unlike other legions that were restructured â a case unique in Roman
history.

The battle abruptly ended the period of triumphant and exuberant Roman
expansion that had followed the end of the Civil Wars 40 years earlier.
Augustus' stepson Tiberius took effective control, and prepared for the
continuation of the war.

The Germanic tribes, on the other hand, profited greatly from the plunder of
their victory, and gradually began to move to a higher stage of development,
although they were still a long way from political unification. This was
apparently the goal of Arminius, who immediately sent Varus' severed head to
Marbod, king of the Marcomanni, the other most powerful Germanic ruler, with
the offer of an anti-Roman alliance. Marbod declined the offer, sent the head
on to Rome for burial, and remained neutral throughout the ensuing war. Only
thereafter did a brief, inconclusive war break out between the two Germanic
leaders.

### [edit] Roman retaliation

Though the shock at the slaughter was enormous, the Romans immediately began a
slow, systematic process of preparing for the reconquest of the country. In AD
14, just after Augustus' death and the accession of his heir and stepson
Tiberius, a massive raid was conducted by the new emperor's nephew Germanicus,
followed the next year by two major campaigns with a large army estimated at
70,000 men, backed by naval forces. He was able to devastate large areas and
eliminate any form of active resistance, but the majority of the Germanic
tribespeople fled at the sight of the Roman army into remote forests. The
raids were considered a success since the major goal of destroying any rebel
alliance networks was completed. After initial successes, including the
capture of Arminius' wife Thusnelda, the army visited the site of the first
battle. According to Tacitus, they found heaps of bleached bones and severed
skulls nailed to trees, which they buried, "looking on all as kinsfolk and of
their own blood". Burial pits with remains fitting this description have been
found at Kalkriese Hill.

In spite of doubts on the part of his uncle, Emperor Tiberius, Germanicus
managed to raise another huge army and invaded Germania again the next year,
in 16 AD. He forced a crossing of the Weser near modern Minden, suffering
heavy losses, and then met Arminius' army at Idistaviso, further up the Weser,
near modern Rinteln, in an engagement often called the Battle of the Weser
River. Germanicus's leadership and command qualities were shown in full at the
battle as his superior tactics and better trained and equipped legions
inflicted huge casualties on the Germanic armies while sustaining only minor
losses. One final battle was fought at the Angivarian Wall west of modern
Hanover, repeating the pattern of high Germanic fatalities, which forced them
to flee. With his main objectives reached and winter approaching, Germanicus
ordered his army back to their winter camps, with the fleet incurring some
damage from a storm in the North Sea. Although only a small number of soldiers
died, it was still a bad ending for a brilliantly fought campaign. After a few
more raids across the Rhine, which resulted in the recovery of two of the
three legions' eagles lost in AD 9, Germanicus was recalled to Rome and
informed by Tiberius that he would be given a triumph and reassigned to a
different command.[2][3]

The third standard was recovered in AD 41 by Publius Gabinius from the Chauci
during the reign of Claudius, brother to Germanicus, according to Cassius Dio
in Roman History Book LX {Book 60} Chapter 8. Possibly the recovered aquilae
were placed within the Temple of the Avenging Mars, (Tempio di Mars Ultor),
the ruins of which stand today in the Forum of Augustus by the Via dei Fori
Imperiali in Rome.

The last chapter of this story is recounted by the historian Tacitus, in
Annales (xii.27). Around AD 50, bands of Chatti invaded Roman territory in
Germania Superior, possibly an area in Hesse east of the Rhine which the
Romans appear to have still held, and began to plunder. The Roman commander,
Lucius Pomponius, raised a force from the Vangiones and Nemetes, supported by
Roman cavalry. They attacked the Chatti from both sides and defeated them, and
joyfully found and liberated some of the men from Varus' legions, who had been
held in slavery for 40 years.

Despite the successes enjoyed by his troops, Germanicus' campaign in Germania
was in reaction to the mutinous intentions of his troops, and lacked any
strategic value. In addition he engaged the very same Germanic leader,
Arminius, who had destroyed three Roman legions in AD 9, and exposed his
troops to the remains of those dead Romans. Furthermore, in leading his troops
across the Rhine, without recourse to Tiberius, he flouted the instructions of
Augustus to keep that river as the boundary of the empire, and opened himself
to doubts about his motives in such independent action. These errors in
strategic and political judgement gave Tiberius reason enough to recall his
nephew.[1]

### [edit] The impact on Roman expansion

From the time of the rediscovery of Roman sources in the 15th Century, the
Battle of Teutoburg Forest has been seen as a pivotal clash which ended Roman
expansion into northern Europe. This notion became especially prevalent in the
19th Century, where it formed an integral part of the mythology of German
nationalism.

However, more recently, scholars have begun to question this interpretation
and pointed out reasons why the Rhine was a much more practical boundary for
the Roman Empire than any river in Germania. Logistically, armies on the Rhine
could be supplied from the Mediterrannean via the RhÃ´ne and Mosel, with a
brief stretch of portage. Armies on the Elbe, on the other hand, would have to
have been supplied either by extensive overland routes or ships travelling the
hazardous Atlantic seas. Economically, the Rhine was already supporting towns
and sizeable villages at the time of the Gallic conquest. Northern Germania,
however, was far less developed, possessed few villages, and had little food
surplus. Thus the Rhine was both significantly more accessible from Rome and
better equipped to supply sizeable garrisons than the regions beyond.[4]

## [edit] The Detmold Memorial

Main article: Hermannsdenkmal

The legacy of the Germanic victory was resurrected with the recovery of the
histories of Tacitus in the 15th century, when the figure of Arminius,
rechristened "Hermann" by Martin Luther, became a nationalistic symbol of Pan-
Germanism. In 1808 the German Heinrich von Kleist's play Die Hermannsschlacht
aroused anti-Napoleonic sentiment, even though it could not be performed under
occupation.

As a symbol of unified Romantic nationalism, the Hermannsdenkmal (Hermann's
monument), a statue in Detmold paid for largely out of private funds, was
completed in 1875 to commemorate the battle; similar statues also exist
outside of Germany in German-founded communities including New Ulm, Minnesota.

In 1847, Josef Viktor von Scheffel wrote a lengthy song, "Als die RÃ¶mer frech
geworden" ("When the Romans started to misbehave"), relating the tale of the
battle with somewhat gloating humour. Copies of the text are still found on
many souvenirs available at the Detmold monument.

## [edit] Site of the battle

For almost 2000 years, the site of the battle was unidentified. The main clue
to its location was an allusion to the saltus Teutoburgiensis in section
i.60-62 of Tacitus's Annals, an area "not far" from the land between the upper
reaches of the Lippe and Ems Rivers in central Westphalia.

During the 19th century, theories as to the true site of the battle abounded,
and the followers of one theory successfully argued for the area of a long
wooded ridge called the Osning, around Bielefeld. This was then renamed the
Teutoburg Forest, and became the site of the Detmold Memorial.

Late 20th-century research and excavations at Kalkriese Hill (52Â°26'29"N,
8Â°8'26"E.) were sparked by finds by British amateur archaeologist Major Tony
Clunn's discovery of coins from the reign of Augustus (and none minted later),
and some ovoid leaden Roman sling shot. Clunn was casually prospecting with a
metal detector in hopes of finding "the odd Roman coin". The excavations soon
turned up more scraps of weapons and equipment, the helmet mask of a Roman
officer, the bone pits, and the remains of the Germanic fortifications. As a
result, Kalkriese is now perceived to be the actual site of part of the
battle, probably its conclusive phase. Kalkriese is a village administratively
part of the city of Bramsche, on the north slope fringes of the Wiehengebirge,
a ridge-like range of hills in Lower Saxony, north of OsnabrÃ¼ck. The site,
some 70 km from Detmold, was first suggested by 19th-century historian Theodor
Mommsen, one of the "founding fathers" of modern research into ancient
history.

While the initial excavations were done by the archaeological team of the
Kulturhistorisches Museum OsnabrÃ¼ck under the direction of Prof. Wolfgang
SchlÃ¼ter from 1987 onward, after the dimensions of the project became
apparent, a new foundation was created to organize future excavations, to
build and run a new museum on the site, and to centralise publicity work and
documentation. Since 1990 the excavations have been directed by Susanne
Wilbers-Rost.

The Varusschlacht Museum ("Varus' Battle Museum") and Park Kalkriese include a
large outdoor area with trails leading to a re-creation of part of the earthen
wall from the battle, and other outdoor exhibits. An observation tower allows
visitors to get an overview of the battle site. Most of the indoor exhibits
are housed in the tower. A second building includes the ticket center, museum
store and a restaurant. The museum houses a large number of artifacts found at
the site, which include fragments of studded sandals legionaries lost,
spearheads, and a Roman officer's ceremonial face-mask, which was originally
silver-plated. Coins minted with the countermark VAR, distributed by Varus,
support the identification of the site. Excavations have revealed battle
debris along a corridor almost 15 miles from east to west and little more than
a mile wide. A long zig-zagging wall constructed of peat turves and packed
sand apparently had been constructed beforehand: concentrations of battle
debris before it, and a dearth of finds behind it, testify to the Romans'
inability to breach the Germans' strong defense. Human remains found here
appear to corroborate Tacitus' account of their later burial.[5]

## [edit] Alternate theories on the battle

Although the majority of evidence has the 3-day battle take place in the area
east and north of OsnabrÃ¼ck and end at Kalkriese Hill, some scholars and
others adhere to older theories. Moreover, there is controversy among
"Kalkriese-adherents" as to the details.

The German historians Peter Kehne and Reinhard Wolters believe that the battle
was probably in the Detmold area after all, and that Kalkriese is the site of
one of the battles in 15 AD. This theory is, however, in serious contradiction
to Tacitus' account.

A very large body of opinion, including the scholars at the Kalkriese Museum
(Susanne Wilbers-Rost, GÃ¼nther Moosbauer; also Historian Ralf Jahn and
British author Adrian Murdoch, see below), believe that the Roman army did not
approach Kalkriese from the south of the Wiehen Mountains (i.e., from
Detmold), but rather from roughly due east, from Minden, Westphalia. This
would have involved a march along the northern edge of the Wiehen mountains,
and would have passed through flat, open country, devoid of the dense forests
and ravines described by Cassius Dio. Their explanation of this contradiction
is that Romans had a stereotyped view of Germania: Just as most Europeans and
Americans, hearing the word "Arabia", think "sandy desert", so, they argue, to
most Romans, the word "Germania" meant "swampy, rainy forest"; thus, Cassius
Dio was, they believe, not really describing the situation, but only
reflecting this stereotype. Historians such as Gustav-Adolf Lehmann and Boris
Dreyer counter that the description is too detailed and differentiated to be
thus dismissed.

Tony Clunn (see below), the discoverer of the battlefield, and a âsouthern-
approachâ proponent, believes that the battered Roman Army regrouped north
of Ostercappeln, where Varus committed suicide, and that the remnants were
finally overcome at the Kalkriese Gap.

Peter Oppitz argues for a site in Paderborn. Based on a reinterpretation of
Tacitus, Paterculus and Florus' writings, together with a new analysis of Dio
Cassius' writings, he proposes that an ambush took place in Varus' summer camp
during a peaceful meeting between the Roman commanders and the Germans.[6]

## [edit] Ancient sources

The following is a list of all known references to the battle from the
literary sources of classical antiquity. Though the account provided in the
Roman History is the most detailed of these, Dio Cassius' almost two century
removal from the time of the event, as well as his use of detail mentioned by
no earlier author, render it much more likely to be a literary re-imagining of
the battle than a reliable historical record.

  * Ovid, Tristia (Sorrows), poetic verses written in 10 and 11
  * Marcus Manilius, Astronomica, poem written in early 1st Century
  * Strabo, Geographia 7:1.4, geographic-themed history written in perhaps 18
  * Marcus Velleius Paterculus, Roman History 2:117-120, history written 30
  * Tacitus, Annals 1.3, 1.10, 1.43, 1.55-71, 2.7, 2.41, 2.45, history written 109
  * Suetonius, Lives of the Twelve Caesars: Augustus 23, Tiberius 17-18, biographies written 121
  * Florus, Epitome de T. Livio Bellorum omnium annorum DCC Libri duo 2:30, history/panegyric written in early 2nd century
  * Dio Cassius, Roman History 56:18-24, history written in the first half of 3rd century

## [edit] Portrayal in fiction

The battle and its aftermath are featured in both the novel and television
series I, Claudius.

A movie named Die Hermannsschlacht / The Hermann Battle (Hermann is the
popular German name of Arminius) was released between 1993 and 1995. The first
public screening of this work took place in DÃ¼sseldorf in May 1995. In 1996
it was honoured by an international jury in Kiel, where it was presented
during an archaeological film festival. The Hermann Battle was successfully
shown in arthouse-cinemas throughout Germany. The actors speak German and
Latin, with German subtitles. Famous British artist Tony Cragg has a brief
role as a Roman citizen in the palace of Augustus.

The Battle of Teutoburg Forest is also a historical battle that can be played
in the video game Rome: Total War. However, it is not an entirely accurate
depiction of the historical battle. The scenario is difficult because the
Roman troops are heavily outnumbered, not due to superior Germanic strategy.

A 1955 novel, "The Lost Eagles", written by Ralph Graves, gave a fictitious
account of a Varus relation, Severus Varus, working to recover the lost eagles
of the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest, as well as the family's honor. The
story follows the historical recovery of the Eagles in the campaigns of
Germanicus.

## [edit] Sources

  1. ^ a b c d e f "The Ambush That Changed History". Fergus M. Bordewich, Smithsonian Magazine. 2005-09. http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history-archaeology/ambush.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-17.
  2. ^ An image of a coin of Germanicus with a recovered standard can be seen at http://www.livius.org/le-lh/legio/xvii.html
  3. ^ Tacitus: [1] Annals: Book 2 {Chapter 32}
  4. ^ Heather, Peter (2006). The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New History of Rome and the Barbarians.
  5. ^ Smithsonian, p 81.
  6. ^ Das Geheimnis der Varuschlacht, Kelkheim, Germany: Zagara-Verlag, 2006

  * Fergus M. Bordewich, "The ambush that changed history" in Smithsonian Magazine, September 2005, pp. 74â81. [2]
  * Tony Clunn, The Quest for the Lost Roman Legions, Savas Beatie LLC, Spellmount, 2005, 371 pp. ISBN-13: 978-0-9544190-0-4 Combination of the account of the discovery and his theory about the course of the battle, recounted in fictional style.
  * Adrian Goldsworthy, In The Name of Rome: The Men Who Won The Roman Empire. Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 2004.
  * Adrian Murdoch, Rome's Greatest Defeat: Massacre in the Teutoburg Forest, Sutton Publishing, Stroud, 2006, ISBN 0-7509-4015-8 (review)Account of the battle, "eastern approach" to Kalkriese
  * PaweÅ Rochala. Las Teutoburski 9 rok n.e. Bellona, Warszawa, 2005.
  * Peter S. Wells, The Battle That Stopped Rome. Emperor Augustus, Arminius, and the slaughter of the legions in the Teutoburg Forest, W.W. Norton & Company, New York, NY 2003, ISBN 0-393-02028-2 Strong on archaeology,; controversial[citation needed] "Florus"-based theory
  * Peter Oppitz, "Das Geheimnis der Varusschlacht", Zadara-Verlag, 2006, ISBN 3-00-019973-X : Paderborn would have been the site of the battle.

## [edit] External links

  * Fergus M. Bordewich: "The Ambush That Changed History" Smithsonian Magazine, September 2005
  * Official site of the Kalkriese foundation
  * Extensive article on this battle and related events by Jona Lendering, with photographs, pictures, and maps
  * Student project site by UniversitÃ¤t OsnabrÃ¼ck, in German
  * Varusbattle in Netherland,in German

Coordinates: 52Â°24â²29â³N 8Â°07â²46â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿52.40806Â°N 8.12944Â°Eï»¿
/ 52.40806; 8.12944

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Teutoburg_Forest"

Categories: 9 | 1st-century conflicts | Battles involving the Roman Empire |
Germanic paganism | History of the Germanic peoples | Julio-Claudian Dynasty

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Galego
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 17:00.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



