
# Pelagianism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Pelagianism is a theological theory named after Pelagius (ad. 354 â ad.
420/440). It is the belief that original sin did not taint human nature and
that mortal will is still capable of choosing good or evil without special
Divine aid. Thus, Adam's sin was "to set a bad example" for his progeny, but
his actions did not have the other consequences imputed to Original Sin.
Pelagianism views the role of Jesus as "setting a good example" for the rest
of humanity (thus counteracting Adam's bad example) as well as providing an
atonement for our sins. In short, humanity has full control, and thus full
responsibility, for obeying the Gospel in addition to full responsibility for
every sin (the latter insisted upon by both proponents and opponents of
Pelagianism). According to Pelagian doctrine, because men are sinners by
choice, they are therefore criminals who need the atonement of Jesus Christ.
Sinners are not victims, they are criminals who need pardon.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Pelagius
  * 3 Comparison of teaching
    * 3.1 Church Fathers on free will
    * 3.2 Church Fathers against Original Sin
    * 3.3 Other Christian Theologians against Original Sin
    * 3.4 Pelagius's views
  * 4 Notes
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Writings by Pelagius
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] History

Pelagianism was opposed by Augustine of Hippo, who is known today as a Church
Father of Catholicism. Augustine was converted to Christianity out of the
Gnostic sect Manicheanism. When Pelagius taught that moral perfection was
attainable in this life because of free will, Augustine contradicted this by
saying that perfection was impossible because we are born sinners with a
sinful heart and will. The Pelagians charged Augustine with teaching
Gnosticism by teaching original sin, because the Gnostics taught that the
flesh was sinful, which was why they denied that Jesus came in the flesh.
Augustine also taught that a person's salvation comes solely through an
irresistible free gift, the efficacious grace of God, and that no free choice
was involved in salvation. The debate of Pelagius vs. Augustine was free will
vs. original sin. Augustine was not successful in having Pelagius condemned by
the Church. He therefore had the political powers severely persecute
him.[citation needed] Years after Pelagius died, Pelagianism was condemned,
aided by the fact that Pelagius could not defend himself against Augustine's
charges. This included the Council of Diospolis[1]. It was condemned in 416
and 418 at the Councils of Carthage.[2] These condemnations were summarily
ratified at the Council of Ephesus in 431, although it was not considered a
major act of that council. Its strict moral teachings were influential in
southern Italy and Sicily, where Pelagianism was openly preached until the
death of its follower Julian of Eclanum in 455.[3] As a movement, Pelagianism
ceased to exist after the 6th century although its ideas continued to cause
disputes.[4]

In De causa Dei contra Pelagium et de virtute causarum, Thomas Bradwardine
denounced Pelagians in the 14th century and Gabriel Biel did the same in the
15th century.[5]

## [edit] Pelagius

Main article: Pelagius

Little or nothing is known about the life of Pelagius. Although he is
frequently referred to as a British monk, it is by no means certain what his
origins were. Augustine says that he lived in Rome "for a very long time" and
referred to him as "Brito" to distinguish him from a different man called
Pelagius of Tarentum. Bede refers to him as "Pelagius Bretto".[6] St. Jerome
suggests he was of Scottish descent but in such terms as to leave it uncertain
as to whether Pelagius was from Scotland or Ireland. He was certainly well
known in the Roman province, both for the harsh asceticism of his public life,
as well as the power and persuasiveness of his speech. Until his more radical
ideas saw daylight, even such pillars of the Church as Augustine referred to
him as âsaintly.â

Pelagius taught that the human will, tempered in good deeds and rigorous
asceticism, was sufficient to live a sinless life. He told his followers that
right action on the part of human beings was necessary for salvation, as a
condition of God's gracious forgiveness. To him, the grace of God did not make
man free, since creation did that, but the grace of God was an influence upon
man's will to help him to obey. Pelagius disbelieved in original sin, but said
that Adam had condemned humankind through bad example, and that Christâs
good example offered humanity a path to salvation, through sacrifice and
through instruction of the will. Jerome emerged as one of the chief critics of
Pelagianism, because, according to him, sin was a part of human nature and we
couldn't help but to sin.

## [edit] Comparison of teaching

### [edit] Church Fathers on free will

Many of the Church Fathers taught that humans have the power of free will and
the choice over good and evil. Justin Martyr said that 'every created being is
so constituted as to be capable of vice and virtue. For he can do nothing
praiseworthy, if he had not the power of turning either way'. 'Unless we
suppose man has the power to choose the good and refuse the evil, no one can
be accountable for any action whatever.' (The First Apology, 43). Tertullian
also argued that no reward can be justly bestowed, no punishment can be justly
inflicted, upon him who is good or bad by necessity, and not by his own
choice. (Doctrine of the Will by Asa Mahan, p. 61). Likewise Origen [7],
Augustine [8], and Clement of Alexandria [9]

But they also taught that the human race was cursed by the original sin of
Adam. Because of the guilt of our first parents, we have been brought into
bondage, and made subject to death. [10]

Justin Martyr said, âLet some suppose, from what has been said by us, that
we say that whatever occurs happens by a fatal necessity, because it is
foretold as known beforehand, this too we explain. We have learned from the
prophets, and we hold it to be true, that punishments, chastisements, and good
rewards, are rendered according to the merit of each manâs actions. Now, if
this is not so, but all things happen by fate, then neither is anything at all
in our own power. For if it is predetermined that this man will be good, and
this other man will be evil, neither is the first one meritorious nor the
latter man to be blamed. And again, unless the human race has the power of
avoiding evil and choosing good by free choice, they are not accountable for
their actions.â [11]

Justin Martyr said, âI have proved in what has been said that those who were
foreknown to be unrighteous, whether men or angels, are not made wicked by
Godâs fault. Rather, each man is what he will appear to be through his own
fault.â [12]

Tatian said, âWe were not created to die. Rather, we die by our own fault.
Our free will has destroyed us. We who were free have become slaves. We have
been sold through sin. Nothing evil has been created by God. We ourselves have
manifested wickedness. But we, who have manifested it, are able again to
reject it.â [13]

Melito said, âThere is, therefore, nothing to hinder you from changing your
evil manner to life, because you are a free man.â [14]

Theophilus said, âIf, on the other hand, he would turn to the things of
death, disobeying God, he would himself be the cause of death to himself. For
God made man free, and with power of himself.â [15]

Irenaeus said, âBut man, being endowed with reason, and in this respect
similar to God, having been made free in his will, and with power over
himself, is himself his own cause that sometimes he becomes wheat, and
sometimes chaff.â [16]

Irenaeus said, âLet your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good deedsââ¦And âWhy call me, Lord, Lord, and do not do the things that
I say?ââ¦All such passages demonstrate the independent will of manâ¦For it
is in manâs power to disobey God and to forfeit what is good.â [17]

Clement of Alexandria said, âWeâ¦have believed and are saved by voluntary
choice.â [18]

Tertullian said, âI find, then, that man was constituted free by God. He was
master of his own will and powerâ¦For a law would not be imposed upon one who
did not have it in his power to render that obedience which is due to law. Nor
again, would the penalty of death be threatened against sin, if a contempt of
the law were impossible to man in the liberty of his willâ¦Man is free, with
a will either for obedience or resistance. [19]

### [edit] Church Fathers against Original Sin

"If a man were created evil, he would not deserve punishment, since he was not
evil of himself, being unable to do anything else than what he was made for."
Justin Martyr (First Apology Chap. 43)

"If anyone is truly religious, he is a man of God; but if he is irreligious,
he is a man of the devil, made such, not by nature, but by his own choice."
Ignatius (Ante-Nicene Fathers, Volume One, p. 61)

"The Scripturesâ¦emphasize the freedom of the will. They condemn those who
sin, and approve those who do rightâ¦ We are responsible for being bad and
worthy of being cast outside. For it is not the nature in us that is the cause
of the evil; rather, it is the voluntary choice that works evil." Origen (A
Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p. 289, published by
Hendrickson Publishers)

"Those who do not do it [good] will receive the just judgment of God, because
they had not work good when they had it in their power to do so. But if some
had been made by nature bad, and others good, these latter would not be
deserving of praise for being good, for they were created that way. Nor would
the former be reprehensible, for that is how they were made. However, all men
are of the same nature. They are all able to hold fast and to do what is good.
On the other hand, they have the power to cast good from them and not to do
it." Irenaeus (A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p.
287, published by Hendrickson Publishers)

### [edit] Other Christian Theologians against Original Sin

"To represent the constitution as sinful, is to present God, who is the author
of the constitution, as the author of sin." Charles Finney (Finney's
Systematic Theology, Bethany House, p. 261).

"To equate humanity with sinfulness is to make God the Author of His own worst
enemy; to make God responsible for the thing that has brought Him
unhappiness." Winkie Pratney (Youth Aflame, Bethany House, pg. 78).

"The next dogma deserving attention is the position, that mankind derived from
our first progenitor a corrupt nature, which renders obedience to the commands
of God impossible, and disobedience necessary, and that for the mere existence
of this nature, men 'deserve God's wrath and curse, not only in this world,
but in that which is to come.' If the above dogma is true, it is demonstrably
evident, that this corrupt nature comes into existence without knowledge,
choice, or agency of the creature, who for its existence is pronounced
deserving of, and 'bound over to the wrath of God.' Equally evident is it,
that this corrupt nature exists as the result of the direct agency of God. He
proclaims himself the maker of 'every soul of man.' As its Maker, He must have
imparted to that soul the constitution or nature which it actually possesses.
It does not help the matter at all, to say, that this nature is derived from
our progenitor: for the laws of generation, by which this corrupt nature is
derived from that progenitor, are sustained and continued by God himselfâ¦
If, then, the above dogma is true, man in the first place, is held as
deserving of eternal punishment for that which exists wholly independent of
his knowledge, choice or agency, in any sense, direct or indirect, He is also
held responsible for the result, not of his own agency, but for that which
results from the agency of God." Asa Mahan (Doctrine of the Will, published by
Truth in Heart, p. 115).

"If man is in fault for his [supposed] sinful nature, why not condemn man for
having blue or black eyes? The fact is, sin never can consist in having a
nature, nor in what nature is, but only and alone in the bad use which we make
of our nature. This is all. Our Maker will never find fault with us for what
He has Himself done or made; certainly not. He will not condemn us, if we will
only make a right use of our powers - of our intellect, our sensibilities, and
our will. He never holds us responsible for our original natureâ¦ since there
is no law against nature, nature cannot be a transgressionâ¦ man's nature is
not a proper subject for legislation, precept, and penalty, inasmuch as it
lies entirely without the pale of voluntary action, or of any action of man at
all." Charles Finney (Sermons on Gospel Themes, p. 78-79, published by Truth
in Heart)

### [edit] Pelagius's views

In contrast, Pelagius taught:

Pelagius said, âWhenever I have to speak on the subject of moral instruction
and conduct of a holy life, it is my practice first to demonstrate the power
and quality of human nature and to show what it is capable of achieving, and
then to go on to encourage the mind of my listener to consider the idea of
different kinds of virtues, in case it may be of little or no profit to him to
be summoned to pursue ends which he has perhaps assumed hitherto to be beyond
his reach; for we can never end upon the path of virtue unless we have hope as
our guide and compassionâ¦any good of which human nature is capable has to be
revealed, since what is shown to be practicable must be put into practice.â
[20]

Pelagius said, "It was because God wished to bestow on the rational creature
the gift of doing good of his own free will and the capacity to exercise free
choice, by implanting in man the possibility of choosing either
alternative...he could do either quite naturally and then bend his will in the
other direction too. He could not claim to possess the good of his own
volition, unless he was the kind of creature that could also have possessed
evil. Our most excellent creator wished us to be able to do either but
actually to do only one, that is, good, which he also commanded, giving us the
capacity to do evil only so that we might do His will by exercising our own.
That being so, this very capacity to do evil is also good - good, I say,
because it makes the good part better by making it voluntary and independent,
not bound by necessity but free to decide for itself." [21]

Pelagius said, "Those who are unwilling to correct their own way of life
appear to want to correct nature itself instead." [22]

Pelagius said, "And lest, on the other hand, it should be thought to be
nature's fault that some have been unrighteous, I shall use the evidence of
the scripture, which everywhere lay upon sinners the heavy weight of the
charge of having used their own will and do not excuse them for having acted
only under constraint of nature." [23]

Pelagius said, "Yet we do not defend the good of nature to such an extent that
we claim that it cannot do evil, since we undoubtedly declare also that it is
capable of good and evil; we merely try to protect it from an unjust charge,
so that we may not seem to be forced to do evil through a fault of our nature,
when, in fact, we do neither good nor evil without the exercise of our will
and always have the freedom to do one of the two, being always able to do
either." [24]

Pelagius said, "Nothing impossible has been commanded by the God of justice
and majesty...Why do we indulge in pointless evasions, advancing the frailty
of our own nature as an objection to the one who commands us? No one knows
better the true measure of our strength than he who has given it to us nor
does anyone understand better how much we are able to do than he who has given
us this very capacity of ours to be able; nor has he who is just wished to
command anything impossible or he who is good intended to condemn a man for
doing what he could not avoid doing." [25]

Pelagius said, "Grace indeed freely discharges sins, but with the consent and
choice of the believer." [26]

Pelagius said, "Obedience results from a decision of the mind, not the
substance of the body." [27]

An unknown Pelagian, "Is it possible then for a man not to sin? Such a claim
is indeed a hard one and a bitter pill for sinners to swallow; it pains the
ears of all who desire to live unrighteous. Who will find it easy now to
fulfil the demands of righteousness, when there are some who find it hard even
to listen to them?" [28]

An unknown Pelagian, "When will a man guilty of any crime or sin accept with a
tranquil mind that his wickedness is a product of his own will, not of
necessity, and allow what he now strives to attribute to nature to be ascribed
to his own free choice? It affords endless comfort to transgressors of the
divine law if they are able to believe that their failure to do something is
due to inability rather than disinclination, since they understand from their
natural wisdom that no one can be judged for failing to do the impossible and
that what is justifiable on grounds of impossibility is either a small sin or
none at all." [29]

An unknown Pelagian, "Under the plea that it is impossible not to sin, they
are given a false sense of security in sinning...Anyone who hears that it is
not possible for him to be without sin will not even try to be what he judges
to be impossible, and the man who does not try to be without sin must perforce
sin all the time, and all the more boldly because he enjoys the false security
of believing that it is impossible for him not to sin...But if he were to hear
that he is able not to sin, then he would have exerted himself to fulfil what
he now knows to be possible when he is striving to fulfil it, to achieve his
purpose for the most part, even if not entirely." [30]

An unknown Pelagian, "Consider first whether that which is such that a man
cannot be without it ought to be described as sin at all; for everything which
cannot be avoided is now put down to nature but it is impious to say that sin
is inherent in nature, because in this way the author of nature is being
judged at faultâ¦ how can it be proper to call sin by that name if, like
other natural things, it cannot be avoided, since all sin is to be attributed
to the free choice of the will, not to the defects of nature?" [31]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ *Transcript From The Council of Diospolis (Lydda) Against Pelagius, 415AD
  2. ^ Dictionary of Philosophy and Religion by William L Reese, Humanities Press 1980 p.421
  3. ^ controverscial.com Unitarian Universalism
  4. ^ Pelagianism The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition; 2006 . (Accessed May. 10, 2006.)
  5. ^ Dictionary of Philosophy and Religion by William L Reese, Humanities Press 1980 p.421
  6. ^ Bede's Ecclesiastical History of the English People: A Historical Commentary
  7. ^ said, âThe soul does not incline to either part out of necessity, for then neither vice nor virtue could be ascribed to it; nor would its choice of virtue deserve reward; nor its declination to vice punishment.â(The Works of the Reverend John Fletcher p.212) Again, âHow could God require that of man which he [man] had not power to offer Him?â (Doctrine of the Will by Asa Mahan, p. 62, published by Truth in Heart)
  8. ^ âThey that would not come [to Christ], ought not to impute it to another, but only to themselves, because, when they are called, it was in the power of their free will to come.â (A critical history of philosophy)
  9. ^ âNeither promises nor apprehensions, rewards, no punishments are just if the soul has not the power of choosing and abstaining; if evil is involuntary.â (Doctrine of the Will by Asa Mahan, p. 63, published by Truth in Heart)
  10. ^ Justin Martyr said, âThe whole human race will be found to be under a curse. For it is written in the Law of Moses, âCursed is everyone who does not continue in all things that are written in the book of the Law and do them.â And no one has accurately done them all.â (c.160, A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p. 271, published by Hendrickson Publishers)
  11. ^ Dialogue with Trypho, chapter 95
  12. ^ Dialogue with Trypho, chapter 140
  13. ^ Address to the Greeks, 11
  14. ^ c.170, A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p. 286, published by Hendrickson Publishers
  15. ^ c.180, A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p. 286, published by Hendrickson Publishers
  16. ^ c.180, A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p. 286, published by Hendrickson Publishers
  17. ^ c.180, A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p. 287, published by Hendrickson Publishers
  18. ^ c.195, A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p. 287, published by Hendrickson Publishers
  19. ^ c.207, A Dictionary of Early Christian Beliefs by David Bercot, p. 288, published by Hendrickson Publishers
  20. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 36-37, published by The Boydell Press
  21. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 38, published by The Boydell Press
  22. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 39, published by The Boydell Press
  23. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 43, published by The Boydell Press
  24. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 43, published by The Boydell Press
  25. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 53-54, published by The Boydell Press
  26. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 92, published by The Boydell Press
  27. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 90, published by The Boydell Press
  28. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 167, published by The Boydell Press
  29. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 167-168, published by The Boydell Press
  30. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 168, published by The Boydell Press
  31. ^ The Letters of Pelagius and his Followers by B. R. Rees, pg 168-169, published by The Boydell Press

## [edit] See also

  * Semipelagianism
  * Charles Finney
  * Erasmus
  * The Fall of Man
  * Meister Eckhart

## [edit] Writings by Pelagius

  * Letters of Pelagius: To A Presbyter, Augustine of Hippo, and Pope Innocent I
  * Confession of Faith
  * On Nature
  * Defense Of The Freedom Of The Will
  * Expositions on Paulâs Epistle
  * Epistle to Demetrias
  * Excerpts Out Of Divine Scriptures: Book One (a.k.a. Chapters)
  * Written Anathema

## [edit] External links

  * The Writings of the legendary Pelagians
  * Canons From The Council Of Carthage Against Pelagianism, May 1, 418
  * CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Pelagius and Pelagianism
  * Pelagians, Donatists, Monks, Anabaptists and other Perfectionists \- a sympathetic look at Pelagianism and similar 'perfectionist' movements
  * Pelagius Library: Online site dedicated to the study of Pelagius
  * Pelagianism: The Religion of Natural Man \- a critical look at Pelagianism

v â¢ d â¢ e

Catholic Church  
Organizations, Papacy, Teachings and Liturgical Traditions  
History

Jesus Â· Twelve Apostles Â· Early Christianity Â· History of the Papacy Â·
Councils Â· Crusades Â· Missions Â· Great Schism of East Â· Great Schism of
West Â· Reformation Â· Counter-Reformation Â· Roman Catholicism by country

<IMG>  
Hierarchy

Pope Â· Cardinals Â· Patriarchs Â· Major Archbishops Â· Primates Â·
Metropolitans Â· Archbishops Â· Diocesan Bishops  
Theology

Trinity Â· Original sin Â· One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church Â· Worship
Â· Divine Grace Â· Salvation Â· Sermon on the Mount Â· The Ten Commandments Â·
Dogma Â· Body and Soul  
Sacraments

Baptism Â· Confirmation Â· Eucharist Â· Penance Â· Anointing of the Sick Â·
Holy Orders Â· Matrimony  
Mariology

Mariology Â· Veneration Â· History of Mariology Â· Mariology of the saints Â·
Mariology of the popes Â· Marian Doctrines Â· Mother of God Â· Perpetual
Virginity Â· Immaculate Conception Â· Assumption  
Doctors of  
the Church

Albertus Magnus Â· Ambrose Â· Anselm of Canterbury Â· Anthony of Padua Â·
Thomas Aquinas Â· Athanasius of Alexandria Â· Augustine of Hippo Â· Basil of
Caesarea Â· Bede Â· Robert Bellarmine Â· Bernard of Clairvaux Â· Bonaventure
Â· Petrus Canisius Â· Catherine of Siena Â· Peter Chrysologus Â· John
Chrysostom Â· Cyril of Alexandria Â· Cyril of Jerusalem Â· Peter Damian Â·
Ephrem the Syrian Â· Francis de Sales Â· Gregory the Great Â· Gregory of
Nazianzus Â· Hilary of Poitiers Â· Isidore of Seville Â· Jerome Â· John of
Damascus Â· John of the Cross Â· Lawrence of Brindisi Â· Leo the Great Â·
Alphonsus Liguori Â· ThÃ©rÃ¨se de Lisieux Â· Teresa of Ãvila  
Pope Benedict XVI

Conclave Â· Theology Â· Works Â· Deus Caritas Est Â· Sacramentum Caritatis Â·
Summorum Pontificum Â· Spe Salvi  
Preceding Popes

Pope John Paul II Â· Pope Paul VI Â· Pope John XXIII Â· Pope Pius XII Â· Pope
Pius XI Â· Pope Benedict XV Â· Pope Pius X Â· Pope Leo XIII Â· Pope Pius IX  
Orders & Societies

Assumptionist Â· Augustinian Order Â· Benedictines Â· Capuchin Order Â·
Carmelites Â· Carthusians Â· Congregations of Holy Cross Â· Dominican Order Â·
Franciscan orders Â· Jesuits Â· Oratory of Saint Philip Neri  
Vatican II

Definition of the Church Â· Gaudium et Spes Â· Lumen Gentium Â· Nostra Aetate  
Particular Churches  
sorted by  
Liturgical Traditions

Alexandrian Â· Coptic Â· Ethiopic Â· Antiochian Â· Maronite Â· Syriac Â· Syro-
Malankara Â· Armenian Â· Armenian Â· Byzantine Â· Albanian Â· Belarusian Â·
Bulgarian Â· Croatian Â· Greek Â· Hungarian Â· Italo-Greek Â· Macedonian Â·
Melkite Â· Romanian Â· Russian Â· Ruthenian Â· Slovak Â· Ukrainian Â· East
Syrian Â· Chaldean Â· Syro-Malabar Â· Roman Â· Ambrosian Â· Sarum Â· Mozarabic
Â· Anglican Use Â· Latin Â· Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter  
<IMG> Pope Portal <IMG> Catholicism Portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

History of the Roman Catholic Church  
General

History of the Roman Catholic Church Â· History of the Papacy Â· Ecumenical
Councils Â· Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church Â· History of Christianity
Â· Role of the Roman Catholic Church in civilization Â· Art in Roman
Catholicism Â· Roman Catholic religious order Â· Christian monasticism Â·
Papal States

<IMG>  
Church beginnings

Jesus Â· Twelve Apostles Â· Saint Peter Â· Paul the Apostle Â· Council of
Jerusalem Â· Saint Stephen Â· John the Apostle Â· Ignatius of Antioch Â·
Irenaeus Â· Pope Victor I Â· Tertullian Â· Apostolic Fathers  
Constantine to  
Pope Gregory I

Constantine I and Christianity Â· Arianism Â· Basilica of St. John Lateran Â·
First Council of Nicaea Â· Pope Sylvester I Â· First Council of Constantinople
Â· Canon Â· Jerome Â· Vulgate Â· Council of Ephesus Â· Council of Chalcedon Â·
Benedict of Nursia Â· Second Council of Constantinople Â· Pope Gregory I Â·
Gregorian Chant  
Early Middle Ages

Third Council of Constantinople Â· Saint Boniface Â· Iconclasm Â· Second
Council of Nicaea Â· Charlemagne Â· Pope Leo III Â· Fourth Council of
Constantinople Â· East-West Schism  
High Middle Ages

Pope Urban II Â· Investiture Controversy Â· Crusades Â· First Council of the
Lateran Â· Second Council of the Lateran Â· Third Council of the Lateran Â·
Pope Innocent III Â· Latin Empire of Constantinople Â· Saint Francis of Assisi
Â· Fourth Council of the Lateran Â· Inquisition Â· First Council of Lyon Â·
Second Council of Lyon Â· Bernard of Clairvaux Â· Thomas Aquinas  
Late Middle Ages

Pope Boniface VIII Â· Avignon Papacy Â· Pope Clement V Â· Council of Vienne Â·
Knights Templar Â· Catherine of Siena Â· Pope Alexander VI  
Protestant Reformation &  
Counter-Reformation

Protestant Reformation Â· Counter-Reformation Â· Thomas More Â· Pope Leo X Â·
Society of Jesus Â· Francis Xavier Â· Dissolution of the Monasteries Â·
Council of Trent Â· Pope Pius V Â· Tridentine Mass Â· Robert Bellarmine  
Baroque Period to  
French Revolution

Pope Innocent XI Â· Pope Benedict XIV Â· Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Â· Anti-clericalism Â· Pope Pius VI Â· Shimabara Rebellion Â· Edict of Nantes
Â· Dechristianisation of France during the French Revolution  
19th century

Pope Pius VII Â· Pope Pius IX Â· Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the
Virgin Mary Â· Our Lady of Lourdes Â· First Vatican Council Â· Papal
infallibility Â· Pope Leo XIII Â· Rerum Novarum  
20th century

Pope Pius X Â· Our Lady of FÃ¡tima Â· Persecutions of the Catholic Church and
Pius XII Â· Pope Pius XII Â· Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Â·
Pope John XXIII Â· Second Vatican Council Â· Pope Paul VI Â· Pope John Paul I
Â· Pope John Paul II  
21st century

Pope Benedict XVI Â· World Youth Day 2008  
<IMG> Pope Portal <IMG> Catholicism Portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

History of Roman Catholic theology  
Theologians Â· Teachings Â· Heresies  
General History

History of the Roman Catholic Church Â· Early Christianity Â· History of the
Papacy Â· Ecumenical Councils Â· Timeline of the Roman Catholic Church Â·
History of Christianity Â· History of Christian theology

<IMG>  
Church beginnings

Epistles of Clement Â· Didache Â· Ignatius of Antioch Â· Epistle of Barnabas
Â· Justin Martyr Â· Irenaeus Â· Tertullian Â· Origen Â· Antipope Novatian Â·
Cyprian  
Constantine to  
Pope Gregory I

Arianism Â· Pelagianism Â· Nestorianism Â· Monophysitism Â· Monothelitism Â·
Pope Leo I Â· Ambrose Â· Augustine of Hippo  
Early Middle Ages

Iconoclasm Â· Transubstantiation Dispute Â· Predestination Disputes  
High Middle Ages

Thomas Aquinas Â· Thomism Â· Anselm of Canterbury Â· Peter Abelard Â· Decretum
Gratiani Â· Bernard of Clairvaux Â· Peter Lombard Â· Hildegard of Bingen Â·
Saint Dominic Â· Saint Francis of Assisi Â· Bonaventure Â· Albertus Magnus  
Mysticism & Reforms

Duns Scotus Â· Dante Alighieri Â· William of Ockham Â· Catherine of Siena Â·
Brigit of Sweden Â· Johannes Tauler Â· Heinrich Seuse Â· Nicholas of Kues Â·
Thomas Ã Kempis  
Protestant Reformation and  
Counter-Reformation

Thomas More Â· John Fisher Â· Thomas Cajetan Â· Johann Eck Â· Ignatius of
Loyola Â· Francis Xavier Â· Teresa of Ãvila Â· John of the Cross Â· Petrus
Canisius Â· Robert Bellarmine Â· Francis de Sales  
Baroque Period to  
French Revolution

Jacques-BÃ©nigne Bossuet Â· Francisco SuÃ¡rez Â· FranÃ§ois FÃ©nelon Â·
Jansenism Â· Blaise Pascal Â· Saint Alphonsus Liguori Â· Saint Louis de
Montfort Â· Alfonso Muzzarelli Â· Louis Thomassin Â· Jean de La Fontaine  
19th century

John Henry Newman Â· Gaetano Sanseverino Â· Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Â· Clemens
Maria Hofbauer Â· Johann Michael Sailer Â· Johann Joseph von GÃ¶rres Â·
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Â· Giuseppe Pecci Â· Joseph
HergenrÃ¶ther Â· Tommaso Maria Zigliara  
20th-21st century

Romano Guardini Â· Sebastiaan Tromp Â· Raimondo Spiazzi Â· Gabriel Roschini Â·
Hugo Rahner Â· Henri de Lubac Â· Pope Pius XII Â· Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Â· Hans Urs von Balthasar Â· Yves Congar Â· Karl Rahner Â· Edward
Schillebeeckx Â· Marie-Dominique Chenu Â· Louis Bouyer Â· Ãtienne Gilson Â·
Hans KÃ¼ng Â· Jean DaniÃ©lou Â· Pope John Paul II Â· Pope Benedict XVI  
<IMG> Pope Portal <IMG> Catholicism Portal  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pelagianism"

Categories: Ancient Christian denominations | Christian theological movements
| Ancient Christian controversies

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 02:18.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



