
# Epicureanism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Epicurean" redirects here. For other uses, see Epicurean (disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Epicurus

Epicureanism is a system of philosophy based upon the teachings of Epicurus
(c. 341âc. 270 BC), founded around 307 BC. Epicurus was an atomic
materialist, following in the steps of Democritus. His materialism led him to
a general attack on superstition and divine intervention. Following
Aristippusâabout whom very little is knownâEpicurus believed that the
greatest good was to seek modest pleasures in order to attain a state of
tranquility and freedom from fear (ataraxia) as well as absence of bodily pain
(aponia) through knowledge of the workings of the world and the limits of our
desires. The combination of these two states is supposed to constitute
happiness in its highest form. Although Epicureanism is a form of hedonism,
insofar as it declares pleasure as the sole intrinsic good, its conception of
absence of pain as the greatest pleasure and its advocacy of a simple life
make it different from "hedonism" as it is commonly understood.

In the Epicurean view, the highest pleasure (tranquility and freedom from
fear) was obtained by knowledge, friendship, and living a virtuous and
temperate life. He lauded the enjoyment of simple pleasures, by which he meant
abstaining from bodily desires, such as sex and appetites, verging on
asceticism. He argued that when eating, one should not eat too richly, for it
could lead to dissatisfaction later, such as the grim realization that one
could not afford such delicacies in the future. Likewise, sex could lead to
increased lust and dissatisfaction with the sexual partner. Epicurus did not
articulate a broad system of social ethics that has survived.

Epicureanism was originally a challenge to Platonism, though later it became
the main opponent of Stoicism. Epicurus and his followers shunned politics.
After the death of Epicurus, his school was headed by Hermarchus; later many
Epicurean societies flourished in the Late Hellenistic era and during the
Roman era (such as those in Antiochia, Alexandria, Rhodes and Ercolano). The
poet Lucretius is its most known Roman proponent. By the end of the Roman
Empire it had all but died out, and would be resurrected in the 17th century
by the atomist Pierre Gassendi, who adapted it to the Christian doctrine.

Some writings by Epicurus have survived. Some scholars consider the epic poem
On the Nature of Things by Lucretius to present in one unified work the core
arguments and theories of Epicureanism. Many of the papyrus scrolls unearthed
at the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum are Epicurean texts. At least some
are thought to have belonged to the Epicurean Philodemus.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Religion
  * 3 Epicurean ethics
  * 4 Epicurean physics
  * 5 Epicurean epistemology
  * 6 Tetrapharmakos
  * 7 Notable Epicureans
  * 8 Modern usage and misconceptions
  * 9 Possible relationship to "Apiqoros" in Judaism
  * 10 External links
  * 11 Notes
  * 12 References
  * 13 Further reading

  
## [edit] History

The school of Epicurus, called "The Garden," was based in Epicurus' home and
garden. It had a small but devoted following in his lifetime. Its members
included Hermarchus, Idomeneus, Colotes, Polyaenus, and Metrodorus. Epicurus
emphasized friendship as an important ingredient of happiness, and the school
seems to have been a moderately ascetic community which rejected the political
limelight of Athenian philosophy. They were fairly cosmopolitan by Athenian
standards, including women and slaves, and were probably vegetarians
(Stevenson 2005).

The school's popularity grew and it became, along with Stoicism and
Skepticism, one of the three dominant schools of Hellenistic Philosophy,
lasting strongly through the later Roman Empire. In Rome, Lucretius was the
school's greatest proponent, composing On the Nature of Things, an epic poem,
in six books, designed to recruit new members. The poem mainly deals with
Epicurean philosophy of nature. Another major source of information is the
Roman politician and amateur philosopher Cicero, although he was highly
critical, denouncing the Epicureans as unbridled hedonists, devoid of a sense
of virtue and duty, and guilty of withdrawing from public life. Another
ancient source is Diogenes of Oenoanda, who composed a large inscription at
Oenoanda in Lycia.

A library, dubbed the Villa of the Papyri, in Herculaneum, owned by Julius
Caesar's father-in-law, Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus, was preserved by
the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 CE, and was found to contain a large number of
works by Philodemus, a late Hellenistic Epicurean, and Epicurus himself,
attesting to the school's enduring popularity. The task of unrolling and
deciphering the charred papyrus scrolls continues today.

After the official approval of Christianity by Constantine, Epicureanism was
repressed. Epicurus' materialist theories that the gods were physical beings
composed of atoms who were unconcerned with human affairs and had not created
the universe, and his general teaching that one's own pleasure, rather than
service to God, was the greatest good were essentially irreconcilable with
Christian teachings. The school endured a long period of obscurity and
decline.

The early Christian writer Lactantius criticizes Epicurus at several points
throughout his Divine Institutes. In Dante's Divine Comedy, the Epicureans are
depicted as heretics suffering in the sixth circle of hell. The word for a
heretic in the Talmudic literature is "Apiqoros" (××¤××§××¨××¡), and
Epicurus is titled in Modern Greek idiom as the "Dark Philosopher".

By the 16th century, the works of Lucretius and Diogenes Laertius were being
printed in Europe. In the 17th century the French Franciscan priest, scientist
and philosopher Pierre Gassendi wrote two books forcefully reviving
Epicureanism. Shortly thereafter, and clearly influenced by Gassendi, Walter
Charleton published several works on Epicureanism in English. Attacks by
Christians continued, most forcefully by the Cambridge Platonists.

In the following times, there was a resurgence of Epicurean philosophy: in the
Modern Age, scientists adopted atomist theories, while materialist
philosophers embraced Epicurus' hedonist ethics and restated his objections to
natural teleology.

## [edit] Religion

Epicureanism emphasizes the neutrality of the gods, that they do not interfere
with human lives. It states that gods, matter and souls are all comprised of
atoms. Souls are made from atoms, and gods possess souls, but their souls
adhere to their bodies without escaping. Humans have the same kind of souls,
but the forces binding human atoms together do not hold the soul forever. The
Epicureans also used the atomist theories of Democritus and Leucippus to
assert that man has free will. They held that all thoughts are merely atoms
swerving randomly. This explanation served to satisfy people who wondered
anxiously about their role in the universe.

The Riddle of Epicurus or Epicurean paradox is the earliest known description
of the Problem of evil, and is a famous argument against the existence of an
all-powerful and providential God or gods. As recorded by Lactantius:

> God either wants to eliminate bad things and cannot, or can but does not
want to, or neither wishes to nor can, or both wants to and can. If he wants
to and cannot, then he is weak - and this does not apply to god. If he can but
does not want to, then he is spiteful - which is equally foreign to god's
nature. If he neither wants to nor can, he is both weak and spiteful, and so
not a god. If he wants to and can, which is the only thing fitting for a god,
where then do bad things come from? Or why does he not eliminate them?[1]

Epicurus did not, however, deny the existence of gods. Rather, he conceived
the gods as blissful and immortal yet material beings made of atoms inhabiting
the metakosmia: empty spaces between worlds in the vastness of infinite space.
In spite of his nominal recognition of the gods, the practical effect of this
materialistic explanation of the gods' existence and their complete non-
intervention in human affairs renders his philosophy akin in divine effects to
the attitude of Deism.

In Dante's Divine Comedy, the flaming tombs of the Epicureans are located
within the sixth circle of hell (Inferno, Canto X). Similarly, according to
Jewish Mishnah, Epicureans (apiqorsim, people who share the beliefs of the
movement) are among the people who do not have a share of the "World-to-Come"
(afterlife or the world of the Messianic era).

Parallels may be drawn to Buddhism, which similarly emphasizes a lack of
divine interference and aspects of its atomism. Buddhism also resembles
Epicureanism in its temperateness, including the belief that great excesses
lead to great dissatisfaction.

The philosophy originated by Epicurus flourished for seven centuries. It
propounded an ethic of individual pleasure as the sole or chief good in life.
Hence, Epicurus advocated living in such a way as to derive the greatest
amount of pleasure possible during oneâs lifetime, yet doing so moderately
in order to avoid the suffering incurred by overindulgence in such pleasure.
The emphasis was placed on pleasures of the mind rather than on physical
pleasures. Therefore, according to Epicurus, with whom a person eats is of
greater importance than what is eaten. Unnecessary and, especially,
artificially produced desires were to be suppressed. Since learning, culture,
and civilization as well as social and political involvements could give rise
to desires that are difficult to satisfy and thus result in disturbing oneâs
peace of mind, they were discouraged. Knowledge was sought only to rid oneself
of religious fears and superstitions, the two primary fears to be eliminated
being fear of the gods and of death. Viewing marriage and what attends it as a
threat to oneâs peace of mind, Epicurus lived a celibate life but did not
impose this restriction on his followers.

The philosophy was characterized by an absence of divine principle.
Lawbreaking was counseled against because of both the shame associated with
detection and the punishment it might bring. Living in fear of being found out
or punished would take away from pleasure, and this made even secret
wrongdoing inadvisable. To the Epicureans, virtue in itself had no value and
was beneficial only when it served as a means to gain happiness. Reciprocity
was recommended, not because it was divinely ordered or innately noble, but
because it was personally beneficial. Friendships rested on the same mutual
basis, that is, the pleasure resulting to the possessors. Epicurus laid great
emphasis on developing friendships as the basis of a satisfying life.

> of all the things which wisdom has contrived which contribute to a blessed
life, none is more important, more fruitful, than friendship

> â [2]

While the pursuit of pleasure formed the focal point of the philosophy, this
was largely directed to the "static pleasures" of minimizing pain, anxiety and
suffering. In fact Epicurus referred to life as a âbitter giftâ.

> When we say...that pleasure is the end and aim, we do not mean the pleasures
of the prodigal or the pleasures of sensuality, as we are understood to do by
some through ignorance, prejudice or wilful misrepresentation. By pleasure we
mean the absence of pain in the body and of trouble in the soul. It is not by
an unbroken succession of drinking bouts and of revelry, not by sexual lust,
nor the enjoyment of fish and other delicacies of a luxurious table, which
produce a pleasant life; it is sober reasoning, searching out the grounds of
every choice and avoidance, and banishing those beliefs through which the
greatest tumults take possession of the soul.

> â [3]

The Epicureans believed in the existence of the gods, but believed that the
gods were made of atoms just like everything else. It was thought that the
gods were too far away from the earth to have any interest in what man was
doing; so it did not do any good to pray or to sacrifice to them. The gods,
they believed, did not create the universe, nor did they inflict punishment or
bestow blessings on anyone, but they were supremely happy; this was the goal
to strive for during oneâs own human life.

Epicureanism rejects immortality and mysticism; it believes in the soul, but
suggests that the soul is as mortal as the body. Epicurus rejected any
possibility of an afterlife, while still contending that one need not fear
death: "Death is nothing to us; for that which is dissolved, is without
sensation, and that which lacks sensation is nothing to us."[4] Bertrand
Russell describes the reception of Epicureanism's conception of death:

> [T]he fear of death is so deeply rooted in instinct that the gospel of
Epicurus could not, at any time, make a wide popular appeal; it remained
always the creed of a cultivated minority. Even among philosophers, after the
time of Augustus, it was, as a rule, rejected in favour of Stoicism. It
survived, it is true, though with diminishing vigour, for six hundred years
after the death of Epicurus; but as men became increasingly oppressed by the
miseries of our terrestrial existence, they demanded continually stronger
medicine from philosophy or religion. The philosophers took refuge, with few
exceptions, in Neoplatonism; the uneducated turned to various Eastern
superstitions, and then, in continually increasing numbers, to Christianity,
which, in its early form, placed all good in life beyond the grave, thus
offering men a gospel which was the exact opposite of that of Epicurus.

> â [5]

## [edit] Epicurean ethics

Epicurus was an early thinker to develop the notion of justice as a social
contract. He defined justice as an agreement "neither to harm nor be harmed."
The point of living in a society with laws and punishments is to be protected
from harm so that one is free to pursue happiness. Because of this, laws that
do not contribute to promoting human happiness are not just. He gave his own
unique version of the Ethic of Reciprocity, which differs from other
formulations by emphasizing minimizing harm and maximizing happiness for
oneself and others:

> It is impossible to live a pleasant life without living wisely and well and
justly (agreeing "neither to harm nor be harmed"[6]),  
>  and it is impossible to live wisely and well and justly without living a
pleasant life.[7]

Epicureanism incorporated a relatively full account of the social contract
theory, following after a vague description of such a society in Plato's
Republic. The social contract theory established by Epicureanism is based on
mutual agreement, not divine decree.

## [edit] Epicurean physics

Epicurus' philosophy of the physical world is found in Letter to Herodotus:
Diogenes Laertius 10.34-83.

If a limited form lives within an unlimited void, the form could only wander
aimlessly about, because what is unlimited is ungraspable; meaning, the
limited form would travel forever, for it does not have any obstacles. The
void would have to be limited in quality and the form of an unlimited quality,
for an unlimited form can oscillate and seemingly graspâpractically, but not
literallyâan unlimited number of spots within the limited void. So therefore
all living things on Earth are unlimited, and the Earth on which they live and
the universe around it, is limited. (Compare the concept of the finite
universe in modern cosmology.)

Forms can change, but not their inherent qualities, for change can only affect
their shape. Some things can be changed and some things cannot be changed
because forms that are unchangeable cannot be destroyed if certain attributes
can be removed; for attributes not only have the intention of altering an
unchangeable form, but also the inevitable possibility of becomingâin
relation to the formâs disposition to its present environmentâboth an
armor and a vulnerability to its stability.

Further proof that there are unchangeable forms and their inability to be
destroyed, is the concept of the ânon-evident.â A form cannot come into
being from the voidâwhich is nothing; it would be as if all forms come into
being spontaneously, needless of reproduction. The implied meaning of
âdestroyingâ something is to undo its existence, to make it not there
anymore, and this cannot be so: if the void is that which does not exist, and
if this void is the implied destination of the destroyed, then the thing in
reality cannot be destroyed, for the thing (and all things) could not have
existed in the first place (as Lucretius said, ex nihilo nihil fit: nothing
comes from nothing). This totality of forms is eternal and unchangeable.
[Compare the modern Law of Conservation of Mass-Energy.]

Atoms move, in the appropriate way, constantly and for all time. [Compare the
modern theory of particle physics.] Forms first come to us in images or
âprojectionsâ--outlines of their true selves. For an image to be perceived
by the human eye, the âatomsâ of the image must cross a great distance at
enormous speed and must not encounter any conflicting atoms along the way.
[Compare the modern theory of light as being composed of subatomic particles
called photons.] The presence of atomic resistance equal atomic slowness;
whereas, if the path is deficient of atomic resistance, the traversal rate is
much faster (and clearer). [Compare the modern concept of the speed of light
and refraction.] Because of resistance, forms must be unlimited (unchangeable
and able to grasp any point within the void) because, if they weren't, a
form's image would not come from a single place, but fragmented and from
several places. This confirms that a single form cannot be at multiple places
at the same time. [Compare Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle.]

And the senses warrant us other means of perception: hearing and smelling. As
in the same way an image traverses through the air, the atoms of sound and
smell traverse the same way. This perceptive experience is itself the flow of
the moving atoms; and like the changeable and unchangeable forms, the form
from which the flow traverses is shed and shattered into even smaller atoms,
atoms of which still represent the original form, but they are slightly
disconnected and of diverse magnitudes. This flow, like that of an echo,
reverberates (off one's senses) and goes back to its start; meaning, oneâs
sensory perception happens in the coming, going, or arch, of the flow; and
when the flow retreats back to its starting position, the atomic image is back
together again [Compare the modern theory of sound.]: thus when one smells
something one has the ability to see it too [because atoms reach the one who
smells or sees from the object.]

And this leads to the question of how atomic speed and motion works. Epicurus
says that there are two kinds of motion: the straight motion and the curved
motion, and its motion traverse as fast as the speed of thought. [Compare the
modern theory of the speed of light.]

Epicurus proposed the idea of 'the space between worlds' (metakosmia) the
relatively empty spaces in the infinite void where worlds had not been formed
by the joining together of the atoms through their endless motion. [Compare
the modern concepts of interstellar and intergalactic space.]

## [edit] Epicurean epistemology

Epicurean epistemology has three criteria of truth: sensations (aesthÃªsis),
preconceptions (prolepsis), and feelings (pathÃª). Prolepsis is sometimes
translated as "basic grasp" but could also be described as "universal ideas":
concepts that are understood by all. An example of prolepsis is the word "man"
because every person has a preconceived notion of what a man is. Sensations or
sense perception is knowledge that is received from the senses alone. Much
like modern science, epicurean philosophy posits that empiricism can be used
to sort truth from falsehood. Feelings are more related to ethics than
Epicurean physical theory. Feelings merely tell the individual what brings
about pleasure and what brings about pain. This is important for the Epicurean
because these are the basis for the entire Epicurean ethical doctrine.

According to Epicurus, the basic means for our understanding of things are the
âsensationsâ (aestheses), 'concepts' (prolepsis), âemotionsâ (pathe)
and the âfocusing of thought into an impressionâ (phantastikes epiboles
tes dianoias).

Epicureans reject dialectic as confusing (parelkousa) because for the physical
philosophers it is sufficient to use the correct words which refer to the
concepts of the world. Epicurus then, in his work On the Canon, says that the
criteria of truth are the senses, the preconceptions and the feelings.
Epicureans add to these the focusing of thought into an impression. He himself
is referring to those in his Epitome to Herodotus and in Principal
Doctrines.[8]

The senses are the first criterion of truth, since they create the first
impressions and testify the existence of the external world. Sensory input is
neither subjective nor deceitful, but the misunderstanding comes when the mind
adds to or subtracts something from these impressions through our preconceived
notions. Therefore, our sensory input alone cannot lead us to inaccuracy, only
the concepts and opinions that come from our interpretations of our sensory
input can. Therefore our sensory data is the only truly accurate thing which
we have to rely for our understanding of the world around us.

> And whatever image we receive by direct understanding by our mind or through
our sensory organs of the shape or the essential properties that are the true
form of the solid object, since it is created by the constant repetition of
the image or the impression it has left behind. There is always inaccuracy and
error involved in bringing into a judgment an element that is additional to
sensory impressions, either to confirm [what we sensed] or deny it.

> â [9]

> Epicurus said that all the tangible things are real and each impression
comes from existing objects and is determined by the object that causes the
sensations.

> â [10]

> Therefore all the impressions are real, while the preconceived notions are
not real and can be modified.

> If you battle with all your sensations, you will be unable to form a
standard for judging which of them are incorrect.

> â [11]

The concepts are the categories which have formed mentally according to our
sensory input, for example the concepts "man", "warm", and "sweet", etc. These
concepts are directly related to memory and can be recalled at any time, only
by the use of the respective word. (Compare the anthropological Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis). Epicurus also calls them "the meanings that underlie the words"
(hypotetagmena tois phthongois: semantic substance of the words) in his letter
to Herodotus. The feelings or emotions (pathe) are related to the senses and
the concepts. They are the inner impulses that make us feel like or dislike
about certain external objects, which we perceive through the senses, and are
associated with the preconceptions that are recalled.

> In this moment that the word "man" is spoken, immediately due to the concept
[or category of the idea] an image is projected in the mind which is related
to the sensory input data.

> â [12]

> First of all Herodotus, we must understand the meanings that underlie the
words, so that by referring to them, we may be able to reach judgments about
our opinions, matters of inquiry, or problems and leave everything undecided
as we can argue endlessly or use words that have no clearly defined meaning.

> â [13]

Apart from these there is the assumption (hypolepsis), which is either the
hypothesis or the opinion about something (matter or action), and which can be
correct or incorrect. The assumptions are created by our sensations, concepts
and emotions. Since they are produced automatically without any rational
analysis and verification (see the modern idea of the subconscious) of whether
they are correct or not, they need to be confirmed (epimarteresis:
confirmation), a process which must follow each assumption.

> For beliefs they [the Epicureans] use the word hypolepsis which they claim
can be correct or incorrect.

> â [14]

Referring to the "focusing of thought into an impression" or else "intuitive
understandings of the mind", they are the impressions made on the mind that
come from our sensations, concepts and emotions and form the basis of our
assumptions and beliefs. All this unity (sensation â concept or category â
emotion â focusing of thought into an impression) leads to the formation of
a certain assumption or belief (hypolepsis). (Compare the modern
anthropological concept of a "world view".) Following the lead of Aristotle,
Epicurus also refers to impressions in the form of mental images which are
projected on the mind. The "correct use of impressions" was something adopted
later by the Stoics. Our assumptions and beliefs have to be âconfirmed',
which actually proves if our opinions are either accurate or inaccurate. This
verification and confirmation (epimarteresis) can only be done by means of the
"evident reason" (henargeia), which means what is self-evident and obvious
through our sensory input.

An example is when we see somebody approaching us, first through the sense of
eyesight, we perceive that an object is coming closer to us, then through our
preconceptions we understand that it is a human being, afterwards through that
assumption we can recognize that he is someone we know, for example
Theaetetus. This assumption is associated with pleasant or unpleasant emotions
accompanied by the respective mental images and impressions (the focusing of
our thoughts into an impression), which are related to our feelings toward
each other. When he gets close to us, we can confirm (verify) that he is
Socrates and not Theaetetus through the proof of our eyesight. Therefore, we
have to use the same method to understand everything, even things which are
not observable and obvious (adela, imperceptible), that is to say the
confirmation through the evident reason (henargeia). In the same way we have
to reduce (reductionism) each assumption and belief to something that can be
proved through the self-evident reason (empirically verified). Verification
theory and reductionism have been adopted, as we know, by the modern
philosophy of science. In this way, one can get rid of the incorrect
assumptions and beliefs (biases) and finally settle on the real (confirmed)
facts.

> Consequently the confirmation and lack of disagreement is the criterion of
accuracy of something, while non-confirmation and disagreement is the
criterion of its inaccuracy. The basis and foundation of [understanding]
everything are the obvious and self-evident [facts].

> â [15]

All the above mentioned criteria of knowledge form the basic principles of the
[scientific] method, that Epicurus followed in order to find the truth. He
described this method in his work On the Canon or On the Criteria.

> If you reject any sensation and you do not distinguish between the opinion
based on what awaits confirmation and evidence already available based on the
senses, the feelings and every intuitive faculty of the mind, you will send
the remaining sensations into a turmoil with your foolish opinions, thus
getting rid of every standard for judging. And if among the perceptions based
on beliefs things that are verified and things that are not, you are
guaranteed to be in error since you have kept everything that leads
uncertainty concerning the correct and incorrect.

> â [16]

(Based on excerpt from Epicurus' Gnoseology 'Handbook of Greek Philosophy:
From Thales to the Stoics Analysis and Fragments', Nikolaos Bakalis, Trafford
Publishing 2005, ISBN 1-4120-4843-5.

## [edit] Tetrapharmakos

Main article: Tetrapharmakos

Tetrapharmakos, or "The four-part cure", is Epicurus' basic guideline as to
how to live the happiest possible life. This poetic doctrine was handed down
by an anonymous Epicurean who summed up Epicurus' philosophy on happiness in
four simple lines:

> Don't fear god,  
>  Don't worry about death;  
>  What is good is easy to get, and  
>  What is terrible is easy to endure.  
>

> â Philodemus, Herculaneum Papyrus, 1005, 4.9-14

## [edit] Notable Epicureans

One of the earliest Roman writers espousing Epicureanism was Amafinius. Other
adherents to the teachings of Epicurus included the poet Horace, whose famous
statement Carpe Diem ("Seize the Day") illustrates the philosophy, as well as
Lucretius, as he showed in his De Rerum Natura. The poet Virgil was another
prominent Epicurean (see Lucretius for further details).

Julius Caesar leaned considerably toward Epicureanism and rejected the idea of
an afterlife, which e.g. led to his plea against the death sentence during the
trial against Catiline, where he spoke out against the Stoic Cato.[17]

In modern times Thomas Jefferson referred to himself as an Epicurean,[18] and
the preamble to the United States Declaration of Independence demonstrates
Epicurean influence by inalienable right of life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness.

Other modern-day Epicureans were Gassendi, Walter Charleton, FranÃ§ois
Bernier, Saint-Evremond, Ninon de l'Enclos, Diderot, and Jeremy Bentham.
Christopher Hitchens has referred to himself as an Epicurean.[19]

Anton LaVey, the author of The Satanic Bible, as well as a variety of other
tomes, and founder of LaVeyan Satanism, has been widely hailed as creating an
"Epicurean" philosophy. But this is a greatly false view due to
misinterpretation of Epicurean philosophy which is based on humanistic and
friendly values more related to Utilitarianism ("happiness for all") and not
on egoistic and vulgar values of Satanism.

## [edit] Modern usage and misconceptions

In modern popular usage, an epicure is a connoisseur of the arts of life and
the refinements of sensual pleasures; epicureanism implies a love or
knowledgeable enjoyment especially of good food and drinkâsee the definition
of gourmet at Wiktionary.

This can be attributed to a misunderstanding of the Epicurean doctrine, as
promulgated by Christian polemicists. Because Epicureanism posits that
pleasure is the ultimate good (telos), it is commonly misunderstood as a
doctrine that advocates the partaking in fleeting pleasures such as constant
partying, sexual excess and decadent food. This is not the case. Epicurus
regarded ataraxia (tranquility, freedom from fear) and aponia (absence of
pain) as the height of happiness. He also considered prudence an important
virtue and perceived excess and overindulgence to be contrary to the
attainment of ataraxia and aponia.

## [edit] Possible relationship to "Apiqoros" in Judaism

In the Jewish exegetical tradition, the word "Apiqoros" (××¤××§××¨××¡)
appears in Rabbinical literature as a reference to those who lack religion or
are ostensibly atheistic. Its origins are uncertain, but it may have
originally referred specifically to the Epicurean philosophy, although it
eventually came to refer to any philosophy lacking a God or a spiritually
based morality. It is also occasionally used to describe heretic principles or
heretics themselves. The word is still used in modern Hebrew, mainly among
religious Jews.

## [edit] External links

  * Epicureans on PhilPapers
  * Epicurus.info - Epicurean Philosophy Online
  * Epicurus & Epicurean Philosophy
  * The Epicurean Garden of Contentment
  * Karl Marx's Notebooks on Epicurean Philosophy
  * Marx's Doctoral Dissertation On the Difference between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Lactantius, De Ira Deorum, 13.19 (Epicurus, Frag. 374, Usener). David Hume paraphrased this passage in his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion: "EPICURUS's old questions are yet unanswered. Is he willing to prevent evil, but not able? then is he impotent. Is he able, but not willing? then is he malevolent. Is he both able and willing? whence then is evil?"
  2. ^ quoted by Cicero, On Goals, 1.65
  3. ^ Epicurus, "Letter to Menoeceus", contained in Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, Book X
  4. ^ Russell, Bertrand. A History of Western Philosophy, pp. 239-240
  5. ^ Russell, Bertrand. A History of Western Philosophy, p. 251.
  6. ^ Tim O'Keefe, Epicurus on Freedom, Cambridge University Press, 2005, p.134
  7. ^ Epicurus Principal Doctrines tranls. by Robert Drew Hicks (1925)
  8. ^ Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, X, 31.
  9. ^ Letter to Herodotus, 50).
  10. ^ (Sextus Empiricus, To Rationals, 8.63.
  11. ^ Principal Doctrines, 23.
  12. ^ Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, X, 33.
  13. ^ Letter to Herodotus, 37.
  14. ^ Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, X, 34.
  15. ^ Sextus Empiricus, To Rationals, 7.211-6.
  16. ^ Principal Doctrines, 24.
  17. ^ Cf. Sallust, The War With Catiline, Caesar's speech: 51.29 & Cato's reply: 52.13).
  18. ^ Letter to William Short, 11 Oct. 1819 in The Writings of Thomas Jefferson : 1816-1826 by Thomas Jefferson, Paul Leicester Ford, G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1899
  19. ^ Townhall.com::Talk Radio Online::Radio Show

## [edit] References

  * Stevenson, Jay. The Complete Idiot's Guide to Philosophy. 3. Indianapolis: Alpha Books, Penguin Group, 2005.
  * Howard Jones, The Epicurean Tradition, Routledge, London 1989.
  * Long, A.A. & Sedley, D.N. The Hellenistic Philosophers Volume 1, Cambridge University Press, 1987. (ISBN 0-521-27556-3)

## [edit] Further reading

  * Zeller, Eduard; Reichel, Oswald J., The Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics, Longmans, Green, and Co., 1892

v â¢ d â¢ e

Epicureanism  
Philosophers

Greek era

Epicurus Â· Polyaenus Â· Metrodorus Â· Leontion Â· Hermarchus Â· Carneiscus Â·
Colotes Â· Idomeneus Â· Polystratus Â· Dionysius of Lamptrai Â· Basilides Â·
Philonides Â· Apollodorus Â· Diogenes of Tarsus Â· Demetrius Lacon Â· Zeno of
Sidon  
Roman era

Amafinius Â· Titus Albucius Â· Philodemus Â· Lucretius Â· Phaedrus Â· Patro Â·
Catius Â· Siro Â· Diogenes of Oenoanda  
Philosophy

Epicureanism Â· Tetrapharmakos  
Concepts

Aponia Â· Ataraxia Â· Clinamen Â· Eudaimonia Â· HÃªdonÃª Â· Metakosmia  
Works

On the Nature of Things  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Greek schools of philosophy  
Pre-Socratic philosophy

Ionian school (Milesian school Â· Ephesian school) Â· Pythagoreanism Â·
Eleatics Â· Pluralism Â· Atomism Â· Sophism  
Socratic philosophy

Platonism (Plato) Â· Peripateticism (Aristotle) Â· Cynics Â· Cyrenaics Â·
Megarian school Â· Eretrian school  
Hellenistic philosophy

Epicureanism Â· Stoicism Â· Pyrrhonism Â· Neopythagoreanism Â· Neoplatonism
(Plotinus)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Philosophy  
Eastern philosophy Â· Western philosophy  
History

Ancient

Buddhist Â· Chinese Â· Greek Â· Hellenistic Â· Hindu Â· Indian Â· Jain Â·
Persian  
Medieval

Christian Â· Early Islamic Â· Islamic Â· Jewish Â· Judeo-Islamic  
Modern

Empiricism Â· Rationalism  
Contemporary

Analytic Â· Continental  
Lists

Basic topics Â· Topic list Â· Philosophers Â· Glossary of philosophical
theories Â· List of philosophical theories Â· Movements Â· more  
Branches

Aesthetics Â· Ethics Â· Epistemology Â· Logic Â· Metaphysics  
Philosophy of

Action Â· Biology Â· Chemistry Â· Education Â· Economics Â· Environment Â·
Geography Â· Information Â· Healthcare Â· History Â· Human nature Â· Humor Â·
Language Â· Law Â· Literature Â· Mathematics Â· Mind Â· Music Â· Being Â·
Philosophy Â· Physics Â· Politics Â· Psychology Â· Religion Â· Science Â·
Social science Â· Technology Â· War  
Schools

Aristotelianism Â· Averroism Â· Avicennism Â· Critical theory Â· Cynicism Â·
Deconstructionism Â· Deontology Â· Dialectical materialism Â· Dualism Â·
Egoism Â· Epicureanism Â· Epiphenomenalism Â· Existentialism Â· Feminist Â·
Functionalism Â· Hedonism Â· Hegelianism Â· Hermeneutics Â· Humanism Â·
Idealism Â· Kantianism Â· Kyoto School Â· Individualism Â· Logical positivism
Â· Marxism Â· Materialism Â· Monism Â· Naturalism Â· Neoplatonism Â· New
Philosophers Â· Nihilism Â· Ordinary language Â· Particularism Â· Peripatetic
Â· Phenomenology Â· Platonism Â· Positivism Â· Posthumanism Â· Postmodernism
Â· Poststructuralism Â· Pragmatism Â· Presocratic Â· Process Â· Solipsism Â·
Realism Â· Relativism Â· Scholasticism Â· Skepticism Â· Stoicism Â·
Structuralism Â· Thomism Â· Utilitarianism  
Portal Â· Category listings  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epicureanism"

Categories: Epicureanism | Ethical schools and movements | Hellenistic
philosophy and religion | Philosophical movements | Roman era philosophy

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 06:13.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



