
# Vril

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(November 2008)  
Vril, the Power of the Coming Race  
<IMG>  
Cover of a 2008 printing  
Author Edward Bulwer-Lytton  
Country United Kingdom  
Language English  
Genre(s) Science fiction novel  
Publisher Broadview Press  
Publication date 1870  
Media type print (hardback & paperback)  
ISBN NA  
Vril is a substance described in Edward Bulwer-Lytton's 1871 novel The Coming
Race, which was later reprinted as Vril: The Power of the Coming Race. The
novel is an early example of science fiction. However, many early readers
believed that its account of a superior subterranean master race and the
energy-form called "Vril" was accurate, to the extent that some theosophists
accepted the book as truth. Furthermore, since 1960 there has been a
conspiracy theory about a secret Vril Society.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Plot summary
    * 2.1 Vril in the novel
  * 3 Analysis
    * 3.1 The "science" of Vril
    * 3.2 The Vril-ya as an Aryan Race
    * 3.3 The Vril-ya as Descendants of Atlantis
    * 3.4 Hollow Earth
  * 4 Literary significance and reception
  * 5 Stage Adaptation
  * 6 Vril society
    * 6.1 Willy Ley
    * 6.2 Jacques Bergier and Louis Pauwels
    * 6.3 Publications on the Vril Society in English
    * 6.4 Publications on the Vril Society in German
    * 6.5 The Conspiracy Theory - Claims in detail
    * 6.6 Occultism and Nazism
  * 7 Allusions and references
    * 7.1 Allusions in popular culture
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Footnotes
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links
    * 11.1 Editions Currently In Print

  
## [edit] History

The Coming Race was originally published anonymously in late 1871 but Bulwer-
Lytton was known to be the author. Samuel Butler's Erewhon was also published
anonymously, in March 1872, and Butler suspected that its initial success was
due to it being taken by many as a sequel by Bulwer-Lytton to The Coming Race;
when it was revealed in the 25 May 1872 edition of the Athenaeum that Butler
was the author, sales dropped by 90 percent because he was at the time an
unknown.[1]

## [edit] Plot summary

The novel centres on a young, independently wealthy traveler (the narrator),
who accidentally finds his way into a subterranean world occupied by beings
who seem to resemble angels, who call themselves Vril-ya. The hero soon
discovers that they are descendants of an antediluvian civilization who live
in networks of subterranean caverns linked by tunnels. There they live in
their technologically supported Utopia, chief among their tools being the
"all-permeating fluid" called "Vril", a latent source of energy which his
spiritually elevated hosts are able to master through training of their will,
to a degree which depends upon their hereditary constitution, giving them
access to an extraordinary force that can be controlled at will. The powers of
the will include the ability to heal, change, and destroy beings and
thingsâthe destructive powers in particular are awesomely powerful, allowing
a few young Vril-ya children to wipe out entire cities if necessary. The
narrator suggests that in time, the Vril-ya will run out of habitable spaces
underground and will start claiming the surface of the earth, destroying
mankind in the process, if necessary.

### [edit] Vril in the novel

The uses of Vril in the novel amongst the Vril-ya vary from an agent of
destruction to a healing substance. According to Zee, the daughter of the
narrator's host, Vril can be changed into the mightiest agency over all types
of matter, both animate and inanimate. It can destroy like lightning or
replenish life, heal, or cure. It is used to rend ways through solid matter.
Its light is said to be steadier, softer and healthier than that from any
flammable material. It can also be used as a power source for animating
mechanisms. Vril can be harnessed by use of the Vril staff or mental
concentration.

A Vril staff is an object in the shape of a wand or a staff which is used as a
channel for Vril. The narrator describes it as hollow with 'stops', 'keys', or
'springs' in which Vril can be altered, modified or directed to either destroy
or heal. The staff is about the size of a walking stick but can be lengthened
or shortened according to the user's preferences. The appearance and function
of the Vril staff differs according to gender, age, etc. Some staffs are more
potent for destruction, others for healing. The staffs of children are said to
be much simpler than those of sages; in those of wives and mothers the
destructive part is removed while the healing aspects are emphasized. The
destructive force is so great that the fire lodged in the hollow of a rod
directed by the hand of a child could cleave the strongest fortress or cleave
its burning way from the van to the rear of an embattled host. It is also said
that if army met army and both had command of the vril-force, both sides would
be annihilated.

Interestingly, the Vril-ya also use Vril to take baths: It is their custom
also, at stated but rare periods, perhaps four times a-year when in health, to
use a bath charged with vril. They consider that this fluid, sparingly used,
is a great sustainer of life; but used in excess, when in the normal state of
health, rather tends to reaction and exhausted vitality. For nearly all their
diseases, however, they resort to it as the chief assistant to nature in
throwing off the complaint.

## [edit] Analysis

### [edit] The "science" of Vril

Bulwer-Lytton makes many references to the scientists of his time.

In Chapter VII, Vril is defined as what Michael Faraday had been experimenting
with:

> Therewith Zee began to enter into an explanation of which I understood very
little, for there is no word in any language I know which is an exact synonym
for vril. I should call it electricity, except that it comprehends in its
manifold branches other forces of nature, to which, in our scientific
nomenclature, differing names are assigned, such as magnetism, galvanism, &c.
These people consider that in vril they have arrived at the unity in natural
energic agencies, which has been conjectured by many philosophers above
ground, and which Faraday thus intimates under the more cautious term of
correlation:--[2]

Faraday is then quoted:

> "I have long held an opinion," says that illustrious experimentalist,
"almost amounting to a conviction, in common, I believe, with many other
lovers of natural knowledge, that the various forms under which the forces of
matter are made manifest have one common origin; or, in other words, are so
directly related and mutually dependent, that they are convertible, as it
were, into one another, and possess equivalents of power in their action."[2]

Again in ChapterXVI, we are told that Faraday would understand the "science"
of Vril:

> Though I had a secret persuasion that whatever the real effects of vril upon
matter Mr. Faraday could have proved her a very shallow philosopher as to its
extent or its causes, I had no doubt that Zee could have brained all the
Fellows of the Royal Society, one after the other, with a blow of her fist.
Every sensible man knows that it is useless to argue with any ordinary female
upon matters he comprehends; but to argue with a Gy seven feet high upon the
mysteries of vril,--as well argue in a desert, and with a simoom! [3]

Bulwer-Lytton refers to the then current, but now disproved, theory of
universal luminiferous aether, which it was thought was required to allow the
propagation of wave energy. The book goes on to say in Chapter XI:

> "She described a subtle and life-giving medium called Lai, which I suspect
to be identical with the ethereal oxygen of Dr. Lewins, wherein work all the
correlative forces united under the name of Vril; and contended that wherever
this medium could be expanded, as it agencies of Vril to have ample play, a
temperature congenial to the highest forms of life could be secured." [4]

Bulwer-Lytton also quotes zoologist Louis Agassiz at length in Chapter XIV a
part of an examination of the religious beliefs of the Vril-ya. [5]Agassiz is
remembered today as the first scientist to propose that there had been an Ice
Age. However, at the time of the book's writing he was well known as a
biologist opposed to Darwin's theory of evolution[6] and an advocate of
"scientific" justifications for racism.[7]

In chapter XV Bulwer-Lytton uses ideas from the geologist Charles Lyell to
introduce an examination of the phrenology of the Vril-ya. [8] Where Lyell is
still considered an important contributor to the development of geology,
phrenology is now considered a discredited science. It claimed to be able to
understanding human personality by examining the shape of the skull.

Lyell was a friend of Darwin's and the story Zee later tells of how the
ancestors of Vril-ya in their ignorant past had a major debate over whether
they descended from frogs or did frogs descend from them is clearly meant to
be a parody of the very heated debate over Darwinism taking place in Bulwer-
Lytton's time.[9] However, there seems to be at least some evidence that
Bulwer-Lytton didn't know the difference between Darwinism and the already
discredited Lamarckism. He explains that the palm nerve necessary to control
Vril was developed by generations of exercising this nerve.

> "It has been slowly developed in the course of generations, commencing in
the early achievements, and increasing with the continuous exercise, of the
vril power; therefore, in the course of one or two thousand years, such a
nerve may possibly be engendered in those higher beings of your race, who
devote themselves to that paramount science through which is attained command
over all the subtler forces of nature permeated by vril" [10]

This book mentions fountains of Naphtha at several points and describes in
chapter XXIII:

> In the centre of the floor were a cistern and a fountain of that liquid
light which I have presumed to be naphtha. It was luminous and of a roseate
hue; it sufficed without lamps to light up the room with a subdued radiance.
All around the fountain was carpeted with a soft deep lichen, not green (I
have never seen that colour in the vegetation of this country), but a quiet
brown,......[11]

Naphtha refers family of a petroleum distillates which burns with about the
same heat and light as gasoline, kerosene, or diesel. They are poisonous to
drink, inhale the fumes, or to have contact the skin. They have dangerous
explosive vapors.

### [edit] The Vril-ya as an Aryan Race

According to the book:

> "I arrived at the conviction that this peopleâthough originally not only
of our human race, but, as seems to me clear by the roots of their language,
descended from the same ancestors as the great Aryan family, from which in
varied streams has flowed the dominant civilization of the world; and having,
according to their myths and their history, passed through phases of society
familiar to ourselves,--had yet now developed into a distinct species with
which it was impossible that any community in the upper world could
amalgamate: And that if they ever emerged from these nether recesses into the
light of day, they would, according to their own traditional persuasions of
their ultimate destiny, destroy and replace our existent varieties of
man."[12]

In essence, the narrator believes the language of the Vril-ya to be of the
same origin as Aryan languages. The passage does not outright affirm the
narrator's belief that there is also an ethnic connection between the Vril-ya
and the Aryans. In fact, subsequent passages have Zee, a female Vril-ya
scientist, explain to the narrator that the Vril-ya are descended from
frogs.[13]

### [edit] The Vril-ya as Descendants of Atlantis

Nowhere does the book contain any statement or even suggestion of such. The
Atlantis connection is entirely the work of subsequent occult writers who
believed The Coming Race to be a non-fiction work.[citation needed]

### [edit] Hollow Earth

The legend has received a further layer of elaboration from recent authors
like Raymond Bernard who conflate Bulwer-Lytton's "Coming Race" with
speculations about interior civilizations which live on the inside of the
Hollow Earth. (The concept of a hollow earth was first advanced by Sir Edmund
Halley at the end of the seventeenth century.) By contrast, Bulwer-Lytton's
subterranean people dwelt in caverns within the crust of a solid earth. The
world of the Vril-ya is always described as being underground tunnels,
artificially lit (using Vril). The book contains no suggestion of a hollow
earth; theories of this kind are only found in subsequent works.

## [edit] Literary significance and reception

The book was quite popular in the late 19th century, and for a time the word
"Vril" came to be associated with "life-giving elixirs".[14] The best known
use of "Vril" in this context is in the name of Bovril (a contraction of
Bovine and Vril).[15]

Some readers believe the book is non-fiction, and "Vril" has become associated
with theories about Nazi-piloted Flugscheiben ("Flight Discs"), Vril-powered
KSK (Kraftstrahlkanone, "force-ray cannon" â transmission rods that produce
potent energy rays), Jesuit "spiritual exercises", and Atlanteans to name a
few.[citation needed]

The concept of the Vril was given new impetus by the French author Louis
Jacolliot (1837-1890), who at one time was the French Consul in Calcutta. In
Les Fils de Dieu (1873) and in Les Traditions indo-europÃ©ennes (1876),
Jacolliot claims that he encountered Vril among the Jains in Mysore and
Gujerat.[16]

The writings of these two authors, and Bulwer-Lytton's occult background,
convinced some commentators that the fictionalised Vril was based on a real
magical force. Helena Blavatsky, the founder of Theosophy, endorsed this view
in her book Isis Unveiled (1877) and again in The Secret Doctrine (1888). In
Jacolliot and Blavatsky, the Vril power and its attainment by a superhuman
elite are worked into a mystical doctrine of race. However, the character of
the subterranean people was transformed. Instead of potential conquerors, they
were benevolent (if mysterious) spiritual guides.

When the theosophist William Scott-Elliot describes life in Atlantis in The
Story of Atlantis & The Lost Lemuria (first published 1896), the aircraft of
the Atlanteans are propelled by vril-force.[17] Obviously he did not regard
that description as fiction, and his books are still published by the
Theosophical Society.

George Bernard Shaw read the book and was attracted to the idea of Vril,
according to Michael Holroyd's biography of him.

## [edit] Stage Adaptation

A stage adaptation of the book was written by journalist David Christie Murray
and magician Nevil Maskelyne. The production premiered at Saint George's Hall
in London on January 2, 1905. Both Nevil Maskelyne and his sohn John Nevil
Maskelyne collaborated on the special effects for the play. The play did not
meet with success and closed after a run of eight weeks. [18]

## [edit] Vril society

Speculation on Vril has not ceased. However, the speculation has not been
continued by the Theosophical Society. A German author called Wilhelm Landig
has linked Vril with Nazi UFOs and an escape by high Nazis to
Antarctica.[citation needed]

#### [edit] Willy Ley

<IMG>

<IMG>

Willy Ley (right) in a discussion with Heinz Haber and Wernher v. Braun, 1954

Willy Ley was a German rocket engineer who had emigrated to the United States
in 1937. In 1947, he published an article entitled "Pseudoscience in Naziland"
in the science fiction magazine Astounding Science Fiction. There he attempted
to explain to his readers how National Socialism could have fallen on such a
fertile ground in Germany. He explained this with the high popularity of
irrational convictions in Germany during the time. Among other pseudo-
scientific groups he mentions a very peculiar one: "The next group was
literally founded upon a novel. That group which I think called itself
Wahrheitsgesellschaft - Society for Truth - and which was more or less
localized in Berlin, devoted its spare time looking for Vril."

The article by Ley, and two small pamphlets by a
âReichsarbeitsgemeinschaftâ Das kommende Deutschland'â, that describe a
perpetual motion based on vril, are the only real basis for the speculation
that set off later. The Society for Truth that Ley describes was conducting
'research' on the existence of Vril. One can assume that it did not succeed,
since the existence of Vril would not comply with common physics. However, it
may not be related in any way to Nazi organisations. On the other hand,
theories around the Nazi's wonder weapons might support links to research to
the existence and application possibilities of vril, for example in the
purported top secret and highly sensitive scientific technological device Die
Glocke.

#### [edit] Jacques Bergier and Louis Pauwels

The existence of a Vril-Society was first alleged in 1960 by Jacques Bergier
and Louis Pauwels.[19] In their book Le Matin des Magiciens, which appeared in
1960, they claimed that the Vril-Society was a secret community of occultists
in pre-Nazi Berlin. The Berlin Vril Society was in fact a sort of inner circle
of the Thule Society. It was also thought to be in close contact with the
English group known as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. The Vril
information takes up about a tenth of the volume, the remainder of which
details other esoteric speculations, but the authors fail to clearly explain
whether this section is fact or fiction.

In his book Monsieur Gurdjieff, Louis Pauwels[20] claimed that a Vril Society
had been founded by General Karl Haushofer, a student of Russian magician and
metaphysician Georges Gurdjieff. Pauwels later recanted many assertions in
relation to Gurdjieff.

Obviously belief in the existence of the Vril Society has persisted.

#### [edit] Publications on the Vril Society in English

Supposedly, a historian with the name Michael Fitzgerald has published two
books on the Vril society, seeking to establish both the reality of the Vril
Society, and Hitler's own membership in it.

  * Michael FitzGerald, Storm Troopers of Satan (Robert Hale, 1990)
  * Michael FitzGerald, Adolf Hitler: A Portrait (Spellmount, 2006)

#### [edit] Publications on the Vril Society in German

The book of Jacques Bergier and Louis Pauwels was published in German with the
title: Aufbruch ins dritte Jahrtausend: von der Zukunft der phantastischen
Vernunft in 1969.

New publications appeared in Germany in the 1990s. In 1992 Norbert JÃ¼rgen-
Ratthofer and Ralf Ettl published: Das Vril-Projekt, in which they linked the
legend of the Vril-Society with the older myth of the Nazi UFOs. In 1993 the
German right-wing author Jan Udo Holey, writing under penname Jan van Helsing,
published Geheimgesellschaften und ihre Macht im 20. Jahrhundert which is said
to have sold over 100.000 times.

### [edit] The Conspiracy Theory - Claims in detail

According to these authors, the Vril Society was founded as "The All German
Society for Metaphysics" in 1921 to explore the origins of the Aryan race, to
seek contact with the "hidden masters" of Ultima Thule, and to practice
meditation and other techniques intended to strengthen individual mastery of
the divine Vril force itself. It was formed by a group of female psychic
mediums led by the Thule Gesellschaft medium Maria Orsitsch (Orsic) of Zagreb,
who claimed to have received communication from Aryan aliens living on Alpha
Tauri, in the Aldebaran system. Allegedly, these aliens had visited Earth and
settled in Sumeria, and the word Vril was allegedly formed from the ancient
Sumerian word Vri-Il, "like god" (In fact, Vri-Il means nothing in Sumerian,
and could not even be a Sumerian word, as Sumerian had no /v/ phoneme, nor
does Sumerian allow consonant clusters at the beginning of words. While the
Akkadian word for "deity" is indeed ilum, the Sumerian word is dingir.). A
second medium was known only as Sigrun, a name etymologically related to
Sigrune, a Valkyrie and one of Wotan's nine daughters in Norse legend. Other
sources[who?] state that the Vril Society was founded by an ill-defined group
of Rosicrucians in Berlin before the end of the 19th century, while still
others[who?] state that it was founded by Karl Haushofer in Berlin in 1918.
Some sources state that the Vril Society was also known as the Luminous Lodge,
or the Lodge of Light,[21] though others claim that it was originally called
the Brothers of the Light.[22]

The Society allegedly not only taught concentration exercises designed to
awaken the forces of Vril, their main goal was to achieve Raumflug
(Spaceflight) to reach Aldebaran. To achieve this, the Vril Society joined the
Thule Gesellschaft and the alleged DHvSS (Die Herren des schwarzen Steins, The
Masters of the Black Stone) to fund an ambitious program involving an inter-
dimensional flight machine based on psychic revelations from the Aldebaran
aliens.

Members of the Vril Society are said to have included Adolf Hitler, Alfred
Rosenberg, Heinrich Himmler, Hermann GÃ¶ring, and Hitler's personal physician,
Dr. Theodor Morell. These were original members of the Thule Society which
supposedly joined Vril in 1919. The NSDAP (National Sozialistische Deutsche
ArbeiterPartei) was created by Thule in 1920, one year later. Dr. Krohn, who
helped to create the Nazi flag, was also a Thulist.

With Hitler in power in 1933, both Thule and Vril Gesellschafts allegedly
received official state backing for continued disc development programs aimed
at both spaceflight and possibly a war machine.

There is no evidence that a functional prototype was ever made. The claim of
an ability to travel in some inter-dimensional mode is similar to Vril claims
of channeled flight with the Jenseitsflugmaschine (Other World Flight Machine)
and the Vril Flugscheiben (Flight Discs).

Hidden masters (the members of the Vril society and their antagonist, the
Jewish World Conspiracy), an escape by Hitler and other Nazis from Berlin to
the South Pole, flying saucers, secret Nazi inventions, and psychic channeling
powers and Aliens from Aldebaran clearly are the elements of a conspiracy
theory. As there yet seems to be no comprehensive scholarly examination of the
proponents of this theory (except for some chapters in Goodrick-Clark's Black
Sun), their motives remain unclear. It must be said, though, that Secret
Societies cannot be held responsible for the Holocaust and the Third Reich.

### [edit] Occultism and Nazism

Main article: Nazi occultism

There are historians who agree that the Vril Society, as described by the
later authors, never existed.[23] Verifiable evidence of the Vril Society's
existence has never been published.

A society that took the book by Edward Bulwer-Lytton seriously and devoted its
spare time looking for vril, but did not have any impact on Nazism, could of
course have existed.

When Alan Bullock freely admits that Hitler was influenced by a range of
occult ideas,[24] and when other historians (Hugh Trevor-Roper,[25] James
Webb,[26] Joachim Fest[27]) also mention the extensive influence of occult
ideas upon Hitler, they are referring to the Ariosophy that was en vogue in
Vienna and Munich during that time. Those esoteric 'societies' that did exist
in this context, such as the Order of the New Templars and the Germanenorden,
were by far not powerful enough to influence Nazi politics, although they
shared a similar world view. After 1941, at latest, these 'societies' were
officially dissolved by the Gestapo.[28] These measures were most probably the
result of the general Nazi policy of suppressing lodge organizations and
esoteric groups.[29]

## [edit] Allusions and references

### [edit] Allusions in popular culture

  * The still-popular English drink Bovril takes its name from the combination of the words "Bovine" and "Vril".

  * The story may have inspired Nikola Tesla when he invented remote control. While Tesla denied this, biographer Marc J. Seifer says the inventor probably knew the story given Bulwer-Lytton's popularity at the time.

  * The book is mentioned in the song by David Bowie "Oh! You Pretty Things": "Look out at your children / See their faces in golden rays / Don't kid yourself they belong to you / They're the start of the coming race".

  * "Vril" is also mentioned in the book "HACKERS" by Steven Levy.

  * The English thrash metal band Sabbat refers to Vril in their song "Behind the Crooked Cross".

  * The Swedish symphonic metal band Therion has a song titled "Enter Vril-ya".

  * English post-punk band Killing Joke sing "I'm in love with the coming race" in their hit "Eighties".

  * The backstory of Iron Sky mentions a Nazi base in Antarctica, from where the Nazis establish a lunar outpost as part of their Vril-program.

  * The Japanese television show GoGo Sentai Boukenger of the Super Sentai franchise has an episode in which the Boukengers find Vril and mistakenly think they've found Oricalcos.

  * In the final issues of Marvel Comics' "Cloak and Dagger" (1992), a white supremacist was duped into summoning an extradimensional race of creatures called "the Vril," which he assumed to be part of the Aryan "master race."

  * The band "Vril" is comprised of Bob Drake (Bass), Chris Cutler (Drums) and Lukas Simonis (Guitar). They released an album called "Effigies in Cork" in 2004. According to the liner notes of that album, the band name was inspired by Edward Bulwer Lytton's novel[30]

  * The fictional "Illuminatus Trilogy" mentions the Vril Society in a conversation between the characters Robert Putney Drake and H. P. Lovecraft.

  * The first issue of the Red 5 Comics series "Atomic Robo" by 8-Bit Theater creator Brian Clevinger involves a Nazi scientist's experiments with a "Vril organ" that gives superhuman powers to the subject it is implanted in.

  * The comic series "Lobster Johnson: The Iron Prometheus" by Hellboy creator Mike Mignola deals with a scientist's experiments with Vril, including its use as a power source for a "Vril Energy Suit".

  * The Book "In Fluid Silence" from G.W. Tirpa is set in the Darkâ¢Matter part of the Alternity RPG world and has Vrill a major part of the plot (Dark Matter is X-Filesesque). The substance is used by a secret society that is run by a 100 year old ex-Nazi and allows the members to heal critical wounds, regenerate limbs, enhanced strength and speed as well as some mental abilities.

  * The Vril-ya are mentioned in the first chapter of the "New Traveller's Almanac" in Alan Moore's The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Volume 2. In this almanac, the Vril-ya Country is supposed to be located under Newcastle, and the editors of the almanac allude to connections between the Vril-ya, Wonderland, and Narnia.

  * In The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest, there is an episode that centers on a long-lost Vril-like subterranean civilization with central or eastern European roots.

  * J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings mentions three Rings of Power given to the Elves, one of which is names Vilya (in an apparent reference to the Elves as being a noble, Vrilya-like race, as well as to the magical Vril-like force contained within the rings)[citation needed]

  * Hip-hop artist Canibus makes an allusion to a "final battle with Vril" on the album "C of Tranquility."

  * Author Max McCoy mentions Vril in one of his Indiana Jones novels.[31]

  * Heavy metal band Bal-Sagoth reference Vril in the track "Invocations Beyond The Outer-World Night" on their 2006 album The Chthonic Chronicles.

## [edit] See also

  * Aether theories
  * Aether (classical element)
  * Etheric body (Spirituality)
  * Etheric plane (Spirituality)
  * Odic fluid, Prana, Qi
  * Jules Verne
  * Bovril

  * Nazi mysticism
  * Reptilian humanoid
  * The Nexus (journal)
  * Nazi UFOs
  * Thule
  * Vrillon

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Redfield, Marc (1996). Phantom Formations: Aesthetic Ideology and the Bildungsroman. Cornell University Press. pp. 170\. ISBN 0801432367.
  2. ^ a b Chapter VII, viewable online
  3. ^ chapterXVI viewable online http://sacred-texts.com/atl/vril/vrl15.htm
  4. ^ Chapter XI, viewable online
  5. ^ chapter XIV,viewable online
  6. ^ Hofstadter, Richard (1965). Social Darwinism in American Thought. Beacon Press. pp. 17. To Agassiz, Darwinism was a crude and insolent challenge to the eternal verities, objectionable as science and abominable for its religious blasphemies.
  7. ^ Ellingson, Terry Jay (2001). The Myth of the Noble Savage. University of California Press. pp. 151\. ISBN 0520226100. His shock at the appearance of Negroes after his move to America caused him ... to incorporate distinctions between human "species" into his theory of contrasting geographic-ecological "provinces"
  8. ^ chapter XV, viewable online
  9. ^ chapterXVI viewable online http://sacred-texts.com/atl/vril/vrl15.htm
  10. ^ chapterXVI viewable online http://sacred-texts.com/atl/vril/vrl15.htm
  11. ^ chapter XXIII viewable online http://sacred-texts.com/atl/vril/vrl22.htm
  12. ^ Chapter XXVI, viewable online
  13. ^ The Coming Race by Baron Edward Bulwer Lytton Lytton at Project Gutenberg
  14. ^ David Seed, The Coming Race By Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, Wesleyan University Press, 2007, p. xvii; p.159
  15. ^ Pter Hadley, A History of Bovril Advertising, London, Bovril, 1972, p.13
  16. ^ Some sources trace the concept of Vril to Jacolliot and maintain that it was re-popularised by Bulwer-Lytton. See http://www.intelinet.org/swastika/swasti02.htm#anchor114253
  17. ^ L. Sprague de Camp, Lost Continents, 1954 (First Edition), p. 67
  18. ^ Jim Steinmeyer, Hiding the Elephant: How Magicians Invented the Impossible and Learned to Disappear, Carrol and Graf, Trade Paperback Edition, 2004, p. 184-185
  19. ^ Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun, p. 113
  20. ^ Amazon.fr: Monsieur Gurdjieff: Louis Pauwels: Livres at www.amazon.fr.
  21. ^ What Is The Vril? at www.bibliotecapleyades.net
  22. ^ Cache:8DsqiL7fx-cJ:home.manyrivers.aunz.com/sting1946/naziufo2.htm Vril Society - Google Search at 72.14.235.104
  23. ^ A Vril Society is not mentioned in the extensive biography of Hitler by Ian Kershaw, nor in the one by Alan Bullock, nor the biography of Hermann GÃ¶ring by Werner Maser, nor the book about the history of the Schutzstaffel (SS) by Heinz Hoehne.
  24. ^ Alan Bullock, Hitler, A Study in Tyranny (Odhams, 1952)
  25. ^ Hugh Trevor-Roper, The Last Days of Hitler (Pan, 1955)
  26. ^ James Webb, The Occult Establishment (Richard Drew, 1981)
  27. ^ Joachim Fest, Hitler (Harvest Books, 2002)
  28. ^ see: Esotericism in Germany and Austria
  29. ^ Goodrick-Clarke, The Occult Roots of Nazism, p. 197
  30. ^ VRIL at MySpace
  31. ^ Max McCoy (1997). Indiana Jones and the Hollow Earth. Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-553-56195-1. http://www.randomhouse.com/bantamdell/catalog/display.pperl?isbn=9780553561951.

## [edit] References

  * Sir Edward Bulwer-Lytton (1870). Vril, The Power of the Coming Race.
  * The Coming Race at Project Gutenberg
  * HTML version of the book.

## [edit] External links

  * From Vril to Ahnenerbe
  * Secret Flying Discs of the Third Reich
  * The German Cylindrical UFO - Interview with a CIC Veteran
  * Conspiracy archive, on the vril society
  * The Development Of The German UFOs From Before WW2
  * The Nazi Connection with Shambhala and Tibet
  * A video presentation on the Vril and Thule Societies Runtime 57 minutes 21 seconds in Real media format.
  * "Article Abstracts: #60 (Special Section: Hard Science Fiction)". http://www.depauw.edu/sfs/abstracts/a60.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-03. "Enthusiasm for The Coming Race and its substantial influence on subsequent SF are attributable to the fact that it presents its psi powers not as magical or supernatural but in terms of biological evolution and in conjunction with novel developments in technology and social organization. Its psi powers have a technological component, which makes them more tolerable to those who regard the depiction of extraordinary psychic powers as puerile but are fascinated by the depiction of extraordinary weapons."

### [edit] Editions Currently In Print

  * Hesperus Press, Edward Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Coming Race', with a foreword by Matthew Sweet, April 2007, Â£6.99, ISBN 9781843911500

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vril"

Categories: 1870 novels | Novels by Edward Bulwer-Lytton | Science fiction
novels | Nazi mysticism | Secret societies | Science fiction themes | Books
about extraterrestrial life | Conspiracy theories | Pseudoscience | Dystopian
novels | Utopian novels

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since November
2008 | All articles that may contain original research | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2007 |
All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded
phrases since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March
2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Magyar
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 00:55.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



