
# Divine Comedy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see The Divine Comedy (disambiguation), Inferno, Purgatorio
(disambiguation), and Paradiso.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dante shown holding a copy of the Divine Comedy, next to the entrance to Hell,
the seven terraces of Mount Purgatory and the city of Florence, with the
spheres of Heaven above, in Michelino's fresco.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Detail of a manuscript in Milan's Biblioteca Trivulziana (MS 1080), written in
1337 by Francesco di ser Nardo da Barberino, showing the beginning of Dante's
Comedy.

The Divine Comedy (Italian: Divina Commedia), written by Dante Alighieri
between 1308 and his death in 1321, is widely considered the central epic poem
of Italian literature, and is seen as one of the greatest works of world
literature.[1] The poem's imaginative and allegorical vision of the Christian
afterlife is a culmination of the medieval world-view as it had developed in
the Western Church. It helped establish the Tuscan dialect in which it is
written as the Italian standard.[2]

The work was originally simply titled Commedia and was later christened
Commedia Divina by Giovanni Boccaccio.

## Contents

  * 1 Structure and story
    * 1.1 Inferno
      * 1.1.1 The Circles of Hell
        * 1.1.1.1 First Circle (Limbo)
        * 1.1.1.2 Second Circle
        * 1.1.1.3 Third Circle
        * 1.1.1.4 Fourth Circle
        * 1.1.1.5 Fifth Circle
        * 1.1.1.6 Sixth Circle
        * 1.1.1.7 Seventh Circle
        * 1.1.1.8 Eighth Circle
        * 1.1.1.9 Ninth Circle
    * 1.2 Purgatorio
      * 1.2.1 The Terraces of Purgatory
    * 1.3 Paradiso
      * 1.3.1 The Spheres of Heaven
  * 2 Earliest manuscripts
  * 3 Thematic concerns
    * 3.1 Dante's personal involvement
    * 3.2 Scientific themes
  * 4 The Divine Comedy and Islamic philosophy
  * 5 Literary influence in the English-speaking world and beyond
  * 6 The Divine Comedy in the arts
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Footnotes
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Structure and story

<IMG>

<IMG>

Albert Ritter sketched the Comedy's geography from Dante's Cantos: Hell's
entrance is near Florence with the circles descending to Earth's centre;
sketch 5 reflects Canto 34's inversion as Dante passes down, and thereby up to
Mount Purgatory's shores in the southern hemisphere, where he passes to the
first sphere of Heaven at the top.

The Divine Comedy is composed of over 14,000 lines that are divided into three
canticas (Ital. pl. cantiche) â Inferno (Hell), Purgatorio (Purgatory), and
Paradiso (Paradise) â each consisting of 33 cantos (Ital. pl. canti). An
initial canto serves as an introduction to the poem and is generally
considered to be part of the first cantica, bringing the total number of
cantos to 100. The number 3 is prominent in the work, represented here by the
length of each cantica. The verse scheme used, terza rima, is hendecasyllabic
(lines of eleven syllables), with the lines composing tercets according to the
rhyme scheme aba, bcb, cdc, ded, ....

The poem is written in the first person, and tells of Dante's journey through
the three realms of the dead, lasting from the night before Good Friday to the
Wednesday after Easter in the spring of 1300. The Roman poet Virgil guides him
through Hell and Purgatory; Beatrice, Dante's ideal woman, guides him through
Heaven. Beatrice was a Florentine woman whom he had met in childhood and
admired from afar in the mode of the then-fashionable courtly love tradition
which is highlighted in Dante's earlier work La Vita Nuova.

In Northern Italy's political struggle between Guelphs and Ghibellines, Dante
was part of the Guelphs, who in general favored the Papacy over the Holy Roman
Emperor. Florence's Guelphs split into factions around 1300, the White
Guelphs, and the Black Guelphs. Dante was among the White Guelphs who were
exiled in 1302 by the Lord-Mayor Cante de' Gabrielli di Gubbio, after troops
under Charles of Valois entered the city, at the request of Pope Boniface
VIII, who supported the Blacks. This exile, which lasted the rest of Dante's
life, shows its influence in many parts of the Comedy, from prophecies of
Dante's exile to Dante's views of politics to the eternal damnation of some of
his opponents.

In Hell and Purgatory, Dante shares in the sin and the penitence respectively.
The last word in each of the three parts of the Divine Comedy is stelle,
"stars."

### [edit] Inferno

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gustave DorÃ©'s engravings illustrated the Divine Comedy (1861â1868); here
Dante is lost in Canto 1 of the Inferno.

The poem begins on the night before Good Friday in the year 1300, "halfway
along our life's path" (Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita). Dante is thirty-
five years old, half of the biblical life expectancy of 70 (Psalm 90:10), lost
in a dark wood (perhaps, allegorically, contemplating suicideâas "wood" is
figured in Canto XIII, and the mention of suicide is made in Canto I of
Purgatorio with "This man has not yet seen his last evening; But, through his
madness, was so close to it, That there was hardly time to turn about"
implying that when Virgil came to him he was on the verge of suicide or
morally passing the point of no return), assailed by beasts (a lion, a
leopard, and a she-wolf) he cannot evade, and unable to find the "straight
way" (diritta via) - also translatable as "right way" - to salvation
(symbolized by the sun behind the mountain). Conscious that he is ruining
himself and that he is falling into a "deep place" (basso loco) where the sun
is silent ('l sol tace), Dante is at last rescued by Virgil, and the two of
them begin their journey to the underworld. Each sin's punishment in Inferno
is a contrapasso, a symbolic instance of poetic justice; for example, fortune-
tellers have to walk forwards with their heads on backwards, unable to see
what is ahead, because they tried to do so in life.

Allegorically, the Inferno represents the Christian soul seeing sin for what
it really is, and the three beasts represent three types of sin: the self-
indulgent, the violent, and the malicious.[3] These three types of sin also
provide the three main divisions of Dante's Hell: Upper Hell (the first 5
Circles) for the the self-indulgent sins; Circles 6 and 7 for the violent
sins; and Circles 8 and 9 for the malicious sins.

Dante passes through the gate of Hell, which bears an inscription, the ninth
(and final) line of which is the famous phrase "Lasciate ogne speranza, voi
ch'intrate", or "Abandon all hope, ye who enter here"[4] Before entering Hell
completely, Dante and his guide see the Uncommitted, souls of people who in
life did nothing, neither for good nor evil (among these Dante recognizes
either Pope Celestine V or Pontius Pilate; the text is ambiguous). Mixed with
them are outcasts who took no side in the Rebellion of Angels. These souls are
neither in Hell nor out of it, but reside on the shores of the Acheron, their
punishment to eternally pursue a banner (i.e. self interest) while pursued by
wasps and hornets that continually sting them while maggots and other such
insects drink their blood and tears. This symbolizes the sting of their
conscience and the repugnance of sin.

Then Dante and Virgil reach the ferry that will take them across the river
Acheron and to Hell. The ferry is piloted by Charon, who does not want to let
Dante enter, for he is a living being. Virgil forces Charon to take him by
means of another famous line Vuolsi cosÃ¬ colÃ ove si puote (which translates
to So it is wanted there where the power lies, referring to the fact that
Dante is on his journey on divine grounds), but their passage across is
undescribed since Dante faints and does not awake until he is on the other
side.

#### [edit] The Circles of Hell

Virgil guides Dante through the nine circles of Hell. The circles are
concentric, representing a gradual increase in wickedness, and culminating at
the center of the earth, where Satan is held in bondage. Each circle's sinners
are punished in a fashion fitting their crimes: each sinner is afflicted for
all of eternity by the chief sin he committed. People who sinned but prayed
for forgiveness before their deaths are found not in Hell but in Purgatory,
where they labor to be free of their sins. Those in Hell are people who tried
to justify their sins and are unrepentant. Furthermore, those in Hell have
knowledge of the past and future, but not of the present. This is a joke on
them in Dante's mind because after the Final Judgment, time ends; those in
Hell would then know nothing.

##### [edit] First Circle (Limbo)

Here reside the unbaptized and the virtuous pagans, who, though not sinful,
did not accept Christ. They are not punished in an active sense, but rather
grieve only their separation from God, without hope of reconciliation. Limbo
shares many characteristics with the Elysian Fields; thus the guiltless damned
are punished by living in a deficient form of Heaven. Without baptism ("the
portal of faith," Canto IV.36) they lacked the hope for something greater than
rational minds can conceive. Limbo includes green fields and a castle, the
dwelling place of the wisest men of antiquity, including Virgil himself, as
well as the Islamic philosophers Averroes and Avicenna. In the castle Dante
meets the poets Homer, Horace, Ovid, and Lucan and the philosophers Socrates
and Aristotle as well as the Roman general and politician Julius Caesar.
Interestingly, he also sees Saladin in Limbo (Canto IV). Dante implies that
all virtuous pagans find themselves here, although he later encounters two in
heaven and one (Cato of Utica) in Purgatory.

Beyond the first circle, all of those condemned for active, deliberately
willed sin are judged by Minos, who sentences each soul to one of the lower
eight circles by wrapping his tail around himself a corresponding number of
times. The lower circles are structured according to the classical
(Aristotelian) conception of virtue and vice, so that they are grouped into
the sins of incontinence, violence, and fraud (which for many commentators are
represented by the leopard, lion, and she-wolf[5]). The sins of incontinence
â weakness in controlling one's desires and natural urges â are the
mildest among them, and, correspondingly, appear first, while the sins of
violence and fraud appear lower down.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gianciotto Discovers Paolo and Francesca by Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres.

##### [edit] Second Circle

Those overcome by lust are punished in this circle. They are the first ones to
be truly punished in Hell. These souls are blown about to and fro by a violent
storm, without hope of rest. This symbolizes the power of lust to blow one
about needlessly and aimlessly. In this circle, Dante sees Semiramis, Dido,
Cleopatra, Achilles and many others who were overcome by sensual love during
their life. Dante is informed by Francesca da Rimini of how she and her
husband's brother Paolo committed adultery and died a violent death at the
hands of her husband (Canto V).

##### [edit] Third Circle

Cerberus guards the gluttons, forced to lie in a vile slush made by freezing
rain, black snow, and hail. This symbolizes the garbage that the gluttons made
of their lives on earth, slavering over food. Dante converses with a
Florentine contemporary identified as Ciacco ("Hog" â probably a nickname)
regarding strife in Florence and the fate of prominent Florentines (Canto VI).

##### [edit] Fourth Circle

<IMG>

<IMG>

In Gustave DorÃ©'s illustrations for the fourth circle, the damned push huge
money bags.

Those whose attitude toward material goods deviated from the desired mean are
punished in this circle. They include the avaricious or miserly, who hoarded
possessions, and the prodigal, who squandered them. Guarded by Plutus, the
miserly group pushes great rocks towards the center of the circle; the wasters
must take the rocks back to their own side of the circle (Canto VII). This is
an antithetical punishment; the sinners must do the opposite of the actions
they carried out in life.

##### [edit] Fifth Circle

In the swamp-like water of the river Styx, the wrathful fight each other on
the surface, and the sullen or slothful lie gurgling beneath the water.
Phlegyas reluctantly transports Dante and Virgil across the Styx in his skiff.
On the way they are accosted by Filippo Argenti, a Black Guelph from a
prominent family (Cantos VII and VIII). All the wrathful throw themselves
against Argenti, who is torn apart.

The lower parts of hell are contained within the walls of the city of Dis,
which is itself surrounded by the Stygian marsh. Punished within Dis are
active (rather than passive) sins. The walls of Dis are guarded by fallen
angels. Virgil is unable to convince them to let Dante and him enter, and the
Furies and Medusa threaten Dante. An angel sent from Heaven secures entry for
the poets (Cantos VIII and IX).

##### [edit] Sixth Circle

Heretics are trapped in flaming tombs. Dante holds discourse with a pair of
Florentines in one of the tombs: Farinata degli Uberti, a Ghibelline; and
Cavalcante de' Cavalcanti, a Guelph who was the father of Dante's friend and
fellow poet Guido Cavalcanti (Cantos X and XI). The followers of Epicurus are
also located here (Canto X).

##### [edit] Seventh Circle

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lower Hell, inside the walls of Dis, in an illustration by Stradanus. There is
a drop from the sixth circle to the three rings of the seventh circle, then
again to the ten rings of the eighth circle, and, at the bottom, to the icy
ninth circle.

This circle houses the violent. Its entry is guarded by the Minotaur, and it
is divided into three rings:

  * Outer ring, housing the violent against people and property, who are immersed in Phlegethon, a river of boiling blood, to a level commensurate with their sins. The Centaurs, commanded by Chiron, patrol the ring, firing arrows into those trying to escape. The centaur Nessus guides the poets along Phlegethon and across a ford in the river (Canto XII). This passage may have been influenced by the early medieval Visio Karoli Grossi.[6]

  * Middle ring: In this ring are the suicides, who are transformed into gnarled thorny bushes and trees. They are torn at by the Harpies. Unique among the dead, the suicides will not be bodily resurrected after the final judgment, having given their bodies away through suicide. Instead they will maintain their bushy form, with their own corpses hanging from the limbs. Dante breaks a twig off one of the bushes and hears the tale of Pier delle Vigne, who committed suicide after falling out of favor with Emperor Frederick II. The other residents of this ring are the profligates, who destroyed their lives by destroying the means by which life is sustained (i.e. money and property). They are perpetually chased by ferocious dogs through the thorny undergrowth. (Canto XIII) The trees are a metaphor; in life the only way of the relief of suffering was through pain (i.e. suicide) and in Hell, the only form of relief of the suffering is through pain (breaking of the limbs to bleed).
  * Inner ring: The violent against God (blasphemers), the violent against nature (sodomites), and the violent against order (usurers), all reside in a desert of flaming sand with fiery flakes raining from the sky. The blasphemers lie on the sand, the usurers sit, and the sodomites wander about in groups. Dante converses with two Florentine sodomites from different groups. One of them is Dante's mentor, Brunetto Latini. Dante is very surprised and touched by this encounter and shows Brunetto great respect for what he has taught him. The other is Iacopo Rusticucci, a politician. (Cantos XIV through XVI) Those punished here for usury include the Florentines Catello di Rosso Gianfigliazzi, Ciappo Ubriachi, and Giovanni di Buiamonte and the Paduans Reginaldo degli Scrovegni and Vitaliano di Iacopo Vitaliani.

##### [edit] Eighth Circle

The last two circles of Hell punish sins that involve conscious fraud or
treachery. The circles can be reached only by descending a vast cliff, which
Dante and Virgil do on the back of Geryon, a winged monster represented by
Dante as having the face of an honest man and a body that ends in a scorpion-
like stinger (Canto XVII).

The fraudulentâthose guilty of deliberate, knowing evilâare located in a
circle named Malebolge ("Evil Pockets"), divided into ten bolgie, or ditches
of stone, with bridges spanning the ditches:

  * Bolgia 1: Panderers (pimps) and seducers march in separate lines in opposite directions, whipped by demons. Just as they misled others in life, they are driven to march by demons for all eternity. In the group of panderers the poets notice Venedico Caccianemico, who sold his own sister to the Marchese d'Este, and in the group of seducers Virgil points out Jason (Canto XVIII).
  * Bolgia 2: Flatterers are steeped in human excrement. This is because their flatteries on earth were nothing but "a load of excrement" (Canto XVIII).
  * Bolgia 3: Those who committed simony are placed head-first in holes in the rock, with flames burning on the soles of their feet (resembling an inverted baptism). One of them, Pope Nicholas III, denounces as simonists two of his successors, Pope Boniface VIII and Pope Clement V (Canto XIX).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ciampolo escapes back into the pitch.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dante's guide rebuffs Malacoda and his fiends between bolgie five and six in
the Eighth Circle of Hell, Inferno, Canto 21.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dante climbs the flinty steps in bolgia seven in the Eighth Circle of Hell,
Inferno, Canto 26.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dante speaks to the traitors in the ice, Inferno, Canto 32.

  * Bolgia 4: Sorcerers and false prophets have their heads twisted around on their bodies backward. In addition, they cry so many tears that they cannot see. This is symbolic because these people tried to see into the future by forbidden means (and possibly retribution for the delusions they concocted that probably led their followers to their own perils); thus in Hell they can only see what is behind them and cannot see forward (Canto XX).
  * Bolgia 5: Corrupt politicians (barrators) are immersed in a lake of boiling pitch, which represents the sticky fingers and dark secrets of their corrupt deals. They are guarded by devils called the Malebranche ("Evil Claws"). Their leader, Malacoda ("Evil Tail"), assigns a troop to escort Virgil and Dante to the next bridge. The troop hook and torment one of the sinners (identified by early commentators as Ciampolo), who names some Italian grafters and then tricks the Malebranche in order to escape back into the pitch. (Cantos XXI through XXIII)
  * Bolgia 6: The bridge over this bolgia is broken: the poets climb down into it and find the Hypocrites listlessly walking along wearing gilded lead cloaks. Dante speaks with Catalano and Loderingo, members of the Jovial Friars. The poets also discover that the guardians of the fraudulent (the malebranche) are hypocrites themselves, as they find that they have lied to them, giving false directions, when at the same time they are punishing liars for similar sins. Caiaphas, the high priest responsible for ordering Jesus crucified, is seen here; he is crucified to the ground, while the others trample over him. (Canto XXIII)
  * Bolgia 7: Thieves, guarded by the centaur (as Dante describes him) Cacus, are pursued and bitten by snakes and lizards. The snake bites make them undergo various transformations, with some resurrected after being turned to ashes, some mutating into new creatures, and still others exchanging natures with the reptiles, becoming lizards themselves that chase the other thieves in turn. Just as the thieves stole other people's substance in life, and because thievery is reptilian in its secrecy, the thieves' substance is eaten away by reptiles and their bodies are constantly stolen by other thieves. (Cantos XXIV and XXV)
  * Bolgia 8: Fraudulent advisors are encased in individual flames. Dante includes Ulysses and Diomedes together here for their role in the Trojan War. Ulysses tells the tale of his fatal final voyage (an invention of Dante's), where he left his home and family to sail to the end of the Earth. He equated life as a pursuit of knowledge that humanity can attain through effort, and in his search God sank his ship outside of Mount Purgatory. This symbolizes the inability of the individual to carve out one's own salvation. Instead, one must be totally subservient to the will of God and realize the inability of one to be a God unto oneself. Guido da Montefeltro recounts how his advice to Pope Boniface VIII resulted in his damnation, despite Boniface's promise of absolution. (Cantos XXVI and XXVII)
  * Bolgia 9: A sword-wielding demon hacks at the sowers of discord. As they make their rounds the wounds heal, only to have the demon tear apart their bodies again. "See how I rend myself! How mutilated, see, is Mahomet; In front of me doth Ali weeping go, Cleft in the face from forelock unto chin; And all the others whom thou here beholdest, Disseminators of scandal and of schism. While living were, and therefore are cleft thus." Muhammad tells Dante to warn the schismatic and heretic Fra Dolcino (Cantos XXVIII and XXIX). Dante writes of Muhammad as a schismatic,[7][8] apparently viewing Islam as an off-shoot from Christianity, and similarly Dante seems to condemn Ali for schism between Sunni and Shiite.
  * Bolgia 10: Here various sorts of falsifiers (alchemists, counterfeiters, perjurers, and impersonators), who are a disease on society, are themselves afflicted with different types of diseases (Cantos XXIX and XXX). Potiphar's wife is briefly mentioned here for her false accusation of Joseph. In the notes on her translation, Dorothy L. Sayers remarks that Malebolge "began with the sale of the sexual relationship, and went on to the sale of Church and State; now, the very money is itself corrupted, every affirmation has become perjury, and every identity a lie; no medium of exchange remains."[9]

##### [edit] Ninth Circle

The Ninth Circle is ringed by classical and Biblical giants. The giants are
standing either on the ninth circle of Hell, or on a ledge above it, and are
visible from the waist up at the ninth circle of the Malebolge. The giant
Antaeus lowers Dante and Virgil into the pit that forms the ninth circle of
Hell. (Canto XXXI) Traitors, distinguished from the "merely" fraudulent in
that their acts involve betraying one in a special relationship to the
betrayer, are frozen in a lake of ice known as Cocytus. Each group of traitors
is encased in ice to a different depth, ranging from only the neck and through
to complete immersion. The circle is divided into four concentric zones:

  * Round 1: CaÃ¯na, named for Cain, is home to traitors to their kindred. The souls here are immersed in the ice up to their necks. (Canto XXXII)
  * Round 2: Antenora is named for Antenor of Troy, who according to medieval tradition betrayed his city to the Greeks. Traitors to political entities, such as party, city, or country, are located here. Count Ugolino pauses from gnawing on the head of his rival Archbishop Ruggieri to describe how Ruggieri imprisoned and starved him and his children. The souls here are immersed at almost the same level as those in CaÃ¯na, except they are unable to bend their necks. (Cantos XXXII and XXXIII)
  * Round 3: Ptolomaea is probably named for Ptolemy, the captain of Jericho, who invited Simon Maccabaeus and his sons to a banquet and then killed them. Traitors to their guests are punished here. Fra Alberigo explains that sometimes a soul falls here before Atropos cuts the thread of life. Their bodies on Earth are immediately possessed by a demon. The souls here are immersed so that only half of their faces are above the ice. As they cry, their tears freeze and seal their eyes shutâthey are denied even the comfort of tears. (Canto XXXIII)
  * Round 4: Judecca, named for Judas Iscariot, Biblical betrayer of Christ, is for traitors to their lords and benefactors. All of the sinners punished within are completely encapsulated in ice, distorted in all conceivable positions.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Satan is trapped in the frozen central zone in the Ninth Circle of Hell,
Inferno, Canto 34.

Dante and Virgil, with no one to talk to, quickly move on to the center of
hell. Condemned to the very center of hell for committing the ultimate sin
(treachery against God) is Satan, who has three faces, one red, one black, and
one a pale yellow, each having a mouth that chews on a prominent traitor.
Satan himself is represented as a giant, terrifying beast, weeping tears from
his six eyes, which mix with the traitors' blood sickeningly. He is waist deep
in ice, and beats his six wings as if trying to escape, but the icy wind that
emanates only further ensures his imprisonment (as well as that of the others
in the ring). The sinners in the mouths of Satan are Brutus and Cassius in the
left and right mouths, respectively. They were involved in the assassination
of Julius Caesarâan act which, to Dante, represented the destruction of a
unified Italy and the killing of the man who was divinely appointed to govern
the world.[10] In the central, most vicious mouth is Judas Iscariotâthe
namesake of this zone and the betrayer of Jesus. Judas is being administered
the most horrifying torture of the three traitors, his head in the mouth of
Lucifer, and his back being forever skinned by the claws of Lucifer. (Canto
XXXIV) What is seen here is a perverted trinity. Satan is impotent, ignorant,
and evil while God can be attributed as the opposite: all powerful, all
knowing, and good. The two poets escape by climbing down the ragged fur of
Lucifer, passing through the center of the earth, emerging in the other
hemisphere just before dawn on Easter Sunday beneath a sky studded with stars.

### [edit] Purgatorio

<IMG>

<IMG>

Plan of Mount Purgatory. As with Paradise, the structure is of the form
2+7+1=9+1=10, with one of the ten regions different in nature from the other
nine.

Having survived the depths of Hell, Dante and Virgil ascend out of the
undergloom, to the Mountain of Purgatory on the far side of the world (in
Dante's time, it was believed that Hell existed underneath Jerusalem). The
Mountain is on an island, the only land in the Southern Hemisphere, created
with earth taken from the excavation of hell. At the shores of Purgatory,
Dante and Virgil are attracted by a musical performance by Casella, but are
reprimanded by Cato, a pagan who has been placed by God as the general
guardian of the approach to the mountain. The text gives no indication whether
or not Cato's soul is destined for heaven: his symbolic significance has been
much debated. (Cantos I and II).

Allegorically, the Purgatorio represents the Christian life. Christian souls
arrive escorted by an angel, singing in exitu Israel de Aegypto. In his Letter
to Cangrande, Dante explains that this reference to Israel leaving Egypt
refers both to the redemption of Christ and to "the conversion of the soul
from the sorrow and misery of sin to the state of grace."[11] Appropriately,
therefore, it is Easter Sunday when Dante and Virgil arrive.

The Purgatorio is notable for demonstrating the medieval knowledge of a
spherical Earth. During the poem, Dante discusses the different stars visible
in the southern hemisphere, the altered position of the sun, and the various
timezones of the Earth. At this stage it is, Dante says, sunset at Jerusalem,
midnight on the River Ganges, and sunrise in Purgatory.

Dante starts the ascent of Mount Purgatory at sunrise. On the lower slopes
(designated as "ante-Purgatory" by commentators) Dante meets first a group of
excommunicates, detained for a period thirty times as long as their period of
contumacy. Ascending higher, he encounters those too lazy to repent until
shortly before death, and those who suffered violent deaths (often due to
leading extremely sinful lives). These souls will be admitted to Purgatory
thanks to their genuine repentance, but must wait outside for an amount of
time equal to their lives on earth (Cantos III through VI). Finally, Dante is
shown a beautiful valley where he sees the lately deceased monarchs of the
great nations of Europe, and a number of other persons whose devotion to
public and private duties hampered their faith (Cantos VII and VIII). Dante's
beautiful description of evening in this valley (Canto VIII) was the
inspiration for a similar passage in Byron's Don Juan.[12] From this valley
Dante is carried (while asleep) up to the gates of Purgatory proper (Canto
IX).

The gate of Purgatory is guarded by an angel who uses the point of his sword
to draw the letter "P" (signifying peccatum, sin) seven times on Dante's
forehead, bidding him to "wash you those wounds within." The angel uses two
keys, silver (remorse) and gold (reconciliation) to open the gate â both are
necessary.[13] The angel at the gate then warns Dante not to look back, lest
he should find himself outside the gate again, symbolizing Dante having to
overcome and rise above the hell that he has just left and thus leaving his
sinning ways behind him.

From there, Virgil guides the pilgrim Dante through the seven terraces of
Purgatory. These correspond to the seven deadly sins, each terrace purging a
particular sin in an appropriate manner. Those in purgatory can leave their
circle whenever they like, but essentially there is an honor system where no
one leaves until they have corrected the nature within themselves that caused
them to commit that sin. Souls can only move upwards and never backwards,
since the intent of Purgatory is for souls to ascend towards God in Heaven,
and can ascend only during daylight hours, since the light of God is the only
true guidance.

Associated with each terrace are historical and mythological examples of the
relevant deadly sin and of its opposite virtue, together with an appropriate
prayer and beatitude.

#### [edit] The Terraces of Purgatory

<IMG>

<IMG>

In an example of humility, the Emperor Trajan stops to render justice to a
poor widow, Purgatorio, Canto 10

On the first three terraces of Purgatory are purified those whose sins were
caused by perverted love directed towards actual harm of others.

  * First Terrace. The proud are purged by carrying giant stones on their backs, unable to stand up straight (Cantos X through XII). This teaches the sinner that pride puts weight on the soul and it is better to throw it off. Furthermore, there are carvings of historical and mythological examples of pride and humility to learn from. With the weight on one's back, one cannot help but see this carved pavement and learn from it. The prayer for this terrace is the Lord's Prayer, and the beatitude is blessed are the poor in spirit. At the ascent to the next terrace, an angel clears a letter P from Dante's head. This process is repeated on each terrace. Each time a P is removed, Dante's body feels lighter, because he becomes less and less weighed down by sin.

  * Second Terrace. The envious are purged by having their eyes sewn shut and wearing clothing that makes the soul indistinguishable from the ground (Cantos XIII through XV). This is akin to a falconer's sewing the eyes of a falcon shut in order to train it. In this regard, God is the falconer and is training the souls not to envy others and to direct their love towards Him. Two examples of envy (Cain who was jealous of his brother, and Aglauros who was jealous of her sister) are contrasted with three of generosity. Because the souls here cannot see, the examples are voices on the air, including Jesus' words "love your enemies." As he is leaving the terrace, the dazzling light of the angel causes Dante to observe that the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection "as theory and experiment will show."[14] The beatitude for this terrace is blessed are the merciful.

  * Third Terrace. The wrathful are purged by walking around in acrid smoke (Cantos XV through XVII). Souls correct themselves by learning how wrath has blinded their vision, impeding their judgment (the sin of wrath represents a perversion of the natural love of justice). The prayer for this terrace is the Agnus Dei, and the beatitude is blessed are the peacemakers.

On the fourth terrace we find sinners whose sin was that of deficient
loveâthat is, sloth or acedia.

  * Fourth Terrace. The slothful are purged by continually running (Cantos XVIII and XIX). Those who were slothful in life can only purge this sin by being zealous in their desire for penance. Allegorically, spiritual laziness and lack of caring lead to sadness, and so the beatitude for this terrace is blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.[15]

On the fifth through seventh terraces are those who sinned by loving good
things, but loving them in a disordered way.

  * Fifth Terrace. The avaricious and prodigal are purged by lying face-down on the ground, unable to move (Cantos XIX through XXI). Excessive concern for earthly goodsâwhether in the form of greed or extravaganceâis punished and purified. The sinner learns to turn his desire from possessions, power or position to God. It is here that the poets meet the soul of Statius, who has completed his purgation and joins them on their ascent to paradise.

  * Sixth Terrace. The gluttonous are purged by abstaining from any food or drink (Cantos XXII through XXIV). Here, the soul's desire to eat a forbidden fruit causes its shade to starve. To sharpen the pains of hunger, the former gluttons on this terrace are forced to pass by cascades of cool water without stopping to drink. (Considering Dante's use of Greek myth, this may be inspired by Tantalus.)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dante's meeting with Beatrice, by John William Waterhouse.

  * Seventh Terrace. The lustful are purged by burning in an immense wall of flame (Cantos XXV through XXVII). All of those who committed sexual sins, both heterosexual and homosexual, are purified by the fire. Excessive sexual desire misdirects one's love from God and this terrace is meant to correct that. In addition, perhaps because all sin has its roots in misguided love, every soul who has completed his penance on the lower six cornices must pass through the wall of flame before ascending to the Earthly Paradise. Here Dante, too, must share the penance of the redeemed as the last "P" is removed from his forehead.

The ascent of the mountain culminates at the summit, which is in fact the
Garden of Eden (Cantos XXVIII through XXXIII). This place is meant to return
one to a state of innocence that existed before the sin of Adam and Eve caused
the fall from grace. Here Dante meets Matelda, a woman of grace and beauty who
prepares souls for their ascent to heaven. With her Dante witnesses a highly
symbolic procession that may be read as an allegorical masque of the Church
and the Sacrament. The procession forms an allegory within the allegory,
somewhat like Shakespeare's play within a play. One participant in the
procession is Beatrice, whom Dante loved in childhood, and at whose request
Virgil was commissioned to bring Dante on his journey.

Virgil, as a pagan, is a permanent denizen of Limbo, the first circle of Hell,
and may not enter Paradise; he vanishes. Beatrice then becomes the second
guide, and will accompany Dante in his vision of Heaven.

Dante drinks from the River Lethe, which causes the soul to forget past sins,
and then from the River EunoÃ«, which effects the renewal of memories of good
deeds. Thus purified, souls can direct their love fully towards God to the
best of their inherent capability to do so. They are then ready to leave Mount
Purgatory for Paradise. Being totally purged of sin, Purgatorio ends with
Dante anticipating his ascent to heaven, his vision aimed at the stars.

### [edit] Paradiso

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dante and Beatrice speak to Piccarda and Constance of Sicily, in a fresco by
Philipp Veit, Paradiso, Canto 3

After an initial ascension (Canto I), Beatrice guides Dante through the nine
celestial spheres of Heaven. These are concentric and spherical, similar to
Aristotelian and Ptolemaic cosmology. Dante admits that the vision of heaven
he receives is the one that his human eyes permit him to see. Thus, the vision
of heaven found in the Cantos is Dante's own personal vision, ambiguous in its
true construction. The addition of a moral dimension means that a soul that
has reached Paradise stops at the level applicable to it. Souls are allotted
to the point of heaven that fits with their human ability to love God. Thus,
there is a heavenly hierarchy. All parts of heaven are accessible to the
heavenly soul. That is to say all experience God but there is a hierarchy in
the sense that some souls are more spiritually developed than others. This is
not determined by time or learning as such but by their proximity to God (how
much they allow themselves to experience Him above other things). It must be
remembered in Dante's schema that all souls in Heaven are on some level always
in contact with God.

While the structures of the Inferno and Purgatorio were based around different
classifications of sin, the structure of the Paradiso is based on the four
cardinal virtues and the three theological virtues.

#### [edit] The Spheres of Heaven

The nine spheres are:

  * First Sphere. The sphere of the Moon is that of souls who abandoned their vows, and so were deficient in the virtue of fortitude (Cantos II through V). Dante meets Piccarda, sister of Dante's friend Forese Donati, who died shortly after being forcibly removed from her convent. Beatrice discourses on the freedom of the will, and the inviolability of sacred vows.

  * Second Sphere. The sphere of Mercury is that of souls who did good out of a desire for fame, but who, being ambitious, were deficient in the virtue of justice (Cantos V through VII). Justinian recounts the history of the Roman Empire. Beatrice explains to Dante the atonement of Christ for the sins of humanity.

  * Third Sphere. The sphere of Venus is that of souls who did good out of love, but were deficient in the virtue of temperance (Cantos VIII and IX). Dante meets Charles Martel of Anjou, who decries those who adopt inappropriate vocations, and Cunizza da Romano. Folquet de Marseilles points out Rahab, the brightest soul among those of this sphere, and condemns the city of Florence for producing that "cursed flower" (the florin) which is responsible for the corruption of the Church.

  * Fourth Sphere. The sphere of the Sun is that of souls of the wise, who embody prudence (Cantos X through XIV). Dante is addressed by St. Thomas Aquinas, who recounts the life of St. Francis of Assisi and laments the corruption of his own Dominican Order. Dante is then met by St. Bonaventure, a Franciscan, who recounts the life of St. Dominic, and laments the corruption of the Franciscan Order. The two orders were not always friendly on earth, and having members of one order praising the founder of the other shows the love present in Heaven. Dante arranges the wise into two rings of twelve; his choices of who to include give his assessment of the significant philosophers of medieval times. Finally, Aquinas introduces King Solomon, who answers Dante's question about the doctrine of the resurrection of the body.

  * Fifth Sphere. The sphere of Mars is that of souls who fought for Christianity, and who embody fortitude (Cantos XIV through XVIII). The souls in this sphere form an enormous cross. Dante speaks with the soul of his ancestor Cacciaguida, who praises the former virtues of the residents of Florence, recounts the rise and fall of Florentine families and foretells Dante's exile from Florence, before finally introducing some notable warrior souls (among them Joshua, Roland, Charlemagne, and Godfrey of Bouillon).

  * Sixth Sphere. The sphere of Jupiter is that of souls who personified justice, something of great concern to Dante (Cantos XVIII through XX). The souls here spell out the Latin for "Love justice, ye that judge the earth," and then arrange themselves into the shape of an imperial eagle. Present here are David, Hezekiah, Trajan (converted to Christianity according to a medieval legend), Constantine, William II of Sicily, and (Dante is amazed at this) Ripheus the Trojan, saved by the mercy of God.

  * Seventh Sphere. The sphere of Saturn is that of the contemplatives, who embody temperance (Cantos XXI and XXII). Dante here meets Peter Damian, and discusses with him monasticism, the doctrine of predestination, and the sad state of the Church. Beatrice, who represents theology, becomes increasingly lovely here, indicating the contemplative's closer insight into the truth of God.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dante and Beatrice see God as a point of light surrounded by angels; from
Gustave DorÃ©'s illustrations for the Divine Comedy, Paradiso, Canto 28.

  * Eighth Sphere. The sphere of fixed stars is the sphere of the Church Triumphant (Cantos XXII through XXVII). Here, Dante sees visions of Christ and of the Virgin Mary. He is tested on faith by Saint Peter, hope by Saint James, and love by Saint John the Evangelist. Dante justifies his medieval belief in astrology, that the power of the constellations is drawn from God.

  * Ninth Sphere. The Primum Mobile ("first moved" sphere) is the abode of angels (Cantos XXVII through XXIX). Dante sees God as a point of light surrounded by nine rings of angels, and is told about the creation of the universe.

From the Primum Mobile, Dante ascends to a region beyond physical existence,
called the Empyrean (Cantos XXX through XXXIII). Here the souls of all the
believers form the petals of an enormous rose. Here, Beatrice leaves Dante
with Saint Bernard, because theology has reached its limits. Saint Bernard
prays to Mary on behalf of Dante. Finally, Dante comes face-to-face with God
Himself, and is granted understanding of the Divine and of human nature. His
vision is improved beyond that of human comprehension. God appears as three
equally large circles within each other representing the Father, the Son and
the Holy Spirit with the essence of each part of God, separate yet one. The
book ends with Dante trying to understand how the circles fit together, how
the Son is separate yet one with the Father but as Dante put it "that was not
a flight for my wings"[16] and the vision of God becomes equally inimitable
and inexplicable that no word or intellectual exercise can come close to
explaining what he saw. Dante's soul, through God's absolute love, experiences
a unification with itself and all things, "but already my desire and my will
were being turned like a wheel, all at one speed, by the Love which moves the
sun and the other stars."[17]

## [edit] Earliest manuscripts

<IMG>

<IMG>

First printed edition, 11 April 1472.

According to the SocietÃ Dantesca Italiana, no original manuscript written by
Dante has survived, though there are many manuscript copies from the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries (more than 825 are listed on their
site[18]). The oldest belongs to the 1330s, almost a decade after Dante's
death. The most precious ones are the three full copies made by Giovanni
Boccaccio (1360s), who himself did not have the original manuscript as a
source.

The first printed edition was published in Foligno, Italy, by Johann Numeister
and Evangelista Angelini on 11 April 1472. Of the 300 copies printed, fourteen
still survive. The original printing press is on display in the Oratorio della
Nunziatella in Foligno.

## [edit] Thematic concerns

The Divine Comedy can be described simply as an allegory: Each canto, and the
episodes therein, can contain many alternative meanings. Dante's allegory,
however, is more complex, and, in explaining how to read the poem (see the
Letter to Cangrande[19]), he outlines other levels of meaning besides the
allegory (the historical, the moral, the literal, and the anagogical).

The structure of the poem, likewise, is quite complex, with mathematical and
numerological patterns arching throughout the work, particularly threes and
nines, which are related to the Trinity. The poem is often lauded for its
particularly human qualities: Dante's skillful delineation of the characters
he encounters in Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise; his bitter denunciations of
Florentine and Italian politics; and his powerful poetic imagination. Dante's
use of real characters, according to Dorothy Sayers in her introduction to her
translation of the Inferno, allows Dante the freedom of not having to involve
the reader in description, and allows him to "[make] room in his poem for the
discussion of a great many subjects of the utmost importance, thus widening
its range and increasing its variety."

Dante called the poem "Comedy" (the adjective "Divine" added later in the 14th
century) because poems in the ancient world were classified as High
("Tragedy") or Low ("Comedy"). Low poems had happy endings and were of
everyday or vulgar subjects, while High poems were for more serious matters.
Dante was one of the first in the Middle Ages to write of a serious subject,
the Redemption of man, in the low and vulgar Italian language and not the
Latin language as one might expect for such a serious topic. Boccaccio's
account that an early version of the poem was begun by Dante in Latin is still
controversial.[20][21]

### [edit] Dante's personal involvement

In his allegorical description of sin (in the Inferno) and virtue (in the
Purgatorio and Paradiso), Dante draws on real characters from ancient Greek
and Roman myths and history, and from his own times. However, his own actions
often also illustrate the concepts he is discussing. For example, Dante shares
the fleshly sins of the damned at several points in the upper circles of Hell.
At the first circle where the virtuous pagans who pursued honor above all else
are punished by eternally knowing they have fallen short for their lack of
faith, Dante shares with them their love of honor, as evidenced by the word
âhonorâ being used repeatedly in the Canto.[22] Similarly, at the third
circle where Ciacco and other gluttons are punished for their appetites,
Danteâs appetite for political information about his fellow Florentines
appears equally gluttonous:

> "And I to him: I wish thee still to teach me,  
>  And make a gift to me of further speech.  
>  
>  Farinata and Tegghiaio, once so worthy,  
>  Jacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca,  
>  And others who on good deeds set their thoughts,  
>  
>  Say where they are, and cause that I may know them;  
>  For great desire constraineth me to learn  
>  If Heaven doth sweeten them, or Hell envenom."[23]

Conversely, in the Purgatorio, after leaving the terrace of the proud, Dante
has learned from the example set by Omberto[24] and suppresses his own pride,
declining to speak of his achievements:

> "And I: Through midst of Tuscany there wanders  
>  A streamlet that is born in Falterona,  
>  And not a hundred miles of course suffice it;  
>  
>  From thereupon do I this body bring.  
>  To tell you who I am were speech in vain,  
>  Because my name as yet makes no great noise."[25]

### [edit] Scientific themes

Although the Divine Comedy is primarily a religious poem, discussing sin,
virtue, and theology, Dante also discusses several elements of the science of
his day (this mixture of science with poetry has received both praise and
blame over the centuries[26]). The Purgatorio repeatedly refers to the
implications of a spherical Earth, such as the different stars visible in the
southern hemisphere, the altered position of the sun, and the various
timezones of the Earth. For example, at sunset in Purgatory it is midnight in
Spain, dawn in Jerusalem, and noon on the River Ganges:[27]

> Just as, there where its Maker shed His blood,  
>  the sun shed its first rays, and Ebro lay  
>  beneath high Libra, and the ninth hour's rays  
>  
>  were scorching Ganges' waves; so here, the sun  
>  stood at the point of day's departure when  
>  God's angel happy showed himself to us.[28]

Dante travels through the centre of the Earth in the Inferno, and comments on
the resulting change in the direction of gravity in Canto XXXIV (lines
76â120). A little earlier (XXXIII, 102â105), he queries the existence of
wind in the frozen inner circle of hell, since it has no temperature
differentials.[29]

Inevitably, given its setting, the Paradiso discusses astronomy extensively,
but of course in the Ptolemaic sense. The Paradiso also discusses the
importance of the experimental method in science, with a detailed example in
lines 94â105 of Canto II:

> "Yet an experiment, were you to try it,  
>  could free you from your cavil and the source  
>  of your arts' course springs from experiment.  
>  
>  Taking three mirrors, place a pair of them  
>  at equal distance from you; set the third  
>  midway between those two, but farther back.  
>  
>  Then, turning toward them, at your back have placed  
>  a light that kindles those three mirrors and  
>  returns to you, reflected by them all.  
>  
>  Although the image in the farthest glass  
>  will be of lesser size, there you will see  
>  that it must match the brightness of the rest."[30]

A briefer example occurs in Canto XV of the Purgatorio (lines 16-21), where
Dante points out that both theory and experiment confirm that the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Other references to science in
the Paradiso include descriptions of clockwork in Canto XXIV (lines 13â18),
and Thales' theorem about triangles in Canto XIII (lines 101â102).

Galileo Galilei is known to have lectured on the Inferno, and it has been
suggested that the poem may have influenced some of Galileo's own ideas
regarding mechanics.[31]

## [edit] The Divine Comedy and Islamic philosophy

In 1919 Professor Miguel AsÃ­n Palacios, a Spanish scholar and a Catholic
priest, published La EscatologÃ­a musulmana en la Divina Comedia ("Islamic
Eschatology in the Divine Comedy"), an account of parallels between early
Islamic philosophy and the Divine Comedy. Palacios argued that Dante derived
many features of and episodes about the hereafter indirectly from the
spiritual writings of Ibn Arabi and from the Isra and Mi'raj or night journey
of Muhammad to heaven. The latter is described in the Hadith and the Kitab al
Miraj (translated into Latin in 1264 or shortly before[32] as Liber Scalae
Machometi, "The Book of Muhammad's Ladder"), and has some slight similarities
to the Paradiso, such as a sevenfold division of Paradise,[33] although this
is not unique to the Kitab al Miraj.

Dante lived in a Europe of substantial literary and philosophical contact with
the Muslim world, encouraged by such factors as Averroism and the patronage of
Alfonso X of Castile. Of the twelve wise men Dante meets in Canto X of the
Paradiso, Thomas Aquinas and, even more so, Sigier of Brabant were strongly
influenced by Arabic commentators on Aristotle.[34] Medieval Christian
mysticism also shared the Neoplatonic influence of Sufis such as Ibn Arabi.
Philosopher Frederick Copleston argued in 1950 that Dante's respectful
treatment of Averroes, Avicenna, and Sigier of Brabant indicates his
acknowledgement of a "considerable debt" to Islamic philosophy.[34]

Although this philosophical influence is generally acknowledged, many scholars
have not been satisfied that Dante was influenced by the Kitab al Miraj. The
twentieth century Orientalist Francesco Gabrieli expressed skepticism
regarding the claimed similarities, and the lack of evidence of a vehicle
through which it could have been transmitted to Dante. Even so, while
dismissing the probability of some influences posited in Palacios' work,[35]
Gabrieli recognized that it was "at least possible, if not probable, that
Dante may have known the Liber scalae and have taken from it certain images
and concepts of Muslim eschatology". Shortly before her death the Italian
philologist Maria Corti pointed out that, during his stay at the court of
Alfonso X, Dante's mentor Brunetto Latini met Bonaventura de Siena, a Tuscan
who had translated the Kitab al Miraj from Arabic into Latin. According to
Corti,[36] Brunetto may have provided a copy of that work to Dante, though
there is no evidence that this occurred.

## [edit] Literary influence in the English-speaking world and beyond

The work was not always so well regarded. After being recognized as a
masterpiece in the first centuries following its publication,[37] the work was
largely ignored during the Enlightenment, with some notable exceptions such as
Vittorio Alfieri, Antoine de Rivarol, who translated the Inferno into French,
and Giambattista Vico, who in the Scienza nuova and in the Giudizio su Dante
inaugurated what would later become the romantic reappraisal of Dante,
juxtaposing him to Homer.[38] The Comedy was "rediscovered" by William Blake
\- who illustrated several passages of the epic - and the romantic writers of
the 19th century. Later authors such as T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, Samuel
Beckett, C.S. Lewis and James Joyce have drawn on it for inspiration. The poet
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was its first American translator,[39] and modern
poets, including Seamus Heaney,[40] Robert Pinsky, John Ciardi, and W. S.
Merwin, have also produced translations of all or parts of the book. In
Russia, beyond Pushkin's memorable translation of a few triplets, Osip
Mandelstam's late poetry has been said to bear of the mark of a "tormented
meditation" on the Comedy.[41] In 1934 Mandelstam gave a disturbingly modern
reading of the poem in his labyrinthine "Conversation on Dante"[42]

New English translations of the Divine Comedy continue to be published
regularly. Notable English translations of the complete poem include:

Year Translator Notes  
1805â1814 Henry Francis Cary An older translation, widely available online  
1882 Henry Wadsworth Longfellow The first American translation, and still
widely read, including online  
1933-1943 Laurence Binyon In an English version of terza rima  
1949â1962 Dorothy L. Sayers Translated for Penguin Classics, intended for a
wider audience, and completed by Barbara Reynolds  
1954â1970 John Ciardi His Inferno was recorded and released by Folkways
Records in 1954  
1981 C. H. Sisson Available in Oxford World's Classics  
1982 Allen Mandelbaum Available online  
1967â2002 Mark Musa An alternative Penguin Classics version  
2000-2007 Robert and Jean Hollander Online as part of the Princeton Dante
Project  
2006â2007 Robin Kirkpatrick A third Penguin Classics version, replacing
Musa's  
## [edit] The Divine Comedy in the arts

Main article: Dante and his Divine Comedy in popular culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rodin's The Kiss represents Paolo and Francesca.[43]

The Divine Comedy has been a source of inspiration for countless artists for
almost seven centuries. There are many references to Dante's work in
literature. In music, Franz Liszt was one of many composers to write works
based on the Divine Comedy. In sculpture, the work of Auguste Rodin is notable
for themes from Dante, and many visual artists have illustrated Dante's work,
as shown by the examples above. There have also been many references to the
Divine Comedy in cinema and computer games.

## [edit] See also

  * List of cultural references in The Divine Comedy
  * Allegory in the Middle Ages

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Bloom, Harold (1994). The Western Canon. See also Western canon for other "canons" that include the Divine Comedy.
  2. ^ See Lepschy, Laura; Lepschy, Giulio (1977). The Italian Language Today. or any other history of Italian language.
  3. ^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Purgatory, notes on page 75.
  4. ^ There are many English translations of this famous line. Some examples include 
    * All hope abandon, ye who enter here \- Henry Francis Cary (1805â1814)
    * All hope abandon, ye who enter in! \- Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1882)
    * Leave every hope, ye who enter! \- Charles Eliot Norton (1891)
    * Leave all hope, ye that enter \- Carlyle-Wicksteed (1932)
    * Lay down all hope, you that go in by me. \- Dorothy L. Sayers (1949)
    * Abandon every hope, you who enter. \- Charles S. Singleton (1970)
    * Abandon all hope, ye who enter here \- John Ciardi (1977)
    * No room for hope, when you enter this place \- C. H. Sisson (1980)
    * Abandon every hope, who enter here. \- Allen Mandelbaum (1982)
    * Abandon all hope, you who enter here \- Robert Pinsky (1993)
    * Abandon every hope, all you who enter \- Mark Musa (1995)
    * Abandon every hope, you who enter. \- Robert M. Durling (1996)
    * All hope abandon, you who enter here. \- James Finn Cotter (2000) [1]
    * Abandon all hope upon entering here! \- Marcus Saunders (2004)
    * All hope is lost when you pass through this portal. \- Colm Ryan (2008) [2]
Verbatim, the line translates as "Leave (lasciate) every (ogne) hope
(speranza), ye (voi) that (ch') enter (intrate)."

  5. ^ There is no general agreement on which animals represent the sins incontinence, violence, and fraud. Some see it as the she-wolf, lion, and leopard respectively, while others see it as the leopard, lion, and she-wolf respectively.
  6. ^ The punishment of immersion was not typically ascribed in Dante's age to the violent, but the Visio attaches it to those who facere praelia et homicidia et rapinas pro cupiditate terrena ("make battle and murder and rapine because of worldly cupidity"). Theodore Silverstein (1936), "Inferno, XII, 100â126, and the Visio Karoli Crassi," Modern Language Notes, 51:7, 449â452, and Theodore Silverstein (1939), "The Throne of the Emperor Henry in Dante's Paradise and the Mediaeval Conception of Christian Kingship," Harvard Theological Review, 32:2, 115â129, suggests that Dante's interest in contemporary politics would have attracted him to a piece like the Visio. Its popularity assures that Dante would have had access to it. Jacques Le Goff, Goldhammer, Arthur, tr. (1986), The Birth of Purgatory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0 226 47083 0), states definitively that ("we know [that]") Dante read it.
  7. ^ Wallace Fowlie, A Reading of Dante's Inferno, University Of Chicago Press, 1981, p. 178.
  8. ^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Inferno, notes on Canto XXVIII.
  9. ^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Inferno, notes on Canto XXIX.
  10. ^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Inferno, notes on Canto XXXIV.
  11. ^ "The Letter to Can Grande," in Literary Criticism of Dante Alighieri, translated and edited by Robert S. Haller (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1973), 99
  12. ^ Byron, Don Juan, Canto 3, CVIII.
  13. ^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Purgatory, notes on page 140.
  14. ^ Purgatorio, XV, line 21, tr. Dorothy L. Sayers, 1955.
  15. ^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Purgatory, notes on pages 209 and 222.
  16. ^ Paradiso, canto 33, line 139, tr. C. H. Sisson
  17. ^ Paradiso, canto 33, lines 142-145, tr. C. H. Sisson
  18. ^ http://www.danteonline.it/english/codici_frames/elencocodici.asp
  19. ^ http://www.english.udel.edu/dean/cangrand.html
  20. ^ Boccaccio also quotes the initial triplet:"Ultima regna canam fluvido contermina mundo, / spiritibus quae lata patent, quae premia solvunt /pro meritis cuicumque suis". For translation and more, see Guyda Armstrong, , Review of Giovanni Boccaccio. Life of Dante. J. G. Nichols, trans. London: Hesperus Press, 2002.
  21. ^ Hiram Peri, The Original Plan of the Divine Comedy, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 18, No. 3/4 (1955), pp. 189-210.
  22. ^ Inferno, Canto 4, lines 72, 73, 76, 80, 100, and 133, Mandelbaum translation
  23. ^ Inferno, Canto VI, lines 77â84, Longfellow translation.
  24. ^ Purgatorio, Canto XI, lines 58â67
  25. ^ Purgatorio, Canto XIV, lines 16â21, Longfellow translation.
  26. ^ Michael Caesar, Dante: The Critical Heritage, Routledge, 1995, pp 288, 383, 412, 631.
  27. ^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Purgatory, notes on page 286.
  28. ^ Paradiso, Canto XXVII, lines 1â6, Mandelbaum translation.
  29. ^ Dorothy L. Sayers, Inferno, notes on page 284.
  30. ^ Paradiso, Canto II, lines 94â105, Mandelbaum translation.
  31. ^ [3] accessed 2 April 2009
  32. ^ I. Heullant-Donat and M.-A. Polo de Beaulieu, "Histoire d'une traduction," in Le Livre de l'Ã©chelle de Mahomet, Latin edition and French translation by GisÃ¨le Besson and MichÃ¨le Brossard-DandrÃ©, Collection Lettres Gothiques, Le Livre de Poche, 1991, p. 22 with note 37.
  33. ^ See the English translation of the Kitab al Miraj.
  34. ^ a b Frederick Copleston (1950). A History of Philosophy, Volume 2. London: Continuum. pp. 200.
  35. ^ Francesco Gabrieli, "New light on Dante and Islam", Diogenes, 2:61-73, 1954>
  36. ^ Maria Corti: Dante e l'Islam (interview)
  37. ^ as Chaucer wrote in the Monk's Tale, "Redeth the grete poete of Ytaille / That highte Dant, for he kan al devyse / Fro point to point; nat o word wol he faille".
  38. ^ Erich Auerbach,Dante: Poet of the Secular World. ISBN 0-226-03205-1.
  39. ^ Irmscher, Christoph. Longfellow Redux. University of Illinois, 2008: 11. ISBN 9780252030635.
  40. ^ see: Seamus Heaney, âEnvies and Identifications: Dante and the Modern Poet.â The Poetâs Dante: Twentieth-Century Responses. Ed. Peter S. Hawkins and Rachel Jacoff. New York: Farrar, 2001. 239-258.
  41. ^ Marina Glazova, Mandelstam and Dante: The Divine Comedy in Mandelstam's poetry of the 1930s Studies in East European Thought, Volume 28, Number 4, November, 1984.
  42. ^ James Fenton, Hell set to music, The Guardian, 16 July 2005.
  43. ^ Le Normand-Romain, Antoinette (1999). Rodin:The Gates of Hell. Paris: MusÃ©e Rodin. ISBN 2-9014-2869-X.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: The Divine Comedy  
Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

The Divine Comedy

  * World of Dante Multimedia website that offers Italian text of Divine Comedy, Allen Mandelbaum's translation, gallery, interactive maps, timeline, musical recordings, and searchable database for students and teachers by Deborah Parker and IATH (Institute for Advanced Technologies in the Humanities) of the University of Virginia
  * Princeton Dante Project Website that offers the complete text of the Divine Comedy (and Dante's other works) in Italian and English along with audio accompaniment in both languages. Includes historical and interpretive annotation.
  * Dante Dartmouth Project: Full text of more than 70 Italian, Latin, and English commentaries on the Commedia, ranging in date from 1322 (Iacopo Alighieri) to the 2000s (Robert Hollander)
  * Dante's Divine Comedy presented by the Electronic Literature Foundation. Multiple editions, with Italian and English facing page and interpolated versions.
  * The Comedy in English: trans. Cary (with DorÃ©'s illustrations) (HTML), trans. Cary (with DorÃ©'s illustrations) (zipped HTML downloadable from Project Gutenberg), Cary/Longfellow/Mandelbaum parallel edition
  * On-line Concordance to the Divine Comedy
  * Audiobooks: Public domain recordings from LibriVox (in Italian, Longfellow translation); some additional recordings
  * Wikisummaries summary and analysis of "Inferno"
  * Danteworlds, multimedia presentation of the Divine Comedy for students by Guy Raffa of the University of Texas
  * Dante's Places: a map (still a prototype) of the places named by Dante in the Commedia, created with GoogleMaps. An explanatory PDF is available for download at the same page

  

<IMG> Dante Alighieri (1265 - 1321)  
Works in Latin: De vulgari eloquentia \- De Monarchia \- Eclogues \- Letters  
Works in Italian: La Vita Nuova \- Le Rime \- Convivio  
Divina Commedia: Inferno \- Purgatorio \- Paradiso  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divine_Comedy"

Categories: The Divine Comedy (Dante) | 1300 | 1321 books | 14th-century books
| 14th-century Christian texts | Epics | Italian poems | Medieval literature |
Virgil | Life after death | Bangsian fantasy | Verse novels | Visionary
literature | Pope-related topics | Works by Dante Alighieri

Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VÃ¨neto
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 00:10.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



