
# New Chronology (Fomenko)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cover of History: Fiction or Science? Chronology volumes 1,2,3

The New Chronology is a theory that the conventional chronology is
fundamentally flawed. The central concepts of the New Chronology are derived
from the ideas of Nikolai Morozov,[1] although Jean Hardouin can be viewed as
an earlier predecessor.[2] The New Chronology is commonly associated with
Anatoly Fomenko, although it is a collaboration between Fomenko and several
other mathematicians.

The New Chronology also contains a reconstruction, an alternative chronology,
radically shorter than the conventional chronology, because all ancient Greek,
Roman and Egyptian history is "folded" onto the Middle Ages. According to the
chronology, the history of humankind goes only as far back as AD 800, there is
almost no information about events between AD 800-1000, and most known
historical events took place in AD 1000-1500.

While some researchers have developed revised chronologies of Classical and
Biblical periods that shorten the timeline of ancient history by eliminating
various "dark ages", none of these are as radical as that of the New
Chronology. The New Chronology is rejected by mainstream historians and is
inconsistent with absolute and relative dating techniques used in the wider
scholarly community.

History: Fiction or Science? which contains this New Chronology was written in
the Russian language but has been translated into English.

## Contents

  * 1 History of New Chronology
  * 2 Fomenko's claims
    * 2.1 Brief summary
    * 2.2 Detailed description
    * 2.3 History and its revision according to A.T. Fomenko and G.V. Nosovsky
  * 3 Fomenko's methods
    * 3.1 Statistical correlation of texts
    * 3.2 Statistical correlation of dynasties
    * 3.3 Astronomical evidence
    * 3.4 Rejection of common dating methods
  * 4 Popularity
  * 5 Criticism
    * 5.1 Overlooked convergence of uncertainty in archaeological dating
    * 5.2 Misuse of historical sources and forced pattern matching
    * 5.3 Unaccounted astronomical phenomena
    * 5.4 Magnitude and consistency of conspiracy theory
    * 5.5 Reviews of Works on the New Chronology
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History of New Chronology

The idea of chronologies different from the conventional chronology can be
traced back to at least the early 17th century. Jean Hardouin then suggested
that many ancient historical documents were much younger than commonly
believed to be. In 1685 he published a version of Pliny the Elder's Natural
History in which he claimed that most Greek and Roman texts had been forged by
Benedictine monks. When later questioned on these results, Hardouin stated
that he would reveal the monks' reasons in a letter to be revealed only after
his death. The executors of his estate were unable to find such a document
among his posthumous papers.[3] In the 17th century, Sir Isaac Newton,
examining the current chronology of Ancient Greece, Ancient Egypt and the
Ancient Near East, expressed discontent with prevailing theories and proposed
one of his own, which, basing its study on Apollonius of Rhodes's Argonautica,
changed the traditional dating of the Argonautic Expedition, the Trojan War,
and the Founding of Rome.[4][5]

In 1887, Edwin Johnson expressed the opinion that early Christian history was
largely invented or corrupted in the 2nd and 3rd centuries.[6] In 1909 Otto
Rank made note of duplications in literary history of a variety of cultures:

> ...almost all important civilized peoples have early woven myths around and
glorified in poetry their heroes, mythical kings and princes, founders of
religions, of dynasties, empires and citiesâin short, their national heroes.
Especially the history of their birth and of their early years is furnished
with phantastic [sic] traits; the amazing similarity, nay literal identity, of
those tales, even if they refer to different, completely independent peoples,
sometimes geographically far removed from one another, is well known and has
struck many an investigator.[7]

Nikolai Morozov was the first to claim the existence of correlations between
the dynasties of Old-Testament kings and Roman emperors and to suggest that
the entire chronology prior to the 1st century BC is wrong.[citation needed]

Fomenko became interested in Morozov's theories in 1973. In 1980, together
with a few colleagues from the mathematics department of Moscow State
University, he published several articles on "new mathematical methods in
history" in peer-reviewed journals. The articles stirred a lot of controversy,
but ultimately Fomenko failed to win any respected historians to his side. By
the early 1990s, Fomenko shifted his focus from trying to convince the
scientific community via peer-reviewed publications to publishing books. Beam
writes that Fomenko and his colleagues were discovered by the Soviet
scientific press in the early 1980s, leading to "a brief period of renown"; a
contemporary review from the journal Questions of History complained, "Their
constructions have nothing in common with Marxist historical science."[8] His
books range from popular to rather involved, yet accessible to educated
readers.

By 2005 his theory had grown to cover all of the Old World, from England and
Ireland to China.

## [edit] Fomenko's claims

### [edit] Brief summary

In volumes 1, 2 , 3 and 4 of History: Fiction or Science?, Fomenko and his
colleagues claim:

  1. That different accounts of the same historical events are often 'assigned' different dates and locations by historians and translators, creating multiple "phantom copies" of these events; these "phantom copies" are often misdated by centuries or even millennia and end up incorporated into conventional chronology;
  2. That this chronology was largely manufactured by Joseph Justus Scaliger in Opus Novum de emendatione temporum (1583) and Thesaurum temporum (1606), and represents a vast array of dates produced without any justification whatsoever, containing the repeating sequences of dates with shifts equal to multiples of the major cabbalistic numbers 333 and 360;
  3. That this chronology was completed by Jesuit Dionysius Petavius in De Doctrina Temporum, 1627 (v.1) and 1632 (v.2);
  4. That archaeological dating, dendrochronological dating, paleographical dating, numismatic dating, carbon dating, and other methods of dating of ancient sources and artifacts known today are erroneous, non-exact or dependent on traditional chronology; that their use in conjunction as 'confiming' one another is a statistical fallacy - probabilities can't be added.
  5. That there is not a single document in existence that can be reliably dated earlier than the 11th century; that most 'ancient' artifacts may find other than consensual explanation;
  6. That histories of Ancient Rome, Greece and Egypt were crafted during the Renaissance by humanists and clergy mostly on the basis of documents of their own making;
  7. That the Old Testament is a rendition of events of the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries AD in Europe and Byzantium, containing 'prophecies' about 'future' events related in the New Testament, which is a rendition of events of 1152 to 1185 AD;
  8. That the history of religions runs as follows: the pre-Christian period (before the XI century and JC), Bacchic Christianity (XI-XII century, before and after JC), JC Christianity (XII-XVI century) and its subsequent mutations into Orthodox Christianity, Catholicism, Judaism, and Islam;
  9. That the most probable prototype of historical Jesus was Andronikos I Komnenos (allegedly AD1152 to 1185), the emperor of Byzantium; known for his failed reforms, his traits and deeds reflected in 'biographies' of many real and imaginary persons;[9]
  10. That the Almagest of Claudius Ptolemy, traditionally dated to around 150 AD and considered to be the corner stone of classical history, was compiled in sixteenth and seventeenth centuries from astronomical data of the ninth to sixteenth centuries.
  11. That 37 complete Egyptian horoscopes found in Denderah, Esna, and other temples have unique valid astronomical solutions with dates ranging from 1000 AD and up to as late as 1700 AD;
  12. That the Book of Revelation we know of contains a horoscope that is dated to 25 September - 10 October 1486 compiled by cabbalist Johannes Reuchlin.
  13. That the horoscopes found in Sumerian/Babylonian tablets do not contain sufficient astronomical data; consequently, they have solutions every 30-50 yrs on the time axis and are therefore useless for purposes of dating;
  14. That the Chinese tables of eclipses are useless for dating as they contain too many eclipses that did not take place astronomically; that Chinese tables of comets even if they were true can't be used for dating;
  15. That all major inventions like powder and guns, paper and print were made in Europe in tenth to sixteenth centuries;
  16. That Ancient Roman and Greek statues, showing perfect command of the human anatomy are fakes crafted in the Renaissance when, according to Fomenko, such command was for the first time attained;
  17. That there was no such thing as the Tartar and Mongol invasion followed by over two centuries of yoke and slavery because the so-called "Tartars and Mongols" were the actual ancestors of the modern Russians, living in a bilingual state with Turkic spoken as freely as Russian;
  18. That the ancient Russian state was governed by a double structure of civil and military authorities and the hordes were actually professional armies with a tradition of lifelong conscription (the recruitment being the so-called "blood tax");
  19. That the Mongol "invasions" were punitive operations against the regions that attempted tax evasion;
  20. That the tsar Ivan the Terrible to be a collation of four rulers, no less. They represented the two rival dynasties - the legitimate Godunov rulers and the ambitious Romanov upstarts;
  21. That official Russian history is a blatant forgery concocted by a host of German scholars brought to Russia by the usurper dynasty of the Romanovs with the mission of making Romanov's reign look legitimate;
  22. That Moscow was founded as late of mid xiv cy and the battle of Kulikovo has taken place in Moscow;
  23. That Russia and Turkey were once parts of the same empire and that Tamerlane was probably Russian warlord;
  24. That the English history of the alleged years 640-830 A.D.and the Byzantine history of 378-553 A.D. are reflections of the same late medieval original;
  25. That the English history of the alleged years 830 - 1040 A.D.and the Byzantine history of 553 - 830 A.D. are reflections of the same late medieval original;

### [edit] Detailed description

Fomenko's theory claims that the traditional chronology consists of four
overlapping copies of the "true" chronology, which lasted 350 years, shifted
back in time by significant intervals (integer multiples of 350 years), with
some further revisions. All events and characters conventionally dated earlier
than 11th century are fictional, and represent "phantom reflections" of actual
Middle Ages events and characters, brought about by intentional or accidental
mis-datings of historical documents. Before the invention of printing,
accounts of the same events by different eyewitnesses were sometimes retold
several times before being written down, then often went through multiple
rounds of translating, copyediting, etc.; names were translated, mispronounced
and misspelled to the point where they bore little resemblance to originals.
According to Fomenko, this led early chronologists to believe or choose to
believe that those accounts described different events and even different
countries and time periods. Fomenko justifies this approach by the fact that,
in many cases, the original documents are simply not available: Fomenko claims
that all history of ancient world is known to us from manuscripts that are
themselves dated with XV-XIX centuries, but describing events that allegedly
happened thousands of years before, originals regrettably and conveniently
lost. For example, oldest extant manuscripts of monumental treatises on
Ancient Roman and Greek history, such as Annals and Histories, are
conventionally dated ca. 1100 AD, more than a full millennium after events
they describe; and they did not come to scholars' attention till 15th
century.[citation needed] In Fomenko's theory, 15th century is probably the
actual timeframe when these documents were first written.

Central to Fomenko's New Chronology is his invention of a vast Slav-Turk
empire, which he called the "Russian Horde", that played the dominant role in
Eurasian history before the seventeenth century. The various peoples
identified in ancient and medieval history, from the Scythians, Huns, Goths
and Bulgars, through the Polyane, Duleby, Drevliane, Pechenegs, to in more
recent times, the Cossacks, Ukrainians, and Belarussians, are nothing but
elements of the single Russian Horde. For the New Chronologists, peoples such
as the Ukrainians, Belarussians, Mongols, and others who assert their national
independence from Russia, are suffering from a historical delusion.[10]

Fomenko claims that the most probable prototype of the historical Jesus was
Andronikos I Komnenos (allegedly AD1152 to 1185), the emperor of Byzantium;
known for his failed reforms, his traits and deeds reflected in 'biographies'
of many real and imaginary persons. The historical Jesus is a composite figure
and reflection of the Old-Testament prophet Elisha (850-800 BC?), Pope Gregory
VII (1020?-1085), Saint Basil of Caesarea (330-379), and even Li Yuanhao (also
known as Emperor Jingzong or "Son of Heaven" - emperor of Western Xia, who
reigned in 1032-1048), Euclides, Bacchus and Dionysius. Fomenko explains the
seemingly vast differences in the 'alleged' biographies of these figures as
resulting from difference in languages, points of view and time-frame of the
authors of said accounts and biographies.

Fomenko also merges Jerusalem, Rome and Troy, contrary to the conventional
history that places them in different locations of the ancient world separated
by hundreds of years, and identifies them as: "New Rome" = Gospel Jerusalem
(in the period 12-13 centuries) = Troy = Yoros Castle.[11] To the south of
Yoros Castle is Joshua's Hill; (allegedly Gospel Calvary).[12]

The Biblical Temple of Solomon was not destroyed, says Fomenko - it is still
known to us as the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople = Old Testament Jerusalem
(in the period 14-16 centuries). The biblical Solomon himself is identified as
sultan Suleiman the Magnificent (1494-1566). The historical Jesus may have
been born in 1152 and was crucified around 1185 AD on hill overlooking the
Bosphorus.[13] The city that we now know as Jerusalem was known prior to the
17th century as the nondescript Ottoman village of Al-Quds, where biblical
"Palestine" is actually the Palatina, along the Rhine, between Basel ,where
Erasmus Rotterdamus wrote the "New-Testament" and between his hometown
Rotterdam. It is also likely it wasn't named "Al-Quds" i.e. "the holy", before
Scaliger decided it would have been the "Holy city" of "Jerusalem".

On the other hand, according to Fomenko the word "Rome" is a placeholder and
can signify any one of several different cities and kingdoms. The "First Rome"
or "Ancient Rome" or "Mizraim" is an ancient Egyptian kingdom in the delta of
the Nile with its capital in Alexandria. The second and most famous "New Rome"
is Constantinople. The third "Rome" is constituted by three different cities:
Constantinople (again), Rome in Italy, and Moscow (which Orthodox scholars
have long named the third Rome). Rome in Italy was allegedly founded around
1380 AD by Aeneas. Moscow as the third Rome was the capital of the great
"Russian Horde".[14] Similarly, the word "Jerusalem" is actually a placeholder
rather than a physical location and can refer to different cities at different
times and the word "Israel" did not define a state, even not a territory but
people fighting for God, for example French St Louis and English called
themselves the King/Queen of Israel.

Parallelism between John the Baptist, Jesus, and Old-Testament prophets
implies that the New Testament was written before the Old Testament. Fomenko
claims that the Bible was being written until the Council of Trent
(1545-1563), when the list of canonical books was established, and all
apocryphal books were ordered destroyed.

As another example of history duplicates, according to Fomenko, Plato,
Plotinus and Gemistus Pletho are one and the same person - according to him,
some texts by or about Pletho were mis-dated and today believed to be texts by
or about Plotinus or Plato. Similar duplicates include Dionysius the
Areopagite, Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite and Dionysius Petavius. Florence
and the princes of Medici bankrolled and played an important role in creation
of the magnificent 'Roman' and 'Greek' past.

Fomenko's theory is both Eurocentric and Eurasian, describing an Empire that
was spreading worldwide and falling apart simultaneously.

### [edit] History and its revision according to A.T. Fomenko and G.V.
Nosovsky

The enormous âMongolianâ = Great Empire was forged in the XIV-XV century;
it comprised the entire territory of Eurasia, the America and North Africa,
for one. Therefore, the Western European rulers were de facto the vicegerents
(or vassals) of the mighty Czar, or Khan, of the Horde, or Russia. According
to Dr Fomenko, there is plenty of evidence testifying to the subservient
position of the Western European rulers in old documents, notwithstanding even
the biased editing campaign of the XVII-XVIII century. Dr Fomenko cites
allegedly relevant and abundant examples in his vol.4 of âHistory:Fiction or
Science?â. His description of the general situation in the XIV-XVI century
is as follows:

Remote provinces of the Empire (among them the countries of Western Europe)
differed from the metropolitan imperial centre (Russia, or the Horde, and the
Ottoman = Ataman Empire) in status, and most considerably so. The centre of
the Empire was primarily occupied with military pursuits and fortification
construction, which was a vital prerequisite for holding on to the enormous
imperial territories. Every now and then, there would be a rebellion, a
dispute or a skirmish between different regions of the Empire. The rebellions
needed to be quelled, the disputes, settled, and the warring neighbours
pacified and judged. Those tasks required an enormous professional army â or
even several armies. A great deal of resources were invested in maintaining an
extensive communications network that spanned the whole territory of the
Empire. Other liabilities included the collection of tax and the organisation
of trade between remote imperial provinces. This is why the metropolitan part
of the Empire required military men and government officials for the most
part, and enormous administrative machinery.

Remote provinces of the Empire were in a different situation. The Khan of the
Horde, or the Czar, was very far away from them. His vicegerents ruled as
plenipotentiaries, assisted by the nearby âMongolianâ Cossacks garrisons
that took care of maintaining order. Therefore, the primary concerns were not
with the local military problems, which did exist, of course, but rather the
task of winning the Emperorâs favour. A lot had depended upon it. For
example, one could gain advantage over oneâs neighbours without the need to
destroy their armies, simply by sending appropriate gifts to the Czar, or
Khan, of the Horde. If the gifts were good, the Czar, of Khan, could be kind
enough to permit the local ruler the annexation of another rulerâs territory
â especially in cases when the Khan was displeased with the latter for one
reason or another (territory mismanagement, irregular tax payments, or the
mere inability to offer anything of novelty or interest to the royal court and
poor quality of gifts).

This is why applied sciences and arts flourished in Western Europe, for
instance â and served the purpose of entertainment, among other things. A
certain entertainment industry was created, especially in the resort provinces
of the Empire with a salubrious climate, such as Italy, France and Spain. The
best specimens were sent to the Khanâs court. The French and the Italians
made great headway in architecture, literature, history and music. The English
were accomplished shipbuilders, and so on.

The Khanâs court in the Horde considered all the cultural and scientific
advances of the Western Europe their very own, at the disposal of the Empire
at all times. If the court needed a new fleet to be built, for instance, they
would send for British shipbuilders, or build the ships on British wharfs. A
skilled medic could be summoned from France, for instance, if France was the
residence of some renowned representative of the medical profession around
that time. If a cathedral needed to be built in Moscow and the deadline was a
tight one, Italian craftsmen could be summoned (which was the case with the
construction of the Moscow Kremlin, qv above). They arrived right away.

It is vital to realise that such a summons could not be disobeyed. As soon as
a province would receive orders from the Empire, the locals hastened to carry
them out or send the required specialists to the imperial capital â from
Italy, France, Spain, Germany, England and Asia.

One must assume that there were parties comprising the representatives of a
variety of provinces at the court of the Khan, or the Czar, in Yaroslavl â
English, French, German parties etc. They competed for priority commissioner
status and be assigned to carry out the most honourable and profitable orders,
each party attempting to prove it to the âMongolianâ Khan and his
administration that their specialists were the best ones around. The
victorious party would get commissioning priorities and become more important
in the eyes of the Khanâs administration, which meant quite a lot in that
epoch.

Then, in the XVII century, after the split-up of the Great = âMongolianâ
Empire, when the Western European countries declared their independence, the
efforts of the independent imperial vicegerents (and their historians,
obviously enough) were focussed on the proof of âhistorical continuityâ of
the modern status quo (the independence of Western European countries, that
is, the main implication being that the Westerners have never been dependent
on the Horde, or Russia. They sought to wipe out the very memory of the
rebellion and their usurper status (from their epochâs perspective). This
was the very reason why Scaligerian and Romanovian history was created â its
primary objective has been to cast the Great = âMongolianâ conquest into
deep antiquity under the coy moniker of âThe Great Migrationâ (the Slavic
conquest of Europe in the alleged IV-V century A. D.). The very recent Empire
was hastily wiped out from the maps of Europe. The history of the
âMongolianâ Khan dynasty of the XIV-XVI century was appropriated as the
history of the âEuropean Habsburgsâ. The latter were declared as âour
very own former emperors, and whoâs ever heard of Muscovite rule? Such
absurd and politically harmful notions should by no means ever be harboured by
anyone.

This âhistoricalâ activity completely supposedly coincided with the
intentions of the pro-Western dynasty of the Romanovs, who seized power in
Russia illegally, as a result of a coup dâÃ©tat. This is why the dynasty of
the Romanovs and their rebellious comrades-in-arms, the new rulers of the
Western Europe, were completely coordinated. The Ottomans (or Atamans), who
had stood in the way of this âcivilisation processâ, were crushed in a
crusade â carried out by Russian soldiers and paid for in Russian blood.

A revision of old documents, chronicles, memoirs and all sorts of historical
evidence in general has been conducted. Many foreigners visited Russia in the
XIV-XVI century. Therefore, many authentic documents had still existed in
Western Europe, and they reflected the real relations between Western Europe
and the Horde perfectly frankly. Documents were discovered and destroyed,
rewritten or edited drastically, with new versions published under older
dates. In other words, the documents were deliberately backdated in order to
confirm the new point of view about the status quo being supported by
chronological continuity. Thus, insists Fomenko, one must always retain the
awareness that the distant past of the XIV-XVI century is, according to his
view, greatly thwarted by the distorting prism of the XVII century editing.

According to Fomenko, abundant unorthodox historical evidence has survived
nevertheless, thus some of the documents that deal with Russia and written by
West Europeans in the XVI century seem quite unordinary at present, the
tendentious editing notwithstanding. In Fomenko's view, some minor details
have escaped the attention of the meticulous editors. Some of them may have
understood their objective worse than others; also, they werenât all of
equal intelligence. Apart from that, the âauthentic picture of historyâ
took a while to form in the heads of what Fomenko considers XVII-XVIII century
hoaxers. He suggests much of what would be resolutely removed from old
documents by later historians and editors of the XIX-XX century was left
intact by an earlier editor of the XVII-XVIII century, providing insights
considered valuable by Fomenko.

## [edit] Fomenko's methods

### [edit] Statistical correlation of texts

One of Fomenko's simplest methods is statistical correlation of texts. His
basic assumption is that a text which describes a sequence of events will
devote more space to more important events (for example, a period of war or an
unrest will have much more space devoted to than a period of peaceful, non-
eventful years), and that this irregularity will remain visible in other
descriptions of the period. For each analysed text, a function is devised
which maps each year mentioned in the text with the number of pages (lines,
letters) devoted in the text to its description (which could be zero). The
function of the two texts are then compared.[15]

For example, Fomenko compares the contemporary history of Rome written by
Titus Livius with a modern history of Rome written by Russian historian V. S.
Sergeev, calculating that the two have high correlation, and thus that they
describe the same period of history, which is undisputed.[16] He also compares
modern texts which describe different periods, and calculates low correlation,
as expected.[16] However, when he compares, for example, the ancient history
of Rome and the medieval history of Rome, he calculates a high correlation,
and concludes that ancient history of Rome is a copy of medieval history of
Rome, thus clashing with mainstream accounts.[17]

### [edit] Statistical correlation of dynasties

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sample Fomenko parallelism

In a somewhat similar manner, Fomenko compares two dynasties of rulers using
statistical methods. First, he creates a database of rulers, containing
relevant information on each of them. Then, he creates "survey codes" for each
pair of the rulers, which contain a number which describes degree of the match
of each considered property of two rulers. For example, one of the properties
is the way of death: if two rulers were both poisoned, they get value of +1 in
their property of the way of death; if one ruler was poisoned and another
killed in combat, they get -1; and if one was poisoned, and another died of
illness, they get 0 (there is possibility that chroniclers were not impartial
and that different descriptions nonetheless describe the same person). An
important property is the length of the rule.

Fomenko lists a number of pairs of seemingly unrelated dynasties â for
example, dynasties of kings of Israel and emperors of late Western Roman
Empire (300-476 AD ) â and claims that this method demonstrates correlations
between their reigns. (Graphs which show just the length of the rule in the
two dynasties are the most widely known, however Fomenko's conclusions are
also based on other parameters, as described above.) He also claims that the
regnal history of the 17th-20th centuries never shows correlation of "dynastic
flows" with each other, therefore Fomenko insists history was multiplied and
outstretched into imaginary antiquity to justify this or other "royal"
pretensions.

Fomenko uses for the demonstration of correlation between the reigns
exclusively the data from the Chronological Tables of J. Blair (Moscow
1808-1809). Fomenko says that Blairâs tables are all the more valuable to us
since they were compiled in an epoch adjacent to the time when Scaligerian
chronology. According to Fomenko these tables contain clearer signs of
âScaligerite activityâ which were subsequently buried under layers of
paint and plaster by historians of the XIX-XX century.

### [edit] Astronomical evidence

Fomenko examines astronomical events described in ancient texts and suggests
that the chronology is actually medieval. For example:

  * He explains the mysterious drop in the value of the lunar acceleration parameter D" between the years 700-1300 AD, which the American astrophycist Robert Newton had explained in terms of non-gravitational forces. By eliminating those anomalous early eclipses the New Chronology produces a constant value of D" beginning around 1000 AD.[18]

  * He associates initially the Star of Bethlehem with the 1140 (Â±20) AD supernova (now Crab Nebula) and the Crucifixion Eclipse with the total solar eclipse of 1170 (Â±20) AD. In the course of further research he came to the conclusion that Crab Nebula supernova could not have exploded in AD 1054, but probably in AD 1153. He connects it with total eclipse of AD 1186. Moreover he holds in strong doubt the veracity of 'ancient' Chinese astronomical data.

  * He argues that the star catalog in the Almagest, ascribed to the Hellenistic astronomer Claudius Ptolemy, was compiled in xv-xvi cy, with this objective in sight develops new methods of dating old stellar catalogues and proves that Almagest is based on the data collected between 600 and 1300 AD, whereby the telluric obliquity is well taken into account. The dating method was tested unambiguously on 736 8-star combinations (Prof Dennis Duke, State University of Florida).

  * He refines and completes Morozov's analysis of some ancient horoscopes, most notably, the so-called Dendera Zodiacsâtwo horoscopes drawn on the ceiling of the temple of Hathorâand comes to the conclusion that they correspond to either the 11th and 13th centuries AD. Moreover he makes in his vol.3 of 'History:Fiction or Science' series final computer aided dating of all 37 Egyptian horoscopes that contain sufficient astronomical data, and shows they all fit into xi-xix timeframe. Traditional history usually either interprets these horoscopes as belonging to the 1st century BC or suggests that they weren't meant to match any date at all.

  * In his final analysis of an eclipse triad described by the ancient Greek Thucydides in History of the Peloponnesian War, Fomenko dates the eclipses to 1039, 1046 and 1057 AD. Because of the layered structure of the manuscript, he concludes that Thucydides actually lived in medieval times and in describing the Peloponnesian War between the Spartans and Athenians he was actually describing the conflict between the medieval Navarrans and Catalans in Greece from 1374 to 1387 AD.

  * Fomenko claims that the abundance of dated astronomical records in cuneiform texts from Mesopotamia is of little use for dating of events as the astronomical information they contain has solutions on the time axis X approx. every 30-40 years.

### [edit] Rejection of common dating methods

On archaeological dating methods, Fomenko concludes that:

> Archaeological, dendrochronological, paleographical and carbon methods of
dating of ancient sources and artifacts are both non-exact and contradictory,
therefore there is not a single piece of firm written evidence or artifact
that could be reliably and independently dated earlier than the XI century

> âAnatoly Fomenko, History: Chronology 1: Second Edition

Dendrochronology is rejected with a claim that it, for dating of objects much
older than the oldest still living trees, isn't an absolute, but a relative
dating method, and thus dependent on traditional chronology. This is discussed
below. Fomenko specifically points to a break of dendrochronological scales
around 1000 AD.[19]

Fomenko also cites a number of cases where carbon dating of a series of
objects of known age gave significantly different dates. He also alleges undue
cooperation between physicists and archaeologists in obtaining the dates,
since most radiocarbon dating labs only accept samples with an age estimate
suggested by historians or archaeologists. Fomenko also claims that carbon
dating over the range of 0 to 2000 AD is inaccurate because it has too many
sources of error that are either guessed at or completely ignored, and that
calibration is done with a statistically meaningless number of samples.[20]
Consequently, Fomenko concludes that carbon dating is not accurate enough to
be used on historical scale.

Fomenko points out that when not fake, presumed 'ancient' coins (Greek, Roman,
Persian) are medieval, their abundance due to the widespread rights of feudal
local coinage. The numismatic dating is both subjective and circular as one
based on the consensual chronology.[citation needed]

He fully agrees with absolute dating methods for clay tablets or coins like
thermoluminescence dating, optically stimulated luminescence dating,
archaeomagnetic, metallographic dating, but points out that their precision
does not allow for comprehensive pinpointing on the time axis either.[citation
needed]

Fomenko also condemns the common archaelogical practice of submitting samples
for dating accompanied with an estimate of the expected age.[citation needed]
He points out that convergence of uncertainty in archaeological dating methods
proves strictly nothing per se. Even if the sum S of probabilities of the
veracity of event produced by N dating methods exceeds 1.00 it does not mean
that the event has taken place with 100% probability.[citation needed]

## [edit] Popularity

Despite criticism, Fomenko has published and sold millions of copies of his
books in his native Russia. His critics have suggested that Fomenko's version
of history appealed to the Russian reading public by keeping alive an imperial
consciousness to replace their disillusionment with the failures of Communism
and consumer capitalism.[21]

Garry Kasparov is a supporter of Fomenko;[22] Billington writes that the
theory "might have quietly blown away in the wind tunnels of academia" if not
for Kasparov's writing in support of it in the magazine Ogonyok.[23] Kasparov
met Fomenko during the 1990s, and found that Fomenko's conclusions concerning
certain subjects were identical to his own. Specifically, regarding the
alleged Dark Ages, Kasparov was incredulous towards the commonly held notion
that art and culture died and were not revived until the Renaissance. Kasparov
also felt it illogical that the Romans and the Greeks living under the banner
of Byzantium could fail to use the mounds of scientific knowledge left them by
Ancient Greece and Rome, especially when it was of urgent military use.

## [edit] Criticism

Although Fomenko is a well-respected mathematician, his historical theories
have been universally rejected by mainstream scholars, who brand them as
pseudoscience.[24] Russian critics tended to see Fomenko's New Chronology as
"an embarrassment and a potent symbol of the depths to which the Russian
academy and society have generally sunk ... since the fall of Communism."[25]
Western critics see his views as part of a renewed Russian imperial ideology,
"keeping alive an imperial consciousness and secular messianism in
Russia."[26][27]

In 2004 Anatoly Fomenko with his coauthor Gleb Nosovsky were awarded for their
books on "New Chronology" the anti-prize of the Moscow International Book Fair
called "Abzatz" (Indent) in the category "Honorary illiteral" awarded for the
worst book published in Russia ÐÐ½ÑÐ¸Ð¿ÑÐµÐ¼Ð¸Ñ Â«ÐÐ±Ð·Ð°ÑÂ»

Critics have accused Fomenko of altering the data to improve the fit with his
ideas and have noted that he violates a key rule of statistics by selecting
matches from the historical record which support his chronology, while
ignoring those which do not, creating artificial, better-than-chance
correlations, and that these practices undermine Fomenko's statistical
arguments.[28] The new chronology was given a comprehensive critical analysis
in a round table on "The 'Myths' of New Chronology" chaired by the dean of the
department of history of Moscow State University in December 1999.[29][30][31]
One of the participants in that round table, the distinguished Russian
archaeologist, Valentin Yanin, compared Fomenko's work to "the sleight of hand
trickery of a David Copperfield."[32]

### [edit] Overlooked convergence of uncertainty in archaeological dating

While Fomenko rejects commonly accepted dating methods, archaeologists,
conservators and other scientists make extensive use of such techniques which
have been rigorously examined and refined during decades of use.[33] While it
is known that radiometric dating methods can only provide approximate dates
(see also this discussion of radiocarbon dating), the uncertainty associated
with each method is known and limited. When several dating methods are used in
conjunction, they usually converge to produce similar ages for objects from
the same layer of a given archaeological site. Independent scientific absolute
dating methods include thermoluminescence dating, optically stimulated
luminescence dating, archaeomagnetic dating, and in some cases
palaeoentomology, as well as relative dating techniques, relying on
stratigraphy or the seriation of different artifact types.

In the specific case of dendrochronology, Fomenko claims that this fails as an
absolute dating method because of gaps in the record. However, independent
dendrochronological sequences beginning with living trees from various parts
of North America[34][35] and Europe[36][37] extend back 12,400 years into the
past. Furthermore, the mutual consistency of these independent
dendrochronological sequences has been confirmed by comparing their
radiocarbon and dendrochronological ages.[38] These and other data have
provided a calibration curve for radiocarbon dating whose internal error does
not exceed Â±163 years over the entire 26,000 years of the curve.[39]

Archaeologists however have developed fully anchored dendrochronology series
going back over 10,000 years.[40] "The absolutely dated tree-ring chronology
now extends back to 12,410 cal BP (10,461 BC)."[41]

### [edit] Misuse of historical sources and forced pattern matching

Critics of Fomenko's theory claim that his use of historical sources is highly
selective and ignores the basic principles of sound historical scholarship.

> Fomenko ... provides no fair-minded review of the historical literature
about a topic with which he deals, quotes only those sources that serve his
purposes, uses evidence in ways that seem strange to professionally-trained
historians and asserts the wildest speculation as if it has the same status as
the information common to the conventional historical literature.[42]

They also note that his method of statistically correlating of texts is very
rough, because it does not take into account the many possible sources of
variation in length outside of "importance". They maintain that differences in
language, style, and scope, as well as the frequently differing views and
focuses of historians, which are manifested in a different notion of
"important events," make quantifying historical writings a dubious proposition
at best. What's more, Fomenko's critics allege that the parallelisms he
reports are often derived by alleged forcing by Fomenko of the data â
rearranging, merging, and removing monarchs as needed to fit the pattern.

For example, on the one hand Fomenko asserts that the vast majority of ancient
sources are either irreparably distorted duplicate accounts of the same events
or later forgeries. In his elision of Jesus and Pope Gregory VII (Book 2,
Chapter 2, pg 51} he ignores the otherwise vast dissimilarities between their
reported lives and focuses on the similarity of their appointment to religious
office by baptism. (The evangelical Jesus is traditionally believed to have
lived for 33 years, and he was an adult at the time of his encounter with John
the Baptist. In contrast, Pope Gregory VII lived for at least 60 years and was
born 8 years after the death of John Crescentius, according to the available
primary sources.[43])

Critics allege that many of the supposed correlations of regnal durations are
the product of the selective parsing and blending of the dates, events, and
individuals mentioned in the original text.[44] Another point raised by
critics is that Fomenko does not explain his altering the data (changing the
order of rulers, dropping rulers, combining rulers, treating interregna as
rulers, switching between theologians and emperors, etc.) preventing a
duplication of the effort and therefore hinting that his results may have a
pathological science aspect to them akin to N-rays over a century ago and
effectively making this whole theory an Ad hoc hypothesis.[28]

### [edit] Unaccounted astronomical phenomena

Critics point out that Fomenko's discussion of astronomical phenomena tends to
be selective, choosing isolated examples that support the New Chronology and
ignoring the large bodies of data that provide statistically supported
evidence for the conventional dating. For his dating of the Almagest star
catalog, Fomenko arbitrarily selected eight stars from the more than 1000
stars in the catalog, one of which (Arcturus) has a large systematic error.
This star has a dominant effect on Fomenko's dating.[45] Statistical analysis
using the same method for all "fast" stars points to the antiquity of the
Almagest star catalog.[46][47] Rawlins points out further that Fomenko's
statistical analysis got the wrong date for the Almagest because he took as
constant Earth's obliquity when it is a variable that changes at a very slow,
but known, rate.[48]

Fomenko's studies ignore the abundance of dated astronomical records in
cuneiform texts from Mesopotamia. Among these texts is a series of
astronomical diaries, which records precise astronomical observations of the
Moon and planets, often dated in terms of the reigns of known historical
figures extending back to the sixth century BCE. Astronomical
retrocalculations for all these moving objects allow us to date these
observations, and consequently the rulers' reigns, to within a single day.[49]
The observations are sufficiently redundant that only a small portion of them
are sufficient to date a text to a unique year in the period 750 BCE to 100
CE. The dates obtained agree with the accepted chronology.[50] In addition, F.
R. Stephenson has demonstrated through a systematic study of a large number of
Babylonian, Ancient and Medieval European, and Chinese records of eclipse
observations that they can be dated consistently with conventional chronology
at least as far back as 600 BCE.[51] In contrast to Fomenko's missing
centuries, Stephenson's studies of eclipse observations find an accumulated
uncertainty in the timing of the rotation of the earth of 420 seconds at 400
BCE, and only 80 seconds at 1000 CE.[52]

### [edit] Magnitude and consistency of conspiracy theory

Fomenko claims that world history prior to 1600 was deliberately falsified for
political reasons. The consequences of this conspiracy theory are twofold.
Documents that conflict with New Chronology are said to have been edited or
fabricated by conspirators (mostly Western European historians and humanists
of late 16th to 17th centuries). The lack of documents directly supporting New
Chronology and conflicting traditional history is said to be thanks to the
majority of such documents being destroyed by the same conspirators.

Consequently, there are many thousands of documents that are considered
authentic in traditional history, but not in New Chronology. Fomenko often
uses "falsified" documents, which he in other contexts dismisses, to prove a
point. For example, he analyzes the Tartar Relation and arrives at the
conclusion that Mongolian capital of Karakorum was located in Central Russia
(equated with present-day Yaroslavl.) However, the Tartar Relation makes
several statements that are at odds with New Chronology (such as that Batu
Khan and Russian duke Yaroslav are two distinct people). Those are said by
Fomenko to have been introduced into the original text by later editors.

Many of the rulers that Fomenko claim are medieval doppelgangers moved in the
imaginary past have left behind vast numbers of coins. Numismatists have made
innumerable identifications of coins to rulers known from ancient sources. For
instance, several Roman emperors issued coinage featuring at least three of
their names, consistent with those found in written sources, and there are
frequent examples of joint coinage between known royal family members, as well
as overstrikes by kings who were known enemies.

Ancient coins in Greek and Latin are unearthed to this day in vast quantities
from Britain to India. For Fomenko's theories to be correct, this could only
be explained by counterfeit on a very grand and consistent scale, as well as a
complete dismissal of all numismatic analyses of hoard findings, coin styles
etc.

### [edit] Reviews of Works on the New Chronology

James Billington, formerly professor of Russian history at Harvard and
Princeton and currently the Librarian of Congress placed Fomenko's work within
the context of the political movement of Eurasianism, which sought to tie
Russian history closely to that of its Asian neighbors. Billington describes
Fomenko as ascribing the belief in past hostility between Russia and the
Mongols to the influence of Western historians. Thus, by Fomenko's chronology,
"Russia and Turkey are parts of a previously single empire."[53] A French
reviewer of Billington's book noted approvingly his concern with the
phantasmagorical conceptions of Fomenko about the global "new chronology."[54]

H. G. van Bueren, professor emeritus of astronomy at the University of
Utrecht, concluded his scathing review of Fomenko's work on the application of
mathematics and astronomy to historical data as follows:

> It is surprising, to say the least, that a well-known (Dutch) publisher
could produce an expensive book of such doubtful intellectual value, of which
the only good word that can be said is that it contains an enormous amount of
factual historical material, untidily ordered, true; badly written, yes;
mixed-up with conjectural nonsense, sure; but still, much useful stuff. For
the rest of the book is absolutely worthless. It reminds one of the early
Soviet attempts to produce tendentious science (Lysenko!), of polywater, of
cold fusion, and of modern creationism. In brief: a useless and misleading
book.[55]

## [edit] See also

  * New Chronology
  * New Rome
  * Phantom time hypothesis

## [edit] References

  * A.T. Fomenko et al.: History: Fiction or Science? Chronology 1, Introducing the problem. A criticism of the Scaligerian chronology. Dating methods as offered by mathematical statistics. Eclipses and zodiacs. ISBN 2-913621-07-4
  * A.T. Fomenko et al.: History: Fiction or Science? Chronology 2, The dynastic parallelism method. Rome. Troy. * Greece. The Bible. Chronological shifts. ISBN 2-913621-06-6
  * A.T. Fomenko et al.: History: Fiction or Science? Chronology 3, Astronomical methods as applied to chronology. Ptolemyâs Almagest. Tycho Brahe. Copernicus. The Egyptian zodiacs. ISBN 2-913621-08-2
  * A.T. Fomenko et al.:History: Fiction or Science? Chronology 4, Russia.Britain.Byzantium.Rome. ISBN 2-913621-10-4
  * Empirico-Statistical Analysis of Narrative Material and its Applications to Historical Dating.

Vol.1: The Development of the Statistical Tools. Vol.2: The Analysis of
Ancient and Medieval Records. â Kluwer Academic Publishers. The Netherlands,
1994.

  * Geometrical and Statistical Methods of Analysis of Star Configurations. Dating Ptolemy's

Almagest. Together with V. V Kalashnikov., G. V. Nosovsky. â CRC-Press, USA,
1993.

  * New Methods of Statistical Analysis of Historical Texts. Applications to Chronology. Antiquity in the Middle Ages. Greek and Bible History. Vols.1, 2, 3. â The Edwin Mellen Press. USA. Lewiston. Queenston. Lampeter, 1999.
  * A.T. Fomenko: ÐÐ¾Ð²ÑÐµ ÑÐ¼Ð¿Ð¸ÑÐ¸ÐºÐ¾-ÑÑÐ°ÑÐ¸ÑÑÐ¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¸Ðµ Ð¼ÐµÑÐ¾Ð´Ð¸ÐºÐ¸ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²Ð°Ð½Ð¸Ñ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½Ð¸Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð±ÑÑÐ¸Ð¹ Ð¸ Ð¿ÑÐ¸Ð»Ð¾Ð¶ÐµÐ½Ð¸Ñ Ðº Ð³Ð»Ð¾Ð±Ð°Ð»ÑÐ½Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½ÐµÐ³Ð¾ Ð¸ ÑÑÐµÐ´Ð½ÐµÐ²ÐµÐºÐ¾Ð²Ð¾Ð³Ð¾ Ð¼Ð¸ÑÐ° (New empirical statistical techniques for dating ancient events, and their applications to the global chronology of the Ancient and Medieval World) (Russian)
  * Robert Grishin and Vladimir Melamed, "The Medieval Empire of the Israelites", published 2003; ISBN 0973757604
  * Sheiko, Konstantin, "Lomonosov's Bastards: Anatolii Fomenko, Pseudo-History, and Russia's Search for a Post-Communist Identity," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wollongong, NSW, Australia, 2004.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Billington, James H. (2004). Russia in Search of Itself. JHU Press. pp. 83\. "The radical revisionism of Nosovsky and Fomenko's New Chronology of Rus has its origins in the attempt by Nicholai Morozov to synthesize science and history during twenty-five years in prison"
  2. ^ Colavito, Jason (2004). "Who Lost the Middle Ages?". Skeptic 11 (2): 66. "Today an intellectual successor to Hardouin claims that it is not classical antiquity that was forged, but instead the history of the Middle Ages. Russian mathematician Anatoly Fomenko has devised a system he calls the 'New Chronology'...".
  3. ^ Diacu, Florin (2005). "Chapter 2. A New Science". The Lost Millennium: History's Timetables Under Siege. Alfred A. Knopf.
  4. ^ Diacu, Florin (2005). "Chapter 3. Swan Song". The Lost Millennium: History's Timetables Under Siege. Alfred A. Knopf.
  5. ^ Newton, Isaac. "Chap. I. Of the Chronology of the First Ages of the Greeks." (download). THE CHRONOLOGY OF ANCIENT KINGDOMS AMENDED. To which is Prefix'd, A SHORT CHRONICLE from the First Memory of Things in Europe, to the Conquest of Persia by Alexander the Great.. http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/15784. Retrieved on 2006-10-26.
  6. ^ Johnson, Edwin. "Preface" (PDF). Atiqua Mater. http://www.radikalkritik.de/AntiquaMater1.pdf.
  7. ^ Rank, Otto (in German). Der Myths von der Geburt des Helden.
  8. ^ Beam, Alex (9/16/1991). "A shorter history of civilization". Boston Globe.
  9. ^ Ð¤Ð¾Ð¼ÐµÐ½ÐºÐ¾ Ð.Ð¢., ÐÐ¾ÑÐ¾Ð²ÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹ Ð.Ð. (2004) (in Russian). Ð¦Ð°ÑÑ Ð¡Ð»Ð°Ð²ÑÐ½. Ð¡ÐÐ±.: ÐÐµÐ²Ð°.
  10. ^ Konstantin Sheiko, "Lomonosov's Bastards: Anatolii Fomenko, Pseudo-History, and Russia's Search for a Post-Communist Identity," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wollongong, NSW, Australia, 2004, pp. 5, 8, 56.
  11. ^ Ð¤Ð¾Ð¼ÐµÐ½ÐºÐ¾ Ð.Ð¢., ÐÐ¾ÑÐ¾Ð²ÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹ Ð.Ð. (2007) (in Russian). ÐÐ°Ð±ÑÑÑÐ¹ ÐÐµÑÑÑÐ°Ð»Ð¸Ð¼: Ð¡ÑÐ°Ð¼Ð±ÑÐ» Ð² ÑÐ²ÐµÑÐµ Ð½Ð¾Ð²Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸: Ð¡ Ð¿ÑÐ¸Ð»Ð¾Ð¶ÐµÐ½Ð¸ÐµÐ¼ Ð¾Ð¿Ð¸ÑÐ°Ð½Ð¸Ñ Ð´Ð²Ð¾ÑÐ° ÑÑÐ»ÑÐ°Ð½Ð¾Ð² Ð¸Ð· Â«Ð¡ÐºÐ¸ÑÑÐºÐ¾Ð¹ Ð¸ÑÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸Ð¸Â» Ð.Ð. ÐÑÐ·Ð»Ð¾Ð²Ð°. Ð.: ÐÑÑÑÐµÐ»Ñ, ÐÐ¡Ð¢.
  12. ^ Grishin, R. (download). THE ZIGZAGS OF OUR HISTORY. http://www.new-tradition.org/real-jesus.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-22.
  13. ^ Ð.Ð¢.Ð¤Ð¾Ð¼ÐµÐ½ÐºÐ¾, Ð.Ð.ÐÐ¾ÑÐ¾Ð²ÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹ (in Russian) (download). ÐÐ°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²ÐºÐ° Ð Ð¾Ð¶Ð´ÐµÑÑÐ²Ð° Ð¥ÑÐ¸ÑÑÐ¾Ð²Ð° ÑÐµÑÐµÐ´Ð¸Ð½Ð¾Ð¹ XII Ð²ÐµÐºÐ°. http://chronologia.org/car/04cs1.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-22.
  14. ^ Dmitrii Sidorov, "Post-Imperial Third Romes: Resurrections of a Russian Orthodox Geopolitical Metaphor", Geopolitics, 11 (2006):317â347, at pp. 336-7 .
  15. ^ Fomenko, A. T.. "1. ÑÑÐ½ÐºÑÐ¸Ñ Ð¾Ð±ÑÐµÐ¼Ð° Ð¸ÑÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¾Ð³Ð¾ ÑÐµÐºÑÑÐ°. ÐÑÐ¸Ð½ÑÐ¸Ð¿ ÐºÐ¾ÑÑÐµÐ»ÑÑÐ¸Ð¸ Ð¼Ð°ÐºÑÐ¸Ð¼ÑÐ¼Ð¾Ð²." (in Russian) (.txt). ÐÐ¾Ð²ÑÐµ ÑÐ¼Ð¿Ð¸ÑÐ¸ÐºÐ¾-ÑÑÐ°ÑÐ¸ÑÑÐ¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¸Ðµ Ð¼ÐµÑÐ¾Ð´Ð¸ÐºÐ¸ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²Ð°Ð½Ð¸Ñ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½Ð¸Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð±ÑÑÐ¸Ð¹ Ð¸ Ð¿ÑÐ¸Ð»Ð¾Ð¶ÐµÐ½Ð¸Ñ Ðº Ð³Ð»Ð¾Ð±Ð°Ð»ÑÐ½Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½ÐµÐ³Ð¾ Ð¸ ÑÑÐµÐ´Ð½ÐµÐ²ÐµÐºÐ¾Ð²Ð¾Ð³Ð¾ Ð¼Ð¸ÑÐ° (ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐºÐ°Ñ ÑÐ¿ÑÐ°Ð²ÐºÐ°). http://www.univer.omsk.su/foreign/fom/fom.txt. Retrieved on 2006-09-12.
  16. ^ a b Fomenko, A. T.. "2. Ð²ÑÑÐ¸ÑÐ»Ð¸ÑÐµÐ»ÑÐ½ÑÐ¹ ÑÐºÑÐ¿ÐµÑÐ¸Ð¼ÐµÐ½Ñ. ÐÑÐ¸Ð¼ÐµÑÑ Ð·Ð°Ð²Ð¸ÑÐ¸Ð¼ÑÑ Ð¸ Ð½ÐµÐ·Ð°Ð²Ð¸ÑÐ¸Ð¼ÑÑ Ð¸ÑÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¸Ñ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¸Ðº." (in Russian) (.txt). ÐÐ¾Ð²ÑÐµ ÑÐ¼Ð¿Ð¸ÑÐ¸ÐºÐ¾-ÑÑÐ°ÑÐ¸ÑÑÐ¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¸Ðµ Ð¼ÐµÑÐ¾Ð´Ð¸ÐºÐ¸ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²Ð°Ð½Ð¸Ñ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½Ð¸Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð±ÑÑÐ¸Ð¹ Ð¸ Ð¿ÑÐ¸Ð»Ð¾Ð¶ÐµÐ½Ð¸Ñ Ðº Ð³Ð»Ð¾Ð±Ð°Ð»ÑÐ½Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½ÐµÐ³Ð¾ Ð¸ ÑÑÐµÐ´Ð½ÐµÐ²ÐµÐºÐ¾Ð²Ð¾Ð³Ð¾ Ð¼Ð¸ÑÐ° (ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐºÐ°Ñ ÑÐ¿ÑÐ°Ð²ÐºÐ°). http://www.univer.omsk.su/foreign/fom/fom.txt. Retrieved on 2006-09-12.
  17. ^ Fomenko, A. T.. "2. ÐÐ°Ð³Ð°Ð´Ð¾ÑÐ½ÑÐµ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¸ÐºÐ¸-Ð´ÑÐ±Ð»Ð¸ÐºÐ°ÑÑ Ð²Ð½ÑÑÑÐ¸ "ÑÑÐµÐ±Ð½Ð¸ÐºÐ° ÑÐºÐ°Ð»Ð¸Ð³ÐµÑÐ°-Ð¿ÐµÑÐ°Ð²Ð¸ÑÑÐ°"." (in Russian) (.txt). ÐÐ¾Ð²ÑÐµ ÑÐ¼Ð¿Ð¸ÑÐ¸ÐºÐ¾-ÑÑÐ°ÑÐ¸ÑÑÐ¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¸Ðµ Ð¼ÐµÑÐ¾Ð´Ð¸ÐºÐ¸ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²Ð°Ð½Ð¸Ñ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½Ð¸Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð±ÑÑÐ¸Ð¹ Ð¸ Ð¿ÑÐ¸Ð»Ð¾Ð¶ÐµÐ½Ð¸Ñ Ðº Ð³Ð»Ð¾Ð±Ð°Ð»ÑÐ½Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½ÐµÐ³Ð¾ Ð¸ ÑÑÐµÐ´Ð½ÐµÐ²ÐµÐºÐ¾Ð²Ð¾Ð³Ð¾ Ð¼Ð¸ÑÐ° (ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐºÐ°Ñ ÑÐ¿ÑÐ°Ð²ÐºÐ°). http://www.univer.omsk.su/foreign/fom/fom.txt. Retrieved on 2006-09-12.
  18. ^ Anatoly T. Fomenko, History: Fiction or Science vol.I, Chronology, 2nd. ed. (Paris, London, New York: Delamere Publishing, 2006), pp.93-94, 105-6. Newton's analysis has since been criticized as suffering "from two fundamental defects. The two parameters he sought to determine were highly correlated; and he also adopted a somewhat arbitrary weighting scheme in analysing suspected observations of total solar eclipses. Many of the observations he investigated were of doubtful reliability. Hence, despite the low weight he assigned them, they had a disproportionate effect on his solutions." F. Richard Stephenson, "Historical Eclipses and Earth's Rotation", Astronomy & Geophysics, 44 (2003): 2.23-2.24.
  19. ^ Fomenko, A. T.. "15.1. ÐÐµÐ¿ÑÐµÑÑÐ²Ð½Ð°Ñ ÑÐºÐ°Ð»Ð° Ð´ÐµÐ½Ð´ÑÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¾Ð³Ð¾ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²Ð°Ð½Ð¸Ñ Ð¿ÑÐ¾ÑÑÐ½ÑÑÐ° Ð² Ð¿ÑÐ¾ÑÐ»Ð¾Ðµ Ð½Ðµ Ð´Ð°Ð»ÐµÐµ Ð´ÐµÑÑÑÐ¾Ð³Ð¾ Ð²ÐµÐºÐ° Ð½Ð¾Ð²Ð¾Ð¹ ÑÑÑ" (in Russian) (.txt). ÐÐ¾Ð²ÑÐµ ÑÐ¼Ð¿Ð¸ÑÐ¸ÐºÐ¾-ÑÑÐ°ÑÐ¸ÑÑÐ¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¸Ðµ Ð¼ÐµÑÐ¾Ð´Ð¸ÐºÐ¸ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²Ð°Ð½Ð¸Ñ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½Ð¸Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð±ÑÑÐ¸Ð¹ Ð¸ Ð¿ÑÐ¸Ð»Ð¾Ð¶ÐµÐ½Ð¸Ñ Ðº Ð³Ð»Ð¾Ð±Ð°Ð»ÑÐ½Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½ÐµÐ³Ð¾ Ð¸ ÑÑÐµÐ´Ð½ÐµÐ²ÐµÐºÐ¾Ð²Ð¾Ð³Ð¾ Ð¼Ð¸ÑÐ° (ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐºÐ°Ñ ÑÐ¿ÑÐ°Ð²ÐºÐ°). http://www.univer.omsk.su/foreign/fom/fom.txt. Retrieved on 2006-09-09.
  20. ^ Fomenko, A. T.. "16. Ð½Ð°Ð´ÐµÐ¶Ð½Ñ Ð»Ð¸ ÑÐ°Ð´Ð¸Ð¾ÑÐ³Ð»ÐµÑÐ¾Ð´Ð½ÑÐµ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²ÐºÐ¸?" (in Russian) (.txt). ÐÐ¾Ð²ÑÐµ ÑÐ¼Ð¿Ð¸ÑÐ¸ÐºÐ¾-ÑÑÐ°ÑÐ¸ÑÑÐ¸ÑÐµÑÐºÐ¸Ðµ Ð¼ÐµÑÐ¾Ð´Ð¸ÐºÐ¸ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²Ð°Ð½Ð¸Ñ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½Ð¸Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð±ÑÑÐ¸Ð¹ Ð¸ Ð¿ÑÐ¸Ð»Ð¾Ð¶ÐµÐ½Ð¸Ñ Ðº Ð³Ð»Ð¾Ð±Ð°Ð»ÑÐ½Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸ Ð´ÑÐµÐ²Ð½ÐµÐ³Ð¾ Ð¸ ÑÑÐµÐ´Ð½ÐµÐ²ÐµÐºÐ¾Ð²Ð¾Ð³Ð¾ Ð¼Ð¸ÑÐ° (ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐºÐ°Ñ ÑÐ¿ÑÐ°Ð²ÐºÐ°). http://www.univer.omsk.su/foreign/fom/fom.txt. Retrieved on 2006-09-09.
  21. ^ Konstantin Sheiko, "Lomonosov's Bastards: Anatolii Fomenko, Pseudo-History, and Russia's Search for a Post-Communist Identity," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wollongong, NSW, Australia, 2004, p. 13.
  22. ^ Mathematics of the Past
  23. ^ Billington, James H. (2004). Russia in Search of Itself. JHU Press. pp. 83.
  24. ^ Vitaly L. Ginzburg, Pseudoscience and the Need to Combat It. Ginzburg is a Nobel laureate and a member of the Commission to Combat Pseudoscience and the Falsification of Scientific Research of the Russian Academy of Sciences.
  25. ^ Konstantin Sheiko, "Lomonosov's Bastards: Anatolii Fomenko, Pseudo-History, and Russia's Search for a Post-Communist Identity," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wollongong, NSW, Australia, 2004, p. 6.
  26. ^ Konstantin Sheiko, "Lomonosov's Bastards: Anatolii Fomenko, Pseudo-History, and Russia's Search for a Post-Communist Identity," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wollongong, NSW, Australia, 2004, p. 13.
  27. ^ Dmitrii Sidorov, "Post-Imperial Third Romes: Resurrections of a Russian Orthodox Geopolitical Metaphor", Geopolitics, 11 (2006):317â347, at pp. 336-7.
  28. ^ a b Morten Monrad Pedersen, Was the First Queen of Denmark a Man?, Skeptic Report, November 2002. Retrieved 9 October 2007.
  29. ^ V.L. Yanin, ed., ÐÐ¸ÑÑ "Ð½Ð¾Ð²Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸": ÐÐ°ÑÐµÑÐ¸Ð°Ð»Ñ ÐºÐ¾Ð½Ñ. Ð½Ð° Ð¸ÑÑ. ÑÐ°Ðº. ÐÐÐ£ Ð¸Ð¼. Ð. Ð. ÐÐ¾Ð¼Ð¾Ð½Ð¾ÑÐ¾Ð²Ð°, 21 Ð´ÐµÐº. 1999 (Myths of the new chronology: Conference in the History Department of the MGU...: 21 Dec. 1999), Moscow: Russkaia Panorama, 2001. ISBN 593165046X.
  30. ^ Introduction to article on Fomenko in the Herald of the Russian Academy of Sciences
  31. ^ Ð "Ð³Ð»Ð¾Ð±Ð°Ð»ÑÐ½Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸" Ð.Ð¢.Ð¤Ð¾Ð¼ÐµÐ½ÐºÐ¾ (On the "Global Chronology" A.T.Fomenko).
  32. ^ V. L. Yanin, "ÐÐ¸ÑÑÑÐ¸Ðµ Ð²ÑÑÐ¾ÑÑ" Ð°ÐºÐ°Ð´ÐµÐ¼Ð¸ÐºÐ° Ð¤Ð¾Ð¼ÐµÐ½ÐºÐ¾ (The "Gaping Heights" of Academician Fomenko); passage translated in James H. Billington, Russia in Search of Itself, (Washington: Woodrow Wilson Center Press / Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press), 2004, pp. 83-4.
  33. ^ See the international journal Radiocarbon for examples.
  34. ^ C. W. Ferguson and D. A. Graybill, "Dendrochronology of Bristlecone Pine: A Progress Report", Radiocarbon, 25 (1983): 287-288
  35. ^ Minze Stuiver, "A High-Precision Calibration of the AD Radiocarbon Time Scale", Radiocarbon, 24 (1982): 1-26.
  36. ^ M. Friedrich, et al. "The 12,460-year Hohenheim oak and pine tree-ring chronology from central Europe - A unique annual record for radiocarbon calibration and paleoenvironment reconstructions", Radiocarbon, 46 (2004): 1111-1122
  37. ^ J. R. Pilcher, et al., "A 7,272-year tree-ring chronology for western Europe", Nature, 312(1984):150-152.
  38. ^ Minze Stuiver, et al., "Radiocarbon Age Calibration back to 13,300 Years BP and the 14C Age Matching of the German Oak and US Bristlecone Pine Chronologies", Radiocarbon, 28 (1986): 969-979.
  39. ^ Paula J. Reimer, et al., "INTCAL04 Terrestrial Radiocarbon Age Calibration, 0â26 Cal Kyr BP", Radiocarbon 46 (2004): 1029-1058; data online at http://www.radiocarbon.org/IntCal04%20files/intcal04.14c .
  40. '^ Friedrich M, Remmele S, Kromer B, Hofmann J, Spurk M, Kaiser KF, Orcel C, KÃ¼ppers M (2004). "The 12,460-year Hohenheim oak and pine tree-ring chronology from central Europe - A unique annual record for radiocarbon calibration and paleoenvironment reconstructions". Radiocarbon '46: 1111â1122.
  41. ^ Friedrich, M., Remmele, S., Kromer, B., Hofmann, J., Spurk, M., Kaiser, K. F., Orcel, C., KÃ¼ppers, M. "The 12,460-year Hohenheim Oak and pine tree-ring chronology from central Europe: A unique annual record for radiocarbon calibration and paleoenvironment reconstructions" Radiocarbon 2004, vol. 46, no3, pp. 1111-1122 [1]
  42. ^ Konstantin Sheiko, "Lomonosov's Bastards: Anatolii Fomenko, Pseudo-History, and Russia's Search for a Post-Communist Identity," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wollongong, NSW, Australia, 2004, p. 21.
  43. ^ CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Pope St. Gregory VII
  44. ^ Who Lost the Middle Ages?
  45. ^ Yu. N. Efremov, ÐÑÑÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð¼Ð¸Ñ Ð¸ ÑÐ¸Ð½Ð´ÑÐ¾Ð¼ âÐ½Ð¾Ð²Ð¾Ð¹ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ð¸â (Astronomy and the Syndrome of "New Chronology").
  46. ^ A. K. Dambis and Yu. N. Efremov, "Dating Ptolemy's Star Catalogue through Proper Motions: The Hipparchan Epoch", Journal for the History of Astronomy, 31 (2000): 115-134;see especially note 17 (p. 134).
  47. ^ Michael L. Gorodetsky, ÐÐ²ÐµÐ·Ð´Ð½ÑÐµ Ð²Ð¾Ð¹Ð½Ñ Ñ Ð¸ÑÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸ÐµÐ¹ (Ð²ÐµÑÐ¸ÑÐ¸ÐºÐ°ÑÐ¸Ñ Ð´Ð°ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¾Ð²ÐºÐ¸ ÐÐ»ÑÐ¼Ð°Ð³ÐµÑÑÐ°) (Starry wars with history (Verification of the dating of the Almagest)).
  48. ^ Dennis Rawlins, "Recovering Hipparchosâ Last Lost Lustrous Star", DIO 4.3 (1994): 119. Like Dambis and Efremov, Rawlins provides evidence that the Almagest star catalog was based on observations made in the second century BCE by Hipparchus.
  49. ^ Asger Aaboe, Episodes from the Early History of Astronomy, (New York: Springer, 2001) pp. 39-40 ISBN 0-387-95136-9.
  50. ^ F. R. Stephenson and J. M. Steele, "Astronomical Dating of Babylonian Texts Describing the Total Solar Eclipse of S.E. 175", Journal for the History of Astronomy, 37 (2006): 55-69. This study showed that either the description of the phenomena observed at the solar eclipse or of a set of conjunctions of the slow planets Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars were sufficient to equate S.E. 175 with 137/6 BCE. Additional details in these texts provided further confirmation of this dating.
  51. ^ F. Richard Stephenson, "Historical Eclipses and Earth's Rotation", Astronomy & Geophysics, 44 (2003): 2.22-2.27.
  52. ^ Fred Espenak, Eclipse Predictions and Earth's Rotation
  53. ^ James H. Billington, Russia in Search of Itself, (Washington: Woodrow Wilson Center Press / Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press), 2004, pp. 82-4.
  54. ^ "les conceptions fantasmagoriques de Fomenko sur la Â« nouvelle chronologie Â» mondiale." MarlÃ¨ne Laruelle, Review of James H. Billington, Russia in search of itself, Washington, D.C., Woodrow Wilson Center Press / Baltimore â London, The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004; Cahiers du Monde Russe, 45/3-4, pp. 736-7.
  55. ^ H. G. van Bueren, "Mathematics and Logic", Review of A. T. Fomenko, Empirico-Statistical Analysis of Narrative Materials and its Applications to Historical Dating, 2 vols, (Dordrecht: Kluwer) 1994, in Annals of Science, 53 (1996): 206-207.

## [edit] External links

  * (Russian) ÐÐ¾Ð²Ð°Ñ Ð¥ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ñ
  * Article "New Hypothetical Chronology and Concept of the English History. British Empire as a Direct Successor of Byzantine-Roman Empire. (Short Scheme)" by A.T.Fomenko, G.V.Nosovskij
  * New Chronology of the World History at www.univer.omsk.su
  * ÐÑÑÐ½Ð°Ð» "ÐÑÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸Ñ Ð¸ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ñ", Ð¿Ð¾ÑÐ²ÑÑÐµÐ½Ð½ÑÐ¹ ÐºÑÐ¸ÑÐ¸ÐºÐµ ÑÑÐ°Ð´Ð¸ÑÐ¸Ð¾Ð½Ð½Ð¾Ð¹ Ð¼Ð¾Ð´ÐµÐ»Ð¸ Ð¿ÑÐ¾ÑÐ»Ð¾Ð³Ð¾ ÑÐµÐ»Ð¾Ð²ÐµÑÐµÑÑÐ²Ð° at www.jesus1053.com
  * http://lib.ru/FOMENKOAT/engltr.txt
  * A debunking of Fomenko's theories: Who Lost the Middle Ages?
  * (Russian) Fomenkology. Critical evaluation of New Chronology of Anatoly Fomenko

v â¢ d â¢ e

Chronology  
Major subjects

Time Â· Astronomy Â· Geology Â· Paleontology Â· Archaeology Â· History

<IMG>  
Portal:ChronologyChronology Portal  
Eras and Epochs

Calendar Eras: Ab urbe condita Â· Anno Domini / Common Era Â· Anno Mundi Â·
Spanish era Â· Before Present Â· Hijri

Egyptian Â· Sothic cycle Â· Hindu units of measurement Â· Hindu Yugas

Regnal year: Canon of Kings Â· King lists Â· Limmu Â· Seleucid era Â· Era
name: Chinese Â· Japanese Â· Korean  
Calendars

Pre-Julian Roman Â· Original Julian Â· Proleptic Julian Â· Revised Julian  

Gregorian Â· Proleptic Gregorian Â· Old Style and New Style

Lunisolar Â· Solar Â· Lunar Â· Islamic Â· Chinese sexagenary cycle  

Astronomical year numbering Â· ISO week date  
Astronomic time  
and techniques

Astronomical chronology Â· Cosmic Calendar Â· Ephemeris Â· Galactic year Â·
Metonic cycle Â· Milankovitch cycles  
Geologic time scale  
and techniques

Deep time Â· Geological history Â· Geological time units: Eons Â· Eras Â·
Periods â¢ Epoch â¢ Age Dating Standards: GSSA â¢ GSSP  
Chronostratigraphy Â· Geochronology Â· Isotope geochemistry Â· Law of
superposition Â· Optical dating Â· Samarium-neodymium dating  
Archaeological  
techniques

Dating methodology  
Absolute dating Â· Incremental dating Â· Archaeomagnetic dating Â·
Dendrochronology Â· Glottochronology Â· Ice core Â· Lichenometry Â·
Paleomagnetism Â· Radiocarbon dating Â· Radiometric dating Â· Tephrochronology
Â· Thermoluminescence dating Â· Uranium-lead dating  
Relative dating Â· Seriation Â· Stratification  
Genetic techniques

Amino acid dating Â· Molecular clock  
Related topics

Chronicle Â· New Chronology Â· Periodization Â· Synchronoptic view Â· Timeline
Â· Year zero Â· Circa Â· Floruit  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Chronology_(Fomenko)"

Categories: Chronology | Conspiracy theories | History books | Pseudohistory |
Russian-language literature

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 07:59 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



