
# Accelerating change

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

In futures studies and the history of technology, accelerating change is an
increase in the rate of technological (and sometimes social and cultural)
progress throughout history, which may suggest faster and more profound change
in the future. While many have suggested accelerating change, its popularity
in modern times is closely associated with the ideas and writings of Raymond
Kurzweil, especially in relation to his theories about technological
singularity.

## Contents

  * 1 Early theories
  * 2 Kurzweil and The Law of Accelerating Returns
  * 3 Criticisms
  * 4 Gallery
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Early theories

In 1958, StanisÅaw Ulam wrote in reference to a conversation with John von
Neumann:

â One conversation centered on the ever accelerating progress of technology
and changes in the mode of human life, which gives the appearance of
approaching some essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which
human affairs, as we know them, could not continue. â  
In his book "Mindsteps to the Cosmos" (HarperCollins, August 1983), Gerald S.
Hawkins elucidated his notion of 'mindsteps', dramatic and irreversible
changes to paradigms or world views. He identified five distinct mindsteps in
human history, and the technology that accompanied these "new world views":
the invention of imagery, writing, mathematics, printing, the telescope,
rocket, computer, radio, TV... "Each one takes the collective mind closer to
reality, one stage further along in its understanding of the relation of
humans to the cosmos." He noted: "The waiting period between the mindsteps is
getting shorter. One can't help noticing the acceleration." Hawkins' empirical
'mindstep equation' quantified this, and gave dates for future mindsteps. The
date of the next mindstep (5; the series begins at 0) is given as 2021, with
two more successively closer mindsteps, until the limit of the series in 2053.
His speculations ventured beyond the technological:

â The mindsteps... appear to have certain things in common - a new and
unfolding human perspective, related inventions in the area of memes and
communications, and a long formulative waiting period before the next mindstep
comes along. None of the mindsteps can be said to have been truly anticipated,
and most were resisted at the early stages. In looking to the future we may
equally be caught unawares. We may have to grapple with the presently
inconceivable, with mind-stretching discoveries and concepts. â  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Mass use of inventions: Years until use by a quarter of US population

Since the late 1970s, others like Alvin Toffler (author of Future Shock),
Daniel Bell and John Naisbitt have approached theories of postindustrial
societies. They argue the industrial era is coming to an end, and services and
information are supplanting industry and goods. Some more extreme visions of
the postindustrial society, especially in fiction, envision the elimination of
economic scarcity.

Many sociologists and anthropologists have created social theories dealing
with social and cultural evolution. Some, like Lewis H. Morgan, Leslie White,
and Gerhard Lenski, declare technological progress to be the primary factor
driving the development of human civilization.

Morgan's concept of three major stages of social evolution (savagery,
barbarism, and civilization) can be divided by technological milestones, like
fire, the bow, and pottery in the savage era, domestication of animals,
agriculture, and metalworking in the barbarian era and the alphabet and
writing in the civilization era.

Instead of specific inventions, White decided that the measure by which to
judge the evolution of culture was energy. For White, "the primary function of
culture" is to "harness and control energy." White differentiates between five
stages of human development: In the first, people use energy of their own
muscles. In the second, they use energy of domesticated animals. In the third,
they use the energy of plants (agricultural revolution). In the fourth, they
learn to use the energy of natural resources: coal, oil, gas. In the fifth,
they harness nuclear energy. Craig Brownell suggests that there could be a
sixth stage in this series: the utilisation of zero-point vacuum quantum
fluctuation energy, for propulsion if not actual power generation. There is
much debate over whether Casimir effects can be exploited, however.

<IMG>

<IMG>

US Patents granted, 1870â2005

White introduced a formula P=ET, where E is a measure of energy consumed, and
T is the measure of efficiency of technical factors utilizing the energy. In
his own words, "culture evolves as the amount of energy harnessed per capita
per year is increased, or as the efficiency of the instrumental means of
putting the energy to work is increased." The Russian astronomer Nikolai
Kardashev extrapolated this theory to create the Kardashev scale, which
categorizes the energy use of advanced civilizations. A Dyson sphere is Type
II on this scale, and humanity is currently at about 0.72.

Lenski takes a more modern approach and focuses on information. The more
information and knowledge (especially allowing the shaping of natural
environment) a given society has, the more advanced it is. He identifies four
stages of human development, based on advances in the history of
communication. In the first stage, information is passed by genes. In the
second, when humans gain intelligence, they can learn and pass information by
experience. In the third, the humans start using signs and develop logic. In
the fourth, they can create symbols, develop language and writing.
Advancements in the technology of communication translates into advancements
in the economic system and political system, distribution of goods, social
inequality and other spheres of social life. He also differentiates societies
based on their level of technology, communication and economy: (1) hunters and
gatherers, (2) simple agricultural, (3) advanced agricultural, (4) industrial
(5) special (like fishing societies).

## [edit] Kurzweil and The Law of Accelerating Returns

Kurzweil in his 2001 essay The Law of Accelerating Returns extends Moore's law
to describe an exponential growth of technological progress. Moore's law
describes an exponential growth pattern in the complexity of integrated
semiconductor circuits. Kurzweil extends this to include technologies from far
before the integrated circuit to future forms of technology. Whenever a
technology approaches some kind of a barrier, according to Kurzweil, a new
technology will be invented to allow us to cross that barrier. He cites
numerous past examples of this to substantiate his assertions. He predicts
that such paradigm shifts have and will continue to become increasingly
common, leading to "technological change so rapid and profound it represents a
rupture in the fabric of human history." He believes the Law of Accelerating
Returns implies that a technological singularity will occur before the end of
the 21st century, in 2045.

The essay begins:

â An analysis of the history of technology shows that technological change
is exponential, contrary to the common-sense 'intuitive linear' view. So we
won't experience 100 years of progress in the 21st centuryâit will be more
like 20,000 years of progress (at today's rate). The 'returns,' such as chip
speed and cost-effectiveness, also increase exponentially. There's even
exponential growth in the rate of exponential growth. Within a few decades,
machine intelligence will surpass human intelligence, leading to the
Singularityâtechnological change so rapid and profound it represents a
rupture in the fabric of human history. The implications include the merger of
biological and nonbiological intelligence, immortal software-based humans, and
ultra-high levels of intelligence that expand outward in the universe at the
speed of light. â  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Moore's Law expanded to other technologies

The Law of Accelerating Returns has in many ways altered public perception of
Moore's. It is a common (but mistaken) belief that Moore's law makes
predictions regarding all forms of technology, when really it only concerns
semiconductor circuits. Many futurists still use the term "Moore's Law" to
describe ideas like those put forth by Kurzweil and others.

According to Kurzweil, since the beginning of evolution, more complex life
forms have been evolving exponentially faster, with shorter and shorter
intervals between the emergence of radically new life forms, such as human
beings, who have the capacity to engineer (intentionally to design with
efficiency) a new trait which replaces relatively blind evolutionary
mechanisms of selection for efficiency. By extension, the rate of technical
progress amongst humans has also been exponentially increasing, as we discover
more effective ways to do things, we also discover more effective ways to
learn, i.e. language, numbers, written language, philosophy, scientific
method, instruments of observation, tallying devices, mechanical calculators,
computers, each of these major advances in our ability to account for
information occur increasingly close together. Already within the past sixty
years, life in the industrialized world has changed almost beyond recognition
except for living memories from the first half of the 20th century. This
pattern will culminate in unimaginable technological progress in the 21st
century, leading to a singularity. Kurzweil elaborates on his views in his
books The Age of Spiritual Machines and The Singularity Is Near.

## [edit] Criticisms

Some claim the exponential growth of technological progress may become linear
or inflected or may begin to flatten into a limited-growth curve. In this
model, instead of an overall acceleration of progress, technological advance
jumps forward whenever there is a human "buy in" and stalls whenever there is
no benefit large enough to profit the technologists. As a result, the sequence
of changes never gets steep enough to become a singularity.

Examples of large human "buy-ins" into technology include the computer
revolution, as well as massive government projects like the Manhattan Project
and the Human Genome Project. The foundation organizing the Methuselah Mouse
Prize believes aging research could be the subject of such a massive project
if substantial progress is made in slowing or reversing cellular aging in
mice.

Both Theodore Modis and Jonathan Huebner have arguedâeach from different
perspectivesâthat the rate of technological innovation has not only ceased
to rise, but is actually now declining. The validity of their conclusions has
been criticized by John Smart.

Choosing technological "milestones", defining the meaning of technological
"growth", and similar semantic exercises often include significant
subjectivity, and are therefore easily criticized. For example, it can be
claimed that inventions are generally created by a fixed population of human
inventors at a constant rate, regardless of their current technological
prowess, and therefore technological "progress" is actually a function of
population growth, not past inventions.

In fact, "technological singularity" is just one of a few singularities
detected through the analysis of a number of characteristics of the World
System development, for example, with respect to the world population, world
GDP, and some other economic indices.[1] It has been shown[2] that the
hyperbolic pattern of the world demographic, economic, cultural, urbanistic,
and technological growth (observed for many centuries, if not millennia prior
to the 1970s) could be accounted for by a rather simple mechanism, the
nonlinear second order positive feedback, that was shown long ago to generate
precisely the hyperbolic growth, known also as the "blow-up regime" (implying
just finite-time singularities). In our case this nonlinear second order
positive feedback looks as follows: more people â more potential inventors
â faster technological growth â the carrying capacity of the Earth grows
faster â faster population growth â more people â more potential
inventors â faster technological growth, and so on. On the other hand, this
research has shown that since the 1970s the World System does not develop
hyperbolically any more, its development diverges more and more from the blow-
up regime, and at present it is moving "from singularity", rather than "toward
singularity".

Juergen Schmidhuber calls the Singularity Omega, referring to Teilhard de
Chardin's Omega point (1916). For Omega = 2040 he says the series Omega - 2^n
human lifetimes (n<10; one lifetime = 80 years) roughly matches the most
important events in human history. But he also questions the validity of such
lists, suggesting they just reflect a general rule for "both the individual
memory of single humans and the collective memory of entire societies and
their history books: constant amounts of memory space get allocated to
exponentially larger, adjacent time intervals further and further into the
past." He suggests that this may be the reason "why there has never been a
shortage of prophets predicting that the end is near - the important events
according to one's own view of the past always seem to accelerate
exponentially."

## [edit] Gallery

Kurzweil created the following graphs to illustrate his beliefs concerning and
his justification for his Law of Accelerating Returns.

<IMG>

Computer power grows exponentially

<IMG>

Exponential growth in supercomputer power  
## [edit] See also

  * Diminishing returns
  * Logarithmic timeline
  * Moore's Law
  * Simulated reality
  * Technological singularity

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ e.g., Johansen, A., and D. Sornette. 2001. Finite-time Singularity in the Dynamics of the World Population and Economic Indices. Physica A 294(3â4): 465â502
  2. ^ e.g., Korotayev A., Malkov A., Khaltourina D. Introduction to Social Macrodynamics: Secular Cycles and Millennial Trends. Moscow: URSS, 2006; Andrey Korotayev. The World System urbanization dynamics. History & Mathematics: Historical Dynamics and Development of Complex Societies. Edited by Peter Turchin, Leonid Grinin, Andrey Korotayev, and Victor C. de Munck. Moscow: KomKniga, 2006. ISBN 5484010020. P. 44-62

## [edit] References

  * History & Mathematics: Historical Dynamics and Development of Complex Societies. Edited by Peter Turchin, Leonid Grinin, Andrey Korotayev, and Victor C. de Munck. Moscow: KomKniga, 2006. ISBN 5484010020
  * Kurzweil, Ray (2001, Essay: The Law of Accelerating Returns
  * Heylighen, Francis (2007), "Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain", in Modelski, G.; Devezas, T.; Thompson, W., Globalization as an Evolutionary Process: Modeling Global Change, London: Routledge, ISBN 9780415773614

## [edit] External links

  * Kurzweil's official site
  * The Law of Accelerating Returns by Ray Kurzweil
  * Is History Converging? Again? by Juergen Schmidhuber: singularity predictions as a side-effect of memory compression?
  * Accelerating Technology
  * Secular Cycles and Millennial Trends
  * The Royal Mail Coach: Metaphor for a Changing World

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accelerating_change"

Categories: Evolution | Sociocultural evolution | Futurology | Theories of
history | Sociological theories

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 13:08 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



