
# R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A scene in the play, showing three robots.

R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots) is a science fiction play in the Czech
language by Karel Äapek, and an upcoming feature film of the same name from
director James Kerwin. It premiered in 1921 and is famous for having
introduced and popularized the term robot.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 The Origin of the Word 'Robot'
  * 3 Characters in R.U.R.
  * 4 Robots in R.U.R
  * 5 Plot of R.U.R.
  * 6 See also
  * 7 Notes
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

The play begins in a factory that makes 'artificial people' â they are
called Robots, but are closer to the modern idea of androids or even clones,
creatures who can be mistaken for humans. They can plainly think for
themselves. Although they seem happy to work for humans, that changes and
leads to the end of the human race due to a hostile robot rebellion. The play
premiered in Prague in 1921. It was translated from Czech into English by Paul
Selver, and adapted for the English stage by Nigel Playfair in 1923. Basil
Dean produced it in April 1923 for the Reandean Company at St. Martin's
Theatre, London.

After having finished the manuscript, Äapek realized that he had created a
modern version of the old Golem legend. He later took a different approach to
the same theme in War with the Newts, in which non-humans become a servant
class in human society.

R.U.R is dark, but not hopeless, and was successful in its day in both Europe
and the United States. In the American production, Spencer Tracy played one of
the robots, in one of his earliest roles.

In February 1938, a thirty-five minute adaptation of a section of the play was
broadcast on BBC Television â the first piece of television science-fiction
ever to be produced. In 1948, another adaptation â this time of the entire
play and running to ninety minutes â was screened by the BBC, and in between
in 1941 BBC radio had also produced a radio play version. None of these three
productions survive in the BBC's archives.

A more modern (1990) translation in English is available in Toward the Radical
Center: A Karel Äapek Reader, published by Catbird Press.

The Hollywood Theater of the Ear dramatized an unabridged audio version of
R.U.R. which is available on the collection 2000x: Tales of the Next Millennia
{ISBN 1-57453-556-0}[1].

The upcoming film adaptation, titled simply R.U.R., is slated for a 2011
release.

## [edit] The Origin of the Word 'Robot'

The play introduced the word Robot, which displaced older words such as
"automaton" or "android" in languages around the world. (In an article in
LidovÃ© noviny, Karel Äapek named his brother Josef as the true inventor of
the word. [1]) In its original Czech, robota means labour. The name Rossum is
an allusion to the Czech word rozum, meaning "reason", "wisdom", "intellect"
or "common-sense". (It has been suggested that the allusion might be preserved
by translating "Rossum" as "Reason", but all published translations to date
have left the name untouched.)

## [edit] Characters in R.U.R.

Parenthesis indicate differences in translations.

Humans

  * Harry Domin (Domain) â General Manager, R.U.R.
  * Fabry â Chief Engineer, R.U.R.
  * Dr. Gall â Head of the Physiological Dept, R.U.R.
  * Dr. Hellman (Hallemeier) â Psychologist-in-Chief
  * Jacob Berman (Busman) â Managing Director, R.U.R.
  * Alquist â Clerk of the Works, R.U.R.
  * Helena Glory â President of the Humanity League, daughter of President Glory
  * Emma (Nana) â Helena's maid

Robots and Robotesses

  * Marius, a Robot
  * Sulla, a Robotess
  * Radius, a Robot
  * Primus, a Robot
  * Helena, a Robotess
  * Daemon (Damon), a Robot

## [edit] Robots in R.U.R

The Robots described in the play are not robots in the modern sense. Rossum's
robots are biological creations engineered in the same fashion as
Frankenstein's creature as described by Mary Shelley. They are biological
entities that have skin mixed in a vat, and their nerves and digestive tracts
spun on spindles, and are then assembled like automobiles. In a limited sense,
they resemble more modern conceptions of man-made life forms (such as the
Replicants in Blade Runner, the Cylons in the new Battlestar Galactica and the
"Actives" in Dollhouse), but in Äapek's time there was no conception of
modern genetic engineering. Äapek's Robots are biological machines, but they
are still assembled, as opposed to grown or born.

## [edit] Plot of R.U.R.

Introduction

Helena, the daughter of the president of a major industrial power, arrives at
the island factory of Rossum's Universal Robots. She meets Domin, the General
Manager of R.U.R., who tells her the history of the company and the Robot
technology, and the basics of economics which generate the demand for labor.
Helena meets Fabry, Dr. Gall, Alquist, and Hallemeier, and reveals she is a
representative of the League of Humanity, a human rights organization which
wishes to "free" the Robots. The managers of the factory find this a
ridiculous proposition, viewing the Robots as any other major appliance, and
Helena is convinced of the irrelevance of such an organization to Robots.
Domin and Helena fall in love and are engaged to be married.

Act One

Ten years later, Helena and her nurse Nana are talking about current events;
in particular the decline in human births. Helena and Domin reminisce about
the day they met, and summarize the last ten years of world history as shaped
by the new worldwide Robot-based economy. Helena meets Dr. Gall's new Robot
experiment, Radius, and Dr Gall describes his experimental Robotess, Robot
Helena. Both are more advanced, fully featured versions. In secret, Helena
burns the formula required to create Robots. The revolt of the Robots reaches
Rossum's island as the act ends.

Act Two

The characters sense that the very universality of the Robots presents a
danger. Reminiscent of the Tower of Babel, the characters discuss whether
creating national Robots who were unable to communicate beyond their language
group would have been desirable. As Robot forces lay siege to the factory,
Helena reveals she has burnt the formula. The characters lament the end of
humanity, and defend their actions despite their imminent deaths as a direct
result. Robots storm the factory and kill all the humans, except for Alquist,
whom the Robots spare because they recognize that "he works with his hands
like the Robots".[2]

Act Three

Years have passed and all humans had been killed by the robot revolution
except for Alquist. Alquist has been working to recreate the formula to make
robots. Because he is not a scientist, he has not made any progress. He has
begged the robot government to search for surviving humans and they have done
so. There are no other surviving humans. Officials from the robot government
approach Alquist and first order and then beg him to complete the formula,
even if it means he will have to kill and dissect other Robots to do so.
Alquist yields, to kill and dissect, which completes the circle of violence
begun in Act Two. Alquist is disgusted by it. Robots Primus and Helena develop
human feelings and fall in love. Playing a hunch, Alquist threatens to dissect
Primus and then Helena; each begs him to take themselves and spare the other.
Alquist realizes that they are the new Adam and Eve, and gives charge of the
world to them.

## [edit] See also

  * Karel Äapek
  * R.U.R. (film)
  * War with the Newts

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ 2000x: Tales of the Next Millennia
  2. ^ Capek, Karel (2001). 'R.U.R.'. translated by Paul Selver and Nigel Playfair. Dover Publications. p. 49.

## [edit] External links

  * General information on the play, including a plot summary and photographs from various historical productions
  * R.U.R. in Czech from Project Gutenberg
  * English language translation by David Wyllie

Retrieved from
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R.U.R._(Rossum%27s_Universal_Robots)"

Categories: Karel Äapek plays | Science fiction theatre | 1921 plays |
Robotics

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * SlovenÄina
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 20:50.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



