
# Zohar

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

    For the villages in southern Israel, see Zohar, Israel and Tzochar. "Zohar" is also a common first name among Israelis.
Rabbinical Eras  
  * Zugot
  * Tannaim
  * Amoraim
  * Savoraim
  * Geonim
  * Rishonim
  * Acharonim

  
Part of a series on  
Kabbalah  
<IMG>  
Subtopics  
Sephirot Â· Qliphoth Â· Ein Sof Â· Tzimtzum Â· Tree of Life Â· Seder
hishtalshelus Â· Jewish meditation Â· Kabbalistic astrology Â· Jewish views of
astrology  
Texts  
Zohar Â· Sefer Yetzirah Â· Bahir Â· Heichalot Â· Sefer Raziel HaMalakh  
Categories  
Kabbalah Â· Judaism Â· Jewish mysticism  
People  
Vilna Gaon Â· Shimon bar Yochai Â· Moshe Cordovero Â· Isaac the Blind Â· Bahya
ben Asher Â· Nahmanides Â· Azriel Â· Isaac Luria Â· Chaim Vital Â· Jacob Emden
Â· Jonathan Eybeschutz Â· Chaim ibn Attar Â· Nathan Adler Â· Shalom Sharabi Â·
Chaim Joseph David Azulai Â· Shlomo Eliyashiv Â· Baba Sali Â· Ben Ish Chai  
  
<IMG>

This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
The Zohar (Hebrew: ×Ö¹×Ö·×¨â, lit Splendor or Radiance) is widely
considered the most important work of Kabbalah, or Jewish mysticism. It is a
mystical commentary on the Torah (the five books of Moses), written in
medieval Aramaic. It contains a mystical discussion of the nature of God, the
origin and structure of the universe, the nature of souls, sin, redemption,
good and evil, and the relationship between God and man.

The Zohar is not one book, but a group of books; these books include
scriptural interpretations as well as material on theosophic theology,
mythical cosmogony, and mystical psychology.

## Contents

  * 1 Origin
  * 2 Traditional view of authorship
    * 2.1 In Jewish thought today
    * 2.2 Critical view of authorship
      * 2.2.1 Arguments for a late dating
      * 2.2.2 Arguments for an earlier dating
  * 3 Academic historical views
    * 3.1 Zohar's ditheistic theology
  * 4 Mysticism
  * 5 Pardes and Biblical exegesis
  * 6 Effects on Judaism
  * 7 Influence on Christian mysticism
  * 8 Appendices and additions
  * 9 English translations
  * 10 See also
  * 11 Notes
  * 12 References
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] Origin

According to the 20th century religious historian Gershom Scholem, most of the
Zohar was written in an exalted, eccentric style of Aramaic, a language that
was spoken in the Land of Israel during the Roman Period in the first
centuries of the Common Era. The Zohar first appeared in Spain in the 13th
century, and was published by a Jewish writer named Moses de Leon. Scholem,
based on accounts from De Leon's contemporaries, and on evidence within the
Zohar (Spanish idioms and syntax, for example), concluded that De Leon was the
actual author.

De Leon himself ascribed this work to a rabbi of the second century, Shimon
bar Yochai.[1] Jewish legend holds that during a time of Roman persecution,
Rabbi Shimon hid in a cave for 13 years, studying the Torah with his son,
Elazar.[2][3] During this time he is said to have been inspired by Elijah the
Prophet to write the Zohar.

## [edit] Traditional view of authorship

<IMG>

<IMG>

Title page of first edition of the Zohar, Mantua, 1558. Library of Congress.

Over time, the general view in the Jewish community came to be one of
acceptance of Moses de Leon's claims; the Zohar was held to be an authentic
book of mysticism passed down from the second century, though certain small
groups (Baladi Yemenite, Andalusian [Western Sefardic or Spanish and
Portuguese Jews] and some Italian communities) never accepted it as authentic.
The Zohar spread among the Jews with remarkable swiftness.[1] Scarcely fifty
years had passed since its appearance in Spain before it was quoted by many
Kabbalists, including the Italian mystical writer Menahem Recanati.[1] Its
authority was so well established in Spain in the 15th century that Joseph ibn
Shem-Tov drew from it arguments in his attacks against Maimonides.[1] Even
representatives of non-mysticism oriented Judaism began to regard it as a
sacred book and to invoke its authority in the decision of some ritual
questions.[1] They were attracted by its glorification of man, its doctrine of
immortality, and its ethical principles, which are more in keeping with the
spirit of Talmudic Judaism than are those taught by the philosophers.[1] While
Maimonides and his followers regarded man as a fragment of the universe whose
immortality is dependent upon the degree of development of his active
intellect, the Zohar declared him to be the lord of the creation, whose
immortality is solely dependent upon his morality.[1] According to the Zohar,
the moral perfection of man influences the ideal world of the Sefirot; for
although the Sefirot accept everything from the Ein Sof (Heb. ××× ×¡××£,
infinity), the Tree of Life itself is dependent upon man: he alone can bring
about the divine effusion.[1] This concept is somewhat akin to the concept of
Tikkun olam. The dew that vivifies the universe flows from the just.[1] By the
practice of virtue and by moral perfection, man may increase the outpouring of
heavenly grace.[1] Even physical life is subservient to virtue.[1] This, says
the Zohar, is indicated in the words "for the Lord God had not caused it to
rain" (Gen. 2:5), which means that there had not yet been beneficent action in
heaven, because man had not yet been created to pray for it.[1]

The Zohar was quoted by Todros Abulafia, by Menahem Recanati, and even by
Isaac of Acco, in whose name the story of the confession of Moses de Leon's
widow is related.[1]

Isaac evidently ignored the woman's alleged confession in favor of the
testimony of Joseph ben Todros and of Jacob, a pupil of Moses de Leon, both of
whom assured him on oath that the work was not written by Moses.[1]

One objection considered by the believers in the authenticity of the Zohar was
the lack of references to the work in Jewish literature; and to this they
answered that Shimon ben Yochai did not commit his teachings to writing, but
transmitted them orally to his disciples, who in turn confided them to their
disciples, and these to their successors, until finally the doctrines were
embodied in the Zohar.[1]

As to the references in the book to historical events of the post-Talmudic
period, it was not deemed surprising that Shimon ben Yochai should have
foretold future happenings. See below however for a more extensive explanation
of these problems. [1]

Most of the major Halachic authoritiesâlike most other Orthodox Jews for
that matterâaccepted the Zohar as authentic, and many of them were
themselves Kabbalists. This includes R' Yosef Karo, R' Moses Isserles, R'
Solomon Luria, R' Yechiel Michel Epstein, Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi (The
Alter Rebbe), The Vilna Gaon and R' Yisrael Meir Kagan.

R' Solomon Luria in his responsa writes that except where the Zohar is
contradicted by the Babylonian Talmud, the Halacha (Law) follows the Zohar.

See Likeutei Sichos Vol. 33 pg. 98 where the author, quoting a response Reb
Hillel Paricher related from Rabbi Shne'ur Zalman of Liadi (The Alter Rebbe)
(quoted also in the beginning of Shar Kakolel) explains that where there is an
argument between Kabbalah and Poskim, the former should be followed. For it is
impossible to say that the Kabbalah is in contradiction with the Talmud
itself, rather the Kabbalists and the Halachists have variant understanding of
the explanation of the Talmud as explained by the Radvaz (Chelek 4, Siman
1,111)and the Chacham Tzvi (Siman 36) (cited in the Sha'arei Teshuvah 25:14).
See also Responsa Tzemach Tzedek A.H. Siman 18,4 and Divrei Nechemia Responsa
O.H. 21. It should be noted however that as Poskim, the view of the Radvaz
[and of the Chacham Tzvi] is that one should follow the opinion of the Zohar
only where a conclusive statement has not been made by the Gemara or Poskim or
when an argument is found between the Poskim. The above quoted view,
attributed to Rabbi Shne'ur Zalman of Liadi, would thus be accepted as
authoritative by followers of Rabbi Shne'ur Zalman of Liadi , followers of the
Ben Ish Chai, and followers of other Halacha codifiers who accept to follow
the rulings of Kabala over those of the Poskim. Such include: Chassidim,
select Sefardim, and other well known groups.

### [edit] In Jewish thought today

Most of Orthodox Judaism holds that the teachings of Kabbalah were transmitted
from teacher to teacher, in a long and continuous chain, from the Biblical era
until its redaction by Shimon ben Yochai. Many (most?) accept fully the claims
that the Kabbalah's teachings are in essence a revelation from God to the
Biblical patriarch Abraham, Moses and other ancient figures, but were never
printed and made publicly available until the time of the Zohar's medieval
publication. The greatest acceptance of this sequence of events is held within
Haredi Judaism. Some claim the tradition that Rabbi Shimon wrote that the
concealment of the Zohar would last for exactly 1200 years from the time of
destruction of the Holy Temple in Jerusalem. The Temple of Jerusalem was
destroyed in 70 CE and so before revealing the Zohar in 1270, Moses De Leon
uncovered the manuscripts in a cave in Israel.

Some in Modern Orthodox Judaism reject the above view as naive. Some Orthodox
Jews accept the earlier rabbinic position that the Zohar was a work written in
the middle medieval period by Moses de Leon, but argue that since it is
obviously based on earlier materials, it can still be held to be authentic,
but not as authoritative or without error as others within Orthodoxy might
hold.

Jews in non-Orthodox Jewish denominations accept the conclusions of historical
academic studies on the Zohar and other kabbalistic texts. As such, most non-
Orthodox Jews have long viewed the Zohar as pseudepigraphy and apocrypha.
Nonetheless, many accepted that some of its contents had meaning for modern
Judaism. Siddurim edited by non-Orthodox Jews often have excerpts from the
Zohar and other kabbalistic works, e.g. Siddur Sim Shalom edited by Jules
Harlow, even though the editors are not kabbalists.

In recent years there has been a growing willingness of non-Orthodox Jews to
study the Zohar, and a growing minority have a position that is similar to the
Modern Orthodox position described above. This seems pronounced among Jews who
follow the path of Jewish Renewal.

### [edit] Critical view of authorship

#### [edit] Arguments for a late dating

The suspicion that the Zohar was found by one person, Moses de Leon, and that
it refers to historical events of the post-Talmudical period, caused the
authorship to be questioned from the outset.[1] A story tells that after the
death of Moses de Leon, a rich man of Avila named Joseph offered Moses' widow
(who had been left without any means of supporting herself) a large sum of
money for the original from which her husband had made the copy.[1] She
confessed that her husband himself was the author of the work. She had asked
him several times, she said, why he had chosen to credit his own teachings to
another, and he had always answered that doctrines put into the mouth of the
miracle-working Shimon bar Yochai would be a rich source of profit.[1] The
story indicates that shortly after its appearance the work was believed by
some to have been written by Moses de Leon.[1]

Elijah Delmedigo, in his Bechinat ha-Dat endeavored to show that it could not
be attributed to Shimon bar Yochai.[1] The objections were that:

  1. If the Zohar was the work of Shimon bar Yochai, it would have been mentioned by the Talmud, as has been the case with other works of the Talmudic period;[1]
  2. The Zohar contains names of rabbis who lived at a later period than that of Simeon;[1]
  3. Were Shimon ben Yochai the father of the Kabbalah, knowing by divine revelation the hidden meaning of the precepts, his decisions on Jewish law would have been adopted by the Talmud; but this has not been done;[1]
  4. Were the Kabbalah a revealed doctrine, there would have been no divergence of opinion among the Kabbalists concerning the mystic interpretation of the precepts (Bechinat ha-Dat ed. Vienna, 1833, p. 43).[1]

These arguments and others of the same kind were used by Leon of Modena in his
Ari Nohem.[1] A work devoted to the criticism of the Zohar was written,
Miá¹­paá¸¥at Sefarim, by Jacob Emden, who, waging war against the remaining
adherents of the Sabbatai Zevi movement, endeavored to show that the book on
which Zevi based his doctrines was a forgery.[1] Emden demonstrates that the
Zohar misquotes passages of Scripture; misunderstands the Talmud; contains
some ritual observances which were ordained by later rabbinical authorities;
mentions the crusades against the Muslims (who did not exist in the second
century); uses the expression esnoga, which is a Portuguese term for
"synagogue,"; and gives a mystical explanation of the Hebrew vowel-points,
which were not introduced until long after the Talmudic period.[1]

There is a small group among the Orthodox who refuse to accept the Zohar,
known as Dor Daim (××¨××¢××). They are mainly from the Jewish community in
Yemen, and claim that the Zohar cannot be true because its ideas clash with
the ideas of the Rambam (Maimonides), the great medieval rabbi and
rationalist, Rabbi Saadiah Gaon, and other early representatives of the Jewish
faith. The Zohar is rejected by almost all Spanish and Portuguese Jews. Some
among them believe the Zohar is collection of ideas based on Midrasim and
misinterpretation of midrashic concepts.

In the mid-20th century, the Jewish historian Gershom Scholem contended that
de Leon himself was the most likely author of the Zohar. Among other things,
Scholem noticed the Zohar's frequent errors in Aramaic grammar, its suspicious
traces of Spanish words and sentence patterns, and its lack of knowledge of
the land of Israel. This finding is still disputed by many within Orthodox
Judaism, although not because of any scholarly proofs, but rather because of
tradition.

Yeshayahu Leibowitz, noted professor of philosophy at the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, claimed that "It is clear that the Zohar was written by de Leon as
it is clear that Theodore Herzl wrote Medinat HaYehudim (The Jewish State)."

Other Jewish scholars have also suggested the possibility that the Zohar was
written by a group of people, including de Leon. This theory generally
presents de Leon as having been the leader of a mystical school, whose
collective effort resulted in the Zohar.

Another theory as to the authorship of the Zohar is that it was transmitted
like the Talmud before it was transcribed: as an oral tradition reapplied to
changing conditions and eventually recorded. This view simultaneously believes
that the Zohar was not written by Shimon bar Yochai, but was a holy work
because it consisted of his principles.

Even if de Leon wrote the text, the entire contents of the book may not be
fraudulent. Parts of it may be based on older works, and it was a common
practice to ascribe the authorship of a document to an ancient rabbi in order
to give the document more weight. It is possible that Moses de Leon considered
himself inspired to write this text.

#### [edit] Arguments for an earlier dating

R' Menachem Mendel Kasher in an article in the periodical Sinai refutes many
of Scholem's points. He writes:

  * 1\. Many statements in the works of the Rishonim (medieval commentors who preceded De Leon) refer to Medrashim that we are not aware of. He writes that these are in fact references to the Zohar. This has also been pointed out by R' David Luria in his work "Kadmus Sefer Ha'Zohar".
  * 2\. The Zohar's major opponent Elijah Delmedigo refers to the Zohar as having existed for "only" 300 years. Even he agrees that it was extant before the time of R' Moses De Leon.
  * 3\. He cites a document from R' Yitchok M' Acco who was sent by the Ramban to investigate the Zohar. The document brings witnesses that attest to the existence of the manuscript.
  * 4\. It is impossible to accept that R' Moshe De Leon managed to forge a work of the scope of the Zohar (1700 pages) within a period of six years as Scholem claims.
  * 5\. A comparison between the Zohar and De Leon's other works show major stylistic differences. Although he made use of his manuscript of the Zohar, many ideas presented in his works contradict or ignore ideas mentioned in the Zohar. (Luria also points this out)
  * 6\. Many of the Midrashic works achieved their final redaction in the Geonic period. Some of the anachronistic terminology of the Zohar may date from that time.
  * 7\. Out of the thousands of words used in the Zohar Scholem finds two anachronistic terms and nine cases of ungrammatical usage of words. This proves that the majority of the Zohar was written within the accepted time frame and only a small amount was added later (in the Geonic period as mentioned).
  * 8\. Some hard to understand terms may be attributed to acronyms or codes. He finds corrolaries to such a practice in other ancient manuscripts.
  * 9\. The "borrowings" from medieval commentaries may be explained in a simple manner. It is not unheard of that a note written on the side of a text should on later copying be added into the main part of the text. The Talmud itself has Geonic additions from such a cause. Certainly this would apply to the Zohar to which there did not exist other manuscripts to compare it with.
  * 10\. He cites an ancient manuscript that refers to a book Sod Gadol that seems to in fact be the Zohar.

Concerning the Zohars's lack of knowledge of the land of Israel, Scholem bases
this on the many references to a city Kaputkia (Cappadocia) which he states
was situated in Turkey not in Israel.

R' Reuvein Margolies (Peninim U' Margolies) states that in an ancient Israeli
tombstone there is mentioned a village Kaputkia. In addition, the Zohar states
that this village was sitiuated within a day's walk of Lod and Margolies's
research corroborates this. This would imply that the author of the Zohar had
precise knowledge of the geography of Israel.

In the same book he cites many statements of Maimonides that could only have
come from a text very similar to the Zohar. In his notes on the Zohar
(Nitzotzei Zohar), he points to many corrolaries between statements in the
Zohar and other Tannatic literature (Medrashim, The two Talmuds,etc.).

## [edit] Academic historical views

In "Zohar", the Encyclopaedia Judaica article written by the late Professor
Gershom Scholem (Hebrew University of Jerusalem) there is an extensive
discussion of the sources that the author of the Zohar drew upon. Scholem's
views are widely held as accurate among historians of the Kabbalah, but like
all textual historical investigations, are not uncriticially accepted; many of
the following conclusions are still accepted as accurate, but some current
academic scholars of Kabbalah have differing ideas.

Scholem views the author of the Zohar as not writing a totally original work,
but rather based the Zohar on a wide variety of Jewish sources that existed
before him. The author, however, invents a number of fictitious works that the
Zohar supposedly quotes, e.g., the Sifra de-Adam, the Sifra de-Hanokh, the
Sifra di-Shelomo Malka, the Sifra de-Rav Hamnuna Sava, the Sifra de-Rav Yeiva
Sava, the Sifra de-Aggadeta, the Raza de-Razin and many others.

While many original ideas in the Zohar are presented as being from
(fictitious) Jewish mystical works, many ancient and clearly rabbinic mystical
teachings are presented without their real, identifiable sources being named.
Academic studies of the Zohar show that many of its ideas are based in the
Talmud, various works of midrash, and earlier Jewish mystical works. Scholem
writes:

    The writer had expert knowledge of the early material and he often used it as a foundation for his expositions, putting into it variations of his own. His main sources were the Babylonian Talmud, the complete Midrash Rabbah, the Midrash Tanhuma, and the two Pesiktot (Pesikta De-Rav Kahana or Pesikta Rabbati), the Midrash on Psalms, the Pirkei de-Rabbi Eliezer, and the Targum Onkelos. Generally speaking they are not quoted exactly, but translated into the peculiar style of the Zohar and summarized....
    ... Less use is made of the halakhic Midrashim, the Jerusalem Talmud, and the other Targums, nor of the Midrashim like the Aggadat Shir ha-Shirim, the Midrash on Proverbs, and the Alfabet de-R. Akiva. It is not clear whether the author used the Yalkut Shimoni, or whether he knew the sources of its aggadah separately. Of the smaller Midrashim he used the Heikhalot Rabbati, the Alfabet de-Ben Sira, the Sefer Zerubabel, the Baraita de-Ma'aseh Bereshit, [and many others]...
The author of the Zohar drew upon the Bible commentaries written by medieval
Jewish rabbis, including Rashi, Abraham ibn Ezra, David Kimhi and even
authorities as late as Nahmanides and Maimonides. Scholem gives a variety of
examples of such borrowings.

The Zohar draws upon early mystical texts such as the Sefer Yetzirah and the
Bahir, and the early medieval writings of the Hasidei Ashkenaz.

Scholem's studies concluded that the author of the Zohar "develops tendencies
which appeared first in the writings of the circle of the Gnostics in Castile
in the middle of the 13th century ." While this view is still widely accepted
as plausible, it is currently being argued that perhaps Scholem has this
conclusion backwards. Moshe Idel has argued that the Gnostic views found
within the Zohar developed indigenously within Judaism, and from there
extended outwards towards adherents of Gnostic theology. A similar approach
has been taken by other scholars as well, for example, Yehuda Liebes and
Elliot R. Wolfson. A careful reading of Scholem indicates that Idel's critique
is only partially correct. Scholem was equivocal on this point, sometimes
arguing that medieval kabbalah was a gnostification of rabbinic thought and
practice, and at other time arguing that underlying the ancient gnostic
sources we could find a Jewish heterodoxy. The latter position is not at odds
with the more recent work of Idel, Liebes, and Wolfson.

### [edit] Zohar's ditheistic theology

In Eros and Kabbalah, Moshe Idel (Professor of Jewish Mysticism, Hebrew
University in Jerusalem) argues that the fundamental distinction between the
rational-philosophic strain of Judaism and theosophic-mystical Judaism, as
exemplified by the Zohar, is the mystical belief that the Godhead is complex,
rather than simple, and that divinity is dynamic and incorporates gender,
having both male and female dimensions. These polarities must be conjoined
(have yihud, "union") to maintain the harmony of the cosmos. Idel
characterizes this metaphysical point of view as "ditheism," holding that
there are two aspects to God, and the process of union as "theoeroticism."
This ditheism, the dynamics it entails, and its reverberations within creation
is arguably the central interest of the Zohar, making up a huge proportion of
its discourse (pp. 5-56).

Mention should also be made of the work of Elliot Wolfson (Professor of Jewish
Mysticism, New York University), who has almost single-handedly challenged the
conventional view, which is affirmed by Idel as well, although in the above
passage Idel's views were presented as unique. Wolfson likewise recognizes the
importance of heteroerotic symbolism in the kabbalistic understanding of the
divine nature. The oneness of God is perceived in androgynous terms as the
pairing of male and female, the former characterized as the capacity to
overflow and the latter as the potential to receive. Where Wolfson breaks with
Idel and other scholars of the kabbalah is in his insistence that the
consequence of that heteroerotic union is the restoration of the female to the
male. Just as, in the case of the original Adam, woman was constructed from
man, and their carnal cleaving together was portrayed as becoming one flesh,
so the ideal for kabbalists is the reconstitution of what Wolfson calls the
male androgyne. Much closer in spirit to some ancient Gnostic dicta, Wolfson
understands the eschatological ideal in traditional kabbalah to have been the
female becoming male (see his Circle in the Square and Language, Eros, Being).
If his reading is accepted, then Idel's ditheism may not be the most
felicitous term to characterize kabbalistic theology.

## [edit] Mysticism

â Woe unto the man, says Shimon ben Yochai, who asserts that this Torah
intends to relate only commonplace things and secular narratives; for if this
were so, then in the present times likewise a Torah might be written with more
attractive narratives. In truth, however, the matter is thus: The upper world
and the lower are established upon one and the same principle; in the lower
world is Israel, in the upper world are the angels. When the angels wish to
descend to the lower world, they have to don earthly garments. If this be true
of the angels, how much more so of the Torah, for whose sake, indeed, the
world and the angels were alike created and exist. The world could simply not
have endured to look upon it. Now the narratives of the Torah are its
garments. He who thinks that these garments are the Torah itself deserves to
perish and have no share in the world to come. Woe unto the fools who look no
further when they see an elegant robe! More valuable than the garment is the
body which carries it, and more valuable even than that is the soul which
animates the body. Fools see only the garment of the Torah, the more
intelligent see the body, the wise see the soul, its proper being; and in the
Messianic time the 'upper soul' of the Torah will stand revealed. â  
âZohar[1]  
## [edit] Pardes and Biblical exegesis

The Zohar assumes four kinds of Biblical text exegesis: Peshat
("simple/literal meaning"), Remez ("thru its hint or allusion/allegorical
meaning"), Derash ("thru rabbinic sermon's comparison or
illustration/metaphorical meaning), and Sod ("thru its secret or
mystery/hidden meaning").[1] The initial letters of the words (P, R, D, S)
form together the word PaRDeS ("paradise/orchard"), which became the
designation for the fourfold meaning of which the mystical sense is the
highest part.[1] Note also the similarity to the word and concept of
"paradise."

The mystic allegory in the Zohar is based on the principle that all visible
things, including natural phenomena, have both an exoteric reality and an
esoteric reality, the latter of which instructs Man in that which is
invisible.[1]

This principle is the necessary corollary of the fundamental doctrine of the
Zohar.[1] According to that doctrine, as the universe is a gradation of
emanations, it follows that the human mind may recognize in each effect the
supreme mark, and thus ascend to the cause of all causes.[1]

This ascension, however, can only be made gradually, after the mind has
attained four various stages of knowledge; namely: (1) the knowledge of the
exterior aspect of things, or, as the Zohar calls it (ii. 36b), "the vision
through the mirror that projects an indirect light"; (2) the knowledge of the
essence of things, or "the vision through the mirror that projects a direct
light"; (3) the knowledge through intuitive representation; and (4) the
knowledge through love, since the Law reveals its secrets only to those who
love it (ii. 99b).[1]

After the knowledge through love comes the ecstatic state which is applied to
the most holy visions.[1] To enter the state of ecstasy one had to remain
motionless, with the head between the knees, absorbed in contemplation and
murmuring prayers and hymns, At the end male and female will unit and desire
will prevail[1]

There were seven ecstatic stages, each of which was marked by a vision of a
different color.[1] At each new stage the contemplative entered a heavenly
hall (hekal) of a different hue, until he reached the seventh, which was
colorless, and the appearance of which marked both the end of his
contemplation and his lapse into unconsciousness.[1]

The Zohar gives the following illustration of an ecstatic state:

One of the most central parts of the Zohar is its interpretation of Biblical
text. The Biblical exegesis of the Zohar has been described in the past as a
"Mystical interpretation of Biblical verses," however this does not accurately
describe the Zohar's relationship to the biblical text. As is often the case
in mystical traditions, the author or authors of the Zohar are not satisfied
examining anything from a superficial level. This is especially true regarding
the Biblical text, where four different levels of increasingly secretive
reading are presented. Collectively known as PaRDeS, they include Peshat (most
simple) Remez , Drash and Sod (most secretive). Interestingly, unlike many
philosophical books of its time, the Zohar works closely with the Biblical
text. Its authors closely analyze verses from the Bible, trying to make sense
of them without imposing any ideology on to them from the outside. Often, the
most enigmatic verses can be understood only after the nuances in the biblical
text have been sufficiently understood. Unlike many medieval commentators, the
Zohar does not apply any sort of order to systematic thought when trying to
understand the Bible. In his book Mishnat Hazohar, Isaiah Tishby describes the
style of the Zohar as a "homiletical exegesis." Similarly the style is
associative and many verses are explained multiple ways through a constructed
dialogue. However Tishby also notes that this lack of structure also has its
downsides. The reader who is unfamiliar with the internal logic of the Zohar
will find it very difficult to decipher its message.

Perhaps the most unusual aspect of the Zohar's exegesis is its relationship to
the Bible itself. Unlike most commentators who develop a subject-object
relationship with the text, the Zohar describes a different sort of
relationship, comparing the Torah to a lover. This sort of subject-subject
relationship allows the reader of the Torah (the author of the Zohar) to
engage in a sort of playful dialogue with the text. Significant is Elliot
Wolfson's argument in "Beautiful Maiden Without Eyes: Peshat and Sod in
Zoharic Hermeneutics,â in The Midrashic Imagination: Jewish Exegesis,
Thought, and History, edited by Michael Fishbane (State University of New York
Press, 1993), 155-203, that the zoharic understanding of the literal and
mystical is such that the two are in essence one. For one who first sets out
on the path, it seems as if the inner and outer are separate, but as one
becomes enlightened, one comes to understand that the external is the
internal, and the internal is external. In more recent work, for example, in
Language, Eros, Being, Wolfson develops his earlier insight by speaking of the
dialectic of concealment and disclosure. Prone to paradoxical modes of
expression, Wolfson has argued that the secret is seen from within the garment
of the text, and not by discarding that garment. In Wolfson's formulation, the
mystery lies right on the surface. In that sense, the text of Torah comprises
everything; indeed, from the standpoint of the Zohar, the Torah is the name of
God, and just as the name is hidden (the written form YHWH is not pronounced)
and revealed (it is vocalized by its epithet Adonai), so the Torah is hidden
and revealed. The mystic sage, who is the lover of the Torah, knows, however,
that the hidden and the revealed are not paradoxically the same. Wolfson has
also argued (in the fifth chapter of Language, Eros, Being) that this insight
on the part of the zoharic kabbalists is a tacit polemic against Christian
exegesis, which is based on a sharper distinction between the literal and the
mystical. The kabbalist resists any notion of reaching the spirit of the text
without taking hold of the letter.

## [edit] Effects on Judaism

On the one hand, the Zohar was lauded by many rabbis because it opposed
religious formalism, stimulated one's imagination and emotions, and for many
people helped reinvigorate the experience of prayer.[1] In many places prayer
had become a mere external religious exercise, while prayer was supposed to be
a means of transcending earthly affairs and placing oneself in union with
God.[1]

On the other hand, the Zohar was censured by many rabbis because it propagated
many superstitious beliefs, and produced a host of mystical dreamers, whose
overexcited imaginations peopled the world with spirits, demons, and all kinds
of good and bad influences.[1] Many classical rabbis, especially Maimonides,
viewed all such beliefs as a violation of Judaic principles of faith.

Its mystic mode of explaining some commandments was applied by its
commentators to all religious observances, and produced a strong tendency to
substitute mystic Judaism in the place of traditional rabbinic Judaism.[1] For
example, Shabbat, the Jewish Sabbath, began to be looked upon as the
embodiment of God in temporal life, and every ceremony performed on that day
was considered to have an influence upon the superior world.[1]

Elements of the Zohar crept into the liturgy of the 16th and 17th centuries,
and the religious poets not only used the allegorism and symbolism of the
Zohar in their compositions, but even adopted its style, e.g. the use of
erotic terminology to illustrate the relations between man and God.[1] Thus,
in the language of some Jewish poets, the beloved one's curls indicate the
mysteries of the Deity; sensuous pleasures, and especially intoxication,
typify the highest degree of divine love as ecstatic contemplation; while the
wine-room represents merely the state through which the human qualities merge
or are exalted into those of God.[1]

In the seventeenth century, it was proposed that only Jewish men who were at
least 40 years old could study Kabbalah, and by extension read the Zohar,
because it was believed to be too powerful for those less emotionally mature
and experienced.

## [edit] Influence on Christian mysticism

The enthusiasm felt for the Zohar was shared by many Christian scholars, such
as Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Johann Reuchlin, Aegidius of Viterbo, etc.,
all of whom believed that the book contained proofs of the truth of
Christianity.[4] They were led to this belief by the analogies existing
between some of the teachings of the Zohar and certain Christian dogmas, such
as the fall and redemption of man, and the dogma of the Trinity, which seems
to be expressed in the Zohar in the following terms: "The Ancient of Days has
three heads. He reveals himself in three archetypes, all three forming but
one.[4] He is thus symbolized by the number Three. They are revealed in one
another.[4][These are:] first, secret, hidden 'Wisdom'; above that the Holy
Ancient One; and above Him the Unknowable One.[4] None knows what He contains;
He is above all conception.[4] He is therefore called for man 'Non-Existing'
[Ayin]"[4] (Zohar, iii. 288b).

This and other similar doctrines found in the Zohar are now known to be much
older than Christianity; but the Christian scholars who were led by the
similarity of these teachings to certain Christian dogmas deemed it their duty
to propagate the Zohar.[4] Shortly after the publication of the work (Mantua
and Cremona, 1558) Joseph de Voisin translated extracts from it which deal
with the soul.[4] He was followed by many others.[4]

The disastrous effects of the Sabbatai Zevi messianic movement on the Jewish
community dampened the enthusiasm that had been felt for the book in the
Jewish community.[4] However, the Zohar is still held in great reverence by
many Orthodox Jews, especially the Hasidim (Hasidic Jews).[4]

## [edit] Appendices and additions

The Zohar is not considered complete without the addition of certain
appendixes, which are often attributed either to the same author, or to some
of his immediate disciples. These supplementary portions are almost always
printed as part of the text with separate titles, or in separate columns. They
are as follows:[1]

  * Sifra di-Tsni`uta, consisting of five chapters, in which are chiefly discussed the questions involved in the Creation, such as the transition from the infinite to the finite, that from absolute unity to multifariousness, that from pure intelligence to matter, etc;[1]
  * Idra Rabbah, in which the teachings of the preceding portion are enlarged upon and developed;[1] and Idra Zuta, giving a rÃ©sumÃ© of the two preceding sections.[1]

To the larger appendixes are added the following fragments:

  * Raza de Razin, ("Secret of Secrets") dealing with the connection of the soul with the body;[1]
  * Sefer Hekalot, describing the seven heavenly halls, paradise, and hell;[1]
  * Raya Mehemna, giving a conversation between Moses, the prophet Elijah, and Shimon ben Yochai on the allegorical import of the Mosaic commandments and prohibitions, as well as of the rabbinical injunctions.[1]
  * Sitre Torah, on various topics;[1]
  * Midrash ha-Ne'elam, explaining passages of Scripture mystically by way of hints and gematria (mystical numerology);[1]
  * Saba, containing a conversation between the prophet Elijah and Shimon ben Yochai about the doctrine of metempsychosis;[1]
  * Yanuá¸³a, on the importance of washing the hands before meals and on similar subjects, written in the name of a child of Hamnuna Saba, whence the title Yanuá¸³a ("child");[1]
  * Tosefta and Matnitin, in which are sketched the doctrines of the Sefirot, the emanation of the primordial light, etc.[1]

## [edit] English translations

  * Michael Berg (born June 29, 1973) is an ordained Rabbi, Kabbalah scholar, and noted spiritual leader. He edited the first unabridged English translation of The Zohar (23 vols.).
  * Matt, Daniel C., trans. Zohar: Pritzker Edition (4 vols. to date). Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004-2007. (The first four volumes of a projected 12-volume, comprehensively-annotated English translation)
  * ____. Zohar: Annotated and Explained. Woodstock, Vt.: SkyLights Paths Publishing Co., 2002. (Selections)
  * ____. Zohar: The Book of Enlightenment. New York: Paulist Press, 1983. (Selections)
  * Scholem, Gershom, ed. Zohar: The Book of Splendor. New York: Schocken Books, 1963. (Selections)
  * Sperling, Harry and Maurice Simon, eds. The Zohar (5 vols.). London: Soncino Press, . (The only complete English translation)
  * Tishby, Isaiah, ed. The Wisdom of the Zohar: An Anthology of Texts (3 vols.). Translated from the Hebrew by David Goldstein. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.

## [edit] See also

  * Kabbalah
  * Mysticism
  * Sefer Yetzirah
  * Bahir
  * Baqashot

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at au av aw ax ay az ba bb bc bd be bf Jacobs, Joseph; BroydÃ©, Isaac. "Zohar". Jewish Encyclopedia. Funk & Wagnalls Company. http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?artid=142&letter=Z#406.
  2. ^ Scharfstein, Sol (2004). Jewish History and You II. Jewish History and You. Jersey City, NJ, USA: KTAV Publishing House. pp. 24. http://books.google.com/books?id=uFuBCOzObf0C&pg=PA24&lpg=PA24&dq=simeon+bar+yohai+cave+13+years&source=web&ots=4stAsWsEER&sig=C5d4vwiGMFzn92srw8NHAeqm-iE.
  3. ^ Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai - Lag BaOmer at OU.ORG
  4. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Jacobs, Joseph; BroydÃ©, Isaac. "Zohar". Jewish Encyclopedia. Funk & Wagnalls Company. http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?artid=142&letter=Z#406.

## [edit] References

  * Tenen, Stan, "Zohar, B'reshit, and the Meru Hypothesis: Scholars debate the origins of Zohar", Meru Foundation eTorus Newsletter #40, July 2007
  * Blumenthal, David R. Three is not enough: Jewish Reflections on Trinitarian Thinking, in Ethical Monotheism, Past and Present: Essays in Honor of Wendell S. Dietrich, ed. T. Vial and M. Hadley (Providence, RI, Brown Judaic Studies:
  * The Encyclopedia of Jewish Myth, Magic, and Mysticism, Geoffrey Dennis, Llewellyn Worldwide, 2007
  * Studies in the Zohar, Yehuda Liebes (Author), SUNY Press, SUNY series in Judaica: Hermeneutics, Mysticism, and Religion, 1993
  * Challenging the Master: Moshe Idelâs critique of Gershom Scholem Micha Odenheimer, MyJewishLearning.Com, Kabbalah and Mysticism
  * Scholem, Gershom, Zohar in Encyclopadeia Judaica, Keter Publishing
  * Scholem, Gershom, Kabbalah in Encyclopadeia Judaica, Keter Publishing
  * Margolies, Reuvein "Peninim U' Margolies" and "Nitzotzei Zohar" (Heb.), Mossad R' Kook
  * Luria, David "Kadmus Sefer Ha'Zohar" (Heb.)
  * Unterman, Alan Reinterpreting Mysticism and Messianism, MyJewishLearning.Com, Kabbalah and Mysticism
  * Adler, Jeremy, Beyond the Law: the artistry and enduring counter-cultural power of the kabbala, Times Literary Supplement 24 Feb 2006, reviewing: Daniel C Matt, translator The Zohar; Arthur Green A Guide to the Zohar; Moshe Idel Kabbalah and Eros.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Zohar  
Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

The Zohar and Later Mysticism

  * Online version in English and Aramaic
  * Authentic Zohar and Kabbalah knowledge, texts - Videos
  * Sefer HaZohar in Hebrew
  * Resources > Medieval Jewish History > Jewish Mysticism The Jewish History Resource Center, Project of the Dinur Center for Research in Jewish History, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
  * Reconstructed Aramaic source text used in the first three volumes of Daniel Matt's translation (PDF format)
  * A translation/interpretation of the Zohar's opening teaching
  * A course on the Zohar from a liberal perspective (Justin Jaron Lewis)
  * Kabbalah and Jewish Mysticism A Talmudist perspective of Kabbalah
  * Sefer HaZohar
  * Who Should Learn the Hidden Torah? A portion of Maimonides [Rambam]'s instruction on who should be taught the deeper aspects of Torah, and how - taken from his book Moreh haNevukhim / Guide for the Perplexed.
  * Menachem Kasher's article on authenticity of the Zohar
  * Notes on the Zohar in English

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zohar"

Categories: Kabbalah texts

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ××Ö´×××©

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 02:13.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



