
# Lucha libre

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the comic book series, see Lucha Libre (comics).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Luchador Rey Mysterio

Lucha libre (Spanish for "free wrestling" or free fighting) is a term used in
Mexico and other Spanish-speaking areas referring to a form of professional
wrestling involving varied techniques and moves. Outside of these areas, the
term is synonymous with the professional wrestling performers in Mexico and
other Latin American countries.

Mexican wrestling is characterized by rapid sequences of holds and moves, as
well as high-flying moves, some of which have been adopted in the United
States, and colorful masks. Lucha libre performers are known as luchadores
(singular luchador).

## Contents

  * 1 Rules
  * 2 History of lucha libre in Mexico
  * 3 Lucha libre style of wrestling
  * 4 Masks
    * 4.1 Luchas de apuestas
      * 4.1.1 Variants
  * 5 Weight classes
  * 6 Other characteristics
  * 7 Female professional wrestlers
  * 8 Luchadores in the U.S.
  * 9 Additional information
  * 10 Promotions using lucha libre rules
    * 10.1 Mexico
    * 10.2 Japan
    * 10.3 United States
  * 11 In the media and popular culture
  * 12 Notes
  * 13 See also
  * 14 References
  * 15 External links

  
## [edit] Rules

<IMG>

<IMG>

Luchador Mistico

The rules of lucha libre are similar to American singles matches. Matches can
be won by pinning the opponent to the mat for the count of three, making him
submit, knocking him out of the ring for a pre-determined count (generally
twenty) or by disqualification. Using the ropes for leverage is illegal and
once a luchador is on the ropes, his opponent must release any holds and he
will not be able to pin him.

Disqualifications occur when an opponent uses an illegal hold, move (such as
the piledriver, which is an illegal move in lucha libre and grounds for
immediate disqualification, though some variations are legal in certain
promotions), or weapon, hits his opponent in the groin (faul), uses outside
interference, attacks the referee, or rips his opponent's mask completely off.
Most matches are two out of three falls (dos de tres caÃ­das), which had been
abandoned for title bouts in North America and Japan in the 1970s.

## [edit] History of lucha libre in Mexico

<IMG>

<IMG>

Publicity still of Salvador Lutteroth Gonzales.

In the early 1900s, professional wrestling was mostly a regional phenomenon in
Mexico until Salvador Lutteroth founded the Empresa Mexicana de Lucha Libre
(Mexican Wrestling Enterprise) in 1933, giving the sport a national foothold
for the first time. The promotion company flourished and quickly became the
premier spot for wrestlers. As television surfaced as a viable entertainment
medium during the 1950s, Lutteroth was then able to broadcast his wrestling
across the nation, subsequently yielding a popularity explosion for the sport.
Moreover, it was the emergence of television that allowed Lutteroth to promote
lucha libreâs first breakout superstar into a national pop-culture
phenomenon.[1]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Arena Mexico on Dr Lavista Street in Colonia Doctores in Mexico City

In 1942, lucha libre would be forever changed when a silver-masked wrestler,
known simply as El Santo (The Saint), first stepped into the ring. He made his
debut in Mexico City by winning an 8-man battle royal. The public became
enamored by the mystique and secrecy of Santo's personality and he quickly
became the most popular luchador in Mexico. His wrestling career spanned
nearly five decades, during which he became a folk hero and a symbol of
justice for the common man through his appearances in comic books and movies,
while the sport of Lucha Libre received an unparalleled degree of mainstream
attention.[2]

Other legendary luchadores who helped popularize the sport include; Gory
Guerrero who is credited with developing moves and holds which are now
commonplace in professional wrestling; Blue Demon, a contemporary of Santo and
possibly his greatest rival; and Mil MÃ¡scaras (Man of A Thousand Masks) who
is credited with introducing the high flying moves of lucha libre to audiences
around the world. He achieved international fame as one of the first high-
flyers, something he was not considered in Mexico where he fell under the mat-
power category.[3][4][5]

## [edit] Lucha libre style of wrestling

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rey Mysterio hitting the "619" on Eddie Guerrero

Luchadores are traditionally more agile and perform more aerial maneuvers than
professional wrestlers in the U.S. who, more often, rely on power moves and
strikes to subdue their opponents. The difference in styles is due to the
independent evolution of the sport in Mexico beginning in the 1930s and the
fact that luchadores in the cruiserweight division (peso semicompleto) are
often the most popular wrestlers in Mexican lucha libre.[6] Luchadores execute
high flying moves characteristic of lucha libre by utilizing the wrestling
ring's ropes to catapult themselves towards their opponents, using intricate
combinations in rapid-fire succession, and applying complex submission holds.
Lucha libre has several different weight classes, many catered to smaller
agile fighters, who often make their debuts in their mid-teens. This system
enables dynamic high-flying luchadores such as Rey Mysterio, Jr., Juventud
Guerrera, Super Crazy and MÃ­stico, to develop years of experience by their
mid-twenties.[7] A number of prominent Japanese wrestlers also started their
careers training in Mexican lucha libre before becoming stars in Japan. These
include Gran Hamada, Satoru Sayama, Jushin Liger, and Ãltimo DragÃ³n. With so
many weight classes, Mexico has the largest number of professional wrestlers
in the world.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A lucha libre tag team match

Lucha libre is also known for its tag team wrestling matches. The teams are
often made up of three members, instead of two as is common in the U.S. These
three man teams participate in what are called trios matches, for tag team
championship belts. Of these three members, one member is designated the
captain. A successful fall in a trios match can be achieved by either pinning
the captain of the opposing team or by pinning both of the other members. A
referee can also stop the match because of "excess punishment". He can then
award the match to the aggressors. Falls often occur simultaneously, which
adds to the extremely stylized nature of the action. In addition, a wrestler
can opt to roll out of the ring in lieu of tagging a partner or simply be
knocked out of the ring, at which point one of his partners may enter. As a
result, the tag team formula that U.S. tag matches tend to follow doesn't
apply to lucha libre because the race to tag isn't a priority. There are also
two-man tag matches (parejas) as well as "four on four" matches (atomicos).[8]

## [edit] Masks

<IMG>

<IMG>

The mask of Blue Demon

Masks (mascaras) have been used dating back to the beginnings of lucha libre
and have a historical significance to Mexico dating to the days of the
Aztecs.[citation needed] Early masks were very simple with basic colors to
distinguish the wrestler. In modern lucha libre, masks are colorfully designed
to evoke the images of animals, gods, ancient heroes, and other archetypes,
whose identity the luchador takes on during a performance. Virtually all
wrestlers in Mexico will start their careers wearing masks, but over the span
of their careers a large number of them will be unmasked. Sometimes, a
wrestler slated for retirement will be unmasked in his final bout or at the
beginning of a final tour, signifying loss of identity as that character.
Sometimes, losing the mask signifies the end of a gimmick with the wrestler
moving on to a new gimmick and mask. The mask is considered "sacred" to a
degree, so much so that fully removing an opponent's mask during a match is
grounds for disqualification.[9]

During their careers, masked luchadores will often be seen in public wearing
their masks and keeping up the kayfabe of Lucha Libre while other masked
wrestlers will interact with the public and press normally. However, they will
still go to great lengths to conceal their true identities; in effect, the
mask is synonymous with the luchador. El Santo continued wearing his mask
after retirement, revealed his face briefly only in old age, and was buried
wearing his silver mask.

More recently, the masks that luchadores wear have become iconic symbols of
Mexican culture. Contemporary artists like Francisco Delgado and Xavier Garza
incorporate wrestler masks in their paintings.[10]

Although masks are a feature of lucha libre, many Americans wrongly assume
that every Mexican wrestler uses one. This is false and there have been
several non-masked wrestlers who have been successful, particularly Tarzan
Lopez, Gory Guerrero and Perro Aguayo. Formerly masked wrestlers who lost
their masks, such as Satanico, Cien Caras and others, have had continued
success despite the mask losses.

### [edit] Luchas de apuestas

With the importance placed on masks in lucha libre, losing the mask to an
opponent is seen as the ultimate insult and can at times seriously hurt the
career of the unmasking wrestler. Putting one's mask on the line against a
hated opponent is a tradition in lucha libre as a means to settle a heated
feud between two or more wrestlers. In these battles, called luchas de
apuestas ("matches with wagers"), the wrestlers "wager" either their mask or
their hair.[11]

The first luchas de apuestas match was presented on July 14, 1940 at Arena
MÃ©xico. The defending champion MurciÃ©lago was so much lighter than his
challenger Octavio that he requested a further condition before he would sign
the contract: Octavio would have to put his hair on the line. Octavio won the
match and MurciÃ©lago unmasked, giving birth to a tradition in lucha
libre.[12]

#### [edit] Variants

  * MÃ¡scara contra mÃ¡scara ("mask versus mask"): two masked luchadores bet their masks, the loser is unmasked by the winner, and his real name is often revealed as well.
  * MÃ¡scara contra cabellera ("mask versus hair"): a masked wrestler and an unmasked one compete, often after the unmasked one has lost his mask to the masked one in a prior bout. If the masked luchador wins, the unmasked one shaves his head as a sign of humiliation. If the unmasked luchador is the winner, he keeps his hair and the loser is unmasked.
  * Cabellera contra cabellera ("hair versus hair"): the loser of the match has his head shaved bald. This can occur both between unmasked wrestlers and between masked wrestlers who have to remove their mask enough to be shaved after the match.

## [edit] Weight classes

Since Lucha Libre has it's roots more in Spanish professional wrestling than
North American professional wrestling it retains some of the basics of the
Spanish version such as more weight classes than professional wrestling in
North America. Lucha Libre has a detailed weight class system patterened after
Boxing. Each weight class has an official upper limit but various examples of
wrestlers who are technically too heavy hold a title being champions are
found. The following weight classes exist in Lucha Libre, as defined by the
the "ComisiÃ³n de Box y Lucha Libre Mexico D.F." (the Mexico City Boxing and
Wrestling Commission), the main regulatory body in Mexico:[13]

Name (English) Name (Spanish) Weight Limit Titles in division  
Flyweight Mosca 52 kg (110 lb) None  
Bantamweight Gallo 57 kg (130 lb) None  
Featherweight Pluma 63 kg (140 lb) Mexican National, UWA  
Lightweight Ligero 70 kg (150 lb) Mexican National, UWA, WWA, IWRG  
Super Lightweight Super Ligero 73 kg (160 lb) CMLL  
Welterweight Welter 77 kg (170 lb) Mexican National, NWA, CMLL, UWA, WWA, IWRG  
Super Welterweight Super welter 82 kg (180 lb) IWRG  
Middleweight Medio 87 kg (190 lb) Mexican National, NWA, CMLL, UWA, WWA, IWRG  
Super Middleweight / Junior Light Heavyweight Super medio / Semicompleto
Junior 92 kg (200 lb) UWA, WWA  
Light Heavyweight Semi completo 97 kg (210 lb) Mexican National, NWA, CMLL,
UWA, WWA, WWF  
Junior Heavyweight / Cruiserweight Completo junior / Crucero 105 kg (230 lb)
UWA, AAA  
Heavyweight Completo 105 kg (230 lb) (Minimum) Mexican National, CMLL, UWA,
WWA, IWRG, AAA  
## [edit] Other characteristics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Blue Demon, Jr. wrestles El Hijo Del Santo.

Luchadores are traditionally divided into two categories, rudos ("bad guys",
or "heels", literally "rude ones"), who bend or break the rules, and tÃ©cnicos
(the "good guys", or "faces", literally "technicians"), who play by the rules
and their moves are much more complex and spectacular. "TÃ©cnicos" tend to
have very formal combat styles, close to Greco-Roman wrestling and martial
arts techniques, where as "rudos" tend to be brawlers. TÃ©cnicos playing the
"good guy" role, and rudos playing the "bad guy" role is very characteristic
of Mexican lucha libre, which differs from U.S. professional wrestling, where
many technical wrestlers play the role of heels, and many brawlers play as
"faces" (e.g., Stone Cold Steve Austin).[14] Although rudos often resort to
using under-handed tactics, they are still expected to live up to a luchador
code of honor. For instance, a luchador who has lost a wager match would
prefer to endure the humiliation of being unmasked or having his head shaved
rather than live with the shame that would come from not honoring his bet.
Rudos have also been known to make the transition into tÃ©cnicos after a
career defining moment, as was the case with Blue Demon, who decided to become
a tÃ©cnico after his wrestling partner, Black Shadow, was unmasked by the
legendary Santo. Tag teams are sometimes comprised of both rudos and tÃ©cnicos
in what are called parejas increibles (incredible pairings). Parejas
increibles highlight the conflict between a luchador's desire to win and his
contempt for his partner.[15]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A wrestling match between tÃ©cnico MÃ­stico and rudo Mephisto

Luchadores, like their foreign counterparts, seek to obtain a campeonato
("championship") through winning key wrestling matches. Since many feuds and
shows are built around luchas de apuestas ("matches with wagers"), title
matches play a less prominent role in Mexico than in the U.S. Titles can be
defended as few as one time per year and wrestlers usually only wear their
belts during big events and title defenses.

Lucha libre uses a more specific weight class system to classify titles.
Popular weight classes include; heavyweight, light-heavyweight, welterweight
and middleweight. Lightweight and super-lightweight titles are also used. The
"Cruiserweight" division is often associated with the lucha libre style of
wrestling, even though in Mexico, the term light-heavyweight (peso
semicompleto) is used due to a different weight class system. In recent years,
weight classes have been mostly nominal and there are occasions when a
wrestler will have titles in two different weight classes. However, title
matches are still major events and many shows are built around them.

The two most popular lucha libre promotions are Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre
(CMLL), which was founded in 1933, and Asistencia AsesorÃ­a y AdministraciÃ³n
(AAA).

Lucha libre is currently experiencing a boom in popularity due to the
emergence of a new generation of stars, most notably, a masked wrestler named
MÃ­stico, whose high-flying style and technique is attracting record crowds in
Mexico.

## [edit] Female professional wrestlers

Female wrestlers or luchadoras also compete in Mexican lucha libre. The CMLL
World Women's Championship is the top title for CMLL's women's division; while
the AAA Reina de Reinas Championship is a championship defended in an annual
tournament by female wrestlers in AAA. AAA also recognizes a World Mixed Tag
Team Championship, contested by tag teams composed of a luchador and luchadora
respectively. Among the new group of notable female luchadoras is El Gato de
Plata (believed to be Ella Brown). In 2000, the all female promotion company
Lucha Libre Feminil (LLF) was founded.[16]

## [edit] Luchadores in the U.S.

In 1994, AAA promoted the When Worlds Collide pay-per-view in conjunction with
the U.S. promotion company World Championship Wrestling (WCW). When Worlds
Collide introduced U.S. audiences to many of the top luchadores in Mexico at
the time.

In recent years, several luchadores have found success in the United States.
Notable luchadores who achieved success in the U.S. are Eddie Guerrero, Rey
Mysterio, Juventud, La Parka, Super Crazy and Psicosis.

Lucha libre shows are broadcast weekly in the U.S. on the GalavisiÃ³n and Fox
Sports en EspaÃ±ol Spanish language cable networks.

## [edit] Additional information

In Peru the term "cachascÃ¡n" (from "catch as can") is used. Wrestlers are
called cachascanistas. In Argentina, in addition to lucha libre, professional
wrestling is also referred to as "catch", or catch as catch can.[17]

## [edit] Promotions using lucha libre rules

### [edit] Mexico

  * Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre (CMLL)
  * Asistencia AsesorÃ­a y AdministraciÃ³n (AAA)
  * ENESMA
  * International Wrestling Revolution Group (IWRG)
  * Universal Wrestling Association (defunct)
  * World Wrestling Association (Promociones Mora)
  * Mexican Wrestling Tour [1]
  * Xtreme Latin American Wrestling
  * Lucha Libre Feminil (LLF)
  * Club Deportivo Unidos
  * Tigere Espanol
  * Club Bombero

### [edit] Japan

  * Michinoku Pro Wrestling
  * Osaka Pro Wrestling
  * Pro Wrestling KAGEKI
  * Toryumon / Dragon Gate
  * Universal Lucha Libre (defunct)

### [edit] United States

  * Chikara Pro
  * Incredibly Strange Wrestling
  * Lucha Va Voom
  * Non-Stop Obliteration
  * Mexican Wrestling Association (MWA)
  * Revolucha
  * Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA)
  * Pro Wrestling Revolution
  * New Tradition Wrestling/Nueva Tradicion De Lucha Llibre (NTW/NTLL)

## [edit] In the media and popular culture

  * A fanciful take on the lucha libre concept can be seen in the animated cartoon Â¡Mucha Lucha!
  * The motion picture Nacho Libre stars Jack Black as a priest-turned-luchador (somewhat similar to the real-life lucha libre personality Fray Tormenta, aka Father Sergio GutiÃ©rrez BenÃ­tez).
  * Nike has designed a line of lucha libre inspired athletic shoes.[18]
  * Coca-Cola developed a Blue Demon Full Throttle energy drink named after the famous luchador.[19]
  * In 2007, Cartoon Network produced an animated series based on the luchador El Santo.[20]
  * The Nashville-based Anglo band Los Straitjackets adopted luchador masks as part of their stage show in the mid-1990s, and have since acquired a large Mexican following.
  * Rob Zombie's upcoming animated film The Haunted World of El Superbeasto stars a Mexican luchador named El Superbeasto.
  * Luchadores have become a staple in many fighting games, characters include: 
    * King & Armor King from Tekken
    * Ramon, Tizoc, and Raiden from The King of Fighters
    * Lisa from Dead or Alive
    * El Blaze from Virtua Fighter
    * Rainbow Mika and El Fuerte from Street Fighter
    * Doctor Eggman, the main antagonist in the Sonic the Hedgehog series, wrestles as "El Gran Gordo" (Spanish for, roughly, "The Big Fat One") in the Sonic X comicseries.[21]
    * El Fuerte from Street Fighter IV
  * The comic Sonambulo revolves around a crime fighting luchador who possesses supernatural powers.
  * The comic Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man includes a storyline titled "Masks" (issues #6-7) which discusses the lucha libre world.
  * The martial arts manga Tenjho Tenge includes a character named KÅji Sagara who fights in the lucha libre style.
  * In the manga History's Strongest Disciple Kenichi, the Smiling Steel Fist Diego Carlos, a member of Yami, and his disciple Castor are both practitioners of Lucha Libre.
  * Suda 51, game developer and head of Grasshopper Studios is known for his fascination of Lucha Libre and often includes them in his game, such as the character MASK de Smith in Killer 7 and the collectible Lucha Libre masks in No More Heroes.
  * The anime Air Master features a luchador style character called Lucha Master.
  * Raz from the game Psychonauts fights four different Lucha Libre wrestlers during the Black Velvetopia level of the game.
  * In the online cartoon series Homestar Runner, Strong Bad wears a luchador mask, and is referred to as a "wrestleman." Humorously, when once asked if he takes off his mask and boxing gloves off before he goes to bed, he responds with, "Well, that's a dumb question. Do you take your face and hands off before you go to bed?"
  * The ABC Family television show The Middleman episode entitled "the sino-Mexican revelation" features luchadores.
  * The American horror movie Wrestlemaniac is centered around the story of an insane luchador with abnormal strength; the titular villain is played by actual lucha libre wrestler Rey Mysterio Sr.
  * The lucha film Mil Mascaras vs. the Aztec Mummy[22] stars luchador Mil Mascaras with appearance by many other famous luchadores such as, El Hijo del Santo, Dos Caras, Huracan Ramirez, Blue Demon Jr, and others[23][24]
  * The WB television series Angel episode entitled "The Cautionary Tale of Numero Cinco" told the story of a family of luchadores called "Los Hermanos Numeros" who also fought evil. Angel must help the remaining brother, Numero Cinco, defeat the Aztec warrior-demon that killed his four brothers.
  * On the show Gaki no Tsukai Tanaka Naoki always falls prey to his comedy partner's (Endo Shozo antics as "Dynamite Shikoku" during the No Laughing Batsu game resulting in some sort of painful punishment. Endo wears a large black wig with the usual colourful mask and tight blue wrestling pants.
  * In Demashita! Powerpuff Girls Z, Karou's father is a luchador.
  * The short-lived Nickelodeon series U-Pick Live featured a masked wrestler named Garbagio, who wore a modified Mil Mascaras mask and would often humorously "wrestle" various objects.

## [edit] Notes

  * Paul Allatson (2007). Key Terms in Latino/a Cultural And Literary Studies[2]. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 1405102500.

## [edit] See also

  * Luchador film

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The History of Lucha Libre
  2. ^ Professional Wrestling Online Museum - Ring Chronicle Hall of Fame Inductee - El Santo
  3. ^ Lucha Legends: Gory Guerrero
  4. ^ Blue Demon
  5. ^ Interview: Mil Mascaras and Satoru Sayama
  6. ^ :: Lucha Libre USA ::
  7. ^ CANOE - SLAM! Sports - Wrestling - Lucha Libre 101
  8. ^ 8.6. Lucha Libre confuses me, what are the rules?
  9. ^ Who Was That Masked Man? - Tempo
  10. ^ X a v i e r G a r z a
  11. ^ CANOE - SLAM! Sports - Wrestling - Viva la lucha libre!
  12. ^ Lourdes Grobet, Alfonso Morales, Gustavo Fuentes, and Jose Manuel Aurrecoechea (2005). Lucha Libre: Masked Superstars of Mexican Wrestling. Trilce. p. 115\. ISBN 978-1933045054.
  13. ^ Arturo Montiel Rojas (2001-08-30). "REGLAMENTO DE BOX Y LUCHA LIBRE PROFESIONAL DEL ESTADO DE MEXICO". ComisiÃ³n de Box y Lucha Libre Mexico D.F.. http://www.ordenjuridico.gob.mx/Estatal/ESTADO%20DE%20MEXICO/Reglamentos/MEXREG004.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-04-03. ""CAPITULO XXVI> DEL PESO DE LOS LUCHADORES""
  14. ^ Wrestling Encyclopedia
  15. ^ Lucha Libre Moves
  16. ^ Among the new group of notable female luchadoras is El Gato de Plata (believed to be Ella Brown)CANOE - SLAM! Sports - Wrestling - LLF promoter loves his luchadoras
  17. ^ Federacion Argentina De Catch
  18. ^ Lucha Libre Air Force Ones - NiceKicks.com
  19. ^ BevNET.com - Coca-Cola Introduces New Full Throttle Blue Demon Energy Drink
  20. ^ Cartoon Network Announces Five New Series for 2007
  21. ^ http://eggmanempire.sonicworld.net/article8.php
  22. ^ "MMvsAM". http://www.mmvsam.com.
  23. ^ "IMDb". http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0469135/.
  24. ^ "PopMatters". http://www.popmatters.com/pm/post/mil-mascaras-resurrection.

## [edit] External links

  * Lucha Wiki
  * From Parts Unknown - Pop-culture resource for Mexican wrestling
  * Pro-Wrestling Title Histories of Mexico
  * SuperLuchas Top Mexican Lucha Libre Magazine (Spanish)
  * Super Libre Mexican Lucha Libre On Line Magazine (Spanish)
  * Lucha Britannia

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucha_libre"

Categories: Professional wrestling by country | Lucha libre | Sports
entertainment | Professional wrestling genres

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 14:21 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



