
# Sea shanty

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the song "Sea Shanty" by Quasi, see Featuring "Birds"

For the album "Sea Shanties" by English band High Tide, see High Tide (band).

Sea shanties (singular "shanty", also spelled "chantey"; derived from the
French word "chanter", 'to sing') were shipboard working songs. Some speculate
that shanties may have been sung as early as the 15th century though there is
little evidence to support this claim. The shanties that survived to be
collected and preserved date from the 19th century through the days of steam
ships in the first half of the 20th century.

## Contents

  * 1 Nature of the songs
  * 2 Categories
  * 3 The shantyman
  * 4 Performance of shanties
  * 5 Literary references to sea shanties
  * 6 Samples
  * 7 Sea shanty and sea music performers
    * 7.1 "Traditional" performers
    * 7.2 "Pirate rock" performers
    * 7.3 Other
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Nature of the songs

In the days when human muscles were the only power source available aboard
ship, sea shanties served a practical purpose: the rhythm of the song served
to synchronize the movements of the sailors as they toiled at repetitive
tasks. They also served a social purpose: singing and listening to songs is
pleasant; it alleviates boredom and lightens the burden of hard work, of which
there was no shortage on long voyages in those days.

Most shanties are "call and response" songs, with one voice (the shantyman)
singing the line and the chorus of sailors bellowing the response (compare
military cadence calls). For example, the shanty "Boney":

    Shantyman: Boney was a warrior,  

    All: Way, hey, ya!  

    Shantyman: A warrior and a terrier,  

    All: Jean-FranÃ§ois!
Working it as a short-drag or sheet chantey (see below), hands on the line
would synchronize their pulls with the last syllable of each response.

Musically, shanties seem to reflect a variety of sources. "Spanish Ladies" is
a perfect galliard (popular around 1600), songs like "Fire Marengo" look like
West African work-songs, others are adapted "folk" songs or 19th century
polkas and waltzes. Lyrically, like the blues, shanties often exhibit a string
of stock verses without much explicit, continuous theme.

## [edit] Categories

Shanties (also spelled Chantey) may be divided into several rough categories:

  * Long-haul (also called "halyard" or "long-drag") shanties: Sung when a job of hauling on a line was expected to last a long time, hoisting topsails, for example. Usually there are two pulls per chorus as in Way, hey, Blow the man down! Examples: "Hanging Johnny", "Blow the Man Down."
  * Short-drag (also called "short-haul", or "sheet") shanties: Sung when a job of hauling on a line was expected to be quick but required great force. These are characterized by one strong pull in each chorus as in "Way, haul away, haul away Joe!". Examples: "Boney", and "Haul on the Bowline."
  * Capstan Shanties: Raising the anchor on a ship involved winding the rope along a giant winch, turned by sailors walking around it. Capstan shanties are anchor-raising shanties. They are typically more "smooth" sounding than other types (no pulling required) and, unlike many other types of shanties, frequently have a full chorus in addition to the call-and-response verses. Examples: "Santianna", "Paddy Lay Back", "Rio Grande", "South Australia", "John Brown's Body" (adapted from Army marching song).
  * Stamp-'n'-Go Shanties: were used only on ships with large crews. Many hands would take hold of a line with their backs to the fall (where the line reaches the deck from aloft) and march away along the deck singing and stamping out the rhythm. Alternatively, with a larger number of men, they would create a loop -- marching along with the line, letting go at the 'end' of the loop and marching back to the 'top' of the loop to take hold again for another trip. These songs tend to have longer choruses similar to capstan shanties. Examples: "Drunken Sailor", "Roll the Old Chariot". Stan Hugill, in his Shanties from the Seven Seas writes: "(Drunken Sailor) is a typical example of the stamp-'n'-go song or walkaway or runaway shanty, and was the only type of work-song allowed in the King's Navee (sic). It was popular in ships with big crews when at halyards; the crowd would seize the fall and stamp the sail up. Sometimes when hauling a heavy boat up the falls would be 'married' and both hauled on at the same time as the hands stamped away singing this rousing tune."
  * Pumping Shanties: All wooden ships leak somewhat. There was a special hold (cargo area) in the ships where the leaked-in water (the bilge) would collect: the bilge hold. The bilge water had to be pumped out frequently; on period ships this was done with a two-man pump. Many pumping shanties were also used as capstan shanties, and vice versa, particularly after the adoption of the Downton pump which used a capstan rather than pump handles moved up and down. Examples include: "Strike The Bell", "Shallow Brown", "Barnacle Bill the Sailor", "Lowlands".
  * Fo'c's'le (Forecastle) Songs, Fo'castle Shanty (Chantey) or Forebitters: Shanties (Chanteys) are worksongs and were sung only for work. However, sailors also sang for pleasure in the fo'c's'le where they slept or, in fine weather, gathered near the fore bitts (large posts on the foredeck). Example: "Rolling Down to Old Maui". While songs with maritime themes were sung, sea songs were not the only sort sung off watch.
  * Menhaden Shanties: These are worksongs used on menhaden fishing boats, sung while pulling up the nets. Typical examples are "The Johnson Girls" and "Won't You Help Me to Raise 'Em Boys".

The above categories are not absolute. Sailors could (and did) take a song
from one category and, with necessary alterations to the rhythm, use it for a
different task. The only rule almost always followed was that songs that spoke
of returning home were only sung on the homeward leg, and songs that sang of
the joys of voyaging etc., were only sung on the outward leg. Other songs were
very specific. "Poor Old Man" (also known as "Poor Old Horse" or "The Dead
Horse") was sung once the sailors had worked off their advance (the "horse") a
month or so into the voyage. "Leave Her, Johnny Leave Her" (also known as
"Time for Us to Leave Her") was only sung during the last round of pumping the
ship dry once it was tied up in port, prior to leaving the ship at the end of
the voyage.

## [edit] The shantyman

The shantyman was a sailor who led the others in singing. He was usually self-
appointed. A sailor would not generally sign on as a shantyman per se, but
took on the role in addition to their other tasks on the ship. Nevertheless,
sailors reputed to be good shantymen were valuable and respected.

## [edit] Performance of shanties

<IMG>

<IMG>

A capstan crew would chant a particular type of shanty in order to coordinate
their movements

Historically, shanties were usually not sung ashore. Today, they are performed
as popular music. Shanty choirs, often large choral groups that perform only
sea shanties, are popular in Europe, particularly Poland and the Netherlands,
but also countries such as Germany and Norway. In English-speaking countries,
sea shanties are comparatively less popular as a separate genre and tend to be
performed by smaller groups as folk music rather than in a choral style. They
are also sung by some folk music clubs as a social pastime, not for
performance. A medley of sea shanties performed by classical orchestra, Sir
Henry Wood's Fantasia on British Sea Songs, is a popular component of the Last
Night of the Proms in Britain. In a completely different style, "Frigging in
the Rigging" was recorded by the Sex Pistols.

Although the "days of the tall ships" are over, the shanty song style is still
used for new musical compositions. Well known examples include the Stan Rogers
song, "Barrett's Privateers," the Steve Goodman song, "Lincoln Park Pirates,"
and the theme song for the television show SpongeBob SquarePants (a version of
"Blow the Man Down"). Even the song "Reise, Reise" by the Neue Deutsche HÃ¤rte
band Rammstein is based on a shanty, "Reise, Reise". The Mariner's Revenge
Song by The Decemberists is also said to be in a sea shanty style.

## [edit] Literary references to sea shanties

> I soon got used to this singing; for the sailors never touched a rope
without it. Sometimes, when no one happened to strike up, and the pulling,
whatever it might be, did not seem to be getting forward very well, the mate
would always say, "Come, men, can't any of you sing? Sing now, and raise the
dead." And then some one of them would begin, and if every man's arms were as
much relieved as mine by the song, and he could pull as much better as I did,
with such a cheering accompaniment, I am sure the song was well worth the
breath expended on it. It is a great thing in a sailor to know how to sing
well, for he gets a great name by it from the officers, and a good deal of
popularity among his shipmates. Some sea-captains, before shipping a man,
always ask him whether he can sing out at a rope. (Herman Melville, Redburn:
His First Voyage, 1849)

> A song is as necessary to sailors as the drum and fife to a soldier. They
must pull together as soldiers must step in time, and they can't pull in time,
or pull with a will, without it. Many a time, when a thing goes heavy, with
one fellow yo-ho-ing, a lively song, like "Heave, to the girls!" "Nancy O!"
"Jack Crosstree," "Cheerly, men," &c., has put life and strength into every
arm. We found a great difference in the effect of the various songs in driving
in the hides. Two or three songs would be tried, one after the other, with no
effect,-- not an inch could be got upon the tackles; when a new song, struck
up, seemed to hit the humor of the moment, and drove the tackles "two blocks"
at once. "Heave round hearty!" "Captain gone ashore!" "Dandy ship and a dandy
crew," and the like, might do for common pulls, but on an emergency, when we
wanted a heavy, "raise-the-dead pull," which should start the beams of the
ship, there was nothing like "Time for us to go!" "Round the corner," "Tally
high ho! you know," or "Hurrah! hurrah! my hearty bullies!" (Richard Henry
Dana, Jr., Two Years Before the Mast, 1840)

There is some suggestion that the ProvenÃ§al song by the Comtessa de Dia
titled "A Chantar M'er" may be a title pun on the French for a Sea Shanty. The
troubadour punning text suggests piracy is afoot.

Fifteen men on the dead man's chest is the first verse of the chorus of a
fictional sea shanty from Robert Louis Stevenson's novel Treasure Island
(1883).

## [edit] Samples

  * 

<IMG>

Roll the Old Chariot Along  
Play sound  
from the Library of Congress' Robert Winslow Gordon; recorded in the Bay Area
of California in the early 1920s. Unfortunately, the identity of the singer is
lost to history, but he is believed to have been a veteran of sailing ships.
Due to the improvisational nature of sea shanties and folk music in general,
this song exists with many different lyrics and even with different tunes.
Depending on the lyrics it has been collected as both a spiritual song and as
a sea shanty.  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
  * 

<IMG>

Haul Away Joe  
Play sound  
The melody for the first two verses of Haul Away Joe  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
  * Download recording â "High Barbaree," as performed by Bounding Main. This rendition adapts a traditional sea shanty to a modern style. Maritime and battle sound effects are added to enhance the story of the battle with Barbary Pirates.
  * YouTube video \-- "South Australia" as performed by "Fishermanâs Friends," the Port Isaac Sea Shanty Singers.
  * YouTube video \-- "Hourra les filles Ã cinq deniers," a French shanty as performed by The NexTradition.
  * YouTube video \-- "Won't You Help Me to Raise Um," a menhaden shanty as performed by The Northern Neck Shanty Singers.

## [edit] Sea shanty and sea music performers

### [edit] "Traditional" performers

  * Hugues Aufray, French singer
  * Jerry Bryant, from Maine
  * Banana Boat, an a cappella sextet from Poland performing neo-shanties as well as traditional sea-shanties in contemporary arrangements.
  * Bounding Main, an a cappella sextet based near Kenosha, Wisconsin.
  * Johnny Collins, a modern-day shantyman.
  * Great Big Sea, Canadian band performing some shanties in traditional style.
  * Stan Hugill, "Last Working Shantyman" (1906-1992).
  * The Idlers, an all-male a cappella shanty group at the United States Coast Guard Academy (1957-present)
  * The Johnson Girls, an all female a cappella shanty group from New York.
  * The Jolly Rogers, a modern-day pirate-themed band and comedy performance group.
  * Tom and Chris Kastle, from Chicago.
  * Tom Lewis, Canadian performer.
  * Northern Neck Shanty Singers, a menhaden shanty group, some of whom learned the songs as work songs on fishing boats when they were young men. [1]
  * William Pint and Felicia Dale, from Seattle.
  * Roberts and Barrand, from New York and New England (1969â)
  * Bob Roberts, British Merchant Seaman and folk singer (1907 â 1982)
  * Salty Walt & the Rattlin' Ratlines, from San Francisco.
  * Stan Rogers, Canadian performer (1949 - 1983).
  * Cyril Tawney, British performer (1930 - 2005).
  * John Townley, also known for opening the first 12-track recording studio in New York, Apostolic Studios.
  * Bob Zentz

### [edit] "Pirate rock" performers

  * Captain Bogg and Salty, a pirate-themed rock band which performs many traditional shanties, as well as writing several of their own.
  * Sforzando, Australian "psych-folk pirate punk" band.
  * Alestorm, a Scottish "pirate metal" band.

### [edit] Other

  * Johnny Depp reportedly developed an interest in sea shanties while filming Pirates of the Caribbean. As a result, in 2006 he helped facilitate Rogue's Gallery: Pirate Ballads, Sea Songs, and Chanteys, an album of informal recordings of variable quality, primarily by performers not known for prior interest in or knowledge of sea shanties. According to the liner notes, the producer, Hal Willner, knew nothing of sea shanties before beginning the project. However, some performers on the album, such as Sting, did have a prior interest.

## [edit] References

  * Doerflinger, William Main, Songs of the Sailor and Lumberman. Mayerbooks, Glenwood, 1990.
  * Harlow, Frederick Pease, Chanteying Aboard American Ships. Mystic Seaport Museum, Mystic. 2004.
  * Hugill, Stan, Shanties and Sailor's Songs. Frederick A. Praeger, New York, 1969
  * Hugill, Stan, Shanties from the Seven Seas. Mystic Seaport Museum, Mystic, 1994.
  * Proctor, David, Music of the Sea. HMSO, London, 1992.
  * Davids, C. A., & Aalbers, B. H. Wat lijdt den zeeman al verdriet: het Nederlandse zeemanslied in de zeiltijd, 1600-1900. The Hague, 1980.

Both Stan Hugill and Frank Shay have written extensively on sea shanties.

## [edit] External links

Sea shanties in general:

  * The Chantey Cabin - Shanty and Maritime Music specialists
  * John Ward's "Shanties and Sea Songs" webpage
  * Shanties and Sea Songs webpage
  * Contemplator.com, "Songs of the sea" section (embedded midi)
  * International Shanty and Seasong Association
  * Bilgemunky Radio online/podcast radio show devoted to pirate music including traditional sea shanty performers and pirate rock performers.

Annual sea music festivals:

  * The Bitter End contains a comprehensive list of forthcoming festivals across the world.

  * Europe 
    * "Shanties 08" in Liverpool, U.K. (Usually held in June, part of the Mersey River Festival.)
    * "Sea Fever Sea Shanty Festival" in Kingston Upon Hull, U.K. (Usually held in September.)
    * "De Slag op 't Wiede" in Giethoorn, the Netherlands. (Usually held in September.)
    * International Sea Songs Festival "Shanties" in KrakÃ³w, Poland (Held since 1981, usually in February.) (Polish)
    * "International Shanty Festival" near the "Oude Haven", "Wijnhaven" and "Leuvehaven" in Rotterdam, The Netherlands (Usually held in the first full week-end of September.) (Dutch)
    * "Langesund International Shantyfestival" in Norway (Annual festival since 1991. Always the first weekend in june)

  * United States 
    * "San Diego Annual Sea Chantey Fest" at Maritime Museum of San Diego (Usually held in May.)
    * "Sea Music Festival" at Mystic Seaport Museum of America and the Sea (Usually held in mid-June.)
    * "Festival of the Sea" at San Francisco Maritime National Historical Park (Usually held in early September at Hyde Street Pier. Reportedly in hiatus, replaced by "Festival of Sail" held every three years.)
    * "Chicago Maritime Festival" in Chicago (Usually held in late February at Chicago History Museum.)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sea_shanty"

Categories: Sea shanties | Folk music | Song forms | Maritime music

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 15:52 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



