
# Yabusame

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (March 2009)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Yabusame Archer on Horseback

<IMG>

<IMG>

Yabusame Archer Takes Aim on the Second Target

Yabusame (æµéé¦¬ ?) is a type of Japanese archery, one that is performed
while riding a horse. The archer shoots a special "turnip-headed" arrow at a
wooden target.

This style of archery has its origins at the beginning of the Kamakura period.
Minamoto no Yoritomo became alarmed at the lack of archery skills his samurai
had. He organized yabusame as a form of practice.

Nowadays, yabusame is performed at the Tsurugaoka Hachiman-gÅ« in Kamakura. It
is also performed in Samukawa and on the beach at Zushi, as well as other
locations.

## Contents

  * 1 History of the Japanese bow and mounted archery
  * 2 Yabusame - ritual mounted archery
  * 3 Famous schools of archery and the impact of Zen
  * 4 The decline and revival of the bow
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] History of the Japanese bow and mounted archery

Japanese bows date back to prehistoric times â the JÅmon Period. The long,
unique asymmetrical bow style with the grip below the center emerged under the
Yayoi culture (300 BC â 300 AD) Bows became the symbol of authority and
power. The legendary first emperor of Japan, Emperor Jimmu, is always depicted
carrying a bow.

The use of the bow had been on foot until around the 4th century when elite
soldiers took to fighting on horseback with bows and swords. In the 10th
century, samurai would have archery duels on horseback. They would ride at
each other and try to shoot at least three arrows. These duels did not
necessarily have to end in death, as long as honor was satisfied. One of the
most famous and celebrated incidents of Japanese mounted archery occurred
during the Genpei War (1180â1185), an epic struggle for power between the
Heike and Genji clans that was to have a major impact on Japanese culture,
society, and politics.

At the Battle of Yashima, the Heike, having been defeated in battle, fled to
Yashima and took to their boats. They were fiercely pursued by the Genji on
horseback, but the Genji were halted by the sea.

As the Heike waited for the winds to be right, they presented a fan hung from
a mast as a target for any Genji archer to shoot at in a gesture of chivalrous
rivalry between enemies.

One of the Genji samurai, Nasu Yoichi, accepted the challenge. He rode his
horse into the sea and shot the fan cleanly through. Nasu won much fame and
his feat is still celebrated to this day.

During the Kamakura Period (1192â1334), mounted archery was used as a
military training exercise to keep samurai prepared for war. Those archers who
did poorly might find themselves commanded to commit seppuku, or ritualistic
suicide.

One style of mounted archery was inuoumono â shooting at dogs. Buddhist
priests were able to prevail upon the samurai to have the arrows padded so
that the dogs were only annoyed and bruised rather than killed. This sport is
no longer practiced.

## [edit] Yabusame - ritual mounted archery

<IMG>

<IMG>

A mounted samurai with bow & arrows, wearing a horned helmet. Circa 1878.

Yabusame was designed as a way to please and entertain the myriad of gods that
watch over Japan, thus encouraging their blessings for the prosperity of the
land, the people, and the harvest.

A yabusame archer gallops down a 255-meter-long track at high speed. The
archer mainly controls his horse with his knees, as he needs both hands to
draw and shoot his bow.

As he approaches a target, he brings his bow up and draws the arrow past his
ear before letting the arrow fly with a deep shout of In-Yo-In-Yo (darkness
and light). The arrow is blunt and round-shaped in order to make a louder
sound when it strikes the board.

Experienced archers are allowed to used arrows with a V-shaped prong. If the
board is struck, it will splinter with a confetti-like material and fall to
the ground. To hit all three targets is considered an admirable
accomplishment. Yabusame targets and their placement are designed to ritually
replicate the optimum target for a lethal blow on an opponent wearing full
traditional samurai armor (O-Yoroi) which left the space just beneath the
helmet visor bare.

Yabusame is characterized as a ritual rather than a sport because of its
solemn style and religious aspects, and is often performed for special
ceremonies or official events, such as entertaining foreign dignitaries and
heads of state. Yabusame demonstrations have been given for the formal visits
of US Presidents Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush. A yabusame demonstration
was given in the United Kingdom for Prince Charles, who reportedly was
fascinated and pleased with the performance.

To be selected as a yabusame archer is a great honor. In the past, they were
chosen from only the best warriors. The archer who performs the best is
awarded a white cloth, signifying divine favor.

## [edit] Famous schools of archery and the impact of Zen

<IMG>

<IMG>

Yabusame Archer wearing traditional 13th Century clothing

There are two famous schools of mounted archery that perform yabusame. One is
the Ogasawara school. The founder, Ogasawara Nagakiyo, was instructed by the
shogun Minamoto Yoritomo (1147â1199) to start a school for archery. Yoritomo
wanted his warriors to be highly skilled and disciplined. Archery was seen as
a good way for instilling the necessary principles for a samurai warrior.

Zen became a major element in both foot and mounted archery as it also became
popular among the samurai in every aspect of their life during the Kamakura
Period.

Yabusame as a martial art helped a samurai learn concentration, discipline,
and refinement. Zen taught breathing techniques to stabilize the mind and
body, giving clarity and focus. To be able to calmly draw one's bow, aim, and
shoot in the heat of battle, and then repeat, was the mark of a true samurai
who had mastered his training and his fear.

The other archery school was begun earlier by Minamoto Yoshiari in the 9th
century at the command of Emperor Uda. This school became known as the Takeda
school of archery. The Takeda style has been featured in classic samurai films
such as Akira Kurosawa's "Seven Samurai" (1954) and "Kagemusha" (1980). The
famed actor of many samurai films, Toshiro Mifune, was a noted student of the
Takeda school.

## [edit] The decline and revival of the bow

With the arrival of the Portuguese and their guns in the mid-16th century, the
bow began to lose its importance on the battlefield. At the Battle of
Nagashino in 1575, well-placed groups of musketeers serving Oda Nobunaga and
Tokugawa shot in volleys and practically annihilated the cavalry charges of
the Takeda clan.

Mounted archery was revived in the Edo Period (1600â1867) by Ogasawara
Heibei Tsuneharu (1666â1747) under the command of the shogun Tokugawa
Yoshimune (1684â1751). Given that the nation was at peace, archery as well
as other military martial arts became more of a method of personal development
rather than military training.

Today, Yabusame is held at various times of the year generally near Shinto
shrines.

## [edit] See also

  * Horses in East Asian warfare

## [edit] External links

  * Takeda school Kyubadou Yabusame
  * Short Video of the Takeda School Performing Yabusame at Meiji Shrine
  * Japan Times article
  * Encyclopedia of Shinto entry

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yabusame"

Categories: Archery | Japanese martial arts | History of archery

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | Articles containing
Japanese language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 18:32.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



