
# Burt Rutan

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (March 2009)  
Burt Rutan  
<IMG>  
  
Born June 17, 1943 (1943-06-17) (age 65)  
Estacada, OR,  
United States  
Occupation aerospace engineer  
Spouse(s) Tonya Rutan  
Elbert Leander "Burt" Rutan (born June 17, 1943 in Estacada, Oregon) is an
American aerospace engineer noted for his originality in designing light,
strong, unusual-looking, energy-efficient aircraft. He is often described as
the "second true innovator" in the field of aerospace materials technology;
his most important predecessor was German engineer Hugo Junkers, who pioneered
the design of all-metal aircraft in 1915. He is most famous for his design of
the record-breaking Voyager, which was the first plane to fly around the world
without stopping or refueling, and the sub-orbital spaceplane SpaceShipOne,
which won the Ansari X-Prize in 2004 for becoming the first privately funded
spacecraft to enter the realm of space twice within a two week period.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
  * 2 Air and space craft designs
    * 2.1 Homebuilts
      * 2.1.1 VariViggen and VariViggen SP
      * 2.1.2 VariEze and Long-EZ
    * 2.2 Ames AD-1
    * 2.3 Defiant
    * 2.4 Quickie
    * 2.5 Amsoil Biplane Racer
    * 2.6 Grizzly
    * 2.7 Fairchild NGT Demonstrator
    * 2.8 Voyager
    * 2.9 Solitaire
    * 2.10 Catbird
    * 2.11 Lotus Microlight
    * 2.12 Beech Starship POC
    * 2.13 Predator
    * 2.14 ATTT
    * 2.15 Triumph
    * 2.16 CM-44
    * 2.17 ARES
    * 2.18 Pond Racer
    * 2.19 Boomerang
    * 2.20 Proteus
    * 2.21 Spacecraft
    * 2.22 GlobalFlyer
  * 3 Awards
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

Born in Estacada, Oregon, 30 miles southeast of Portland, and raised in
Dinuba, California, Rutan displayed an early interest in aircraft design. By
the time he was eight years old he was designing and building model aircraft.
His first solo flight piloting an airplane was in an Aeronca Champ in 1959,
when he was sixteen. In 1965 he graduated third in his class from California
Polytechnic University with a BS degree in aeronautical engineering.

From 1965 to 1972 Rutan worked for the U.S. Air Force at Edwards Air Force
Base as a flight test project engineer, working on nine separate projects
including fighter spin tests and the LTV XC-142 VSTOL transport. He left to
become director of the Bede Test Center for Bede Aircraft, in Newton, Kansas,
a position he held until 1974. At that time Jim Bede still had a powered
version of a Schweizer SGS 2-32 sailplane which he had built with the intent
of achieving a nonstop flight around the world. That effort had effectively
ceased in 1969, before Rutan was hired (Bede had not announced that the
project was stopped, but he had moved onto other projects, effectively
abandoning it), but the aircraft was still part of the BTC.

Rutan returned to California in June 1974, to create his own business, the
Rutan Aircraft Factory. In this business he designed and developed prototypes
for several aircraft, mostly homebuilt. His first design was the Rutan
VariViggen, a two-seat pusher single-engine craft of canard configuration. The
canard would become a common feature of Rutan's designs.

In April 1982, Burt Rutan founded Scaled Composites,LLC, which has become one
of the world's pre-eminent aircraft design and prototyping facilities. Scaled
Composites is headquartered in Mojave, California, at the Mojave Air & Space
Port.

Rutan is married to Tonya Rutan, his fourth wife.

## [edit] Air and space craft designs

### [edit] Homebuilts

#### [edit] VariViggen and VariViggen SP

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Rutan VariViggen

His first design, the VariViggen, which he began building in his garage in
1968, first flew in April 1972. It had the rear wing, forward canard, and
pusher configuration design elements which became his trademarks. In lieu of
wind tunnel testing, Rutan developed the aerodynamic parameters for the
VariViggen using a model rigged atop his station wagon, and measuring the
forces while driving on empty roads.

The VariViggen was the Rutan model 27. A new set of outer wings, with
winglets, was later developed by Rutan for the VariViggen, producing the
VariViggen SP, Rutan model 32. The VariViggen was named in honor of the Saab
37 Viggen, a canard-configured fighter jet developed in Sweden. One
VariViggen, built in France, was powered by two Microturbo TRS-18 jet engines
in lieu of the usual piston engine.

#### [edit] VariEze and Long-EZ

<IMG>

Rutan VariEze homebuilt experimental aircraft

The VariViggen design led to the successful Rutan VariEze homebuilt
experimental aircraft designs, in which he pioneered the use of moldless
glass-reinforced plastic construction in homebuilts. In 1975 his brother Dick
Rutan set a world distance record in the under-500 kg (1100 lb) class in the
VariEze, and these aircraft went on to set other world records in this
class.[1] They were also the first aircraft to fly with NASA-developed
winglets.[2] The original VW-powered VariEze used by Dick Rutan to set the
forementioned records was the Rutan model 31. The later, standard homebuilt
VariEze was the Rutan model 33. Most VariEzes have been powered by Continental
O-200 engines.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vari Eze (1976)

Rutan later revised the VariEze design, providing more volume for fuel and
cargo, resulting in the Rutan model 61 Long-EZ, designed to be powered by a
Lycoming O-235, although some have used Lycoming O-320s or Lycoming O-360s.

### [edit] Ames AD-1

In the 1980s NASA issued a contract to Ames Industrial Company of Bohemia, New
York to develop a small, low-cost aircraft to investigate Robert T. Jones's (a
NASA researcher at NASA's Ames Research Center) oblique wing concept. Ames
turned to Rutan, who designed a small, fiberglass airframe, powered by two
Microturbo TRS-18 jet engines. This was the Rutan model 35, the Ames AD-1.
After being tested at the NASA Dryden Research Center it was retired to the
Hiller Aviation Museum in San Carlos, California.

### [edit] Defiant

Rutan next developed a twin-engined canard-configured aircraft, the Rutan
model 40 Defiant. The aircraft was configured with the two piston engines
mounted in the fuselage, one pulling and one pushing. After several years of
use as Rutan's personal airplane a homebuilt version was developed, the Rutan
model 74 Defiant. The prototype is now at the Hiller Aviation Museum.

### [edit] Quickie

Rutan was approached by Gene Sheehan and Tom Jewett to develop a single-seat
personal sport aircraft. A tandem wing configuration resulted from their
collaboration. The aircraft was powered by a 22.5 hp Onan industrial engine.
The prototype was the Rutan model 49. Quickie Aircraft then marketed a
slightly improved version as the Quickie. This was the Rutan model 54 Quickie.

Two derivatives of the Quickie were subsequently developed, both expanded to
include two seats. Quickie Aircraft had Gary LaGare develop the Q2, while
Viking Aircraft developed the Viking Dragonfly.

### [edit] Amsoil Biplane Racer

Dan Mortensen approached Burt Rutan about designing an aircraft for use in the
Biplane Class at the Reno Air Races. Rutan chose a layout similar to the
Quickie. The Lycoming O-290 powered aircraft was the Rutan model 68 AMSOIL
Racer. The aircraft was first raced in 1981. In 1983 it crashed during a heat
race. Pilot Mortensen sustained minor injuries but the airplane was destroyed.
The aircraft was rebuilt for static display and was displayed in a bar at the
Grand Sierra Resort in Reno, Nevada until 2008.

### [edit] Grizzly

Rutan designed the model 72 Grizzly to investigate the possibility of a STOL
canard aircraft. It was retired after testing.

### [edit] Fairchild NGT Demonstrator

Ames Industrial was contracted to build a twin-engine demonstrator of
Fairchild Republic's design for the US Air Force's Next Generation Trainer
competition. Ames contracted to Rutan to design and build the airframe. The
aircraft, powered by two Microturbo TRS-18 jet engines, was the Rutan model
73. The aircraft was retired after test flights helped Fairchild win the NGT
contract with the T-46 (although the T-46 . was later rejected by the USAF).

### [edit] Voyager

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rutan Voyager on display in the National Air and Space Museum

Rutan was approached by his brother Dick about designing an airplane that
could fly nonstop, unrefueled around the world, something that had never been
done before (around-the-world flights had been accomplished by military crews
using in-flight refueling). About this time, Quickie Aircraft was working on
an aircraft for the same mission and Jim Bede had designed the BD-2 LOVE with
that goal in mind, but had effectively given it up.

Rutan developed a twin-engined (piston engines, one pusher and one tractor)
canard-configured design, the Rutan model 76 Voyager. The pusher engine would
run continuously; the tractor engine would be used for take-off and the
initial climb to altitude, then would be stopped.

The aircraft was first flown with two Lycoming O-235 engines. After
development work, it was reengined with a Continental O-200 (modified to
include liquid cooling) as the pusher engine and a Continental O-240 as the
tractor engine. Initially, MT propellers were used, but after several
propeller failures, a switch was made to Hartzell propellers.

As a proving flight, Dick and his partner Jeana Yeager made a record setting
endurance flight off the coast of California. In December 1986, they took off
from Edwards Air Force Base in California and flew around the world (westward)
in nine days, fulfilling the aircraft's design goals. The Voyager was retired
and now has the honor of hanging in the Milestones of Flight exhibit in the
National Air and Space Museum (NASM) main exhibit hall, with the Wright Flyer,
Spirit of St. Louis and Bell X-1.

### [edit] Solitaire

The Soaring Society of America opened a competition for a homebuilt, self-
launching sailplane. Rutan designed the model 77 Solitaire for this
competition, which it won. The sailplane was canard-configured, with a
retractable engine ahead of the cockpit.

### [edit] Catbird

Desiring a new personal airplane, Rutan designed a five-place, single-engined
pressurized airplane, the Model 81 Catbird. The airplane was configured as a
three-surface aircraft (canard, main wing, and tail). After serving as Rutan's
personal airplane, it was retired. The Catbird is notable for winning the CAFE
Challenge aircraft efficiency prize in 1993.[3]

### [edit] Lotus Microlight

Rutan was approached by Colin Chapman, the founder of Lotus Racing, to design
a single-seat ultralight aircraft. Again, a canard configuration was
developed, the Rutan model 91. Colin Chapman's untimely death brought this
project to an end, after the aircraft had flown.

### [edit] Beech Starship POC

Beech Aircraft Company contracted Rutan to participate in the design of a twin
turboprop business aircraft. Initial design studies (model 89) were for a
three-surface aircraft. At Beech President Lyndon Blue's direction, the
aircraft was instead configured like a scaled-up LongEZ, powered by two Pratt
& Whitney PT6A engines, mounted on the wings in pusher configuration. The
result was the Rutan model 115. An 85% scale prototype was built and flown.
From this, Beech developed the Beechcraft Starship.

### [edit] Predator

Rutan was contracted by David Record to design an agricultural aircraft.
Initially, a joined-wing design was chosen, the Rutan model 59. This was
revised to a three-surface configuration, the Rutan model 120. A prototype was
built and flight tested. After delivery to the customer, the airframe was
destroyed in a crash, but the pilot was not injured.

### [edit] ATTT

Rutan formed an expanded company, Scaled Composites, in 1982. DARPA contracted
Scaled to design and build a special-mission utility twin aircraft. After
studying several configurations, a three-surface design was chosen, the Rutan
model 133 Advanced Tactical Trainer and Transport (ATTT). Powered by two Pratt
& Whitney PT6A turboprops, this aircraft was built and flown. After initial
testing, the conventional tail was replaced with a "Bronco tail". The aircraft
is now retired and stored at Edwards Air Force Base.

### [edit] Triumph

Scaled Composites was purchased by Raytheon, the parent company of Beech
Aircraft. Rutan was tasked with designing a cabin twin aircraft that could
alternatively be powered by piston, turboprop or turbofan engines. The
resulting three-surface configuration aircraft was the model 143 Triumph.
Construction started on two airframes, but only one was completed, powered by
two Williams FJ44 turbofan engines. After being flight tested, the aircraft
was retired and is now on display in the Plant 42 Heritage Air Park in
Palmdale, California.

### [edit] CM-44

California Microwave contracted Scaled to develop a slightly scaled up Long EZ
for use as an optionally piloted UAV. The resulting aircraft was the model 144
CM-44. The aircraft, powered by a Lycoming O-360 was flight-tested and
delivered to the customer.

### [edit] ARES

After discussions with DARPA, Scaled began design of a single-seat turbofan
ground attack aircraft. The canard-configured aircraft was the model 151 ARES.
the aircraft was powered by a single Pratt & Whitney JT15D turbofan, offset to
port, with a 30 mm cannon, offset to starboard. The aircraft was flown, tested
and then stored for a number of years; in 2008 it was reactivated as a flight
test vehicle.

### [edit] Pond Racer

Concerned about the dwindling numbers of WWII aircraft, with many being
consumed by use as Unlimited Class racers at the Reno Air Races, Bob Pond
contracted Scaled to design an Unlimited Class racer. The result was the Pond
Racer. After design studies, a twin-engined, conventional configured layout
was chosen. The aircraft was powered by two 1000 hp Electromotive-Nissan VG-30
3-liter GTP piston engines running on methanol. The aircraft was built and
tested before delivery to the customer. It appeared at the Reno Air Races in
1991, 1992 and 1993. The aircraft was destroyed in a forced landing crash on
September 14 1993, killing pilot Rick Brickert.

### [edit] Boomerang

A departure from the canard design was the Scaled Composites Boomerang perhaps
one of the unconventional designer's most unconventional aircraft. The
aircraft, the model 202 Boomerang, is an asymmetric twin-engine tractor
configuration aircraft with one engine on the fuselage and another mounted on
a pod. A November 1996 Popular Mechanics feature article said it "looks more
like a trimotor that lost its right boom and engine". [4]

### [edit] Proteus

The Model 281 Proteus is a tandem-wing high-endurance aircraft designed by
Burt Rutan to investigate the use of aircraft as high altitude
telecommunications relays. Its first flights were in 1998. It holds several
altitude records, set in 2000.

### [edit] Spacecraft

<IMG>

<IMG>

SpaceShipOne now hangs in the National Air and Space Museum in Washington D.C.
with the Spirit of Saint Louis and Bell X-1 "Glamorous Glennis"

Rutan made headlines again in 2004 with SpaceShipOne, which became the first
privately built, flown, and funded craft to reach space in June of that year,
winning the Ansari X Prize a few months later on October 4. SpaceShipOne
completed two flights within two weeks, flying with the equivalent weight of 3
persons and doing so while reusing at least 80% of the vehicle hardware. The
project team was honored with the 2004 Collier Trophy, awarded by the National
Aeronautic Association for "greatest achievement in aeronautics or
astronautics in America." The craft embodies Rutan's unique style, and is
another of the "icons of flight" displayed in the NASM Milestones of Flight
exhibit.[5]

This achievement was quickly commercialized â Virgin Galactic, an offshoot
of Sir Richard Branson's Virgin Group, announced that it would begin space
tourism flights in 2008 using craft based on the designs of SpaceShipOne.
Dubbed SpaceShipTwo, these new craft, also designed by Burt Rutan, are
intended to allow six "experience optimized" passengers to glimpse the planet
from 70â80 miles up in suborbital space. Production of the first of five
planned SpaceShipTwo craft has started, with the first test flights currently
scheduled for 2007-8. An explosion at the Scaled Composite factory at the
Mojave Spaceport on July 26, 2007 killed three engineers and seriously injured
three others. They were testing components for SpaceShipTwo, but as of August
2007[update] Scaled Composites remained dedicated to perfecting the design of
SpaceShipTwo.[6]

Richard Branson, on July 28, 2008, unveiled Scaled Composites White Knight Two
"Eve," at the Mojave Spaceport. Flight tests were set to begin in September
2008.[7][8] The launch customer of White Knight Two is Virgin Galactic, which
will have the first 2 units, and exclusive rights to the craft for the first
few years. Branson prophesy the maiden space voyage will take place in 18
months: "It represents... the chance for our ever-growing group of future
astronauts and other scientists to see our world in a completely new light."
Virgin Galactic contracted aerospace designer Burt Rutan to build the
mothership and spacecraft.[9][10]

Burt Rutan is also working with t/Space in the development of an air launched,
two-stage-to-orbit, manned spacecraft. It is intended to have a taxi capacity
to carry passengers to the International Space Station. As of June, 2005 air
drop tests of quarter scale mockups had verified the practicality of air
release and rotation to vertical.

### [edit] GlobalFlyer

On March 3, 2005, the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer, an aircraft similar to the
Voyager design, but built by Rutan's new company Scaled Composites, with
stiffer materials and a single jet engine, completed the first solo non-stop,
non-refueled flight around the world with adventurer Steve Fossett as pilot.
Reducing weight was critical to the design, and Rutan is quoted as facetiously
telling his staff that when they finish building a part, they must throw it up
in the air for a weight test, and "If it comes down, it's too heavy".[11]
Between February 7, 2006 â February 11, 2006, Fossett and the GlobalFlyer
set a record for the longest flight in history: 41,467.53 km (26,389 miles),
the third absolute world record set with this aircraft[12] before being flown
to the NASM Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center. Global Flyer is the sixth vehicle
designed by Burt Rutan in the NASM collection.[13]

## [edit] Awards

(Alphabetical with year(s))

  * Aviation Week & Space Technology "Laural Legend" award (2002)
  * Aviation Week & Space Technology Hall of Fame (2002)
  * Aviation Week & Space Technology Current Achievement Award (2005)
  * Chrysler Design Award (1997)
  * Collier Trophy for ingenious design and development of the Voyager and skillful execution of the first non-stop, non-refueled flight around the world (1987) and for designing and launching the first commercial manned launch vehicle SpaceShipOne (2004)
  * Design News Engineer of the Year (1988)
  * EAA Outstanding New Design (1975, 1976 and 1978)
  * EAA Freedom of Flight Award, (1996)
  * EAA Homebuilders Hall of Fame, (1998)
  * Engineers Council Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson "Skunk Works" award (2000)
  * Grand Medal of the Aero Club of France (1987)
  * International Aerospace Hall of Fame {1988)
  * SETP James H. Doolittle Award (1987 and 2004)
  * Lindbergh Foundation, Lindbergh Award (2000)
  * National Aviation Hall of Fame (1995)
  * National Medal of the Aero Club of France (1987)
  * Presidential Citizens Medal presented by Ronald Reagan (December 29, 1986)
  * Professional Pilot Magazine, Designer of the Year, (1999)
  * Royal Aeronautical Society, British Gold Medal for Aeronautics (1987)
  * SAMPE George Lubin Award, (1995)
  * Scientific American Business Leader in Aerospace (2003)
  * Time Magazine "100 Most Influential People of the World" (April 18, 2005)
  * Western Reserve Aviation Hall of Fame, Meritorious Service Award (1988)
  * Robert A. Heinlein Award (2008)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ List of records established by the 'Rutan VariEze'. Accessed 5 January 2006.
  2. ^ Winglets by Gail S. Langevin of NASA. Accessed 5 January 2006.
  3. ^ CAFE Foundation
  4. ^ Boomerang!. Accessed January 5, 2006.
  5. ^ SpaceShipOne Joins the Icons of Flight on Display at Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum. Accessed January 5, 2006.
  6. ^ Doligosa, Felix, Jr. (2007-07-27). "Query into tragic test begins : But finding the cause of the deadly blast may take up to six months, officials say>". Kern County news. http://www.bakersfield.com/102/story/199769.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-29.
  7. ^ "2008 AirVenture Oshkosh schedule". http://www.airventure.org/2008/news/080605_ss2.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-19.
  8. ^ Leonard David (June 6, 2008). "Virgin Galactic Spaceline: Mega-Mothership Set for Rollout Debut". SPACE.com. http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/080606-virgin-mother.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-10.
  9. ^ bbc.co.uk, Branson unveils space tourism jet
  10. ^ space.newscientist.com, Virgin Galactic rolls out SpaceShipTwo's 'mothership'
  11. ^ David Noland (February 2005). "Burt Rutan and the Ultimate Solo". Popular Mechanics. http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/air_space/1262012.html?page=3.
  12. ^ List of records established by the 'Scaled Composites M311'. Accessed January 5, 2006.
  13. ^ National Air and Space Museum to Welcome Steve Fossettâs History-Making Airplane for Permanent Display at Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center. Accessed January 5, 2006.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Burt Rutan  
  * The Ultimate Online Resource on Every Known Rutan Project
  * Chrysler Design Award webpage
  * Online biography
  * Biography from House Committee on Science
  * Video of Burt Rutan at the TED Conference discussing NASA and space entrepreneurs. (Recorded February 2006 in Monterey, CA. Duration: 20 mins)

v â¢ d â¢ e

The Spaceship Company  
Companies

Virgin Galactic (Virgin Group) Â· Scaled Composites (Northrop Grumman) Â·
Mojave Aerospace Ventures

SpaceShipOne hanging under White Knight  
People

Richard Branson Â· Burt Rutan Â· Paul Allen Â· Mike Melvill Â· Brian Binnie  
Ships

SpaceShipOne Â· White Knight Â· SpaceShipTwo (Enterprise Â· Voyager) Â· White
Knight Two (Eve) Â· SpaceShipThree  
Sequence

Tier One (11P Â· 13P Â· 14P Â· 15P Â· 16P Â· 17P) Â· Tier 1b Â· Tier Two  
Places

Mojave Spaceport Â· Spaceport America Â· Spaceport Sweden  
See also...

Ansari X Prize Â· KÃ¡rmÃ¡n line Â· Other companies Â· Space tourism Â· Sub-
orbital spaceflightÂ· Suborbital spaceplane  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Lists relating to aviation  
General

Timeline of aviation Â· Aircraft (manufacturers) Â· Aircraft engines
(manufacturers) Â· Airports Â· Airlines Â· Civil authorities Â· Museums  
Military

Air forces Â· Aircraft weapons Â· Missiles Â· Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
Â· Experimental aircraft  
Accidents/incidents

General Â· Military Â· Commercial (airliners) Â· Deaths  
Records

Airspeed Â· Distance Â· Altitude Â· Endurance Â· Most-produced aircraft  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burt_Rutan"

Categories: 1943 births | American aerospace engineers | American aviators |
Living people | People from Clackamas County, Oregon | Collier Trophy
recipients | Aviation pioneers

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | Articles containing
potentially dated statements from August 2007 | All articles containing
potentially dated statements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 20:02.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



