
# Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Endurance in full sail c. 1915

The Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition (1914â17), also known as the
Endurance Expedition, was the last major expedition of the Heroic Age of
Antarctic Exploration. Conceived by Sir Ernest Shackleton, the expedition
sought to achieve the first land crossing of the Antarctic continent. After
the conquest of the South Pole by Roald Amundsen in 1911, the crossing
remained, in Shackleton's words, the "one great main object of Antarctic
journeyings".[1] The expedition failed entirely to accomplish this aim, but it
remains memorable as an epic of heroism and survival.

Shackleton had served in the Antarctic on Captain Scott's Discovery
Expedition, 1901â04, and had led the British Antarctic Expedition,
1907â09. The new expedition required a main party to sail to the Weddell Sea
and to land a shore party at around latitude 78Â°S, in the vicinity of Vahsel
Bay, in preparation for a transcontinental march via the South Pole to the
Ross Sea. A supporting group, the Ross Sea party, would meanwhile travel to
the opposite side of the continent, establish camp in McMurdo Sound, and from
there lay a series of supply depots across the Ross Ice Shelf to the foot of
the Beardmore Glacier. These depots would be essential for the
transcontinental party's survival, as they would not carry enough provisions
to make the crossing otherwise. The expedition required two ships; the
Endurance would take Shackleton's party to the Weddell Sea, and the Aurora,
under Captain Aeneas Mackintosh, would take the Ross Sea party to McMurdo
Sound.

Endurance became beset in the ice of the Weddell Sea before reaching Vahsel
Bay, and despite efforts to free the ship, she drifted northward with the pack
throughout the Antarctic winter of 1915. Eventually, the ice crushed and sank
the ship, stranding her 28-man complement on the ice and subjecting them to a
series of harrowing episodesâmonths spent in makeshift camps on the ice, a
journey in lifeboats to Elephant Island, an 800-mile (1,300 km) open-boat
journey in the James Caird, and the first crossing of South Georgiaâthat led
eventually to their rescue without a single fatality. Meanwhile, the Ross Sea
party overcame great hardships to fulfill its mission, after Aurora was blown
from her moorings during a gale and could not return. The depots were laid,
but three lives were lost in the process.

<IMG>

<IMG>

1914â1917: Map showing the sea routes of Endurance, Aurora and James Caird,
planned overland route of the transcontinental party, and supply depot route
of the Ross Sea party: Voyage of Endurance Drift of Endurance in pack Ice
drift after Endurance sinks Voyage of James Caird Planned transcontinental
route Voyage of Aurora to Antarctica Drift and retreat of Aurora Supply depot
route

## Contents

  * 1 Preparations
    * 1.1 Origins
    * 1.2 Shackleton's plan
    * 1.3 Finance
  * 2 Personnel
  * 3 Expedition
    * 3.1 Weddell Sea party
      * 3.1.1 Voyage through the ice
      * 3.1.2 Drift of the Endurance
      * 3.1.3 Camping on the ice
      * 3.1.4 Lifeboat journey to Elephant Island
      * 3.1.5 Voyage of the James Caird
      * 3.1.6 South Georgia crossing
      * 3.1.7 Rescue
      * 3.1.8 On Elephant Island
    * 3.2 Ross Sea Party
  * 4 Return to civilization
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 Sources
  * 8 Further reading
  * 9 Films
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Preparations

### [edit] Origins

Shackleton lived restlessly and somewhat aimlessly after his return from the
Nimrod Expedition in 1909, despite the public acclaim that had greeted his
achievement of a Furthest South record at 88Â°23'S. He becameâin the words
of British skiing pioneer Sir Harry Brittainâ"a bit of a floating gent".[2]
The nature of his further Antarctic work now depended on the achievements of
Scott's Terra Nova Expedition, which had left Cardiff in July 1910.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ernest Shackleton

Shackleton's focus became clearer when the news of Amundsen's unexpected
conquest of the South Pole reached him, on 11 March 1913. The Pole itself was
no longer an objective, no matter what Scott's expedition achieved. Shackleton
wrote: "The discovery of the South Pole will not be the end of Antarctic
exploration".[3] The next work, he said, would be "a transcontinental journey
from sea to sea, crossing the pole".[3] He could not be certain that this work
would fall to him, because others were in the field. On 11 December 1911 a
German expedition under Wilhelm Filchner had sailed from South Georgia, with
the purpose of penetrating deep into the Weddell Sea, establishing a southerly
base, and from there attempting to cross the continent to the Ross Sea.[4] In
late 1912 Filchner withdrew to South Georgia, having failed to set up his base
headquarters.[4] However, his discovery of possible landing sites in Vahsel
Bay, at around 78Â° latitude, was noted by Shackleton, and incorporated into
his expedition plans.[5]

In the wake of the sombre news of the fate of Captain Scott and his companions
on their return journey from the South Pole, Shackleton initiated preparations
for his own transcontinental expedition. He solicited financial and practical
support from, among others, Tryggve Gran of Scottâs expedition, and former
Prime Minister Lord Rosebery, but got little joy from either. Gran was
evasive, and Rosebery blunt: "I have never been able to care one farthing
about the Poles".[6] He got more support from William Speirs Bruce, leader of
the Scottish National Antarctic Expedition of 1902â04, who had harboured
plans for an Antarctic crossing since 1908, but had abandoned the project for
lack of funds. Bruce gladly allowed Shackleton to adopt his plans,[7] although
the eventual plan announced by Shackleton owed little to Bruce. On 29 December
1913, having acquired certain promises of financial backing,[8] he made his
public announcement, in a letter to the The Times newspaper.[9]

### [edit] Shackleton's plan

Shackleton gave his expedition the grand title of "Imperial Trans-Antarctic
Expedition", and to arouse the interest of the general public[10] issued a
detailed programme in early 1914. The expedition was to consist of two parties
and two ships. The Weddell Sea party would travel in the Endurance and proceed
to the Vahsel Bay area, where fourteen men would land of whom six, under
Shackleton, would form the Transcontinental Party.[11] This group, with 100
dogs, two motor sledges, and equipment "embodying everything that the
experience of the leader and his expert advisers can suggest",[10] would
undertake the 1,800-mile (2,900 km) journey to the Ross Sea.[12] The remaining
eight shore party members would carry out scientific work, three going to
Graham Land, three to Enderby Land and two remaining at base camp.

The Ross Sea party would travel in the Aurora to the Ross Sea base in McMurdo
Sound, on the opposite side of the continent. After landing there they would
"lay down depots on the route of the transcontinental party, make a march
south to assist that party, and make geological and other observations".[10]
The Ross Sea partyâs role was vital; Shackleton's party would carry supplies
sufficient to see them only to the foot of the Beardmore Glacier. Their
survival during the final 400 miles (640 km) to the Ross Sea base would depend
on depots having been laid at agreed coordinates across the Ross Ice Shelf.

In his programme Shackleton clearly expresses the intention that the crossing
should take place in the first season, 1914â15.[10] Later, he saw the
improbability of this, and was to have informed Mackintosh, in charge of the
Ross Sea party, of a change of plan. Unfortunately, according to Daily
Chronicle correspondent Ernest Perris, this cable was never sent, an omission
that unnecessarily complicated the Ross Sea party's first season of work.[13]

### [edit] Finance

Shackleton thought that he would need Â£50,000 (2008 approximation Â£2.2
million) to carry out the simplest version of his plan.[14][15] He did not
believe in appeals to the public: "(they) cause endless book-keeping
worries".[16] His chosen method of fund-raising was to solicit contributions
from wealthy backers, and he had begun this process early in 1913, with little
initial success.[17] His first significant break came in December 1913 when
the Government offered him Â£10,000,[14] a useful sum, but only half what they
had subscribed to enable Shackleton to pay off the Nimrod Expedition's
debts.[18] The Royal Geographical Society, from which he had expected nothing,
gave him Â£1,000âaccording to Huntford, Shackleton, in a grand gesture,
advised them that he would only need to take up half of this sum.[19] With
time running out, contributions were eventually secured during the spring and
early summer of 1914. Dudley Docker of the Birmingham Small Arms Company
(BSA)[20] gave Â£10,000, wealthy tobacco heiress Janet Stancomb-Wills gave a
"generous" sum (the amount was not revealed), and, in June, Scottish
industrialist Sir James Caird donated Â£24,000. "This magnificent gift
relieves me of all anxiety", Shackleton informed the Morning Post.[21]

Shackleton now had the money to proceed. For Â£14,000[14] he acquired a
300-ton barquentine called Polaris, which had been built for the Belgian
explorer Adrien de Gerlache for an expedition to Spitsbergen. This scheme had
collapsed and the ship became available.[22] Shackleton changed her name to
Endurance, reflecting his family motto "By endurance we conquer".[14] He also
acquired, for Â£3,200, Douglas Mawsonâs expedition ship Aurora, which was
lying in Hobart, Tasmania, as the Ross Sea party's vessel.

The total amount raised by Shackleton is uncertain, since the size of the
Stancomb-Wills donation is not known. However money, or rather the lack of it,
haunted the expedition.[23] As an economy measure the proportion of funding
allocated to the Ross Sea party was summarily halved, as the partyâs
commander Aeneas Mackintosh discovered only when he arrived in Australia to
take up his command.[24] Mackintosh was forced to haggle and plead for money
and supplies to make his part of the expedition viable.[25] Lack of money
would also hamper the operation to rescue the Ross Sea party when this need
arose in 1916.[26] Shackleton did have an eye on recouping costs after his
return, though: he sold the exclusive rights to the expedition's story to the
Daily Chronicle, and formed the Imperial Trans Antarctic Film Syndicate to
take advantage of the film rights.[27][28]

## [edit] Personnel

For more details on this topic, see List of personnel of the Imperial Trans-
Antarctic Expedition.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Frank Worsley, who captained Endurance

There was no shortage of volunteers to join Shackleton.[29] More than 5,000
applications reached him, including one from "three sporty girls".[30]
Eventually the crew was reduced to 56 men, 28 for each arm of the
expedition.[31]

As second-in-command Shackleton chose Frank Wild, who had been with him on
both the Discovery and Nimrod expeditions, and had been in the Furthest South
party in 1909. Wild had just returned from Mawsonâs Australian Antarctic
Expedition. RN Chief Petty Officer Tom Crean, a hero from the Terra Nova,[32]
was appointed Second Officer, with another seasoned Antarctic hand, Alfred
Cheetham, as third officer. Two other Nimrod veterans were assigned to the
Ross Sea party, Aeneas Mackintosh who commanded it, and Ernest Joyce.[33]

Shackleton had wanted John King Davis, who had captained Aurora during the
Australian Antarctic Expedition, to captain Endurance. Davis refused, thinking
the enterprise was "doomed",[22] so Shackleton appointed Frank Worsley, who
reportedly had applied to the expedition after learning of it in a dream.[34]
The scientific staff of six accompanying Endurance comprised the two surgeons,
Alexander Macklin and James McIlroy; geologist James Wordie; biologist Robert
S. Clark; physicist Reginald James; and meteorologist Leonard Hussey, who
would eventually edit Shackletonâs expedition account South. Photographer
Frank Hurley and artist George Marston would ensure that the expedition was
visually recorded.

The final composition of the Ross Sea party was hurried. Some who left Britain
for Australia to join Aurora resigned before it departed for the Ross Sea, and
a full complement of crew was in doubt until the last minute.[35] Only
Mackintosh and Joyce had any previous Antarctic experience, and in the case of
the former this was extremely limited.[36]

## [edit] Expedition

### [edit] Weddell Sea party

#### [edit] Voyage through the ice

Endurance left Plymouth on 8 August 1914, stopping briefly in Buenos Aires
where Hurley came on board, and William Bakewell and stowaway Perce Blackborow
were added to the crew.[37] After a final month-long halt in Grytviken, South
Georgia, Endurance departed for the Antarctic on 5 December. Two days later
Shackleton was disconcerted to encounter pack ice as far north as
57Â°26âS,[38] forcing the ship to manoeuvre. During the following days there
were more tussles with the pack, which on 14 December was thick enough to halt
the ship for 24 hours. Three days later the ship was stopped again. Shackleton
commented: "I had been prepared for evil conditions in the Weddell Sea, but
had hoped that the pack would be loose. What we were encountering was fairly
dense pack of a very obstinate character".[39]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Working to free the ship

Progress was delayed by frequent halts until leads opened up and Endurance was
able to proceed steadily southward on 22 December. This remained the case for
the next two weeks, taking the ship deep into the Weddell Sea. Further delays
slowed progress during the early days of 1915, although from 7â10 January a
lengthy run south brought them close to the 100-foot (30 m) tall ice walls
which masked the Antarctic coastal region of Coats Land, discovered and named
by William Speirs Bruce in 1904.[40] On 15 December Endurance came abreast of
a great glacier, the edge of which formed a bay which looked like an excellent
landing place. However there was no question of landing so far north of Vahsel
Bay, "except under pressure of necessity"âa decision that Shackleton would
later regret.[41] On 17 January, after a long run of 124 miles (200 km), the
ship reached 76Â°27âS, where land was observed which Shackleton named Caird
Coast, after his principal sponsor. Bad weather forced them to shelter in the
lee of a stranded berg.

They were now close to Luitpold Land, at the southern end of which lay their
destination, Vahsel Bay. Next day, the ship was forced westward for 14 miles
(23 km), resuming in a southerly and then briefly north-westerly direction,
before being stopped altogether.[41] The position was 76Â°34âS, 31Â°30âW.
It soon became clear that Endurance was now trapped in the ice, and after ten
days of inactivity the shipâs fires were banked, to save fuel.[41] Efforts
continued to release her; on 14 February Shackleton ordered men on to the ice
with ice-chisels, prickers, saws and picks, to try and force a passage, but
the effort proved futile. Shackleton did not abandon all hope of breaking
free, but now contemplated the "possibility of having to spend a winter in the
inhospitable arms of the pack".[42]

#### [edit] Drift of the Endurance

<IMG>

<IMG>

Shackleton and Wild among the pressure ridges in the pack ice

On 21 February, Endurance, held fast, drifted to her most southerly latitude,
76Â°58âS, and thereafter began moving steadily northwards with the pack.[43]
On 24 February, Shackleton, realizing that they would be beset throughout the
winter, ordered shipâs routine abandoned. The dogs were taken off board and
housed in ice-kennels or "dogloos", while the shipâs interior was converted
to suitable winter quarters for the various groups of menâofficers,
scientists, engineers, and seamen. A wireless apparatus was rigged, but the
location was too remote to receive or transmit signals.[42]

As to the possibility of release, Shackleton was aware of the recent example
of Wilhelm Filchner's ship, the Deutschland, which had become icebound in the
same vicinity three years earlier. After Filchner's attempts to establish a
land base at Vahsel Bay failed, his ship Deutschland was trapped on 6 March
1912, about 200 miles (320 km) off the coast of Coats Land. Six months later,
at latitude 63Â°37â, the ship broke free, then sailed to South Georgia
apparently none the worse for its ordeal. A similar experience might allow
Endurance to make a second attempt to reach Vahsel Bay in the following
Antarctic spring.[4]

During February and March the rate of drift was very slow. At the end of March
Shackleton calculated that the ship had travelled a mere 95 miles (155 km)
since 19 January.[44] However, as winter set in the speed of the drift
increased, and the condition of the surrounding ice changed. On 14 April
Shackleton recorded the nearby pack "piling and rafting against the masses of
ice"âif the ship was caught in this disturbance "she would be crushed like
an eggshell".[44] In May, as the sun set for the winter months, the ship was
at 75Â°23âS, 42Â°14âW, still drifting in a generally northerly direction.
It would be at least four months before spring brought the chance of an
opening of the ice and it was possible that Endurance would not break free in
time to make a repeat trip to the Vahsel Bay area.[45] Shackleton now pondered
the possibility of finding an alternative landing ground on the west shores of
the Weddell Sea, if such a spot could be reached. "In the meantime", he wrote,
"we must wait".[44]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dogs watching Endurance in the final stages of its drift, shortly before
sinking to the bottom of the Weddell Sea

The dark winter months of May, June and July were relatively uneventful,
Shackletonâs greatest task being to maintain fitness, training and morale, a
task he reportedly accomplished with great skill;[46] football matches and dog
racing took place on the ice, and skits were performed in the evenings. The
first signs of the ice breaking up occurred on 22 July, and on 1 August,
during a south-westerly gale with heavy snow, with Endurance at 72Â°26âS,
48Â°10âW, the ice floe began to break up all around the ship, the pressure
forcing masses of ice beneath the keel and causing a heavy list to port. The
position was perilous; Shackleton wrote: "The effects of the pressure around
us was awe-inspiring. Mighty blocks of ice [â¦] rose slowly till they jumped
like cherry-stones gripped between thumb and finger [...] if the ship was once
gripped firmly her fate would be sealed".[47] This danger passed, and the
succeeding weeks were quiet. During this relative lull the ship drifted into
the area where, in 1823, Captain Benjamin Morrell of the sealer Wasp reported
seeing a coastline which he identified as "New South Greenland". There was no
sign of any such land; Shackleton concluded that Morrell had been deceived by
the presence of large icebergs.[48]

Heavy buffeting returned, however, early in September, and continued
intermittently thereafter. On 30 September the ship sustained "the worst
squeeze we had experienced", and withstood what her captain, Worsley,
described as fearful pressure, as she was "thrown to and fro like a
shuttlecock a dozen times".[49] Shackleton had previously informed Worsley
that he believed Endurance would as likely be destroyed as it would escape the
ice.[50]

Although the Endurance had proved capable of withstanding huge stresses, the
ship's predicament was now dire, and when, on 24 October, its starboard side
was forced against a large floe, the pressure of the ice on the side of the
ship mounted until the hull began to bend and splinter; then water from below
the ice began to pour into the ship. When the timbers broke they made terrific
noises which sailors later described as being similar to the sound of "heavy
fireworks and the blasting of guns".[51] The supplies and three lifeboats were
transferred to the ice, while the crew attempted to shore up the boat's hull
and pump out the incoming sea, but after a few days, on 27 October 1915, and
in freezing temperatures below â15Â°F (â25Â°C), Shackleton was forced to
give the order to abandon ship. The position at abandonment was recorded as
69Â°05âS, 51Â°30âW.[52] The wreckage remained afloat, and over the
following weeks the crew salvaged further supplies and materials, including
Hurley's photographs and cameras that had initially been left behind. From
around 550 plates Hurley chose the best 150, the maximum that could be
carried, and smashed the rest.[53]

#### [edit] Camping on the ice

<IMG>

<IMG>

Frank Hurley and Ernest Shackleton at Ocean Camp

With the loss of the ship, all thoughts of a transcontinental journey had to
be abandoned, and the focus of the expedition shifted to one of
straightforward survival. To this end Shackleton intended to march the crew
towards either Snow Hill Island, the base of Otto NordenskiÃ¶ldâs Swedish
expedition in 1902â04,[54] where emergency stores were to be found; Paulet
Island, where Shackleton knew there was a substantial food depot;[55] or
Robertson Island.[56] Shackleton believed they would be able to cross Graham
Land from any of these islands and reach the whaling outposts in Wilhelmina
Bay. The distance to Snow Hill Island from their initial stranded position was
calculated by Worsley to be 312 miles (500 km), with a further 120 miles (190
km) to Wilhelmina Bay.[57] They would have to take with them food, fuel,
survival gear and three heavy lifeboats.

The march started on 30 October, but problems quickly arose. The condition of
the sea ice around them made travel almost impossible. As the horizontal
pressure had increased, the sea ice buckled and rose up on itself, forming
large pressure ridges often 10 feet (3.0 m) high. Over this surface, in two
days the party managed to travel barely two miles (3.2 km). On 1 November
Shackleton abandoned the march and decided, in conjunction with Wild and
Worsley, that they would make camp and await the break-up of the ice.[58] They
gave the name "Ocean Camp" to the flat and solid-looking floe on which their
aborted march had ended, and settled down to wait. Parties continued to
revisit the Endurance wreck, which was still drifting with the ice a short
distance from the camp. More of the abandoned supplies were retrieved until,
on 21 November 1915, the ship finally slipped beneath the ice.[59]

The speed of drift had started to increase after 1 November, and by the 7th
was a steady three miles a day. By 5 December they had passed 68Â°S, but the
direction was turning slightly east of north. This was taking them to a
position from which it would be difficult or impossible to reach Snow Hill
Island. However, to its north-east lay Paulet Island, which now became the
target destination.[60] It was about 250 miles (400 km) away, and Shackleton
was anxious to reduce the length of the lifeboat journey that would be
necessary to reach it. Therefore, on 21 December he announced a second march,
to begin on 23 December.[61]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Harry McNish

Conditions, however, had not improved since the earlier attempt. Temperatures
had risen and it was uncomfortably warm, with men sinking to their knees in
soft snow as they struggled to haul the boats through the pressure ridges. On
27 December shipâs carpenter Harry McNish (or McNeishâthere is no
consensus as to spelling among chroniclers) rebelled and refused to work. He
argued that Shipâs Articles had lapsed since Enduranceâs sinking, and that
he was no longer under orders. Shackletonâs firm remonstrance finally
brought the carpenter to heel, but the incident was never forgotten.[61] In
due course McNish would make his own contribution to the salvation of the
party, but he was nonetheless one of only four of the crew denied the Polar
Medal on Shackletonâs recommendation.[62][63] Two days later, with only
seven and a half milesâ (12 km) progress achieved in seven back-breaking
days, Shackleton called a halt, observing: "It would take us over three
hundred days to reach the land".[64] The crew put up their tents and settled
into what Shackleton called "Patience Camp", which would be their home for
more than three months.[64]

Supplies were now running low. Hurley and Macklin were sent back to Ocean Camp
to recover food that had been left there in order to lighten the sledging
teamsâ burden. On 2 February 1916 Shackleton sent a larger party back, to
recover the third lifeboat that had also been left. Food shortages became
acute as the weeks passed, and seal meat, which had simply added variety to
their diet before, became a staple as Shackleton attempted to conserve the
remaining packaged rations. In January, all but two teams of the dogs (whose
overall numbers had been depleted by mishaps and illness in the preceding
months) were shot on Shackletonâs orders, because the dogs' requirements for
seal meat were excessive.[65] The final two teams were shot on 2 April, by
which time their meat was a welcome addition to the rations. Meanwhile, the
rate of drift became erratic; after being held at around 67Â° for several
weeks, at the end of January there was a series of rapid north-eastward
movements which, by 17 March, brought Patience Camp to the latitude of Paulet
Island, but 60 miles (97 km) to its east. "It might have been six hundred for
all the chance we had of reaching it across the broken sea-ice", Shackleton
recorded.[66]

Frustratingly, land was continuously in sight. The peak of Mount Haddington on
James Ross Island remained in view as the party drifted slowly by. With Snow
Hill and Paulet Island now inaccessible, Shackleton wrote that all hopes were
fixed on two remaining small islands at the northern extremity of Graham Land:
Clarence Island and Elephant Island, about 100 miles (160 km) due north of
their position on 25 March.[66] He then had further thoughts and decided that
Deception Island might be a better target destination. This lay far to the
west, towards the end of a chain which formed the South Shetland Islands, but
Shackleton thought it might be attainable by island-hopping. Its advantage was
that it was sometimes visited by whalers and might contain provisions.[67] All
of these destinations would require a perilous journey in the lifeboats, once
the pack upon which they were drifting finally broke up. Prior to this journey
the lifeboats were each named after the expeditionâs chief financial
sponsors: James Caird, Dudley Docker and Stancomb Wills.

#### [edit] Lifeboat journey to Elephant Island

<IMG>

<IMG>

Elephant Island. Point Wild is shown, on the northern shore.

The end of Patience Camp was signalled on the evening of 8 April, when the
floe suddenly split. The camp now found itself on a small triangular raft of
ice; a break-up of this would mean disaster, so Shackleton readied the
lifeboats for the partyâs enforced departure.[67] He had now decided they
would try, if possible, to reach the distant Deception Island because a small
wooden church had been reportedly erected for the benefit of whalers. This
could provide a source of timber that might enable them to construct a
seaworthy boat.[67] At 1 pm on 9 April the Dudley Docker was launched, and an
hour later all three boats were away. Shackleton himself commanded the James
Caird, Worsley the Dudley Docker, and navigating officer Hubert Hudson was
nominally in charge of the Stancomb Wills, though because of his precarious
mental state the effective commander was Tom Crean.[68]

The next few days were very difficult. The boats were still in the pack,
dependent upon leads of water opening up, and progress was perilous and
erratic. Frequently the boats were tied to floes, or dragged up on to them,
while the men camped and waited for conditions to improve. Shackleton was
wavering again between several potential destinations, and on 12 April
rejected the various island options and decided on Hope Bay, at the very tip
of Graham Land.[69] However, conditions in the boats, in temperatures
sometimes as low as -20Â°F (â30Â°C), with little food and regular soakings
in icy seawater, were wearing the men down, physically and mentally.[70]
Shackleton therefore decided that Elephant Island, the nearest of the possible
refuges, was now the only practical option.

On 14 April the boats lay off the south-east coast of this island, but there
was no question of a landing, since this shore was one of perpendicular cliffs
and glaciers. The following day, the James Caird rounded the eastern point of
the island to reach the northern lee shore, and eventually discovered a narrow
shingle beach at which Shackleton decided to land. Soon after, all three
boats, which had been separated during the previous night, were reunited at
the landing place. It was soon clear from high tide marks, however, that this
beach would not serve as a long-term camp.[71] The next day Wild and a crew
set off in the Stancomb Wills to explore the coast for somewhere better. They
returned with news of a long spit of land, seven miles (11 km) to the west,
which seemed possible as a camping-ground. With minimum delay the men returned
to the boats and transferred to this new location, which they later christened
Point Wild.[72]

#### [edit] Voyage of the James Caird

Main article: Voyage of the James Caird

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sketch showing (green) lifeboat journeys to Elephant Island, (red) voyage of
the James Caird from Elephant Island to South Georgia

Elephant Island was remote, uninhabited, and rarely visited by whalers or any
other ships. If the party was to return to civilization it would be necessary
to summon help. The only realistic way that this could be done was to adapt
one of the boats for the 800-mile (1,300 km) voyage across the Southern Ocean,
to South Georgia. Shackleton had abandoned thoughts of taking the party on to
Deception Island (an "infinitely less dangerous journey"[73]), presumably
because the physical condition of his party precluded further extended
exposure to the rough winter seas. Tierra del Fuego and the Falkland Islands
were closer than South Georgia, but would require sailing against the
prevailing winds.

Shackleton selected his boat party: himself, Worsley as navigator, Crean,
McNish, John Vincent and Timothy McCarthy. On instructions from Shackleton,
McNish immediately set about adapting the James Caird, cleverly improvising
tools and materials.[74] Frank Wild was to be left in charge of the Elephant
Island party, with instructions to make for Deception Island the following
spring, should Shackleton not return.[73] Shackleton took supplies for only
four weeks, knowing that if land had not been reached within that time the
boat would be lost.[75]

The 22.5-foot (6.85 m) James Caird was launched on 24 April 1916.
"Astonishing" and "incredible" are words typically used[76] to describe the
open-boat journey which followed. Everything depended on the pin-point
accuracy of Worsley's navigation, based on observations that would have to be
made in the most unfavourable of conditions.[77] The prevailing wind was
helpfully north-west, but the heavy sea conditions quickly soaked everything
in icy water. Soon ice settled thickly on the boat, making her ride
sluggishly. On 5 May a north-westerly gale almost brought about the boat's
destruction as it faced what Shackleton described as the largest waves he had
seen in twenty-six years at sea.[78] On 8 May, thanks to Worsleyâs
navigation, South Georgia was sighted, after a 14-day battle with the elements
that had driven the boat party to their physical limits.[79] Two days later,
after a prolonged struggle with heavy seas and hurricane-force winds to the
south of the island, the exhausted party struggled ashore at King Haakon Bay.

#### [edit] South Georgia crossing

<IMG>

<IMG>

South Georgia. "Peggotty Camp" was situated in the deep bay on the SW side,
under the words "Prince Olav Harbour".

<IMG>

<IMG>

South Georgia interior, photographed by Frank Hurley a year after the crossing

The arrival of the James Caird at King Haakon Bay was followed by a period of
much-needed rest and recuperation, while Shackleton pondered the next move.
The populated whaling stations of South Georgia lay on the northern coast. To
reach them would mean either another boat journey around the island, or a land
crossing through its unexplored interior. The condition of the James Caird,
and the physical state of the party, particularly Vincent and McNish, meant
that only the second of these options was viable.[80]

After five days the party took the boat a short distance eastwards, to the
head of a deep bay which would be the starting point for the crossing.
Shackleton, Worsley and Crean would undertake the land journey, the others
remaining at what they christened "Peggotty Camp",[81] to be picked up later
by boat. A storm on 18 May delayed their start, but by two o'clock the
following morning the weather was clear and calm, and an hour later the
crossing party set out.[80]

Without a map, the route they chose was largely conjectural. By dawn they had
ascended to 3,000 feet (910 m) and could see the northern coast. They were
above Possession Bay, which meant that they were too far to the west and would
need to move eastward to reach Stromness, their target whaling station. This
meant the first of several backtrackings that would extend the journey and
frustrate the men. At the close of that first day, needing to descend to the
valley below them before nightfall, they risked everything by sliding down a
mountainside on a makeshift rope sledge.[82] There was no question of
restâthey travelled on by moonlight, moving upwards towards a gap in the
next mountainous ridge. Early next morning, seeing Husvik Harbour below them,
they knew that they were on the right path. At seven o'clock in the morning
they heard the steam whistle sound from the whaling station, "the first sound
created by an outside human agency that had come to our ears since we left
Stromness Bay in December 1914".[83] After a difficult descent, which involved
passage down through a freezing waterfall, they at last reached safety.[84]

Shackleton, not a religious man, wrote afterwards: "I have no doubt that
Providence guided usâ¦I know that during that long and racking march of
thirty-six hours over the unnamed mountains and glaciers it seemed to me often
that we were four, not three".[85] This image of a fourth travellerâechoed
by Worsley and Creanâwas taken up by T. S. Eliot in his poem The Waste
Land.[86]

#### [edit] Rescue

Shackleton's first task, on arriving at the Stromness station, was to arrange
for his three companions at Peggoty Camp to be picked up. A whaler was sent
round the coast, with Worsley aboard to show the way, and by the evening of 21
May all six of the James Caird party were safe.[87]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Shackletonâs return to Elephant Island, 30 August 1916. All 22 men left
there had survived.

It took four attempts before Shackleton was able to return to Elephant Island
to rescue the party stranded there. He first left South Georgia a mere three
days after he had arrived in Stromness, after securing the use of a large
whaler, The Southern Sky, which was laid up in Husvik Harbour. Shackleton
assembled a volunteer crew, which had it ready to sail by the morning of 22
May. As the vessel drew close to Elephant Island they saw that an impenetrable
barrier of pack ice had formed, some 70 miles (110 km) from the island. The
Southern Sky was not built for ice breaking, and retreated to Port Stanley in
the Falkland Islands.[88]

On reaching Port Stanley, Shackleton informed London by cable of his
whereabouts, and requested that a suitable vessel be sent south for the rescue
operation. He was informed by the Admiralty that nothing was available before
October, which in his view was too late. Then, with the help of the British
Minister in Montevideo, Shackleton secured from the Uruguayan government the
loan of a tough trawler, Instituto de Pesca No. 1, which started south on 10
June. Again the pack thwarted them. In search of another ship, Shackleton,
Worsley and Crean travelled to Punta Arenas, in Chile, where they encountered
Allan MacDonald, the British owner of the schooner Emma. McDonald equipped
this vessel for a further rescue attempt, which left on 12 July, but with the
same negative resultâthe pack defeated them yet again.[89][90]

It was now mid-August. Shackleton begged the Chilean Government to lend him
Yelcho, a small, tough steamer that had assisted Emma during the previous
attempt. The Government agreed, and on 25 August Yelcho, captained by Luis
Pardo, set out for Elephant Island. This time, as Shackleton records,
Providence favoured them. The seas were open, and the ship was able to
approach close to the island, in thick fog. At 11:40 am on 30 August the fog
lifted, the camp was spotted and, within an hour, all the Elephant Island
party were safely aboard, bound for Punta Arenas.[91]

#### [edit] On Elephant Island

<IMG>

<IMG>

The men left behind on Elephant Island (from left to right): (back row)
Greenstreet, McIlroy, Marston, Wordie, James, Holness, Hudson, Stephenson,
McLeod, Clark, Orde-Lees, Kerr, Macklin; (second row) Green, Wild, How,
Cheetham, Hussey, Bakewell; (front) Rickinson.[92]

After Shackleton left with the James Caird, Frank Wild took command of the
Elephant Island party, some of whom were in a low state, physically or
mentally.[93] The first need for the party was a permanent shelter against the
rapidly approaching southern winter. On the suggestion of Marston and Lionel
Greenstreet, a hut (nicknamed the "Snuggery") was improvised by upturning the
two boats and placing them on low stone walls, to provide around five feet of
headroom. By means of canvas and other materials the structure was made more
or less weatherproof. It was a crude shelter, but effective.[94]

No one knew how long they would have to wait for rescue. Wild, over-
optimistically, initially estimated one month, and refused to allow long-term
stockpiling of seal and penguin meat because this, in his view, was
defeatist.[95] This policy led to sharp disagreements with Thomas Orde-Lees.
Orde-Lees was not a popular man, and his presence apparently did little to
improve the morale of his companions,[96] unless it was by way of being the
butt of their jokes.

Wild did what he could to establish and maintain routines and activities that
would relieve the tedium, as the weeks spread out well beyond his initial
optimistic forecast. A lookout was kept for the supposedly imminent arrival of
the rescue ship, cooking and housekeeping rotas were established, and there
were hunting trips for seal and penguin.[97] Concerts were held on Saturdays,
and anniversaries celebrated, but nothing could altogether stem the growing
feelings of despondency as months passed with no sign of the ship. The toes on
Blackborow's left foot became gangrenous from frostbite, and, on 15 June, had
to be amputated by the surgeons Macklin and James McIlroy in the candle-lit
hut. Using the very last of the chloroform that had survived in the medical
supplies, the whole procedure took 55 minutes, and was a total success.[98] By
23 August, it appeared that Wildâs no-stockpiling policy was in ruins. The
surrounding sea was dense with pack ice that would halt any rescue ship, food
supplies were running out and no penguins were coming ashore. Orde-Lees wrote:
"We shall have to eat the one who dies first [â¦] thereâs many a true word
said in jest".[99] Wildâs thoughts were turning seriously to the possibility
of a boat trip to Deception Island (he planned to set out on 5 October in the
hoping of crossing with a whaling ship[100]) when, on 30 August 1916, the
ordeal ended suddenly with the appearance of the relief ship.[101]

### [edit] Ross Sea Party

Main article: Ross Sea party

Aurora left Hobart on 24 December 1914, having been delayed in Australia by
financial and organizational problems. Her arrival in McMurdo Sound on 15
January 1915 was later in the season than planned, but the partyâs commander
Aeneas Mackintosh made immediate plans for a depot-laying journey on the Ross
Ice Shelf, believing that Shackleton might attempt a crossing from the Weddell
Sea during that first season.[102] Neither the men nor the dogs were
acclimatized, and the party was, as a whole, very inexperienced in ice
conditions.[103] This first, hurried journey on the ice resulted in the loss
of ten of the partyâs 18 dogs, a single incomplete depot, and a frost-bitten
and generally demoralized shore party.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Arnold Spencer-Smith, the Ross Sea party's chaplain, who died during the
depot-laying journey, March 1916

Worse was to follow in May, when Aurora, anchored at the Cape Evans
headquarters, was blown out to sea during a gale, and was not able to return,
being trapped in a floe. She drifted in the ice until 12 February 1916, a
distance of around 1,600 miles (2,600 km) before releasing herself and limping
to New Zealand. She carried with her the greater part of the shore partyâs
fuel, food rations, clothing and equipment, although fortunately the sledging
rations for the depots had been landed ashore. However, in order to continue
with its mission, the stranded shore party had to re-supply and re-equip
itself from the leftovers from earlier expeditions, notably Captain Scottâs
Terra Nova Expedition. Due to the party's ingenious improvisations the second
seasonâs depot-laying began on schedule, in September 1915.[104]

During the following months, by a supreme effort, the required depots were
laid, at whole degree intervals right across the Ross Ice Shelf to the
Beardmore Glacier. On the return journey the entire depot-laying party was
attacked by scurvy. During the struggle to return to base Arnold Spencer-
Smith, the expeditionâs chaplain and photographer, collapsed and died on the
ice. The remainder reached the temporary shelter of Hut Point and recovered
there. On 8 May 1916 Mackintosh and Hayward decided to walk across the
unstable sea ice to Cape Evans, were caught in a blizzard, and were not seen
again. The seven survivors then endured eight more months of hardship until on
10 January 1917 the Aurora, which had been refitted in New Zealand, arrived to
transport them back to civilization.

Shackleton accompanied the Aurora as a supernumerary officer, having been
denied command by the governments of New Zealand, Australia and Great Britain,
who had jointly organized the relief. He thus participated in the rescues of
both parts of his expedition, but his wayward attitude to the original
organizational arrangements for the Ross Sea party was held against him.
Despite its chaotic beginnings, its muddles, the disastrous loss of Aurora,
and the three deaths, the Ross Sea party was the only part of the entire
expedition that fulfilled its original mission, even though the failures of
the Weddell Sea party meant that it did so in vain.[105]

## [edit] Return to civilization

The rescued party, having had its last contact with civilization in 1914, was
unaware of the course of the World War. News of Shackleton's safe arrival in
the Falklands briefly eclipsed war news in the British newspapers on 2 June
1916.[106] The expedition returned home in piecemeal fashion, at a critical
stage in the war, without the normal honours and civic receptions. When
Shackleton himself finally arrived in England on 29 May 1917, after a short
American lecture tour, his return was barely noticed.[107]

Most of the members of the expedition returned to take up immediate active
military or naval service. Before the war ended twoâTim McCarthy of the open
boat journey and the veteran Antarctic sailor Alfred Cheethamâhad been
killed in action, and Ernest Wild of the Ross Sea party had died of typhoid
while serving in the Mediterranean. Several others were severely wounded, and
many received decorations for gallantry.[108] Following a propaganda mission
in Buenos Aires, Shackleton was employed during the last weeks of the war on
special service in Murmansk, with the Army rank of Major.[109] This occupied
him until March 1919. He thereafter organized one final Antarctic expedition,
the ShackletonâRowett Expedition on Quest, which left London on 17 September
1921. Shackleton died of a heart attack on 5 January 1922, while Quest was
anchored at South Georgia.

Wild, Worsley, Macklin, McIlroy, Hussey, Alexander Kerr, Thomas McLeod and
cook Charles Green, from Endurance, all sailed with Quest. After
Shackletonâs death the original programme, which had included an exploration
of Enderby Land,[110] was abandoned. Wild led a brief cruise which brought
them into sight of Elephant Island. They anchored off Cape Wild, and were able
to see the old landmarks, but sea conditions made it impossible for them to
land.[111]

It would be more than 40 years before the first crossing of Antarctica was
achieved, by the Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition, 1955â58. This
expedition set out from Vahsel Bay, following a route which avoided the
Beardmore Glacier altogether, and bypassed much of the Ross Ice Shelf,
reaching McMurdo Sound via a descent of the Skelton Glacier. The entire
journey took 98 days.[112]

## [edit] See also

  * List of Antarctic expeditions
  * Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Shackleton, Preface to South, p. xi
  2. ^ Huntford, p. 348
  3. ^ a b Huntford, p. 50
  4. ^ a b c Murphy pp. 87â102. See also Wilhelm Filchner on-line article
  5. ^ Shackleton, p. 2
  6. ^ Huntford, pp. 356â57
  7. ^ Huntford, p. 367
  8. ^ He had received the promise of a Â£10,000 grant from the British Government.
  9. ^ Huntford, p. 362
  10. ^ a b c d Shackleton, South, (preface)
  11. ^ According to Huntford, p. 401, the transcontinental was to consist of Shackleton, Hurley, Macklin, Wild, Marston and Crean.
  12. ^ This is the distance quoted by Shackleton in his programme. It is an approximation, dependent upon the exact route followed.
  13. ^ Tyler-Lewis, p. 216
  14. ^ a b c d Fisher, p. 306.
  15. ^ The Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition Prospectus says Â£60,000 would be required
  16. ^ Huntford, p. 355
  17. ^ Huntford, pp. 356â58
  18. ^ Most of the money raised in England to finance the Nimrod Expedition had been in the form of repayable loans. Shackleton had no funds to meet these obligations, hence the Government's grant. Huntford, pp. 313â14
  19. ^ Huntford, p. 369
  20. ^ Father of Sir Bernard Docker, who would acquire much fame in the 1950s and 1960s
  21. ^ Huntford, pp. 375â77
  22. ^ a b Huntford, p. 370
  23. ^ In 1920 the Daily Mail estimated that the expedition had cost Â£80,000 â Fisher, p. 306
  24. ^ Tyler-Lewis, pp. 34â35
  25. ^ Tyler-Lewis, pp. 41â48
  26. ^ Tyler-Lewis, pp. 222â27
  27. ^ Alexander, p. 10.
  28. ^ Even as Shackleton set out for South Georgia in the James Caird he left instructions for Frank Wild concerning the lecture tour schedule if he should not return. â Alexander, pp. 140â41
  29. ^ The much-quoted advertisement (Men wanted [...] hazardous journey [...] safe return doubtful) is undoubtedly apocryphal. A certain website recently offered a $100 prize for anyone able to locate the original advertisement; no winner has been found. Nevertheless, the text has entered popular consciousness as associated with Shackleton.
  30. ^ Fisher, p. 308, footnote. Online at the Scott Polar Research Institute
  31. ^ This total of 56 includes William Bakewell who joined the ship in Buenos Aires; Perce Blackborow, Bakewell's friend, who stowed-away when he was refused permission to join the crew; and several last-minute appointments made to the Ross Sea party in Australia. It does not include Sir Daniel Gooch who temporarily stepped in to help Shackleton as a dog handler at the last moment and who left the ship at South Georgia.
  32. ^ He had been awarded the Albert Medal for saving the life of Lieutenant Evans.
  33. ^ Shackleton had hoped that the Aurora would be manned by a naval crew, and applied to the Admiralty, but was turned down. There was apparently a shortage of officers and men, and war with Germany seemed imminent. Huntford, pp. 370â71
  34. ^ Huntford, pp. 364â65
  35. ^ Tyler-Lewis, pp. 48â53
  36. ^ Mackintosh had lost an eye as the result of an accident during the Nimrod expedition and had gone home early, returning with the ship in January 1909.
  37. ^ Several crew members mentioned by Worsley during the trip from England disappear from the log after this stop. Presumably they disembarked in Argentina. Alexander p. 15.
  38. ^ Shackleton, p. 5
  39. ^ Shackleton, p. 11
  40. ^ During the Scottish National Antarctic Expedition, with the Scotia.
  41. ^ a b c Shackleton, p. 27
  42. ^ a b Shackleton, p. 34
  43. ^ Huntford, p. 418
  44. ^ a b c Shackleton, p. 43
  45. ^ Huntford, p. 421
  46. ^ See comments of Orde-Lees, reported in Huntford, p. 426
  47. ^ Shackleton, p. 58
  48. ^ Shackleton, pp. 60â61
  49. ^ Quoted by Shackleton, p. 65
  50. ^ Worsley, p. 20
  51. ^ This was reported by Shackleton in South (pp. 72â73) as well as by sailor Walter How, in a later interview as incorporated into the documentary film The Endurance (2000).
  52. ^ Shackleton, pp. 74â77
  53. ^ Huntford, p. 461.
  54. ^ Fisher, p. 358. See also Otto NordenskiÃ¶ld on-line article.
  55. ^ He knew because he had ordered it laid himself 12 years earlier, while organizing relief for NordenskiÃ¶ldâs expedition. Shackleton, p. 75
  56. ^ Alexander, p. 95
  57. ^ Huntford, pp. 456â57
  58. ^ Huntford, p. 459
  59. ^ The exact coordinates for the sinking were not recorded by Shackleton. From maps it appears that the position was just south of 67Â°, about 100 miles (160 km) from the abandonment 25 days earlier
  60. ^ Huntford, pp. 468â69
  61. ^ a b Huntford, p. 473
  62. ^ Huntford, p. 656
  63. ^ The other men denied the medal were William Stephenson, Ernest Holness and John Vincent.
  64. ^ a b Shackleton, p. 106
  65. ^ Shackleton, p. 108
  66. ^ a b Shackleton, p. 116
  67. ^ a b c Shackleton, p. 119
  68. ^ Huntford, p. 506
  69. ^ Huntford, pp. 509â10
  70. ^ Huntford, pp. 512â13
  71. ^ Shackleton, pp. 144â45
  72. ^ Shackleton, p. 151. Point Wild was also called "Cape Wild"
  73. ^ a b Fisher, p. 371
  74. ^ Shackleton, pp. 158â59
  75. ^ Shackleton, p. 162, lists the stores taken.
  76. ^ For example, by Lord Hunt in his Introduction to the Century Publishing edition of Shackleton's South.
  77. ^ Huntford, p. 563
  78. ^ Fisher, pp. 378â81
  79. ^ Vincent had collapsed completely. Shackleton wrote: "Physically he was one of the strongest men in the boat. He was a young man, he had served on North Sea trawlers, and he should have been able to bear hardships better than McCarthy who, not strong, was always happy". Shackleton, p. 175
  80. ^ a b Fisher, p. 383
  81. ^ After the upturned boat that forms the home of Daniel Peggotty in David Copperfield
  82. ^ Fisher, p. 384
  83. ^ Shackleton, quoted in Fisher, p. 385
  84. ^ Fisher, p. 386
  85. ^ Shackleton, South, p. 209
  86. ^ Huntford, pp. 696â97
  87. ^ Shackleton, p. 208â09
  88. ^ Shackleton, pp. 210â13
  89. ^ Shackleton, pp. 214â18
  90. ^ Shackleton later named a glacier for McDonald on the Brunt Ice Shelf in the Weddell Sea. When this glacier could not be identified, a nearby ice rise was renamed the McDonald Ice Rumples.
  91. ^ Shackleton, pp. 218â19
  92. ^ Hurley and Blackborow are missing from the photograph: Hurley was taking the picture and Blackborow was laid up in the hut after having his toes amputated.
  93. ^ Lewis Rickinson had suffered a suspected heart attack; Blackborow was unable to walk, due to frostbitten feet; Hudson was mentally depressed. Huntford, p. 533
  94. ^ Mills, p. 239â40
  95. ^ Mills, p. 241
  96. ^ Mills, pp. 242â50
  97. ^ Mills, pp. 250â52
  98. ^ Huntford, pp. 532â33
  99. ^ Huntford, p. 541
  100. ^ Alexander, p. 182
  101. ^ Mills, p. 261
  102. ^ As recorded above, he had not received instructions from Shackleton to the contrary. In South Shackleton maintains the possibility of a first-season crossing until Endurance is beset in the ice.
  103. ^ Of the party, only Mackintosh and Ernest Joyce had been to Antarctica before. See Ross Sea party.
  104. ^ It would appear that the Terra Nova Expedition was lavishly equipped, judging by the volume of supplies and materials the Ross Sea party were able to salvage.
  105. ^ Main source for this section is The Lost Men (Kelly Tyler-Lewis). For full list of sources and in-text citations see Ross Sea party article.
  106. ^ Huntford, pp. 605â06
  107. ^ Huntford, p. 647
  108. ^ Shackleton, p. 339â41
  109. ^ Fisher, p. 432
  110. ^ Mills, p. 289
  111. ^ Mills, pp. 304â05
  112. ^ Fuchs & Hillary, p. 293

## [edit] Sources

  * Alexander, Caroline: The Endurance: Shackleton's Legendary Antarctic Expedition Bloomsbury, 1998 ISBN 0 7475 4123 X
  * Fisher, M & J: Shackleton James Barrie Books, 1957
  * Fuchs, Sir V & Hillary, Sir E: The Crossing of Antarctica Cassell, 1958
  * Huntford, Roland: Shackleton Hodder & Stoughton, 1985 ISBN 0 340 25007 0
  * Mills, Lief: Frank Wild Caedmon of Whitby, 1999 ISBN 0 905355 48 2
  * Murphy, David Thomas: German Exploration of the Polar World: a History, 1870-1940 University of Nebraska Press, 2002 ISBN 0 8032 3205 5
  * "Otto NordenskiÃ¶ld" Southpole.com retrieved on 5 April 2008
  * Shackleton, Sir Ernest: South Century Travellers edition, Century Publishing, 1983 ISBN 0 7126 0111 2
  * Tyler-Lewis, Kelly: The Lost Men Bloomsbury paperback, 2007 ISBN 978 0 7475 7972 4
  * "Wilhelm Filchner 1877â1957" Southpole.com retrieved on 5 April 2008
  * Worsley, Frank A.: Endurance: An Epic of Polar Adventure W.W. Norton & Company, 1999 ISBN 0 393 31994 6

## [edit] Further reading

  * Lansing, Alfred: Endurance: Shackleton's Incredible Voyage Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London 2001 ISBN 0 297 82919 X
  * McKernan, Victoria: Shackleton's Stowaway Laurel Leaf, London 2006 ISBN 0-440-41984-0
  * Tamiko, Rex (ed.): South with Endurance: Shackleton's Antarctic Expedition 1914-17 (photographs of Frank Hurley) BCL Press, New York 2001 ISBN 1 9323 2042
  * Worsley, Frank A.: Shackleton's Boat Journey W.W. Norton & Company, London 1998 ISBN 0 7126 6574 9

## [edit] Films

  * The Endurance: Shackleton's Legendary Antarctic Expedition. (2000).
  * Shackelton's Antarctic Adventure. NOVA
  * Great Adventurers: Ernest Shackleton - To The End Of The Earth. (2006).
  * Shackleton. (2001).

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Imperial Trans-
Antarctic Expedition  
  * Works by Ernest Shackleton at Project Gutenberg
    * My South Polar Expedition at Project Gutenberg by Sir Ernest Shackleton
    * South: the story of Shackleton's 1914-1917 expedition at Project Gutenberg by Sir Ernest Shackleton
  * South! â Audiobook from LibriVox
  * Google Earth KML file of the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition
  * Biography of each of the crew members of the crew of the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition
  * Crew member biographies, including sizable entries on some of the least well-known, at Coolantarctica.com.
  * Nova special on Shackleton and the expedition
  * American Museum of Natural History exhibition on the Endurance
  * Shackleton's Antarctic Adventure
  * Kodak feature on expedition photographer Frank Hurley and the voyage of the Endurance
  * James Caird Society remembers the man that rescued the Endurance crew

Featured article

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperial_Trans-
Antarctic_Expedition"

Categories: Featured articles | Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition |
Exploration of Antarctica | Scientific expeditions | 1914 in the United
Kingdom

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 March 2009, at 15:08.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



