
# Quantum

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Quanta" redirects here. For other uses, see Quantum (disambiguation).

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (February 2008)  
<IMG>

This article relies largely or entirely upon a single source. Please help
improve this article by introducing appropriate citations of additional
sources. (April 2009)  
In physics, a quantum (plural: quanta) is an indivisible entity of a quantity
that has the same units as the Planck constant and is related to both energy
and momentum of elementary particles of matter (called fermions) and of
photons and other bosons. The word comes from the Latin "quantus", for "how
much." Behind this, one finds the fundamental notion that a physical property
may be "quantized", referred to as "quantization". This means that the
magnitude can take on only certain discrete numerical values, rather than any
value, at least within a range. There is a related term of quantum number.

A photon is often referred to as a "light quantum". The energy of an electron
bound to an atom (at rest) is said to be quantized, which results in the
stability of atoms, and of matter in general. But these terms can be a little
misleading, because what is quantized is this Planck's constant quantity whose
units can be viewed as either energy multiplied by time or momentum multiplied
by distance.

Usually referred to as quantum "mechanics", it is regarded by virtually every
professional physicist as the most fundamental framework we have for
understanding and describing nature at the infinitesimal level, for the very
practical reason that it works. It is "in the nature of things", not a more or
less arbitrary human preference.

## Contents

  * 1 Development of quantum theory
    * 1.1 The quantum black-body radiation formula
  * 2 Beyond electromagnetic radiation
    * 2.1 The birth of quantum mechanics
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 Notes

  
## [edit] Development of quantum theory

Quantum theory, the branch of physics which is based on quantization, began in
1900 when Max Planck published his theory explaining the emission spectrum of
black bodies. In that paper Planck used the Natural system of units he
invented the previous year. The consequences of the differences between
classical and quantum mechanics quickly became obvious. But it was not until
1926, by the work of Werner Heisenberg, Erwin SchrÃ¶dinger, and others, that
quantum mechanics became correctly formulated and understood mathematically.
Despite tremendous experimental success, the philosophical interpretations of
quantum theory are still widely debated.

Planck was reluctant to accept the new idea of quantization, as were many
others. But, with no acceptable alternative, he continued to work with the
idea, and found his efforts were well received. Eighteen years later, when he
accepted the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions, he called it "a few
weeks of the most strenuous work" of his life. During those few weeks, he even
had to discard much of his own theoretical work from the preceding years.
Quantization turned out to be the only way to describe the new and detailed
experiments which were just then being performed. He did this practically
overnight, openly reporting his change of mind to his scientific colleagues,
in the October, November, and December meetings of the German Physical
Society, in Berlin, where the black body work was being intensely discussed.
In this way, careful experimentalists (including Friedrich Paschen, O.R.
Lummer, Ernst Pringsheim, Heinrich Rubens, and F. Kurlbaum), and a reluctant
theorist, ushered in a momentous scientific revolution.

### [edit] The quantum black-body radiation formula

When a body is heated, it emits radiant heat, a form of electromagnetic
radiation in the infrared region of the EM spectrum. All of this was well
understood at the time, and of considerable practical importance. When the
body becomes red-hot, the red wavelength parts start to become visible. This
had been studied over the previous years, as the instruments were being
developed. However, most of the heat radiation remains infrared, until the
body becomes as hot as the surface of the Sun (about 6000 K or 5726 Â°C, where
most of the light is white in color). This was not achievable in the
laboratory at that time. What is more, measuring specific infrared wavelengths
was only then becoming feasible, due to newly developed experimental
techniques. Until then, most of the electromagnetic spectrum was not
measurable, and therefore blackbody emission had not been mapped out in
detail.

The quantum black-body radiation formula, being the very first piece of
quantum mechanics, appeared Sunday evening October 7, 1900, in a so-called
back-of-the-envelope calculation by Planck. It was based on a report by Rubens
(visiting with his wife) of the very latest experimental findings in the
infrared. Later that evening, Planck sent the formula on a postcard, which
Rubens received the following morning. A couple of days later, he informed
Planck that it worked perfectly. At first, it was just a fit to the data; only
later did it turn out to enforce quantization.

This second step was only possible due to a certain amount of luck (or skill,
even though Planck himself called it "a fortuitous guess at an interpolation
formula"). It was during the course of polishing the mathematics of his
formula that Planck stumbled upon the beginnings of Quantum Theory. Briefly
stated, he had two mathematical expressions:

  * (i) from the previous work on the red parts of the spectrum, he had x;
  * (ii) now, from the new infrared data, he got xÂ².

Combining these as x(a+x), he still has x, approximately, when x is much
smaller than a (the red end of the spectrum); but now also xÂ² (again
approximately) when x is much larger than a (in the infrared). The formula for
the energy E, in a single mode of radiation at frequency Î», and temperature
T, can be written

    E = \\frac{h \\lambda}{e^{\\frac{h \\lambda}{k T}} - 1} 
This is (essentially) what is being compared with the experimental
measurements. There are two parameters to determine from the data, written in
the present form by the symbols used today: h is the new Planck's constant,
and k is Boltzmann's constant. Both have now become fundamental in physics,
but that was by no means the case at the time. The "elementary quantum of
energy" is hÎ». But such a unit does not normally exist, and is not required
for quantization.

## [edit] Beyond electromagnetic radiation

While quantization was first discovered in electromagnetic radiation, it
describes a fundamental aspect of energy not just restricted to photons.[1]

### [edit] The birth of quantum mechanics

From the experiments, Planck deduced the numerical values of h and k. Thus he
could report, in the German Physical Society meeting on December 14, 1900,
where quantization (of energy) was revealed for the first time, values of the
Avogadro-Loschmidt number, the number of real molecules in a mole, and the
unit of electrical charge, which were more accurate than those known until
then. This event has been referred to as "the birth of quantum mechanics".

## [edit] See also

  * Quantum mechanics
  * Quantum state
  * Quantum number
  * Quantum cryptography
  * Quantum electronics
  * Quantum computer
  * Quantum chromodynamics
  * Quantum entanglement
  * Quantum coherence
  * Quantum immortality
  * Quantum lithography
  * Quantum metrology
  * Quantum sensor
  * Quantum dot
  * Magnetic flux quantum
  * Quantum cellular automata
  * Quantization
  * Subatomic particle
  * Elementary particle
  * Photon polarization

## [edit] References

  * J. Mehra and H. Rechenberg, The Historical Development of Quantum Theory, Vol.1, Part 1, Springer-Verlag New York Inc., New York 1982.

  * Lucretius, "On the Nature of the Universe", transl. from the Latin by R.E. Latham, Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth 1951. There are, of course, many translations, and the translation's title varies. Some put emphasis on how things work, others on what things are found in nature.

  * M. Planck, A Survey of Physical Theory, transl. by R. Jones and D.H. Williams, Methuen & Co., Ltd., London 1925 (Dover editions 1960 and 1993) including the Nobel lecture.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Real-World Quantum Effects Demonstrated February 11, 2005

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum"

Categories: Quantum mechanics

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles
lacking in-text citations from February 2008 | Articles lacking reliable
references from April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 00:04.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



