
# Fourth wall

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss
these issues on the talk page.

  * It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since January 2009.  

  * It may require general cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Tagged since August 2008.  

  
The fourth wall refers to the imaginary "wall" at the front of the stage in a
proscenium theatre, through which the audience sees the action in the world of
the play. The term also applies to the boundary between any fictional setting
and its audience. When this boundary is broken (for example by an actor
speaking to the audience directly through the camera in a television sitcom),
it is called "breaking the fourth wall."

## Contents

  * 1 Origin and meaning
  * 2 Breaking the fourth wall
  * 3 "Fifth wall"
  * 4 References
  * 5 See also

  
## [edit] Origin and meaning

The term was made explicit by Denis Diderot[1] and spread in nineteenth
century theatre with the advent of theatrical realism. Critic Vincent Canby
described it in 1987 as "that invisible screen that forever separates the
audience from the stage."[2] Another among early practitioners of this method
(now referred to as the "Fourth Wall") is Thornton Wilder & his 1937 play "Our
Town". The term "fourth wall" stems from the absence of a fourth wall on a
three-walled set where the audience is viewing the production. The audience is
supposed to assume there is a "fourth wall" present, even though it physically
is not there. This is widely noticeable on various television programs, such
as sitcoms, but the term originated in theatre, where conventional three-
walled stage sets provide a more obvious "fourth wall". The term "fourth wall"
has been adapted to refer to the boundary between the fiction and the
audience. "Fourth wall" is part of the suspension of disbelief between a
fictional work and an audience. The audience will accept the presence of the
fourth wall without giving it any direct thought, allowing them to enjoy the
fiction as if they were observing real events.The presence of a fourth wall is
one of the best established conventions of fiction and as such has led some
artists to draw direct attention to it for dramatic or comedic effect. This is
known as "breaking the fourth wall". For instance, in Puckoon, Spike talks to
the author multiple times. Spike also at one stage in the book, looks to see
what page the reader is on. Besides theatre and cinema, the term has been
adopted by other media, such as television, comics, and more recently, video
games. Though some table-top roleplaying games do allow for breaking the
fourth wall, these are usually beer and pretzels type games.

## [edit] Breaking the fourth wall

<IMG>

<IMG>

Paul (Arno Frisch) smirks at the audience in the film Funny Games, which
frequently breaks the fourth wall.

"Breaking the fourth wall" refers to a situation in which a character reveals
his or her awareness of the audience. This can also be called metatheatre. The
technique has been used for millennia: it was standard practice in Greek
comedy.

For instance, at one point in the Greek playwright Aristophanes' play Peace,
the hero Trygaeus (who is being lifted into the air by a crane situated
offstage) tells the crane-handler to be more careful. The fourth wall didn't
actually exist in Greek theatre; even in tragedies many characters spoke
directly to the audience, aware of their existence.Most often, the fourth wall
is broken by having a character directly address the audience (one example is
the Stage Manager in Thornton Wilder's Our Town, in which three of the
"audience" members ask questions that are part of the script and are responded
to by the Stage Manager). A similar effect can be achieved by having
characters interact with objects outside the context of the work (e.g., a
character is handed a prop by a stage hand). Productions of William
Shakespeare's plays, which frequently feature asides and soliloquies which the
characters in question presumably speak only to themselves, sometimes present
the dialogue as being delivered directly to the audience. In Sir Laurence
Olivier's 1955 film adaptation of Richard III, Olivier addresses the audience
directly, a ground breaking technique in film.

A notable case of Shakespeare breaking the fourth wall is the end of A
Midsummer Night's Dream, in which Puck suggests to the audience that they
pretend, should they have disliked the play they just saw, that the entire
production was only a dream.Sometimes, an actor in a play may physically
penetrate the fourth wall. For example, in plays that involve sword (or other
melee) fights, such as Romeo and Juliet, fighters may go into the audience.
The reasons for doing this are plentiful, but the most obvious reason is that
it helps draw the audience into the play.Various artists have used this
jarring effect to make a point, as it forces an audience to see the fiction in
a new light and to watch it less passively. Bertolt Brecht was known for
deliberately breaking the fourth wall to encourage his audience to think more
critically about what they were watching, referred to as Verfremdungseffekt
("alienation effect"). Breaking the fourth wall is often employed for comic
effect, as a sort of visual non-sequitur; the unexpected departure from normal
narrative conventions is often surprising and creates humor. A very early
example of this occurs in Francis Beaumont's play The Knight of the Burning
Pestle, which contains three characters who are purportedly part of the
audience. They frequently interrupt the performance and demand to be consulted
on the plot, ordering a number of sudden (and usually extremely awkward)
changes throughout the play, with often comical results.Such exploitation of
an audience's familiarity with the conventions of fiction is a key element in
many works defined as post-modern, which dismantle established rules of
fiction. Works which break or directly refer to the fourth wall often utilize
other post-modern devices such as meta-reference or breaking character.From
the early days of sound motion pictures, stage-to-screen productions often
broke this barrier, especially those of the Marx Brothers', most often by
having a character look directly into the camera and speak to the audience.

In their 1932 film Horse Feathers, for example, when Chico sits down at a
piano to begin a musical interlude, Groucho turns to the camera and deadpans
"I've got to stay here, but there's no reason why you folks shouldn't go out
into the lobby until this thing blows over." [3] Bob Hope, who also frequently
addressed the audience, uses a similar gag in Road to Bali: just as Bing
Crosby begins a number, Hope tells us, "He's gonna sing, folks. Now's the time
to go out and get your popcorn." In the 1978 movie Animal House, John Belushi
as Blutarsky, watches outside a coed's dorm window as she undresses. As he
watches, he looks back over his shoulder at the camera and raises his eyebrows
as if to say, "Can you believe this?" In the 1983 movie A Christmas Story, the
fourth wall is broken just once when the character Ralphie, played by Peter
Billingsley, is getting cleaned up by his mother after getting hit by a BB
from his Red Ryder BB gun. During the scene, Ralphie looks directly at the
camera and smiles to show the audience his pleasure that his mother believed
the lie that he was actually hit by an icicle. In the 1986 comedy film Ferris
Bueller's Day Off, Ferris breaks the fourth wall multiple times throughout the
film. The 1988 film Casual Sex? begins with the main characters speaking to
the audience, and breaks the fourth wall throughout the movie. Many satirical
comedy movies use the fourth wall by calling attention to how absurd or
hackneyed certain elements of the plot are. Scary Movie involved a scene where
the cast laughed at how the situation they found themselves in resembled a bad
horror movie, and then joked that the producers would have hired people in
their twenties to portray their teen characters. In Jay and Silent Bob Strike
Back the cast at several points asked who would watch a movie based on the
titular characters before pausing to stare at the camera. The movies produced
by Mel Brooks often involve a significant breaking of the fourth wall, from a
brawl that spreads into the rest of the movie studio in Blazing Saddles to
various characters referencing the movie script in Robin Hood: Men In Tights
after an unexpected plot twist (specifically, when Robin misses during the
archery contest Robin finds this strange, takes out a copy of the script and
finds that he gets another shot; when Prince John and the Sheriff hear this
they take out their own copies of the script and confirm Robin's assertion).

Similarly, in the film Spaceballs, when the villains lose track of the
protagonists, they obtain a copy of the videotape of the film they are in to
discover the heroes' location.Films from Hal Roach regulars Laurel and Hardy
often featured Oliver Hardy looking towards the camera to garner sympathy
(albeit in the form of laughter) from the audience for either Stan Laurel's
seemingly unbelievable, naive activities or for "another fine mess" he'd
gotten them into, usually resulting in harm coming to "Ollie".In Annie Hall,
Diane Keaton's character mistakenly says "wife" instead of "life". Woody
Allen's character points this out. She denies it and so he turns to the camera
and says "You heard that!".The technique was arguably first employed in the
modern sense in the sensational 1921 premiere of Pirandello's play Sei
Personaggi in Cerca d'Autore (Six Characters in Search of an Author), wherein
six ordinary people come to the rehearsal of a play to demand that their
stories be told as part of the performance. This type of fourth wall breaking
is also used in The Aliens Are Coming! The Aliens Are Coming! when it becomes
impossible to tell what is 'real' and what is not in the play, as the aliens
end up everywhere.The fourth wall is sometimes included as part of the
narrative, when a character discovers that they are part of a fiction and
'breaks the fourth wall' to make contact with "the real world", as in films
like Tom Jones, which won the Academy Award for Best Picture in 1963, Woody
Allen's Annie Hall (with Marshall McLuhan) and The Purple Rose of Cairo, Last
Action Hero and Jonathan Gash's Lovejoy novels. Both Peter Pan and Captain
Hook break the fourth wall in the 1954 musical adaptation of Peter Pan. George
Burns commonly addressed the audience in his 1950s TV comedy show, and
sometimes even watched it on TV in another room.[4] More recently The Truman
Show depicted a man whose entire life was a TV show and how he broke through
the fourth wall to discover the real world.

The fourth wall has also been broken in literature such as The Master and
Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov,[5] Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes, Lost in
the Funhouse by John Barth, Midnight's Children and The Moor's Last Sigh by
Salman Rushdie, Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote by Jorge Luis Borges,
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead by Tom Stoppard, If on a Winter's Night
a Traveler by Italo Calvino, Travelling People by B.S. Johnson, Double or
Nothing by Raymond Federman, The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco and The
French Lieutenant's Woman by John Fowles, which has the author inserting
himself into the story and discussing the possible endings he was considering,
thus causing the reader to wonder which ending he would choose. It can be
intentional; some television series involve a character telling the audience
important facts, such as citing statistics on gun violence in schools, helping
people with certain kinds of diseases, coping with death in the immediate
family, and so on.

The fourth wall is frequently broken in cartoons, often in ways difficult or
impossible with live actors. Perhaps one of the most humorous is to "fight the
iris": right before the picture ends and while the image is diminished by a
contracting circle, a character forces the "eye" open to interject a wry
comment or complaint. The character may appear onscreen after the iris is
closed, walking or running over a solid black background. The award-winning
cartoon Duck Amuck breaks the fourth-wall for the entire running-time, with
Daffy Duck arguing with the off-screen animator (Bugs Bunny) throughout the
cartoon. In a similar vein, characters can occasionally be seen in other
episodes, running right off the "edge" of the display, leaving them standing
in a blank white space, accompanied by a stretch of movie film rolling by
along one edge of the screen. In the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, Donatello
decodes a villain's clue as written in latitude and longitude, Raphael makes
an aside comment, "And they say cartoons aren't educational." In the The
Simpsons episode Duffless, for example, Moe Szyslak says to a character in his
bar "You'll be back", turns to another to say "And you", and then turns to
face the camera directly and says, apparently to the audience, "And you." He
appears to have broken the fourth wall, before the shot zooms out to show that
he was in fact facing and addressing Barney Gumble.

In traditional British pantomime, the audience is encouraged and expected to
break the fourth wall by interacting with the cast--booing the villains, who
will often respond, cheering the heroes, who will often thank the audience,
and by providing hints to the characters as to what to do next, e.g. shouting
'he's behind you' when the villain is sneaking up on the hero, or 'She's in
the cellar' when Prince Charming is searching for Cinderella who has been
locked in the basement by the Ugly Sisters.

Monty Python's Flying Circus often broke the fourth wall with characters
speaking to the audience, asking about their lines or commenting on the
content of the sketch. The character 'The Colonel' repeatedly stopped sketches
because he thought they were too silly and The Spanish Inquistion remark on
the movement of the end credits when they are trying to get to court.Comics
can occasionally break the fourth wall, as Marvel Comics characters Deadpool
and She-Hulk are aware that they are comic book characters. The Joker often
addresses the comic reader and has even at times forced his way out of the
comic frames to do things such as help turn the page. The comic character Opus
is also aware that he is a comic character, and usually consults with the
"Creator" character (Berkeley Breathed, the artist). Also in a Peanuts comic
that can be found in the book Peanuts: The Art of Charles M. Schlutz shows
Schroeder playing piano and he gets a perfect pitch. When he tells Charlie
Brown he tells Schroeder that he must mean "A perfect pitch" and that baseball
season is over besides. Schroeder then responds as he walks off, "Sometimes I
should put for a transfer to a new comic strip!" In the Marvel Comics of the
1960s, Stan Lee's style of writing regularly broke the fourth wall when
writing captions and narration.Another way of breaking the fourth wall is when
a character changes a part of the scene; for example, in Chowder, Schnitzel is
often instructed by Mung Daal to change the scene when they are running low on
time. In another episode, Chowder starts practicing his writing on the screen,
until Gazpacho wipes it off. Chowder asks "about that [drawing]", and points
to the Cartoon Network watermark. Gazpacho responds that "It doesn't come off.
I know. I've tried." In the February 12, 2009 episode of Chowder, after all
the kitchen's money is spent, the characters announce there is no money for
animators, at which time the actual real-life voice actors are shown and have
to wash cars until they earn enough money for animation once again. One
SpongeBob SquarePants episode has a similar method, as SpongeBob is nervous
about painting Mr. Krabs' walls and tells himself he will start to work, but
it takes about three hours before Patrick says "Can you move it along? I'm
running out of time cards."In reality shows such as The Real World, breaking
the fourth wall can refer to a direct interaction between the cast and crew.In
the video game Paper Mario:The Thousand-Year Door, a poorly disguised villain
speaks to the player, saying, "You there! In front of the TV. Don't tell the
red guy who I am!" Similarly, in Super Paper Mario, when Bestovius gives Mario
the ability to flip, and Mario does not know what the "A button" is, Bestovius
claims that "...the great beings who watch us will understand." Several other
occasions can be pinpointed in the Paper Mario series.In the video game
series, Destroy All Humans!, Crypto, Pox, or any other character have
beenknown to break the fourth wall.In Nintendo's game series Animal Crossing,
Mr Resetti constantly breaks the fourth wall. He is an Anthropomorphic mole
who complains for extended periods of time whenever you reset your console or
turn it off without saving. Also his first appearance will make him thank the
player for buying the game. It is also used in music. The Progressive/Celtic
Rock band "The Reasoning" have a song called "Breaking the Fourth Wall". The
fourth wall can also be broken when a celebrity reveals an intense interaction
with fans. This recently happened when bassist of Fall Out Boy, Pete Wentz,
submitted a Twitter that let the Livejournal community 'icecreamhdaches' know
that he reads their comments.[6]

## [edit] "Fifth wall"

Main article: Fifth wall

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "The Fourth Wall and the Third Space" by John Stevenson, creator or Playback Theatre.
  2. ^ "Film view: sex can spoil the scene;" (review). Canby, Vincent. New York Times. (Late Edition (East Coast)). New York, N.Y.: Jun 28, 1987. pg. A.17. ProQuest ISSN: 03624331 ProQuest document ID: 956621781 (subscription). retrieved July 3, 2007
  3. ^ Horse Feathers (1932) - Memorable quotes
  4. ^ "At work with Garry Shandling; Late-Night TV, Ever More Unreal;" [Biography]. Weinraub, Bernard, New York Times. (Late Edition (East Coast)). New York, N.Y.: Dec 10, 1992. pg. C.1. Proquest ISSN: 03624331 ProQuest document ID: 965497661 retrieved July 3, 2007.
  5. ^ [1]
  6. ^ http://twitter.com/ztnewetep/statuses/1264935746

## [edit] See also

  * Corpsing*Gaze*Kayfabe, a similar concept in professional wrestling*Descartes' philosophy \- The concept of reality itself being illusory.*Alternate reality game

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourth_wall"

Categories: Metafictional techniques | Parts of a theatre | Theatre

Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from January 2009 |
Cleanup from August 2008 | All pages needing cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 05:10.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



