
# Typewriter

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject.
WikiProject Media or the Media Portal may be able to help recruit one.
(November 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Mechanical desktop typewriters, such as this Underwood Five, were long time
standards of government agencies, newsrooms, and sales offices. They were
largely replaced in these roles during the later 20th century, first by IBM
Selectrics and other electric typewriters, and then by personal computers.
Though slower than electric models, the advantage of manual typewriters was
that since no electrical power was required, they would work anywhere.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Old style Hermes typewriter

A typewriter is a mechanical or electromechanical device with a set of "keys"
that, when pressed, cause characters to be printed on a medium, usually paper.
For much of the 20th century, typewriters were indispensable tools for many
professional writers and in business offices. By the end of the 1980s, word
processor applications on personal computers had largely replaced the tasks
previously accomplished with typewriters. Typewriters, however, remain popular
in the developing world and among some niche markets, and for some office
tasks.

Notable typewriter manufacturer companies have included E. Remington and Sons,
IBM, Imperial typewriters, Oliver Typewriter Company, Olivetti, Royal
Typewriter Company, Smith Corona, and Underwood Typewriter Company.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Early innovations
    * 1.2 Standardization
    * 1.3 Electric designs
  * 2 Typewriter/printer hybrids
  * 3 Legacy
    * 3.1 Keyboard layouts: "QWERTY" and others
    * 3.2 Computer jargon
  * 4 Effect on culture
  * 5 Correction methods
  * 6 Typing speed records and speed contests
  * 7 Authors and writers who had unusual relationships with typewriters
    * 7.1 Early adopters
    * 7.2 Others
    * 7.3 Late users
  * 8 Typewriters in popular culture
    * 8.1 In music
    * 8.2 In film
    * 8.3 The Internet
    * 8.4 Television
  * 9 Forensic identification
  * 10 Gallery
  * 11 See also
  * 12 References
    * 12.1 Patents
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] History

### [edit] Early innovations

<IMG>

<IMG>

This Smith Premier typewriter, purchased around the end of the 19th century,
was found abandoned in the Bodie ghost town. This early example had separate
keys for upper- and lower-case letters.

Christopher Latham Sholes (1819-1890) invented the typewriter. As with the
automobile, telephone, and telegraph, a number of people contributed insights
and inventions that eventually resulted in commercially successful
instruments. In fact, historians have estimated that some form of typewriter
was invented 52 times as tinkerers tried to come up with a workable design.[1]

In 1714, Henry Mill obtained a patent in Britain for a machine that, from the
patent, appears to have been similar to a typewriter, but nothing further is
known.[2] Other early developers of typewriting machines include Pellegrino
Turri, who also invented carbon paper. Many of these early machines, including
Turri's, were developed to enable the blind to write.

In 1829, William Austin Burt patented a machine called the "Typographer." Like
many other early machines, it is sometimes listed as the "first typewriter";
the Science Museum (London) describes it merely as "the first writing
mechanism whose invention was documented," but even that claim may be
excessive, since Turri's machine is well known.[3] Even in the hands of its
inventor, it was slower than handwriting. Burt and his promoter John D.
Sheldon never found a buyer for the patent, and it was never commercially
produced. Because it used a dial to select each character rather than keys, it
was called an "index typewriter" rather than a "keyboard typewriter," if it is
to be considered a typewriter at all.

By the mid-1800s, the increasing pace of business communication was creating a
need for mechanization of the writing process. Stenographers and telegraphers
could take down information at rates up to 130 words per minute, but a writer
with a pen was limited to about 30 words per minute (the 1853 speed
record).[4] From 1829 to 1870, many printing or typing machines were patented
by inventors in Europe and America, but none went into commercial production.

Charles Thurber developed multiple patents; his first, in 1843, was developed
as an aid to the blind. See Charles Thurber's 1845 Chirographer, as an
example. In 1855, the Italian Giuseppe Ravizza created a prototype typewriter
called Cembalo scrivano o macchina da scrivere a tasti ("Scribe harpsichord,
or machine for writing with keys"). It was an advanced machine that let the
user see the writing as it was typed. In 1861, Father Francisco JoÃ£o de
Azevedo, a Brazilian priest, made his own typewriter with basic materials and
tools, such as wood and knives. D. Pedro I, the Brazilian emperor, in that
same year, presented a gold medal to Father Azevedo for this invention. Many
Brazilian people as well as the Brazilian federal government recognize Fr.
Azevedo as the real inventor of the typewriter, a claim that has been the
subject of some controversy.[5] In 1865, American John Pratt built a machine
called the Pterotype which appeared in an 1867 Scientific American article and
inspired other inventors. Between 1864 and 1867 Peter Mitterhofer, a carpenter
from South Tyrol (then Austria) developed several models of a typewriter and a
fully functioning prototype in 1867.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Commercial 1878 model of the Hansen Writing Ball

In 1865, Rev. Rasmus Malling-Hansen of Denmark invented the Hansen Writing
Ball, which went into commercial production in 1870 and was the first
commercially sold typewriter. It was a success in Europe and was reported as
being used in offices in London as late as 1909.[6] In addition, Malling-
Hansen used a solenoid escapement to return the carriage on some of his models
and was a responsible candidate for the first "electric" typewriter. From the
book Hvem er Skrivekuglens Opfinder?, written by Malling-Hansen's daughter,
Johanne Agerskov, we know that, in 1865, Malling-Hansen made a porcelain model
of the keyboard of his writing ball and experimented with different placements
of the letters to achieve the fastest writing speed. Malling-Hansen placed the
letters on short pistons that went directly through the ball and down to the
paper. This, together with placement of the letters so that the fastest
writing fingers struck the most frequently used letters, made the Hansen
Writing Ball the first typewriter to produce text substantially faster than a
person could write by hand.

Malling-Hansen developed his typewriter further through the 1870s and 1880s
and made many improvements, but the writing head remained the same. On the
first model of the writing ball from 1870, the paper was attached to a
cylinder inside a wooden box. In 1874, the cylinder was replaced by a
carriage, moving beneath the writing head. Then, in 1875, the well-known tall
model was patented and it was the first of the writing balls that worked
without electricity. Malling-Hansen attended the world exhibitions in Vienna
in 1873 and Paris in 1878. At both exhibitions, he received the first-prize
medals for his invention.[7][8][9]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sholes and Glidden Type-Writer from 1873, showing a modified QWERTY key layout

The first typewriter to be commercially successful was invented in 1867 by
Christopher Sholes,[1] Carlos Glidden and Samuel W. Soule in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin. Sholes soon disowned the machine and refused to use or even to
recommend it.[1] The patent (US 79,265) was sold for $12,000 to Densmore and
Yost, who made an agreement with E. Remington and Sons (then famous as a
manufacturer of sewing machines) to commercialize the machine as the Sholes
and Glidden Type-Writer, which was the origin of the term typewriter.
Remington started production of its first typewriter on March 1, 1873, in
Ilion, New York. It had a QWERTY keyboard layout, which because of the
machine's success slowly was adopted by other typewriter manufacturers.

<IMG>

Because the typebars of this typewriter strike upwards, the typist in this
French postcard, c. 1910, could not have seen characters as they were typed.

The ability to view what is typed, as it is typed, is taken for granted today.
In most early keyboard typewriters, however, the typebars struck upward
against the bottom of the platen. Thus, what was typed was not visible until
the typing of subsequent lines caused it to scroll into view. The difficulty
with any other arrangement was ensuring that the typebars fell back into place
reliably when the key was released. This was eventually achieved with various
ingenious mechanical designs and so-called "visible typewriters", such as the
Oliver typewriter, were introduced in 1895. Surprisingly, the older style
continued in production to as late as 1915.

### [edit] Standardization

<IMG>

<IMG>

Typebars which became entangled when the six keys operating the typebars were
pressed simultaneously

By about 1910, the "manual" or "mechanical" typewriter had reached a somewhat
standardized design. There were minor variations from one manufacturer to
another, but most typewriters followed the concept that each key was attached
to a typebar that had the corresponding letter molded, in reverse, into its
striking head. To have letters typed in exact location, the typebar was guided
all its way till the ribbon by segment. When a key was struck briskly and
firmly, the typebar hit a ribbon (usually made of inked fabric) stretched in
front of a cylindrical platen that moved back and forth. The paper was rolled
around by the typewriter's platen, which was then rotated by the "carriage
return" lever (at the far left) into position for each new line of text.

A significant innovation was the Shift key. This key physically "shifted"
either the basket of typebars, in which case the typewriter is described as
"basket shift", or the the whole carriage, in which case the typewriter is
described as "carriage shift". This means that a different portion of the bar
would come in contact with the ribbon/platen. The result is that each typebar
could type two different characters, cutting the number of keys and typebars
in half (and simplifying the internal mechanisms considerably). The obvious
use for this was to allow letter keys to type both upper and lower case, but
normally the number keys were also duplexed, allowing access to special
symbols such as percent (%) and ampersand (&). With the Shift key,
manufacturing costs (and therefore purchase price) were greatly reduced, and
typist operation was simplified; both factors contributed greatly to mass
adoption of the technology. Certain models, such as the Barlet, had a double
shift so that each key performed three functions. These little three row
machines were very portable and could be used by journalists, etc.

However, because the Shift key required more force to push (its mechanism was
moving a much larger mass than other keys), and was operated by the "pinky"
finger (normally the weakest finger on the hand), it was difficult to hold the
Shift down for more than two or three consecutive strokes. The "Shift Lock"
key (the precursor to the modern Caps Lock) allowed the shift operation to be
maintained indefinitely. Unlike the today's Caps Lock, however, the Shift Lock
was a two-key operation: Shift would be held down, and the Shift Lock
(normally directly above) would be pressed simultaneously, triggering a simple
lock mechanism. To unlock, Shift was tapped again, releasing both keys and
unshifting the basket.

Some ribbons were inked in black and red stripes, each being half the width
and the entire length of the ribbon. A lever on most machines allowed
switching between colors, which was useful for bookkeeping entries where
negative amounts had to be in red.

In the early part of the 20th century, a typewriter was marketed under the
name "Noiseless" and advertised as "silent". It was developed by Wellington
Parker Kidder and the first model was marketed by the Noiseless Typewriter
Company in 1917. An agreement with Remington in 1924 saw production
transferred to Remington, and a further agreement in 1929 allowed Underwood to
produce it as well.[10] It failed, leading some observers to the conclusion
that the clickety-clack of the typical typewriter was a consumer
preference.[1] A more likely reason is that the claims of silent operation
were simply untrue.

In a conventional typewriter the type bars are decelerated at the end of their
travel simply by impacting upon the ribbon and paper. So-called "noiseless"
typewriters have a complex lever mechanism that decelerates the typebar
mechanically and then presses it against the ribbon and paper[10] in an
attempt to render the process less noisy. It was not particularly successful;
it certainly reduced the high-frequency content of the sound, rendering it
more of a "clunk" than a "clack" and arguably less intrusive, but the
grandiose claims of the advertising - such as "a machine that can be operated
a few feet away from your desk - And not be heard" \- were entirely without
foundation.

### [edit] Electric designs

Although electric typewriters would not achieve widespread popularity until
nearly a century later, the basic groundwork for the electric typewriter was
laid by the Universal Stock Ticker, invented by Thomas Edison in 1870. This
device remotely printed letters and numbers on a stream of paper tape from
input generated by a specially designed typewriter at the other end of a
telegraph line.

The first electric typewriter was produced by the Blickensderfer Manufacturing
Company, of Stamford, Connecticut, in 1902. Like the manual Blickensderfer
typewriters it used a cylindrical typewheel rather than individual typebars.
It was not a commercial success, which may have been due to the fact that at
the time electricity had not been standardized and current differed from city
to city. The next step in the development of the electric typewriter came in
1909, when Charles and Howard Krum filed a patent for the first practical
teletype machine. The Krums' machine also used a typewheel rather than
individual typebars. While innovative, neither of these machines reached
business or personal consumers.

James Fields Smathers of Kansas City invented what is considered the first
practical power-operated typewriter in 1914. In 1920, after returning from
Army service, he produced a successful model and in 1923 turned it over to the
Northeast Electric Company of Rochester for development. Northeast was
interested in finding new markets for their electric motors and developed
Smathers's design so that it could be marketed to typewriter manufacturers,
and from 1925 Remington Electric typewriters were produced powered by
Northeast's motors.

After some 2,500 electric typewriters had been produced, Northeast asked
Remington for a firm contract for the next batch. However, Remington was
engaged in merger talks which would eventually result in the creation of
Remington Rand and no executives were willing to commit to a firm order.
Northeast instead decided to enter the typewriter business for itself, and in
1929 produced the first Electromatic Typewriter.

In 1928, Delco, a division of General Motors, purchased Northeast Electric,
and the typewriter business was spun off as the Electromatic Typewriters, Inc.
In 1933, Electromatic was acquired by IBM, which then spent $1 million on a
redesign of the Electromatic Typewriter, launching the IBM Electric Typewriter
Model 01 in 1935. By 1958 IBM was deriving 8% of its revenue from the sale of
electric typewriters.

Electrical typewriter designs removed the direct mechanical connection between
the keys and the element that struck the paper. Not to be confused with later
electronic typewriters, electric typewriters contained only a single
electrical component: the motor. Where the keystroke had previously moved a
typebar directly, now it engaged mechanical linkages that directed mechanical
power from the motor into the typebar.

IBM and Remington Rand electric typewriters were the leading models until IBM
introduced the IBM Selectric typewriter in 1961, which replaced the typebars
with a spherical element (or typeball) slightly larger than a golf ball, with
reverse-image letters molded into its surface. The Selectric used a system of
latches, metal tapes, and pulleys driven by an electric motor to rotate the
ball into the correct position and then strike it against the ribbon and
platen. The typeball moved laterally in front of the paper instead of the
former platen-carrying carriage moving the paper across a stationary print
position.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Replaceable IBM typeballs with clip, 2 Euro coin to compare

The typeball design had many advantages, especially the elimination of "jams"
(when more than one key was struck at once and the typebars became entangled)
and in the ability to change the typeball, allowing multiple fonts to be used
in a single document. Selectric mechanisms were widely incorporated into
computer terminals in the 1960s, as they possessed obvious advantages:

  * The mechanism was reasonably fast and jam-free
  * It could produce high quality output compared to competitors such as Teletype machines
  * It could be initiated by a short, low-force mechanical action
  * It did not require the movement of a heavy "type basket" to shift between lower- and upper-case
  * It did not require the platen roller assembly to move from side to side (a problem with continuous-feed paper)

The IBM 2741 terminal was a popular example of a Selectric-based computer
terminal, and similar mechanisms were employed as the console devices for many
IBM System/360 computers. These mechanisms used "ruggedized" designs compared
to those in standard commercial typewriters.

IBM also gained an advantage by marketing more heavily to schools than did
Remington, with the idea that students who learned to type on an IBM Electric
would later choose IBM typewriters over the competition in the workplace as
businesses replaced their old manual models.[citation needed]

Later models of IBM Executives and Selectrics replaced inked fabric ribbons
with "carbon film" ribbons that had a dry black or colored powder on a clear
plastic tape. These could be used only once, but later models used a cartridge
that was simple to replace. A side effect of this technology was that the text
typed on the machine could be easily read from the used ribbon, raising issues
where the machines were used for preparing classified documents (ribbons had
to be accounted for to ensure that typists didn't carry them from the
facility).[11]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Composer output showing Roman, Bold and Italic fonts available by changing the
type ball

A variation known as "Correcting Selectrics" introduced a correction feature,
where a sticky tape in front of the carbon film ribbon could remove the black-
powdered image of a typed character, eliminating the need for white dab-on
paint or hard erasers that could tear the paper. These machines also
introduced selectable "pitch" so that the typewriter could be switched between
pica (10 characters per inch) and elite (12 per inch), even within one
document. Even so, all Selectrics were monospacedâeach character and
letterspace was allotted the same width on the page, from a capital "W" to a
period. Although IBM had produced a successful typebar-based machine with
three levels of proportional spacing, called the IBM Executive, no
proportionally spaced Selectric office typewriter was ever introduced. There
were, however, two other machines with fully proportional spacing: the
expensive Selectric Composer, which was capable of right-margin justification
and was considered a typesetting machine rather than a typewriter; and the
more reasonably priced IBM Electronic Typewriter 50, which was capable of
proportional spacing but not right-justifying. By 1970, as offset printing
began to replace letterpress printing, the Composer would be adapted as the
output unit for a typesetting system. The system included a computer-driven
input station to capture the key strokes on magnetic tape and insert the
operator's format commands, and a Composer unit to read the tape and produce
the formatted text for photo reproduction.

Some of IBM's advances were later adopted in less expensive machines from
competitors. For example, Smith-Corona electric typewriters of the 1970s used
interchangeable ribbon cartridges, including fabric, film, erasing, and two-
color versions.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Electronic typewriter - the final stage in typewriter development. A 1989
Canon Typestar 110

The final major development of the typewriter was the "electronic" typewriter.
Most of these replaced the typeball with a metal or plastic daisy wheel
mechanism (a disk with the letters molded on the outside edge of the
"petals"). A plastic daisy-wheel was much simpler and cheaper than the
typeball but also wore out more easily. Some electronic typewriters were in
essence dedicated word processors with internal memory and cartridge, magnetic
card or diskette external memory-storage devices. Unlike the Selectrics and
earlier models, these really were "electronic" and relied on integrated
circuits and multiple electromechanical components. These typewriters were
sometimes called display typewriters (cf. US patent 4,620,808) or word-
processing typewriters, though the latter term was also frequently applied to
less sophisticated machines that featured only a tiny, possibly single-row
display.

Due to falling sales, IBM sold its typewriter division in 1990 to Lexmark.

## [edit] Typewriter/printer hybrids

Towards the end of the commercial popularity of typewriters in the 1980s, a
number of hybrid designs combining features of typewriters and computer
printers were introduced.

These often incorporated keyboards from existing models of typewriters and
printing mechanisms of dot-matrix printers. The generation of teletypes with
impact pin-based printing engines was not adequate for the demanding quality
required for typed output and alternative thermal transfer technologies used
in thermal label printers had become technically feasible for typewriters.

IBM produced a series of typewriters called Thermotronic with letter-quality
output and correcting tape along with printers tagged Quietwriter. Brother
extended the life of their typewriter product line with similar products. DEC
meanwhile had the DECwriter.

The development of these proprietary printing engines provided the vendors
with exclusive markets in consumable ribbons and the ability to use
standardised printing engines with varying degrees of electronic and software
sophistication to develop product lines.

Although these changes reduced prices - and greatly increased the convenience
- of typewriters, the technological disruption posed by word processors left
these improvements with only a short-term low-end market. To extend the life
of these products, many examples were provided with communication ports to
connect them to computers as printers.

The increasing dominance of personal computers, desktop publishing, the
introduction of low-cost, truly high-quality, laser and inkjet printer
technologies, and the pervasive use of web publishing, email and other
electronic communication techniques have largely replaced typewriters.

## [edit] Legacy

### [edit] Keyboard layouts: "QWERTY" and others

<IMG>

The "QWERTY" layout of typewriter keys became a de facto standard and
continues to be used long after the reasons for its adoption (including
reduction of key/lever entanglements) have ceased to apply.

The 1874 Sholes & Glidden typewriters established the "QWERTY" layout for the
letter keys. During the period in which Sholes and his colleagues were
experimenting with this invention, other keyboard arrangements were apparently
tried, but these are poorly documented.[12] The near-alphabetical sequence on
the "home row" of the QWERTY layout (a-s-d-f-g-h-j-k-l) demonstrates that a
straightforward alphabetical arrangement was the original starting point.[13]
The QWERTY layout of keys has become the de facto standard for English-
language typewriter and computer keyboards. Other languages written in the
Latin alphabet sometimes use variants of the QWERTY layouts, such as the
French AZERTY, the Italian QZERTY, and the German QWERTZ layouts.

The QWERTY layout is not the most efficient layout possible, since it requires
a touch-typist to move his or her fingers between rows to type the most common
letters. A popular story suggests that it was designed and used for early
typewriters exactly because it was so inefficient; it slowed a typist down so
as to reduce the frequency of the typewriter's typebars wedging together and
jamming the machine. Another story is that the QWERTY layout allowed early
typewriter salesmen to impress their customers by being able to easily type
out the example word "typewriter" without having learnt the full keyboard
layout, because "typewriter" can be spelled purely on the top row of the
keyboard. The most likely explanation is that the QWERTY arrangement was
designed to reduce the likelihood of internal clashing by placing commonly
used combinations of letters farther from each other inside the
machine.[14][15] This allowed the user to type faster without jamming.
Unfortunately, no definitive explanation for the QWERTY keyboard has been
found, and typewriter aficionados continue to debate the issue.

A number of radically different layouts such as Dvorak have been proposed to
reduce the perceived inefficiencies of QWERTY, but none have been able to
displace the QWERTY layout; their proponents claim considerable advantages,
but so far none has been widely used. The Blickensderfer typewriter with its
DHIATENSOR layout may have possibly been the first attempt at optimizing the
keyboard layout for efficiency advantages.

Many old typewriters do not contain a separate key for the numeral 1 or the
exclamation point, and some even older ones also lack the numeral zero.
Typists who learned on these machines learned the habit of using the lowercase
letter l for the digit 1, and the uppercase O for the zero. The exclamation
point was a three-stroke combination of an apostrophe, a backspace, and a
period. These characters were omitted to simplify design and reduce
manufacturing and maintenance costs; they were chosen specifically because
they were "redundant" and could be recreated using other keys. On modern
keyboards, the exclamation point is the shifted character on the 1 key, a
direct result of the heritage that these were the last characters to become
"standard" on keyboards. Holding the spacebar pressed down usually suspended
the carriage advance mechanism, allowing to type multiple symbols on a single
location. The Â¢ symbol (meaning cents) was located above the number 6 on old
typewriters. Modern keyboards now use ^ above the 6.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Chinese typewriter produced by Shuangge, with 2,450 keys.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Japanese typewriter SH-280, a small machine with 2,268 keys.

Many non-Latin alphabets have keyboard layouts that have nothing to do with
QWERTY. The Russian layout, for instance, puts the common trigrams ÑÐ²Ð°,
Ð¿ÑÐ¾, and Ð¸ÑÑ on adjacent keys so that they can be typed by rolling the
fingers. The Greek layout, on the other hand, is a variant of QWERTY.

Typewriters were also made for East Asian languages with thousands of
characters, such as Chinese or Japanese. They were not easy to operate, but
professional typists used them for a long time until the development of
electronic word processors in the 1980s.

### [edit] Computer jargon

Several words of the typewriter age have survived into the personal computer
era. Examples include:

  * backspace â a keystroke that moved the cursor backwards one position (on a physical platen, this is the exact opposite of the space key), for the purpose of overtyping a character. This could be for combining characters (e.g. an apostrophe, backspace, and period make an exclamation point - a character missing on some early typewriters), or for correction such as with the correcting tape that developed later.
  * carbon copy â now in its abbreviated form "CC" designating copies of email messages (with no carbon paper involved).
  * carriage return (CR) â indicating an end of line and return to the first column of text.
  * cursor â a marker used to indicate where the next character will be printed.
  * cut and paste â taking text, a table, or an image and pasting it into a document; originally used when such compound documents were created using manual paste up techniques.
  * line feed (LF), aka "newline" â standing for moving the cursor to the next on-screen line of text in a word processor document.
  * Shift â Today being a simple function key to make uppercase letters, different symbols, and whatnot, but in the age of typewriters it meant literally shifting the print carriage to allow a different stamp (such as a D instead of a d) to press into the ribbon and print on a page.
  * tty, short for teletypewriter, is used in Unix-like operating systems to designate a given "terminal".

## [edit] Effect on culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

"Get out! Can't you see I'm busy." Early 20th century humorous postcard; boss
man puts his arm around female typist.

When Remington first started marketing typewriters, the company assumed the
machine would not be used for composing but for transcribing dictation, and
that the person typing would be a woman. Flowers were printed on the casing of
early models to make the machine seem more comfortable for women to use. In
the United States, women often started in the professional workforce as
typists; in fact, according to the 1910 U.S. census, 81 percent of typists
were female. With more women brought out of the home and into offices, there
was some concern about the effects this would have on the morals of society.
The "typewriter girl" became part of the iconography of the early-twentieth-
century office. The "Tijuana bibles"âadult comic books produced in Mexico
for the American market, starting in the 1930sâoften featured women typists.
In one panel, a businessman in a three-piece suit, ogling his secretaryâs
thigh, says, "Miss Higby, are you ready forâahem!âerâdictation?"[1]

The famous quote by Marcus Glenn, "Live by the typewriter, die by the
typewriter!" also dates from this period.

## [edit] Correction methods

<IMG>

<IMG>

An old typewriter on display at the Historic Archive and Museum of Mining in
Pachuca, Mexico

According to the standards taught in secretarial schools in the mid-1900s, a
business letter was supposed to have no mistakes and no visible corrections.
Accuracy was prized as much as speed. Indeed, typing speeds, as scored in
proficiency tests and typewriting speed competitions, included a deduction of
ten words for every mistake. Corrections were, of course, necessary, and
several methods were used.

The traditional method involved the use of a special typewriter eraser made of
hard rubber that contained an abrasive material. It was in the shape of a
thin, flat, disk, approximately 2 in (50 mm) in diameter by 1/8 in (3 mm)
thick, allowing for erasure of individual typed letters. Business letters were
typed on heavyweight, high-rag-content bond paper, not merely to provide a
luxurious appearance, but also to stand up to erasure. Typewriter erasers were
often equipped with a brush for clearing eraser crumbs and paper dust, and
using the brush properly was an important element of typewriting skill (if
erasure detritus fell into the typewriter, a small buildup could cause the
typebars to jam in their narrow supporting grooves).

Erasing a set of carbon copies was particularly difficult, and called for the
use of a device called an eraser shield to prevent the pressure of erasure on
the upper copies from producing carbon smudges on the lower copies.

Paper companies produced a special form of typewriter paper called erasable
bond (for example, Eaton's Corrasable Bond). This incorporated a thin layer of
material that prevented ink from penetrating and was relatively soft and easy
to remove from the page. An ordinary soft pencil eraser could quickly produce
perfect erasures on this kind of paper. However, the same characteristics that
made the paper erasable made the characters subject to smudging due to
ordinary friction and deliberate alteration after the fact, making it
unacceptable for business correspondence, contracts, or any archival use.

In the 1950s and 1960s, correction fluid made its appearance, under brand
names such as Liquid Paper, Wite-Out and Tipp-Ex. This was a kind of opaque,
white, fast-drying paint that produced a fresh white surface onto which a
correction could be retyped. However, when held to the light, the covered-up
characters were visible, as was the patch of dry correction fluid (which was
never perfectly flat, and never a perfect match for the color, texture, and
luster of the surrounding paper). The standard trick for solving this problem
was photocopying the corrected page, but this was possible only with high
quality photocopiers.

Dry correction products (such as correction paper25) under brand names such as
"Ko-Rec-Type" were introduced in the 1970s and functioned like white carbon
paper. A strip of the product was placed over the letters needing correction,
and the incorrect letters were retyped, causing the black character to be
overstruck with a white overcoat. Similar material was soon incorporated in
carbon-film electric typewriter ribbons; like the traditional two-color black-
and-red inked ribbon common on manual typewriters, a black and white
correcting ribbon became commonplace on electric typewriters.

The pinnacle of this kind of technology was the IBM Electronic Typewriter
series. These machines, and similar products from other manufacturers, used a
separate correction ribbon and a character memory. With a single keystroke,
the typewriter was capable of automatically reversing and overstriking the
previous characters with minimal marring of the paper. White cover-up or
plastic lift-off correction ribbons are used with fabric ink or carbon film
typing ribbons, respectively. 2 1

## [edit] Typing speed records and speed contests

During the 1920s through 1940s, typing speed was an important secretarial
qualification and typing contests were popular and often publicized by
typewriter companies as promotional tools.

As of 2005, writer Barbara Blackburn was the fastest English language typist
in the world, according to The Guinness Book of World Records. Using the
Dvorak Simplified Keyboard, she has maintained 150 words per minute (wpm) for
50 minutes, and 170 wpm for shorter periods. She has been clocked at a peak
speed of 212 wpm. Blackburn, who failed her typing class in high school, first
encountered the Dvorak keyboard in 1938, quickly learned to achieve very high
speeds, and occasionally toured giving speed-typing demonstrations during her
secretarial career. She appeared on The David Letterman Show and was deeply
offended by Letterman's comedic treatment of her skill.[16] Blackburn died in
April 2008.[16]

## [edit] Authors and writers who had unusual relationships with typewriters

<IMG>

<IMG>

William Faulkner's Underwood Universal Portable sits in his office at Rowan
Oak, which is now maintained by the University of Mississippi in Oxford as a
museum.

### [edit] Early adopters

The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche used a typewriter in an attempt to stem
his migraine headaches and his incipient blindness.

As he claimed in Mark Twain's Autobiography, Mark Twain was the first
important writer to present a publisher with a typewritten manuscript for The
Adventures of Tom Sawyer (1876). However, typewriter collector and historian
Darryl Rehr states that Twain's memory was faulty and the first novel
submitted in typed form was Life on the Mississippi (1883).[17]

Henry James dictated to a typist.[1]

### [edit] Others

E. E. Cummings may have been the first poet to deliberately use a typewriter
for poetic effect. His grasshopper poem is perhaps the most famous example.

William S. Burroughs wrote in some of his novelsâand possibly
believedâthat "a machine he called the 'Soft Typewriter' was writing our
lives, and our books, into existence," according to a book review in The New
Yorker. And, in the film adaptation of his novel, "Naked Lunch," his
typewriter is a living, insect-like entity (voiced by Canadian actor Peter
Boretski) and actually dictates the book to him.

Writer Zack Helm and director Mark Forster explored the potential mechanics of
the 'Soft Typewriter' philosophy in the movie "Stranger than Fiction" ... in
which the very act of typing up her handwritten notes gives a fiction writer
the power to kill or otherwise manipulate her main character in real life.

Ernest Hemingway used to write his books standing up in front of a Royal
typewriter suitably placed on a tall bookshelf. This typewriter, still on its
bookshelf, is kept in Finca Vigia, Hemingway's Havana house (now a museum)
where he lived until 1960--the year before his death.

Jack Kerouac, a fast typist at 100 words per minute, typed On the Road on a
roll of paper so he wouldn't be interrupted by having to change the paper.
Within two weeks of starting to write On the Road, Kerouac had one single-
spaced paragraph, 120 feet long. Some scholars say the scroll was shelf paper;
others contend it was a Thermo-fax roll; another theory is that the roll
consisted of sheets of architectâs paper taped together.[1] Another fast
typist of the Beat period was Richard Brautigan, who said that he thought out
the plots of his books in detail beforehand, then typed them out at speeds
approaching 90 to 100 words a minute.[18]

Tom Robbins waxes philosophical about the Remington SL3, a typewriter that he
bought to write Still Life with Woodpecker, and eventually does away with it
because it is too complicated and inhuman of a machine for the writing of
poetry.

After completing the novel Beautiful Losers, Leonard Cohen is said to have
flung his typewriter into the Aegean Sea.

### [edit] Late users

Andy Rooney and William F. Buckley Jr. were among many writers who were very
reluctant to switch from typewriters to computers. David Sedaris used a
typewriter to write his essay collections through Me Talk Pretty One Day at
least. Hunter S. Thompson kept a typewriter in his kitchen and is believed to
have written his "Hey, Rube!" column for ESPN.com on a typewriter. He used a
typewriter until his suicide in 2005. William Gibson used a Hermes 2000 model
manual typewriter to write Neuromancer and half of Count Zero before a
mechanical failure and lack of replacement parts forced him to upgrade to an
Apple IIc computer.[3] Theodore Kaczynski, the Unabomber, wrote his manifesto
as well as his letters on a manual typewriter.

## [edit] Typewriters in popular culture

### [edit] In music

  * The composer Leroy Anderson wrote a short piece of music for orchestra and typewriter, which has since been used as the theme for numerous radio programs.
  * The Dolly Parton song "9 to 5" features typewriter noises as percussion.
  * The Pulitzer Prizeâwinning musical comedy How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying (music and lyrics by Frank Loesser) is a satire set in the world of big business and features typewriter sound effects in the song A Secretary is Not a Toy.
  * The Guess Who used typewriter keys on the track "One Way Road to Hell" on their 1974 album Road Food.
  * The Tom Tom Club used the clacking keys of a typewriter to open its 1981 single Wordy Rappinghood.
  * The Winnipeg band Poor Tree incorporates typewriters into its music. Two to three members would type a poem while reading them at the same time, interlocking the lines, words and sounds.
  * On the album Taking Tiger Mountain By Strategy, Brian Eno takes a typewriter solo in the song China My China.
  * Multi-instrumentalist and composer Yann Tiersen has used the typewriter as a percussion instrument in a number of his compositions, notably "Pas si simple" on his 1996 album Rue des Cascades.
  * On the hidden track 'Writer's Block' from 2000's Binaural Pearl Jam's Eddie Vedder can be heard mashing his typewriter keys over and over.
  * A suite of songs entitled "Green Typewriters" is on The Olivia Tremor Control's album Dusk At Cubist Castle, and the sounds of typewriters can be heard in a few of the sections.

### [edit] In film

  * Typewriters in songs and ambient typewriter sounds are present throughout the 1985 movie Brazil.
  * Typewriters are foundational in the soundtrack for the 2007 film Atonement.
  * In the 1982 movie Tron, when the Master Control Program's defenses are destroyed, he reverts to his core form of an old man. The sound of typewriters is heard, associating him with obsolete technology.

### [edit] The Internet

  * Typewriters are used to write typecast blogs in which text is typed on a manual typewriter and then scanned for posting on blogs, a practice called typecasting.

### [edit] Television

  * In the very popular television show Murder, She Wrote, Jessica Fletcher, played by Angela Lansbury is seen in the opening credits and in a few scenes throughout several episodes in different seasons using a typewriter to type her murder mystery novels.

## [edit] Forensic identification

Identifying the make and model of typewriters is part of questioned document
examination. Because of the tolerances of the mechanical parts, slight
variation in the alignment of the letters and their uneven wear, each
typewriter has its individual "signature" or "fingerprint", allowing a
typewritten document to be tracked back to the typewriter it was produced on.
The ribbon ink can also be analyzed.

Typewriter analysis was used in the Leopold and Loeb and Alger Hiss cases. In
the Eastern Bloc, typewriters (together with printing presses, copy machines,
and later computer printers) were a controlled technology, with secret police
in charge of maintaining files of the typewriters and their owners. (In the
Soviet Union, the organization in charge of typewriters was the First
Department of the KGB.) This posed a significant risk for dissidents and
samizdat authors.

## [edit] Gallery

<IMG>

Fr. Francisco Azevedo's 1861 typewriter

<IMG>

The Pterotype, John Pratt's 1865 typewriter.

<IMG>

The Hansen Writing Ball, invented in 1865. This model is from 1870

<IMG>

1868 patent drawing for the Sholes, Glidden, and Soule typewriter.  
<IMG>

Hammond 1B typewriter, invented 1870s, manufactured 1881.

<IMG>

Types in a 1920s typewriter  
## [edit] See also

Office

  * Carbon paper
  * Correction paper
  * Duplicating machines
  * Liquid Paper
  * Typewriter desk
  * Word processing
  * Writing

Printers and Fonts

  * Daisy wheel printer
  * Teleprinter
  * Type
  * Typeface

Alphanumeric keyboards

  * Alphanumeric keyboard
  * AZERTY
  * Chorded keyboard
  * Dvorak Keyboard
  * Keys
  * Letter (alphabet)
  * Modifier key
  * Projection keyboard
  * QWERTY
  * Typewriter keyboard

Corporations and typewriters

  * IBM Executive series typewriter
  * IBM Selectric typewriter
  * Smith Corona
  * Xerox

Use as Computer peripherals

  * Frieden Flexowriter
  * JOHNNIAC
  * UNIVAC 1102

Non-latin typewriters

  * Chinese typewriter
  * Japanese typewriter

  
## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d e f g [1] Acocella, Joan, "The Typing Life: How writers used to write", The New Yorker, April 9, 2007, a review of The Iron Whim: A Fragmented History of Typewriting (Cornell) 2007, by Darren Wershler-Henry
  2. ^ "Typewriter history". precision-dynamics.com.au. http://web.archive.org/web/20070825123932/http://www.precision-dynamics.com.au/typewriters/history.html. Retrieved on 2006-03-10.
  3. ^ "William Austin Burt's Typographer 1829". Science Museum. http://sciencemuseum.org.uk/onlinestuff/stories/typewriters.aspx. Retrieved on 2006-03-10.
  4. ^ Utterback, James M. (1994). Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation. Harvard Business School Press. ISBN 0875847404. http://books.google.com/books?id=oT-3oLvR1_EC. , p.3
  5. ^ "Typewriter and Inventors". http://www.1st-in-typewriters.com/typewriter_inventor.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-12.
  6. ^ "Early Office Museum: Antique Typewriters". http://www.officemuseum.com/typewriters.htm. Retrieved on 2006-03-10.
  7. ^ Otto Burghagen, Die Schreibmaschine. Illustrierte Beschreibung aller gangbaren Schreibmaschinen nebst grÃ¼ndlicher Anleitung zum Arbeiten auf sÃ¤mtlichen Systemen. Hamburg 1898.
  8. ^ Dieter Eberwein, Nietzsches Schreibkugel. Ein Blick auf Nietzsches Schreibmaschinenzeit durch die Restauration der Schreibkugel. Eberwein-Typoskriptverlag, Schauenburg 2005.
  9. ^ Johanne Agerskov, Hvem er Skrivekuglens Opfinder?. KÃ¸benhavn 1925.
  10. ^ a b [2]Reproduction of advertisement for Noiseless typewriters, with list of models and diagram of typebar mechanism
  11. ^ Ellen, David (2005). Scientific Examination of Documents. CRC Press. pp. 106â107. ISBN 0849339251.
  12. ^ Liebowitz, S. J.; Stephen E. Margolis (1990). "The Fable of the Keys". Journal of Law & Economics (The University of Chicago) XXXIII (April 1990). http://wwwpub.utdallas.edu/~liebowit/keys1.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-18. "This article examines the history, economics, and ergonomics of the typewriter keyboard. We show that David's version of the history of the market's rejection of Dvorak does not report the true history, and we present evidence that the continued use of Qwerty is efficient given the current understanding of keyboard design.".
  13. ^ David, P.A. (1986): Understanding the Economics of QWERTY: the Necessity of History. In: Parker, William N.: Economic History and the Modern Economist. Basil Blackwell, New York and Oxford.
  14. ^ David, P.A. (1986): Understanding the Economics of QWERTY: the Necessity of History. In: Parker, William N.: Economic History and the Modern Economist. Basil Blackwell, New York and Oxford.
  15. ^ "Consider QWERTY". http://home.earthlink.net/~dcrehr/whyqwert.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-18. "QWERTY's effect, by reducing those annoying clashes, was to speed up typing rather than slow it down."
  16. ^ a b "Barbara Blackburn, the World's Fastest Typist". http://web.syr.edu/~rcranger/blackburn.htm. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  17. ^ "The First Typewriter". Rehr, Darryl. http://home.earthlink.net/~dcrehr/firsttw.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-16.
  18. ^ Foster, Edward H., Richard Brautigan, Twayne 1983.

### [edit] Patents

  * US79265 \-- Type Writer Machine

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Typewriter  
  * Antique Typewriter Collecting, History & Resources for the Collector
  * Early Typewriter Collectors' Association
  * The Classic Typewriter Page
  * Robert, Paul (2001). "The Virtual Typewriter Museum". http://www.typewritermuseum.org/index.html. Many photos and closeups of machines, histories of early machines, historical photos of typewriters being used.
  * Martin Howard's Antique Typewriters
  * Mr. Martin's Typewriter Museum
  * The Portable Typewriter Reference Site
  * Nick Beland's Typewriter Pages

v â¢ d â¢ e

Typewriters  
Manufacturers

E. Remington and Sons Â· IBM Â· Oliver Typewriter Company Â· Olivetti Â· Royal
Typewriter Company Â· Smith Corona Â· Underwood Typewriter Company  
Models

Â· Blickensderfer typewriter Â· Hansen Writing Ball Â· IBM Selectric
typewriter  
Inventors

James Densmore Â· Carlos Glidden Â· Rasmus Malling-Hansen Â· Henry Mill Â·
Christopher Sholes Â· James Fields Smathers Â· Samuel W. Soule  
Elements

Platen Â· QWERTY Â· Typebar Â· Typewriter ribbon  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Typewriter"

Categories: Media articles needing expert attention | Typewriters | 1843
introductions

Hidden categories: Articles needing expert attention since November 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
March 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * IÃ±upiak
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * à·à·à¶à·à¶½
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 April 2009, at 10:14 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



