
# Demagogy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Demagogy (also demagoguery) (Ancient Greek Î´Î·Î¼Î±Î³ÏÎ³Î¯Î±, from
Î´á¿Î¼Î¿Ï dÄmos "people" and á¼Î³ÎµÎ¹Î½ agein "to lead") refers to a
political strategy for gaining political power by appealing to the popular
prejudices, emotions, fears and expectations of the public â typically via
impassioned rhetoric and propaganda, and often using nationalist or populist
themes.

## Contents

  * 1 Uses and definitions
  * 2 History and Examples
  * 3 Methods
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Uses and definitions

The early 20th century American social critic and humorist H. L. Mencken,
known for his "definitions" of terms, defined a demagogue as "one who will
preach doctrines he knows to be untrue to men he knows to be idiots."

As George Bernard Shaw said:

> But though there is no difference in this respect between the best demagogue
and the worst, both of them having to present their cases equally in terms of
melodrama, there is all the difference in the world between the statesman who
is humbugging the people into allowing him to do the will of God, in whatever
disguise it may come to him, and one who is humbugging them into furthering
his personal ambition and the commercial interests of the plutocrats who own
the newspapers and support him on reciprocal terms.

Max Weber:

> Political leadership in the form of the free 'demagogue' who grew from the
soil of the city state is of greater concern to us; like the city state, the
demagogue is peculiar to the Occident and especially to Mediterranean culture.
Furthermore, political leadership in the form of the parliamentary 'party
leader' has grown on the soil of the constitutional state, which is also
indigenous only to the Occident.

Though this definition emphasizes the use of lying and falsehoods, skilled
demagogues often need to use only special emphasis by which an uncritical
listener will be led to draw the desired conclusion themselves. Moreover, a
demagogue may well believe his or her own arguments (for example, there are
good reasons to assume that Adolf Hitler\--certainly one of the most
successful demagogues in history-- sincerely believed his own anti-Jewish
diatribes).

## [edit] History and Examples

Athenian democracy relied upon Demagogues in its political system. "These
impractical [political] schemes reflect at once Plato's discontent with the
demagogy then prevalent in Athens and in his personal predilection for the
aristocratic form of government"[1] The Demagogues learned their rhetoric and
law from the Sophists.

A famous usage was by the aging Erich Ludendorff, who was for a time a strong
supporter of the early rise of Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany. After learning
of Hitler's appointment as Chancellor, he expressed his disappointment to
German President Paul von Hindenburg [1][2]:

    "By appointing Hitler Chancellor of the Reich, you have handed over our sacred German Fatherland to one of the greatest demagogues of all time. I prophesy to you this evil man will plunge our Reich into the abyss and will inflict immeasurable woe on our nation. Future generations will curse you in your grave for this action."
Hitler indeed would become regarded as perhaps the epitome of a demagogue,
having successfully risen to power through appeals to the ethnic and
nationalistic prejudices and vanities of the German people.

## [edit] Methods

The methods listed are all Fallacies:

Apples and oranges â mixing of incomparable quantities. For example, "our
government has increased social spending by 5 billion dollars, while the
previous government increased it only by 0.4 percent." The latter sounds like
less, but one cannot be sure without an absolute value.

Half-truth â making statements that are true only in a strict and relatively
meaningless sense. For example, "the opposition has accused us of cutting
foreign aid, but actually our government spends more than 500 million dollars
in foreign aid," not mentioning that (adjusted for inflation) the allocated
funds have in fact gone down.

False authority â relying on the general authority of a person who is not
proficient in the discussed topic. For example, "the professor read my book,
and liked it very much," omitting the fact that it was a professor of
chemistry who read a book on history.

False dilemma â assuming that there are only two possible opinions on a
given topic. For example, "You're either with us or against us...," ignoring
the possibility of a neutral position or divergence.

Demonization â identifying others as a mortal threat. Often this involves
scapegoating â blaming others for one's own problems. This is often advanced
by using vague terms to identify the opposition group and then stereotyping
that group. This allows the demagogue to exaggerate this group's influence and
ascribe any trait to them by identifying that trait in any individual in the
group. This method can be aided by constructing a false dilemma that portrays
opposition groups as having a value system that is the polar opposite of one's
own, as opposed to simply having different priorities. This method was
incorporated by the Nazi regime to gain the general support of the public when
it began to initiate its anti-Semitic policies.

Straw man â mischaracterizing the opposing position and then arguing against
the mischaracterization.

Loaded question â posing a question with an implied position that the
opponent does not have, e.g. "Do you still beat your wife?"

Unrelated facts â bringing unrelated facts that sound in favor of the
speaker's agenda. For example, marking a vegetable or cereal product as
"cholesterol free". Since cholesterol is only found in animal products, such
labeling does not actually distinguish this product from similar competitors.

Emotional appeal or personal attack â attempting to bring a discussion to an
emotional level. For example, "Everyone is against me!", "Can't I be right
just once?", "You're stupid!", or just the classic retort "Shut up!"

## [edit] See also

  * Big Lie
  * Brownshirt tactics
  * Fear mongering
  * Loaded question
  * Fallacy
  * Polemic
  * Populism
  * Social dominance orientation
  * Sophism
  * Daisy Girl

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Catholic_Encyclopedia_(1913)/Plato_and_Platonism

## [edit] References

  * B. Katzenelenbaum, "Demagogiya â opyt klassifikacii", Nauka i zhizn 9 (1989); in Russian; available online (accessed July 10, 2006).
  * S. Alinsky, "Rules for Radicals: A Pragmatic Primer for Realistic Radicals" (1971) Random House, ISBN 0-394-44341-1, Vintage books paperback: ISBN 0-679-72113-4

## [edit] External links

  * C. Chalquist, "Demagogy Checklist", http://www.terrapsych.com/demagogy.html
  * P.M. Carpenter, "What Qualifies as Demagoguery?, http://hnn.us/articles/7603.html

Sister project Look up demagogy in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demagogy"

Categories: Linguistics | Propaganda techniques

Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 23:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



