
# Qilin

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Kirin (disambiguation).

For the county in Yunnan, see Qilin District.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A qilin of the Qing dynasty in Beijing's Summer Palace

<IMG>

<IMG>

A painting by the court artist depicting one of Zheng He's giraffes in 1414.
The painting was titled "Qilin Brings Serenity (rui) Ode"

The Qilin (Chinese: éºéº; pinyin: qÃ­lÃ­n; Wade-Giles: ch'ilin), also
spelled Kylin, Kirin, or Ká»³ lÃ¢n (Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese) is a
mythical hooved Chinese chimerical creature known throughout various East
Asian cultures, and is said to appear in conjunction with the arrival of a
sage. It is a good omen that brings rui (Chinese: ç; pinyin: ruÃ¬; roughly
translated as "serenity" or "prosperity"). It is often depicted with what
looks like fire all over its body.

## Contents

  * 1 Name in other languages
  * 2 Origins
  * 3 The nature of the beast
  * 4 Variations
    * 4.1 Ming dynasty example
    * 4.2 A Qing dynasty example
    * 4.3 In Japan
    * 4.4 Turko-Mongol Iran
  * 5 Contemporary media references
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References

  
## [edit] Name in other languages

The Qilin is known in other languages as: Sabitun Sabintu (in Manchu),
Hariharipo Hariharimo (in Tibetan), ÐÐ¸Ð»Ð¸Ð³ÑÑÐ¹ ÐÑÐ»ÑÐ³ÑÑÐ¹
ÐÓ©ÑÓ©Ó©Ñ (in Mongolian), Ká»³ lÃ¢n (in Vietnamese), Girin (in Korean),
Kirin (in Japanese) and Keilun (Cantonese).

## [edit] Origins

The earliest references to the Qilin are in the 5th century BC book Zuo
Zhuan.[1][2] The Qilin made appearances in a variety of subsequent Chinese
works of history and fiction. At one point, however, it became identified with
the giraffe, and even today, the giraffe is called a "kirin" in Korean and
Japanese.

The Qilin became a stylised representation of the giraffe in Ming dynasty. It
is known that on Zheng He's voyage to East Africa (landing, among other
places, in modern-day Kenya), the fleet brought back two giraffes to Beijing.
It is also known that these two giraffes were referred to as "Qilins". The
Emperor proclaimed the giraffes magical creatures, whose capture signalled the
greatness of his power.

The identification between the Qilin and the giraffe is supported by some
attributes of the Qilin, including its vegetarian and quiet nature. Its
reputed ability to "walk on grass without disturbing it" may be related to the
giraffe's long legs. Also the Qilin is described as having antlers like a deer
and scales like a dragon or fish; since the giraffe has horn-like "ossicones"
on its head and a tessellated coat pattern that looks like scales it is easy
to draw an analogy between the two creatures.

It is unlikely that giraffes and qilin were regarded as the same creature in
pre-modern times however. For example, typical depictions of the qilin have
much shorter necks than giraffes. However, the Chinese character éº and éº
both carry Chinese radical é¹¿, suggesting that it was originally a type of
deer, or perhaps an antelope.

## [edit] The nature of the beast

Although it looks fearsome, the Qilin only punishes the wicked. It can walk on
grass yet not trample the blades and it can also walk on water. Being a
peaceful creature, its diet does not include flesh. It takes great care when
it walks never to tread on any living thing, and it is said to appear only in
areas ruled by a wise and benevolent leader (some say even if this area is
only a house). It is normally gentle but can become fierce if a pure person is
threatened by a sinner, spouting flames from its mouth and exercising other
fearsome powers that vary from story to story.

Some stories state that the Qilin is a sacred pet (or familiar) of the
deities. Therefore, in the hierarchy of dances performed by the Chinese (Lion
Dance, Dragon Dance, Phoenix Dance, etc.), the Qilin ranks highly; second only
to the Dragon and Phoenix who are the highest.

Kirin is an excellent animal to be named after.

In the Qilin Dance, movements are characterised by fast, powerful strokes of
the head. The Qilin Dance is often regarded as the hardest dance to perform
due to the weight of the head, stances and the emphasis on "fÇ jÃ¬n"
(traditional Chinese: æ³å) â outbursts of strength/power/energy.

## [edit] Variations

There are variations in the appearance of the qilin, even as seen in a single
country such as China, owing to cultural differences between dynasties and
regions.

### [edit] Ming dynasty example

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Qilin in the dragon, fish, and ox style of the Ming Dynasty. Note the pair
of horns.

In the Ming dynasty of China (1368â1644) the Qilin is represented as an
oxen-hooved animal with a dragon-like head surmounted by a pair of horns and
flame-like head ornaments.

### [edit] A Qing dynasty example

The Qilin of China's subsequent Manchurian dominated Qing dynasty
(1644â1911) is a much more fanciful animal. Manchurian depictions of the
Qilin show a creature with the head of a dragon, the antlers of a deer, the
skin and scales of a fish, the hooves of an ox and tail of a lion. (An image
is shown above as a bronze sculpture.)

### [edit] In Japan

In Japanese, the Qilin is called Kirin. Japanese art tends to depict the Qilin
as more deer-like than in Chinese art. Kirin Brewery Company, Ltd. is named
after the animal, and the word Kirin has also come to be used in modern
Japanese for a giraffe. It's depicted as a dragon shaped like a European-style
unicorn, only with a horse's tail instead of a lion's.

In the Post-Qin Chinese hierarchy of mythological animals, the Qilin is ranked
as the third most powerful creature (after the dragon and phoenix), but in
Japan, the Kirin occupies the top spot. This is following the style of the
ancient Chinese, as QiLin, before the Qin Dynasty, was ranked higher than the
Dragon or Phoenix. In fact, during the Zhou Dynasty, the Dragon is the third,
the Phoenix rank second.[citation needed]

### [edit] Turko-Mongol Iran

In Ilkhanid and Timurid Mongol-Persian mythological miniatures, the buraq was
portrayed in a style reminiscent of the Chinese qilin, reflecting the Chinese
background of painters who introduced watercolor techniques to Iran and
initiated several medieval schools of Persian miniature painting.

## [edit] Contemporary media references

  * In the Dungeons & Dragons universe, the ki-rin are monsters in the Oriental Adventures setting, cited as an example of how D&D uses influences from many places.[3]
  * In the Twelve Kingdoms anime series, based on the fantasy novels by Fuyumi Ono, the monarch of each kingdom is chosen by a kirin, who then becomes his (or her) principal counselor. The kirin's name is derived from the name of the kingdom plus either "ki" (male) or "rin" (female).
  * The kirin appears in the video game series Final Fantasy. Kirin is one of the Espers, or summoned monsters, in Final Fantasy VI. Kirin also makes an appearance as the strongest of the "gods" in Final Fantasy XI.
  * It appears in the game SaGa Frontier as a playable character named Kylin, the only master of "Space Magic."
  * The Legendary PokÃ©mon Arceus is based on the Qilin.
  * In Digimon, Kudamon's Ultimate form, Qilinmon, is named after and based on the Qilin.
  * In Golden Sun: Lost age, Kirin appears as a summon option when two or more fire djinn are equipped
  * In the computer game Guild Wars Factions, players encounter both helpful Kirin charged with safeguarding certain areas, as well as several tainted Kirin as enemies.
  * In the Magic: The Gathering set Saviors of Kamigawa, there are five Kirin, one for each color of Magic: Infernal Kirin, Skyfire Kirin, Cloudhoof Kirin, Celestial Kirin, and Bounteous Kirin.
  * The Kirin is one of the mythical beasts that passes through Count D's mythical petshop in Pet Shop of Horrors. It is said to have changed the fate of the world several times by choosing a worthy leader for a country. The Kirin's inability to walk on living beings is compared to the ancient, crippling Chinese practice of footbinding.
  * The Kirin in the manga Genju no Seiza is the only deity who can tell which baby the constantly reincarnating Holy King has taken host of. He is blind and deaf, but able to sense thoughts, and thus unpopular in the palace despite the respect given to him.
  * In Takashi Miike's The Great Yokai War the hero is bitten during a street festival by the dancer's kirin head. According to local custom that made him the next "kirin rider."
  * In the popular manga series Naruto, the Sasuke Uchiha's ultimate attack is called Kirin and takes the form of the legendary beast.
  * In the free-to-play MMORPG, Perfect World, one of the classes a player can create, the werefox, has a humanoid Kirin form. Kirins are also available as high end mounts players can ride on.
  * In the Otori Tales series, written by Lian Hearn, a kirin is brought to the Three Countries in the last book of the series, The Harsh Cry of the Heron.
  * In Gosei Sentai Dairanger, Kazu of the Heavenly Time Star, uses his Chi to manifest the power of the Kirin to become the Kirinranger and pilots the Mythical Chi Beast is Sei-Kirin. The Sei-Kirin was then adapted to the Dairanger's 1994 counter part, the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers. However, the Kirin was renamed as the Griffin Thunderzord. Despite the Sei-Kirin having no resemblance to a griffin, the name was changed for American audiences with no explanation. It is commonly thought this change was made because of American audience's unfamiliarity with Chinese mythology.
  * In the Yu-Gi-Oh! Trading Card Game a Monster Card called Cyber Kirin is based on the Qilin.
  * In the game Monster Hunter Freedom one and two there is a Kirin. It is portrayed more as a unicorn though.
  * In Super Robot Taisen: Original Generation 2 for Game Boy Advance (and it's enchanced PS2 remake), one of game's antagonists, Axel Almer, uses "Code: Kirin" as his ultimate attack. So does leader of Shadow-Mirrors, Vindel Mauser ("Kirin Ne Plus Ultra")

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Qilin  
  * Chimera
  * Shaanxi Kylins of the Chinese Basketball Association
  * Unicorn
  * Chinese dragon
  * Yali, a Hindu mythological beast.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Chinese Literature - Chunqiu-Zuozhuan æ¥ç§å·¦å³, Gongyangzhuan å ¬ç¾å³, Guliangzhuan ç©æ¢å³ (www.chinaknowledge.de)
  2. ^ å¤å»ºä¸çä¸»è¦è£ é¥°çº¹æ ·ââéºéº å¤å»ºå­æææ¯ï¼ä½è :å¾åé
  3. ^ Jonathan Rubin, "Farewell to the Dungeon Master: How D&D creator Gary Gygax changed geekdom forever," Slate (March 6, 2008).

v â¢ d â¢ e

Chinese mythology  
Overview topics

Creation myth Â· Astrology Â· Dragons Â· Religion (Folk religion) Â· Deities
Â· Pangu  
Major entities

Deities Â· Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors Â· Eight Immortals  
Creatures

XuÃ¡n WÇ Â· QÄ«ng LÃ³ng Â· BÃ¡i HÇ Â· ZhÅ« QuÃ¨ Â· Qilin Â· Fenghuang Â·
Huli jing Â· Shi  
Places

Xuanpu Â· Yaochi Â· Fusang Â· Queqiao Â· Penglai Â· Longmen Â· Diyu  
Literary sources

Shan Hai Jing Â· Fengshen Yanyi Â· Legend of the White Snake Â· Strange
Stories from a Chinese Studio Â· Journey to the West Â· Fairy Couple  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Cryptozoology and cryptobotany  
Overview  
Core topics

Cryptid Â· List of cryptids Â· Homin Â· Zoology Â· Botany Â· Megafauna
discovered in modern times Â· Pseudoscience  
Cryptozoologists

Bernard Heuvelmans Â· Karl Shuker Â· Jonathan Downes Â· Jon-Erik Beckjord Â·
John Bindernagel Â· Richard Freeman Â· Loren Coleman Â· Alexandr Mikhailovych
Kondratov Â· Roy Mackal Â· Ivan T. Sanderson Â· Organizations  
Books and TV

Animal X Â· Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious World Â· Destination Truth Â·
Fortean TV Â· Is It Real? Â· Lost Tapes Â· Monster Quest Â· On the Track of
Unknown Animals Â· The X Creatures Â· Sci Fi Investigates Â· The Secret
Saturdays Â· Weird Travels  
Zoological cryptids  
Africa

Asanbosam Â· Bili ape Â· Deinotherium Â· Emela-ntouka Â· Ennedi tiger Â· Gambo
Â· Grootslang Â· Inkanyamba Â· Kasai rex Â· Kongamato Â· Mbielu-Mbielu-Mbielu
Â· Mokele-mbembe Â· Malawi terror beast Â· Mamlambo Â· Nandi Bear Â· Nguma-
monene Â· Pygmy elephant Â· Trunko Â· Zanzibar Leopard  
Asia

Almas Â· Akkorokamui Â· Ahool Â· Barmanou Â· Batutut Â· Bergman's bear Â·
Brosno dragon Â· Bukit Timah Monkey Man Â· Buru Â· Caspian Tiger Â· Cat-fox Â·
Con rit Â· Devil Bird Â· Elasmotherium Â· Hibagon Â· Hokkaido Wolf Â· HonshÅ«
Wolf Â· Isshii Â· Javan Tiger Â· Kappa Â· Killer badger Â· Kting Voar Â·
Kusshii Â· Lake Tianchi Monster Â· Lake Van Monster Â· Mongolian Death Worm Â·
Monkey-man of Delhi Â· Orang Pendek Â· Pygmy elephant Â· Qilin Â· Ropen Â·
Tsuchinoko Â· Woolly mammoth Â· Yeren Â· Yeti  
Australasia/Oceania

Amomongo Â· Blue Mountains panther Â· Bunyip Â· Ebu Gogo Â· Gippsland phantom
cat Â· Globster Â· Homo floresiensis Â· Manaul Â· Maero Â· Megalania Â· Moa Â·
Moehau Â· Queensland Tiger Â· Siyokoy Â· Taniwha Â· Thylacine Â· Thylacoleo Â·
Tikbalang Â· Waitoreke Â· Yowie Â· ZuiyÅ Maru  
Europe

Afanc Â· Ayia Napa sea monster Â· Beast of GÃ©vaudan Â· British big cats Â·
Canvey Island Monster Â· Dahu Â· Dobhar-chu Â· Each uisge Â· Eachy Â·
Elwedritsche Â· Fear liath Â· Giglioli's Whale Â· High-finned sperm whale Â·
Jenny Haniver Â· Kellas cat Â· Kraken Â· LagarfljÃ³ts Worm Â· Lariosauro Â·
Lindworm Â· Loch Ness Monster Â· Morag Â· Morgawr Â· Muc-sheilch Â· Owlman Â·
Sea bishop Â· Sea monk Â· Seljordsormen Â· Skvader Â· StorsjÃ¶odjuret Â·
Stronsay Beast Â· Tatzelwurm Â· Teggie Â· Wolpertinger  
North America

Altamaha-ha Â· Bear Lake Monster Â· Beast of Bray Road Â· Beast of Busco Â·
Bessie Â· Bigfoot Â· Cadborosaurus willsi Â· Champ Â· Chessie Â· Chupacabra Â·
Dover Demon Â· Flatwoods monster Â· Fiji mermaid Â· Fouke Monster Â· Fur-
bearing Trout Â· Goatman Â· Hodag Â· Homo gardarensis Â· Hoop snake Â· Iliamna
Lake Monster Â· Jackalope Â· Jersey Devil Â· Kingstie Â· Lake Worth monster Â·
Lizard Man of Scape Ore Swamp Â· Loveland frog Â· Lusca Â· MacFarlane's Bear
Â· Manipogo Â· Melon heads Â· Menehune Â· Minnesota Iceman Â· Momo the Monster
Â· Mothman Â· Mussie Â· Ogopogo Â· Old Yellow Top Â· Ozark Howler Â· Piasa Â·
Pope Lick Monster Â· Shunka Warakin Â· Sidehill gouger Â· Skunk Ape Â·
Thunderbird Â· Trinity Alps giant salamander Â· Turtle Lake Monster Â· Waheela
Â· Wampus cat  
South America

Ameranthropoides loysi Â· Andean Wolf Â· Bloop Â· Cherufe Â· Chupacabra Â·
Hombre Gato Â· Living dinosaurs Â· Giant anaconda Â· Gnome Â· Mapinguari Â·
MinhocÃ£o Â· Mono Grande Â· Mylodon Â· Nahuelito Â· Peuchen Â· Yacumama  
Botanical cryptids  
Man-eating tree Â· Umdhlebi Â· Vegetable Lamb of Tartary  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qilin"

Categories: Chinese mythology | Chinese legendary creatures | Japanese
legendary creatures | Legendary mammals | Fictional giraffes

Hidden categories: Articles containing Chinese language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since December
2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 20:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



