
# Allen Carr

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the self-help writer. For the English comedian, see Alan
Carr. For film producer and manager, see Allan Carr.

Allen Carr  
<IMG>  
Allen Carr  
Born Allen Carr  
2 September 1934(1934-09-02)  
London, England  
Died 29 November 2006 (aged 72)  
MÃ¡laga, Spain[1]  
Occupation Author, Therapist  
Nationality English  
Genres Self-help  
Notable work(s) The Easy Way to Stop Smoking  
Official website  
Allen Carr (2 September 1934 â 29 November 2006) was most notable as the
author of books on how to stop smoking (having stopped smoking after 31 years
as a five-pack-per-day chain smoker) and, as he stressed, escape nicotine
addiction.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Philosophy
    * 1.2 Easyway
  * 2 Personal life
  * 3 Publications
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

London-born Carr started smoking while doing National Service aged 18. He
qualified as an accountant in 1958. Carr finally quit smoking in 1983, aged
48, after seeing a hypnotherapist. However, Carr claimed that it wasn't the
hypnotherapy itself that enabled him to quit, but that the visit crystallised
in his mind just how easy it was to stop and so released him to follow an
overwhelming desire to explain his method to as many smokers as
possible.[citation needed]

### [edit] Philosophy

Carr teaches that, contrary to their perception, smokers do not receive a
boost from smoking a cigarette: smoking only relieves the withdrawal symptoms
from the previous cigarette, which in turn creates more withdrawal symptoms
once it is finished. In this way the drug addiction perpetuates itself. He
asserted that the "relief" smokers feel on lighting a cigarette, the feeling
of being "back to normal", is the feeling experienced by non-smokers all the
time. So that smokers, when they light a cigarette are really trying to
achieve a state that non-smokers enjoy their whole lives. He further asserted
that withdrawal symptoms are actually created by doubt and fear in the mind of
the ex-smoker, and therefore that stopping smoking is not as traumatic as is
commonly assumed, if that doubt and fear can be removed.

At Allen Carr Clinics during quit smoking sessions, smokers are allowed to
continue smoking while their doubts and fears are removed, with the aim of
encouraging and developing the mindset of a non-smoker before the final
cigarette is even extinguished. A further reason for allowing smokers to smoke
while undergoing counseling, is that Carr believed it was more difficult to
convince a smoker to quit, until they understood the mechanism of "the
nicotine trap". This is because their attention is diminished while they
continue to believe it is traumatic and extremely difficult to quit and
maintain the belief that they are dependent on nicotine.

Another assertion, unique to Carr's method is that willpower is not required
to quit smoking. This is because it takes no willpower to stop doing something
that an individual has no desire to do, which is the realization smokers come
to once their doubt and fear about stopping has gone. When this is combined
with the understanding that the actual physical withdrawal from nicotine is so
inconsequential as to be minor and therefore almost insignificant, it enables
smokers to finally break free. Smokers using willpower who do not come to
these realizations, allow the mental "withdrawal" or anguish to overpower
them, resulting in physical manifestations (e.g. sweaty palms, panic feelings,
irritation, flushes etc.). It is precisely because many smokers believe these
symptoms are caused by lack of nicotine (i.e. physical withdrawal) and not by
their psychological dependency and feeling of deprivation, that they are not
successful at quitting.

His contention was that fear of "giving up" is what causes the majority of
smokers to continue smoking, therefore necessitating the smoker's perpetuation
of the illusion of genuine enjoyment, as a moral justification of the inherent
absurdity of smoking in the face of overwhelming medical and scientific
evidence of its dangers.

Carr was very specific and analytical in his use of language. Thus he rarely
referred to "giving up smoking" (preferring "stopping smoking") as the very
words "giving up" hint at the suggestion that a smoker would be sacrificing
something that was worth having; instead of freeing themselves. Such analyses
were a cornerstone to his approach to overcoming the "nicotine trap" which was
both subtle and pervasive.

### [edit] Easyway

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Easy Way to Stop Smoking by Allen Carr

Carr left his accountancy job in 1983 and set up his first Easyway clinic to
help other addicts. He wrote ten bestsellers including his 1985 hit The Easy
Way To Stop Smoking, which topped the non-fiction book charts in nine
countries and remains the highest selling book on quitting smoking worldwide.
The success of the original London clinic, through word-of-mouth and direct
recommendation, has led to a worldwide network of 100 Easyway clinics in 35
countries plus the production of audio CDs and DVDs. Based on their full
money-back guarantee, Carr's clinics claim a 90 percent success rate in
helping smokers stop. Celebrity clients include Richard Branson, Anthony
Hopkins, Ashton Kutcher, Britney Spears, Ellen DeGeneres, and Charlotte
Church.

EasyWay has now been released for Nintendo DS and iPod Touch / iPhone

All Allen Carr's Clinics are run by dedicated therapists who were once smokers
and used Allen's method to quit smoking. All therapists are Members of the
Association of Allen Carr Therapists International (MAACTI).

Carr also wrote a number of other How to books, on subjects such as losing
weight and controlling alcohol consumption. The combined publishing effort and
global clinic network built him a Â£120 million fortune[2].

## [edit] Personal life

In late July 2006 it was revealed that he had been diagnosed with lung cancer
at the age of 71[3]. The following month he revealed that it was terminal and
his life expectancy was about nine months[4]. Carr said: "Since I smoked my
final cigarette, 23 years ago, I have been the happiest man in the world. I
still feel the same way today.â Carr wrote to Tony Blair, urging the UK
Government and NHS to accept his method, saying that the âpowerful
influenceâ of lobbyists working for nicotine replacement firms had turned
them against him.

Carr died as a result of his lung cancer on 29 November 2006 at his home near
MÃ¡laga, Spain[1].

Allen Carr is survived by his second wife, Joyce, his four children, two
stepchildren, 11 grandchildren, and one great-grandchild.

## [edit] Publications

  * The Easy Way to Stop Smoking
  * The Easy Way to Stop Drinking
  * The Only Way to Stop Smoking Permanently
  * Allen Carr's Easy Way for Women to Stop Smoking
  * Allen Carr's Easy Way to Control Alcohol
  * Allen Carr's Easyweigh to Lose Weight
  * The Easy Way to Enjoy Flying
  * The Easy Way to Stop Worrying
  * Allen Carr's Easy Way to Be Successful
  * The Little Book of Quitting
  * The Illustrated Easy Way to Stop Smoking
  * Scandal

## [edit] See also

  * Tobacco smoking
  * Smoking cessation

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b "Allen Carr dies from lung cancer". BBC. 29 November 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/6194670.stm. Retrieved on 2006-11-29.
  2. ^ Allen Carr dies of lung cancer | The Sun |HomePage|News
  3. ^ "Allen Carr fighting lung cancer". BBC. 30 July 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/5229048.stm. Retrieved on 2006-07-30.
  4. ^ "Quit smoking guru Allen Carr: 'I have nine months to live'". Daily Mail. 14 August 2006. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/health/healthmain.html?in_article_id=399517&in_page_id=1774. Retrieved on 2006-08-23.

## [edit] External links

  * Allen Carr's web site
  * Allen Carr's books legally available free to read online

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allen_Carr"

Categories: 1934 births | 2006 deaths | People from London | English activists
| English accountants | English self-help writers | Deaths from lung cancer |
Cancer deaths in Spain

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 March 2009, at 10:35.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



