
# Dark Shadows

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Dark Shadows  
<IMG>  
Dark Shadows title card  
Format Soap Opera  
Created by Dan Curtis  
Starring Joan Bennett  
Jonathan Frid  
Grayson Hall  
Louis Edmonds  
Nancy Barrett  
Lara Parker  
David Selby  
Kate Jackson  
Kathryn Leigh Scott  
David Henesy  
Denise Nickerson  
Thayer David  
Alexandra Moltke  
Country of origin <IMG> United States  
No. of episodes 1225  
Production  
Running time 30 minutes  
Broadcast  
Original channel ABC  
Original run June 27, 1966 â April 2, 1971  
Dark Shadows is a Gothic soap opera that originally aired weekdays on the ABC
television network, from June 27, 1966 to April 2, 1971. The show was created
by Dan Curtis, who tells of a dream he had in which a girl takes a long train
ride to visit a large mansion. The story "bible," which was written by Art
Wallace, does not mention any supernatural elements. It was considered daring
(and unprecedented in daytime television) when ghosts were introduced about
six months after it began.

The series became hugely popular when, a year into its run, vampire Barnabas
Collins, played by Jonathan Frid, appeared. In addition to vampires, Dark
Shadows featured werewolves, ghosts, zombies, man-made monsters, witches,
warlocks, time travel, both into the past and into the future, and a parallel
universe. A small company of actors each played many roles and, as actors came
and went, some characters were played by several actors. Major writers in
addition to Art Wallace included Sam Hall, Gordon Russell, and Violet Welles.

Dark Shadows was distinguished by its vividly melodramatic performances,
atmospheric interiors, memorable story lines and an unusually adventurous
music score. Now regarded as somewhat of a camp classic, it continues to enjoy
intense cult status among its followers. Director Tim Burton and pop icon
Madonna have both gone on record as fans of the series. As a child Johnny Depp
was so obsessed with Barnabas Collins that he wanted to be him[1].

## Contents

  * 1 Brief synopsis
  * 2 Main cast
  * 3 "Telenovela" format
  * 4 Sources
  * 5 Series production
  * 6 Syndication and cable repeats
  * 7 Home video
  * 8 Broadcast history, ABC
  * 9 Revivals
    * 9.1 Upcoming film
  * 10 In other media
  * 11 Dark Shadows audio drama
    * 11.1 Big Finish
  * 12 TV and film locations
  * 13 Influence
  * 14 References
  * 15 Bibliography
  * 16 Further reading
  * 17 External links

  
## [edit] Brief synopsis

Victoria Winters: episode 1 (June 27, 1966) to 127 (December 20, 1966)
Victoria Winters arrives at Collinwood as governess for David Collins and
encounters strange goings-on in the old mansion. Elizabeth Collins Stoddard
has a secret and never leaves the Collinwood estate. Her daughter Carolyn is
staying out to all hours. Roger Collins, David's father, is afraid that
someone is trying to kill him. And Burke Devlin has returned to Collinsport.

The Murder of Bill Malloy: episode 46 (August 29, 1966) to 126 (December 19,
1966) Bill Malloy, Elizabeth's right-hand man, threatens to publicly reveal
hushed-up details about the feud between Roger Collins and Burke Devlin, and
involving Sam Evans. Malloy's body is then discovered floating in the waters
at the base of Widow's Hill. The ghost of Bill Malloy appears to Victoria
Winters, and later the ghost of Josette emerges from her portrait at the old
house. The spirits of wailing women are heard from Widow's Hill.

Laura the Phoenix: episode 128 (December 21, 1966) to 192 (March 21, 1967)
Young David Collins's mother Laura returns after a ten year absence, searching
for her son. She is an immortal phoenix, and wishes to have him join her in
the sacred fires of the Egyptian god Ra.

Jason McGuire: episode 195 (March 24, 1967) to 275 (July 14, 1967) Jason
McGuire, an old friend of Elizabeth's long-missing husband Paul Stoddard,
shows up and insinuates himself into the Collins household. He knows a dark
secret about Elizabeth's missing husband and, much to the family's dismay, she
submits to his demands, which includes allowing his violent drifter friend
Willie Loomis to stay at Collinwood.

Barnabas: episode 211 (March 22, 1967) to 365 (November 17, 1967) Barnabas
Collins, a nearly two-hundred-year-old vampire, is released from his coffin by
Willie Loomis and brings terror to Collinsport. Doctor Julia Hoffman is called
to investigate the strange kidnapping of Maggie Evans, a Collinsport waitress
whom the vampire believes to be the reincarnation of his long lost love,
Josette.

1795: episode 366 (November 14, 1967) to 460 (March 29, 1968) A sÃ©ance is
held in the great house at Collinwood, during which Victoria Winters travels
back in time to the year 1795. In that era, Barnabas is still an ordinary
human being, but becomes the object of desire for a deadly witch Angelique,
who invokes the vampiric curse upon him. Meanwhile, Victoria is accused of
witchcraft by the paranoiac Rev. Trask. She's defended in court by Peter
Bradford, a man who follows her back through time to the 20th century.

Dream Curse/Adam and Eve: episode 461 (April 1, 1968) to 637 (December 3,
1968) Angelique, a witch who tricked Barnabas into marrying her in the 1790s,
returns. At the same time, Barnabas and Dr. Julia Hoffman explore the
possibility of freeing Barnabas from his curse, by giving life to an
artificial being called Adam.

Werewolf/Quentin's Ghost: episode 638 (December 4, 1968) to 700 (February 28,
1969) A werewolf (Chris Jennings) is loose on the Collins estate and the ghost
of Quentin Collins is terrorizing the children, David Collins and Amy
Jennings.

1897: episode 701 (March 3, 1969) to 884 (November 13, 1969) In order to save
the imperilled David and unravel the mystery of Quentin's ghost, Barnabas
travels back in time using the I Ching. He encounters Angelique, the phoenix
Laura Collins, a gypsy curse, lycanthropy, and the severed hand of the dreaded
Count Petofi.

The Leviathans: episode 885 (November 14, 1969) to 980 (March 27, 1970) An
ancient Lovecraftian race of beings coerce Barnabas into joining their ranks.
Together they attempt to enslave the Collins family and bring the town under
the thrall of their mysterious leader, Jeb Hawkes.

Parallel Time: episode 981 (March 30, 1970) to 1060 (July 17, 1970) In a
closed-off section of the house, Barnabas and Julia discover a doorway to a
parallel universe, where the master of the house Quentin Collins has recently
married Maggie Evans, who finds herself threatened by the vengeful spirit of
Quentin's first wife, Angelique.

1995: episode 1061 (July 20, 1970) to 1070 (July 31, 1970) Barnabas and Julia
travel forward in time to a Collinwood that has been destroyed and the Collins
family either dead or mad.

Gerard Stiles: episode 1071 (August 3, 1970) to 1109 (September 24, 1970)
Ghosts from the 1840s possess David Collins and Hallie Stokes. Barnabas and
Julia try to find a way to prevent the future destruction of Collinwood.

1840: episode 1110 (September 25, 1970) to 1198 (January 27, 1971) Using a
stairway through time hidden within the walls of Collinwood, Julia travels
back to the 1840s to unravel the mystery of Gerard and Daphne Harridge. When
Barnabas joins her they find an unexpected ally in their old foe, Angelique.

1841 in Parallel Time: episode 1199 (January 28, 1971) to 1245 (April 2, 1971)
In a parallel universe Bramwell Collins returns home to find that his true
love, Catherine Harridge, has married his wealthy cousin, Morgan Collins. The
Collins family is under a curse that requires them to hold a lottery, the
loser to spend the night in a room that will leave them either dead or insane.

## [edit] Main cast

See also: List of Collins family members

  * Mark Allen played Sam Evans
  * Humbert Allen Astredo played Nicholas Blair, Evan Hanley, and Charles Dawson
  * Conrad Bain played Mr. Wells, the hotel clerk
  * Nancy Barrett played Carolyn Stoddard, Millicent Collins, Charity Trask, Carolyn Loomis PT, Leticia Faye, Melanie Collins PT, and Amanda Collins PT.
  * Lee Beery played Joanna Mills.
  * Joan Bennett played Elizabeth Collins Stoddard, Naomi Collins, Judith Collins, Elizabeth Collins Stoddard PT, Flora Collins, and Flora Collins PT.
  * Chris Bernau played Philip Todd.
  * Clarice Blackburn played Mrs. Johnson, Abigail Collins, and Minerva Trask.
  * Don Briscoe played Tom Jennings, Christopher Jennings, Timothy Shaw, and Chris Collins PT.
  * Kathy Cody played Hallie Stokes, Carrie Stokes, and Carrie Stokes PT.
  * Terry Crawford played Beth Chavez and Edith Collins.
  * Joel Crothers played Joe Haskell and Nathan Forbes.
  * Thayer David played Matthew Morgan, Ben Stokes, Professor Timothy Stokes, Sandor, Victor Fenn-Gibbon/Count Petofi, Timothy Stokes PT, Mordecai Grimes, and Ben Stokes PT.
  * Roger Davis played Peter Bradford/Jeff Clark, Ned Stuart, Dirk Wilkins, and Charles Delaware Tate.
  * Louis Edmonds played Roger Collins, Joshua Collins, Edward Collins, Roger Collins PT, Daniel Collins, Amadeus Collins, and Brutus Collins PT.
  * Elizabeth Eis played Nelle Gunston, Buffie Harrington PT, and Mrs. Mildred Ward.
  * Dana Elcar played Sheriff Patterson.
  * David Ford played Sam Evans and Andre du Pres.
  * Conrad Fowkes played Frank Garner.
  * Jonathan Frid played Barnabas Collins and Bramwell Collins PT.
  * Anthony George played Burke Devlin and Jeremiah Collins.
  * Robert Gerringer played Dr. Woodard.
  * Grayson Hall played Dr. Julia Hoffman, Natalie du Pres, Magda, Julia Hoffman PT, Julia Collins (a.k.a. Dr. Julia Hoffman), Julia Collins PT, and Constance Collins PT.
  * James Hall played Willie Loomis (episodes 199-205).
  * David Henesy played David Collins, Daniel Collins, Jamison Collins, Daniel Collins PT, and Tad Collins.
  * Kate Jackson played Daphne and Daphne Harridge PT.
  * John Karlen played Willie Loomis (from episode 206), Carl Collins, William Hollingshead Loomis PT, Desmond Collins, and Kendrick Young PT.
  * Jerry Lacy played Tony Peterson, Reverend Trask, Gregory Trask, Mr. Trask PT, and Lamar Trask.
  * John Lasell played Dr. Peter Guthrie.
  * Marsha Mason played Audrey, the female Leviathan.
  * Donna McKechnie played Amanda Harris/Olivia Corey.
  * Diana Millay played Laura Collins, the phoenix.
  * Alexandra Moltke played Victoria Winters.
  * Denise Nickerson played Amy Jennings, Nora Collins, and Amy Collins PT.
  * Lara Parker played Angelique/Cassandra Collins/Valerie Collins/Miranda Duval, Alexis Stokes PT, Angelique PT, and Catherine Harridge PT.
  * Dennis Patrick played Jason McGuire and Paul Stoddard.
  * Christopher Pennock played Jeb Hawkes, Dr. Cyrus Longworth PT/John Yaegar PT, Sebastian Shaw, Gabriel Collins, and Gabriel Collins PT.
  * Addison Powell played Judge Matigan, Dr. Eric Lang, and Judge Wiley.
  * Keith Prentice played Morgan Collins PT.
  * Lisa Richards played Sabrina Stuart and Sabrina Stuart PT.
  * Robert Rodan played Adam.
  * Mitchell Ryan played Burke Devlin.
  * Frank Schoefield played Bill Malloy.
  * Geoffrey Scott played Sky Rumson.
  * Kathryn Leigh Scott played Maggie Evans, Josette du Pres, Rachel Drummond, Lady Hampshire/Kitty Soames, and Maggie Collins PT
  * David Selby played Quentin Collins (1897, 1969-1970, 1995, 1970), Grant Douglas, Quentin Collins PT (1970 PT), Quentin Collins (1840), and Quentin Collins PT (1841 PT).
  * Craig Slocum played Noah Gifford and Harry Johnson.
  * Sharon Smyth played Sarah Collins.
  * Alex Stevens played The Werewolf.
  * James Storm played Gerard Stiles and Gerald Stiles PT.
  * Michael Stroka played Aristede, Bruno, Bruno PT, and Laszlo Ferrari.
  * Virginia Vestoff played Samantha Collins and Samantha Drew PT.
  * Marie Wallace played Eve, Jenny, and Megan Todd.
  * Donna Wandrey played Roxanne Drew PT and Roxanne Drew.

A more extensive list can be found on TV.com's Dark Shadows Cast & Crew page.

During the past thirty years, Dark Shadows has developed a large and loyal fan
following. This is due largely to the willingness of former cast members to
participate in several gatherings each year, notably the Dark Shadows Festival
held alternately in California and New York and a Halloween fright fest
centering around the mansion used in taping the stock outdoor footage. Several
cast members have written books, and several have appeared on Dark Shadows
audio dramas.

## [edit] "Telenovela" format

Although the series began as a typical American soap opera with several story
threads running open-ended simultaneously, it eventually evolved into a format
closer to modern day Spanish-language "telenovelas". There would be one
overarching storyline, with several minor subplots tying into it, involving
every single character in the show. The storyline would eventually be wrapped
up, and a new storyline begun in its place. This was especially noticeable in
the various time travel storylines. When Victoria Winters travelled back to
1795, for example, the principal storyline was to show how a human Barnabas
Collins was transformed into a vampire and how he happened to get chained up
in his coffin. The storyline had a definitive beginning (Victoria finding
herself in the past), middle (Angelique placing the vampire curse on
Barnabas), and end (Barnabas chained up in the coffin and Victoria sent back
to her proper time). Every cast member on the show at that time played a
character who had some function in this singular storyline. This was in sharp
contrast to the typical American soap which tends to feature at least three or
four major storylines simultaneously that might play out over the course of
many years, with only a few characters deeply involved in any particular plot-
thread.

An unusual feature of this format was that whenever the storyline shifted into
a new time and a new storyline was begun, a majority of the cast played all-
new characters who would not continue past the conclusion of that storyline.
This gave the writers a certain freedom to actually kill off central
characters, including the heroes and heroines whom the audience would usually
root for, and characters performed by contract players. For instance, Kathryn
Leigh Scott, who played Maggie Evans in the modern day storyline, was recast
as Rachel Drummond in the 1897 storyline. Although Rachel was a central heroic
character throughout the first several months of this particular storyline,
her character was killed off halfway through it. Soon thereafter, Scott
returned as an entirely different character, Kitty Soames. Then, when the
storyline shifted back to the present day, Scott simply resumed her Maggie
Evans character and continued with the show. This allowed for a bit more
suspense than the normal soap, as no character was off-limits and the audience
could not be sure who would actually survive harrowing ordeals.

## [edit] Sources

Dark Shadows often used classic stories with gothic themes, such as Dracula,
Frankenstein, The Wolf Man, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, The Picture of Dorian
Gray, The Turn of the Screw, and Wuthering Heights. The series modified this
material freely, giving the familiar stories unusual twists. No author of the
macabre was exempt from inclusion in subplots. Edgar Allan Poe, Shirley
Jackson, Oscar Wilde, Bram Stoker, Mary Shelley, Guy Endore, Nathaniel
Hawthorne, Henry James, H. P. Lovecraft, and others were explored, exploited,
and exposed in a history of the Collins family. Stylistically, Dark Shadows
appears to have taken inspiration from Roger Corman's 1961 movie The Pit and
the Pendulum.

## [edit] Series production

Working within the constraints of the live-to-tape format â with almost
every scene done in one take â Dark Shadows displayed an unusually inventive
use of costume, make-up and, in particular, special effects. Both time travel
and ghosts allowed characters killed in earlier sequences to return, often in
period clothing. SÃ©ances held in the old mansion were often visited by
ghostly apparitions of quivering ectoplasm. Dream sequences included colorful
psychedelic spectacles superimposed over ethereal, fog-filled fantasies.
Individuals of normal appearance were transformed into hideous creatures of
the netherworld.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Joan Bennett

At times, however, the special effects could appear cardboard-cut-out and
amateur. This, together with the show's heightened melodrama and stilted
dramatic moments, is where the show's very modern â and in its way,
sophisticated â camp appeal enters the picture. The difficulty of keeping up
with the demanding schedule of a daily half-hour show manifested itself on
screen, often to laughable but endearing effect. In addition to sets wobbling
unintentionally, actors â especially Frid and Bennett â often struggled
with their lines. Occasionally a stagehand could be spotted wandering onto the
back of the set. And at other times the microphone boom appeared in the frame
(giving the show the unintentional nickname "Mic Shadows"), or a fly hovered
around the head of an actor. In retrospect, however, the actors â who
effectively formed a repertory company as they played many different roles â
created memorable characters, and overcame the challenge of daily scripts
combined with brief and demanding rehearsals.

Of particular note is Robert Cobert's inspired music score, which broke new
ground for a television program. The original soundtrack cracked the top 20 of
Billboard's national album chart in 1969 and still ranks as one of the top-
selling TV soundtracks ever. The spoken-word instrumental track "Quentin's
Theme", for which Cobert earned a Grammy nomination, was recorded by the
Charles Randolph Grean Sounde. The single peaked at number 13 on the Billboard
Hot 100 chart (and number 3 on its Easy Listening chart) in the summer of
1969, when Dark Shadows was perhaps at the peak of its popularity.

Dark Shadows has the distinction of being one of the few classic television
soap operas to have all of its episodes, except one, survive intact (although
a handful of early episodes are available only in 16 mm kinescope format). For
the one lost episode (#1219), only a home audio recording of the episode
exists (the home video version and cable reruns of this episode were
reconstructed from this soundtrack and from still pictures taken at the time
of the episode's production).

1,225 episodes were produced, but during the course of its run, the show was
preempted 20 times. ABC would compensate for this by sometimes double
numbering, and in one case triple numbering, episode numbers in order to keep
a show ending in a 5 or 0 airing on Fridays. This is why the last episode
produced has #1245 when in actuality it was only the 1,225th episode produced.

## [edit] Syndication and cable repeats

Dark Shadows was to be syndicated by ABC's distribution arm, ABC Films as the
series was ending in late 1970/early 1971. However, delays kept the show from
entering syndication, mainly due to the FCC imposing Fin-syn rules forcing the
networks to sell off their syndication companies. Finally, in 1975,
Worldvision Enterprises (spun off from ABC Films) released 130 episodes to
syndication. Over the years, more episodes were released in varying quantities
until the show finished its syndicated run in 1990. However, the first 209
shows and the last year's worth of shows were never seen in syndication. It is
still important to note however that Dark Shadows was lucky to be in
syndication at all while other daytime serials sat on the shelf collecting
dust or have been lost forever.

For many years, the show was rerun on the Sci Fi Channel. Unlike the
precarious issuance of episodes to the broadcast syndication marketplace, Sci
Fi had the entire run of 1,225 episodes to show. The network stopped airing
Dark Shadows in December 2003, only two weeks short of completing the series.
All 1,225 episodes in the series were shown on the Sci Fi Channel at various
times between 1993 and 2003.

## [edit] Home video

MPI Home Video currently holds the home video rights to the series. All
episodes were issued on VHS from 1989 through 1995. Episodes 210â1245
(Barnabas' arrival through to the end of the series) have been released on DVD
in 26 Collections from 2002 through 2006. Episodes 1-209 were released in 2007
under the title of Dark Shadows: The Beginning.

## [edit] Broadcast history, ABC

Perhaps one of ABC's first truly popular daytime shows, Dark Shadows found its
perfect demographic niche in teenagers coming home from school in time to
watch the show at 4 p.m. Eastern / 3 p.m. Central, where it aired for all of
its network run (except for a 15-month stretch between April 1967 and July
1968, when it aired a half hour earlier). With mothers (and, sometimes,
grandmothers) usually away from the television set at that time of day in
order to tend to household chores such as preparing the family's dinner, the
young people got control of the family set and claimed the show as a badge of
the then-burgeoning youth consciousness in the culture at large.

Whatever the cultural context or audience composition of Dark Shadows, it
became one of ABC's first daytime shows to actually win its timeslot, leading
to the demise of NBC's original Match Game and Art Linkletter's long-running
House Party on CBS, both in 1969. Even the launch of a much-ballyhooed spinoff
of NBC's Another World, Somerset, the following year did not hurt Dark
Shadows.

By early 1971, though, due to an economic recession and the U.S. government's
recent ban on cigarette commercials causing a sharp dip in advertising
revenues and because of a record-high number of soaps (much more expensive to
produce than game or talk shows) on the networks' daytime schedules, ABC
decided to cut costs by weeding out supposedly unproductive programming.
Despite its relatively high station clearances for its timeslot and low
production costs, Dark Shadows fell victim to the purge mainly because of its
young audience, who usually did not make decisions about the purchasing of
household goods and food products for the family, which were the two chief
industries that bought airtime on daytime television in that era. Practically
no other daytime show skewed so much under the 18â35 demographic threshold
as Dark Shadows did. Furthermore, primetime shows and movies with horror or
science fiction themes (e.g., Star Trek, The Man from U.N.C.L.E.) had been on
the decline for some time, and, of course, the serial appealed heavily to
fanciers of those genres, people who usually snubbed their noses at the often
sentimental domestic or romantic themes that traditional soaps had relied on
since their inception on radio in the 1930s. In addition and probably more
decisively, the program experienced a precipitous drop in its ratings during
its last two years on the air, falling from a peak of 8.4 in 1968-69 to a 5.3
in 1970-71. [2]

So, despite massive letters of protest from outraged fans, ABC cancelled the
five-year-old show on April 2, 1971 and replaced it with a new version of the
hit 1960s game Password. Although some highly irate viewers threatened to
vocally (and possibly violently) decry the cancellation by disrupting the
taping of Password at ABC's Los Angeles studios, nothing ever came of those
plans. The rather abrupt ending of the series left some plot lines (such as
the story of the Jennings family) unfinished, though most of the plot threads
came to a happy conclusion, via a voiceover explaining future events in the
final minute of the last episode.

## [edit] Revivals

In 1991, a short-lived primetime remake was produced by MGM Television and
aired by NBC, airing from January 13 to March 22. The revival was a lavish,
big budget weekly serial combining gothic romance and stylistic horror.
Although it was a huge hit at introduction (watched by almost 1 in 4
households according to official ratings during that time period), an untimely
international incident would inflict a fatal wound to the show. The onset of
the Gulf War caused NBC to continually pre-empt or reschedule the early
episodes resulting in viewer confusion and a loss of momentum. It was canceled
after twelve episodes.

The final episode ended with a cliffhanger -- Victoria (played by Joanna
Going) learning that Barnabas Collins (played by Ben Cross) was a 200-year old
vampire (a secret never discovered by Victoria in the original series). It has
been reported that the opening episode for a proposed second season would have
had Victoria collapsing, after seeing Barnabas, and losing her memory of his
terrible secret.

It also starred veterans Jean Simmons as Elizabeth and Roy Thinnes as Roger,
British character actress Lysette Anthony as Angelique, Barbara Steele as Dr.
Julia Hoffman, and future 3rd Rock from the Sun star Joseph Gordon-Levitt as
David.

Plans for another revival series (or film) have been discussed off and on
since the 1991 series' demise, including a TV miniseries to wrap up the plot
lines of the canceled NBC series and a feature film, co-written by Dan Curtis
and Barbara Steele, utilizing the 1991 cast. In 2004, a pilot for a new WB
network Dark Shadows series starring Marley Shelton as Victoria Winters and
Alec Newman as Barnabas Collins was written and shot, but never picked up. The
pilot has been screened at the Dark Shadows Festival conventions with Dan
Curtis Productions' blessing, but has yet to surface elsewhere. This pilot was
produced by Warner Bros. Television.

### [edit] Upcoming film

In July 2007, Warner Bros. announced they had purchased the film rights of the
Dark Shadows television series from the estate of Dan Curtis (the creator,
producer and director of Dark Shadows). Warner Bros. teamed with Johnny Depp
to star and produce (with his Infinitum Nihil production company) in the film.
Depp had a childhood obsession with Dark Shadows, calling it a "childhood
dream" to portray Barnabas Collins. Depp and Graham King will produce with
David Kennedy, who ran Dan Curtis Productions until Curtis' death in March
2006.[3] The following November, John August said he was working "with Tim
Burton on a live action project which I almost certainly will be writing post-
strike. And yes, Iâd love to tell you what it is. But I canât."[4] By June
2008, Burton was signed on as director with August writing the script.[5]
Filming will begin in London in mid-2009.[6]

## [edit] In other media

MGM released a feature film entitled House of Dark Shadows in 1970. Dan Curtis
directed it, and Sam Hall and Gordon Russell wrote the screenplay. Many cast
members from the soap opera reprised their roles. These included Jonathan
Frid, Grayson Hall, Roger Davis, and Kathryn Leigh Scott, among others. 1971
saw the release of Night of Dark Shadows, also directed by Dan Curtis. In
addition, Curtis and Sam Hall wrote it. Players included David Selby, Grayson
Hall, Kate Jackson, and Lara Parker, among others.

There have been two series of Dark Shadows novels. The first, released during
the show's original run, were all penned by romance writer Marilyn Ross
(actually Dan Ross, using his wife's name as a pseudonym). The second consists
of two novels by Lara Parker (who played Angelique in the series), Angelique's
Descent (recently recorded on CD by Big Finish Productions and read by Ms.
Parker) and The Salem Branch, and Dreams of the Dark by horror authors
Elizabeth Massie and Stephen Mark Rainey. Gold Key Comics released 35 issues
of a regular Dark Shadows comic book, which ran for years after the
cancellation of the series on ABC.1969â1976; and in 1991, Innovation
Publishing released a short-lived comic book series based on the NBC-TV
revival show. There have also been two board games, a few coloring books, a
jigsaw puzzle and a View-Master reel. There also have been several books about
Dark Shadows, including The Dark Shadows Almanac and The Dark Shadows
Companion.

<IMG>

Detail from Dark Shadows newspaper comic strip. Art by Ken Bald.

From March 14, 1971 to March 11, 1972, the Newspaper Enterprise Association
syndicated a Dark Shadows comic strip by illustrator Kenneth Bruce Bald
(credited as "K. Bruce" due to contractual obligations) to dozens of
newspapers across the country.[7]

During its original run, Dark Shadows was featured in many magazines,
including Afternoon TV, Daytime TV, Famous Monsters of Filmland, and Castle of
Frankenstein. In 2003, a two-part article entitled "Collecting Dark Shadows:
Return to Collinwood," appeared in Autograph Collector magazine. It was the
first major article to chronicle the show in years. In 2005, Scary Monsters
magazine #55 devoted an entire issue to Dark Shadows. Included were full-
length interviews with cast members Marie Wallace, David Selby and Kathryn
Leigh-Scott, as well as "Don't Open That Coffin! A Baby Boomer's Adventures in
the Land of Dark Shadows!" Both the Autograph Collector and Scary Monsters
articles were penned by freelance writer Rod Labbe, who once ran a fan club
for Dennis ("Paul Stoddard") Patrick. Labbe is currently working on a third
article, a 40th anniversary retrospective of the show.

The show was discussed in several episodes of the NPR radio program This
American Life, namely one entitled "Conventions." [8]

On the CBS television show The King Of Queens, Spence Olchin (Patton Oswalt)
mentions he attends Dark Shadows conventions in several episodes.

Gilmore Girls paid a tribute to the show in a season-five episode in which a
character watches Dark Shadows.

The series is also referenced in Gina Gionfriddo's 2006 play After Ashley.

## [edit] Dark Shadows audio drama

Based on a stage play performed at a Dark Shadows convention, Return to
Collinwood is an audio drama written by Jamison Selby and Jim Pierson, and
starring David Selby, Kathryn Leigh Scott, John Karlen, Nancy Barrett, Lara
Parker, Roger Davis, Marie Wallace, Christopher Pennock, Donna Wandrey, James
Storm and Terry Crawford. The show is available on CD.

### [edit] Big Finish

In summer 2006, Big Finish Productions continued the Dark Shadows saga with an
original series of audio dramas, starring the original cast. The first season
comprises four discs, featuring David Selby (Quentin Collins), Lara Parker
(Angelique), Kathryn Leigh Scott (Maggie Evans) and John Karlen (Willie
Loomis). Robert Rodan, who played Adam in the original series, also appears in
the fourth story, playing a new character. A "making of" CD was released in
March 2007, followed by a two-CD audiobook of Lara Parker's novel Angelique's
Descent. In 2008, original readings were released starring Kathryn Leigh Scott
with Alec Newman, David Selby, Lara Parker, Jerry Lacy and John Karlen.

According to the official "Dark Shadows Reborn" web site, Big Finish
Productions has announced that a second series will be released beginning in
early 2009.

Season 1

  * The House of Despair
  * The Book of Temptation
  * The Christmas Presence
  * The Rage Beneath

  * The Legend Reborn: The Making of the New Audio Dramas \-- behind-the-scenes documentary CD

Dramatic Readings

  * Angelique's Descent with Lara Parker as "Angelique"
  * Clothes of Sand with Kathryn Leigh Scott as "Maggie Evans" and Alec Newman
  * The Ghost Watcher with Kathryn Leigh Scott as "Maggie Evans" and Alec Newman
  * The Skin Walkers with David Selby as "Quentin Collins" and Lara Parker as "Angelique"
  * The Path of Fate with Lara Parker as "Angelique" and David Selby as "Quentin Collins"
  * The Wicked and the Dead with Jerry Lacy as "Reverend Gregory Trask" and John Karlen as "Carl Collins"

## [edit] TV and film locations

Both theatrical films, House of Dark Shadows (1970) and Night of Dark Shadows
(1971) were shot primarily on location at the Lyndhurst estate in Tarrytown,
New York. The Collinwood stand-in mansion used for the TV series is the Carey
Mansion in Newport, Rhode Island (though the shots in the opening credits of
the water and cliffs were done in Kennebunkport, Maine). It is currently used
by Salve Regina University. The Lockwood-Mathews Mansion in South Norwalk,
Connecticut was also used for some scenes in House of Dark Shadows. Some
outdoors shots for the series were filmed in the famous Sleepy Hollow
Cemetery, not very far from the Lyndhurst Mansion.

## [edit] Influence

Dark Shadows pioneered the concept of a soap opera with a supernatural theme.
In later years, the prime-time satire Soap would introduce an Exorcist-
inspired storyline. Days of our Lives would feature a groundbreaking plot in
which its leading female character, Marlena Evans (Deidre Hall), was possessed
by Satan. Coming full circle, the soap operas Port Charles and Passions would
emerge in the 1990s, both largely driven by supernatural-based plots involving
vampires, witches, and werewolves. Twin Peaks was a prime-time soap with many
supernatural elements, though without classical movie monsters. The popular
Joss Whedon series Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel, with their continuing
serial plotlines, could be described as treading a path first laid by Dark
Shadows. Even the popular gay and lesbian here! network has produced its own
supernatural soap operas in "Dante's Cove" and "The Lair" which both contain
witchcraft and vampire storylines. Dark Shadows is also widely credited with
introducing the concept of the "compassionate vampire", the mostly "good"
vampire tortured by his affliction and looking for a cure. This concept has
continued to be used in most vampire TV shows and movies ever since.

During the 1970 "Parallel Time" storyline, Barnabas is trapped in his coffin
and forced to relate his vampiric history to a down-and-out writer, who hopes
to publish the interviews as a book. This anticipated Anne Rice's wildly
popular cult series of novels (the plot of the first book in this series â
Interview with the Vampire â is about a down-and-out writer who listens to a
vampire relate his tortured history) that themselves could be considered a
vampire soap opera. Also like Dark Shadows, Rice's narratives often feature
abrupt shifts in time periods (as whichever vampire is currently narrating his
story will relate stories from varying points in his centuries-long
existence).

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Johnny Depp on cutting loose in ''Sweeney Todd'' | Johnny Depp | 5 | Holiday Movie Q&A | Movies | Holiday Movies 2007 | Entertainment Weekly
  2. ^ [1]Soap Opera Network Boards | Ratings Archive
  3. ^ Michael Fleming (2007-07-26). "Depp lights up Dark Shadows". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117969246. Retrieved on 2008-11-01.
  4. ^ "Frankenweenie". John August.com. 2007-11-27. http://johnaugust.com/archives/2007/frankenweenie. Retrieved on 2008-11-01.
  5. ^ Robert Sanchez (2008-06-02). "IESB Exclusive: Director and Writer Named for Depp's Dark Shadows!". IESB. http://www.iesb.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=4997&Itemid=99. Retrieved on 2008-11-01.
  6. ^ Steve Weintraub (2008-12-04). "Producer Richard D. Zanuck talks DARK SHADOWS". Collider. http://www.collider.com/entertainment/interviews/article.asp/aid/10021/tcid/1. Retrieved on 2008-12-04.
  7. ^ Bald, Kenneth Bruce (1996). Dark Shadows: The Comic Strip Book. Beverly Hills, California: Pomegranate Press, Ltd.. ISBN 0938817396. http://www.pompress.com/.
  8. ^ This American Life (1997-08-30). "Episode #74: Conventions". http://www.thisamericanlife.org/Radio_Episode.aspx?episode=74. Retrieved on 2007-11-29.

## [edit] Bibliography

  * The Dark Shadows Companion: 25th Anniversary Collection, edited by Kathryn Leigh Scott, foreword by Jonathan Frid, Pomegranate Press, 1990. ISBN 0-938817-25-6

  * Dark Shadows Almanac, edited by Kathryn Leigh Scott & Jim Pierson, Pomegranate Press, 1995. ISBN 0-938817-18-3

  * Dark Shadows: The Comic Strip Book, by Kenneth Bruce Bald (illustrator), Pomegranate Press, 1996. ISBN 0938817396

## [edit] Further reading

  * Borzellieri, Frank. "The Physics of Dark Shadows". Cultural Studies Press, 2008. ISBN 9780981540702
  * Clute, John and Grant, John. The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. St. Martin's Press, 1999. p 823. ISBN 0312198698
  * Hamrick, Craig. Barnabas & Company: The Cast of the TV Classic Dark Shadows. iUniverse, 2003. ISBN 0595290299
  * Jones, Stephen. The Essential Monster Movie Guide: A Century of Creature Features on Film, TV and Video. Watson-Guptill, 2000. p. 99. ISBN 0823079368
  * Krensky, Stephen. Vampires. Lerner Publications, 2007. p. 48. ISBN 0822558912
  * Mansour, David. From Abba to Zoom: A Pop Culture Encyclopedia Of The Late 20th Century. Andrews McMeel Publishing, 2005. p. 109. ISBN 0740751182
  * McNally, Raymond T. and Florescu, Radu R. In Search of Dracula: The History of Dracula and Vampires. Houghton Mifflin Books, 1994. p. 270. ISBN 0395657830
  * Mitchell, Charles P. The Complete H. P. Lovecraft Filmography. Greenwood Press, 2001. p 220. ISBN 0313316414
  * Riccardo, Martin V. Vampires Unearthed: The Complete Multi-media Vampire and Dracula Bibliography. Garland Publishing, Incorporated, 1983. p. 19. ISBN 0824091280
  * Schemering, Christopher. The Soap Opera Encyclopedia. Ballantine Books, 1985. p. 61. ISBN 0345324595
  * Senn, Bryan and Johnson, John. Fantastic Cinema Subject Guide: A Topical Index to 2500 Horror, Science Fiction, and Fantasy Films. McFarland & Co, 1992. p. 551. ISBN 089950681X
  * South, Malcolm. Mythical and Fabulous Creatures: A Source Book and Research Guide. Greenwood Press, 1987. p. 260. ISBN 0313243387
  * Sullivan, Jack. The Penguin Encyclopedia of Horror and the Supernatural. Viking, 1986. p. 422. ISBN 0670809020
  * Terrance, Vincent. The Complete Encyclopedia of Television Programs, 1947-1979. A. S. Barnes & Company, 1979.
  * Worland, Rick. The Horror Film: An Introduction. Blackwell Publishing, 2006. p. 93. ISBN 1405139021

## [edit] External links

  * Dark Shadows (1966-1971) at the Internet Movie Database
  * Dark Shadows Revival (1991) at the Internet Movie Database
  * Dark Shadows (2010) at the Internet Movie Database
  * Dark Shadows (1966-1971) at TV.com
  * Dark Shadows (1991) at TV.com

v â¢ d â¢ e

Dark Shadows  
Characters

Angelique Bouchard Collins Â· Nicholas Blair Â· Barnabas Collins Â· Daniel
Collins Â· David Collins Â· Jeremiah Collins Â· Quentin Collins Â· Millicent
Collins-Forbes Â· Naomi Collins Â· Maggie Evans Â· Willie Loomis Â· Count
Petofi Â· Elizabeth Collins Stoddard Â· Victoria Winters Â· Josette du Pres Â·
List of Collins family members  
Films

House of Dark Shadows Â· Night of Dark Shadows  
Audio plays

Angelique's Descent Â· The Book of Temptation Â· The Christmas Presence Â·
Clothes of Sand Â· The Ghost Watcher Â· The House of Despair Â· The Path of
Fate Â· The Rage Beneath Â· The Skin Walkers  
Revivals

1991 remake Â· 2004 remake Â· Reunion  
Other

Collinsport, Maine Â· Collinwood Mansion  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_Shadows"

Categories: Dark Shadows | 1966 television series debuts | 1971 television
series endings | 1991 television series debuts | 1991 television series
endings | 1960s American television series | 1970s American television series
| 1990s American television series | American Broadcasting Company network
shows | American television soap operas | NBC network shows | Paranormal
television | Horror television series | Fantasy television series | Television
shows set in Maine | Gold Key Comics titles | Innovation Publishing |
Television series by MGM Television | Time travel television series |
Werewolves in film and television | Vampires in film and television

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 16:13 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



