
# Dracula

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the novel. For the titular character, see Count Dracula.
For other uses, see Dracula (disambiguation).

Dracula  
Dracula by Bram Stoker, 1st edition cover, Archibald Constable and Company,
1897  
The cover of the first edition  
Author Bram Stoker  
Country United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland  
Language English  
Genre(s) Horror novel, Gothic novel  
Publisher Archibald Constable and Company (UK)  
Publication date May 1897  
Media type print (hardback)  
ISBN NA  
Dracula is an 1897 novel by Irish author Bram Stoker, featuring as its primary
antagonist the vampire Count Dracula.

Dracula has been attributed to many literary genres including vampire
literature, horror fiction, the gothic novel and invasion literature.
Structurally it is an epistolary novel, that is, told as a series of diary
entries and letters. Literary critics have examined many themes in the novel,
such as the role of women in Victorian culture, conventional and conservative
sexuality, immigration, colonialism, postcolonialism and folklore. Although
Stoker did not invent the vampire, the novel's influence on the popularity of
vampires has been singularly responsible for many theatrical and film
interpretations throughout the 20th and 21st centuries.

## Contents

  * 1 Plot summary
  * 2 Background
  * 3 Reaction
  * 4 Historical and geographical references
  * 5 Themes
  * 6 Adaptations
  * 7 Dracula's Guest
  * 8 Official sequel
  * 9 Notes for Dracula
  * 10 See also
  * 11 Notes and references
  * 12 Bibliography
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] Plot summary

<IMG>

<IMG>

Stoker's handwritten notes on the personnel of the novel

The novel is mainly composed of journal entries and letters written by several
narrators who also serve as the novel's main protagonists; Stoker supplemented
the story with occasional newspaper clippings to relate events not directly
witnessed by the story's characters. The tale begins with Jonathan Harker, a
newly qualified English solicitor, journeying by train and carriage from
England to Count Dracula's crumbling, remote castle (situated in the
Carpathian Mountains on the border of Transylvania and Moldavia). The purpose
of his mission is to provide legal support to Dracula for a real estate
transaction overseen by Harker's employer, Peter Hawkins, of Exeter in
England. At first seduced by Dracula's gracious manner, Harker soon discovers
that he has become a prisoner in the castle. He also begins to see disquieting
facets of Dracula's nocturnal life. One night while searching for a way out of
the castle, and against Dracula's strict admonition not to venture outside his
room at night, Harker falls under the spell of three wanton female vampires,
the Brides of Dracula. He is saved at the last second by the Count, however,
who ostensibly wants to keep Harker alive just long enough to obtain needed
legal advice and teachings about England and London (Dracula's planned travel
destination was to be among the "teeming millions"). Harker barely escapes
from the castle with his life.

Not long afterward, a Russian ship, the Demeter, having weighed anchor at
Varna, runs aground on the shores of Whitby, England, during a fierce tempest.
All of the crew are missing and presumed dead, and only one body is found,
that of the captain tied to the ship's helm. The captain's log is recovered
and tells of strange events that had taken place during the ship's journey.
These events led to the gradual disappearance of the entire crew apparently
owing to a malevolent presence on board the ill-fated ship. An animal
described as a large wolf is seen on the ship leaping ashore. The ship's cargo
is described as silver sand and boxes of "mould" or earth from Transylvania.

Soon Dracula is menacing Harker's devoted fiancÃ©e, Wilhelmina "Mina" Murray,
and her vivacious friend, Lucy Westenra. Lucy receives three marriage
proposals in one day, from an asylum psychiatrist, Dr. John Seward; an
American, Quincey Morris; and the Hon. Arthur Holmwood (later Lord Godalming).
Lucy accepts Holmwood's proposal while turning down Seward and Morris, but all
remain friends. There is a notable encounter between Dracula and Seward's
patient Renfield, an insane man who means to consume insects, spiders, birds,
and other creatures â in ascending order of size â in order to absorb
their "life force". Renfield acts as a kind of motion sensor, detecting
Dracula's proximity and supplying clues accordingly.

Lucy begins to waste away suspiciously. All her suitors fret, and Seward calls
in his old teacher, Professor Abraham Van Helsing from Amsterdam. Van Helsing
immediately determines the cause of Lucy's condition but refuses to disclose
it, knowing that Seward's faith in him will be shaken if he starts to speak of
vampires. Van Helsing tries multiple blood transfusions, but they are clearly
losing ground. On a night when Van Helsing must return to Amsterdam (and his
message to Seward asking him to watch the Westenra household is accidentally
sent to the wrong address), Lucy and her mother are attacked by a wolf. Mrs
Westenra, who has a heart condition, dies of fright, and Lucy apparently dies
soon after.

Lucy is buried, but soon afterward the newspapers report children being
stalked in the night by a "bloofer lady" (as they describe it), i.e.
"beautiful lady"[1]. Van Helsing, knowing that this means Lucy has become a
vampire, confides in Seward, Lord Godalming and Morris. The suitors and Van
Helsing track her down, and after a disturbing confrontation between her
vampiric self and Arthur, they stake her heart, behead her, and fill the mouth
with garlic.

Around the same time, Jonathan Harker arrives home from recuperation in
Budapest (where Mina joined and married him after his escape from the castle);
he and Mina also join the coalition, who turn their attentions to dealing with
Dracula.

After Dracula learns of Van Helsing and the others' plot against him, he takes
revenge by visiting â and biting â Mina at least three times. Dracula also
feeds Mina his blood, creating a spiritual bond between them to control her.
The only way to forestall this is to kill Dracula first. Mina slowly succumbs
to the blood of the vampire that flows through her veins, switching back and
forth from a state of consciousness to a state of semi-trance during which she
is telepathically connected with Dracula. It is this connection that they
start to use to deduce Dracula's movements. It is only possible to detect
Dracula's surroundings when Mina is put under hypnosis by Van Helsing. This
ability gradually gets weaker as the group makes their way to Dracula's
castle.

Dracula flees back to his castle in Transylvania, followed by Van Helsing's
group, who manage to track him down just before sundown and destroy[2] him by
shearing "through the throat" with a Kukri and stabbing him in the heart with
a Bowie knife. Dracula crumbles to dust, his spell is lifted and Mina is freed
from the marks. Quincey Morris is killed in the final battle, stabbed by
Gypsies who had been charged with returning Dracula to his castle; the
survivors return to England.

The book closes with a note about Mina's and Jonathan's married life and the
birth of their first-born son, whom they name after all four members of the
party, but refer to only as Quincey in remembrance of their American friend.

## [edit] Background

Between 1879 and 1898 Stoker was a business manager for the world-famous
Lyceum Theatre in London, where he supplemented his income by writing a large
number of sensational novels, his most famous being the vampire tale Dracula
published on May 26, 1897. Parts of it are set around the town of Whitby,
where he spent summer vacations. Throughout the 1880s and 1890s, authors such
as H. Rider Haggard, Rudyard Kipling, Robert Louis Stevenson, Arthur Conan
Doyle, and H.G. Wells wrote many tales in which fantastic creatures threatened
the British Empire. Invasion literature was at a peak, and Stoker's formula of
an invasion of England by continental European influences was by 1897 very
familiar to readers of fantastic adventure stories. Victorian readers enjoyed
it as a good adventure story like many others, but it would not reach its
iconic legendary status until later in the 20th century when film versions
began to appear.[3]

<IMG>

Shakespearean actor and friend of Stoker's, Sir Henry Irving was a real-life
inspiration for the character of Dracula, tailor-made to his dramatic
presence, gentlemanly mannerisms and affinity for playing villain roles.
Irving, however, never agreed to play the part on stage.

Before writing Dracula, Stoker spent seven years researching European folklore
and stories of vampires, being most influenced by Emily Gerard's 1885 essay
"Transylvania Superstitions".

Though the most famous vampire novel ever, Dracula was not the first. It was
preceded and partly inspired by Sheridan Le Fanu's 1871 "Carmilla", about a
lesbian vampire who preys on a lonely young woman. The image of a vampire
portrayed as an aristocratic man, like the character of Dracula, was created
by John Polidori in "The Vampyre" (1819), during the summer spent with
Frankenstein creator Mary Shelley and other friends in 1816. The Lyceum
Theatre, where Stoker worked between 1878 and 1898, was headed by the
tyrannical actor-manager Henry Irving, who was Stoker's real-life inspiration
for Dracula's mannerisms and who Stoker hoped would play Dracula in a stage
version. Although Irving never did agree to do a stage version, Dracula's
dramatic sweeping gestures and gentlemanly mannerisms drew their living
embodiment from Irving.

The Dead Un-Dead was one of Stoker's original titles for Dracula, and up until
a few weeks before publication, the manuscript was titled simply The Un-Dead.
Stoker's Notes for Dracula show that the name of the count was originally
going to be Count Wampyr, but while doing research, Stoker became intrigued by
the word dracul. Dracula is derived from the word dracul in the Romanian
language, meaning devil (originally dragon).

The novel has been in the public domain in the United States since its
original publication because Stoker failed to follow proper copyright
procedure. In the United Kingdom and other countries following the Berne
Convention on copyrights, however, the novel was under copyright until April
1962, fifty years after Stoker's death.[4] When F. W. Murnau's unauthorized
film adaptation Nosferatu was released in 1922, the popularity of the novel
increased considerably, owing to the controversy caused when Stoker's widow
tried to have the film banned.[5]

## [edit] Reaction

When it was first published, in 1897, Dracula was not an immediate bestseller,
although reviewers were unstinting in their praise. The contemporary Daily
Mail ranked Stoker's powers above those of Mary Shelley and Edgar Allan Poe as
well as Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights. [6]

According to literary historians Nina Auerbach and David Skal in the Norton
Critical Edition, the novel has become more significant for modern readers
than it was for contemporary Victorian readers, most of whom enjoyed it just
as a good adventure story; it only reached its broad iconic legendary classic
status later in the 20th century when the movie versions appeared.[7] However
some Victorian fans were ahead of the time, describing it as "the sensation of
the season" and "the most blood-curdling novel of the paralysed century".[8]
The Daily Mail review of June 1, 1897 proclaimed it a classic of Gothic
horror:

    "In seeking a parallel to this weird, powerful, and horrorful story our mind reverts to such tales as The Mysteries of Udolpho, Frankenstein, The Fall of the House of Usher ... but Dracula is even more appalling in its gloomy fascination than any one of these."[9]
Other reviewers compared it favorably to the novels of Wilkie Collins and
similar good reviews appeared when the book was published in the USA in
1899.[10]

## [edit] Historical and geographical references

Although Dracula is a work of fiction, it does contain some historical
references. The historical connections with the novel and how much Stoker knew
about the history are a matter of conjecture and debate.

Following the publication of In Search of Dracula by Radu Florescu and Raymond
McNally in 1972, the supposed connections between the historical
Transylvanian-born Vlad III Dracula of Wallachia and Bram Stoker's fictional
Dracula attracted popular attention. During his main reign (1456â1462),
"Vlad the Impaler" is said to have killed from 20,000 to 40,000 European
civilians (political rivals, criminals, and anyone else he considered "useless
to humanity"), mainly by using his favourite method of impaling them on a
sharp pole. The main sources dealing with these events are records by Saxon
settlers in neighbouring Transylvania, who had frequent clashes with Vlad III.
Vlad III is revered as a folk hero by Romanians for driving off the invading
Turks. His impaled victims are said to have included as many as 100,000
Turkish Muslims.

Historically, the name "Dracul" is derived from a secret fraternal order of
knights called the Order of the Dragon, founded by Sigismund of Luxembourg
(king of Hungary, Croatia and Bohemia, and Holy Roman Emperor) to uphold
Christianity and defend the Empire against the Ottoman Turks. Vlad II Dracul,
father of Vlad III, was admitted to the order around 1431 because of his
bravery in fighting the Turks. From 1431 onward, Vlad II wore the emblem of
the order and later, as ruler of Wallachia, his coinage bore the dragon
symbol. The name Dracula means "Son of Dracul".

Stoker came across the name Dracula in his reading on Romanian history, and
chose this to replace the name (Count Wampyr) that he had originally intended
to use for his villain. However, some Dracula scholars, led by Elizabeth
Miller, have questioned the depth of this connection. They argue that Stoker
in fact knew little of the historic Vlad III except for his nickname. There
are sections in the novel where Dracula refers to his own background, and
these speeches show that Stoker had some knowledge of Romanian history. Yet
Stoker includes no details about Vlad III's reign and does not mention his use
of impalement. Given Stoker's use of historical background to make his novel
more horrific, it seems unlikely he would have failed to mention that his
villain had impaled thousands of people. It seems that Stoker either did not
know much about the historic Vlad III, or did not intend his character Dracula
to be the same person as Vlad III.

Vlad III was an ethnic Vlach. In the novel, Dracula claims to be a SzÃ©kely:
"We Szekelys have a right to be proud..."

The Dracula legend as he created it and as it has been portrayed in films and
television shows may be a compound of various influences. Many of Stoker's
biographers and literary critics have found strong similarities to the earlier
Irish writer Sheridan le Fanu's classic of the vampire genre, Carmilla. In
writing Dracula, Stoker may also have drawn on stories about the sÃ­dhe, some
of which feature blood-drinking women. The folkloric figure of Abhartach has
also been suggested as a source.

It has been suggested that Stoker was influenced by the history of Countess
Elizabeth Bathory, who was born in the Kingdom of Hungary. Bathory is known to
have tortured and killed anywhere between 36 and 700 young women over a period
of many years, and it was commonly believed that she committed these crimes in
order to bathe in or drink their blood, believing that this preserved her
youth. No credible evidence of blood-drinking or other blood crimes in the
Bathory case has ever been found, however the stories and influence may
explain why Dracula appeared younger after feeding.[11]

Some have claimed the castle of Count Dracula was inspired by Slains Castle,
at which Bram Stoker was a guest of the 19th Earl of Erroll. However, since as
Stoker visited the castle in 1895âfive years after work on Dracula had
begunâthere is unlikely to be much connection. Many of the scenes in Whitby
and London are based on real places that Stoker frequently visited, although
in some cases he distorts the geography for the sake of the story.

It has been suggested that Stoker received much historical information from
Ãrmin VÃ¡mbÃ©ry, a Hungarian professor he met at least twice. Miller argues
"there is nothing to indicate that the conversation included Vlad, vampires,
or even Transylvania" and that, "furthermore, there is no record of any other
correspondence between Stoker and VÃ¡mbÃ©ry, nor is VÃ¡mbÃ©ry mentioned in
Stoker's notes for Dracula."[12]

## [edit] Themes

Dracula is an epistolary novel, written as a collection of diary entries,
telegrams, and letters from the characters, as well as fictional clippings
from the Whitby and London newspapers and phonograph cylinders. This literary
style, made most famous by one of the most popular novels of the 19th century,
The Woman in White (1860), was considered rather old-fashioned by the time of
the publication of Dracula, but it adds a sense of realism and provides the
reader with the perspective of most of the major characters. By use of the
epistolary structure, Stoker, without employing either an omniscient narrator
or any awkward framing device, maximizes suspense by avoiding any implicit
promise to the reader that any first-person narrator must survive all the
story's perils.

Although some critics find the novel somewhat crude and sensational, it
nevertheless retains its psychological power, and the sexual longings
underlying the vampire attacks are manifest. As one critic wrote:

    
    What has become clearer and clearer, particularly in the fin de siÃ¨cle years of the twentieth century, is that the novel's power has its source in the sexual implications of the blood exchange between the vampire and his victims...Dracula has embedded in it a very disturbing psychosexual allegory whose meaning I am not sure Stoker entirely understood: that there is a demonic force at work in the world whose intent is to eroticize women. In Dracula we see how that force transforms Lucy Westenra, a beautiful nineteen-year-old virgin, into a shameless slut.[13]
Dracula may be viewed as a novel about the struggle between tradition and
modernity at the fin de siÃ¨cle. Throughout, there are various references to
changing gender roles; Mina Harker can be seen as a thoroughly modern woman,
using such modern technologies as the typewriter. She also displays some
characteristics of the New Woman through her rejection of deference to male
superiority and her economic independence. However, Mina still embodies a
traditional gender role, as seen in her feminine and maternal nature and her
occupation as an assistant schoolmistress.

Stoker's novel deals in general with the conflict between the world of the
past â full of folklore, legend, and religious piety â and the emerging
modern world of technology, positivism, and secularism.

Van Helsing epitomizes this struggle because he uses, at the time, extremely
modern technologies like blood transfusions; but he is not so modern as to
eschew the idea that a demonic being could be causing Lucy's illness: he
spreads garlic around the sashes and doors of her room and makes her wear a
garlic flower necklace. After Lucy's death, he receives an indulgence from a
Catholic cleric to use the Eucharist (held by the Church to be trans-
substantiated into the body and blood of Jesus) in his fight against Dracula.
In trying to bridge the rational/superstitious conflict within the story, he
cites new sciences, such as hypnotism, that were only recently considered
magical. He also quotes (without attribution) the American psychologist
William James, whose writings on the power of belief become the only way to
deal with this conflict.

No character in the novel advocates a rejection of science in favour of either
religion or superstition. Van Helsing receives the admiration of the other
characters and succeeds in defeating Dracula by dint of a combination of
encyclopaedic knowledge and "open-mindedness." Late in the novel, as Dr.
Seward comes to embrace Van Helsing's open-mindedness, he writes, "In an age
when the existence of ptomaines is a mystery we should not wonder at
anything!" For the characters, and presumably for the author, science opens
the possibility of shockingly unfamiliar phenomena. If the novel sounds a
cautionary note, it merely warns against the presumption that established
science as yet offers a complete world-view. Within Stoker's fictional
universe, (correct) superstitious beliefs have an empirical basis and promise
to yield to scientific inquiry.

Jonathan Harker's character displays the problems of dwelling in a strictly
rational modern world. Visiting Count Dracula in Eastern Europe, Jonathan
scoffs at the peasants who tell him to delay his visit until after Saint
George's feast day. As a solicitor, Jonathan is concerned âwith facts â
bare meagre facts, verified by books and figures, and of which there can be no
doubtâ. All of Jonathanâs rationality weakens him to what he witnesses at
Castle Dracula. For example, the first time Jonathan witnesses Dracula
crawling down the face of the castle headfirst, he is in complete disbelief.
Not believing what he sees, he attempts to explain what he saw as a trick of
the moonlight.

The characters of Dracula use modern technology and rationalism to defeat the
Count. For example, during their pursuit of the vampire, they use railroads
and steamships, not to mention the telegraph (and a telephone is even used on
their behalf at one point), to keep a step ahead of him (in contrast, Dracula
escapes in a sailing ship). Van Helsing uses hypnotism to pinpoint Dracula's
location. Mina even employs criminology to anticipate Dracula's actions and
cites both Cesare Lombroso and Max Nordau, who at that time were considered
experts in this field.

A number of scholars have noted the theme of a 'barbarian' prince attempting
to usurp British society as being an example of the invasion literature which
was popular at the time. Author Kim Newman characterized Dracula as being the
story of "a one-man invasion" and drew attention to Van Helsing's claim that
Dracula's goal was to become "the father or furthurer of a new order of
beings, whose road must lead through Death, not Life".[14] The imperialism,
xenophobia and use of technology to achieve results, along with the presence
of a vampire, have all been also discussed in academia as present in both
Dracula and Stoker's 1909 novel, The Lady of the Shroud.

## [edit] Adaptations

For more details on this topic, see Dracula in popular culture.

The story of Dracula has been the basis for countless films and plays. Of all
the movies, the most popular are: Dracula (1931), The Horror of Dracula
(1958), and Bram Stoker's Dracula (1992). Another famous version of the story
was Nosferatu (1922), a film directed by the German director F.W. Murnau, was
produced while Stoker's widow was alive, and the filmmakers were forced to
change the setting and the characters' names for copyright reasons. The
vampire in Nosferatu is called Count Orlok rather than Count Dracula.

The character of Count Dracula has remained popular over the years, and many
films have used the character as a villain, while others have named him in
their titles, such as Dracula's Daughter, Brides of Dracula, and Zoltan, Hound
of Dracula. An estimated 160 films (as of 2004) feature Dracula in a major
role, a number second only to Sherlock Holmes. The number of films that
include a reference to Dracula may reach as high as 649, according to the
Internet Movie Database.[15]

Most adaptations do not include all the major characters from the novel. The
Count is always present, and Jonathan and Mina Harker, Dr. Seward, Dr. Van
Helsing, and Renfield usually appear as well. The characters of Mina and Lucy
are often combined into a single female role. Jonathan Harker and Renfield are
also sometimes reversed or combined. Quincey Morris and Arthur Holmwood are
usually omitted entirely.

## [edit] Dracula's Guest

In 1914, two years after Stoker's death, the short story Dracula's Guest was
posthumously published. It was, according to most contemporary critics, the
deleted first (or second) chapter from the original manuscript[16] and the one
which gave the volume its name,[17] but which the original publishers deemed
unnecessary to the overall story.

Dracula's Guest follows an unnamed Englishman traveller (whom most readers
identify as Jonathan Harker, assuming it is the same character from the novel)
as he wanders around Munich before leaving for Transylvania. It is Walpurgis
Night, and in spite of the coachman's warnings, the young Englishman foolishly
leaves his hotel and wanders through a dense forest alone. Along the way he
feels he is being watched by a tall and thin stranger (possibly Count
Dracula).

The short story climaxes in an old graveyard, where in a marble tomb (with a
large iron stake driven into it), he encounters the ghost of a female vampire
called Countess Dolingen. The spirit of this malevolent and beautiful vampire
awakens from her marble bier to conjure a snowstorm before being struck by
lightning and returning to her eternal prison. Harker's troubles are not quite
over, as a wolf then emerges through the blizzard and attacks him. However,
the wolf merely keeps him warm and alive until help arrives.

When Harker is finally taken back to his hotel, a telegram awaits him from his
expectant host Dracula, with a warning about "dangers from snow and wolves and
night".

## [edit] Official sequel

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)  
A great-grandnephew of Bram Stoker, Dacre Stoker and Dracula documentarian Ian
Holt have written a family-endorsed sequel to Dracula titled "The Un-Dead"
(which was Bram's original title for his work). Dacre claims that parts of the
work are based on excised material from the original novel and Stoker's Notes.
On October 3 it was announced that North American rights to the book had been
sold, and it would be appearing in October 2009. A film based on the book will
begin shooting in June 2009.

Ian Holt and Alexander Galant have completed the screenplay based on the
official sequel novel. Dacre Stoker and Alexander Galant are both Canadians,
though Dacre now lives in the US.

## [edit] Notes for Dracula

In 2008, Robert Eighteen-Bisang and Elizabeth Miller published Bram Stoker's
Notes for Dracula: A Facsimile Edition (Jefferson NC & London: McFarland. ISBN
978-0-7864-3410-7) based on the materials from the Rosenbach Museum & Library,
containing a complete set of Stoker's handwritten and typed notes. Notes are
fully transcribed and annotated.

## [edit] See also

  * Elizabeth BÃ¡thory
  * Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu
  * Vlad III the Impaler
  * Tsutomu Miyazaki
  * Alucard
  * Castlevania
  * Blacula
  * Universal Monsters
  * Draculin
  * Nosferatu

## [edit] Notes and references

  1. ^ Leonard Wolf (2004), The Essential Dracula, Chapter 13, Note 31. "Bloofer lady" is explained as baby-talk for "beautiful lady."
  2. ^ Already dead, Dracula can not be killed, only destroyed.
  3. ^ Nina Auerbach and David Skal, editors. Dracula. Norton Critical Edition. 1997. ISBN 0393970124. Preface, first paragraph.
  4. ^ Lugosi v. Universal Pictures, 70 Cal.App.3d 552 (1977), note 4.
  5. ^ [1] â Article at the BBC Cult website.
  6. ^ Cited in Paul Murray's "From the Shadow of Dracula: A Life of Bram Stoker" 2004. p. 363-4
  7. ^ Nina Auerbach and David Skal, editors. Dracula. Norton Critical Edition. 1997. ISBN 0393970124. Preface, first paragraph.
  8. ^ Richard Dalby (1986) "Bram Stoker" in The Penguin Encyclopedia of Horror and the Supernatural
  9. ^ Cited in Nina Auerbach and David Skal, editors, Dracula, Norton Critical Edition, 1997, p. 363-4
  10. ^ Richard Dalby (1986) "Bram Stoker" in The Penguin Encyclopedia of Horror and the Supernatural
  11. ^ BÃ¡thory ErzsÃ©bet - Elizabeth Bathory: Bram Stoker, Elizabeth Bathory, and Dracula (Elizabeth Miller)
  12. ^ Elizabeth Miller, Filing for Divorce Count Dracula vs Vlad Tepes Dracula: The Shade and the Shadow, ed. Elizabeth Miller (Westcliff-on-Sea: Desert Island Books, 1998
  13. ^ Leonard Wolf, "Introduction" to the Signet Classic Edition, 1992
  14. ^ Anno Dracula: The Background
  15. ^ Count Dracula at the Internet Movie Database
  16. ^ James Craig Holte (1997), Dracula Film Adaptations, Page 27.
  17. ^ Barbara Belford (2002), Bram Stoker and the Man Who Was Dracula, ISBN 0-306-81098-0.Page 325

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Dalby, Richard and Hughes, William. Bram Stoker: A Bibliography (Westcliff-on-Sea: Desert Island Books, 2005)
  * Frayling, Christopher. Vampyres: Lord Byron to Count Dracula (1992) ISBN 0-571-16792-6
  * Eighteen-Bisang, Robert and Miller, Elizabeth. Bram Stoker's Notes for Dracula: A Facsimile Edition Toronto: McFarland, 2008, ISBN 978-0-7864-3410-7
  * Hughes, William. Beyond Dracula: Bram Stoker's Fiction and its Cultural Contexts (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2000)
  * McNally, Raymond T. & Florescu, Radu. In Search of Dracula. Houghton Mifflin Company, 1994. ISBN 0-395-65783-0
  * Miller, Elizabeth. Dracula: Sense & Nonsense. 2nd ed. Desert Island Books, 2006. ISBN 1-905328-15-X
  * Wolf, Leonard. The Essential Dracula. ibooks, inc., 2004. ISBN 0-7434-9803-8

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Dracula

  * Dracula at Project Gutenberg , text version of 1897 edition. PDF
  * Dracula, New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1897. Scanned first edition from Internet Archive.
  * Dracula Research Centre run by the Canadian Chapter of the Transylvanian Society of Dracula

* * *
v â¢ d â¢ e

Bram Stoker's Dracula  
Characters of Dracula

Count Dracula â¢ Jonathan Harker â¢ Mina Harker â¢ Abraham Van Helsing â¢
Lucy Westenra â¢ Arthur Holmwood â¢ Dr. John Seward â¢ Quincey Morris â¢
Renfield â¢ Brides

<IMG>  
Film adaptations

Nosferatu (1922) â¢ Dracula (1931) â¢ Dracula (1931 Spanish Version) â¢
Drakula Ä°stanbul'da (1953) â¢ Dracula (1958) â¢ Dracula (1968) â¢ Count
Dracula (1970) â¢ Dracula (1973) â¢ Count Dracula (1977) â¢ Dracula (1979)
â¢ Nosferatu the Vampyre (1979) â¢ Dracula (1992) â¢ Dracula (2002) â¢
Dracula: Pages from a Virgin's Diary (2002) â¢ Dracula (2006)  
Other films

Universal Horror

Dracula's Daughter (1936) â¢ Son of Dracula (1943) â¢ House of Frankenstein
(1944) â¢ House of Dracula (1945) â¢ Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein
(1948)  
Hammer Horror

The Brides of Dracula (1960) â¢ Dracula: Prince of Darkness (1966) â¢
Dracula Has Risen from the Grave (1968) â¢ Taste the Blood of Dracula (1970)
â¢ Scars of Dracula (1970) â¢ Dracula AD 1972 (1972) â¢ The Satanic Rites
of Dracula (1973) â¢ The Legend of the 7 Golden Vampires (1974)  
Dracula 2000

Dracula 2000 (2000) â¢ Dracula II: Ascension (2003) â¢ Dracula III: Legacy
(2005)  
Parodies

Blacula (1972) â¢ Scream Blacula Scream (1973) â¢ Blood for Dracula (1974)
â¢ Love at First Bite (1979) â¢ The Monster Squad (1987) â¢ Waxwork (1988)
â¢ Dracula: Dead and Loving It (1995) â¢ Monster Mash (1995)  
Others

Dracula's Death (1923) â¢ Blood of Dracula's Castle (1969) â¢ The Halloween
That Almost Wasn't (1969) â¢ Dracula vs. Frankenstein (1971) â¢ Zoltan,
Hound of Dracula (film) (1978) â¢ The Halloween That Almost Wasn't (1979) â¢
Dark Prince: The True Story of Dracula (2000) â¢ Dracula 3000 (2004) â¢
Blade: Trinity (2004) â¢ Van Helsing (2004) â¢ The Batman vs. Dracula (2005)
â¢ Bram Stoker's Dracula's Curse (2006)  
Stage adaptations

Dracula (1924) â¢ Count Dracula (1972) â¢ Dracula, a Musical Nightmare
(1974) â¢ Dracula (1980) â¢ Dracula: the Musical? (1982) â¢ Dracula (1995)
â¢ Dracula (1996) â¢ Dracula (2000) â¢ Dracula, the Musical (2004)  
Comics

The Tomb of Dracula (1972-1979) â¢ Dracula (Marvel Comics) â¢ Dracula (Dell
Comics) â¢ Sword of Dracula  
Video games

Castlevania â¢ Dracula â¢ Alucard  
See also

Buffy the Vampire Slayer "Buffy vs. Dracula" (2000) â¢ Fangland (2007)  
Alternate storylines

Anno Dracula (1992)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Works by Bram Stoker  
Novels:

The Primrose Path (1875) â¢ The Snake's Pass (1890) â¢ The Watter's Mou'
(1895) â¢ The Shoulder of Shasta (1895) â¢ Dracula (1897) â¢ Miss Betty
(1898) â¢ The Mystery of the Sea (1902) â¢ The Jewel of Seven Stars (1903)
â¢ The Man (AKA: The Gates of Life) (1905) â¢ Lady Athlyne (1908) â¢ The
Lady of the Shroud (1909) â¢ The Lair of the White Worm (1911)  
Short story collections:

Under the Sunset (1881) â¢ Snowbound: The Record of a Theatrical Touring
Party (1908) â¢ Dracula's Guest (1914)  
Non-fiction:

The Duties of Clerks of Petty Sessions in Ireland (1879) â¢ A Glimpse of
America (1886) â¢ Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving (1906) â¢ Famous
Impostors (1910)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dracula"

Categories: 1897 novels | Dracula | English-language novels | Epistolary
novels | Gothic fiction | Gothic novels | Horror novels | Invasion literature
| Irish novels | North Yorkshire | Novels by Bram Stoker | Romania in fiction
| Vampires in written fiction | Vampire novels

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Suomi
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 17:26.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



