
# Meditations

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Marcus Aurelius wrote Meditations in Greek at his base in Sirmium in modern-
day Serbia and also while positioned at Aquincum on campaign in Pannonia in
modern-day Hungary

This article is about the writings by Marcus Aurelius. For other uses, see
Meditation (disambiguation).

Meditations (Î¤á½° Îµá¼°Ï á¼Î±Ï ÏÏÎ½, Ta eis heauton, literally
"thoughts/writings addressed to himself") is the title of a series of personal
writings by Marcus Aurelius setting forth his ideas on Stoic philosophy.

Marcus Aurelius wrote the 12 books of the Meditations in "highly-educated"
Koine Greek[1] as a source for his own guidance and self-improvement. It is
possible that large portions of the work were written in Sirmium, where he
spent much time planning military campaigns from 170 to 180. We know that some
of it was written while he was positioned at Aquincum on campaign in Pannonia,
because internal notes tell us that the second book was written when he was
campaigning against the Quadi on the river Granova (modern-day Hron) and the
third book was written at Carnuntum. It is not clear that he ever intended the
writings to be published, so the title Meditations is but one of several
commonly assigned to the collection. These writings take the form of
quotations varying in length from one sentence to long paragraphs.

His stoic ideas often revolve around the denial of emotion, a skill which, he
says, will free a man from the pains and pleasures of the material world. He
claims that the only way a man can be harmed by others is to allow his
reaction to overpower him. An order or logos permeates existence. Rationality
and clear-mindedness allow one to live in harmony with the logos. This allows
one to rise above faulty perceptions of "good" and "bad."

## Contents

  * 1 Reception and Influence
  * 2 Quotations
  * 3 Editions
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Reception and Influence

Marcus Aurelius has been lauded for his capacity "to write down what was in
his heart just as it was, not obscured by any consciousness of the presence of
listeners or any striving after effect." Gilbert Murray compares the work to
Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Confessions and St. Augustine of Hippo's Confessions.
Though Murray criticizes Marcus for the "harshness and plainness of his
literary style," he finds in his Meditations "as much intensity of
feeling...as in most of the nobler modern books of religion, only [with] a
sterner power controlling it." "People fail to understand Marcus," he writes,
"not because of his lack of self-expression, but because it is hard for most
men to breathe at that intense height of spiritual life, or, at least, to
breathe soberly."[2] D.A. Rees calls the Meditations "unendingly moving and
inspiring", but does not offer them up as works of original philosophy.[3]
Bertrand Russell found them contradictory and inconsistent, evidence of a
"tired age" where "even real goods lose their savour." Using Marcus as an
example of greater Stoic philosophy, he found their ethical philosophy to
contain an element of "sour grapes". "We can't be happy, but we can be good;
let us therefore pretend that, so long as we are good, it doesn't matter being
unhappy."[4] Both Russell and Rees find an element of Marcus' Stoic philosophy
in Kant's own philosophical system.[5][3] Gregory Hays' translation of
Meditations for The Modern Library made the bestseller list for two weeks in
2002.[6]

## [edit] Quotations

  * If thou art pained by any external thing, it is not this that disturbs thee, but thy own judgment about it. And it is in thy power to wipe out this judgment now. (VIII. 47, trans. George Long)
  * A cucumber is bitter. Throw it away. There are briers in the road. Turn aside from them. This is enough. Do not add, "And why were such things made in the world?" (VIII. 50, trans. George Long)
  * Soon you'll be ashes or bones. A mere name at most--and even that is just a sound, an echo. The things we want in life are empty, stale, trivial. (V. 33, trans. Gregory Hays)
  * Never regard something as doing you good if it makes you betray a trust or lose your sense of shame or makes you show hatred, suspicion, ill-will or hypocrisy or a desire for things best done behind closed doors. (III. 7, trans. Gregory Hays)
  * Not to feel exasperated or defeated or despondent because your days aren't packed with wise and moral actions. But to get back up when you fail, to celebrate behaving like a human--however imperfectly--and fully embrace the pursuit you've embarked on. (V. 9, trans. Gregory Hays)
  * Let opinion be taken away, and no man will think himself wronged. If no man shall think himself wronged, then is there no more any such thing as wrong. (IV. 7, trans. MÃ©ric Casaubon)
  * (...) As for others whose lives are not so ordered, he reminds himself constantly of the characters they exhibit daily and nightly at home and abroad , and of the sort of society they frequent; and the approval of such men, who do not even stand well in their own eyes has no value for him. (III. 4, trans. Maxwell Staniforth)
  * Take away your opinion, and there is taken away the complaint, [...] Take away the complaint, [...] and the hurt is gone (IV. 7, trans. George Long)
  * Whatever happens to you has been waiting to happen since the beginning of time. The twining strands of fate wove both of them together: your own existence and the things that happen to you. (V. 8, trans. Gregory Hays)
  * Do not act as if thou wert going to live ten thousand years. Death hangs over thee. While thou livest, while it is in thy power, be good. (IV. 17, trans. George Long)
  * Do not then consider life a thing of any value. For look at the immensity of time behind thee, and to the time which is before thee, another boundless space. In this infinity then what is the difference between him who lives three days and him who lives three generations? (IV. 50, trans. George Long)
  * When you wake up in the morning, tell yourself: The people I deal with today will be meddling, ungrateful, arrogant, dishonest, jealous, and surly. They are like this because they can't tell good from evil. But I have seen the beauty of good, and the ugliness of evil, and have recognized that the wrongdoer has a nature related to my own-not of the same blood or birth, but the same mind, and possessing a share of the divine. (II. 1, trans. Gregory Hays)

## [edit] Editions

Some popular English translations include:

  * The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, translated by George Long (1862); reprinted many times, including in Vol. 2 of the Harvard Classics.
  * The Golden Book of Marcus Aurelius, translated by Meric Casaubon. J.M. Dent & Co. (London). 1906-1908.
  * Meditations, translated by Maxwell Staniforth. ISBN 0-14-044140-9.
  * Meditations, translated by Gregory Hays. ISBN 0-679-64260-9.
  * The Emperor's Handbook: A New Translation of the Meditations, translated by Scot and David Hicks. ISBN 0-7432-3383-2.
  * Meditations, translated by A.S.L. Farquharson. ISBN 0-19-283907-1.
  * "The Essential Marcus Aurelius" Newly translated and introduced by Jacob Needleman and John P. Piazza. ISBN 978-1-58542-617-1

## [edit] See also

  * Sirmium
  * John Bourchier, 2nd Baron Berners

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Close imitation of Attic was not required because [Marcus Aurelius] wrote in a philosophical context without thought of publication. Galen's many writings in what he calls 'the common dialect' are another excellent example of non-atticizing but highly educated Greek." Simon Swain, (1996), Hellenism and Empire, page 29. Oxford University Press.
  2. ^ Murray, Gilbert (2002) [1912]. Five Stages of Greek Religion (3rd Edition ed.). Dover Publications. pp. 168â9. ISBN 0-486-42500-2.
  3. ^ a b D.A. Rees, Introduction pp. xvii. In Farquhrson, A. S. L. (1992) [1944]. Meditations. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-679-41271-9.
  4. ^ Russell, Bertrand (2004) [1946]. History of Western Philosophy. London: Routledge. pp. 248â56. ISBN 0-415-32505-6.
  5. ^ Ibid. 254-5
  6. ^ The Washington Post Bestseller List June 9th, 2002

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Meditations

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to:
Meditations  
  * Multiple editions of the Meditations at the Internet Archive
  * Î¤á½° Îµá¼°Ï á¼Î±Ï ÏÏÎ½, an online Greek version of the Meditations after A.S.L.Farquharson's publication
  * The Meditations, an online version at the Internet Classics Archive
  * The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, an online version from The Harvard Classics series, published 1909-1914.
  * Meditations, an online version from Project Gutenberg (text is from The Golden Book of Marcus Aurelius, translated by Meric Casaubon, published 1906-1908.)
  * Latin Version by J. M. Schulz (1802)
  * Audio recording of George Long's translation at LibriVox.org

v â¢ d â¢ e

Stoicism  
Philosophers

Early Stoa

Zeno of Citium Â· Persaeus Â· Aristo Â· Sphaerus Â· Herillus Â· Cleanthes Â·
Chrysippus Â· Zeno of Tarsus Â· Crates of Mallus Â· Diogenes of Babylon Â·
Apollodorus Â· Antipater of Tarsus  
Middle Stoa

Panaetius Â· Dardanus Â· Mnesarchus Â· Hecato Â· Posidonius Â· Diodotus Â·
Geminus Â· Antipater of Tyre Â· Athenodoros Cananites  
Late Stoa

Seneca Â· Cornutus Â· Musonius Rufus Â· Euphrates Â· Cleomedes Â· Epictetus Â·
Hierocles Â· Sextus Â· Junius Rusticus Â· Marcus Aurelius  
Philosophy

Stoicism Â· Stoic Categories Â· Stoic Passions Â· Neostoicism  
Concepts

Adiaphora Â· Apatheia Â· Ataraxia Â· Diairesis Â· Eudaimonia Â· Katalepsis Â·
Logos Â· Kathekon Â· Physis Â· Pneuma  
Works

Dialogues (Seneca) Â· Discourses (Epictetus) Â· Enchiridion (Epictetus) Â·
Epistles (Seneca) Â· Meditations (Marcus Aurelius) Â· Republic (Zeno)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meditations"

Categories: 2nd-century books | Ancient Greek works | Nerva-Antonine Dynasty |
Stoicism | Cognitive science literature

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * Latina
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Nederlands
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 20 March 2009, at 18:35.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



