
# Invisible hand

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Invisible hand (disambiguation).

<IMG>

This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article
or discuss these issues on the talk page.

  * It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since December 2007.  

  * It contains too many quotations for an encyclopedic entry. Tagged since March 2008.  

  
In economics, the invisible hand is the term economists use to describe the
self-regulating nature of the marketplace.[1] The invisible hand is a metaphor
coined by the economist Adam Smith. Once in The Wealth of Nations and other
writings, Smith tried to show that, in a free market, an individual pursuing
his own self-interest tends to also promote the good of his community as a
whole through a principle that he called âthe invisible hand.â He argued
that each individual maximizing revenue for himself maximizes the total
revenue of society as a whole, as this is identical with the sum total of
individual revenues.

Smith used the term 'invisible hand' only three times, but the metaphor later
gained widespread use.

## Contents

  * 1 The Wealth of Nations
  * 2 Economists' interpretation of the "invisible hand" quote
  * 3 Understood as a metaphor
  * 4 Examples and arguments
  * 5 Tawney's interpretation
  * 6 Other uses of the phrase by Smith
  * 7 Criticism
    * 7.1 Joseph E. Stiglitz
    * 7.2 Noam Chomsky
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] The Wealth of Nations

Adam Smith mentions the metaphor in Book IV of The Wealth of Nations, arguing
that people in any society will certainly employ their capital in foreign
trading only if the profits available by that method far exceed those
available locally, and that in such a case it is better for society as a whole
if they so did.

> But the annual revenue of every society is always precisely equal to the
exchangeable value of the whole annual produce of its industry, or rather is
precisely the same thing with that exchangeable value. As every individual,
therefore, endeavors as much he can both to employ his capital in the support
of domestic industry, and so to direct that industry that its produce may be
of the greatest value; every individual necessarily labors to render the
annual revenue of the society as great as he can. He generally, indeed,
neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is
promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign
industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in
such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his
own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand
to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the
worse for the society that it was not part of it. By pursuing his own interest
he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he
really intends to promote it. I have never known much good done by those who
affected to trade for the public good. It is an affectation, indeed, not very
common among merchants, and very few words need be employed in dissuading them
from it.

(IV.ii.6-9, page 456 of the 1776 Glasgow Edition of Smithâs works; vol. IV,
ch. 2, p. 477 of 1776 U. of Chicago Edition.) (Book IV, Ch. II, page 484-485
Modern Library Edition, New York)

## [edit] Economists' interpretation of the "invisible hand" quote

The concept of the Invisible Hand is nearly always generalized beyond Smith's
original discussion of domestic versus foreign trade. Smith himself
participated in such generalization, as is already evident in his allusion to
"many other cases," quoted above.

Milton Friedman, a Nobel Prize winner in economics, called Smith's Invisible
Hand "the possibility of cooperation without coercion."[2]

Notice that the Invisible Hand is here considered a natural inclination, not
yet a social mechanism as it was later classified by Leon Walras and Vilfredo
Pareto.

The theory of the Invisible Hand states that if each consumer is allowed to
choose freely what to buy and each producer is allowed to choose freely what
to sell and how to produce it, the market will settle on a product
distribution and prices that are beneficial to all the individual members of a
community, and hence to the community as a whole. The reason for this is that
greed will drive actors to beneficial behavior. Efficient methods of
production will be adopted in order to maximize profits. Low prices will be
charged in order to undercut competitors. Investors will invest in those
industries that are most urgently needed to maximize returns, and withdraw
capital from those that are less efficient in creating value. Students will be
guided to prepare for the most needed (and therefore most remunerative)
careers. And all these effects will take place dynamically and automatically.

It also works as a balancing mechanism. For example, the inhabitants of a poor
country will be willing to work very cheaply. Entrepreneurs can make great
profits by building factories in poor countries. But because they increase the
demand for labor, they will increase its price. And because the new producers
will also become consumers, local businesses will have to hire more people in
order to provide for them the things that they want to consume. As this
process continues, the labor prices will eventually rise to the point at which
there is no advantage for the foreign countries doing business in the formerly
poor country. Overall, this mechanism will cause the local economy to function
on its own.

In The Wealth of Nations Smith provides an example that illustrates the
simplicity of the principle:

â It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer or the baker,
that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own self interest.
We address ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never
talk to them of our own necessities but of their advantages.[3] â  
## [edit] Understood as a metaphor

Smith uses the metaphor in the context of an argument against protectionism
and government regulation of markets, but it is based on very broad principles
developed by Bernard Mandeville, Bishop Butler, Lord Shaftesbury, and Francis
Hutcheson. In general, the term âinvisible handâ can apply to any
individual action that has unplanned, unintended consequences, particularly
those which arise from actions not orchestrated by a central command and which
have an observable, patterned effect on the community.

Bernard Mandeville argued that private vices are actually public benefits. In
The Fable of the Bees (1714), he laments that the âbees of social virtue are
buzzing in Manâs bonnetâ: that civilized man has stigmatized his private
appetites and the result is the retardation of the common good.

Bishop Butler argued that pursuing the public good was the best way of
advancing oneâs own good since the two were necessarily identical.

Lord Shaftesbury turned the convergence of public and private good around,
claiming that acting in accordance with oneâs self-interest will produce
socially beneficial results. An underlying unifying force that Shaftesbury
called the âWill of Natureâ maintains equilibrium, congruency, and
harmony. This force, if it is to operate freely, requires the individual
pursuit of rational self-interest, and the preservation and advancement of the
self.

Francis Hutcheson also accepted this convergence between public and private
interest, but he attributed the mechanism, not to rational self-interest, but
to personal intuition, which he called a âmoral sense.â Smith developed
his own version of this general principle in which six psychological motives
combine in each individual to produce the common good. In The Theory of Moral
Sentiments, vol. II, page 316, he says, âBy acting according to the dictates
of our moral faculties, we necessarily pursue the most effective means for
promoting the happiness of mankind.â

Contrary to common misconceptions, Smith did not assert that all self-
interested labour necessarily benefits society, or that all public goods are
produced through self-interested labour. His proposal is merely that in a free
market, people usually tend to produce goods desired by their neighbours. The
tragedy of the commons is an example where self-interest tends to bring an
unwanted result.

Moreover, a free market arguably provides numerous opportunities for
maximizing oneâs own profit at the expense (rather than for the benefit) of
others. The tobacco industry is often cited as an example of this: the sale of
cigarettes and other tobacco products certainly brings a very good revenue,
but the industryâs critics deny that the social benefits (the pleasures
associated with smoking, the camaraderie, the feeling of doing something
âcoolâ) can possibly outbalance the social costs.[citation needed]

## [edit] Examples and arguments

Since Smithâs time, the principle of the invisible hand has been further
incorporated into economic theory. Leon Walras developed a four-equation
general equilibrium model which concludes that individual self-interest
operating in a competitive market place produces the unique conditions under
which a societyâs total utility is maximized. Vilfredo Pareto used an
edgeworth box contact line to illustrate a similar social optimality.

Ludwig von Mises, in Human Action (see note 3 at the bottom), claims that
Smith believed that the invisible hand was that of God. He did not mean this
as a criticism, since he held that secular reasoning leads to similar
conclusions.

The invisible hand is traditionally understood as a concept in economics, but
Robert Nozick argues in Anarchy, State and Utopia that substantively the same
concept exists in a number of other areas of academic discourse under
different names, notably Darwinian natural selection. In turn, Daniel Dennett
has argued in Darwinâs Dangerous Idea that this represents a âuniversal
acidâ which may be applied to a number of seemingly disparate areas of
philosophical enquiry (consciousness and free will in particular). See also
Social Darwinism.

## [edit] Tawney's interpretation

Christian socialist R. H. Tawney saw Smith as putting a name on an older idea:

â

> If preachers have not yet overtly identified themselves with the view of the
natural man, expressed by an eighteenth-century writer in the words, trade is
one thing and religion is another, they imply a not very different conclusion
by their silence as to the possibility of collisions between them. The
characteristic doctrine was one, in fact, which left little room for religious
teaching as to economic morality, because it anticipated the theory, later
epitomized by Adam Smith in his famous reference to the invisible hand, which
saw in economic self-interest the operation of a providential plan... The
existing order, except insofar as the short-sighted enactments of Governments
interfered with it, was the natural order, and the order established by nature
was the order established by God. Most educated men, in the middle of the
[eighteenth] century, would have found their philosophy expressed in the lines
of Pope:

>     Thus God and Nature formed the general frame,

>     And bade self-love and social be the same.

> Naturally, again, such an attitude precluded a critical examination of
institutions, and left as the sphere of Christian charity only those parts of
life which could be reserved for philanthropy, precisely because they fell
outside that larger area of normal human relations, in which the promptings of
self-interest provided an all-sufficient motive and rule of conduct. (Religion
and the Rise of Capitalism, page 195.)

â  
## [edit] Other uses of the phrase by Smith

Adam Smith used the phrase two other times in his writings, once published and
once unpublished. The unpublished reference simply says that practitioners of
Polytheistic religions did not attribute gravity or fire to the invisible hand
of Jupiter, and the idea clearly has no relation to the invisible hand of the
market. However, this particular reference should be observed for a complete
picture of what Smith intends to portray by the term "Invisible Hand."[4]

The other is in his published work, Theory of Moral Sentiments. Here, Smith
uses the invisible hand to explain the distribution of wealth (1759, p. 350):

> "The rich ... consume little more than the poor, and in spite of their
natural selfishness ... They are led by an invisible hand to make nearly the
same distribution of the necessaries of life, which would have been made, had
the earth been divided into equal portions among all its inhabitants, and ...
advance the interest of the society, and afford means to the multiplication of
the species."

So unequal distribution does not matter because it filters to the poor.[5]
More importantly, unequal distribution of the necessaries of life is the only
possible outcome given the realities of human life. Therefore, Smith argues
that a society governed by an "invisible hand" or market transactions is the
most just society in that it minimizes, more than any other political economy,
the marginalization of the poor. This was written before Smith visited France
and the "Ãconomistes" (Physiocrats) who gave him and classical economics the
"circular flow" vision of the economy. See the emphasis of "annually" in
Smith's Introduction. In a "circular flow" output that do not become input in
the next circle is "unproductive labour" produced by a "classe stÃ©rile"
(Ãconomistes). So the beneficial results of the "invisible hand" in Smith's
"Moral Sentiments" are contradicted by Smith's argument against "unproductive
labour" in the "Wealth of Nations." The demand for unproductive labour is
often a demand for luxuries and therefore an obstacle for deepening the
division of labour (i.e. economic progress in general) and increasing the
"Wealth of Nations."

## [edit] Criticism

### [edit] Joseph E. Stiglitz

The Nobel Prize winning economist (2001) Joseph E. Stiglitz says: "the reason
that the invisible hand often seems invisible is that it is often not there."
(Making Globalization Work, 2006).[6] Stiglitz explains his position:

    
    Adam Smith, the father of modern economics, is often cited as arguing for the âinvisible handâ and free markets: firms, in the pursuit of profits, are led, as if by an invisible hand, to do what is best for the world. But unlike his followers, Adam Smith was aware of some of the limitations of free markets, and research since then has further clarified why free markets, by themselves, often do not lead to what is best. As I put it in my new book, Making Globalization Work, the reason that the invisible hand often seems invisible is that it is often not there.
    
    Whenever there are âexternalitiesââwhere the actions of an individual have impacts on others for which they do not pay or for which they are not compensatedâmarkets will not work well. Some of the important instances have been long understoodâenvironmental externalities. Markets, by themselves, will produce too much pollution. Markets, by themselves, will also produce too little basic research. (Remember, the government was responsible for financing most of the important scientific breakthroughs, including the internet and the first telegraph line, and most of the advances in bio-tech.)
    
    But recent research has shown that these externalities are pervasive, whenever there is imperfect information or imperfect risk marketsâthat is always.
    
    Government plays an important role in banking and securities regulation, and a host of other areas: some regulation is required to make markets work. Government is needed, almost all would agree, at a minimum to enforce contracts and property rights.
    
    The real debate today is about finding the right balance between the market and government (and the third âsectorâânon-governmental non-profit organizations.) Both are needed. They can each complement each other. This balance will differ from time to time and place to place.[6]
### [edit] Noam Chomsky

Noam Chomsky, although acknowledging the intelligence of the thesis of Adam
Smith, criticizes how the term of the "invisible hand" has been misused and
abused. He also explains:

    
    Throughout history, Adam Smith observed, we find the workings of "the vile maxim of the masters of mankind": "All for ourselves, and nothing for other People." He had few illusions about the consequences. The invisible hand, he wrote, will destroy the possibility of a decent human existence "unless government takes pains to prevent" this outcome, as must be assured in "every improved and civilized society." It will destroy community, the environment and human values generally â and even the masters themselves, which is why the business classes have regularly called for state intervention to protect them from market forces. (...)[7]
## [edit] See also

Books

  * Essays on Philosophical Subjects by Adam Smith
  * I, Pencil by Leonard Read
  * The National Gain by Anders Chydenius
  * The Theory of Moral Sentiments by Adam Smith
  * The Wealth of Nations by Adam Smith

Articles

  * Enlightened self-interest
  * Free price system
  * Laissez-faire
  * Market fundamentalism
  * Philosophy of social science
  * Rational egoism
  * Rational selfishness
  * Spontaneous order

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Sullivan, arthur; Steven M. Sheffrin (2003). Economics: Principles in action. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458: Pearson Prentice Hall. pp. 32\. ISBN 0-13-063085-3. http://www.pearsonschool.com/index.cfm?locator=PSZ3R9&PMDbSiteId=2781&PMDbSolutionId=6724&PMDbCategoryId=&PMDbProgramId=12881&level=4.
  2. ^ Friedman's Introduction to I, Pencil
  3. ^ Smith, Adam. "2". Wealth of Nations. http://www.econlib.org/LIBRARY/Smith/smWN1.html#B.I%2C%20Ch.2%2C%20Of%20the%20Principle%20which%20gives%20Occasion%20to%20the%20Division%20of%20Labour%2C%20benevolence. Retrieved on 2007-12-08.
  4. ^ Minowitz, Peter. "Adam Smith's Invisible Hands" (December 2004). [1]
  5. ^ Minowitz, Peter. "Adam Smith's Invisible Hands" (December 2004). [2]
  6. ^ a b ALTMAN, Daniel. Managing Globalization. In: Q & Answers with Joseph E. Stiglitz, Columbia University and The International Herald Tribune, October 11, 2006 05:03AM.
  7. ^ http://www.chomsky.info/articles/199303--.htm

## [edit] External links

  * The Theory of Moral Sentiments (full text)
  * The Wealth of Nations (full text) or
  * The History of Astronomy, in Essays on Philosophical Subjects (full text)
  * I, Pencil (full text)
  * The National Gain (full text)
  * "Is the Invisible Hand Un-Smithian?" article by N. Emrah AydÄ±nonatPDF (70.7 KiB)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invisible_hand"

Categories: Classical liberalism | Social philosophy

Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from December 2007 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 09:00.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



