
# Atlas Shrugged

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Atlas Shrugged  
<IMG>  
First edition cover.  
Author Ayn Rand  
Country United States  
Language English  
Genre(s) Philosophical novel  
Publisher Random House  
Publication date 10 October 1957  
Media type print (hardback & paperback)  
Pages 1368 (depending on edition)  
ISBN ISBN 0-394-41576-0 (hardback edition)  
Atlas Shrugged is a novel by Ayn Rand, first published in 1957 in the United
States. It was Rand's fourth, longest, and last novel. Afterward, she
completed only non-fiction works, concentrating on philosophy, politics, and
cultural criticism.

Rand believed Atlas Shrugged, at over 1000 pages in length, to be her magnum
opus.[1] The book explores a number of philosophical themes that Rand would
subsequently develop into the philosophy of Objectivism.[2][3] It centers on
the decline of Western civilization, and Rand described it as demonstrating
the theme of "the role of man's mind in existence." In doing so it expresses
many facets of Rand's philosophy, such as the advocacy of reason,
individualism, the market economy and the failure of government.

As indicated by its original working title The Strike, the plot device is a
general strike by leading industrialists and businessmen, led by the
protagonist John Galt.

## Contents

  * 1 Philosophy and writing
  * 2 Setting
  * 3 Plot
    * 3.1 Galt's speech
    * 3.2 From The Strike to Atlas Shrugged
    * 3.3 Originality
  * 4 Characters
  * 5 Social concepts
    * 5.1 Looters and moochers
    * 5.2 Sanction of the victim
    * 5.3 Social classes
    * 5.4 Theory of sex
  * 6 Companies
    * 6.1 Looter companies vs John Galt's Movement
    * 6.2 Comparison with real-life railways
    * 6.3 Comparison with real-life railway industry
  * 7 Fictional technology
    * 7.1 Rearden metal
    * 7.2 Project X
    * 7.3 Galt's motor
    * 7.4 Project F
    * 7.5 Other
  * 8 Reception
    * 8.1 Early reception
    * 8.2 Criticism
    * 8.3 Praise and influence
    * 8.4 Renewed popularity
  * 9 Film adaptation
  * 10 See also
  * 11 Footnotes
  * 12 Further reading
    * 12.1 Publications
    * 12.2 Foreign language translations
  * 13 External links
    * 13.1 Reviews

  
## [edit] Philosophy and writing

Main article: Objectivism

The theme of Atlas Shrugged is the role of the mind in man's life and,
consequently, the presentation of a new morality: the morality of rational
self-interest.[4]

The main crux of the book surrounds the decision of the "men of the mind" to
go on strike, refusing to contribute their inventions, art, business
leadership, scientific research, or new ideas of any kind to the rest of the
world, as long as those contributions were subject to the government's
control. Each man of ability eventually reasons (or is convinced) that society
hampers him with restrictive, burdensome obstacles and manipulates his
contributions to the world, confiscating the profits and sullying the
reputation he has rightfully earned. The peaceful cohesiveness of the world
begins to disintegrate as the government exerts more and more control and men
of ability are forced out of business or simply choose to disappear. Society
loses those individuals whose mental effort allows it to continue functioning.
The strikers believe that they are crucial to a government that exploits them,
denying them freedom or failing to acknowledge their right to self-interest,
and the gradual collapse of civilization is triggered by their strike. This is
not to say that they believed that giving the creators their due would cost
civilization; rather, the strikers believe that the current irrational
altruist/collectivist culture impeded them and therefore the rest of society
as well. Thus it would serve no one's interest to continue to allow himself to
be exploited, although the strike is not primarily motivated by the harm the
current state of society does to others as well.

The novel's title is a reference to the mythical Greek titan Atlas, who was
described as holding the celestial globe on his shoulders. In the novel, the
mythological allusion comes during a conversation between two protagonists,
Francisco d'Anconia and Hank Rearden, near the end of part two, chapter three,
where Francisco (convincing Rearden that he is under-appreciated) tells
Rearden that if he could suggest to Atlas that he do one thing, it would be to
shrug.

This plot expresses Ayn Rand's beliefs in regards to multiple facets of her
philosophy. The collapse of society when the "men of the mind" go on strike in
response to their exploitation presents Ayn Rand's belief in the necessity to
human life of reason, independent-mindedness, individualism, individual
rights, and the market economy.

In the world of Atlas Shrugged, society stagnates when independent productive
achievers began to be socially demonized and even punished for their
accomplishments, even though society had been far more healthy and prosperous
by allowing, encouraging and rewarding self-reliance and individual
achievement. Independence and personal happiness flourished to the extent that
people were free, and achievement was rewarded to the extent that individual
ownership of private property was strictly respected. The hero, John Galt,
lives a life of laissez-faire capitalism as the only way to live consistently
with his beliefs.

In addition to the plot's more obvious statements about the significance of
industrialists and mental work to society, this explicit conflict is used by
Rand to draw wider philosophical conclusions, both implicit in the plot and
via the characters' own statements. Positions are expressed on a variety of
topics, including sex, politics, friendship, charity, childhood, and many
others. Part of this is the theme that its broad array of ideas are in fact
interrelated by their basic philosophy, and the significance of ideas to
society and to one's life.

Atlas Shrugged portrays fascism, socialism and communism â any form of state
intervention in society â as systemically and fatally flawed. Rand said that
it is not a fundamentally political book, but that the politics portrayed in
the novel are a result of her attempt to display her image of the ideal person
and the individual mind's position and value in society.[5]

Rand argues that independence and individual achievement enable society to
survive and thrive, and should be embraced. But this requires a "rational"
moral code. She argues that, over time, coerced self-sacrifice causes any
society to self-destruct.

Similarly, Rand rejects faith (that "short-cut to knowledge," she writes in
the novel, which in fact is only a "short-circuit" destroying knowledge),
along with any sort of a god or higher being. Rand urges the rejection of
anything claiming "authority" over one's own mind - apart from the absolute of
existence itself. The book positions itself against religion specifically,
often directly within the characters' dialogue.

## [edit] Setting

Exactly when Atlas Shrugged is meant to take place is kept deliberately vague.
There are many early 20th century technologies available, but the political
situation is clearly quite different from actual history.

In fact, the regime depicted in the book â unlike the Soviet regime which
was the background of We the Living â is not formally "socialist" at all. It
does not resort to outright nationalizations of private property: when Hank
Rearden confronts the government bureaucrats with "Why don't you take over my
mills and be done with it", they react with "a jolt of genuine horror" and
cries of "Oh no!" "We wouldn't think of it!" and "We stand for free
enterprise!" Instead, the regime passes restrictive laws which allow the
takeover of the enterprises of the producers. The regime then installs its own
choice to run that enterprise.

The regime's kind of interference with and regulation of economic life are in
fact reminiscent of those instituted through President Franklin D. Roosevelt's
"New Deal" â of which Rand strongly disapproved. The Washington bureaucrats
depicted in the book are similar to those with which Ellsworth Toohey is
involved in the later parts of The Fountainhead â which are explicitly set
in the later 1930s, under Roosevelt's New Deal administration.

This is in line with an excerpt from a 1964 interview with Playboy magazine in
which Rand states "What we have today is not a capitalist society, but a mixed
economy â that is, a mixture of freedom and controls, which, by the
presently dominant trend, is moving toward dictatorship. The action in Atlas
Shrugged takes place at a time when society has reached the stage of
dictatorship. When and if this happens, that will be the time to go on strike,
but not until then," thus implying that her novel takes place at some point in
the future. The concept of societal stagnation in the wake of collectivist
systems is central to the plot of another of Rand's works, Anthem.

The "mixed economy" of the book's present is often contrasted with the "pure"
capitalism of 19th century America, wistfully recalled as a lost Golden Age
personified in the larger-than-life character of Nathaniel Taggart, founder of
the Taggart dynasty.

In Atlas Shrugged, all countries outside the US have become â or are
becoming throughout the course of the novel â "People's States," which
survive mainly through aid given by the United States. Unlike the United
States, these do resort to outright nationalizations â though in at least
one case, that of Argentina and Chile, such "nationalizations" are explicitly
shown to be a cynical ploy for transferring the seized assets to the hands of
an American looter-capitalist (Orren Boyle).

Rand conceived the book and started writing it at the time when the US
implemented the Marshall Plan and sent extensive aid to European countries,
many of which â while opposed to the Soviet Union â implemented Socialist
or Social-Democratic policies of one kind or another. Specifically, a major
beneficiary of American aid was Britain under the Attlee Government, which
implemented more clearly Socialist policies than any other British Labour
Party cabinet, carried out significant nationalizations and instituted the
Welfare State. (A minor character in the book, Gilbert Keith-Worthing, is a
British novelist who comes to the US and urges his American hosts to
nationalize their country's railways.)

While many countries in the world are mentioned in passing, there is no
mention of the Soviet Union and no reference to World War II or the Cold War
â at its height at the time of writing. Nor is there any mention of other
countries under Communist rule at the time of writing and their relation to
the America of the book â with the possible exception of a reference to
American aid sent to "The People's State of Germany," suggesting that Germany
was never split apart or had been united under Communist rule at some time
before the book's action takes place.

There are many examples of early 20th century technology in Atlas Shrugged,
but no post-war advances such as nuclear weapons or computers. Jet planes are
mentioned briefly as being a relatively new technology. Television is a
novelty that has yet to assume any cultural significance, while radio
broadcasts are prominent (in fact, television only makes its first appearance
later on in the book, reflecting the fact that television appeared in the
fifties; i.e., during the ten years it took to write the book). Although Rand
does not use many of the technological innovations available while she was
writing in the book, she introduces some advanced, fictional inventions (e.g.,
sonic-based weapons of mass destruction, torture devices, as well as static
electricity-sourced power plants and a highly advanced strong steel alloy).

Rand's previous work on a proposed (but never realized) screenplay based on
the development of the Atomic Bomb, including her interviews of J. Robert
Oppenheimer, was utilized in the portrait of Robert Stadler and the novel's
depiction of the development of Project X. By this stage in her career, Rand
herself knew several leading business figures and economists, and had read
several histories of specific industries. In order to do further background
research, Rand toured and inspected a number of industrial facilities, such as
the Kaiser Steel plant, and even learned to drive the engine of the Twentieth
Century Limited Locomotive (and proudly reported that when operating it,
"nobody touched a lever except me.")[6]

Most of the action in Atlas Shrugged occurs in the United States. However,
there are important events around the world, such as in the People's States of
Mexico, Chile, and Argentina, and piracy at sea.

## [edit] Plot

The novel's plot is split into three parts. The first two parts, and to some
extent the last, follow Dagny Taggart, a no-nonsense railroad executive, and
her attempt to keep the company alive despite repeated encroachments by a
society moving toward collectivism, altruism, and statism. Throughout the
novel, people repeat a platitude Dagny greatly resents: "Who is John Galt?" It
is a reflection of their helplessness, as the saying means "Don't ask
important questions, because we don't have answers."

The leaders and innovators of industry in the world seem to be disappearing,
and the apparent decline of civilization is making it more and more difficult
for her to sustain her life-long aspirations of running the trans-continental
railroad, which has been in her family for several generations. She deals with
other characters who often personify archetypes of what Rand considers the
various schools of philosophy for living and working in the world (though they
are in most cases often unaware of it).

Some of these are Henry "Hank" Rearden, a self-made businessman of great
integrity whose career is hindered by his feelings of obligation toward his
wife; Francisco d'Anconia, Dagny's childhood friend, first love, and king of
the copper industry, who appears to have become a worthless playboy who is
destroying his business; James Taggart, Dagny's brother, president of the
railroad, who seems peripherally aware of the troubles facing the company and
the country in general, but who almost always makes the most short term and
ultimately self-destructive choice; and Dr. Robert Stadler, a Physics
professor who was involved with the creation of a "State Science Institute,"
so that science could be released from the demands of its capitalist sponsors
- at the cost of serving the interests of bureaucrats and politics.

As the novel progresses, the myths about the real John Galt, as well as
Francisco d'Anconia's actions, increasingly become a reflection of the state
of the culture and seem to make more and more sense. Hank and Dagny begin to
experience the futility of their attempts to survive in a society that hates
them and those like them for their greatness.

Dagny and Hank find the remnants of a motor that turns atmospheric static
electricity into kinetic energy, an astounding feat in the light of the
physics involved but a useful "literary stretch" that serves the plot; they
also find evidence that the minds (the "Atlases") of the world are
disappearing because of one particular "destroyer" taking them away. Dagny and
Hank deal with the irrationalities and apparent contradictions of their
atmosphere, and search for the creator of the motor as well as "the destroyer"
who is draining the world of its prime movers, in an effort to secure their
ability to live rational lives.

The question "Who is John Galt?" is also answered towards the closing of the
novel â John Galt is a man disgusted that non-productive members of society
use force (through the law) and guilt to leech from the value created by
productive members of society, and furthermore even exalt the qualities of the
leeches over the workers and inventors. He made a pledge that he would never
live his life for the sake of another man, nor ask another man to live for
him, and founded an enclave (Galt's Gulch), separate from the rest of the
country, where he and other productive members of society have fled.

### [edit] Galt's speech

John Galt's speech is the core of Atlas Shrugged. In it, Galt explains the
philosophy of Objectivism. The speech encompasses metaphysical,
epistemological, ethical, and political ideas. (See main article,
Objectivism.)

The speech is very long, spanning 56 pages in one paperback edition (the only
interruption occurs after the first paragraph), and appears in the chapter
"This is John Galt Speaking" in the third section of the book. (In that
edition, the single speech constitutes a full chapter, and the longest chapter
in the book at that.)[7] Later in the book, the speech is referred to as being
approximately three hours long. In an audiobook version, the speech lasts
approximately three hours and forty minutes.

### [edit] From The Strike to Atlas Shrugged

In the introduction to the 35th Anniversary edition, Leonard Peikoff writes,
"Atlas Shrugged did not become the novel's title until Rand's husband Frank
O'Connor made the suggestion in 1956. The working title throughout her writing
was The Strike. According to Barbara Branden, the change was made for dramatic
reasonsââRand believed that titling the novel âThe Strikeâ would have
revealed the mystery element of the novel prematurely.[8]

### [edit] Originality

Justin Raimondo observed that there are similarities between Atlas Shrugged
and The Driver, written by Garet Garrett in 1922.[9] He reports that The
Driver is also about an idealized industrialist who is a transcontinental
railway owner, trying to improve the world but fighting against government and
socialism. It is unknown whether Rand was familiar with this work, but in "The
Driver", the central character is named Henry Galt, whereas in Atlas Shrugged
the main character is John Galt. Other important characters in Atlas Shrugged
are industrialist Henry Rearden (although he is commonly called "Hank"
throughout the novel), and Dagny Taggart, who is vice-president of a
transcontinental railway. In "The Driver", at one point, the question is asked
"Who is Henry Galt?". In Atlas Shrugged many central and peripheral characters
repeatedly ask the question "Who is John Galt?" Whether these were
coincidences or an intentional allusion to "The Driver" is not known. Less
emphasized by Raimondo are the many profound differences between these stories
and their authors' themes.

Rand's literary influences appear to be those she identified herself, notably,
Victor Hugo, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Edmond Rostand, and O. Henry.

## [edit] Characters

Main article: Characters in Atlas Shrugged

Protagonists:

  * Dagny Taggart \- Operating Vice President of Taggart Transcontinental
  * Hank Rearden \- Owner of Rearden Steel
  * John Galt \- Inventor and first striker
  * Francisco d'Anconia \- Owner of d'Anconia Copper
  * Ragnar DanneskjÃ¶ld \- Pirate

Antagonists:

  * James Taggart President of Taggart Transcontinental
  * Lillian Rearden Hank Rearden's wife
  * Orren Boyle Steel Magnate
  * Wesley Mouch Washington Lobbyist
  * Dr. Robert Stadler Head of the State Science Institute

## [edit] Social concepts

### [edit] Looters and moochers

Rand's heroes must continually fight against the "parasites," "looters" and
"moochers" of the society surrounding them.

The looters are those who confiscate others' earnings "at the point of a gun"
âoften because they are government officials, and thus their demands are
backed by the threat of force. Some looters are following the policies of the
government, such as the officials who confiscate one state's seed grain to
feed the starving citizens of another state; others are exploiting those
policies, such as the railroad regulator who illegally sells the railroad's
supplies on the side. The common factor is that both use force to take
property from the people who produced or earned it, and both are ultimately
destructive.

The moochers are those who demand others' earnings on behalf of the needy and
those unable to earn themselves. Even as they beg for their help, however,
they curse the producers who make that help possible, and are characterized by
a hatred of the talented for having the talent they don't possess. Although
the moochers seem benign at first glance, they are portrayed as more
destructive than the lootersâthey destroy the productive through guilt, for
they, too, make their demands as a matter of moral right, and often motivate
the "lawful" looting performed by governments.

Looting and mooching are seen at all levels of the world Atlas Shrugged
portrays, from the looting officials Dagny Taggart must work around and the
mooching brother Hank Rearden struggles with, to the looting of whole
industries by companies like Associated Steel and the mooching demands for
foreign aid by the starving countries of Europe. The "Anti-dog-eat-dog" rule,
as passed by the National Alliance of Railroads, is an example of this
mooching becoming codified into law. "The Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule is the logical
result of a mixed economyâone in the process of rejecting capitalism. When
the government has the power to control and regulate private business, itâs
in a position to dispense economic favors."[10]

And one of the novel's heroes, Francisco d'Anconia, indicates the role of
"looters" in relation to money itself:

"So you think that money is the root of all evil?... Have you ever asked what
is the root of money? Money is a tool of exchange, which can't exist unless
there are goods produced and men able to produce them. Money is the material
shape of the principle that men who wish to deal with one another must deal by
trade and give value for value. Money is not the tool of the moochers, who
claim your product by tears, or the looters who take it from you by force.
Money is made possible only by the men who produce. Is this what you consider
evil? ... Not an ocean of tears nor all the guns in the world can transform
those pieces of paper in your wallet into bread you need to survive tomorrow.
... Whenever destroyers appear among men, they start by destroying money, for
money is men's protection and the base of a moral existence. Destroyers seize
gold and leave its owners a counterfeit pile of paper. This kills all
objective standards and delivers men into the arbitrary power of an arbitrary
setter of values... Paper is a mortgage on wealth that does not exist, backed
by a gun aimed at those who are expected to produce it. Paper is a check drawn
by legal looters upon an account which is not theirs: upon the virtue of the
victims. Watch for the day when it becomes marked: 'Account Overdrawn.'"[11]

### [edit] Sanction of the victim

The Sanction of the victim is defined as "the willingness of the good to
suffer at the hands of the evil, to accept the role of sacrificial victim for
the 'sin' of creating values."

The entire story of Atlas Shrugged can be seen as an answer to the question,
what would happen if this sanction were revoked? When Atlas shrugs, relieving
himself of the burden of carrying the world, he is revoking his sanction.

The concept may be original in the thinking of Ayn Rand and is foundational to
her moral theory. She holds that evil is a parasite on the good and can only
exist if the good tolerates it. To quote from Galt's Speech, as presented in
the novel: "Evil is impotent and has no power but that which we let it extort
from us," and, "I saw that evil was impotent...and the only weapon of its
triumph was the willingness of the good to serve it." Morality requires that
we do not sanction our own victimhood, Rand claims. In adhering to this
concept, Rand assigns virtue to the trait of rational self-interest. However,
Rand contends that moral selfishness does not mean a license to do whatever
one pleases, guided by whims. It means the exacting discipline of defining and
pursuing one's rational self-interest. A code of rational self-interest
rejects every form of human sacrifice, whether of oneself to others or of
others to oneself.

Throughout Atlas Shrugged, numerous characters admit that there is something
wrong with the world but they cannot put their finger on what it is. The
concept they cannot grasp is the sanction of the victim. The first person to
grasp the concept is John Galt, who vows to stop the motor of the world by
getting the creators of the world to withhold their sanction.

We first glimpse the concept in section 121 when Hank Rearden feels he is
duty-bound to support his family, despite their hostility towards him.

In section 146 the principle is stated explicitly by Dan Conway: "I suppose
somebody's got to be sacrificed. If it turned out to be me, I have no right to
complain."

### [edit] Social classes

Atlas Shrugged endorses the belief that a society's best hope rests on its
adopting a system of pure laissez-faire. John Galt says, "The political system
we will build is contained in a single moral premise: no man may obtain any
values from others by resorting to physical force," and claims that "no rights
can exist without the right to translate oneâs rights into realityâto
think, to work and to keep the resultsâwhich means: the right of property."
The characters are assessed negatively or positively based on their productive
effort (though not necessarily their monetary worth), respect for rights,
intellectual honesty, and moral integrity, and this does not necessarily
reflect their class backgrounds. Different social classes are represented
among both the heroes and the villains of Atlas Shrugged. Among the heroes,
John Galt and Hank Rearden are from working class backgrounds, while Dagny
Taggart and Francisco d'Anconia are from wealthy families. Among the villains,
Fred Kinnan is from a working class background, while James Taggart and Betty
Pope are from wealthy families.

Compare: Aristocracy

### [edit] Theory of sex

In rejecting the traditional altruistic moral code, Rand also rejects the
sexual code that, in her view, is the logical implication of altruism.

Rand introduces a theory of sex in Atlas Shrugged that is based in her broader
ethical and psychological theories. Far from being a debasing animal instinct,
sex to Rand is the highest celebration of human values, a physical response to
intellectual and spiritual values that gives concrete expression to what could
otherwise only be experienced in the abstract.

In Atlas Shrugged, characters are sexually attracted to those who embody or
seem to embody their values, be they higher or lower values by Rand's
standards. Characters who lack clear purpose find sex devoid of meaning. This
is illustrated in the contrasting relationships of Hank Rearden with Lillian
Rearden and Dagny Taggart, by the relationships of James Taggart with Cherryl
Brooks and later with Lillian Rearden, and finally in the relationship between
Dagny and John Galt.

Illustrations of this theory are found in:

  * Section 152 â recounts Dagny's relationship with Francisco d'Anconia.
  * Section 161 â recounts Hank and Lillian Rearden's courtship, and Lillian's attitude towards sex.
  * Section 231 â recounts the value for value basis of Dagny's seemingly unconditional love for Rearden

## [edit] Companies

### [edit] Looter companies vs John Galt's Movement

The companies in Atlas Shrugged are generally divided into two groups: those
that are operated by hard working characters who join in John Galt's Movement
and those owned by looters and moochers. The first group are usually given the
name of the owner, while companies operated by antagonist characters are given
impersonal names like Associated Steel.

For example, Hank Rearden's companies are all named after him; Wyatt Oil after
Ellis Wyatt; and Taggart Transcontinental and d'Anconia Copper are named after
their founders (and, being family-held, their present owners). Nielsen Motors,
Hammond Cars and Ayers Music Publishing are also presented as competent. Those
who use their own names to name their companies become Strikers, with the
minor exception of Mr. Ayers of the Ayers Music Publishing Company.

On the other hand, names which convey a sense of a collective, impersonal
entity are those of looter companies: Orren Boyle named his government-
dependent, influence-peddling company "Associated Steel." Another example is
Mr. Mowen's "Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company, Inc."

Two companies' names seem to belong to neither category:

  * The name of the Phoenix-Durango Railroad - run by a competent entrepreneur who becomes a Striker in his own way without joining the actual Strikers in Galt's Gulch \- indicates that it was originally a local, one-line company (linking, presumably, Phoenix, Arizona with Durango, Colorado), which extended its operations in the Southwest US only due to the vacuum left by Jim Taggart's mismanagement of his giant company's lines in that area.
  * The Twentieth Century Motor Company was founded and originally run by Jed Starnes - also a competent entrepreneur. Mismanagement of the Twentieth Century in the hands of Starnes' heirs first seeds the thoughts of a strike in John Galt's mind. Given the fact that events in this company clearly have a symbolic significiance for the world in general, its name might indicate that the company's name shows it to reflect Rand's view on the development of world history during the Twentieth Century. The Starnes heirs are a different breed of "looters" from Jim Taggart, Orren Boyle etc. On the one hand, they sincerely try to implement outspoken socialist principles ("From each according to his ability, to each according to his need") which other looters don't; on the other hand, the Starnes heirs do this with their own factory, left to them by their father, and without asking for any government help - not even when facing complete bankruptcy.

### [edit] Comparison with real-life railways

James Jerome Hill (1838â 1916) was known as the Empire Builder and built the
Great Northern Railway (U.S.) that is in many ways similar to Taggart
Transcontinental; for example, it was constructed entirely privately and
profitably in sharp contrast to The Northern Pacific Railway, the Union
Pacific Railroad and the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad all of which
failed in the Panic of 1893. The Great Northern reached Seattle, Washington
from St. Paul, Minnesota, crossing the continental divide through Marias Pass,
James J Hill's railroad crossed the Rockies at their lowest point, much like
the fictional railroad. The Great Northern like the fictional Taggart
Transcontinental, also crossed the Mississippi River, through the Stone Arch
Bridge (Minneapolis). However St. Paul is not New York, and the Great Northern
was not in fact a transcontinental railroad. Many railroad references in the
book point to locations on, and equipment operated by, the New York Central
Railroad. Its president at the time that "Atlas Shrugged" was published,
Robert R. Young, was reputedly a fan of Ayn Rand's work.

### [edit] Comparison with real-life railway industry

In actuality, there had never been a US railway company as the one described
in the book, maintaining tracks of its own all the way from the Atlantic to
the Pacific. Rather, in the United States, the term transcontinental railroad
usually refers to a line over the Rocky Mountains between the Midwest and
Pacific Ocean, and such companies tend to have the area of the Mississippi
River as a transfer point with other companies active in the East.

Taggart Transcontinental in the later part of the book is driven to act in a
like manner and rely on other companies for the western part of its traffic;
that is, however, an emergency measure which is part of the gradual collapse
of the company (and the entire world) and Dagny is far from pleased with the
need to resort to it.

By 1957, the date of the book's publication, railways in the USA were facing a
decline that had begun in the 1920s. Passengers were increasingly switching to
road transport which, unlike the railways, was subject to market competition,
developing quickly to the benefit of consumers.[12] Air transport was also
growing quickly, with the restrictions of Government intervention and
regulation coming later to the aviation industry than to trucking or
railroads.[13] (For details, see Amtrak)

## [edit] Fictional technology

Because the book centers on industrial capitalism, Ayn Rand mentions many
technologies throughout the book. In addition to normal technologies, she
introduces several fictional inventions, including refractor rays (Gulch
mirage), Rearden Metal, a sonic death ray ("Project X"), motors powered by
static electricity, and a sophisticated electrical torture device. The
depiction of progress coming in leaps and bounds at the hands of heroic
entrepreneurs is similar to Joseph Schumpeter's theory of Creative destruction
(expressed in Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy).

### [edit] Rearden metal

Rearden metal is a fictitious metal alloy invented by Hank Rearden. It is
lighter and stronger than traditional steel, and is to steel what steel was to
iron. It is described as greenish-blue. Among its ingredients are iron and
copper, two metals seldom found together in real-world alloys.

Initially, no one is willing to use Rearden metal due to an unsupported but
nonetheless damaging report by the State Science Institute which implies the
metal is weak and prone to breaking. The introduction of the metal is seen as
potentially damaging to the already established steel industries. Dagny
Taggart, regardless of the public opinion, places an order for Rearden metal
when she needs rails to rebuild the Rio Norte Line which is in disrepair. Once
the metal is proven in the Rio Norte Line, the "looters" seek both to place it
on the market for everyone, and to deny it to the industrialists who would
make the most profitable use of it. Later, the formula for the metal itself is
extorted by way of blackmail from Rearden and dubbed "Miracle Metal". It is
noted, by Hank Rearden, that the looters designation "Miracle Metal" is
appropriate because they considered any achievement in technology to be
mystic, not a product of man's mind.

### [edit] Project X

Project X, also known as Project Xylophone, is an invention of the scientists
at the State Science Institute, requiring tons of Rearden metal. It is a sonic
weapon, capable of destroying everything in a 100-mile radius. The scientists
claim that the project will be used to preserve peace and quash rebellion. The
mechanism is destroyed towards the end of the book, and emits a sonic pulse
that destroys everything within a hundred mile radius, including Cuffy Meigs
and Dr. Stadler, as well as half of the Taggart Bridge, which spanned the
Mississippi River, and was, effectively, the lifeline of New York City.

### [edit] Galt's motor

John Galt invented a new type of electrical apparatus described in the book as
a motor. This motor is revolutionary because it uses static electricity from
the atmosphere as its main source of energy, requiring only a small amount of
conventional fuel to run the conversion mechanism. The motor is described as
super-efficient, and capable of revolutionizing the industry of the world.
This approximates a perpetual motion machine of the second kind, a machine
which spontaneously converts thermal energy into mechanical work (versus
conventional heat engines, which convert thermal energy into mechanical work
by transferring thermal energy from one reservoir to another). The theory is
that the power is drawn from the environment.

The book gives the source as static electricity from the air, and suggests
that a new physics was necessary to tap it. Additionally, the motor could be
seen as a metaphor for a person who, like Rearden and Dagny, has the ability
to convert dispersed energy and resources into useful materials.[citation
needed]

Dagny discovers a discarded prototype of the motor, and it is superficially
described in section Part 1, Chapter 9. In Part 3, Chapter 1, Dagny learns
that Galt is using a working version of the motor to generate electricity for
Galt's Gulch.

### [edit] Project F

A torture device invented by Dr. Floyd Ferris is introduced towards the end
where John Galt is tortured. It consists of having the victim tied to a
mattress with electrodes attached to the wrists, the ankles and the hips.
Electricity is passed in various combinations (wrist-to-wrist, ankle-to-hip)
to inflict pain on the victim. The current being passed through the victim is
calculated to cause maximum pain without inflicting any permanent physical
damage to the victim, though during a session an irregular heartbeat is quite
possible, and death is a risk. Due to the risk, the victim's health is very
closely monitored during the session. It is located in a small underground
building alongside the State Science Institute.

### [edit] Other

Rand also mentioned technologies that were unavailable at the time, but which
have since been invented. Examples are voice activated door locks (Gulch power
station), palm-activated door locks (Galt's NY lab), and oil from shale.

## [edit] Reception

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2007)  
Atlas Shrugged was generally disliked by critics, despite being a popular
success[citation needed]. According to a 1991 United States survey by the
Library of Congress and the Book of the Month Club, Atlas Shrugged was the
book that made most difference in readers' lives after the Bible.[14]

### [edit] Early reception

It was reviewed shortly after its publication in 1957 by many major newspapers
and magazines. The initial reviews were largely negative, criticizing both the
book's literary qualities and its political vision.[15]

### [edit] Criticism

In the conservative magazine the National Review, Whittaker Chambers wrote a
critical review of Atlas Shrugged, in which he argues against, among other
things, the novel's implicit endorsement of atheism whereby "Randian man, like
Marxian man is made the center of a godless world."[16] Chambers also wrote
that the implicit message of the novel is totalitarian ("To the gas chambers
go!"), despite Rand's explicit and consistent advocacy in the novel of
political, economic and personal freedomâand despite her own flight from
dictatorship as a young woman. The Intellectual Activist's Robert Tracinski
published a reply nearly 50 years later, arguing that Chambers did not
actually read the novel, as he misspells the names of major characters, and
never uses quotations from the novel itself [6].

Former Ayn Rand associate Nathaniel Branden argues that Atlas Shrugged
"encourages emotional repression and self-disowning" and that it, along with
Rand's other major Objectivist novel, The Fountainhead, contains contradictory
messages. Though he notes that the book shows that Rand understood the human
need for social interaction, Branden claims that "rarely you find the heroes
and heroine talking to each other on a simple, human level without launching
into philosophical sermons," which he believes increases the reader's self-
alienation. He further criticizes the potential psychological impact of the
novel, stating that John Galt's claim that contempt and moral condemnation are
appropriate responses to wrongdoing clashes with the recommendations of
psychologists, who say that this kind of behavior only causes the wrongdoing
to repeat itself.[17] Rand herself, however, would not have regarded a novel
as needing to portray such "ordinary" human interaction at all, even if an
entire philosophy of life does need to address this.[18] Indeed, since
Branden's critique was published, Rand's private journal entries regarding
Branden have been released, and they show that, in actuality, Rand herself had
warned Branden against such "self-disowning" traits.[19]

### [edit] Praise and influence

For more details on this topic, see Bibliography of work on Objectivism.

Howard Dickman of Reader's Digest wrote that the novel had "turned millions of
readers on to the ideas of liberty" and said that the book had the important
message of the readers' "profound right to be happy."

The libertarian Cato Institute held a joint conference with The Atlas Society,
an Objectivist organization, to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the
publication of Atlas Shrugged.[20]

In a three-month online poll[21][22] of reader selections of the hundred best
novels of the twentieth century, administered by publisher Modern Library in
1998, Atlas Shrugged was voted number one, ahead of The Fountainhead (#2),
Battlefield Earth (#3), The Lord of the Rings (#4) and To Kill a Mockingbird
(#5), while the list chosen by the Modern Library panel of authors and
scholars did not include the book.[23] The list was formed on 217,520 votes
cast.[24]

The C-SPAN television series American Writers listed Rand as one of twenty-two
surveyed figures of American literature, though primarily mentioning The
Fountainhead rather than Atlas Shrugged.[25]

Rand's impact on contemporary libertarian thought has been considerable, and
it is noteworthy that the title of the leading libertarian magazine, Reason:
Free Minds, Free Markets is taken directly from John Galt, the hero of Atlas
Shrugged, who argues that "a free mind and a free market are corollaries."

Although not an Objectivist, the popular conservative pundit Rush Limbaugh
makes frequent positive reference to "Atlas" on his radio program, and former
President Ronald Reagan described himself as an "admirer" of Rand in private
correspondence written in the 1960s.[26] Conservative Associate Justice of the
Supreme Court Clarence Thomas cites Atlas Shrugged as among his favorite
novels.[27]

For a more complete indication of the influence of the novel and its author,
see the article, "Bibliography of work on Objectivism."

### [edit] Renewed popularity

In the wake of the late 2000s recession, sales of Atlas Shrugged have sharply
increased, according to The Economist magazine and The New York Times. The
Economist reported that the fifty-two-year-old novel ranked #33 among
Amazon.com's top-selling books on 13 January, 2009 and that its thirty day
sales average showed the novel selling three times faster than during the same
period of the previous year, outselling even the newly elected Barack Obama's
latest title. With an attached sales chart, The Economist reported that sales
"spikes" of the book seemed to coincide with the release of economic data. The
reason given by Republican Congressman John Campbell was: "People are starting
to feel like weâre living through the scenario that happened in [the
novel]... We're living in Atlas Shrugged," echoing Stephen Moore in an article
published in The Wall Street Journal on 9 January, 2009, titled "Atlas
Shrugged From Fiction to Fact in 52 Years." Subsequently, on 2 April, 2009,
Atlas Shrugged ranked #15 at Amazon, and they ranked the novel their #1 seller
in "Fiction and Literature."[28][29][30][31][32]

## [edit] Film adaptation

Atlas Shrugged has been in "development hell" for over 35 years. In 1972,
Albert S. Ruddy approached Ayn Rand to produce a cinematic adaptation of Atlas
Shrugged. Rand insisted on having final script approval, to which Ruddy would
not agree. Consequently the project was shelved.

Rand received other offers and in 1978 Henry and Michael Jaffe negotiated a
deal for an eight-hour miniseries on NBC. Michael Jaffe hired screenwriter
Sterling Silliphant to adapt the novel and he obtained approval from Rand on
the final script. However, in 1979 with Fred Silvermanâs rise as president
of NBC, the project was scrapped.

Rand, a former Hollywood screenwriter herself, began writing her own
screenplay but died in 1982 with only a third of it finished. She left her
estate to her student Leonard Peikoff who sold an option to Michael Jaffe and
Ed Snider. Peikoff would not approve the script and the deal fell through.

In 1992 investor and Objectivist John Aglialoro bought an option to produce
the film, paying Peikoff over $1 million for full creative control.

In 1999, under Aglialoroâs sponsorship, Albert Ruddy negotiated a deal with
TNT for a four-hour miniseries but the project was killed after the AOL Time
Warner merger. After the TNT deal fell through Howard and Karen Baldwin
obtained the rights while running Phillip Anschutz's Crusader Entertainment.
The Baldwins left Crusader and formed Baldwin Entertainment Group taking the
rights to Atlas Shrugged with them. Michael Burns of Lions Gate approached the
Baldwins to fund and distribute Atlas Shrugged. Baldwin Entertainment Group
purchased the film rights in 2003.

The film is currently in active development by Baldwin Entertainment Group and
Lions Gate Entertainment. A two-part draft screenplay written by James V. Hart
was developed into a 127-page screenplay by writer-director Randall
Wallace.[33]

Angelina Jolie has been confirmed to play the role of Dagny Taggart, and there
are discussions with Russell Crowe to play the part of Hank Rearden.[34] Brad
Pitt is rumored to be cast in a yet unspecified role. Both Jolie and Pitt are
fans of Rand's works.[35] The role of the mysterious John Galt is likely to be
played by an unknown.[34] Vadim Perelman (House of Sand and Fog) had been
confirmed to direct,[36] but as of June 18, 2008 is no longer attached to the
project.[37] Lions Gate Entertainment picked up worldwide distribution rights.
The film was expected to be released in 2011.

Jolie's 2008 pregnancy and Perelman's departure has cast the project into
doubt.[38] As of November 2008[update], the Internet Movie Database lists the
film's development status as "unknown".[37]

## [edit] See also

  * Aristotelianism
  * Austrian School
  * Dystopia
  * Gulching
  * Industrial Revolution
  * Libertarianism
  * Libertarianism and Objectivism
  * Laissez-faire capitalism
  * Objectivism (Ayn Rand)
  * Objectivist Movement
  * Romanticism

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Rand, Ayn. Journals of Ayn Rand, edited by David Harriman. (1997) Dutton. ISBN 0525943706 p.704 Harriman quotes from a 1961 interview in which Rand says, "Atlas Shrugged was the climax and completion of the goal I had set for myself at the age of nine. It expressed everything that I wanted of fiction writing."
  2. ^ Michael Shermer. The Mind of the Market. (2008). Times Books. ISBN 0805078320, p. XX
  3. ^ "Scandals lead execs to 'Atlas Shrugged'" USA Today, September 23, 2002
  4. ^ Rand, Ayn. Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal. (1986) Signet. ISBN 0451147952 p.150
  5. ^ Peikoff, Leonard. "Introduction to the 35th Anniversary Edition," in Ayn Rand, Atlas Shrugged (1996/1957) Signet. ISBN 0-451-19114-5 p. 6-8.
  6. ^ David Harriman, edit.,Journals of Ayn Rand, pp. 311-344, pp. 566-578, 617; Michael Berliner, edit., Letters of Ayn Rand, pp. 311,378, 381-383, and 457-459, and "letter to Isabel Paterson," Feb. 7, 1948, pp.188-193.
  7. ^ Atlas Shrugged, Centennial Edition, Signet, 1992.
  8. ^ Barbara Branden, The Passion of Ayn Rand, Doubleday, 1984, p. 291.
  9. ^ Raimondo, Justin. Reclaiming the American Right: The Lost Legacy of the Conservative Movement, Center for Libertarian Studies (1993), ISBN 1883959004
  10. ^ http://education.yahoo.com/homework_help/cliffsnotes/atlas_shrugged/24.html
  11. ^ Atlas Shrugged, p. 410-413
  12. ^ Milton & Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, 1980, University of Chicago Press, p193
  13. ^ Milton & Rose Friedman, Free to Choose, 1980, University of Chicago Press, p200
  14. ^ Michael Shermer. The Mind of the Market. (2008). Times Books. ISBN 0805078320, p. XX
  15. ^ See http://www.noblesoul.com/orc/books/rand/atlas/, retrieved August 9, 2006, for a list of reviews and bibliographical information.
  16. ^ Chambers, Whittaker. "Big Sister Is Watching You." National Review. December 28, 1957.
  17. ^ Branden, Nathaniel. "The Benefits and Hazards of the Philosophy of Ayn Rand: A Personal Statement". 1984.
  18. ^ Rand, Ayn, Romantic Manifesto, Revised Edition, p. 26
  19. ^ James Valliant, The Passion of Ayn Rand's Critics (2005) Durban House.
  20. ^ "Cato Events: Hundreds Gather to Celebrate Atlas Shrugged". Cato Policy Report. November/December 1997.
  21. ^ Subject of article: Headlam, Bruce. "Forget Joyce; Bring on Ayn Rand." The New York Times July 30, 1998, G4 (Late Edition, East Coast).
  22. ^ Subject of article: Yardley, Jonathan. "The Voice of the People Speaks. Too Bad It Doesn't Have Much to Say." The Washington Post August 10, 1998, D2 (Final Edition). Retrieved from ProQuest Historical Newspapers.
  23. ^ "100 Best Novels". RandomHouse.com. Retrieved June 20, 2006.
  24. ^ "100 Best"
  25. ^ C-SPAN American Writers: Ayn Rand
  26. ^ Skinner, Anderson and Anderson, Reagan: a Life in Letters (2003) New York: Free Press, pp.281-282.
  27. ^ Bidinotto, Robert James. "Celebrity 'Rand Fans' â Clarence Thomas". Retrieved May 26, 2006
  28. ^ [1] The New York Times.com 3/9/09. Retrieved March 9, 2009
  29. ^ [2] The Economist, 2/26/09. Retrieved March 9, 2009
  30. ^ [3] WSJ Online, 1/9/09. Retrieved March 9, 2009
  31. ^ [4] The Washington Independent.com 3/4/09. Retrieved March 9, 2009
  32. ^ [5] "Amazon.com" 3/15/09. Retrieved April 2, 2009
  33. ^ Fleming, Michael (2007-09-04). "Vadim Perelman to direct 'Atlas'". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117971319.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-09-19.
  34. ^ a b John Aglialoro on the Atlas Shrugged Movie
  35. ^ McClintock, Pamela (2006-04-26). "Lionsgate shrugging". Variety. http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117942127.html?categoryid=13&cs=1. Retrieved on 2007-09-19.
  36. ^ Bansal, Shaveta (2008-09-06). "Vadim Perelman To Rewrite And Direct "Atlas Shrugged"". All Headline News. http://www.allheadlinenews.com/articles/7008433844. Retrieved on 2007-09-19.
  37. ^ a b Atlas Shrugged at the Internet Movie Database
  38. ^ Jolie Fears She's Missed Out On Atlas Film With Pitt, Imdb.com

## [edit] Further reading

### [edit] Publications

  * Atlas Shrugged, Ayn Rand; Signet (September 1996) ISBN 0-451-19114-5
  * Essays on Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged, Robert Mayhew, editor (Lexington Books, 2009) ISBN 0-73912-780-2
  * Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged: A Philosophical and Literary Companion, Edward Younkins (Ashgate Publishing, 2007). ISBN 0-75465-549-0
  * Atlas Shrugged (Cliffs Notes), Andrew Bernstein, CliffsNotes (June 5, 2000) ISBN 0-7645-8556-8
  * The World of Atlas Shrugged, Robert Bidinotto/The Objectivist Center, HighBridge Company (April 19, 2001) ISBN 1-56511-471-X
  * Atlas Shrugged: Manifesto of the Mind (Twayne's Masterwork Studies, No. 174) Mimi Reisel Gladstein, Twayne Pub., (June 2000) ISBN 0-8057-1638-6
  * The Moral Revolution in Atlas Shrugged, Nathaniel Branden, The Objectivist Center, (July 1999) ISBN 1-57724-033-2
  * Odysseus, Jesus, and Dagny, Susan McCloskey, The Objectivist Center (August 1, 1998) ISBN 1-57724-025-1

### [edit] Foreign language translations

  * Chinese:é¿ç¹ææ¯è¸è¸è©, 2 vol., published by Chongqing Publishing Group, October 2007, ISBN 9787536686397, Translator: æ¬æ ¼.
  * Dutch: Atlas in Staking, published by the "De Boekenmaker", www.boekenmaker.nl, tel: +31-75-61471772 (Krommenie, 2006).
  * French: La rÃ©volte d'Atlas, 2 vol. (Paris 1958 et 1959, Editions Jeheber)
  * German: Wer ist John Galt? (Hamburg, Germany: GEWIS Verlag), ISBN 3-932564-03-0.
  * Italian: La rivolta di Atlante, 3 vol. (Milano, Corbaccio, 2007), ISBN 88-797-2863-6, 88-797-2878-4, 88-797-2881-4. Translator: Laura Grimaldi
  * Japanese: è©ãããããã¢ãã©ã¹ ã(ãã¸ãã¹ç¤¾), ISBN 4-8284-1149-6. Translator: èå ããã¿.
  * Norwegian: De som beveger verden. (Kagge Forlag, 2000), ISBN 82-489-0083-5 (hardcover), ISBN 82-489-0169-6 (paperback). Translator: John Erik BÃ¸e Lindgren.
  * Polish: Atlas Zbuntowany (Zysk i S-ka, 2004), ISBN 83-7150-969-3 (hardcover). Translator: Iwona MichaÅowska.
  * Portuguese: Quem Ã© John Galt? (Editora ExpressÃ£o e Cultura), ISBN 85-208-0248-6 (paperback). Translator: Paulo Henriques Britto.
  * Russian: ÐÑÐ»Ð°Ð½Ñ ÑÐ°ÑÐ¿ÑÐ°Ð²Ð¸Ð» Ð¿Ð»ÐµÑÐ¸ (ÐÐ·Ð´Ð°ÑÐµÐ»ÑÑÑÐ²Ð¾ ÐÐ»ÑÐ¿Ð¸Ð½Ð° ÐÐ¸Ð·Ð½ÐµÑ ÐÑÐºÑ, 2007 Ð³.), ISBN 978-5-9614-0603-0. Translator: Ð®.Ð¡Ð¾ÐºÐ¾Ð»Ð¾Ð², Ð.ÐÐµÐ±ÐµÑ, Ð.ÐÐ¾Ð·Ð½ÑÐºÐµÐ²Ð¸Ñ.

  * Spanish: La rebeliÃ³n de Atlas. (Editorial Grito Sagrado), ISBN 987-20951-0-8 (hardcover), ISBN 987-20951-1-6 (paperback).
  * Swedish: Och vÃ¤rlden skÃ¤lvde. (Timbro FÃ¶rlag, 1986), ISBN 9905849041. Translator: Maud Freccero.
  * Turkish: Atlas Silkindi.. (Plato YayÄ±nlarÄ±, 2003), ISBN 975-96772-6-1. Translator: BelkÄ±s ÃorapÃ§Ä±.
  * Hebrew: ××¨× ×× ×¤××××, (Tel Aviv, Israel: S. Fridman, 1999), 2 vol., Danacode 113-138 (hardcover). Translator: Itzhak Avrahami.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikibooks has a book on the topic of

Atlas Shrugged  
  * Free Online CliffsNotes for Atlas Shrugged
  * Website dedicated to Atlas Shrugged
  * Website dedicated to Ayn Rand's novels
  * Timeline of major events in the novel
  * Cast of characters in the novel
  * Excerpt from Atlas Shrugged at the ARI
  * Andrew Bernstein, "Transfiguring the Novel: The Literary Revolution in Atlas Shrugged"
  * Edward W. Younkins, "A Review of Andrew Bernstein's The Philosophic and Literary Integration in Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged"
  * Atlas Shrugged Essay Contest
  * [7] Ayn Rand and Garet Garrett discussion at the Mises Institute.
  * Sculpture dedicated to Atlas Shrugged at Universidad Francisco Marroquin

### [edit] Reviews

  * A negative review from the December 28, 1957 issue of National Review by Whittaker Chambers.
  * Review of Atlas Shrugged as one of 50 'self-help classics'

v â¢ d â¢ e

Ayn Rand  
Objectivism

Philosophy

Objectivist metaphysics Â· Objectivist epistemology Â· Objectivist ethics Â·
Objectivist politics Â· Romantic realism  
Further reading

Ayn Rand Â· Ayn Rand and the history of philosophy Â· Bibliography of work on
Objectivism  
Special topics

Libertarianism and Objectivism Â· Objectivism, Ayn Rand, and homosexuality Â·
Neo-Objectivism  
Groups

Objectivist movement Â· Ayn Rand Institute Â· The Atlas Society Â· Nathaniel
Branden Institute Â· The Ayn Rand Collective  
Criticism

Criticisms of Objectivism Â· Nathaniel Branden Â· William F. Buckley, Jr. Â·
Whittaker Chambers Â· Murray Rothbard Â· George Saunders  
Works of Ayn Rand

Fiction

Night of January 16th Â· We the Living Â· Anthem Â· The Fountainhead Â· Atlas
Shrugged  
Non-fiction

For the New Intellectual Â· The Virtue of Selfishness Â· Capitalism: The
Unknown Ideal Â· Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology Â· The Romantic
Manifesto Â· Return of the Primitive: The Anti-Industrial Revolution Â·
Philosophy: Who Needs It Â· The Voice of Reason  
Cultural depictions

"A Streetcar Named Marge" (The Simpsons episode) Â· Ayn Rand: A Sense of Life
Â· Atlas Shrugged (film) Â· BioShock Â· "Chickenlover" (South Park episode) Â·
The Fountainhead (film) Â· The Passion of Ayn Rand  
Wikisource Â· Wikimedia Commons Â· Wikiquote  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atlas_Shrugged"

Categories: 1957 novels | American novels | English-language novels | Novels
by Ayn Rand | Philosophical novels | Prometheus Award winners | Dystopian
novels | Capitalist books | Economics books | Books critical of religion |
Fictional technology

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2007 | Articles needing additional
references from October 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March
2009 | Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2008 |
All articles containing potentially dated statements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 18:53.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



