
# Edith Wharton

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Edith Wharton  
<IMG>  
  
Born January 24, 1862(1862-01-24)  
New York City, New York  
Died August 11, 1937 (aged 75)  
Saint-Brice-sous-ForÃªt, France  
Occupation Novelist, short story writer, designer  
Edith Wharton (January 24, 1862 â August 11, 1937) was an American novelist,
short story writer and designer.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Literary success
  * 3 Later life
  * 4 Death
  * 5 Writing style
  * 6 In popular culture
  * 7 Books
    * 7.1 Novels
    * 7.2 Short Story Collections
    * 7.3 Poetry
    * 7.4 Non-Fiction
    * 7.5 As Editor
  * 8 Additional publications
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Early life

Wharton was born Edith Newbold Jones to parents George Frederic Jones and
Lucretia Stevens Rhinelander. She had two brothers, Frederic Rhinelander and
Henry Edward. The saying "Keeping up with the Joneses" is said to refer to the
family of her father.[2] She combined her insider's view of America's
privileged classes with a brilliant, natural wit to write humorous and
incisive novels and short stories. As such, she was well-acquainted with many
of her era's literary and public figures, including Henry James and Theodore
Roosevelt.

In 1885, at 23 years of age, she married Edward (Teddy) Robbins Wharton, who
was twelve years her senior. From a well-established Boston family, he was a
sportsman and a gentleman of her social class and shared her love of travel,
although they had little in common intellectually. He began spending money on
younger women and this began to take a toll on Wharton's mental health. They
divorced in 1913, after she suffered a nervous breakdown and was confined to a
hospital. She then moved to Europe. Edith and Edward were married for 28
years, though she later called the marriage her "greatest mistake."

In addition to her famous novels, Wharton wrote at least 85 short stories, and
was also a highly regarded landscape architect, interior designer, and taste-
maker of her time. She authored several influential books, including her first
published work,The Decoration of Houses, co-authored by Ogden Codman, and
Italian Villas and Their Gardens.[3]

## [edit] Literary success

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Mount, 2006

In 1902 she built The Mount, her estate in Lenox, Massachusetts, which
survives today as the supreme example of her design principles. The house and
its gardens have been extensively restored and are open to the public from May
through October although, as of the end of March 2008, the house museum is
threatened with foreclosure.[4] There, Edith Wharton wrote several of her
novels, including The House of Mirth (1905), the first of many chronicles of
the true nature of old New York, and entertained the cream of American
literary society, including her close friend, the novelist Henry James.

Although she spent many months traveling in Europe nearly every year, The
Mount was her primary residence until 1911. When she was there, as well as
traveling abroad, Wharton was usually driven to her appointments by her
longtime chauffeur and friend Charles Cook, a native of nearby South Lee,
Massachusetts.[5][6] When her marriage deteriorated, however, she decided to
move permanently to France, living initially at 58 Rue de Varenne, Paris, in
an apartment that belonged to George Washington Vanderbilt II.

Helped by her influential connections to the French government, primarily
Walter Berry (then president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Paris),
she was one of the few foreigners in France who was allowed travel to the
front lines. Wharton described those trips in the series of articles Fighting
France: From Dunkerque to Belfort.

Throughout the war she worked tirelessly in charitable efforts for refugees,
and, in 1916, was named a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor in recognition of
her commitment to the displaced. The scope of her relief work included setting
up work rooms for unemployed Frenchwomen, organizing concerts to provide work
for musicians, opening tuberculosis hospitals, and founding the American
Hostels for Belgian refugees. In 1916, Wharton edited The Book of the
Homeless, composed of writings, art, and musical scores by almost every major
contemporary European artist. When World War I ended in 1918 she abandoned the
fashionable urban address for the delights of the country at the Pavillon
Colombe in nearby Saint-Brice-sous-ForÃªt.

Wharton was a committed supporter of French imperialism, describing herself as
a "rabid imperialist".[7] After World War I, she travelled to Morocco as the
guest of the Resident General, General Hubert Lyautey, and wrote a book In
Morocco, about her experiences. Wharton's writing on her Moroccan travels is
full of praise for the French administration and for Lyautey and his wife in
particular.

After the war she divided her time between Paris and HyÃ¨res, in Provence,
where she finished The Age of Innocence in 1920.

In 1927 she purchased a villa, Castel Sainte-Claire, on the site of a
seventeenth-century convent, in the hills above the city of HyÃ¨res in
Provence, where she lived during the winters and springs. She called the villa
"Sainte-Claire du Chateau" and filled the garden with cactus and subtropical
plants. She returned to the U.S. only once after the war, to receive an
honorary doctorate degree from Yale University in 1923.

## [edit] Later life

<IMG>

<IMG>

Edith Wharton c. 1919

The Age of Innocence (1920) won the 1921 Pulitzer Prize for literature,[8]
making her the first woman to win the award. She spoke flawless French as well
as several other languages and many of her books were published in both French
and English.

Wharton was friend and confidante to many gifted intellectuals of her time:
Henry James, Sinclair Lewis, Jean Cocteau, and AndrÃ© Gide were all guests of
hers at one time or another. Bernard Berenson and Kenneth Clark were valued
friends as well, and she was the godmother of Clark's second son, Colin
(1932â2002), who wrote the book The Prince, the Showgirl and Me about his
work as third assistant director of the film The Prince and the Showgirl. Her
meeting with F. Scott Fitzgerald is described by the editors of her letters as
"one of the better-known failed encounters in the American literary annals".
She was also good friends with Theodore Roosevelt.

In 1934 Wharton's autobiography A Backward Glance was published. In the view
of Judith E. Funston, in the entry she wrote for American National Biography
about Wharton, "What is most notable about A Backward Glance, however, is what
it does not tell: her criticism of Lucretia Jones [her mother], her
difficulties with Teddy, and her affair with Morton Fullerton, which did not
come to light until her papers, deposited in Yaleâs Beinecke Rare Book Room
and Manuscript Library, were opened in 1968."[9]

## [edit] Death

She died in 1937 at the domaine Le Pavillon Colombe, her eighteenth-century
house on Rue de Montmorency in Saint-Brice-sous-ForÃªt, in the then existing
dÃ©partement of Seine-et-Oise (78), but now in Val d'Oise (95). The street is
today called Rue Edith Wharton. [1][10] She is buried in the American Cemetery
in Versailles, France.

Wharton continued writing until her death, lying in bed and dropping each
finished page to the floor to be collected when she finished. Wharton's last
novel, The Buccaneers, was unfinished at the time of her death. Marion
Mainwaring finished the story after carefully studying the notes and synopsis
Wharton had previously written. The novel was published in 1938 (unfinished
version) and 1993 (Mainwaring's completion).

## [edit] Writing style

Many of Wharton's novels are characterized by a subtle use of dramatic irony.
Having grown up in upper-class pre-World War I society, Wharton became one of
its most astute critics. In such works as The House of Mirth and The Age of
Innocence she employed both humor and profound empathy to describe the lives
of New York's upper-class and the vanishing of their world in the early years
of the 20th century. In contrast, she used a harsher tone in her novel Ethan
Frome to convey the atmosphere of lower-class rural Massachusetts.

In addition to penning several respected novels, Wharton produced a wealth of
short stories and is particularly well regarded for her ghost stories.

## [edit] In popular culture

In The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, Edith Wharton (Clare Higgins) travels
across North Africa with Indiana Jones in Chapter 16, Tales of Innocence.

Edith Wharton is mentioned in the HBO television series "Entourage" in the
third season's thirteenth episode: Vince is handed a screenplay for Wharton's
The Glimpses of the Moon by Amanda, his new agent, for a film to be directed
by Sam Mendes. In the same episode, period films of Wharton's work are
lampooned by agent Ari Gold, who says that all her stories are "about a guy
who likes a girl, but he can't have sex with her for five years, because those
were the times!" Carla Gugino, who plays Amanda, was the protagonist of the
BBC-PBS adaptation of The Buccaneers (1995), one of her early jobs.

A musical version of The Glimpses of the Moon was presented in New York City
in the Algonquin Hotel's Oak Room in early 2008.

Suzanne Vega's seventh studio release Beauty & Crime contains a song named
"Edith Wharton's Figurines."

"Edith Wharton's Journey" is a radio adaptation, for the NPR series Radio
Tales, of the short story "A Journey" from Edith Wharton's collection The
Greater Inclination.

In 2009, Edith Wharton's home, The Mount, was investigated for paranormal
activity in the hit SciFi Channel reality series Ghost Hunters.

In an episode of the CW show Gossip Girl, "The Age of Dissonance", the cast
star in a production of Wharton's "The Age of Innocence".

## [edit] Books

### [edit] Novels

  * The Touchstone, 1900
  * The Valley of Decision, 1902
  * Sanctuary, 1903
  * The House of Mirth, 1905
  * Madame de Treymes, 1907
  * The Fruit of the Tree, 1907
  * Ethan Frome, 1911
  * The Reef, 1912
  * The Custom of the Country, 1913
  * Summer, 1917
  * The Marne, 1918
  * The Age of Innocence, 1920 (Pulitzer Prize winner)
  * The Glimpses of the Moon, 1922
  * A Son at the Front, 1923
  * Old New York, 1924
  * The Mother's Recompense, 1925
  * Twilight Sleep, 1927
  * The Children, 1928
  * Hudson River Bracketed, 1929
  * The Gods Arrive, 1932
  * The Buccaneers, 1938
  * Fast and Loose, 1938 (first novel, written in 1876-1877)

### [edit] Short Story Collections

  * The Greater Inclination, 1899
  * Crucial Instances, 1901
  * The Descent of Man and Other Stories, 1903
  * The Hermit and the Wild Woman and Other Stories, 1908
  * Tales of Men and Ghosts, 1910
  * Xingu and Other Stories, 1916
  * Here and Beyond, 1926
  * Certain People, 1930
  * Human Nature, 1933
  * The World Over, 1936
  * Ghosts, 1937

### [edit] Poetry

  * Verses, 1878
  * Artemis to Actaeon and Other Verse, 1909
  * Twelve Poems, 1926

### [edit] Non-Fiction

  * The Decoration of Houses, 1897
  * Italian Villas and Their Gardens, 1904
  * Italian Backgrounds, 1905
  * A Motor-Flight Through France, 1908 (travel)
  * Fighting France, from Dunkerque to Belfort, 1915 (war)
  * French Ways and Their Meaning, 1919
  * In Morocco, 1920 (travel)
  * The Writing of Fiction, 1925 (essays on writing)
  * A Backward Glance, 1934 (autobiography)

### [edit] As Editor

  * The Book of the Homeless, 1916

## [edit] Additional publications

  * Novels (R.W.B. Lewis, ed.) (The Library of America, 1986) ISBN 978-0-94045031-8. Includes The House of Mirth, The Reef, The Custom of the Country, and The Age of Innocence.
  * The Letters of Edith Wharton (R.W.B. Lewis and Nancy Lewis, eds.) ISBN 0-02-034400-7, particularly the editorial introductions to the chronological sections, especially for 1902â07, 1911â14, 1919â27, and 1928â37, and the editorial footnotes to the letter to F.S. Fitzgerald (June 8, 1925)
  * Novellas and Other Writings (Cynthia Griffin Wolff, ed.) (The Library of America, 1990) ISBN 978-0-94045053-0, which contains her autobiography, A Backward Glance.
  * Collected Stories 1891-1910 (Maureen Howard, ed.) (The Library of America, 2001) ISBN 978-1-88301193-2
  * Collected Stories 1911-1937 (Maureen Howard, ed.) (The Library of America, 2001) ISBN 978-1-88301194-9
  * Selected Poems (Louis Auchincloss, ed.) (The Library of America, 2005) ISBN 978-1-93108286-0
  * Twilight Sleep (R.F.Godfrey, ed.) ISBN 0-684-83964-4

## [edit] Further reading

  * Shari Benstock (1994) No Gifts From Chance: A Biography of Edith Wharton
  * Hermione Lee (2007) Edith Wharton, Chatto & Windus, ISBN-10 0701166657 (UK)/Knopf (USA forthcoming)
  * R.W.B. Lewis (1975) Edith Wharton: A Biography, Harper & Row.
  * Lowry, Elizabeth (December 2008). "What Edith Knew: Freeing Wharton from the Master's Shadow". Harper's Magazine 317 (1903): 96-100, 102.
  * Cynthia Griffin Wolff (1977) A Feast of Words

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b "Edith Wharton, 75, Is Dead in France". New York Times. August 13, 1937. http://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/0124.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-21. "Edith Wharton, American novelist, died yesterday afternoon at her villa, Pavilion Colombes [sic], near Saint Brice, Seine-et-Oise."
  2. ^ Benstock, Shari. No Gifts from Chance: A Biography of Edith Wharton. (New York: Scribner's, 1994), 26.
  3. ^ Edith Wharton, Ogden Codman, Pforzheimer Bruce Rogers Collection (Library of Congress) (1897). The Decoration of Houses. Charles Scribner's Sons. http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&id=rtMDAAAAYAAJ&dq=edith+wharton+codman&printsec=frontcover&source=web&ots=Rd4FvSeOqT&sig=Zw_q7Me4kWJJvYfsLJZ138LMhjw.
  4. ^ New York Times, February 23, 2008. Retrieved on 2/26/08, "Landmark Massachusetts Building Where Wharton Wrote Faces Foreclosure".
  5. ^ No Gifts from Chance: A Biography of Edith Wharton, Shari Benstock, University of Texas Press, 2004
  6. ^ Photograph of Edith Wharton, Teddy Wharton, Henry James and Chauffeur Charles Cook, A Historical Guide to Edith Wharton, Carol J. Singley, Oxford University Press, 2003
  7. ^ Wegener, Fredrick "Rabid Imperialist"': Edith Wharton and the Obligations of Empire in Modern American Fiction, American Literature 72: 4
  8. ^ Nelson, Randy F. The Almanac of American Letters. Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann, Inc., 1981: 9. ISBN 086576008X
  9. ^ Entry for Edith Wharton written by Judith E. Funston in American National Biography, New York, Oxford University Press, 1999, Vol 23, pp. 111â112. ISBN 0-19-512802-8.
  10. ^ Domaine du Pavillon Colombe Ã Saint-Brice-sous-ForÃªt (95)

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Edith Wharton

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Edith
Wharton  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Edith Wharton  
  * "Glimpses of the Moon -- A Jazz Age Musical
  * The Mount \- Estate and gardens designed by Edith Wharton
  * The Edith Wharton Papers at the Lilly Library, Indiana University
  * "Edith Wharton's passionate realism". A review of Hermione Lee's Edith Wharton in the TLS, February 9, 2007.
  * Edith Wharton Society includes links to all Wharton's works legally available on the web, links to resources, searchable texts, bibliographies, queries and replies, and other materials.

  * Works by Edith Wharton at Project Gutenberg
  * Edith Wharton at the Internet Broadway Database
  * Edith Wharton at the Internet Movie Database
  * Free book downloads in HTML, PDF, text formats at ebooktakeaway.com
  * Archival material relating to Edith Wharton listed at the UK National Register of Archives

  

Persondata  
NAME Wharton, Edith  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Jones, Edith Newbold  
SHORT DESCRIPTION American novelist, short story writer, designer  
DATE OF BIRTH January 24, 1862  
PLACE OF BIRTH  
DATE OF DEATH August 11, 1937  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edith_Wharton"

Categories: 1862 births | 1937 deaths | American expatriates in France |
American novelists | American short story writers | LÃ©gion d'honneur
recipients | People from New York City | Pulitzer Prize for the Novel winners

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 05:42.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



