
# Elizabeth I of England

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Elizabeth I" redirects here. For other meanings, see Elizabeth I
(disambiguation).

Semi-protected

Elizabeth I  
Queen of England and Ireland  
Elizabeth I , "Darnley Portrait", c. 1575  
Elizabeth I , "Darnley Portrait", c. 1575  
Reign 17 November 1558 â 24 March 1603  
Coronation 15 January 1559  
Predecessor Mary I  
Successor James I  
Father Henry VIII  
Mother Anne Boleyn  
Born 7 September 1533  
Greenwich, England  
Died 24 March 1603 (aged 69)  
Richmond, England  
Burial Westminster Abbey  
Signature Elizabeth I of England's signature  
Elizabeth I of England (7 September 1533 â 24 March 1603) was Queen of
England and Queen of Ireland from 17 November 1558 until her death. Sometimes
called The Virgin Queen, Gloriana, or Good Queen Bess, Elizabeth was the fifth
and last monarch of the Tudor dynasty. The daughter of Henry VIII, she was
born a princess, but her mother, Anne Boleyn, was executed three years after
her birth, and Elizabeth was declared illegitimate. Her brother, Edward VI,
cut her out of the succession. His will, however, was set aside, and in 1558
Elizabeth succeeded her half-sister, the Catholic Mary, during whose reign she
had been imprisoned for nearly a year on suspicion of supporting Protestant
rebels.

Elizabeth set out to rule by good counsel,[1] and she depended heavily on a
group of trusted advisers led by William Cecil, Baron Burghley. One of her
first moves as queen was to support the establishment of an English Protestant
church, of which she became the Supreme Governor. This Elizabethan Religious
Settlement held firm throughout her reign and later evolved into today's
Church of England. It was expected that Elizabeth would marry, but despite
several petitions from parliament, she never did. The reasons for this choice
are unknown, and they have been much debated. As she grew older, Elizabeth
became famous for her virginity, and a cult grew up around her which was
celebrated in the portraits, pageants and literature of the day.

In government, Elizabeth was more moderate than her father and siblings.[2]
One of her mottoes was "video et taceo" ("I see, and say nothing").[3] This
strategy, viewed with impatience by her counsellors, often saved her from
political and marital misalliances. Though Elizabeth was cautious in foreign
affairs and only half-heartedly supported a number of ineffective, poorly
resourced military campaigns in the Netherlands, France and Ireland, the
defeat of the Spanish armada in 1588 associated her name forever with what is
popularly viewed as one of the greatest victories in English history. Within
20 years of her death, she was being celebrated as the ruler of a golden age,
an image that retains its hold on the English people. Elizabeth's reign is
known as the Elizabethan era, famous above all for the flourishing of English
drama, led by playwrights such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe,
and for the seafaring prowess of English adventurers such as Francis Drake,
John Hawkins and Walter Raleigh.

Historians, however, tend to be more cautious in their assessment. They often
depict Elizabeth as a short-tempered,[4] sometimes indecisive ruler,[5] who
enjoyed more than her share of luck. Towards the end of her reign, a series of
economic and military problems weakened her popularity to the point where many
of her subjects were relieved at her death. Elizabeth is, however,
acknowledged as a charismatic performer and a dogged survivor, in an age when
government was ramshackle and limited and when monarchs in neighbouring
countries faced internal problems that jeopardised their thrones. Such was the
case with Elizabeth's rival, Mary, Queen of Scots, whom she imprisoned in 1568
and eventually had executed in 1587. After the short reigns of Elizabeth's
brother and sister, her 44 years on the throne provided valuable stability for
the kingdom and helped forge a sense of national identity.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Thomas Seymour
  * 3 Queen Mary
  * 4 Queen Elizabeth
  * 5 Religion
  * 6 Marriage question
  * 7 Foreign policy
    * 7.1 Scotland
    * 7.2 Spain
    * 7.3 France
    * 7.4 Ireland
  * 8 Slavery
  * 9 Later years
  * 10 Death
  * 11 Legacy
  * 12 Ancestry
  * 13 See also
  * 14 Notes and References
  * 15 Bibliography
  * 16 External links

  
## Early life

<IMG>

<IMG>

Elizabeth's parents, Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn

Elizabeth was born in Greenwich Palace in the Chamber of Virgins on 7
September 1533 between three and four o'clock in the afternoon[6] and named
after both her paternal and maternal grandmothers, Elizabeth of York and
Elizabeth Howard.[7] She was the second legitimate child of Henry VIII of
England to survive infancy; her mother was Henry's second wife, Anne Boleyn.
At birth, Elizabeth was the heiress presumptive to the throne of England. Her
older half-sister, Mary, had lost her position as legitimate heir when Henry
annulled his marriage to Mary's mother, Catherine of Aragon, in order to marry
Anne.[8][9] King Henry had desperately wanted a legitimate son, to ensure the
Tudor succession. After Elizabeth's birth, Queen Anne failed to provide a male
heir. She suffered at least two miscarriages, one in 1534 and another at the
beginning of 1536. On 2 May 1536, she was arrested and imprisoned. Hastily
convicted on trumped-up charges, she was beheaded on 19 May 1536.[10][11]

Elizabeth, who was 2 years 8 months old at the time, was declared illegitimate
and deprived of the title of princess.[12] Eleven days after Anne Boleyn's
death, Henry married Jane Seymour,[13] who died 12 days after the birth of
their son, Prince Edward. Elizabeth was placed in Edward's household and
carried the chrisom, or baptismal cloth, at his christening.[14]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Elizabeth Tudor, c. 1546, by an unknown artist. The simplicity of this
portrait contrasts with the ornate icons that came later.[15]

Elizabeth's first governess, Lady Margaret Bryan, wrote that she was âas
toward a child and as gentle of conditions as ever I knew any in my
lifeâ.[16] At the age of four, Elizabeth passed into the care of Catherine
Champernowne, better known by her later, married name of Catherine âKatâ
Ashley, who remained Elizabethâs friend for life. Champernowne clearly made
a good job of Elizabethâs early education: by the time William Grindal
became her tutor in 1544, Elizabeth could write English, Latin, and Italian.
Under Grindal, a talented and skillful tutor, she also progressed in French
and Greek.[17] After Grindal died in 1548, Elizabeth received her education
under Roger Ascham, a sympathetic teacher who believed that learning should be
fun.[18] By the time her formal education ended in 1550, she was the best
educated woman of her generation.[19]

## Thomas Seymour

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Miroir or Glasse of the Synneful Soul, a manuscript translation from the
French, by Elizabeth, aged 11, presented to Catherine Parr in 1544. The
embroidered binding with the monogram KP for "Katherin Parr" is believed to
have been worked by Elizabeth.[20]

Henry VIII died in 1547, when Elizabeth was 13 years old, and was succeeded by
her half brother, Edward VI. Catherine Parr, Henry's last wife, soon married
Thomas Seymour of Sudeley, Edward VI's uncle and the brother of the Lord
Protector, Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset. The couple took Elizabeth into
their household at Chelsea. There Elizabeth experienced an emotional crisis
that historians believe affected her for the rest of her life.[21] Seymour,
approaching age 40 but having charm and "a powerful sex appeal",[21] engaged
in romps and horseplay with the 14-year-old Elizabeth. These included entering
her bedroom in his nightgown, tickling her and slapping her on the buttocks.
After Catherine Parr discovered the pair in an embrace, she ended this state
of affairs.[22][23] In May 1548, Elizabeth was sent away.[24]

Seymour continued scheming to control the royal family.[25][26] When Catherine
Parr died of puerperal fever after childbirth on 5 September 1548, he renewed
his attentions towards Elizabeth, intent on wedding her.[27] The details of
his former behaviour towards Elizabeth emerged during an interrogation of
Catherine Ashley and Thomas Parry, Elizabethâs cofferer.[28] For his brother
and the council, this was the last straw,[29] and in January 1549, Seymour was
arrested on suspicion of plotting to marry Elizabeth and overthrow his
brother. Elizabeth, living at Hatfield House, would admit nothing. Her
stubbornness exasperated her interrogator, Sir Robert Tyrwhitt, who reported,
"I do see it in her face that she is guilty".[29] Seymour was beheaded on 20
March 1549.

## Queen Mary

Edward VI died, probably of tuberculosis, on 6 July 1553, aged 15. His will
swept aside the Succession to the Crown Act 1543, excluded both Mary and
Elizabeth from the succession, and instead declared as his heir Lady Jane
Grey, granddaughter of Henry VIII's sister Mary, Duchess of Suffolk.[30] Lady
Jane was proclaimed queen by the Privy Council, but her support quickly
crumbled, and she was deposed less than two weeks later. Mary rode
triumphantly into London, with Elizabeth at her side.[31]

The show of solidarity between the sisters did not last long. Mary was
determined to crush the Protestant faith in which Elizabeth had been educated,
and she ordered that everyone attend Mass. This included Elizabeth, who had to
outwardly conform.[32] Mary's initial popularity ebbed away when it became
known that she planned to marry Prince Philip of Spain, the son of Emperor
Charles V.[33] Discontent spread rapidly through the country, and many looked
to Elizabeth as a focus for their opposition to Mary's religious policies. In
January and February 1554, uprisings broke out (known as Wyatt's rebellion) in
several parts of England and Wales, led by Thomas Wyatt.[34]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mary I

Upon the collapse of the uprising, Elizabeth was brought to court and
interrogated. On 18 March, she was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where
Lady Jane Grey had been executed on 12 February to deter the rebels.[35] The
terrified Elizabeth fervently protested her innocence.[36] Though it is
unlikely that she had plotted with the rebels, some of them were known to have
approached her. Mary's closest confidant, Charles V's ambassador Simon Renard,
argued that her throne would never be safe while Elizabeth lived; and the
Chancellor, Stephen Gardiner, worked to have Elizabeth put on trial.[37]
However, Elizabeth's supporters in the government, including Lord Paget,
convinced Mary to spare her sister in the absence of hard evidence against
her. Instead, on 22 May, Elizabeth was moved from the Tower to Woodstock,
where she was to spend almost a year under house arrest in the charge of Sir
Henry Bedingfield. Crowds cheered her all along the way.[38][39]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The remaining wing of the Old Palace, Hatfield House. It was here that
Elizabeth was told of her sister's death in November 1558.

On 17 April 1555, Elizabeth was recalled to court to be closely attended
during the final stages of Mary's apparent pregnancy. If Mary and her child
died, Elizabeth would become queen. If, on the other hand, Mary gave birth to
a healthy child, Elizabeth's chances of becoming queen would recede
sharply.[38] When it became clear that Mary was not pregnant, no one believed
any longer that she could have a child.[40] Elizabeth's succession seemed
assured.[41] Even Philip, who became King of Spain in 1556, acknowledged the
new political reality. From this time forward, he cultivated Elizabeth,
preferring her to the likely alternative, Mary, Queen of Scots, who was
betrothed to the Dauphin of France.[42] When his wife fell ill in 1558, Philip
sent the Count of Feria to consult with Elizabeth.[43] By October, Elizabeth
was making plans for her government. On 6 November, Mary recognised Elizabeth
as her heir.[44][45] Eleven days later, Elizabeth succeeded to the throne when
Mary died at St. James's Palace on 17 November 1558.

## Queen Elizabeth

Elizabeth became queen at the age of 25. As her triumphal progress wound
through the city on the eve of the coronation ceremony, she was welcomed
wholeheartedly by the citizens and greeted by orations and pageants, most with
a strong Protestant flavour. Elizabeth's open and gracious responses endeared
her to the spectators, who were "wonderfully ravished".[46] The following day,
15 January 1559, Elizabeth was crowned at Westminster Abbey and anointed by
the Catholic bishop of Carlisle. She was then presented for the people's
acceptance, amidst a deafening noise of organs, fifes, trumpets, drums, and
bells.[47]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Elizabeth I in her coronation robes, patterned with Tudor roses and trimmed
with ermine. She wears her hair loose, as traditional for the coronation of a
queen, perhaps also as a symbol of virginity.[48] The painting dates to the
first decade of the seventeenth century and is based on a lost original.[49]

On 20 November 1558, Elizabeth declared her intentions to her Council and
other peers who had come to Hatfield to swear allegiance. The speech contains
the first record of her often-used metaphor of the "two bodies": the body
natural and the body politic:

> My lords, the law of nature moves me to sorrow for my sister; the burden
that is fallen upon me makes me amazed, and yet, considering I am God's
creature, ordained to obey His appointment, I will thereto yield, desiring
from the bottom of my heart that I may have assistance of His grace to be the
minister of His heavenly will in this office now committed to me. And as I am
but one body naturally considered, though by His permission a body politic to
govern, so shall I desire you all...to be assistant to me, that I with my
ruling and you with your service may make a good account to Almighty God and
leave some comfort to our posterity on earth. I mean to direct all my actions
by good advice and counsel.[50]

## Religion

Main article: Elizabethan Religious Settlement

Unfortunately for historians, Elizabeth's personal religious convictions will
never be definitely known. Her religious policy favoured pragmatism above all
in dealing with three major concerns. The first concern was that of her
legitimacy. Although she was technically illegitimate under both Protestant
and Catholic law, her retroactively declared illegitimacy under the English
church was not a serious bar compared to having never been legitimate as the
Catholics claimed she was. Perhaps most importantly, the break with Rome made
her legitimate in her own eyes. For this reason, it was never in serious doubt
that the Elizabeth would embrace at least nominal Protestantism.

Regnans in Excelsis was a papal bull issued on February 25, 1570, by Pope Pius
V declaring "Elizabeth, the pretended Queen of England and the servant of
crime" to be a heretic and releasing all her subjects from any allegiance to
her and excommunicating any that obeyed her orders. The bull, written in
Latin, is named from its incipit, the first three words of its text, which
mean "ruling from on high" (a reference to God).[1] Among the queen's
offences, "She has removed the royal Council, composed of the nobility of
England, and has filled it with obscure men, being heretics."

Elizabeth and her advisors perceived the threat of a Catholic crusade against
heretical England. Elizabeth therefore sought a Protestant solution that would
not offend Catholics too greatly while addressing the desires of the third
concern, English Protestants; she could not afford to appease the more radical
Puritans though, who were pushing for far-reaching reforms.[51] As a result,
the parliament of 1559 started to legislate for a church based on the
Protestant settlement of Edward VI, with the monarch as its head, but with
many superficially Catholic elements, such as priestly vestments.[52]

The House of Commons backed the proposals strongly, but the bill of supremacy
met opposition in the House of Lords, particularly from the bishops. Elizabeth
was fortunate, however, that many bishops were vacant at the time, including
the Archbishopric of Canterbury.[53][54]

This enabled supporters amongst peers to outvote the bishops and conservative
peers. Nevertheless, Elizabeth was forced to accept the title of Supreme
Governor of the Church of England rather than the more contentious title of
Supreme Head, which many thought unacceptable for a woman to bear. The new Act
of Supremacy became law on 8 May 1559. All public officials were to swear an
oath of loyalty to the monarch as the supreme governor or risk
disqualification from office; however, the heresy laws were repealed, to avoid
a repeat of the persecution of dissenters practised by Mary. At the same time,
a new Act of Uniformity was passed, which made attendance at church and the
use of an adapted version of the 1552 Book of Common Prayer compulsory, though
the penalties for recusancy, or failure to attend and conform, were not
extreme.[55]

## Marriage question

<IMG>

<IMG>

Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, attributed to Steven van der Meulen, 1560s.
Elizabeth's friendship with Dudley, her foremost favourite, lasted for over
thirty years.

From the start of Elizabeth's reign, the question arose whom she would marry.
However, she never married, and the reasons for this are not clear. Historians
have speculated that Thomas Seymour had put her off sexual relationships, or
that she knew herself to be infertile.[56][57] Until bearing a child became
impossible, she considered several suitors. Her last courtship, ending in 1581
when she was aged 48, was with FranÃ§ois, Duke of Anjou, 22 years her junior.
Elizabeth had no need of a man's help to govern, and marrying risked a loss of
control or of foreign interference in her affairs, as had happened to her
sister Mary. On the other hand, marriage offered the chance of an heir.[58]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The "Hampden" portrait, by Steven van der Meulen, ca. 1563. This is the
earliest full-length (2 m/7 ft tall) portrait of the young queen, and depicts
her in red satin trimmed with pearls and jewels, made before the emergence of
symbolic portraits representing the iconography of the "Virgin Queen". In
November 2007 it was auctioned by Sotheby's for â¤2.6 million, more than
twice the maximum predicted. [59]

Elizabeth often received offers of marriage, but she only seriously considered
three or four suitors for any length of time. Of these, her childhood friend
Robert Dudley probably came closest. During 1559, Elizabeth's friendship with
the married Dudley seems to have turned to love. Rumour spread through the
court that she was sleeping with him;[60] William Cecil, Elizabeth's most
trusted advisor, made clear his disapproval. When Dudley's wife, Amy Robsart,
was found dead in 1560, under ambiguous circumstances, a great scandal
arose.[61] For a time, Elizabeth seriously considered marrying Dudley; but
after several months, she put duty ahead of her feelings and decided against
the marriage. Dudley, whom she made Earl of Leicester and appointed to the
Privy Council, retained a special place in her heart, though her infatuation
mellowed in time to a special and lasting friendship. After Elizabeth died, a
note from Dudley, who had died in 1588, was found among her possessions,
marked "his last letter".[62]

After the Dudley affair, Elizabeth kept the marriage question open but often
only as a diplomatic ploy.[63] She appears to have considered marriage out of
duty rather than personal preference. Parliament repeatedly petitioned her to
marry, but she always answered evasively.[64] In 1563, she told an imperial
envoy: "If I follow the inclination of my nature, it is this: beggar-woman and
single, far rather than queen and married".[63] In the same year, following
Elizabeth's illness with smallpox, the succession question became a heated
issue. Parliament urged the queen to marry or nominate an heir, to prevent a
civil war upon her death. She refused to do either. In April, she prorogued
the Parliament, which did not reconvene until she needed its support to raise
taxes in 1566. The House of Commons threatened to withhold funds until she
agreed to provide for the succession. In 1566, Sir Robert Bell boldly pursued
the issue despite Elizabeth's command to desist and became the target of her
anger, saying, "Mr. Bell with his complices must needs prefer their speeches
to the upper house to have you my lords, consent with them, whereby you were
seduced, and of simplicity did assent unto it."[65] In 1566, she confided to
the Spanish ambassador that if she could find a way to settle the succession
without marrying, she would do so. By 1570, senior figures in the government
privately accepted that Elizabeth would never marry or name a successor.
William Cecil was already seeking solutions to the succession problem.[63] For
this stance, as for her failure to marry, she was often accused of
irresponsibility.[66] However, Elizabeth's silence strengthened her own
political security: she knew that if she named an heir, her throne would be
vulnerable to a coup.[67]

Elizabeth's unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity. In poetry and
portraiture, she was depicted as a virgin or a goddess or both, not as a
normal woman.[68] At first, only Elizabeth made a virtue of her virginity: in
1559, she told the Commons, "And, in the end, this shall be for me sufficient,
that a marble stone shall declare that a queen, having reigned such a time,
lived and died a virgin".[68] Later on, particularly after 1578, poets and
writers took up the theme and turned it into an iconography that exalted
Elizabeth. In an age of metaphors and conceits, she was portrayed as married
to her kingdom and subjects, under divine protection. In 1599, Elizabeth spoke
of "all my husbands, my good people".[69]

## Foreign policy

<IMG>

<IMG>

FranÃ§ois, Duke of Anjou, by Nicholas Hilliard. Elizabeth called the duke her
"frog", finding him "not so deformed" as she had been led to expect.[70]

Apart from the Dudley affair, Elizabeth treated the marriage issue as an
aspect of foreign policy.[71] Though she turned down Philip II's own offer in
1559, she negotiated for several years to marry his cousin Archduke Charles of
Austria. However, relations with the Habsburgs deteriorated by 1568. Elizabeth
then considered marriage to two French Valois princes in turn, first Henri,
Duke of Anjou, and later, from 1572 to 1581, his brother FranÃ§ois, Duke of
Anjou.[72] This last proposal was tied to a planned alliance against Spanish
control of the Southern Netherlands.[73] Elizabeth seems to have taken the
courtship seriously for a time, and wore a frog-shaped earring that Anjou had
sent her.[74]

Elizabeth's foreign policy was largely defensive. The exception was the
disastrous occupation of Le Havre from October 1562 to June 1563, when
Elizabeth's Huguenot allies joined with the Catholics to retake the port.
Elizabeth had intended to exchange Le Havre for Calais, retaken by France in
January 1558.[75] She sent troops into Scotland in 1560 to prevent the French
using it as a base.[76] In 1585, she signed the Treaty of Nonsuch with the
Dutch to block the Spanish threat to England.[77] Only through the activities
of her fleets did Elizabeth pursue an aggressive policy. This paid off in the
war against Spain, 80% of which was fought at sea.[78] She knighted Francis
Drake after his circumnavigation of the globe from 1577 to 1580, and he won
fame for his raids on Spanish ports and fleets. In truth, however, an element
of piracy and self-enrichment drove Elizabethan seafarers, over which the
queen had little control.[79][80] Her reign also saw the first colonisation or
"planting" of new land in North America; the colony of Virginia was named by
her when she modified the name of a Native American regional "king" named
"Wingina" that had been recorded in 1584 by the Sir Walter Raleigh
expedition.[81]

### Scotland

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mary, Queen of Scots. School of FranÃ§ois Clouet

Elizabeth's first policy toward Scotland was to oppose the French presence
there.[82] She feared that the French planned to invade England and put Mary,
Queen of Scots, who was considered by many to be the heir to the English
crown,[83] on the throne.[84] Elizabeth was persuaded to send a force into
Scotland to aid the Protestant rebels, and though the campaign was inept, the
resulting Treaty of Edinburgh of July 1560 removed the French threat in the
north.[85] When Mary returned to Scotland in 1561 to take up the reins of
power, the country had an established Protestant church and was run by a
council of Protestant nobles supported by Elizabeth.[86] Mary refused to
ratify the treaty.[87]

Elizabeth offended Mary by proposing her own former suitor, Robert Dudley, as
a husband.[87] Instead, in 1565 Mary married Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, who
carried his own claim to the English throne. The marriage, however, was the
first of a series of errors of judgement by Mary that handed the victory to
the Scottish Protestants and to Elizabeth. Darnley quickly became unpopular in
Scotland and then infamous for presiding over the murder of Mary's Italian
secretary David Rizzio. In February 1567, Darnley was murdered by conspirators
almost certainly led by James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell. Shortly afterwards,
on 15 May 1567, Mary married Bothwell, arousing suspicions that she had been
party to the murder of her husband. Elizabeth wrote to her:

> How could a worse choice be made for your honour than in such haste to marry
such a subject, who besides other and notorious lacks, public fame has charged
with the murder of your late husband, besides the touching of yourself also in
some part, though we trust in that behalf falsely.[88]

These events led rapidly to Mary's defeat and imprisonment in Loch Leven
Castle. The Scottish lords forced her to abdicate in favour of her son James,
who had been born in June 1566. James was taken to Stirling Castle to be
raised as a Protestant. Mary escaped from Loch Leven in 1568 but after another
defeat fled across the border into England, where she had once been assured of
support from Elizabeth. Elizabeth's first instinct was to restore her fellow
monarch; but she and her council instead chose to play safe. Rather than risk
returning Mary to Scotland with an English army or sending her to France and
the Catholic enemies of England, they detained her in England. She was
imprisoned there for the next nineteen years.[89]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Signature of Elizabeth I of England

Mary was soon the focus for rebellion. In 1569, plotters in the Rising of the
North talked of freeing her, and a scheme arose to marry her to Thomas Howard,
Duke of Norfolk. Elizabeth reacted by sending Howard to the block. Mary may
not have been told of every Catholic plot to put her on the English throne,
but from the Ridolfi Plot of 1571 to the Babington Plot of 1586, Elizabeth's
spymaster Sir Francis Walsingham and the royal council keenly assembled a case
against her.[90] At first, Elizabeth resisted calls for Mary's death. By late
1586, however, she had been persuaded to sanction her trial and execution on
the evidence of letters written during the Babington Plot.[91] Elizabeth's
proclamation of the sentence announced that "the said Mary, pretending title
to the same Crown, had compassed and imagined within the same realm divers
things tending to the hurt, death and destruction of our royal person."[92] On
8 February 1587, Mary was beheaded at Fotheringhay Castle,
Northamptonshire.[93]

### Spain

Main article: Spanish Armada

Main article: AngloâSpanish War (1585)

<IMG>

<IMG>

"Queen Elizabeth I Feeds the Dutch Cow", a satirical painting, ca. 1586. The
cow represents the Dutch provinces. King Philip II of Spain is vainly trying
to ride the cow, drawing blood with his spurs. Queen Elizabeth is feeding it
while William of Orange holds it steady by the horns. The cow is defecating on
the Duke of Anjou, who is holding its tail.

After the disastrous occupation and loss of Le Havre in 1562â1563, Elizabeth
avoided military expeditions on the continent until 1585, when she sent an
English army to aid the Protestant Dutch rebels against Philip II. This
followed the deaths in 1584 of the allies William the Silent, Prince of
Orange, and FranÃ§ois, Duke of Anjou, and the surrender of a series of Dutch
towns to Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, Philip's governor of the Spanish
Netherlands. In December 1584, an alliance between Philip II and the French
Catholic League at Joinville undermined the ability of Anjou's brother, Henry
III of France, to counter Spanish domination of the Netherlands. It also
extended Spanish influence along the channel coast of France, where the
Catholic League was strong, and exposed England to invasion.[77] The English
and the Dutch reacted in August 1585 with the Treaty of Nonsuch, whereby
Elizabeth, pressured by her advisors, promised military support to the Dutch.
The treaty marked the beginning of the Anglo-Spanish War, which lasted until
the Treaty of London in 1604.

Elizabeth did not trust this course of action from the start. The expedition,
led by her former suitor, Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, achieved
nothing.[94] Elizabeth's strategy, to use the English army as a defensive
bargaining tool, was soon at odds with that of Dudley, who wanted to fight an
active campaign but lacked the resources to do so. He enraged Elizabeth by
accepting the post of Governor-General from the Dutch States-General.
Elizabeth saw this as a Dutch ploy to embroil her further in their
defense.[95] She wrote to him:

> We could never have imagined (had we not seen it fall out in experience)
that a man raised up by ourself and extraordinarily favoured by us, above any
other subject of this land, would have in so contemptible a sort broken our
commandment in a cause that so greatly touches us in honour....And therefore
our express pleasure and commandment is that, all delays and excuses laid
apart, you do presently upon the duty of your allegiance obey and fulfill
whatsoever the bearer hereof shall direct you to do in our name. Whereof fail
you not, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost peril.[96]

Elizabeth and her parliament's failure to send Dudley sufficient money and
troops, combined with his own incompetence as a military leader, doomed the
campaign to impotence. Dudley finally resigned his command in December 1587,
his reputation in tatters. By that time, Philip II had decided to take the war
to England.[97]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Portrait of Elizabeth to commemorate the defeat of the Spanish Armada (1588),
depicted in the background. Elizabeth's hand rests on the globe, symbolising
her international power.

On 12 July 1588, the Spanish Armada, a great fleet of ships, set sail for the
channel, planning to ferry a Spanish invasion force under the Duke of Parma to
the coast of southeast England from the Netherlands. The armada, however, was
defeated by a combination of miscalculation,[98] misfortune, and an attack of
English fire ships on 29 July off Gravelines which dispersed the Spanish ships
to the northeast.[99] The armada straggled home to Spain in shattered
remnants, after disastrous losses on the coast of Ireland (after some ships
had tried to struggle back to Spain via the North Sea, and then back south
past the west coast of Ireland).[100] Unaware of the armada's fate, English
forces mustered to defend the country. Elizabeth inspected her troops at
Tilbury in Essex on 8 August. Wearing a silver breastplate over a white velvet
dress, she addressed them in one of her most famous speeches:[101]

> My loving people, we have been persuaded by some that are careful of our
safety, to take heed how we commit ourself to armed multitudes for fear of
treachery; but I assure you, I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful
and loving people....I know I have the body but of a weak and feeble woman,
but I have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a King of England too, and
think foul scorn that Parma or Spain, or any Prince of Europe should dare to
invade the borders of my realm.[102]

When no invasion came, the nation rejoiced. Elizabeth's procession to a
thanksgiving service at St Paul's Cathedral rivalled that of her coronation as
a spectacle.[100] The defeat of the armada was a potent propaganda victory,
both for Elizabeth and for Protestant England. The English took their delivery
as a symbol of God's favour and of the nation's inviolability under a virgin
queen.[78] However, the victory was not a turning point in the war, which
continued and often favoured Spain.[103] The Spanish still controlled the
Netherlands, and the threat of invasion remained.[97] Sir Walter Raleigh
claimed after her death that Elizabeth's caution had impeded the war against
Spain:

> If the late queen would have believed her men of war as she did her scribes,
we had in her time beaten that great empire in pieces and made their kings of
figs and oranges as in old times. But her Majesty did all by halves, and by
petty invasions taught the Spaniard how to defend himself, and to see his own
weakness.[104]

Though some historians have criticised Elizabeth on similar grounds,[105]
Raleigh's verdict has more often been judged unfair. Elizabeth had good reason
not to place too much trust in her commanders, who once in action tended, as
she put it herself, "to be transported with an haviour of vainglory".[106]

### France

When the Protestant Henry IV inherited the French throne in 1589, Elizabeth
sent him military support. It was her first venture into France since the
retreat from Le Havre in 1563. Henry's succession was strongly contested by
the Catholic League and by Philip II, and Elizabeth feared a Spanish takeover
of the channel ports. The subsequent English campaigns in France, however,
were disorganised and ineffective.[107] Lord Willoughby, largely ignoring
Elizabeth's orders, roamed northern France to little effect, with an army of
4,000 men. He withdrew in disarray in December 1589, having lost half his
troops. In 1591, the campaign of John Norreys, who led 3,000 men to Brittany,
was even more of a disaster. As for all such expeditions, Elizabeth was
unwilling to invest in the supplies and reinforcements requested by the
commanders. Norreys left for London to plead in person for more support. In
his absence, a Catholic League army almost destroyed the remains of his army
at Craon, north-west France, in May 1591. In July, Elizabeth sent out another
force under Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex, to help Henry IV in besieging
Rouen. The result was just as dismal. Essex accomplished nothing and returned
home in January 1592. Henry abandoned the siege in April.[108] As usual,
Elizabeth lacked control over her commanders once they were abroad. "Where he
is, or what he doth, or what he is to do," she wrote of Essex, "we are
ignorant".[109]

### Ireland

Although Ireland was one of her two kingdoms, Elizabeth faced a hostileâand
in places virtually autonomous[110]âCatholic population that was willing to
plot with her enemies. Her policy there was to grant land to her courtiers and
prevent the rebels from giving Spain a base from which to attack England.[76]
In response to a series of uprisings, the English forces pursued scorched-
earth tactics, burning the land and slaughtering man, woman and child. During
a revolt in Munster led by Gerald FitzGerald, Earl of Desmond, in 1582, an
estimated 30,000 Irish people starved to death. The poet Edmund Spenser wrote
that the victims "were brought to such wretchedness as that any stony heart
would have rued the same".[111] Elizabeth advised her commanders that the
Irish, "that rude and barbarous nation", be well treated; but she showed no
remorse when force and bloodshed were deemed necessary.[112]

Between 1594 and 1603, Elizabeth faced her most severe test in Ireland, with
the revolt known as Tyrone's Rebellion, or the Nine Years War. Its leader,
Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, was backed by Spain.[113] In spring 1599,
Elizabeth sent Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, to put the revolt down. To
her frustration,[114] he made little progress and returned to England without
permission. He was replaced by Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, who took three
years to defeat the rebels. O'Neill finally surrendered in 1603, a few days
after Elizabeth's death.[115]

## Slavery

Elizabeth financed and helped Sir John Hawkins in his efforts to transport
slaves to the New World. In 1564, she partnered with him by renting him the
huge old 700-ton ship Jesus of Lubeck. Hawkins sailed to Borburata, along the
way he captured around 400 Africans. After Borburata, Hawkins sailed to Rio de
la Hacha. The Spanish officials tried to prevent Hawkins from selling the
slaves by imposing taxes. Captain Hawkins refused the taxes and threatened to
burn the towns. After selling his slaves, Captain Hawkins sailed to a French
colony in Florida for a respite. Captain Hawkins returned to England in
September 1566, his expedition a total success as his financiers made a 60%
profit.[116]

## Later years

As Elizabeth aged and marriage became unlikely, her image gradually changed.
She was portrayed as Belphoebe or Astraea, and after the Armada, as Gloriana,
the eternally youthful Faerie Queene of Edmund Spenser's poem. Her painted
portraits became less realistic and more a set of enigmatic icons that made
her look much younger than she was. In fact, her skin had been scarred by
smallpox in 1562, leaving her half bald and dependent on wigs and
cosmetics.[117][118] Sir Walter Raleigh called her "a lady whom time had
surprised".[119] However, the more Elizabeth's beauty faded, the more her
courtiers praised it.[117]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, by William Segar, 1590

Elizabeth was happy to play the part,[120] but it is possible that in the last
decade of her life she began to believe her own performance. She became fond
and indulgent of the charming but petulant young Robert Devereux, Earl of
Essex, who took liberties with her for which she forgave him.[121] She
repeatedly appointed him to military posts despite his growing record of
irresponsibility. After Essex's desertion of his command in Ireland in 1599,
Elizabeth had him placed under house arrest and the following year deprived
him of his monopolies.[122] In February 1601, the earl tried to raise a
rebellion in London. He intended to seize the queen but few rallied to his
support, and he was beheaded on 25 February. Elizabeth knew that her own
misjudgements were partly to blame for this turn of events. An observer
reported in 1602 that "Her delight is to sit in the dark, and sometimes with
shedding tears to bewail Essex".[123]

The monopolies Elizabeth reclaimed from Essex were her typical reward to a
courtier during the last years of her reign. She had come to rely on this
cost-free system of patronage rather than ask Parliament for more subsidies in
a time of war.[124] The practice soon led to price-fixing, the enrichment of
courtiers at the public's expense, and widespread resentment.[125] This
culminated in agitation in the House of Commons during the parliament of
1601.[126] In her famous "Golden Speech" of 30 November 1601, Elizabeth
professed ignorance of the abuses and won the members over with promises and
her usual appeal to the emotions:[127]

> Who keeps their sovereign from the lapse of error, in which, by ignorance
and not by intent they might have fallen, what thank they deserve, we know,
though you may guess. And as nothing is more dear to us than the loving
conservation of our subjects' hearts, what an undeserved doubt might we have
incurred if the abusers of our liberality, the thrallers of our people, the
wringers of the poor, had not been told us![128]

The period after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 brought new
difficulties for Elizabeth that lasted the fifteen years until the end of her
reign.[103] The conflicts with Spain and in Ireland dragged on, the tax burden
grew heavier, and the economy was hit by poor harvests and the cost of war.
Prices rose and the standard of living fell.[129][130] During this time,
repression of Catholics intensified, and Elizabeth authorised commissions in
1591 to interrogate and monitor Catholic householders.[131] To maintain the
illusion of peace and prosperity, she increasingly relied on internal spies
and propaganda.[129] In her last years, mounting criticism reflected a decline
in the public's affection for her.[132]

This same period of economic and political uncertainty, however, produced an
unsurpassed literary flowering in England.[133] The first signs of a new
literary movement had appeared at the end of the second decade of Elizabeth's
reign, with John Lyly's Euphues and Edmund Spenser's The Shepheardes Calender
in 1578. During the 1590s, some of the great names of English literature
entered their maturity, including William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe.
During this period and into the Jacobean era that followed, the English
theatre reached its highest peaks.[134] The notion of a great Elizabethan age
depends largely on the builders, dramatists, poets, and musicians who were
active during Elizabeth's reign. They owed little directly to the queen, who
was never a major patron of the arts.[135]

## Death

<IMG>

<IMG>

Portrait of King James by John de Critz, circa 1606

Elizabeth's most trusted advisor, Burghley, died on 4 August 1598. His
political mantle passed to his son, Robert Cecil, who soon became the leader
of the government.[136] One task he addressed was to prepare the way for a
smooth succession. Since Elizabeth would never name her successor, Cecil was
obliged to proceed in secret.[137] He therefore entered into a coded
negotiation with James VI of Scotland, who had a strong but unrecognised
claim. Cecil coached the impatient James to humour Elizabeth and "secure the
heart of the highest, to whose sex and quality nothing is so improper as
either needless expostulations or over much curiosity in her own
actions".[138] The advice worked. James's tone delighted Elizabeth, who
responded: "So trust I that you will not doubt but that your last letters are
so acceptably taken as my thanks cannot be lacking for the same, but yield
them to you in grateful sort".[139] In historian J. E. Neale's view, Elizabeth
may not have declared her wishes openly to James, but she made them known with
"unmistakable if veiled phrases".[140]

The Queen's health remained fair until the autumn of 1602, when a series of
deaths among her friends plunged her into a severe depression. In February
1603, the death of her cousin and close friend, Catherine Carey, Countess of
Nottingham, came as a particular blow. In March, Elizabeth fell sick and
remained in a "settled and unremovable melancholy".[141] She died on 24 March
1603 at Richmond Palace, between two and three in the morning. A few hours
later, Cecil and the council set their plans in motion and proclaimed James VI
of Scotland as king of England.[142]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Elizabeth's funeral cortÃ¨ge, 1603, sometimes attributed to William Camden

Elizabeth's coffin was carried downriver at night to Whitehall, on a barge lit
with torches. At her funeral on 28 April, the coffin was taken to Westminster
Abbey on a hearse drawn by four horses hung with black velvet. In the words of
the chronicler John Stow:

> Westminster was surcharged with multitudes of all sorts of people in their
streets, houses, windows, leads and gutters, that came out to see the obsequy,
and when they beheld her statue lying upon the coffin, there was such a
general sighing, groaning and weeping as the like hath not been seen or known
in the memory of man.[143]

Though despite the presence of several other possible claimants to the
throne[144] the transition of power went much more smoothly than the
transition of power in similar circumstances after Edward VI's death, it
contravened statute law,[145] to wit: 35 Hen. VIII, c.1 and the entail in
favor of the line of his younger sister Mary Tudor in Henry's Will that this
Act authorized. To rectify this problem James had Parliament pass the
Succession to the Crown Act 1603. The question whether or not Parliament could
control by statute the succession to the crown would remain controversial
throughout the 17th century.[146]

## Legacy

Elizabeth was lamented, but many people were relieved at her death.[147]
Expectations of King James were high, and at first they were met, with the
ending of the war against Spain in 1604 and lower taxes. Until the death of
Robert Cecil in 1612, the government ran along much the same lines as
before.[148] James's rule, however, became unpopular when he turned state
affairs over to court favourites, and in the 1620s there was a nostalgic
revival of the cult of Elizabeth.[149] Elizabeth was praised as a heroine of
the Protestant cause and the ruler of a golden age. James was depicted as a
Catholic sympathiser, presiding over a corrupt court.[150] The triumphalist
image that Elizabeth had cultivated towards the end of her reign, against a
background of factionalism and military and economic difficulties,[151] was
taken at face value and her reputation inflated. Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of
Gloucester, recalled: "When we had experience of a Scottish government, the
Queen did seem to revive. Then was her memory much magnified."[152]
Elizabeth's reign became idealised as a time when crown, church and parliament
had worked in constitutional balance.[153]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Elizabeth I, painted by an unknown artist after 1620, during the first revival
of interest in her reign. Time sleeps on her right and Death looks over her
left shoulder; two putti hold the crown above her head.[154]

The picture of Elizabeth painted by her Protestant admirers of the early 17th
century has proved lasting and influential.[155] Her memory was also revived
during the Napoleonic Wars, when the nation again found itself on the brink of
invasion.[156] In the Victorian era, the Elizabethan legend was adapted to the
imperial ideology of the day,[147][157] and in the mid-20th century, Elizabeth
was a romantic symbol of the national resistance to foreign threat.[158][159]
Historians of that period, such as J. E. Neale (1934) and A. L. Rowse (1950),
interpreted Elizabeth's reign as a golden age of progress.[160]

Recent historians, however, have taken a more complicated view of
Elizabeth.[161] Her reign is famous for the defeat of the Armada, and for
successful raids against the Spanish, such as those on CÃ¡diz in 1587 and
1596, but some historians point to military failures on land and at sea, such
as the "Islands voyage" to the Azores, of 1597 (where Robert Devereux, 2nd
Earl of Essex defied the Queen's orders, and pursued the Spanish treasure
fleet before ensuring that the Spanish navy was out of action).[107]
Elizabeth's problems in Ireland also stain her record.[162] Rather than as a
brave defender of the Protestant nations against Spain and the Habsburgs, she
is more often regarded as cautious in her foreign policies. She offered
minimal aid to foreign Protestants and failed to provide her commanders with
the funds to make a difference abroad.[163]

Elizabeth established an English church that helped shape a national identity
and remains in place today.[164][165][166] Those who praised her later as a
Protestant heroine overlooked her refusal to drop all Catholic
practices.[167][168] Historians note that in her day, strict Protestants
regarded the Acts of Settlement and Uniformity of 1559 as a
compromise.[169][170][171] In fact, Elizabeth believed that faith was personal
and did not wish, as Francis Bacon put it, to "make windows into men's hearts
and secret thoughts".[172][173]

Despite Elizabeth's largely defensive foreign policy, her reign raised
England's status abroad. "She is only a woman, only mistress of half an
island," marvelled Pope Sixtus V, "and yet she makes herself feared by Spain,
by France, by the Empire, by all".[174] Under Elizabeth, the nation gained a
new self-confidence and sense of sovereignty, as Christendom
fragmented.[149][175][176] Elizabeth was the first Tudor to recognise that a
monarch ruled by popular consent.[177] She therefore always worked with
parliament and advisers she could trust to tell her the truthâa style of
government that her Stuart successors failed to follow. Some historians have
called her lucky;[174] she believed that God was protecting her.[178] Priding
herself on being "mere English",[179] Elizabeth trusted in God, honest advice,
and the love of her subjects for the success of her rule.[180] In a prayer,
she offered thanks to God that:

> [At a time] when wars and seditions with grievous persecutions have vexed
almost all kings and countries round about me, my reign hath been peacable,
and my realm a receptacle to thy afflicted Church. The love of my people hath
appeared firm, and the devices of my enemies frustrate.[174]

## Ancestry

v â¢ d â¢ e

Ancestors of Elizabeth I of England  
16\. Owen Tudor  
8\. Edmund Tudor, 1st Earl of Richmond  
17\. Catherine of Valois  
4\. Henry VII of England  
18\. John Beaufort, 1st Duke of Somerset  
9\. Margaret Beaufort  
19\. Margaret Beauchamp of Bletso  
2\. Henry VIII of England  
20\. Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York  
10\. Edward IV of England  
21\. Cecily Neville  
5\. Elizabeth of York  
22\. Richard Woodville, 1st Earl Rivers  
11\. Elizabeth Woodville  
23\. Jacquetta of Luxembourg  
1\. Elizabeth I of England  
24\. Geoffrey Boleyn  
12\. William Boleyn  
25\. Anne Hoo  
6\. Thomas Boleyn, 1st Earl of Wiltshire  
26\. Thomas Butler, 7th Earl of Ormonde  
13\. Margaret Butler  
27\. Anne Hankford  
3\. Anne Boleyn  
28\. John Howard, 1st Duke of Norfolk  
14\. Thomas Howard, 2nd Duke of Norfolk  
29\. Catherine de Moleyns  
7\. Elizabeth Howard  
30\. Frederick Tilney  
15\. Elizabeth Tilney  
31\. Elizabeth Cheney  
## See also

  * Portraiture of Elizabeth I
  * Cultural depictions of Elizabeth I of England
  * English Renaissance
  * Protestant Reformation
  * Tudor re-conquest of Ireland

## Notes and References

  1. ^ "I mean to direct all my actions by good advice and counsel." Elizabeth's first speech as queen, Hatfield House, 20 November 1558. Loades, 35.
  2. ^ a b Starkey, 5.
  3. ^ Neale, 386.
  4. ^ In 1593, the French ambassador confessed: "When I see her enraged against any person whatever, I wish myself in Calcutta, fearing her anger like death itself". Somerset, 731â32.
  5. ^ Somerset, 729.
  6. ^ Marie Louise Bruce Anne Boleyn,pg.234
  7. ^ Somerset, 4.
  8. ^ Loades, 3â5
  9. ^ Somerset, 4â5.
  10. ^ Loades, 6â7.
  11. ^ Haigh, 1â3.
  12. ^ In the act of July 1536, it was stated that Elizabeth was "illegitimate... and utterly foreclosed, excluded and banned to claim, challenge, or demand any inheritance as lawful heir...to [the King] by lineal descent". Elizabeth who was an incredibly bright child, did not notice that her mother was gone but she did notice the change of her name. She apparently said to her governess. "how haps it governor, yesterday my Lady Princess, today but my Lady Elizabeth?" Somerset, 10.
  13. ^ "It had taken Henry VIII a month to dispose of his wife on a charge of treason, sweep some of her friends to the block with her, bastardise her child, and acquire a new queen. Here was the power of the Tudor monarchy in action, with the King bending his Council, the Church, and the law to do his will." Haigh, 1.
  14. ^ Loades, 7â8.
  15. ^ "The painter ... is unknown, but in a competently Flemish style he depicts the daughter of Anne Boleyn as quiet and studious-looking, ornament in her attire as secondary to the plainness of line that emphasizes her youth. Great is the contrast with the awesome fantasy of the later portraits: the pallid, mask-like features, the extravagance of headdress and ruff, the padded ornateness that seemed to exclude all humanity." Gaunt, 37.
  16. ^ Somerset, 11.
  17. ^ Our knowledge of Elizabethâs schooling and precocity comes largely from the memoirs of Roger Ascham, also the tutor of Prince Edward. Loades, 8â10.
  18. ^ Somerset, 25.
  19. ^ Loades, 21.
  20. ^ Davenport, 32.
  21. ^ a b Loades, 11.
  22. ^ Loades, 14.
  23. ^ "Kat Ashley told another of Elizabethâs servants, Thomas Parry, that the Queen lost patience with both her husband and Elizabeth after she âsuddenly came upon them where they were all alone, he having her in his armsâ.â Somerset, 23.
  24. ^ She moved into the household of Catherine Ashleyâs sister Joan and her husband, Sir Anthony Denny, at Cheshunt. Loades, 16.
  25. ^ Haigh, 8.
  26. ^ Not only Elizabeth but Princess Mary and Lady Jane Grey had lived in Seymour's household at various times. Seymour had also "wormed his way" into King Edwardâs confidence by slipping him pocket money and calling the Lord Protector stingy; and he had tried to have himself appointed the governor of the Kingâs person. Neale, 32.
  27. ^ Williams, 24.
  28. ^ Loades, 14, 16.
  29. ^ a b Neale, 33.
  30. ^ Loades, 24â25.
  31. ^ Elizabeth had assembled 2,000 horsemen, "a remarkable tribute to the size of her affinity". Loades 25.
  32. ^ Loades, 26.
  33. ^ Loades, 27.
  34. ^ Neale, 45.
  35. ^ Somerset, 49.
  36. ^ Loades, 28.
  37. ^ Somerset, 51.
  38. ^ a b Loades, 29.
  39. ^ "The wives of Wycombe passed cake and wafers to her until her litter became so burdened that she had to beg them to stop." Neale, 49.
  40. ^ Loades, 32.
  41. ^ Somerset, 66.
  42. ^ Neale, 53.
  43. ^ Loades, 33.
  44. ^ Neale, 59.
  45. ^ Somerset, 71.
  46. ^ Somerset, 89â90. The "Festival Book" account, from the British Library
  47. ^ Neale, 70.
  48. ^ Loades, 34.
  49. ^ Another copy of the lost original has been attributed both to Nicholas Hilliard and to Levina Teerlinc. See Strong, 163, and Doran, 43.
  50. ^ Full document reproduced by Loades, 36â37.
  51. ^ Lee, Christopher (1995, 1998). "Disc 1". This Sceptred Isle 1547-1660. ISBN 0563557699.
  52. ^ Loades, 46.
  53. ^ "It was fortunate that ten out of twenty-six bishoprics were vacant, for of late there had been a high rate of mortality among the episcopate, and a fever had conveniently carried off Mary's Archbishop of Canterbury, Reginald Pole, less than twenty-four hours after her own death". Somerset, 98.
  54. ^ "There were no less than ten sees unrepresented through death or illness and the carelessness of 'the accursed cardinal' [Pole]". Black, 10.
  55. ^ Somerset, 101â103.
  56. ^ Loades, 38.
  57. ^ Haigh, 19.
  58. ^ Loades, 39.
  59. ^ Anna Dowdeswell (28 November 2007). "Historic painting is sold for Â£2.6 million". bucksherald.co.uk. http://www.bucksherald.co.uk/news/Historic-painting-is-sold-for.3532557.jp. Retrieved on 2008-12-17.
  60. ^ Loades, 42.
  61. ^ In April 1559, Amy had been reported as suffering from a "malady in one of her breasts", and it is now presumed that she had cancer. At the time, it was widely believed that Dudley had done away with her in order to marry the queen. Somerset, 166â167.
  62. ^ Loades, 42â45.
  63. ^ a b c Haigh, 17.
  64. ^ Loades, 40.
  65. ^ Hasler, 421â424.
  66. ^ Haigh, 20â21.
  67. ^ When in 1566 a parliamentary commission urged Elizabeth to name an heir, she referred to the way "a second person, as I have been" had been used as the focus of plots against her sister, Queen Mary. Haigh, 22â23.
  68. ^ a b Haigh, 23.
  69. ^ Haigh, 24.
  70. ^ Frieda, 397.
  71. ^ Loades, 51.
  72. ^ Loades, 53â54.
  73. ^ Loades, 54.
  74. ^ Somerset, 408.
  75. ^ Frieda, 191.
  76. ^ a b Loades, 55.
  77. ^ a b Haigh, 135.
  78. ^ a b Loades, 61.
  79. ^ Flynn and Spence, 126â128.
  80. ^ Somerset, 607â611.
  81. ^ Stewart, George (1945). Names on the Land: A Historical Account of Place-Naming in the United States. New York: Random House. p. 22.
  82. ^ Haigh, 131.
  83. ^ Mary's position as heir derived from her great-grandfather Henry VII of England, through his daughter Margaret Tudor. In her own words, "I am the nearest kinswoman she hath, being both of us of one house and stock, the Queen my good sister coming of the brother, and I of the sister". Guy, 115. However, Henry VIII, authorized by the 35 Hen. VIII, c.1 statute, already mentioned, had made an entail that excluded the line of Margaret from the succession. Mary disputed the testament on the ground that Henry allegedly had not personally signed it, as required by the statute. See e.g. John Guy Queen of Scots: The True Life of Mary Stuart (Mariner Books, 2005 ISBN 0618619178), p. 267.
  84. ^ On Elizabeth's accession, Mary's Guise relatives had pronounced her Queen of England and had the English arms emblazoned with those of Scotland and France on her plate and furniture. Guy, 96â97.
  85. ^ By the terms of the treaty, both British and French troops withdrew from Scotland. Haigh, 132.
  86. ^ Loades, 67.
  87. ^ a b Loades, 68.
  88. ^ Letter to Mary, Queen of Scots, 23 June 1567." Quoted by Loades, 69â70.
  89. ^ Loades, 72â73.
  90. ^ Loades, 73.
  91. ^ Guy, 483â484.
  92. ^ Loades, 78â79.
  93. ^ Guy, 1â11.
  94. ^ Haigh, 134.
  95. ^ Haigh, 137.
  96. ^ Letter to Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, 10 February 1586, delivered by Sir Thomas Heneage. Loades, 94.
  97. ^ a b Haigh, 138.
  98. ^ When the Spanish naval commander, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, reached the coast near Calais, he found the Duke of Parma's troops unready and was forced to wait, giving the English the opportunity to launch their attack. Loades, 64.
  99. ^ Black, 349.
  100. ^ a b Neale, 300.
  101. ^ Though most historians accept that Elizabeth gave such a speech, its authenticity has been questioned (Frye, The Myth of Elizabeth at Tilbury, 1992), since it was not published until 1654. Doran, 235â236.
  102. ^ Somerset, 591.  
â¢ Neale, 297â98.

  103. ^ a b Black, 353.
  104. ^ Haigh, 145.
  105. ^ For example, C. H. Wilson (Berkeley, 1970) castigates Elizabeth for half-heartedness in the war against Spain. Haigh, 183.
  106. ^ "In some respects she had a firmer grasp of strategy than the men to whom she had to entrust the conduct of the war, and certainly much more damage was caused by her commanders' failure to adhere to carefully formulated instructions than by Elizabeth's vacillation or attempts to economise." Somerset, 655.
  107. ^ a b Haigh, 142.
  108. ^ Haigh, 143.
  109. ^ Haigh, 143â144.
  110. ^ One observer wrote that Ulster, for example, was "as unknown to the English here as the most inland part of Virginia". Somerset, 667.
  111. ^ Somerset, 668.
  112. ^ Somerset, 668â669.
  113. ^ Loades, 98.
  114. ^ In a letter of 19 July 1599 to Essex, Elizabeth wrote: "For what can be more true (if things be rightly examined) than that your two month's journey has brought in never a capital rebel against whom it had been worthy to have adventured one thousand men". Loades, 98.
  115. ^ Loades, 98â99.
  116. ^ http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/sir_john_hawkins.htm
  117. ^ a b Loades, 92.
  118. ^ Gaunt, 37.
  119. ^ Haigh, 171.
  120. ^ "The metaphor of drama is an appropriate one for Elizabeth's reign, for her power was an illusionâand an illusion was her power. Like Henry IV of France, she projected an image of herself which brought stability and prestige to her country. By constant attention to the details of her total performance, she kept the rest of the cast on their toes and kept her own part as queen." Haigh, 179.
  121. ^ Loades, 93.
  122. ^ Loades, 97.
  123. ^ Black, 410.
  124. ^ A Patent of Monopoly gave the holder control over an aspect of trade or manufacture. See Neale, 382.
  125. ^ Williams, 208.
  126. ^ Black, 192â194.
  127. ^ She gave the speech at Whitehall Palace to a deputation of 140 members, who afterwards all kissed her hand. Neale, 383â384.
  128. ^ Loades, 86.
  129. ^ a b Haigh, 155.
  130. ^ Black, 355â356.
  131. ^ Black, 355.
  132. ^ This criticism of Elizabeth was noted by Elizabeth's early biographers William Camden and John Clapham. For a detailed account of such criticisms and of Elizabeth's "government by illusion", see chapter 8, "The Queen and the People", Haigh, 149â169.
  133. ^ Black, 239.
  134. ^ Black, 239â245.
  135. ^ Haigh, 176.
  136. ^ After Essex's downfall, James VI of Scotland referred to Cecil as "king there in effect". Croft, 48.
  137. ^ Cecil wrote to James, "The subject itself is so perilous to touch amongst us as it setteth a mark upon his head forever that hatcheth such a bird". Willson, 154.
  138. ^ Willson, 154.
  139. ^ Willson, 155.
  140. ^ Neale, 385.
  141. ^ Black, 411.
  142. ^ Black, 410â411.
  143. ^ Weir, 486.
  144. ^ The heir presumptive under the terms of Henry VIII's Will, i.e. either Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp, or Anne Stanley, Countess of Castlehaven, depending on whether one recognized the legitimacy of the first-mentioned's birth; and the Lady Arbella Stuart on grounds similar to James's own.
  145. ^ Jeffrey Denys Goldsworthy (1999) The Sovereignty of Parliament (Oxford U.P., 1999, ISBN 0198268939), p. 145
  146. ^ ibid.; see also Noel Cox "The Law of Succession to the Crown in New Zealand" in: Waikato Law Review (1999), esp. ch. III "Power to change descent of the Crown" [1] for a discussion of the controversy, and the place of James's succession therein.
  147. ^ a b Loades, 100â101.
  148. ^ Willson, 333.
  149. ^ a b Somerset, 726.
  150. ^ Strong, 164.
  151. ^ Haigh, 170.
  152. ^ Weir, 488.
  153. ^ Dobson and Watson, 257.
  154. ^ Strong, 163â164.
  155. ^ Haigh, 175, 182.
  156. ^ Dobson and Watson, 258.
  157. ^ The age of Elizabeth was redrawn as one of chivalry, epitomised by courtly encounters between the queen and sea-dog "heroes" such as Drake and Raleigh. Some Victorian narratives, such as Raleigh laying his cloak before the queen or presenting her with a potato, remain part of the myth. Dobson and Watson, 258.
  158. ^ Haigh, 175.
  159. ^ In his preface to the 1952 reprint of Queen Elizabeth I, J. E. Neale observed: "The book was written before such words as "ideological", "fifth column", and "cold war" became current; and it is perhaps as well that they are not there. But the ideas are present, as is the idea of romantic leadership of a nation in peril, because they were present in Elizabethan times".
  160. ^ Haigh, 182.
  161. ^ Haigh, 183.
  162. ^ Black, 408â409.
  163. ^ Haigh, 142â147, 174â177.
  164. ^ Loades, 46â50.
  165. ^ Weir, 487.
  166. ^ Hogge, 9â10.
  167. ^ The new state religion was condemned at the time in such terms as "a cloaked papistry, or mingle mangle". Somerset, 102.
  168. ^ "The problem with the 'Protestant heroine' image was that Elizabeth did not always live up to it. London Protestants were horrified in 1561 when they heard of the plan to get Spanish support for a Dudley marriage by offering concessions on religion, and it took Elizabeth almost a decade to re-establish her Protestant credentials." Haigh, 165.
  169. ^ Haigh, 45â46, 177.
  170. ^ Black, 14â15.
  171. ^ Collinson, 28â29.
  172. ^ Williams, 50.
  173. ^ Haigh, 42.
  174. ^ a b c Somerset, 727.
  175. ^ Hogge, 9n.
  176. ^ Loades, 1.
  177. ^ As Elizabeth's Lord Keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon, put it on her behalf to parliament in 1559, the queen "is not, nor ever meaneth to be, so wedded to her own will and fantasy that for the satisfaction thereof she will do anything...to bring any bondage or servitude to her people, or give any just occasion to them of any inward grudge whereby any tumults or stirs might arise as hath done of late days". Starkey, 7.
  178. ^ Somerset, 75â76.
  179. ^ Edwards, 205.
  180. ^ Starkey, 6â7.

## Bibliography

  * Black, J. B. The Reign of Elizabeth: 1558â1603. Oxford: Clarendon, (1936) 1945. OCLC 5077207
  * Brimacombe, Peter. All the Queen's Men: The World of Elizabeth I. New York: St Martin's Press, 2000. ISBN 0312232519.
  * Camden, William. History of the Most Renowned and Victorious Princess Elizabeth. Wallace T. MacCaffrey (ed). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, selected chapters, 1970 edition. OCLC 59210072.
  * Clapham, John. Elizabeth of England. E. P. Read and Conyers Read (eds). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1951. OCLC 1350639.
  * Collinson, Patrick. "The Mongrel Religion of Elizabethan England." Elizabeth: The Exhibition at the National Maritime Museum. Susan Doran (ed.). London: Chatto and Windus, 2003. ISBN 0701174765.
  * Croft, Pauline. King James. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. ISBN 0333613953.
  * Davenport, Cyril. English Embroidered Bookbindings. Alfred Pollard (ed.). London: Kegan Paul, Trench, TrÃ¼bner and Co., 1899. OCLC 705685.
  * Dobson, Michael; and Nicola Watson. "Elizabeth's Legacy". Elizabeth: The Exhibition at the National Maritime Museum. Susan Doran (ed.). London: Chatto and Windus, 2003. ISBN 0701174765.
  * Doran, Susan. "The Queen's Suitors and the Problem of the Succession." Elizabeth: The Exhibition at the National Maritime Museum. Susan Doran (ed.). London: Chatto and Windus, 2003. ISBN 0701174765.
  * Edwards, Philip. The Making of the Modern English State: 1460â1660. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004. ISBN 031223614X.
  * Elizabeth I: The Collected Works Leah S. Marcus, Mary Beth Rose & Janel Mueller (eds.). Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2002. ISBN 0226504654.
  * Elton, G.R. England under the Tudors. London: Routledge, 1991. ISBN 041506533X.
  * Flynn, Sian; and David Spence. "Elizabeth's Adventurers". Elizabeth: The Exhibition at the National Maritime Museum. Susan Doran (ed.). London: Chatto and Windus, 2003. ISBN 0701174765.
  * Frieda, Leonie. Catherine de Medici. London: Phoenix, 2005. ISBN 0173820390.
  * Gaunt, William. Court Painting in England from Tudor to Victorian Times. London: Constable, 1980. ISBN 0094618704.
  * Graves, Michael A. R. Elizabethan Parliaments: 1559â1601. London and New York: Longman, 1987. ISBN 0582355168.
  * Guy, John. My Heart is My Own: The Life of Mary Queen of Scots. London and New York: Fourth Estate, 2004. ISBN 184115752X.
  * Haigh, Christopher. Elizabeth I. Harlow (UK): Longman Pearson, (1988) 1998 edition. ISBN 0582437547.
  * Hasler. P. W (ed). History of Parliament. House of Commons 1558â1603 (3 vols). London: Published for the History of Parliament Trust by H.M.S.O., 1981. ISBN 0118875019.
  * Hogge, Alice. God's Secret Agents: Queen Elizabeth's Forbidden Priests and the Hatching of the Gunpowder Plot. London: HarperCollins, 2005. ISBN 0007156375.
  * Lockyer, Roger. Tudor and Stuart Britain 1471-1714. Third Edition, 2004. London: Pearson.
  * Loades, David. Elizabeth I: The Golden Reign of Gloriana. London: The National Archives, 2003. ISBN 1903365430.
  * Neale, J.E. Queen Elizabeth I: A Biography. London: Jonathan Cape, (1934) 1954 reprint. OCLC 220518.
  * Ridley, Jasper. Elizabeth I: The Shrewdness of Virtue. New York : Fromm International, 1989. ISBN 088064110X.
  * Rowse, A. L. The England of Elizabeth. London: Macmillan, 1950. OCLC 181656553.
  * Russell, Conrad. The Crisis of Parliaments: English History, 1509â1660. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971. ISBN 0199130345.
  * Somerset, Anne. Elizabeth I. London: Phoenix, (1991) 1997 edition. ISBN 0385721579.
  * Starkey, David. "Elizabeth: Woman, Monarch, Mission." Elizabeth: The Exhibition at the National Maritime Museum. Susan Doran (ed.). London: Chatto and Windus, 2003. ISBN 0701174765.
  * Strong, Roy. Gloriana: The Portraits of Queen Elizabeth I. London: Pimlico, (1987) 2003. ISBN 071260944X.
  * Waller, Maureen, "Sovereign Ladies: Sex, Sacrifice, and Power. The Six Reigning Queens of England." St. Martin's Press, New York, 2006. ISBN 0-312-33801-5
  * Weir, Alison. Elizabeth the Queen. London: Pimlico, (1998) 1999 edition. ISBN 0712673121.
  * Williams, Neville. The Life and Times of Elizabeth I. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1972. ISBN 0297831682.
  * Willson, David Harris. King James VI & I. London: Jonathan Cape, (1956) 1963. ISBN 0224605720.
  * Wilson, Charles H. Queen Elizabeth and the Revolt of the Netherlands. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1970. ISBN 0520017447.

## External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Elizabeth I of England  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Elizabeth I

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Elizabeth
I of England  
  * William Camden. Annales Rerum Gestarum Angliae et Hiberniae Regnante Elizabetha. (1615 and 1625.) Hypertext edition, with English translation. Dana F. Sutton (ed.), 2000. Retrieved 7 December 2007.
  * Tudor and Elizabeth Portraits. Tudor and Elizabethan portraits and other works of art, provided for research and education. Retrieved 15 December 2007.
  * Archival material relating to Elizabeth I of England listed at the UK National Register of Archives
  * Annals of the Reformation and Establishment of Religion, and Other Various Occurrences in the Church of England, During Queen Elizabeth's Happy Reign by John Strype (1824 ed.): Vol. I, Pt. I, Vol. I, Pt. II, Vol. II, Pt. I, Vol. II., Pt. II, Vol. III, Pt. I, Vol. III, Pt. II, Vol. IV

Elizabeth I of England

House of Tudor

Born: 7 September 1533 Died: 24 March 1603  
Regnal titles  
Preceded by  
Mary I Queen of England  
Queen of Ireland  
17 November 1558 â 24 March 1603 Succeeded by  
James I  
English royalty  
Preceded by  
Lady Mary Tudor Heir to the English Throne  
as heiress presumptive  
March 1534 â 1536 Succeeded by  
Edward, Prince of Wales  
Preceded by  
Lady Catherine Grey Heir to the English and Irish Thrones  
as heiress presumptive  
19 July 1553 â 17 November 1558 Vacant

Never designated an heirÂ¹

Title next held by

Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales  
Notes and references  
1\. Her potential heirs at the time of succession were Lady Frances Brandon by
the Third Succession Act and Mary I of Scotland by cognatic primogeniture  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Part of a series on the Anglican Communion  
Organisation

Archbishop of Canterbury \- Rowan Williams \- Primates' Meeting \- Lambeth
Conferences  
Anglican Consultative Council \- Bishops, Dioceses, and Episcopal polity

Canterbury Cathedral  
Background

Christianity \- Christian Church \- Anglicanism \- History \- Jesus Christ \-
St Paul  
Catholicity and Catholicism \- Apostolic Succession \- Ministry \- Ecumenical
councils  

Augustine of Canterbury \- Bede \- Medieval Architecture \- Henry VIII \-
Reformation  
Thomas Cranmer \- Dissolution of the Monasteries \- Church of England \-
Edward VI  
Elizabeth I \- Matthew Parker \- Richard Hooker \- James I \- Authorized
Version  
Charles I \- William Laud \- Nonjuring schism \- Ordination of women \-
Homosexuality  

Windsor Report  
Theology

Trinity (Father, Son, Holy Spirit) - Theology \- Doctrine \- Thirty-Nine
Articles  

Caroline Divines \- Oxford Movement \- Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral \-
Sacraments  

Mary \- Saints  
Liturgy and Worship

Book of Common Prayer \- Morning and Evening Prayer \- Eucharist \- Liturgical
Year  
Biblical Canon \- Books of Homilies \- High Church \- Low Church \- Broad
Church  
Miscellaneous Topics

Ecumenism \- Monasticism \- Preaching \- Prayer \- Music \- Liturgy \- Symbols
\- Art  
<IMG> Anglicanism Portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

English Monarchs  
Monarchs Pre-Conquest

<IMG>

Alfred the Great Â· Edward the Elder Â· Ãlfweard Â· Athelstan the GloriousÂ¶
Â· Edmund the MagnificentÂ¶ Â· EadredÂ¶ Â· Eadwig the FairÂ¶ Â· Edgar the
PeaceableÂ¶ Â· Edward the Martyr Â· Ethelred the Unready Â· Sweyn Forkbeard Â·
Edmund Ironside Â· Cnut the GreatÂ¶ Â· Harold Harefoot Â· Harthacnut Â· Edward
the Confessor Â· Harold Godwinson Â· Edgar the Ãtheling  
Monarchs Post-Conquest

<IMG>

William I Â· William II Â· Henry I Â· Stephen Â· Matilda (disputed) Â· Henry
II Â· Richard I Â· Johnâ  Â· Henry IIIâ  Â· Edward Iâ  Â· Edward IIâ  Â·
Edward IIIâ  Â· Richard IIâ  Â· Henry IVâ  Â· Henry Vâ  Â· Henry VIâ  Â·
Edward IVâ  Â· Edward Vâ  Â· Richard IIIâ  Â· Henry VIIâ  Â· Henry VIIIâ
Â· Edward VIâ  Â· Jane (disputed)â  Â· Mary Iâ  Â· Elizabeth Iâ  Â· James
Iâ¡ Â· Charles Iâ¡ Â· Commonwealth Â· Charles IIâ¡ Â· James IIâ¡ Â·
William IIIâ¡ with Mary IIâ¡ Â· William IIIâ¡ Â· Anneâ¡  
Â¶Also Overlord of Britain. â Also Lord/Monarch of Ireland. â¡Also Monarch
of Scotland and Ireland.  
Featured article

Persondata  
NAME Elizabeth I  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Elizabeth I of England; The Virgin Queen; Gloriana; Good
Queen Bess  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Queen of England; Queen of Ireland  
DATE OF BIRTH 7 September 1533(1533-09-07)  
PLACE OF BIRTH Greenwich, England  
DATE OF DEATH 24 March 1603  
PLACE OF DEATH Richmond, Surrey  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_I_of_England"

Categories: 1533 births | 1603 deaths | 16th-century women writers | Burials
at Westminster Abbey | English Anglicans | English women writers | Founders of
English schools and colleges | Henry VIII's children | People excommunicated
by the Roman Catholic Church | People from London | People of the French Wars
of Religion | Pretenders to the throne of the kingdom of France (Plantagenet)
| Protestant monarchs | Queens regnant of England | Regicides of Mary Queen of
Scots | Smallpox survivors

Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kernewek
  * Kiswahili
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Scots
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 20:50.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



