
# Diablo Cody

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Diablo Cody  
<IMG>  
Diablo Cody in January 2008  
Born Brook Busey  
June 14, 1978 (1978-06-14) (age 30)  
Lemont, Illinois, USA  
Occupation Screenwriter, journalist, memoirist, blogger  
Years active 2007-present  
Official website  
Brook Busey (born June 14, 1978), better known by the pen name Diablo Cody,[1]
is an American Academy Award & BAFTA-winning screenwriter, writer, blogger,
journalist and author. First known for her candid chronicling of her year as a
stripper in her Pussy Ranch blog and her 2006 memoir, Candy Girl: A Year in
the Life of an Unlikely Stripper, Cody won wider fame as the writer of the
2007 film Juno, for which she won the Academy Award for Best Original
Screenplay.

Cody wrote a horror-drama screenplay about a teenage cannibal called
Jennifer's Body during the filming, and promotion, of Juno. Jennifer's Body
was filmed from 2007 to 2008 and is set for a September 2009 release.

A sitcom created by Cody, called United States of Tara, based on an idea by
Steven Spielberg, has been picked up for 13 episodes (including pilot) by the
U.S. cable TV network Showtime and Canadian channel The Movie Network.[2].
After the airing of only 4 episodes, the show was renewed for a second season
[3].

## Contents

  * 1 Early life and career
  * 2 Stripping and journalism
  * 3 Screenwriting
    * 3.1 Nominations and awards
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Early life and career

Cody, who took the pen name Diablo Cody (diablo is Spanish for "devil") after
repeatedly listening to the song El Diablo by Arcadia[4] while passing through
Cody, Wyoming,[5] attended Benet Academy, a Roman Catholic school in Lisle,
Illinois. Cody, and her older brother Marc grew up in Lemont, Illinois, a
suburb of Chicago. She graduated from the University of Iowa with a media
studies degree.[6] While at the University of Iowa, Cody was a DJ at KRUI 89.7
FM. Her first jobs were doing secretarial work at a Chicago law firm and later
proofreading copy for advertisements that played on Twin Cities radio
stations.

Cody began a parody of a weblog called Red Secretary, detailing the
(fictional) exploits of a secretary living in Belarus.[7] The events were
thinly-veiled allegories for events that happened in Cody's real life, but
told from the perspective of a disgruntled, English-idiom-challenged Eastern
Bloc girl.

Cody's first bona fide blog appeared under the nickname Darling Girl after
Cody had moved from Chicago to Minneapolis, Minnesota.[7] Cody currently
resides in Los Angeles.[8]

## [edit] Stripping and journalism

On a whim, Cody signed up for amateur night at a Minneapolis strip club called
the Skyway Lounge.[6] Enjoying the experience, she eventually quit her day job
and took up stripping full-time.[9] Cody also spent time working peep shows at
Sex World, a Minneapolis adult novelty and DVD store. Cody soon made a retreat
to journalism, and a budding writing career stimulated by her skin trade days.

While still stripping, Cody began writing for City Pages, an alternative Twin
Cities weekly newspaper.[6] She left City Pages just before it changed
editorial hands. Cody has since written for the now-defunct Jane magazine. In
December 2007, Cody debuted as Entertainment Weekly magazine's newest Backpage
columnist, joining regular contributors Mark Harris and the iconic pop horror
author Stephen King on a rotational basis.

At the age of 24, Cody wrote her memoir Candy Girl: A Year in the Life of an
Unlikely Stripper. The memoir began after Mason Novick, who would soon become
Cody's manager, showed interest in Cody's acerbic wit. Based on the popularity
Pussy Ranch had received, he was able to secure her a publishing contract with
Gotham Books.

## [edit] Screenwriting

After completion of her book, Cody was encouraged by Novick to write her first
screenplay.[5] Within months she wrote Juno, a coming-of-age story about a
teenager's unplanned pregnancy. The Jason Reitman-directed comedy stars Ellen
Page and Michael Cera.

In July 2007, Showtime announced that it would be producing a pilot of Cody's
Dreamworks television series, United States of Tara. Based on an idea by
Steven Spielberg, Tara is a comedy about a mother with dissociative identity
disorder, starring Toni Collette.[8] The series began filming in Spring 2008,
and premiered on January 18, 2009.

In October 2007, Cody sold a script titled Girly Style to Universal Studios,
and a horror script called Jennifer's Body to Fox Atomic.[10] Set for release
on September 18, 2009, Jennifer's Body stars Megan Fox as the title
character.[11] Cody also partially wrote the script for Burlesque, a musical
film by director/screenwriter Steven Antin.[12]

Cody is good friends with fellow screenwriters Dana Fox (What Happens in
Vegas) and Lorene Scafaria (Nick and Norah's Infinite Playlist) and they often
write their screenplays while hanging out together in order to get advice from
one another. [13]

### [edit] Nominations and awards

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2008)  
Juno was runner-up for the Toronto International Film Festival People's Choice
Award, won second prize at the Rome Film Festival, and earned four Academy
Award nominations, including one for Best Picture. Cody herself won the Best
Original Screenplay Oscar for her debut script, which also picked up a Golden
Globe nomination and an Independent Spirit Award for Best First Screenplay.
She also won screenplay honors from BAFTA, the Writers Guild of America,
Broadcast Film Critics Association, the National Board of Review, the Chicago
Film Critics Association, the Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association, the
Florida Film Critics Circle, the Southeastern Film Critics Association, and
the Satellite Awards, the Cinema for Peace Award 2008 for Most Valuable Work
of Director, Producer & Screenwriter for Juno.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "What Makes Diablo Cody Unique Now Gets Pans". Associated Press. 2007-02-29. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/23360051/. Retrieved on 2008-03-03.
  2. ^ Schneider, Michael (2008-06-04). "Showtime pledges to 'United States'". "Variety". http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117986860.html?categoryid=14&cs=1. Retrieved on 2008-07-25.
  3. ^ "'United States of Tara' renewed for second season". Los Angeles Times. 2009-02-10. http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/showtracker/2009/02/united-states-2.html. Retrieved on 2009-02-17.
  4. ^ "Diablo Cody: From Ex-Stripper to A-Lister". "Entertainment Weekly". 2007-11-09. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20166944_20166964_20157948,00.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-17.
  5. ^ a b "Ex-stripper in movie spotlight". CNN. 2008-01-23. http://www.cnn.com/2008/SHOWBIZ/Movies/01/09/film.diablo.cody.ap/index.html?iref=mpstoryview. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  6. ^ a b c Desson, Thomson (2007-12-15). "Hollywood takes a shine to 'Juno' writer's body of work". The Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/ae/movies/articles/2007/12/15/hollywood_takes_a_shine_to_juno_writers_body_of_work/?page=2. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  7. ^ a b Abramowitz, Rachel (2007-12-06). "Diablo Cody: From stripper to screenwriter". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 2008-02-25. http://world-news-live.blogspot.com/2007/12/diablo-cody-from-stripper-to.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  8. ^ a b "Diablo Cody, dancer turned ace screenwriter". Times Online. 2008-01-20. http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/film/article3199604.ece. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
  9. ^ Scott, Megan (2006-03-10). "Unlikely pole dancer tells strippers' story". Orange County Register. http://www.ocregister.com/ocregister/life/features/lifestyle/article_1032959.php. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  10. ^ Covert, Colin (2007-12-07). "Interview: Diablo Cody: Dancing as fast as she can". Minneapolis Star Tribune. http://www.startribune.com/entertainment/movies/12219916.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-30.
  11. ^ "First Look". Entertainment Weekly. February 13, 2009 (#1034). pp. 7.
  12. ^ Billington, Alex (2007-10-16). "Juno Writer Diablo Cody's Burlesque - Moulin Rouge Mixed With Cabaret". Firstshowing.net. http://www.firstshowing.net/2007/10/16/juno-writer-diablo-codys-burlesque-moulin-rouge-mixed-with-cabaret/. Retrieved on 2008-02-15.
  13. ^ http://lfpress.ca/newsstand/News/CanadaWorld/2008/09/07/6685901-sun.html

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Category:Diablo Cody  
  * Her blogs: 
    * The Pussy Ranch at blogspot.com, beginning September 2007
    * The Pussy Ranch at City Pages, February 2005 - September 2007
    * The Pussy Ranch at blogspot.com through the Internet Archive, February 2003 - August 2004
    * Red Secretary at GeoCities, November 1, 2002 - December 4, 2002
  * Diablo Cody at the Internet Movie Database
  * Diablo Cody at MySpace
  * Diablo Cody at Twitter
  * Interview with Diablo Cody about JUNO at the Telluride Film Festival, September 10, 2007
  * Reitman and Cody, Consorting with 'Juno' \- interviewed on NPR's Fresh Air, December 6, 2007
  * Diablo Cody for JUNO, SuicideGirls interview, December 10, 2007
  * City Pages interview with Diablo Cody, December 26, 2007
  * Off the Stripper Pole and Into the Movies, The New York Times, December 2, 2007
  * Showtime Pledges to United States, "Variety", June 4, 2008

Awards  
Preceded by  
Michael Arndt  
for Little Miss Sunshine Academy Award for Writing, Best Original Screenplay  
2007  
for Juno Succeeded by  
Dustin Lance Black  
for Milk  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diablo_Cody"

Categories: 1978 births | American memoirists | American bloggers | American
Roman Catholics | American screenwriters | Best Original Screenplay Academy
Award winners | Writers Guild of America Award winners | Living people |
People from Minnesota | University of Iowa alumni | Women screenwriters |
Writers from Chicago, Illinois | American erotic dancers

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 08:38.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



