
# Persuasion (novel)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Persuasion  
<IMG>  
Title page of the original 1818 edition  
Author Jane Austen  
Country England  
Language English  
Genre(s) Novel  
Publisher John Murray  
Publication date 1818  
Media type print (hardback and paperback)  
ISBN N/A  
Persuasion is Jane Austen's last completed novel. She began it soon after she
had finished Emma, completing it in August, 1816. She died, aged 41, in 1817,
but Persuasion was not published until 1818.

Persuasion is connected with Northanger Abbey not only by the fact that the
two books were originally bound up in one volume and published together two
years later, but also because both stories are set partly in Bath, a
fashionable health resort with which Jane Austen was well acquainted, having
lived there from 1801 to 1805.

## Contents

  * 1 Plot introduction
  * 2 Title as variation on a theme
  * 3 Plot summary
  * 4 Main characters
  * 5 Literary significance & criticism
  * 6 Allusions/references from other works
  * 7 Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
  * 8 Footnotes
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Plot introduction

More than seven years prior to the events in the novel, Anne Elliot fell in
love with a handsome and ambitious, but poor, young naval officer, Frederick
Wentworth. The Elliots, led by Sir Walter, Anne's father and lord of the
family estate, were dissatisfied with her choice, feeling he was not
distinguished enough for their family. Her older friend and mentor, Lady
Russell, acting in place of Anne's deceased mother, persuaded her to break off
the match. Now age 27 and considered a spinster, Anne re-encounters her former
fiancÃ© as he associates with the Musgrove family.

Now Wentworth is an early captain and wealthy from wartime victories in the
Royal Navy and from prize-money for capturing enemy ships. He hasn't forgiven
Anne for her rejection of him. Meanwhile, the self-interested machinations of
Anne's father, her older sister Elizabeth, Elizabeth's friend Mrs. Clay, and
William Elliot (Anne's cousin and her father's heir) constitute important
subplots.

## [edit] Title as variation on a theme

Readers of "Persuasion" might infer Jane Austen intended 'persuasion' as the
working theme of the story. Certainly that theme is repeated several times,
with vignettes within the story as variations on the theme. On the other hand,
there is evidence that Austen did not have in mind such an explicit theme and
variations. Indeed, it even appears she didn't envision the title of the story
as "Persuasion". It is speculated the title of the novel was chosen by her
brother Henry or her sister Cassandra.[citation needed] Henry had long been
the champion of his sister's writing, especially in the business and
publishing circles where he had more access than Cassandra. After Jane's death
it was he who arranged for publishing the novel, perhaps naming it in the
process. Another speculation is the two siblings collaborated in choosing the
title. Some critics believe Austen intended to name the novel "The Elliots"
but that she died without titling it.

## [edit] Plot summary

Anne Elliot is the overlooked middle daughter of the vain Sir Walter Elliot, a
baronet who is all too conscious of his good looks and rank and spends
excessive amounts of money. Anne's mother, a fine, sensible woman, is long
dead, and her elder sister, Elizabeth, resembles her father in temperament and
delights in the fact that as the eldest daughter she can assume her mother's
former position in their rural neighborhood. Anne's younger sister, Mary, is a
nervous, clinging woman who has made an unspectacular marriage to Charles
Musgrove of Uppercross Hall, the heir to a bucolic but respected local squire.
None of her surviving family can provide much companionship for the elegant-
minded Anne, who, still unmarried at 27, seems destined for spinsterhood.

Soon after her earlier commitment to Wentworth, at age nineteen, Anne had been
persuaded by her mother's great friend --and her own trusted confidante, the
widow Lady Russell-- to break the engagement to the man she loved deeply. Lady
Russell had questioned the wisdom of Anne marrying a moneyless young naval
officer without family or connections and whose prospects were so uncertain.

Wentworth re-enters Anne's life when Sir Walter is forced by his own
profligacy to let the family estate to none other than Wentworth's brother-in-
law, Admiral Croft. Wentworth's successes in the Napoleonic Wars resulted in
his promotion and enabled him to amass the then considerable fortune of
Â£25,000 (around Â£2.5 million in today's money) from prize money awarded for
capturing enemy vessels. The Musgroves, including Mary, Charles and Charles's
younger sisters, Henrietta and Louisa, are delighted to welcome the Crofts and
Wentworth to the neighborhood. Both Musgrove girls are attracted to Wentworth,
though Henrietta is informally engaged to clergyman cousin Charles Hayter.
Hayter is viewed as a merely respectable match, being a bit beneath the
Musgroves, socially and financially. Charles, Mary, and the Crofts continually
speculate as to which one Wentworth might marry.

Captain Wentworth's visit to a close friend, Captain Harville, in nearby Lyme
Regis results in a day-long outing being organized by those eager to see the
resort. While there, Louisa Musgrove sustains a concussion in a fall brought
about by her own impetuous behaviour. This highlights the difference between
the headstrong Louisa and the more sensible Anne. While onlookers exclaim that
Louisa is dead and her companions stand around dumbfounded, Anne administers
first aid and summons assistance. Wentworth's admiration for Anne reawakens as
a result.

Louisa's recovery is slow and her self-confidence is severely shaken. Her
newfound timidity elicits the kind attention and reassurance of Wentworth's
friend Captain Benwick, who had been mourning the recent death of his
fiancÃ©e. The couple find their personalities to be now more in sympathy and
they become engaged.

Meanwhile, Sir Walter, Elizabeth, and Elizabeth's scheming friend Mrs. Clay,
the widowed daughter of Sir Walter's agent, have relocated to Bath. There they
hope to live in a manner befitting a baronet and his family with the least
possible expense until their finances are restored to a firmer footing. Sir
Walter's cousin and heir, William Elliot, who long ago slighted the baronet,
now seeks a reconciliation. Elizabeth assumes that he wishes to court her,
while Lady Russell more correctly suspects that he admires Anne.

Although William Elliot seems a perfect gentleman, Anne distrusts him; she
finds his character disturbingly opaque. She is enlightened by an unexpected
source when she discovers an old school friend, Mrs. Smith, living in Bath in
straitened circumstances. Mrs. Smith and her now-deceased husband had once
been Mr. Elliot's closest friends. Having encouraged them into financial
extravagance, he had quickly dropped them when they became impoverished. Anne
learns, to her great distress, of his layers of deceit and calculated self-
interest. In addition, her friend speculates that Mr. Elliot wants to
reestablish his relationship with her family primarily to safeguard his
inheritance of the title, fearing a marriage between Sir Walter and Mrs. Clay.
This helps Anne to understand more fully the dangers of persuasion --in that
Lady Russell pressed her to accept Mr. Elliot's likely offer of marriage-- and
helps her to develop more confidence in her own judgment.

Ultimately, the Musgroves visit Bath to purchase wedding clothes for their
daughters Louisa and Henrietta (who has become engaged to Hayter). Captain
Wentworth and his friend Captain Harville accompany them. Anne and Harville
discuss attachments with Wentworth writing a note within earshot of the
discussion. This causes him to write a note to Anne detailing his feelings for
her. In a tender scene, Anne and Wentworth reconcile and renew their
engagement. The match is now more palatable to Anne's family â their waning
fortunes and Wentworth's waxing ones have made a considerable difference.
Also, ever overvaluing good looks, Sir Walter is favorably impressed with his
future son-in-law's appearance. Lady Russell admits she has been completely
wrong about Captain Wentworth, and she and Anne remain friends.

## [edit] Main characters

Sir Walter Elliot, Bt. â A vain and self-satisfied baronet, Sir Walter's
profligacy since the death of his prudent wife 13 years before has put his
family in financial straits. These are severe enough to force him to lease his
estate, Kellynch Hall, to Admiral Croft and take a more economical residence
in Bath.

Elizabeth Elliot â The eldest and most beautiful daughter of Sir Walter, who
encourages her father's imprudent spending and extravagance. She and her
father routinely put their interests ahead of Anne's, regarding her as
inconsequential.

Anne Elliot â

Main article: Anne Elliot

The second daughter of Sir Walter is 27 years old and unmarried. She is very
intelligent and was very pretty but lost her bloom after breaking off her
engagement with Wentworth. Now nearly eight years ago, she fell in love with
Captain Wentworth but was persuaded (the persuasion of the title) by Lady
Russell to reject his proposal because of his poverty and uncertain future.

Mary Musgrove â The youngest daughter of Sir Walter, married to Charles
Musgrove. She is attention-seeking, always looking for ways she might have
been slighted or not given her full due, and often claims illness when she is
upset. She greatly opposes sister-in-law Henrietta's interest in marrying
Charles Hayter, who Mary feels is beneath them.

Charles Musgrove â Husband of Mary and heir to the Musgrove estate. He had
wanted to marry Anne and settled for Mary (much to the disappointment of the
Musgrove family, and to his misfortune) when Anne refused him due to her
continued love for Wentworth.

Lady Russell â A friend of the Elliots, particularly Anne, of whom she is
the godmother. She is instrumental in Sir Walter's decision to leave Kellynch
hall and avoid financial crisis. Years ago, she persuaded Anne to turn down
Captain Wentworth's proposal of marriage. While far more sensible than Sir
Walter Elliot, she shares his concern for rank and connections, and did not
think Wentworth good enough for Anne because of his inferior birth and
financial status.

Mrs. Clay â A poor widow, daughter of Sir Walter's lawyer, and intimate
'friend' of Elizabeth Elliot. She aims to flatter Sir Walter into marriage,
while her oblivious friend looks on.

Captain Frederick Wentworth â A naval officer who was briefly engaged to
Anne some years ago. At the time, he had no fortune and uncertain prospects,
but owing to much success in the Napoleonic Wars, his situation has greatly
improved. One of two brothers of Sophia Croft.

Admiral Croft â Good-natured, plainspoken tenant at Kellynch Hall and
brother-in-law of Captain Wentworth.

Sophia Croft â Sister of Captain Wentworth and wife of Admiral Croft. She
offers Anne an example of a strong-minded woman who has married for love
instead of money.

Louisa Musgrove â Second sister of Charles Musgrove, aged about 19. Louisa
is a high-spirited young lady who has recently returned with her sister from
school. Captain Wentworth admires her for her resolve and determination,
especially in contrast to Anne's prudence and what he sees as Anne's lack of
conviction. She is ultimately engaged to Captain Benwick.

Henrietta Musgrove â Eldest sister of Charles Musgrove, aged about 20.
Henrietta is informally engaged to her cousin Charles Hayter, but is
nevertheless tempted by the more dashing Captain Wentworth.

Captain Harville â A friend of Captain Wentworth. Severely wounded two years
ago and discharged at half-pay, he and his family have settled in nearby Lyme.

Captain James Benwick â A friend of Captain Harville. Benwick had been
engaged to marry Captain Harville's sister Fanny, but she died while Benwick
was at sea. Benwick's loss has left him melancholic and a lover of poetry. His
enjoyment of reading makes him one of the few characters in the story to find
an intellectual connection with Anne, and it is implied that he might have an
interest in Anne. But Benwick ultimately becomes engaged to Louisa Musgrove.

Mr. William Elliot â A relation and the heir presumptive of Sir Walter, who
became estranged from the family when he wed a woman of much lower social
rank, for her fortune. Sir Walter and Elizabeth had hoped William would marry
Elizabeth Elliot. He is now a widower. Now wanting very much to inherit the
title, he mends the rupture in order to keep an eye on the ambitious Mrs.
Clay. If Sir Walter married her, William's inheritance would be endangered.
When he meets Anne by accident, his interest is piqued; if he could marry Anne
his title and inheritance is likely secured. Rumors circulate that Anne and he
are engaged.

Mrs. Smith â a friend of Anne Elliot who lives in Bath. She is a widow and
has suffered ill health and financial difficulties. She keeps abreast of the
doings of Bath society through news she gets from her nurse, Nurse Rooke, who
also works for a friend of William Elliot's. Her financial problems could have
been straightened out with some assistance from William Elliot, her husband's
former friend, but Elliot would not exert himself, leaving her much
impoverished. Later Wentworth acts on her behalf.

Lady Dalrymple â a viscountess, cousin to Sir Walter. She occupies an
exalted position in society by virtue of wealth and rank. Sir Walter and
Elizabeth are eager to be seen at Bath in the company of this great relation.

## [edit] Literary significance & criticism

<IMG>

Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further
information might be found on the talk page. (January 2007)  
Persuasion is widely appreciated as a moving love story despite what has been
labelled as a simple plot, and exemplifies Austen's acclaimed wit and ironic
narrative style.[citation needed] Austen wrote Persuasion in a hurry, during
the onset of the illness from which she eventually died; as a result, the
novel is both shorter and less polished than Mansfield Park and Emma, and was
not subject to the usual pattern of careful retrospective revision.

Although the impact of Austen's failing health at the time of writing this
novel cannot be overlooked, the novel is strikingly original in several ways.
Persuasion is the first of Austen's novels to feature as the central character
a woman who, by the standards of the time, is well past the first bloom of
youth; biographer Claire Tomalin characterizes the book as Austen's "present
to herself, to Miss Sharp, to Cassandra, to Martha Lloyd . . . to all women
who had lost their chance in life and would never enjoy a second spring."[1]

At the same time, the novel is a paean to the self-made man. Captain Wentworth
is just one of several naval officers in the story who have risen from humble
beginnings to affluence and status on the strength of merit and luck, not by
inheritance. It marks a time where the very roots of society were changing, as
'old money' (exemplified by Sir Walter) had to accommodate the rising strength
of the nouveau riche (such as Wentworth). The success of Austen's own two
brothers in the Royal Navy is probably significant. There are also clear
parallels with the earlier novel Mansfield Park as there are inherent and
sustained messages of the importance of constancy in the face of adversity and
of the need to endure.

Austen makes some biting comments about 'family' and those we choose to
associate with. Mary wants to nurse Louisa but doesn't want to nurse her son.
Elizabeth prefers Mrs Clay to her sister who is 'amongst the nobility of
England and Ireland', yet courts the attentions of Lady Dalrymple.

Through her heroine's words, Austen makes pointed remarks about the condition
of women as 'rational creatures' at the mercy of males (only) recording
history, writing books, etc., while castigating women's "inconstancy" and
"fickleness". "Men have had every advantage of us in telling their own story.
...the pen has been in their hands. I will not allow books to prove anything"
(Persuasion Volume 2 Chapter 11).

She ends the novel with the similar theme to Pride and Prejudice, where the
heroine leaves the others behind with marriage.

## [edit] Allusions/references from other works

  * Persuasion is featured in the 2006 movie The Lake House, and provides a thematic background for the lovers.
  * Many themes and incidents from Persuasion are presented in an updated setting in the novel Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason.
  * "Persuading Annie" a novel by Melissa Nathan, is a modern version of "Persuasion"
  * Connivance a novel by Helen Baker is a continuation, resolving the future of Mrs Clay in Persuasion.
  * Jane Austen in Scarsdale, a novel by Paula Marantz Cohen, is based on the plot of Persuasion. However, Cohen's novel stars Anne Ehrlich, a high school guidance counselor dealing with parents' and students' anxiety over college admissions.
  * "Persuasion" is referenced in John Fowles' "The French Lieutenant's Woman"

## [edit] Film, TV or theatrical adaptations

Persuasion has been the subject of several adaptations:

  * 1960: Persuasion, BBC miniseries starring Daphne Slater as Anne and Paul Daneman as Captain Wentworth.

  * 1971: Persuasion, BBC miniseries starring Anne Firbank as Anne and Bryan Marshall as Captain Wentworth.

  * 1995: Persuasion, made-for-television film (which was released in US theatres by Sony Pictures Classics) starring Amanda Root as Anne and CiarÃ¡n Hinds as Captain Wentworth.

  * 2007: Persuasion, teleplay, filmed in Bath in September 2006 for ITV1, with Sally Hawkins as Anne, Rupert Penry-Jones as Wentworth, and Anthony Head as Sir Walter Elliot, and Julia Davis

  * "Persuasion" is mentioned at least once in the novel "Cold Comfort Farm" by Stella Gibbons (1932).

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Claire Tomalin, Jane Austen: A Life (New York: Vintage, 1997), p. 256

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Persuasion

  * Persuasion at Project Gutenberg
  * Persuasion, free e-book in PDF format.
  * Persuasion free downloads in PDF, PDB and LIT formats
  * Persuasion read into public domain audio form by several readers at Librivox
  * Persuasion audio book, public domain solo recording by Moira Fogarty at Internet Archive
  * Persuasion page at Pemberley.com (includes novel text, discussion board, and FAQ)
  * Persuasion, full text and audio at PublicLiterature.org
  * Chronology/calendar for Persuasion

v â¢ d â¢ e

Jane Austen  
General

Timeline of Jane Austen Â· Reception history of Jane Austen Â· Jane Austen in
popular culture Â· A Memoir of Jane Austen Â· Janeite Â· Jane Austen Centre Â·
Jane Austen's House Museum

<IMG>  
Related people

Catherine Hubback Â· Francis Austen Â· Cassandra Austen Â· Thomas Langlois
Lefroy Â· Charles Austen  
Major works

Sense and Sensibility (1811) Â· Pride and Prejudice (1813) Â· Mansfield Park
(1814) Â· Emma (1815) Â· Northanger Abbey (1817) Â· Persuasion (1817)  
Minor works

Lady Susan Â· Sanditon (unfinished) Â· The Watsons (unfinished)  
Juvenilia

Love and Freindship Â· The Beautifull Cassandra Â· The History of England  
Characters

Fitzwilliam Darcy Â· Elizabeth Bennet Â· Elinor Dashwood â¢ Edward Ferrars
â¢ John Willoughby â¢ Anne Elliot â¢ Fanny Price â¢ Edmund Bertram â¢
Maria Bertram â¢ Thomas Bertram â¢ Henry Crawford â¢ Miss Mary Crawford â¢
George Knightley  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persuasion_(novel)"

Categories: 1818 novels | British novels | English-language novels | Novels by
Jane Austen | Posthumous works

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles to be expanded since
January 2007 | All articles to be expanded | Articles with unsourced
statements since January 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 07:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



