
# Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"OotP" redirects here. For the baseball simulator, see Out of the Park
Baseball. For other uses, see Order of the Phoenix.

"HP5" redirects here. For the postal district for Chesham, see HP postcode
area.

This article is about the book. For the film, see Harry Potter and the Order
of the Phoenix (film). For the video game, see Harry Potter and the Order of
the Phoenix (video game).

Harry Potter books  
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix  
<IMG>  
Author J. K. Rowling  
Illustrators Jason Cockcroft (UK)  
Mary GrandPrÃ© (US)  
Genre Fantasy  
Publishers Bloomsbury (UK)  
Scholastic (US)  
Raincoast (Canada)  
Released 21 June 2003  
Book no. Five  
Sales 55 million (Worldwide)  
Story timeline 1995â1996  
Chapters 38  
Pages 766 (UK)  
870 (US)  
Preceded by Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire  
Followed by Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince  
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the fifth novel in the Harry
Potter series written by J. K. Rowling. It is the longest book in the series,
and was released on 21 June 2003. The novel features Harry's struggles through
his fifth year at Hogwarts, including the surreptitious return of Harry's
nemesis Lord Voldemort, O.W.L. exams, awkward teenage love and an obstructive
Ministry of Magic. The book has been made into a film, which was released in
2007.

## Contents

  * 1 Plot
  * 2 Release history
  * 3 Translations
  * 4 Editions
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Plot

<IMG>

The plot summary in this section is too long or detailed compared to the rest
of the content. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather
than merely reiterating the plot. (December 2008)  
Several weeks into the summer, Harry Potter has heard nothing from his friends
or acquaintances from the wizard world. Finding himself walking down a street
with his cousin Dudley, the two of them are attacked by a pair of Dementors.
Harry drives them off with a Patronus Charm, and is surprised to learn that
the Dursleys' elderly neighbour Arabella Figg, is a Squib and has been keeping
an eye on him on Albus Dumbledoreâs orders. On returning home, he
immediately receives a notice of expulsion from Hogwarts for using magic
outside school, and that his wand is to be snapped, though these decisions are
reversed, set to be decided at a disciplinary hearing. One night, an advance
guard from the Order of the Phoenix arrives at the house and escorts Harry to
their secret headquarters at Number Twelve, Grimmauld Place in London, where
Harry joins the Weasley family, Hermione Granger, and Harryâs godfather
Sirius Black.

They tell Harry that Voldemort is building an army and is attempting to
retrieve a weapon, but is still moving in secret. In this, he is actually
aided by the Ministry, since Minister Cornelius Fudge is conducting an
extensive smear campaign against Harry, Dumbledore, and anyone else who says
Voldemort is back. Knowing that Voldemortâs return would mean mass panic and
then open war, Fudge prefers to believe that Dumbledore is lying and
attempting to supplant him as Minister.

A few days later, Arthur Weasley escorts Harry to his expulsion hearing, which
Fudge has done everything in his power to slant against him. But testimony
from Dumbledore and Mrs Figg confirms the presence of the Dementors, and Harry
is found to have acted in self-defence.

Shortly before returning to Hogwarts, Harry is surprised and a little
disappointed when Ron and Hermione, but not he, are made prefects of
Gryffindor House.

Along the way to Hogwarts, on the Hogwarts express, Harry meets a girl named
Luna Lovegood, a girl who has a reputation for believing far-fetched stories.
Her huge imagination is the reason that she is commonly disliked and rejected.
At the welcome feast, the trio are surprised that their new Defense Against
the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts is Dolores Umbridge, a hostile Ministry
official who attempted to get Harry arrested at his hearing. Hermione guesses,
correctly, that her appointment is a sign that the Ministry is interfering at
Hogwarts. As a teacher, Umbridge forces the students to study magical theory
out of textbooks, rather than practical defence methods (according to Sirius,
Fudge is so paranoid that he now believes Dumbledore is recruiting students
into a private army). A short time later, she is appointed as High Inquisitor,
with the power to evaluate and dismiss other teachers, and impose strict rules
and regulations on students.

Underneath her cloying faÃ§ade, Umbridge imposes sadistic punishments on
naughty students, her favourite being to make them write lines with blood
quills (which cut the words into the skin when used, and uses the writer's own
blood as ink). She focuses particularly on Harry, as part of Fudgeâs
campaign to silence his âliesâ about Voldemortâs return. Her punishments
also include banning Harry from the Gryffindor Quidditch team.

She is also intensely bigoted, harbouring deep loathing for "half-breeds",
such as centaurs, werewolves, and Rubeus Hagrid (a half-giant). In short
order, she dismisses Sybill Trelawney, the Divination teacher, as incompetent,
and places Hagrid on probation. Although Dumbledore is unable to prevent
Trelawney's dismissal, he invokes his authority to allow her to remain in the
castle and appoints a new Divination teacher â- the centaur, Firenze.

Hagrid was absent for half the year, he reveals to Harry, Ron, and Hermione,
because of a diplomatic mission to the giants on Dumbledoreâs orders, to try
to dissuade them from joining Voldemort. His mission was a failure, but he
also reveals, somewhat shamefacedly, that he secretly brought one of the
giants back - his half-brother Grawp, whom he has been keeping tied up in the
Forbidden Forest and trying to "civilize."

Because Umbridgeâs lessons are useless both for passing their O.W.L.s and
for preparing for the very real threat of Voldemort, Hermione decides that the
students need to learn the subject themselves. Harry is surprised when she
proposes him as a teacher, but she reminds him that his adventures of the last
four years at Hogwarts have actually made him an authority on the subject.
Several other students from Gryffindor, Ravenclaw, and Hufflepuff likewise
sign up to the clandestine group, named "Dumbledore's Army" (by Ginny) in
mockery of Fudgeâs paranoia.

Under Harry's tutoring, the group learns defensive magic. At the last meeting
before Christmas, Cho Chang stays after, and Harry, hoping to receive a Merry
Christmas, gets an even bigger surprise -- a kiss. When they return to
Hogwarts after Christmas break, Harry asks her to go with him to Hogsmeade on
Valentine's Day. However, while they are there, Harry mistakenly makes Cho
think he likes Hermione. Cho breaks up with him.

To combat the Ministry's smear campaign against Harry and Dumbledore, Hermione
blackmails yellow journalist Rita Skeeter into writing an interview with Harry
about his witnessing Voldemort's return. Ravenclaw student Luna Lovegood's
father publishes the story in his magazine, The Quibbler. Furious, Umbridge
bans the Quibbler from the school, but the story spreads rapidly, garnering
support for Harry. Harry and Cho get back together.

Midway through the year, the school is alarmed to hear news of a mass prison
break from Azkaban Prison, when ten of Voldemortâs most powerful Death
Eaters escape. Many wizards are not satisfied with the Ministryâs official
explanation, and begin to come around to Dumbledore and Harryâs claims,
while the D.A. members are inspired to work even harder.

Eventually Umbridge's Inquisitorial Squad, comprising mostly Slytherin
students, uncover the D.A. meetings, helped by a member of the D.A. named
Marietta, who told Umbridge about the meetings (the charm Hermione created on
the list of D.A. members to punish any who tell Umbridge on them was to create
large pimples on the person's face spelling "SNEAK" all over). To protect
Harry and other students from reprisals, Dumbledore claims that he organized
the group to counter Voldemort. Confronted by Fudge, Percy Weasley, Umbridge
and Aurors (John Dawlish and Kingsley Shacklebolt), Dumbledore easily
overpowers them and is whisked away by his phoenix, Fawkes. Cho, who is
Marietta's friend, gets mad at Harry for accusing Marietta and breaks up with
him again.

Umbridge becomes Headmistress and enacts even stricter rules and fires Hagrid.
The disenchanted Weasley twins revolt, unleashing relentless magical chaos
throughout the school, while the staff purposely do nothing to help Umbridge
regain control. The twins are caught, but summoning their confiscated brooms,
they fly away, leaving Hogwarts to open their own joke shop.

Throughout the year, Harry has disturbing dreams/visions about running down a
hallway and attempting to open a door in the Ministry's Department of
Mysteries. Shortly before Christmas, he dreams he is a snake attacking Ron's
father. Mr Weasley is indeed found injured at the Ministry, suffering from
severe venomous snakebites, causing Harry to fear that Voldemort is possessing
him. In response, Dumbledore has Severus Snape teach Harry Occlumency to block
his mind from intrusion, but after Harry accidentally sees some of Snape's
childhood memories of being bullied by Harry's father, James, in the pensive
Snape ends their lessons prematurely. Harry is shocked to see his father James
Potter bullying Snape and acting as arrogantly as Snape always said that he
did. He also notices (but is not surprised) that Snape refers to his mother as
a mudblood, despite the fact that she defended him.

In the middle of his last O.W.L. exam, Harry has a vision of Sirius being
tortured at the Department of Mysteries, although Hermione suspects it may be
a trap. Harry, with help from various members of Dumbledore's Army, attempts
to contact Sirius at Grimmauld Place via the Floo Network in Umbridge's office
fireplace, but he is caught. Believing that he is attempting to contact the
fugitive Dumbledore, Umbridge interrogates Harry, who swears he does not know
where he is. Umbridge summons Snape to bring truth serum, but Snape says he
has run out. Before Snape leaves her office, Harry desperately tells about his
vision of Sirius in code ("They've got Padfoot in the place that it's
hidden").

Reaching the end of her patience, Umbridge announces that she plans to use the
illegal torture curse on Harry. She is sure that no one will find out or even
care, and reveals that it was she and not Voldemort who sent the dementors to
attack him, in an attempt to frame and silence him. As she raises her wand to
administer the curse, Hermione pretends to crack and confesses that Dumbledore
has hidden a powerful weapon in the Forbidden Forest. She leads Harry and
Umbridge into the forest where they encounter the centaurs. Umbridge foolishly
insults them and an angry centaur carries her off screaming into the woods.
However, the centaurs are just as hostile toward Harry and Hermione, but they
are saved when Grawp crashes onto the scene and they escape amid the chaos.
Running back to the castle, they encounter Ron, and D.A. members Ginny,
Neville and Luna, who insist on accompanying them. The students fly to London
on the school's Thestrals.

Reaching the room in his dreams, The Hall of Prophecy, Harry sees that Sirius
is not there, but notices a glass ball containing some kind of record, that
has been labelled with his name. As soon as he takes it down from the shelf, a
squad of Death Eaters surrounds them, including many of the recent escapees,
led by Lucius Malfoy. Malfoy reveals that Voldemort planted a false vision to
lure Harry to the Ministry, as he is the only one (besides Voldemort himself)
who can remove the prophecy from its shelf. The prophecy is "the weapon"
Voldemort has been after the entire year.

Harry and his friends heroically defend themselves, putting up a far tougher
fight than the dark wizards expected, but are outmatched. As they are nearly
defeated, members of the Order arrive, including Sirius. During the ensuing
battle, the glass sphere that Voldemort was seeking is accidentally dropped
and shatters, and the record is lost. However, just as Dumbledore arrives in
person to help, Sirius is blasted with a spell by his Death Eater cousin,
Bellatrix Lestrange, and falls backwards through a mysterious veiled archway.
Lupin restrains Harry from going after him; Sirius is dead.

The Death Eaters are captured except for Bellatrix, whom Harry pursues into
the Ministryâs atrium. Bellatrix is far more powerful, but is taken aback
with horror when Harry taunts her that the prophecy has been destroyed, and
their mission has failed. In a rage, Voldemort appears in person and attacks
Harry, but is confronted by Dumbledore. The two duel furiously, but each is
unable to finish the other. In an attempt to break the stalemate, Voldemort
possesses Harry and tortures him, hoping that Dumbledore will kill Harry to
destroy Voldemort. However, in the midst of his torture, Harry re-visits his
grief for Sirius, and Voldemort is unexpectedly repelled by the emotion. Fudge
and the Aurors arrive in time to see the Dark Lord before he Disapparates,
taking Bellatrix with him. Fudge finally admits that Voldemort has returned.
Rita Skeeter's story is reprinted in the Daily Prophet, exonerating Harry and
Dumbledore.

Speaking alone to Harry in his office, Dumbledore reveals that he has kept
many things hidden from Harry over the past five years (for instance, why he
placed the baby Harry with the Dursleys) and insists that Harry return to
their home every summer, knowing what abusive guardians they are. The reason
is, Dumbledore knew Voldemort would return one day, and that Harry would need
the most powerful protection possible until he came of age. When his mother
died to protect him, this created a powerful protective charm: as long as
Harry stays at the house of his motherâs blood-relative long enough to call
it home, it shields him in a way even Voldemort cannot overcome.

The reason Dumbledore says he has kept this and other secrets hidden for so
long is because he has been reluctant to burden Harry with the most terrible
secret: the contents of the prophecy. The prophecy was originally made to him
by Sybill Trelawney, while he was interviewing her for her teaching position,
and unexpected by either of them:

> The one with the power to vanquish the Dark Lord approaches ... born to
those who have thrice defied him, born as the seventh month dies ... and the
Dark Lord will mark him as equal, but he will have power the Dark Lord knows
not ... and either must die at the hand of the other for neither can live
while the other survives ... the one with the power to vanquish the Dark Lord
will be born as the seventh month dies ...

One of Voldemortâs followers overheard the first half of the prophecy, and
reported it to him. Although there were actually two newborn boys whose
parents fit the description in the prophecy (the other being Neville
Longbottom), Dumbledore believes that Voldemort chose to attack Harry because
he was a half-blood like himself, while Neville is a pureblood. In doing so,
Voldemort inadvertently âmarked him as his equal.â According to the
prophecy, either Harry or Voldemort must destroy the other one day.

Finally, Dumbledore confesses that he did not make Harry a prefect, despite
his many worthy achievements, simply because Dumbledore did not want to burden
him with more responsibilities. Dumbledore reveals that he cares very much
about Harry, even to an unwise degree â- Voldemort has always believed love
to be a weakness that can be exploited, hence his use of Sirius to lure Harry
to the Ministry.

Dumbledore is reinstated at Hogwarts, and immediately rescinds all of
Umbridgeâs decrees. Umbridge herself is rescued from the forest by
Dumbledore, and appears to still be in shock. Professor Trelawney is also
reinstated, though Firenze stays on as well, since he has been expelled from
the centaur herd.

Shortly before school ends, Harry seeks out Nearly Headless Nick. He asks if
Sirius can come back as a ghost, but Sir Nick says, it is only those fearing
death that remain as earthbound spirits; "he will have...gone on."

Still grieving, Harry finds Luna hanging notes in the hall asking for the
return of her missing possessions, since students have been taking and hiding
them as a practical joke. He remembers that Luna, like him, can see Thestrals,
which are invisible except to people who have witnessed death. He asks, and
she replies that she saw her mother die, the result of an experimental spell
gone wrong. However, Luna appears serene, and says she knows she will see her
mother again; she and others who have died are just behind the veiled arch.
Harry feels comforted knowing that he may see Sirius again and heads off to
finish packing. His last attempt to bring Sirius back was his visiting of the
two way mesaging mirrior that he had given him. The mirror had been broken,
and wouldn't have been able to see Sirius anyway.

At King's Cross station, several Order members are there to greet Harry and
the Dursleys. Alastor Moody warns Uncle Vernon that if Harry is maltreated,
they will intervene. Harry leaves to head back to 4 Privet Drive with the
Dursleys, stopping once to look back towards his two best friends, Ron and
Hermione.

## [edit] Release history

Potter fans waited three years between the releases of the fourth and fifth
books.[1] Before the release of the fifth book, 200 million copies of the
first four books had already been sold and translated into 55 languages in 200
countries.[2] As the series was already a global phenomenon, the book forged
new pre-order records, with thousands of people queuing outside book stores on
20 June 2003 to secure their copy at midnight.[2] Despite the security,
thousands of copies were stolen from an Earlestown, Merseyside warehouse on 15
June 2003.[3]

In a Newsnight interview with Jeremy Paxman, Rowling reported that she was
"reduced to tears" when she killed off a significant character in the book,
despite rewriting the death scene several times.[4] She added that although
her husband suggested she undo the character's death to stop her sadness, she
needed to be "a ruthless killer".[4] However, Rowling revealed in a 2007
interview that she had originally planned to kill off Arthur Weasley in this
book, but ultimately could not bear to do it.[5] Three days before the book's
release, betting firm Ladbrokes stopped taking bets as to the identity of the
character to die, saying that people already knew and that it would be a
"licence to lose money".[4] Scottish bookmaker Blue Square also took bets on
the identity of the killed character, with Hagrid the favourite at 7/2 odds,
followed by Sirius Black at 4/1 and Professors Minerva McGonagall and Albus
Dumbledore at 5/1.[6]

In another interview, when asked if there was anything she would go back and
change about the seven novels, Rowling replied that she would have edited
Phoenix more, as she feels it is too long.[7]

## [edit] Translations

Main article: Harry Potter in translation

The first official foreign translation of the book appeared in Vietnamese on
21 July 2003, when the first of twenty-two installments was released. The
first official European translation appeared in Serbia and Montenegro in
Serbian, by the official publisher Narodna Knjiga, in early September 2003.
Other translations appeared later, e.g. in November 2003 in Dutch and German.
The English language version has topped the best seller list in France, while
in Germany and The Netherlands an unofficial distributed translation process
has been started on the net.[8]

In the Czech Republic a college student translated the book in July/September,
long before its intended release date, and one 14-year old schoolboy made it
available on his private website. This led to confusion, with many newspapers
stating that this unofficial translation was done by group of teenagers[9] and
the official Czech publisher (Albatros) announcing that they would sue the
schoolboy.[10] Later they retracted this announcement.

## [edit] Editions

The book was published on 21 June 2003 in the United Kingdom and the majority
of other countries. It sold almost seven million copies in the United Kingdom
and United States combined on that day. It has 38 chapters, is about 255,000
words long,[11] and is the longest book in the series.

In Britain, the blind then-Home Secretary David Blunkett complained about the
delay of the cassette version of the book, as well as its projected price.[12]

The Canadian version of the book is made from recycled paper and saved the
equivalent of 29,650 trees in the initial print run of one million books. J.
K. Rowling comments on this in a message written specifically for the Canadian
edition of the book.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ MuggleNet The Books
  2. ^ a b CNN.com - Potter-mania sweeps bookstores - Jun. 21, 2003
  3. ^ BBC NEWS Entertainment | Thousands of Potter books stolen
  4. ^ a b c "Rowling's tears at Potter book death", BBC News, 2003-06-18. Retrieved on 2007-07-24.
  5. ^ Stop your sobbing! More Potter to come - Wild about Harry - MSNBC.com
  6. ^ The-Pensieve.org: June 2003 Archives
  7. ^ Harry Potter: The final chapter - Harry Potter - MSNBC.com
  8. ^ "Harry auf Deutsch: Projekt-Ãbersicht der Harry Potter Ãbersetzung(en)". http://www.harry-auf-deutsch.de/. Retrieved on 2005-12-05.
  9. ^ "Radio Prague - News". http://www.radio.cz/en/news/42665. Retrieved on 2005-12-05.
  10. ^ "http://www.albatros.cz". http://www.albatros.cz. Retrieved on 2005-12-05.
  11. ^ "Guardian Unlimited Books: Special Reports: June date for Harry Potter 5". http://books.guardian.co.uk/harrypotter/story/0,10761,875390,00.html. Retrieved on 2005-12-05.
  12. ^ "Anger Over Harry Potter Tape Costs". http://news.sky.com/skynews/Home/Sky-News-Archive/Article/200806412369025. Retrieved on 2008-12-07.

## [edit] External links

<IMG> Harry Potter portal  
Sister project The Wikibook Muggles' Guide to Harry Potter has a page on the
topic of

Books/Order of the Phoenix  
  * Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix on Harry Potter Wiki, an external wiki

v â¢ d â¢ e

The Harry Potter series by J. K. Rowling  
Philosopher's StoneFilm â¢ Game â¢ Soundtrack Chamber of SecretsFilm â¢
Game â¢ Soundtrack Prisoner of AzkabanFilm â¢ Game â¢ Soundtrack Goblet of
FireFilm â¢ Game â¢ Soundtrack Order of the PhoenixFilm â¢ Game â¢
Soundtrack Half-Blood PrinceFilm â¢ Game Deathly HallowsFilms  
Characters

Harry Potter Â· Ron Weasley Â· Hermione Granger Â· Lord Voldemort Â· Albus
Dumbledore Â· Severus Snape Â· Rubeus Hagrid Â· Draco Malfoy Â· Hogwarts staff
Â· Order of the Phoenix Â· Dumbledore's Army Â· Death Eaters Â· Supporting
characters  
Universe

Magic Â· Chronology Â· Places Â· Hogwarts Â· Ministry of Magic Â· Quidditch Â·
Magical creatures Â· Muggle Â· Spells Â· Magical objects Â· Horcrux  
Related

Film series Â· Cast members Â· Fandom Â· Influences and analogues Â· Legal
disputes Â· Parodies Â· Politics Â· Religious debates Â· Translation  
Spin-off canon

Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them Â· Quidditch Through the Ages Â· The
Tales of Beedle the Bard Â· Prequel  
Other games

Quidditch World Cup Â· Lego Harry Potter Â· Lego Creator: Harry Potter Â·
Trading Card Game Â· Action figures  
Retrieved from
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Potter_and_the_Order_of_the_Phoenix"

Categories: 2003 novels | Harry Potter books | Novels by J. K. Rowling |
Sequel novels

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with plot summary needing attention from
December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 01:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



