
# Donna Haraway

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Donna Haraway  
<IMG>  

Donna Haraway with Cayenne, 2006; photograph by Rusten Hogness  
Born September 6, 1944 (1944-09-06)  
Denver, Colorado  
Occupation professor  
Donna J. Haraway (born September 6, 1944 in Denver, Colorado) is currently a
professor and chair of the History of Consciousness Program at the University
of California, Santa Cruz, United States. She is the author of Crystals,
Fabrics, and Fields: Metaphors of Organicism in Twentieth-Century
Developmental Biology (1976), Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the
World of Modern Science (1989), Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention
of Nature (1991), Modest Witness@Second Millenium. FemaleMan Meets OncoMouse:
Feminism and Technoscience (1997, Ludwig Fleck Prize), The Companion Species
Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness (2003), and When Species
Meet (2008).

Haraway earned a degree in zoology and philosophy at the Colorado College and
received the Boettcher Foundation scholarship. She lived in Paris for a year,
studying philosophies of evolution on a Fulbright scholarship before
completing her Ph. D. from the Biology Department of Yale in 1972. She wrote
her dissertation on the functions of metaphor in shaping research in
developmental biology in the twentieth century.

Haraway has taught Women's Studies and General Science at the University of
Hawaii and Johns Hopkins University. In september, 2000, Haraway was awarded
the highest honor given by the Society for Social Studies of Science (4S), the
J. D. Bernal Award, for lifetime contributions to the field. Haraway has also
lectured in feminist theory and techno-science at the European Graduate School
in Saas-Fee, Switzerland. Haraway is a leading thinker about people's love and
hate relationship with machines. Her ideas have sparked an explosion of debate
in areas as diverse as primatology, philosophy, and developmental biology
(Kunzru, 1).

## Contents

  * 1 Haraway's books
    * 1.1 Primate Visions
    * 1.2 A Cyborg Manifesto
    * 1.3 Cyborg feminism
    * 1.4 Situated Knowledges
    * 1.5 "I'd rather be a Cyborg than a goddess"
  * 2 Publications
  * 3 References
  * 4 Footnotes
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Haraway's books

### [edit] Primate Visions

When reading Harawayâs books, it is clear that her writings are
predominantly grounded in her knowledge of the history of science and biology
(Carubia, 4). In her book, Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the
World of Modern Science, Haraway explicates the metaphors and narratives that
direct the science of primatology. She demonstrates that there is a tendency
to masculinize the stories about "reproductive competition and sex between
aggressive males and receptive females [that] facilitate some and preclude
other types of conclusions" (Carubia, 4). She contends that female
primatologists focus on different observations that require more communication
and basic survival activities, offering very different perspectives of the
origins of nature and culture than the currently accepted ones. Drawing on
examples of Western narratives and ideologies of gender, race and class,
Haraway questions the most fundamental constructions of scientific human
nature stories based on primates. In Primate Visions, she writes:

> My hope has been that the always oblique and sometimes perverse focusing
would facilitate revisionings of fundamental, persistent western narratives
about difference, especially racial and sexual difference; about reproduction,
especially in terms of the multiplicities of generators and offspring; and
about survival, especially about survival imagined in the boundary conditions
of both the origins and ends of history, as told within western traditions of
that complex genre (377).

Haraway's aim for science is "to reveal the limits and impossibility of its
'objectivity' and to consider some recent revisions offered by feminist
primatologists" (Russon, 10). An expert in her field, Haraway proposed an
alternative perspective of the accepted ideologies that continue to shape the
way scientific human nature stories are created. More importantly, Haraway
offers inventive analogies that reveal whole new vistas and possibilities for
investigation (Elkins).

### [edit] A Cyborg Manifesto

Haraway has been described as a "feminist, rather loosely a neo-Marxist and a
postmodernist" (Young, 172). In 1985, Haraway published the essay "A Cyborg
Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth
Century" in Socialist Review. Although most of Haraway's earlier work is
focused on emphasizing the masculine bias in scientific culture, she has also
contributed greatly to feminist narratives of the twentieth century.

In A Cyborg Manifesto, Haraway deploys the metaphor of a cyborg in order to
challenge feminists to engage in a politics beyond naturalism and
essentialisms. She also uses the metaphor of the cyborg to offer a political
strategy for the seemingly disparate interests of socialism and feminism.
Firstly, she introduces and defines the "cyborg." A cyborg is (see also Cyborg
theory) a :

  * Cybernetic organism
  * Hybrid of machine and organism
  * Creature of both fiction and lived social reality

As a postmodern feminist, she argues against essentialism â which is "any
theory that claims to identify a universal, transhistorical, necessary cause
or constitution of gender identity or patriarchy" (Feminist Epistemology,
2006). Such theories, argues Haraway, either exclude women who don't conform
to the theory and segregate them from "real women" or represent them as
inferior. Another form of feminism that Haraway is disputing is "a
jurisprudence model of feminism made popular by the legal scholar and marxist,
Catharine MacKinnon" (Burow-Flak, 2000) who fought to outlaw pornography as a
form of hate speech. Haraway argues that MacKinnon's legalistic version of
radical feminism assimilates all of women's experiences into a particular
identity, which ironically recapitulates the very Western ideologies that have
contributed to the oppression of women. She writes: "It is factually and
politically wrong to assimilate all of the diverse 'moments' or
'conversations' in recent women's politics named radical feminism to
MacKinnon's version" (158).

According to Haraway's Manifesto, "there is nothing about being female that
naturally binds women together into a unified category. There is not even such
a state as 'being' female, itself a highly complex category constructed in
contested sexual scientific discourses and other social practices" (155). A
cyborg does not require a stable, essentialist identity, argues Haraway, and
feminists should consider creating coalitions based on "affinity" instead of
identity. To ground her argument, Haraway analyzes the phrase "women of
color", suggesting it as one possible example of affinity politics. Using a
term coined by theorist Chela Sandoval, Haraway writes that "oppositional
consciousness" is comparable with a cyborg politics, because rather than
identity it stresses how affinity comes as a result of "otherness, difference,
and specificity" (156).

### [edit] Cyborg feminism

In her essay A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism
in the Late Twentieth Century[1] , part of her book Simians, Cyborgs and
Women: The Reinvention of Nature (1991), Haraway uses the cyborg metaphor to
explain how fundamental contradictions in feminist theory and identity should
be conjoined, rather than resolved, similar to the fusion of machine and
organism in cyborgs. The Cyborg Manifesto is also an important feminist
critique of capitalism.

The idea of the cyborg deconstructs binaries of control and lack of control
over the body, object and subject, nature and culture, in ways that are useful
in postmodern feminist thought. Haraway uses the metaphor of cyborg identity
to expose ways that things considered natural, like human bodies, are not, but
are constructed by our ideas about them. This has particular relevance to
feminism, since women are often discussed or treated in ways that reduce them
to bodies. Balsamo and Haraway's ideas are also an important component of
critiques of essentialist feminism and essentialism, as they subvert the idea
of naturalness and of artificiality; the cyborg is a hybrid being.

An interpretation of the Cyborg Manifesto:

â Haraway feels that the cyborg myth has the potential for radical political
action as it frees feminists from a desperate search for similarity with one
another, since physical/epistemological boundary breaks can be extrapolated to
political boundary crossings. â  
[2]

### [edit] Situated Knowledges

Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of
Partial Perspective (1988) sheds light on Haraway's vision for a feminist
science. This essay originated as a commentary on Sandra Harding's The Science
Question in Feminism (1987) and is a reply to Harding's "successor science".
Haraway offers a critique of the feminist intervention into masculinized
traditions of scientific rhetoric and the concept of "objectivity". The essay
identifies the metaphor that gives shape to the traditional feminist critique
as a polarization. At one end lies those who would assert that science is a
rhetorical practice and, as such, all "science is a contestable text and a
power field" (577). At the other are those interested in a feminist version of
objectivity, a position Haraway describes as a "feminist empiricism". While
the constructivist position, informed by Post-Structuralist theory, served as
a strong tool for deconstructing the truth claims of hostile science by
showing the radical historical specificity, and so contestability, of "every
layer of the onion of scientific and technological constructions", it also
resulted in a dismantling of any apparatus that might be used to effectively
talk about the "real" world. Making use of the history of feminist standpoint
theories, Haraway suggests that there may be a way to reconcile what has been
accomplished by the radical constructivist critique of the historical social
implications of the rhetoric of science with a specifically feminist
positioning with regards to the practice of science. To do this Haraway leaves
aside the polarizing metaphor to explore the possibility of a metaphor of
vision as one that might see us clear of an agonistic methodology and
conception of objectivity in science.

### [edit] "I'd rather be a Cyborg than a goddess"

The 1990s brought about the beginning of the cyborg era and Haraway is a
constant contributor to the cyberculture that exists even today. Although
Haraway's writing endorses technology in her metaphor of the cyborg, it is
equally critical of what technology can bring about. The idea that machines
can contribute to liberation is something feminists and women should consider.
Haraway writes: "Up till now (once upon a time), female embodiment seemed to
be given, organic, necessary; and female embodiment seemed to mean skill in
mothering and its metaphoric extensions. Only by being out of place could we
take intense pleasure in machines, and then with excuses that this was organic
activity after all, appropriate to females" (180). In spite of this phrase
Haraway also wishes to not completely dissassociate heself from ecofeminist
values.

## [edit] Publications

  * Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields : Metaphors of Organicism in Twentieth-Century Developmental Biology, 1976.
  * "Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspectives", in Feminist Studies, 1988, pp. 575â599.
  * Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the World of Modern Science, Routledge: New York and London, 1989.
  * Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature, New York: Routledge, and London: Free Association Books, 1991. (includes "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century")
  * Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium.FemaleManÂ©Meets_OncoMouseâ¢: Feminism and Technoscience, New York: Routledge, 1997. ISBN 0-415-91245-8
  * The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness, Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2003. ISBN 0-97175758-5
  * When species meet, Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press, 2008. ISBN 0-816-65045-4
  * How Like a Leaf: A Conversation with Donna J. Haraway, Thyrza Nichols Goodeve, Routledge, 1999

## [edit] References

  * Burow-Flak, Elizabeth, "Background Information on Cyborg Manifesto", 17 September 2000. Online, 30 January 2006.
  * Campbell, Kirsten, "The Promise of Feminist Reflexivities: Developing Donna Haraway's Project for Feminist Science Studies", in Hypatia, 2004, pp.162-182.
  * Carubia, Josephine M., "Haraway on the Map", in Semiotic Review of Books. 9:1 (1998) 4-7.
  * Elkins, Charles, "The Uses of Science Fiction", in Science Fiction Studies, 17:2 (1990).
  * "Feminist Epistemology and Philosophy of Science", in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 30 January 2006. Online
  * Flanagan, Mary and Austin Booth, Reload: Rethinking Women + Cyberculture, 2002.
  * Kunzru, Hari. "You Are Cyborg", in Wired Magazine, 5:2 (1997) 1-7.
  * O'Riley, Patricia Ann, "Technology, culture, and socioeconomics: a rhizoanalysis of educational discourses", New York: P. Lang, 2003.
  * Packman, Carl, "God(desses) and the Jouissance of Woman, or The (Cyborg) Future of Enjoyment", [Online]
  * Russon, Anne. "Deconstructing Primatology?", in Semiotic Review of Books, 2:2 (1991) 9-11.
  * Sandoval, Chela, "New Sciences: Cyborg Feminism and the Methodology of the Oppressed", in Chris Hables Gray (ed.), The Cyborg Handbook, New York: Routledge, 1995.
  * Senft, Theresa M. "Reading Notes on Donna Haraway's 'Cyborg Manifesto'", 21 October 2001. Online, 1 February 2006.
  * Young, Robert M, "Science, Ideology & Donna Haraway", in Science as Culture, 15.3 (1992): 165-207.

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Haraway, Donna. "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century". http://www.stanford.edu/dept/HPS/Haraway/CyborgManifesto.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.
  2. ^ Scott, Krista. "Haraway, Donna". http://www.stumptuous.com/comps/cyborg.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-17.

## [edit] See also

  * Cyborg theory
  * Democratic transhumanism
  * Postgenderism
  * Posthumanism
  * Postmodernism
  * Sandy Stone
  * Techno-progressivism
  * Technoscience
  * Ecofeminism

## [edit] External links

  * History of Consciousness Program Website
  * Donna Haraway Faculty Website European Graduate School
  * 1997 Interview in Wired
  * A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s. Socialist Review 15, no. 2 (1985).
  * Cleaned up copy of Stanford hosted version, with typographical and formatting errors corrected.
  * A discussion of cyborg feminism at the Purdue University website

v â¢ d â¢ e

University of California, Santa Cruz  
Santa Cruz, California  
<IMG> Colleges  
& Schools

Cowell College Â· Stevenson College Â· Crown College Â· Merrill College Â·
Porter College Â· Kresge College Â· Oakes College Â· College Eight Â· College
Nine Â· College Ten Â· Baskin School of Engineering  
Research  
& Services

Lick Observatory Â· W. M. Keck Observatory Â· Arboretum Â· NASA Ames Research
Center UARC Â· Silicon Valley Initiatives Â· Santa Cruz Institute for Particle
Physics Â· Long Marine Laboratory Â· Shakespeare Santa Cruz Â· New Teacher
Center Â· UC Police Department Â· UCSC Fire Department Â· UC Students
Association Â· Women of Color Film Festival Â· History of Consciousness Â·
McHenry Library Â· Long Range Development Plan  
Media

City on a Hill Press Â· Fish Rap Live! Â· KZSC  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donna_Haraway"

Categories: University of California, Santa Cruz | 1944 births | American
academics | Feminist studies scholars | Female philosophers | Primatologists |
Historians of science | Living people | Posthumanists | Transhumanists |
University of California, Santa Cruz faculty | Yale University alumni |
Feminism and the arts

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 03:09.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



