
# Sarah McLachlan

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Sarah McLachlan  
Sarah McLachlan performing at John Labatt Centre, London, Ontario, Canada
during the 2005 Afterglow tour.  

Sarah McLachlan performing at John Labatt Centre, London, Ontario, Canada
during the 2005 Afterglow tour.  
Background information  
Born January 28, 1968 (1968-01-28) (age 41)  
Origin Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada  
Genre(s) Pop  
Occupation(s) Singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, painter, executive
producer  
Instrument(s) vocals, piano, keyboard, guitars, harp[1]  
Voice type(s) Mezzo-soprano[2]  
Years active 1988 - present  
Label(s) Arista (outside Canada), Nettwerk  
  
Website www.sarahmclachlan.com  
Sarah Ann McLachlan, OC, OBC (born January 28, 1968(1968-01-28)) is a Canadian
musician, singer and songwriter.[3]

She is known for the emotional sound of her ballads and mezzo-soprano vocal
range.[4] As of 2006, she has sold over 40 million albums worldwide. Her best-
selling album to date is Surfacing, for which she won two Grammy Awards (out
of three nominations) and eight Juno Awards. In addition to her personal
artistic efforts, she founded the Lilith Fair tour, which showcased female
musicians in the late 1990s.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
  * 2 Musical career
    * 2.1 Touch and Solace
    * 2.2 Fumbling Towards Ecstasy, Surfacing, and Lilith Fair
    * 2.3 Hiatus
    * 2.4 "The Witness", Afterglow and associated philanthropy
    * 2.5 Wintersong and later work
  * 3 Currently
  * 4 Awards and achievements
  * 5 Discography
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

Sarah McLachlan was born on January 28, 1968(1968-01-28), and adopted in
Halifax, Nova Scotia. As a child, she took voice lessons, along with studies
in classical piano and guitar. When she was 17 years old, and still a student
at Queen Elizabeth High School, she fronted a short-lived rock band called The
October Game. One of the band's songs, "Grind", credited as a group
composition, can be found on the independent Flamingo Records release 'Out of
the Fog' and the CD 'Out of the Fog Too'. It has yet to be released elsewhere.
Her high school yearbook predicted that she was "destined to become a famous
rock star."

Following The October Game's first concert at Dalhousie University opening for
Moev, McLachlan was offered a recording contract with Vancouver-based
independent record label Nettwerk by Moev's Mark Jowett. McLachlan's parents
persuaded her to finish her studies at the Nova Scotia College of Art and
Design before embarking on a new life as a recording artist, and McLachlan
finally signed to Nettwerk two years later before having written a single
song.

In 1997, Sarah McLachlan married her drummer, Ashwin Sood, in Jamaica.
McLachlan lost her mother to cancer in December 2001, while McLachlan herself
was pregnant. McLachlan gave birth to a daughter, whom she named India Ann
Sushil Sood, on April 6, 2002, in Vancouver. By this time, McLachlan had
already completed three-quarters of the production on her next record,
Afterglow. On June 24, 2007, she gave birth to her second daughter, Taja
Summer Sood, in Vancouver. McLachlan announced her separation from Ashwin Sood
in September 2008.[5]

## [edit] Musical career

### [edit] Touch and Solace

The signing prompted McLachlan to move to Vancouver, British Columbia. There
she recorded the first of her albums, Touch, in 1988, which received both
critical and commercial success and included the hit song "Vox". During this
period she also contributed to an album by Moev, and embarked on her first
national concert tour as an opening act for The Grapes of Wrath.

Her 1991 album, Solace, was her mainstream breakthrough in Canada, spawning
the hit singles "The Path of Thorns (Terms)" and "Into the Fire". Solace also
marked the beginning of her partnership with Pierre Marchand. Marchand and
McLachlan have been collaborators ever since, with Marchand producing all of
McLachlan's albums and occasionally co-writing songs.

### [edit] Fumbling Towards Ecstasy, Surfacing, and Lilith Fair

<IMG>

<IMG>

McLachlan at a 1993 benefit for Clayoquot Sound

1993's Fumbling Towards Ecstasy was an immediate smash hit in Canada. From her
Nettwerk connection, her piano version of the song "Possession" was included
on the first Due South soundtrack in 1996. Over the next two years, Fumbling
Towards Ecstasy quietly became McLachlan's international breakthrough as well,
scaling the charts in a number of countries.

In 1993, Darryl Neudorf filed a lawsuit against McLachlan and her label,
Nettwerk, alleging that he had made a significant and uncredited contribution
to the songwriting on Touch, and alleging that he wasn't paid properly for
work done on Solace. The judge in this suit eventually ruled in McLachlan's
favour on the songs; though Neudorf may have contributed to the songwriting,
neither regarded each other as joint authors. The judge ruled in Neudorf's
favour on the payment issue.

In 1994, she was sued by Uwe Vandrei, an obsessed fan from Ottawa, Ontario,
who alleged that his letters to her had been the basis of the single
"Possession".[6] The lawsuit was also challenging for the Canadian legal
systemâVandrei was a self-admitted stalker whose self-acknowledged goal in
filing the lawsuit was to be near McLachlan physically. Consequently, special
precautions were planned to ensure McLachlan's safety if at any time she had
to be in the same location as Vandrei. The lawsuit never came to trial,
however, as Vandrei was found dead in an apparent suicide before the trial
began. This topic was explored at length in Canadian author Judith
Fitzgerald's book, Building A Mystery: The Story of Sarah McLachlan & Lilith
Fair.

Following the success from Fumbling Towards Ecstasy, McLachlan returned in
1997 with Surfacing, her best selling album to date. Earning her two Grammy
Awards and four Juno Awards, the album has since sold over 11 million copies
worldwide and brought her much international success. Still in the spotlight
from the album, McLachlan launched the highly popular Lilith Fair tour. Her
song "Angel"âinspired by the fatal overdose of Smashing Pumpkins touring
keyboardist Jonathan Melvoinâmade sales skyrocket. In Spring 1998 the motion
picture City of Angels featured "Angel". It became the No. 1 album on the
Billboard chart. More than five months after the movie disappeared from the
theaters, City of Angels: Music from the Motion Picture remained firmly
entrenched among Billboard's top 40 albums. This soundtrack earned quadruple-
platinum status.[7]

Lilith Fair  
The McLachlan-founded Lilith Fair tour brought together 2 million people over
its three-year history and raised more than $7 million for charities. It was
the most successful all-female music festival in history, one of the biggest
music festivals of the 1990s, and helped launch the careers of several well-
known female artists.

### [edit] Hiatus

<IMG>

<IMG>

McLachlan performing for Good Morning America in 1998

In 1998, in addition to performing her own set, she performed a cover of Sad
Lisa with rock band Phish at the annual Bridge School Benefit concert in
California, hosted by Neil Young, after which McLachlan began an extended
period away from recording or touring.

However, she did release a live album in 1999, entitled Mirrorball. The
album's singles included a new live version of her earlier doubles "I Will
Remember You." (The studio recording had previously been released on The
Brothers McMullen soundtrack as well as B Sides and Other Rarities.)

Also that year, McLachlan recorded the Randy Newman song "When She Loved Me"
on the Toy Story 2 soundtrack. This song was nominated for the Academy Award
for Best Song in 2000, and McLachlan performed it at the awards ceremony, but
the award went to "You'll Be in My Heart" from Tarzan, written and recorded by
Phil Collins.

In 1997, McLachlan co-wrote and provided guest vocals on the Delerium song
"Silence" for their album Karma. This song achieved a massive amount of top 40
airplay when released as a single in late 2000 and also featured on the
soundtrack for the movie Brokedown Palace. In 2001, McLachlan provided
background vocals, guitar, and piano on the closing track "Love Is" from
Stevie Nicks' eighth solo album, Trouble in Shangri-La, in addition to drawing
the dragon used for the "S" in Stevie's name on the album cover. In May 2002,
her duet with Bryan Adams was released on the Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron
soundtrack. She sang harmonies and played the piano on the song "Don't Let Go"
while Sood did the drum work.

McLachlan also participated in several concerts during her break, such as
Sheryl Crow's Live from Central Park in 1999, the Arista Records twenty-fifth
anniversary celebration in 2000, as well as the 2002 British Columbia Cancer
Foundation Benefit Concert in memory of cancer victim Michele Bourbonnais. She
participated along with four other Canadian artists: Bryan Adams, Jann Arden,
Barenaked Ladies, and Chantal Kreviazuk.

### [edit] "The Witness", Afterglow and associated philanthropy

<IMG>

<IMG>

McLachlan in Menlo Park, USA

In addition to being used often to remember human beings who have died in
disasters like 9-11, McLachlan's song "Angel" also appears on the soundtrack
near the end of Tribe Of Heart's 45-minute documentary DVD titled "The
Witness". The scene shows people's reactions to videos shown by Eddie Lama
from his van, of how animals are killed for use of their fur. Their emotions
of shock and grief dovetailed perfectly with the compassion in the song.

McLachlan returned to public life and touring with her 2003 album release,
Afterglow, which contained the singles "Fallen", "Stupid", and "World On
Fire." Rather than shoot a conventional music video for "World On Fire",
McLachlan donated all but $15 of the $150,000 budget to various charitable
causes around the world and then used the video to explain how it benefited
the communities that received the money.

Although she has returned to touring, she has no current plans to resurrect
Lilith Fair. Another live album, Afterglow Live, was released in late 2004.
The CD consisted of several tracks from a full-length concert which was
included in its entirety on a DVD, as well as the three music videos from
Afterglow.

In 2004, Darryl "D.M.C." McDaniels, who credits McLachlan and her music for
lifting him from a period of depression, invited her to join him on a track
from his solo album. Although the album was not released until early 2006,
remixes of the song "Just Like Me" were included on a number of compilations
in 2005.

In early 2005, McLachlan took part in a star-studded tsunami disaster relief
telethon on NBC. On January 29 McLachlan was a headliner for a benefit concert
in Vancouver along with other Canadian superstars such as Avril Lavigne and
Bryan Adams. The show also featured a performance by the Sarah McLachlan
Musical Outreach Choir & Percussion Ensemble, a children's choir and
percussion band from the aforementioned Vancouver outreach program. In
addition to her own headliner show she also joined Delerium live on stage for
their first-ever performance of 'Silence'. The concert was titled One World:
The Concert for Tsunami Relief, and raised approximately $3.6 million for
several Canadian aid agencies working in south and southeast Asia. The show
was the brainchild of McLachlan's manager, Terry McBride, CEO of Nettwerk. It
ran for four hours and aired live on CTV across Canada.

On July 2, 2005, McLachlan participated in the Philadelphia installment of the
Live 8 concerts, where she performed her hit "Angel" with Josh Groban. These
concerts, which were held simultaneously in nine major cities around the
world, were intended to coincide with the G8 summit to put pressure on the
leaders of the world's richest nations to fight poverty in Africa by
cancelling debt.

### [edit] Wintersong and later work

McLachlan hand-wrote a letter, copies of which were sent to members of her fan
club in late March 2006, stating that she was beginning work on a holiday
album due to be released later that year.

On July 29, a press release[8] announced McLachlan would be releasing a new
album 17 October titled Wintersong on Arista Records. The first new studio
recording since the 2003 release of Afterglow, the album includes 11 new
recordings, featuring covers of Joni Mitchellâs âRiverâ, Gordon
Lightfoot's "Song for a Winter's Night", and John Lennonâs âHappy Xmas
(War Is Over)", which she recorded with her outreach children and youth choir,
and seasonal favourites interpreted by McLachlan with her signature style:
âChristmas Time Is Here,â âO Little Town of Bethlehem,â âHave
Yourself a Merry Little Christmas,â âSilent Night,â âThe First
Noel,â and âGreensleeves (What Child Is This?) â among others. Included,
also, is the title track, an original work of McLachlan's.

Wintersong debuted at No. 42 on the Billboard 200 album chart the week ending
November 4, 2006. It has peaked at #7 and has sold 759,162 copies in the US to
date. For the week of December 5, 2006, it was the #1 album on iTunes.
Worldwide the album has sold 1.1 million copies to date. It has been certified
Platinum in the U.S and 2x Platinum in Canada.

Wintersong was nominated for both a Grammy Award, in the Best Traditional Pop
Vocal Album category, as well as for a Juno Award, for Pop Album of the Year.

On October 3, 2006, the live album Mirrorball was re-released as Mirrorball:
The Complete Concert. This release contains 2 discs that span over 2 hours of
a concert performed in Portland, Oregon, in April 1998.

In November 2006, McLachlan performed the song "Ordinary Miracle" for that
year's feature film, Charlotte's Web. The song was written by Glen Ballard and
David A. Stewart of Eurythmics. McLachlan was the subject of rumours of an
Oscar nomination for the song, but in the end was not nominated. She helped to
promote the song and movie by performing it on The Oprah Winfrey Show as well
as during the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade. As of January 2008, "Ordinary
Miracle" was covered by Kathy Fisher for use in commercials for CVS/pharmacy,
and jazz singer Emilie-Claire Barlow recorded her own version of the song for
Sun Life Financial commercials in Canada.

## [edit] Currently

McLachlan has collaborated on two tracks since Wintersong. In early 2007, she
added her voice to Dave Stewart's Go Green, alongside Nadirah X, Imogen Heap,
Natalie Imbruglia, and others.[9]

McLachlan also appeared on Annie Lennox's album, Songs of Mass Destruction.
Together with Madonna, CÃ©line Dion, Pink, Sugababes, AngÃ©lique Kidjo, k.d.
lang, Faith Hill, Fergie, Melissa Etheridge, Bonnie Raitt, Shakira, Anastacia,
Joss Stone, Dido and KT Tunstall, Sarah loaned her voice to the track "Sing".

McLachlan stated in an interview with Billboard on October 18, 2006, that she
has written one song, and starting in the new year, she will focus more on
writing a new album.[10]

In 2007, McLachlan's song "Answer" featured in The Brave One starring Jodie
Foster.

She is an avid supporter of the ASPCA and animal welfare. She filmed a two-
minute advertisement for the organization [11] which featured her song
"Angel". The advertisement's imagery of shelter animals mixed with the
soundtrack and McLachlan's simple appeal for donations has raised $30 million
for the ASPCA since it began to air in 2006, which allowed the organization to
air appeals in higher profile prime-time cable ad slots; subsequently the
organization produced a new ad for the 2008 holiday season featuring McLachlan
appealing for the ASPCA over her Wintersong performance of "Silent Night", and
a new ad with her was released in January 2009 featuring the song Answer [12].

April 29, 2008 saw the release of Rarities, B-Sides and Other Stuff Volume 2.
The tracklist includes McLachlan's recent covers of Joni Mitchell's "River"
and Dave Stewart's "Ordinary Miracle", as well as collaborations throughout
her career with The Perishers, Cyndi Lauper and Bryan Adams, among others.

August 5, 2008 saw the release of the 15th anniversary 3-disc edition of
Fumbling Towards Ecstasy. The set includes the original remastered album, The
Freedom Sessions and a DVD that includes live performances, music videos and
more. The album was released by Legacy Recordings.

McLachlan released a greatest hits album, Closer: The Best of Sarah McLachlan,
on October 7, 2008. On August 12, 2008 she released a new song from the album,
"U want me 2," a mid-tempo contemplative love song, as a digital single on
iTunes; also accompanied with a video performance. McLachlan also admitted the
song was inspired by the dissolution of her marriage, which she announced in
September 2008, during initial promotion. Being quietly released as a single
on February 3, 2009 the other new song found on the album, "Don't Give Up on
Us", signals a wrap. (McLachlan's official website features pictures of
McLachlan from a companion photo shoot.)

## [edit] Awards and achievements

McLachlan has been nominated for twenty-one Juno Awards and awarded eight. In
1992, her video for "Into the Fire" was selected as best music video. In 1998,
she won Female Vocalist of the Year, Songwriter of the Year (along with Pierre
Marchand), Single of the Year for "Building a Mystery", and Album of the Year
for Surfacing. In 2000, she won an International Achievement award and in
2004, won Pop Album of the Year for Afterglow and again shared the Songwriter
of the Year award with Pierre Marchand for the singles "Fallen", "World on
Fire", and "Stupid."

She has also won three Grammy Awards. She was awarded Best Female Pop Vocal
Performance in 1997 for "Building a Mystery" and again in 1999 for the live
version of "I Will Remember You." She also scored Best Pop Instrumental
Performance in 1997 for "Last Dance." Among these, she is credited for various
nominations.

Her song "Building A Mystery" came in at 91 on VH1's 100 Greatest Songs of the
90s.[13]

McLachlan has been extensively profiled by media including cover stories for
Rolling Stone, Time magazine, Entertainment Weekly and Flare, a Canadian
fashion magazine.

Through her career, she has also received many awards, primarily in
recognition of her efforts in launching Lilith Fair. She was awarded the
Elizabeth Cady Stanton Visionary Award in 1998 for advancing the careers of
women in music. In 1999, she was appointed as an Officer of the Order of
Canada by then-Governor General Adrienne Clarkson in recognition of her
successful recording career, her role in Lilith Fair, and the charitable
donations she made to women's shelters across Canada. In 2001, she was
inducted to the Order of British Columbia.

McLachlan also funds an outreach program in Vancouver that provides music
education for inner city children. In 2007, the provincial government
announced $500,000 in funding for the outreach program.[14]

## [edit] Discography

Main article: Sarah McLachlan discography

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=10:ab6jtr8ukl1x~T2 Allmusic.com
  2. ^ Sarah McLachlanâs voice range.
  3. ^ "Honours (Sarah McLachlan, O.C., O.B.C.)". Governor General of Canada. http://www.gg.ca/honours/search-recherche/honours-desc.asp?lang=e&TypeID=orc&id=6456. Retrieved on 2007-04-22.
  4. ^ Sarah McLachlanâs voice range.
  5. ^ http://www.billboard.com/bbcom/news/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003848771
  6. ^ "Canadian Scandals". AskMen.com. http://ca.askmen.com/toys/top_10_150/165_top_10_list.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-22.
  7. ^ http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9F0CE1D8103DF934A15751C1A96E958260&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=all
  8. ^ http://www.advocate.com/news_detail_ektid34824.asp Advocate.com
  9. ^ www.greenpeaceworks.com
  10. ^ Blackened-Sky.net
  11. ^ http://www.aspca.org/site/PageServer?pagename=now_drtv ASPCA.org Retrieved on 2007-05-18
  12. ^ http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/26/us/26charity.html
  13. ^ "100 greatest songs of the 90s (hour 1) from VH1
  14. ^ B.C. gives $500,000 to music outreach project for youth, News release, Office of the Premier, May 14, 2007, retrieved on 2007-05-22

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Sarah
McLachlan  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Sarah McLachlan  
  * Official site
  * Sarah McLachlan at the Internet Movie Database
  * Sarah McLachlan's Order of Canada Citation \- Governor General of Canada Website
  * Sarah McLachlan Music Outreach\- SMMO her inner-city youth program
  * The Official World on Fire Site â with a complete list of donation recipients
  * Exclusive: Sarah McLachlan at AOL Canada Music Sessions
  * Sarah discusses her vocal contribution to the Delerium track SILENCE
  * Interview with Sarah McLachlan

v â¢ d â¢ e

Sarah McLachlan  
Studio albums

Touch Â· Solace Â· Fumbling Towards Ecstasy Â· Surfacing Â· Afterglow Â·
Wintersong  
Live albums

Live EP Â· The Freedom Sessions Â· Mirrorball Â· Afterglow Live Â· Mirrorball:
The Complete Concert Â· Live From Etown: 2006 Christmas Special  
Other albums

Rarities, B-Sides and Other Stuff Â· Remixed Â· Bloom: Remix Album Â· iTunes
Originals Â· Rarities, B-Sides and Other Stuff Volume 2 Â· Closer: The Best of
Sarah McLachlan  
Singles

"Vox" Â· "The Path of Thorns (Terms)" Â· "Into the Fire" Â· "Drawn to the
Rhythm" Â· "Possession" Â· "I Will Remember You" Â· "Building a Mystery" Â·
"Sweet Surrender" Â· "Adia" Â· "Angel" Â· "Fallen" Â· "Stupid" Â· "World on
Fire" Â· "River" Â· "U Want Me 2"  
Collaborators

Pierre Marchand Â· Ashwin Sood Â· Terry McBride  
Related articles

Discography Â· Lilith Fair Â· Nettwerk Â· Music of Canada Â· Music of British
Columbia Â· Silence  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sarah_McLachlan"

Categories: Arista Records artists | British Columbia musicians | Canadian
adoptees | Canadian female singers | Canadian mezzo-sopranos | Canadian pop
singers | Canadian singer-songwriters | Canadian pop guitarists | Canadian pop
pianists | Canadian harpists | Canadian keyboardists | Canadian music video
directors | Canadian female guitarists | Canadian multi-instrumentalists |
Feminist artists | Gemini Award winners | Grammy Award winners | Juno Award
winners | Members of the Order of British Columbia | Nova Scotia musicians |
Officers of the Order of Canada | People from Vancouver | People from Halifax,
Nova Scotia | 1968 births | Living people | Ballad musicians

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 22:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



