
# Twilight (series)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

For the cycling race, see Twilight Series.

Twilight  
<IMG>  

A hardcover box set of all four books in the series  
Twilight  
New Moon  
Eclipse  
Breaking Dawn  
Author Stephenie Meyer  
Country United States  
Language English  
Genre Romance, fantasy, young-adult fiction  
Publisher Little, Brown and Company  
Published 2005â2008  
Media type Print  
Twilight is a series of four vampire-based fantasy/romance novels by the
American author Stephenie Meyer. It follows the life of Isabella "Bella" Swan,
a teenager who moves to Forks, Washington, and finds her life turned upside-
down when she falls in love with a vampire named Edward Cullen.

The series is told primarily from Bella's point of view, with the epilogue of
Eclipse and a portion of Breaking Dawn being told from the viewpoint of
character Jacob Black. Midnight Sun, if published, will be a retelling of the
first book, Twilight, from Edward Cullen's point of view.

The Twilight series is popular among young adults, having sold over 42 million
copies worldwide[1] with translations into 37 different languages around the
globe.[2][3] The four Twilight books were the biggest selling novels of 2008
on the USA Today Best-Selling Books list.[4]

## Contents

  * 1 Plot overview
    * 1.1 Twilight
    * 1.2 New Moon
    * 1.3 Eclipse
    * 1.4 Breaking Dawn
    * 1.5 Main characters
  * 2 Setting
  * 3 Structure and genre
  * 4 Themes and inspiration
  * 5 Origins and publishing history
  * 6 Future books
  * 7 Reception and influence
    * 7.1 The Twilight Phenomenon
  * 8 Critical reception
    * 8.1 Praise and cultural impact
    * 8.2 Criticism and controversy
  * 9 Film adaptations
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## Plot overview

### Twilight

Main article: Twilight (novel)

Bella Swan moves from Phoenix, Arizona to live with her father in Forks,
Washington to allow her mother to travel with her new husband, a minor league
baseball player. After moving to Forks, Bella finds herself involuntarily
drawn to a mysterious, handsome boy, Edward Cullen. She eventually learns that
he is a member of a vampire family who drink animal blood rather than human.
Edward and Bella fall in love, but James, a sadistic vampire from another
coven, is drawn to drink Bella's blood. Edward and the other Cullens defend
Bella. She escapes to Phoenix, Arizona, where she is tricked into confronting
James, who tries to kill her. She is seriously wounded, but Edward rescues her
and they return to Forks.

### New Moon

Main article: New Moon (novel)

Edward and his family leave Forks because he believes he is endangering
Bella's life. Bella falls into a deep depression, until she develops a strong
friendship with werewolf Jacob Black. Jacob and the other wolves in his tribe
must protect her from Victoria, a vampire seeking to avenge her mate James'
death by killing Bella. A misunderstanding occurs, and Edward believes Bella
is dead. Edward decides to commit suicide in Volterra, Italy, but he is
stopped by Bella and Alice, Edward's sister. They meet with the Volturi, a
powerful coven of vampires, and are released on the condition that Bella be
turned into a vampire in the near future. Bella and Edward are reunited, and
the Cullens return to Forks.

### Eclipse

Main article: Eclipse (novel)

The vampire Victoria (James's mate from Twilight) has created an army of
"newborn" vampires to battle the Cullen family and kill Bella. Meanwhile,
Bella is forced to choose between her relationship with Edward and her
friendship with Jacob. Edward's vampire family and Jacob's werewolf pack join
forces to successfully destroy Victoria and her vampire army. In the end,
Bella chooses Edward's love over Jacob's and agrees to marry him.

### Breaking Dawn

Main article: Breaking Dawn

Bella and Edward get married, but their honeymoon is cut short when Bella
discovers she is pregnant. Her pregnancy progresses rapidly, making her weak.
She nearly dies giving birth to her and Edward's half-vampire-half-human
daughter, Renesmee, but Edward injects Bella with his venom to save her life
by turning her into a vampire. A vampire from another coven sees Renesmee and
mistakes her for an "immortal child", whose existence violates vampire rules,
and informs the Volturi. The Cullens gather vampire witnesses who can verify
that the child is not one of the immortal children. The Cullens and their
witnesses convince the Volturi that Renesmee poses no danger to vampires or
their secret, and they are left in peace.

### Main characters

See also: List of Twilight characters

  * Isabella "Bella" Swan â The series' protagonist, teenager Bella is a perpetually clumsy "danger magnet" with dark brown hair and brown eyes. She is often portrayed as having low self-esteem and unable to grasp Edward's love for her. She has an immunity to supernatural abilities involving the mind, such as Edward's mind-reading ability. After her transformation into a vampire in the saga's fourth installment, Bella acquires the ability to shield both herself and others from "mental harm" from other vampires.

  * Edward Cullen â Edward is a vampire who lives with a coven of like-minded vampires known as the Cullen family, who feed on animals rather than humans. At first, Edward feels a mutual hatred toward Jacob Black because of his love for Bella, but in Breaking Dawn he comes to see Jacob as a brother and friend. Like some vampires, Edward has a supernatural ability, mind reading; it allows him to read anyone's thoughts within a few miles radius. Bella is immune to his power as a human, but learns how to lower this "shield" after she becomes a vampire.

  * Jacob Black â A minor character in the first novel, Jacob is introduced as a member of the Quileute tribe. He resurfaces in New Moon with a much larger role, becoming a werewolf and Bella's best friend as she struggles through her depression over losing Edward. Although he is in love with Bella, she initially sees him as just her best friend. In Eclipse Bella realizes that she loves Jacob as well, though this love is overpowered by her love for Edward Cullen. In Breaking Dawn, Jacob finds a soulmate in Bella and Edward's baby daughter Renesmee, thus ridding him of his heartache for Bella.

## Setting

The story is set primarily in the town of Forks, Washington, where Bella and
her father, Charlie Swan, live. Other cities in Washington briefly appear in
the series or are mentioned, such as Port Angeles, Olympia, Seattle and La
Push. Some events in Twilight take place in Phoenix, Arizona, where Bella was
raised. Volterra, Italy, is featured in New Moon, when Edward travels there to
commit suicide and Bella rushes to save him. Jacksonville, Florida, is
mentioned first in Twilight and second in Eclipse, when Edward and Bella visit
Bella's mother, who has moved there with her new husband. Seattle, Washington,
is featured in Breaking Dawn when Jacob tries to escape his love for Bella,
and when Bella tries to locate a man named J. Jenks. A fictional "Isle Esme"
off the coast of Brazil is mentioned in Breaking Dawn, where Bella and Edward
spend their honeymoon.

## Structure and genre

The Twilight series falls under the genre of young adult, fantasy, and
romance, though Meyer herself categorized her first book, Twilight, as
"suspense romance horror comedy".[5] However, she states that she considers
her books as "romance more than anything else".[5] The series explores the
unorthodox romance between human Bella and vampire Edward, as well as the love
triangle between Bella, Edward, and Jacob, a werewolf.[6] The books avoid
delving into provocative sex, drugs, and harsh swearing because, according to
Meyer, "I don't think teens need to read about gratuitous sex."[7]

The books are written in first-person narrative, primarily through Bella's
eyes with the epilogue of the third book and a part of the last book being
from Jacob's point of view. When asked about the structure of the novel, Meyer
described her difficulty to pinpoint the premise of the novels to any specific
category:

> I have a hard time with that. Because if I say to someone, 'You know, it's
about vampires,' then immediately they have this mental image of what the book
is like. And it's so not like the other vampire books out thereâAnne Rice's
and the few that I've read. It isn't that kind of dark and dreary and blood-
thirsty world. Then when you say, 'It's set in high school,' a lot of people
immediately put it in another pool. It's easy to pigeonhole with different
descriptions.[8]

The books are based on the vampire myth, but Twilight vampires differ in a
number of particulars from vampire lore. For instance, Twilight vampires have
strong piercing teeth rather than fangs; they glitter in sunlight rather than
burn; and they may drink animal blood as well as human blood. Meyer says that
her vampire mythology differs from that of other authors because she wasn't
informed about the canon vampires, saying,

> It wasn't until I knew that Twilight would be published that I began to
think about whether my vampires were too much the same or too much different
from the others. Of course, I was far too invested in my characters at that
point to be making changes... so I didn't cut out fangs and coffins and so
forth as a way to distinguish my vampires; that's just how they came to me.[9]

## Themes and inspiration

According to the author, her books are "about life, not death" and "love, not
lust".[10] Each book in the series was inspired by and loosely based on a
different literary classic: Twilight on Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice; New
Moon on Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet; Eclipse on Emily BrontÃ«'s Wuthering
Heights; and Breaking Dawn on a second Shakespeare play, A Midsummer Night's
Dream.[11] Meyer also states that Orson Scott Card and L. M. Montgomery's Anne
of Green Gables series are a big influence on her writing.[8]

Other major themes of the series include choice and free will.[8][12] Meyer
says that the books are centered around Bella's choice to choose her life
herself, and the Cullens' choices to abstain from killing rather than follow
their temptations: "I really think that's the underlying metaphor of my
vampires. It doesn't matter where you're stuck in life or what you think you
have to do; you can always choose something else. There's always a different
path."[12]

Meyer, a Mormon, acknowledges that her faith has influenced her work. In
particular, she says that her characters "tend to think more about where they
came from, and where they are going, than might be typical."[7] Meyer also
steers her work from subjects such as gratuitous sex, despite the romantic
nature of the novels. Meyer says that she does not consciously intend her
novels to be Mormon-influenced, or to promote the virtues of sexual abstinence
and spiritual purity, but admits that her writing is shaped by her values,
saying, "I don't think my books are going to be really graphic or dark,
because of who I am. There's always going to be a lot of light in my
stories."[13]

## Origins and publishing history

Author Stephenie Meyer says that the idea for Twilight came to her in a dream
on June 2, 2003. The dream was about a human girl, and a vampire who was in
love with her but thirsted for her blood. Based on this dream, Meyer wrote the
transcript of what is now chapter 13 of the book.[14] Despite having very
little writing experience, in a matter of three months she had transformed
that vivid dream into a completed novel.[12] After writing and editing the
novel, she signed a three-book deal with Little, Brown and Company for
$750,000, an unusually high amount for a first time author; Megan Tingley, the
editor who signed Meyer, says that halfway through the reading manuscript she
realized that she had a future bestseller in her hands.[15] The book was
released in 2005.

Twilight quickly gained recognition and won numerous honors, including:

  * A New York Times Editor's Choice
  * A Publishers Weekly Best Book of the Year
  * An Amazon.com "Best Book of the Decade...So Far"
  * A Teen People "Hot List" pick
  * An American Library Association "Top Ten Best Book for Young Adults" and "Top Ten Books for Reluctant Readers"
  * Reached #5 on the New York Times Best Seller list for young adult chapter books[16]

Following the success of Twilight, Meyer expanded the story into a series with
three more books: New Moon (2006), Eclipse (2007), and Breaking Dawn (2008).
In its first week after publication, the first sequel, New Moon, debuted at #5
on the New York Times Best Seller List for Children's Chapter Books, and in
its second week rose to the #1 position, where it remained for the next eleven
weeks. In total, it spent over 50 weeks on the list.[17] After the release of
Eclipse, the first three "Twilight" books spent a combined 143 weeks on the
New York Times Best Seller list.[12] The fourth installment of the Twilight
series, Breaking Dawn, was released with an initial print run of 3.7 million
copies.[18] Over 1.3 million copies were sold on the first day alone, setting
a record in first-day sales performance for the Hachette Book Group USA.[19]
Upon the completion of the fourth entry in the series, Meyer indicated that
Breaking Dawn would be the final novel to be told from Bella Swan's
perspective.[20] In 2008, the four books of the series claimed the top four
spots on USA Today's year-end bestseller list, making Meyer the first author
to ever achieve this feat.[21]

## Future books

Meyer originally planned to write a companion book to Twilight called Midnight
Sun. Midnight Sun would be the story of Twilight told from the point of view
of Edward Cullen. She stated that Twilight was the only book that she planned
to rewrite from Edward's point of view.[22] However, a copy of the first
twelve chapters of Midnight Sun was illegally posted on the internet in its
raw format. Stephenie Meyer has since put these twelve chapters of the book on
her website so that her fans wouldn't feel guilty about reading it, but has
put the project on hold indefinitely due to her feelings about the situation.
She stated,

> If I tried to write Midnight Sun now, in my current frame of mind, James
would probably win and all the Cullens would die, which wouldn't dovetail too
well with the original story. In any case, I feel too sad about what has
happened to continue working on Midnight Sun, and so it is on hold
indefinitely.[23]

Though she has no current plans to do so, Meyer has also stated that if she
were to continue writing in the same universe she would write from the
perspective of either Leah Clearwater or Renesmee Cullen.[24]

The Twilight Saga: The Official Guide, which will give further information on
the world of the Twilight series, is due to come out in 2009.[25]

## Reception and influence

### The Twilight Phenomenon

The widespread appeal of the novels and the huge online fan community of the
series are often noted,[26][27] and the author and the series' popularity are
often compared with J.K. Rowling and Harry Potter.[12][28] Meyer responds to
such comparisons, saying: "It's terribly flattering to be compared to her, but
there's never going to be another J.K. Rowling; that's a phenomenon that's not
gonna happen again", however noting that "you can compare my fans to her fans
more easily [than me to her]. I do think that we both have people who are just
really really enthusiastic, and will come miles to see you and be involved,
and everybody really cares about our characters."[29] The Twilight series'
popularity and enthusiastic fan following have grabbed media attention and
been dubbed "The Twilight Phenomenon".[30][dead link][31] Fans of Stephenie
Meyer are noted to "dress up like her characters. They write their own stories
about them and post their tales on the Internet. When she appears at a
bookstore, 3,000 people go to meet her. There are Twilight-themed rock
bands."[12] Describing the fan following of the books, Phoenix New Times
wrote, "Meyer's fandom is reminiscent of Harry Potter mania."[15]

Economically, the town of Forks, Washington, the setting for the Twilight
series, has improved due to tourism from fans of the books.[32] The town also
hosts Twilight tours, which visit places such as La Push's First Beach, the
hospital where Carlisle Cullen supposedly works, and a two-story house meant
to portray the Swan residence.[32] In response to plans for the aging Forks
High School to be renovated, Twilight fans have teamed up with Infinite
Jewelry Co. and the West Olympic Peninsula Betterment Association to collect
donations in an attempt to save the brick appearance or the building
altogether.[33] According to Megan Tingley, editor at Little, Brown and
Company, "Stephenie's fans are rabid, Stephenie has tapped into something very
deep in her readers, and they respond on an emotional level."[15]

## Critical reception

### Praise and cultural impact

Upon Twilight's initial publication, the book generally received positive
reviews. The Times praised the book for capturing "perfectly the teenage
feeling of sexual tension and alienation", while Sunday Herald called it "the
thrilling tale of a vampire romance at high school".[34] Larry Carroll for MTV
Movies deemed Edward and Bella "an iconic love story for a whole
generation".[35] Amazon.com hailed the book as "romantic and extraordinarily
suspenseful",[36] while School Library Journal stated, "realistic, subtle,
succinct, and easy to follow, Twilight will have readers dying to sink their
teeth into it".[37] Booklist said, "this dark romance is gripping".[38]

Referring to the series' enduring popularity and fandom, USA Today said, "Move
over Harry Potter".[39] In addition, Entertainment Weekly hailed Meyer as "the
world's most popular vampire novelist since Anne Rice".[40] Novelist Orson
Scott Card called Meyer "...an amazing phenomenonâout of the brightness of
her mind and spirit comes the illuminated darkness of her stories".[41] Lev
Grossman of Time wrote that the books have a "pillowy quality distinctly
reminiscent of Internet fan fiction", but still praised the series, comparing
it to The Lord of the Rings and Harry Potter:

> People do not want to just read Meyer's books; they want to climb inside
them and live there...There's no literary term for the quality Twilight and
Harry Potter (and The Lord of the Rings) share, but you know it when you see
it: their worlds have a freestanding internal integrity that makes you feel as
if you should be able to buy real estate there.[12]

As well, US president Barack Obama told USA Today that he and his ten-year-old
daughter, Malia, often bond over Twilight.[42]

### Criticism and controversy

Despite Twilight's immense popularity, the books have received much criticism.
Laura Miller of Salon.com noted that "the characters, such as they are, are
stripped down to a minimum, lacking the texture and idiosyncrasies of actual
people", and said that "Twilight would be a lot more persuasive as an argument
that an "amazing heart" counts for more than appearances if it didn't harp so
incessantly on Edward's superficial splendors."[43] Natalie Pompillo of The
Philadelphia Inquirer criticized Meyer's writing, noting, "Bella is often
struck by Edward's beauty and icy perfection, to the point where I want to
say, 'We get it. She thinks he's hot. Move along.' The author loves
adjectives, adverbs, and any word that can stretch out a sentence."[44]

The books have also received criticism of alleged sexism for the portrayal of
the series' female characters, most notably Bella Swan's obsessive behavior
relating to Edward Cullen and the emphasis on his romantic hero status.[43]
Meyer has dismissed these criticisms, arguing both that the books center
around Bella's choice, which she perceives as the foundation of modern
feminism, and that Bella's damsel in distress persona is due only to her
humanity.[45]

In an interview with USA Weekend's Brian Truitt, Stephen King stated, "the
real difference [between Rowling and Meyer] is that Jo Rowling is a terrific
writer, and Stephenie Meyer can't write worth a darn. She's not very
good."[46]

## Film adaptations

Main article: Twilight (2008 film)

A screenplay for Twilight was written by Melissa Rosenberg and has been
adapted into a film by Summit Entertainment. The film was directed by
Catherine Hardwicke, with Kristen Stewart and Robert Pattinson in the leading
roles of Isabella Swan and Edward Cullen, respectively. The movie was released
in the United States on November 21, 2008.[47][48] Twilight: The Complete
Illustrated Movie Companion, written by Mark Cotta Vaz, was released October
28.[49]

On November 22, 2008, following the box office success of Twilight, Summit
Entertainment confirmed a sequel based on the second book in the series, New
Moon.[50][51][52]

## References

  1. ^ Acocella, Joan (March 16, 2009). "In the Blood: A Critic at Large". The New Yorker. p. 103. http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2009/03/16/090316crat_atlarge_acocella?currentPage=2. Retrieved on March 14, 2009.
  2. ^ Claudia Parsons (2008-11-20). ""Twilight" publisher sees film boosting book sales". Yahoo!. http://news.yahoo.com/s/nm/20081121/en_nm/us_twilight_books. Retrieved on 2008-11-21.
  3. ^ Kenneth Turan (2002-11-21). "Movie Review: 'Twilight'". LA Times. http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/la-et-twilight21-2008nov21,0,2444525.story. Retrieved on 2008-11-21.
  4. ^ Mary Cadden (2008-01-15). "New star authors made, old ones rediscovered in 2008". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/life/books/news/2009-01-14-top-sellers-side_N.htm. Retrieved on 2008-01-16.
  5. ^ a b Kirschling, Gregory (August 2, 2007). "Stephenie Meyer's 'Twilight' Zone". EW.com. Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20049578,00.html. Retrieved on December 11, 2008.
  6. ^ Meadows, Bob; Kari Lydersen (September 8, 2008). "Stephenie Meyer: Written in Blood". People 70 (10). http://www.people.com/people/archive/article/0,,20230708,00.html. Retrieved on December 11, 2008.
  7. ^ a b Trachtenberg, Jeffrey A. (August 10, 2007). "Booksellers Find Life After Harry In a Vampire Novel". The Wall Street Journal. http://online.wsj.com/article_email/SB118670290131693667-lMyQjAxMDE3ODA2OTcwMDkyWj.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-11.
  8. ^ a b c Margolis, Rick (October 1, 2005). "Love at First Bite". http://www.schoollibraryjournal.com/article/CA6260602.html. Retrieved on December 11, 2008.
  9. ^ "BookStories Interview with Stephenie Meyer". August 2006. http://chbookstore.qwestoffice.net/fa2006-08.html. Retrieved on December 12, 2008.
  10. ^ Horng, Eric (August 19, 2007). "Will New Bestseller 'Eclipse' Harry Potter?". ABC News. http://www.abcnews.go.com/WN/story?id=3499052. Retrieved on 2008-12-12.
  11. ^ Proctor, Maurine (August 8, 2008). "Stephenie Meyer's Twilight". Meridian. http://www.meridianmagazine.com/books/080806vampire.html. Retrieved on December 11, 2008.
  12. ^ a b c d e f g Grossman, Lev (April 24, 2008). "Stephenie Meyer: A New J.K. Rowling?". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1734838,00.html. Retrieved on December 12, 2008.
  13. ^ Mills, Tony-Allen (August 10, 2008). "News Review interview: Stephenie Meyer". The Times. http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/books/article4492238.ece. Retrieved on 2008-12-12.
  14. ^ Walker, Michael R. (2007). "A Teenage Tale With Bite". BYU Magazine. http://magazine.byu.edu/?act=view&a=1972. Retrieved on 2008-08-01.
  15. ^ a b c Irwin, Megan (July 11, 2007). "Charmed". http://www.phoenixnewtimes.com/2007-07-12/news/charmed. Retrieved on 2008-12-8.
  16. ^ Wadley, Carma (May 11, 2008). "Meyer on fire with books". Deseret News. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qn4188/is_20080511/ai_n25425697. Retrieved on 2008-06-30.
  17. ^ "Best Sellers: Children's Books". The New York Times. August 12, 2007. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/08/12/books/bestseller/0812bestchildren.html?partner=permalink&exprod=permalink. Retrieved on December 12, 2008.
  18. ^ Jacks, Brian (August 4, 2008). "'Breaking Dawn' Sells 1.3 Million Copies in One Day". MTV.com. http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2008/08/04/breaking-dawn-sells-13-million-copies-in-one-day. Retrieved on 2008-08-09.
  19. ^ Milliot, Jim (August 4, 2008). "'Breaking Dawn' Breaks Hachette Records". Publishers Weekly. http://www.publishersweekly.com/article/CA6584007.html?nid=2286&source=title&rid=&q=twilight. Retrieved on 2008-10-18.
  20. ^ Meyer, Stephenie (July 7, 2008). "Breaking Dawn". http://www.stepheniemeyer.com/breakingdawn.html. Retrieved on December 12, 2008.
  21. ^ Bob Minzesheimer and Anthony DeBarros (2009-01-15). "Sellers basked in Stephenie Meyer's 'Twilight' in 2008". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/life/books/news/2009-01-14-top-sellers-main_N.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-15.
  22. ^ Meyer, Stephenie. Interview with Nicole Sperlin. Twilight (part 3) (Video). EW.com. November 21, 2008. Retrieved on December 12, 2008.
  23. ^ Meyer, Stephenie (August 28, 2008). "Midnight Sun". http://www.stepheniemeyer.com/midnightsun.html. Retrieved on December 12, 2008.
  24. ^ Weiss, Sabrina Rojas (August 12, 2008). "'Twilight' Tuesday: Stephenie Meyer Answers Your Burning 'Breaking Dawn' Questions". MTV. http://www.mtv.com/movies/news/articles/1592582/story.jhtml. Retrieved on 2008-10-22.
  25. ^ "Hey Fans - An Update on The Twilight Saga: The Official Guide". thetwilightsaga.com. Little, Brown and Company. http://www.thetwilightsaga.com/blog/hey-fans-an-update-on-the-twilight-saga-the-official-guide.
  26. ^ Merrill, Julie (May 1, 2008). "The Twilight Phenomenon". bookstove.com. http://www.bookstove.com/Fantasy/The-Twilight-Phenomenon.117474. Retrieved on December 7, 2008.
  27. ^ Green, Heather (July 31, 2008). "The Online Fan World of the Twilight Vampire Books". BusinessWeek. http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/08_32/b4095044373786.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-07.
  28. ^ Valby, Karen (July 18, 2008). "Stephenie Meyer: Inside the 'Twilight' Saga". Entertainment Weekly (1002). http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20213067_20213068_20211938,00.html. Retrieved on December 7, 2008.
  29. ^ Carroll, Larry (April 10, 2008). "'Twilight' Author Stephenie Meyer Sees J.K. Rowling As Kindred Spirit". MTV Movies Blog. http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2008/04/10/twilight-author-stephenie-meyer-sees-jk-rowling-as-kindred-spirit/. Retrieved on December 7, 2008.
  30. ^ "The 'Twilight' Phenomenon: The Director and Author at Comic-Con 2008". http://www.premiere.com/features/4673/the-twilight-phenomenon-the-director-and-author-at-comic-con-2008.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-8.
  31. ^ Greydanus, Steven D. (2008). "Twilight Appeal: The cult of Edward Cullen and vampire love in Stephenie Meyerâs novels and the new film". http://www.decentfilms.com/sections/articles/twilight.html. Retrieved on December 8, 2008.
  32. ^ a b Ramirez, Marc (July 27, 2008). "Fans of "Twilight" vampire series pump new blood into Forks". The Seattle Times. http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/entertainment/2008075490_twilight270.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-31.
  33. ^ Dickerson, Paige (September 12, 2008). "Twilight fans campaign to donate to help save brick building of Forks High School". Peninsula Daily News. http://www.peninsuladailynews.com/article/20080913/NEWS/809130304. Retrieved on 2008-09-17.
  34. ^ http://www.timeout.co.nz/books/Twilight_Twilight_Saga_1/1905654340.html?option=results&search_by=isbn&search_text=1905654340&Fnew_search=1&pagestyle=single&nsBookshop_Session=94693b5d1553bb65f965892d72766539
  35. ^ Carroll, Larry (April 22, 2008). "'Twilight' Stars Robert Pattinson, Kristen Stewart Turn Up The Heat To Prepare For Love Story". MTV. http://www.mtv.com/movies/news/articles/1585986/20080421/story.jhtml.
  36. ^ http://www.amazon.com/Twilight-Saga-Book-1/dp/0316015849/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1238491146&sr=1-1
  37. ^ http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/product-description/0316015849/ref=dp_proddesc_0?ie=UTF8&n=283155&s=books
  38. ^ http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/product-description/0316015849/ref=dp_proddesc_0?ie=UTF8&n=283155&s=books
  39. ^ http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/product-description/0316160202/ref=dp_proddesc_0?ie=UTF8&n=283155&s=books
  40. ^ http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/product-description/0316160202/ref=dp_proddesc_0?ie=UTF8&n=283155&s=books
  41. ^ http://www.stepheniemeyer.com/thehost.html
  42. ^ http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2008/11/10/president-elect-obama-reads-twilight-so-is-he-team-edward-or-team-jacob/
  43. ^ a b Miller, Laura (August 30, 2007). "Touched by a vampire". Salon.com. http://www.salon.com/books/review/2008/07/30/Twilight/. Retrieved on September 17, 2008.
  44. ^ Pompilio, Natalie (August 2, 2008). "Bella drama". The Philadelphia Inquirer. http://www.philly.com/inquirer/magazine/26203399.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-17.
  45. ^ "New Moon: The Story". StephenieMeyer.com. http://www.stepheniemeyer.com/nm_thestory.html. Retrieved on November 13, 2008.
  46. ^ Brain Tuitt: It's great to be the King, page 7. USA Weekend, March 6-8, 2009.
  47. ^ Weiss, Sabrina Rojas (August 15, 2008). "Did 'Harry Potter' Release Date Change To Avoid 'Twilight' Competition?". MTV. http://moviesblog.mtv.com/2008/08/15/did-harry-potter-release-date-change-to-avoid-twilight-competition/. Retrieved on 2008-09-09.
  48. ^ Medina, Jed (August 16, 2008). "A Strategic Move? Twilight moves release date to November 21st!". The Movie Fanatic. http://themovie-fanatic.com/the_buzz!/movie_news/twilight_new_date_of_release/. Retrieved on September 9, 2008.
  49. ^ Hoffmann, Sharon (September 30, 2008). "Twilight shopping calendar". The Kansas City Star. http://www.kansascity.com/twilight/story/818952.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-01.
  50. ^ Martin, Denise (November 22, 2008). "'Twilight' sequel 'New Moon' gets the greenlight from Summit". Los Angeles Times. http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/entertainmentnewsbuzz/2008/11/twilight-sequel.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-24.
  51. ^ Associated Press (November 23, 2008). "'Twilight' debuts in No. 1 slot at box office". http://www.cnn.com/2008/SHOWBIZ/Movies/11/23/boxoffice.ap/index.html?eref=rss_topstories. Retrieved on 2008-11-24.
  52. ^ McNary, Dave (November 22, 2008). "Summit announces 'Twilight' sequel". Variety (Reed Business Information). http://www.variety.com/article/VR1130001163.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-22.

## External links

  * Stephenie Meyer's website
  * The Twilight Series's official website
  * Twilight Saga Wiki

v â¢ d â¢ e

The Twilight series by Stephenie Meyer  
Novels

Twilight Â· New Moon Â· Eclipse Â· Breaking Dawn  
Other books

Midnight Sun (unpublished)  
Film series

Twilight (soundtrack) Â· New Moon Â· Eclipse  
Characters

Bella Swan Â· Edward Cullen Â· Jacob Black Â· Other characters  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twilight_(series)"

Categories: Contemporary fantasy | Culture of the Pacific Northwest | Fantasy
novel series | Horror novels | Romance novels | Twilight series | Vampires in
written fiction | Young adult novels | 2000s fads

Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism |
Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | All articles with dead external
links | Articles with dead external links since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * à¹à¸à¸¢

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 01:56 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



