
# Beatrix Potter

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Beatrix Potter  
<IMG>  
  
Born 28 July 1866  
Kensington, London  
Died 22 December 1943 (aged 77)  
Near Sawrey  
Occupation Children's author, illustrator  
Genres Children's literature  
Notable work(s) The Tale of Peter Rabbit  
Helen Beatrix Potter (28 July 1866 â 22 December 1943) was an English
author, illustrator, mycologist and conservationist who was best known for her
many best-selling children's books that featured animal characters, such as
Peter Rabbit.

Born into a privileged household, Potter was educated by governesses and grew
up isolated from other children. She had numerous pets and, through holidays
spent in Scotland and the Lake District, developed a love of landscape, flora
and fauna, all of which she closely observed and painted. As a young woman her
parents discouraged her intellectual development, but her study and paintings
of fungi led her to be widely respected in the field of mycology. In her
thirties Potter published the highly successful children's book The Tale of
Peter Rabbit, and became secretly engaged to her publisher, Norman Warne,
causing a breach with her parents, who disapproved of his social status. Warne
died before the wedding could take place.

Potter began writing and illustrating children's books, and, having become
financially independent of her parents, was able to buy a farm in the Lake
District, which she extended with other purchases over time. In her forties
she married a local solicitor, William Heelis. She became a sheep breeder and
farmer while continuing to write and illustrate books for children, eventually
publishing twenty-three. Potter died in 1943, and left almost all of her
property to her husband who, after his death in 1945, left it to The National
Trust in order to preserve the beauty of the Lake District as she had known
it, protecting it from developers.

Potter's books continue to sell well throughout the world, in multiple
languages. Her stories have been retold in various formats, including a
ballet, films and in animation.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
    * 1.1 Scientific aspirations and work on fungi
    * 1.2 Literary career
    * 1.3 Later life: the Lake District and conservation
  * 2 Subsequent events
  * 3 Film and TV adaptations
  * 4 Partial bibliography
  * 5 References
  * 6 Sources
  * 7 Further reading
    * 7.1 Fictional works
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

<IMG>

<IMG>

Potter at fifteen years with her springer spaniel, Spot

Beatrix Potter was born in South Kensington, London on 28 July 1866. Educated
at home by a succession of governesses, she had little opportunity to mix with
other children. Even her younger brother, Bertram, was rarely at home; he was
sent to boarding school, leaving Beatrix alone with her many pets. She had
frogs, newts, ferrets and even a pet bat. She also had two rabbits â the
first was Benjamin, whom she described as "an impudent, cheeky little thing",
while the second was Peter, whom she took everywhere with her, even on the
occasional outings, on a little lead. Potter would watch these animals for
hours on end, sketching them. Gradually the sketches became better and better,
developing her talents from an early age.

Beatrix Potter's father, Rupert William Potter (1832â1914), although trained
as a barrister, spent his days at gentlemen's clubs and rarely practised law.
Her mother, Helen Potter nÃ©e Leech (1839â1932), the daughter of a cotton
merchant, spent her time visiting or receiving visitors. The family was
supported by both parents' inherited incomes.

Every summer, Rupert Potter would rent a country house; firstly Dalguise House
in Perthshire, Scotland for the eleven summers of 1871 to 1881,[1] then later
one in the English Lake District. In 1882 the family met the local vicar,
Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley, who was deeply worried about the effects of industry
and tourism on the Lake District. He would later found the National Trust in
1895, to help protect the countryside. Beatrix Potter had immediately fallen
in love with the rugged mountains and dark lakes, and through Rawnsley, learnt
of the importance of trying to conserve the region, something that was to stay
with her for the rest of her life.

### [edit] Scientific aspirations and work on fungi

When Potter came of age, her parents appointed her their housekeeper and
discouraged any intellectual development, instead requiring her to supervise
the household. From the age of 15 until she was past 30, she recorded her
everyday life in journals, using her own secret code which was not decoded
until 20 years after her death. [2]

An uncle attempted to introduce her as a student at the Royal Botanic Gardens
at Kew, but she was rejected because she was female. Potter was later one of
the first to suggest that lichens were a symbiotic relationship between fungi
and algae.[3] As, at the time, the only way to record microscopic images was
by painting them, Potter made numerous drawings of lichens and fungi. As the
result of her observations, she was widely respected throughout England as an
expert mycologist. She also studied spore germination and life cycles of
fungi. Potter's set of detailed watercolours of fungi, numbering some 270
completed by 1901, is in the Armitt Library, Ambleside.

In 1897, her paper on the germination of spores was presented to the Linnean
Society by her uncle Sir Henry Enfield Roscoe, as women were barred from
attending meetings. (In 1997, the Society issued a posthumous official apology
to Potter for the way she had been treated.) The Royal Society also refused to
publish at least one of her technical papers. She also lectured at the London
School of Economics several times.

### [edit] Literary career

Much of her stories' vocabulary and artistic practice stemmed from Joel
Chandler Harris's Uncle Remus stories, while the basis of her many projects
and stories were the small animals that she smuggled into the house or
observed during family holidays in Scotland and the Lake District. When she
was 27 and on one such holiday in Scotland, in a letter dated 4 September 1893
she sent a story about rabbits to Noel Moore, the five-year-old son of her
last governess. She was encouraged by former governess Annie Moore to publish
the story, so she borrowed it back in 1901 and made it into the book entitled
The Tale of Peter Rabbit and Mr. McGregor's Garden. She sent her slightly
rewritten picture letters to six publishers, but was turned down by all of
them. The primary complaint from all of them was the lack of colour pictures,
which were popular at the time. In September 1901, she decided to self-publish
and distribute 250 copies of a renamed The Tale of Peter Rabbit. Later that
year, because the colour printing blocks were already created and other
childrenâs books were popular, she finally attracted the publisher Frederick
Warne & Co. The publishing contract was signed in June 1902 and, by the end of
the year, 28,000 copies were in print. Later, the character Peter Rabbit was
patented and produced as a soft toy in 1903. This makes Peter the oldest
licensed character.[4]

She followed it with The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin in 1903, that was also based
on an earlier letter. Such was the popularity of these and her subsequent
books that she gained an independent income from their sales. She also became
secretly engaged to the publisher, Norman Warne in 1905, but her parents were
set against her marrying a tradesman. Their opposition to the wedding caused a
breach between Beatrix and her parents. However, the wedding was not to be,
for soon after the engagement, Norman fell ill of pernicious anemia and died
within a few weeks. Beatrix was devastated. She wrote in a letter to his
sister, Millie, "He did not live long, but he fulfilled a useful happy life. I
must try to make a fresh beginning next year."[5]

Potter eventually wrote 23 books, all in the same small format. Her writing
efforts finally abated around 1920 due to poor eyesight. The Tale of Little
Pig Robinson was published in 1930; however, the actual manuscript was one of
the first to be written and far predates this publication date.[6]

### [edit] Later life: the Lake District and conservation

After Warne's death Potter purchased Hill Top Farm in the village of Sawrey
(then in Lancashire, now in Cumbria), in the Lake District.[7] She loved the
landscape, and visited the farm as often as she could, discussing the set-up
with farm manager John Cannon.[8] With the steady stream of royalties from her
books, she began to buy pieces of land under the guidance of local solicitor
William Heelis. In 1913 at the age of 47, Potter married Heelis and moved to
Hill Top Farm permanently. Some of Potter's best-loved works show the Hill Top
farmhouse and the village. While the couple had no children, the farm was
constantly alive with dogs, cats and even a pet hedgehog named "Mrs. Tiggy-
Winkle".

On moving to the Lake District, Potter became engrossed in breeding and
showing Herdwick sheep.[7] She became a respected farmer, a judge at local
agricultural shows and President of the Herdwick Sheep Breeders' Association.
When Potter's parents died, she used her inheritance to buy more farms and
tracts of land. After some years Potter and Heelis moved down into the village
of Sawrey, and into Castle Cottage â where the local children knew her for
her grumpy demeanour, and called her "Auld Mother Heelis".[9] Her letters of
the time reflect her increasing concerns with her sheep, preservation of
farmland, and World War II.[10]

Beatrix Potter died at Castle Cottage in Sawrey on 22 December 1943. Her body
was cremated at Carleton Crematorium, Blackpool and her ashes were scattered
in the countryside near Sawrey.[11]

## [edit] Subsequent events

In her will, Potter left almost all of her property to the National Trust â
4,000 acres (16 kmÂ²) of land, cottages, and 15 farms. The legacy has helped
ensure that the Lake District and the practice of fell farming remain
unspoiled to this day. Her properties now lie within the Lake District
National Park. The Trust's 2005 Swindon headquarters are named "Heelis" in her
honour.

Beatrix Potter Gallery, a gallery run by the National Trust and situated in a
17th-century Lake District townhouse in Hawkshead, Cumbria, England, now
displays her original book illustrations.

## [edit] Film and TV adaptations

In 1971, the film The Tales of Beatrix Potter directed by Reginald Mills was
released. Several of the Tales were set to music and danced by the members of
The Royal Ballet including Frederick Ashton who was also the choreographer.
The Tale of Pigling Bland was turned into a musical theatrical production by
Suzy Conn and was first performed on 6 July 2006 at the Toronto Fringe
Festival in Toronto, Canada.

In 1982, the BBC produced The Tale of Beatrix Potter. This dramatisation of
her life was written by John Hawkesworth and directed by Bill Hayes. It
starred Holly Aird and Penelope Wilton as the young and adult Beatrix
respectively. The modern author Susan Wittig Albert publishes a series of
mysteries featuring a fictionalised Beatrix Potter, focusing on the period of
her life between her fiancÃ©'s death and her eventual establishment as a
farmer in Sawrey. In December 2006 Penguin Books published Beatrix Potter: A
Life in Nature, a new biography by Linda Lear, which emphasises Potter's
scientific accomplishments both as a botanical artist and as an amateur
mycologist.[12]

In 1992, the BBC produced an animated series based on the stories of Beatrix
Potter called The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends. It aired on the Family
Channel in 1993â95. The entire series was released individually on VHS and
later released on DVD as a 2 disc set.

Miss Potter, a biographical film starring RenÃ©e Zellweger, was released on 29
December 2006. It was written by Richard Maltby, Jr. and directed by Chris
Noonan. The character of Norman Warne was played by Ewan McGregor, while that
of William Heelis was played by Lloyd Owen. Beatrix as a young girl was played
by Lucy Boynton.

## [edit] Partial bibliography

  * The Tale of Peter Rabbit (1902)
  * The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin (1903)
  * The Tailor of Gloucester (1903)
  * The Tale of Benjamin Bunny (1904)
  * The Tale of Two Bad Mice (1904)
  * The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy-Winkle (1905)
  * The Tale of the Pie and the Patty-Pan (1905)
  * The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher (1906)
  * The Story of A Fierce Bad Rabbit (1906)
  * The Story of Miss Moppet (1906)
  * The Tale of Tom Kitten (1907)
  * The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck (1908)
  * The Tale of Samuel Whiskers or, The Roly-Poly Pudding (1908)
  * The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies (1909)
  * The Tale of Ginger and Pickles (1909)
  * The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse (1910)
  * The Tale of Timmy Tiptoes (1911)
  * The Tale of Mr. Tod (1912)
  * The Tale of Pigling Bland (1913)
  * Appley Dapply's Nursery Rhymes (1917)
  * The Tale of Johnny Town-Mouse (1918)
  * Cecily Parsley's Nursery Rhymes (1922)
  * The Fairy Caravan (1929)
  * The Tale of Little Pig Robinson (1930)
  * Wag-By-Wall (decorations by J. J. Lankes) (1944)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Overview of Dalguise", Gazetteer for Scotland, University of Edinburgh School of Geosciences.
  2. ^ "Peterrabbit.com". 2008-08-04. http://web.archive.org/web/20070519051617/http://www.peterrabbit.com/miss_potter/miss_potter_world/diary.cfm. Retrieved on 2005-07-06.
  3. ^ Chet Raymo, "The Sharp and the Half-Sharp", Science Musings (blog of Stonehill College professor and former Boston Globe columnist, Chet Raymo), September 29, 2006.
  4. ^ [1], Frederick Warne & Co Limited 2002, retrieved March 2009
  5. ^ Peterrabbit.com, Frederick Warne & Co Limited 2002, retrieved Feb 2007
  6. ^ Egoff, Sheila et al. (ed.) (1996). Only Connect: Readings on Children's Literature. Oxford University Press.
  7. ^ a b Thomson, Keith Stewart (2007). "Beatrix Potter, Conservationist". American Scientist 95: 210â212. doi:10.1511/2007.65.376.
  8. ^ The National Trust, "The Story of Beatrix Potter".
  9. ^ BBC, "Beatrix Potter - Children's Author", Dec. 20, 2001.
  10. ^ e.g., Jane Crowell Morse (ed.), Beatrix Potter's Americans: Selected Letters, Horn Book, Inc., 1982
  11. ^ Britain Unlimited, "Beatrix Potter".
  12. ^ Beatrix Potter, A Life in Nature, by Linda Lear

## [edit] Sources

  * Judy Taylor, "Potter, (Helen) Beatrix (1866â1943)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 accessed 14 Jan 2007
  * Jane Crowell Morse (ed.), Beatrix Potter's Americans: Selected Letters, Horn Book, Inc., 1982
  * Linda Lear, Beatrix Potter: A Life in Nature (Allen Lane, 2006) (ISBN 0713995602, ISBN 978-0713995602) (biography)

## [edit] Further reading

  * Susan Denyer, Beatrix Potter: At Home in the Lake District (2000) (biographical, plus photography of Potter's Lake District)
  * Anne Stevenson Hobbs, Beatrix Potter: Author and Illustrator (2005) (ISBN 0723257000; ISBN 978-0723257004) (collection of 200 of Potter's paintings, a catalogue of the Dulwich Picture Gallery exhibition of 2005)
  * Anne Stevenson Hobbs, Judy Taylor, and Joyce Whalley, Beatrix Potter, 1866â1943: The Artist and Her World (1987) (ISBN 0723235619; 978-0723235613) (a companion to the Tate Gallery Exhibition)
  * Margaret Lane, The Tale of Beatrix Potter: A Biography (2001) (ISBN 978-0723246763 ; 0723246769)
  * Jane Crowell Morse (ed.), Beatrix Potter's Americans: Selected Letters, Horn Book, Inc., 1982
  * Beatrix Potter, Beatrix Potter: A Journal (2006) (ISBN 0723258058; ISBN 978-0723258056)
  * Judy Taylor, Beatrix Potter: Artist, Storyteller and Countrywoman (1996) (ISBN 0723241759; ISBN 978-0723241751)

### [edit] Fictional works

  * Richard Maltby, Miss Potter: The Novel (novelization of the film) (2006) (ISBN 0723258619; ISBN 978-0723258612)
  * Garth Pearce, The Making of Miss Potter (2006) (ISBN 0723258635; ISBN 978-0723258636) (book about the making of the film)
  * Bryan Talbot, The Tale of One Bad Rat (1996) (ISBN-10: 1-56971-127-5; ISBN-13: 978-1-56971-127-9) (A graphic novel about a teenager who runs away from an abusive home and finds solace in her love of the Beatrix Potter books and the Lake Country.)

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Beatrix
Potter  
<IMG>

Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Beatrix Potter

Beatrix Potter also appears in a motion picture movie called "Miss Potter".

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Beatrix Potter  
  * Works by Beatrix Potter at Project Gutenberg
  * Biography of Beatrix Potter incorporating primary sources
  * "Beatrix Potter's tales of escape": a review by Nicola Shulman in the TLS, 21 February 2007.
  * A list of online e-texts
  * Online feature of the Information Sciences Library at the University of Pittsburgh
  * Archival material relating to Beatrix Potter listed at the UK National Register of Archives
  * The world's largest collection of Potter's drawings, literary manuscripts, correspondence, photographs and related materials at the Victoria and Albert Museum
  * "Beatrix Potter in Cumbria"

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beatrix_Potter"

Categories: 1866 births | 1943 deaths | Beatrix Potter | English children's
writers | English illustrators | Children's book illustrators | English
Unitarians | British botanists | British conservationists | Fabulists |
Scientific illustrators | Women botanists | People from Kensington | Writers
who illustrated their own writing

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 05:45.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



