
# Cuckold

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008)  
<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (October 2006)  
A cuckold is a married man with an adulterous wife. Due to the word's original
meaning, a man who is unwittingly raising another man's child, it refers to a
man who is unaware of his victimization. Because of this association, it is
one of the few masculine specific words in the English language without a
feminine counterpart. In current usage it sometimes refers to non-married
couples in committed relationships, although this is not the traditional
meaning. A man who knows and acquiesced in his wifeâs taking of another
lover was called a wittol, itself a derivation from the Middle English for
"witting (as in knowing) cuckold."

## Contents

  * 1 History of the term
  * 2 Cultural usage
  * 3 Cuckoldry as a fetish
    * 3.1 Cuckquean
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] History of the term

Cuckold is derived from the Old French for the cuckoo, cocu, with the
pejorative suffix -ald. The earliest written use of the Middle English
derivation, cokewold, occurs in 1250. The females of certain varieties of
cuckoo lay their eggs in other birdâs nests, freeing themselves from the
need to nurture the eggs to hatching.

Cuckolds have sometimes been written as "wearing the horns of a cuckold" or
just "wearing the horns". This refers to the fact that the man being cuckolded
is the last to know of his wife's infidelity. He is wearing horns that can be
seen by everybody but him. This also refers to a tradition claiming that in
villages of unknown European location, the community would gather to
collectively humiliate a man whose wife gives birth to a child recognizably
not his own. According to this legend, a parade was held in which the hapless
husband is forced to wear antlers on his head as a symbol of his wifeâs
infidelity. Whether this did actually happen or not is inconsequential as the
phrase has survived.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ca. 1815 French satire on cuckoldry, which shows both men and women wearing
horns

In French the term is porter des cornes and is used by MoliÃ¨re to describe
someone whose consort has been unfaithful. MoliÃ¨re's L'Ãcole des femmes
(1662) is the story of a man who mocks cuckolds and becomes one at the end. In
Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales (c.1372-77), the Miller's Tale is a story
that humorously examines the life of a cuckold. The genre has recently been
revived by Howard Jacobson in his 2008 novel The Act of Love.

The term dates from the Roman empire[citation needed], since legionaries
returning from the war were given horns as a triumph or prize. So, the use of
the term is a mockery of the husband, victorious in the battlefield, but
defeated in his own bed.

## [edit] Cultural usage

In Brazil, Germany, Bulgaria, Greece, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Czech
Republic, Croatia, Hungary, Slovenia, Turkey, Spanish speaking countries and
also Arabic speaking countries, "horns" are a metaphor for suffering the
infidelity of a partner, not limited to husbands in modern usage. The gesture
of the horned hand can be used to insult the cuckold.

The Italian equivalent is cornuto, sharing the same double entendre with the
English word cornuted, asserting both featuring horns and cuckolded. Its use
is playful and lightheartedly derisive, with little or no particular efficacy
in scorning someone during confrontations as it is lacking earnest damning
credentials, potentially leading all parties to a chuckle and smothering the
feud at its inception. A pervasive metaphor parodies the use of cornuto to
great effect: il bue che dÃ del cornuto all'asino, meaning the ox labelling
the donkey cornute, equivalent to pot calling the kettle black.

In Portuguese the terms corno ("horn"), cornudo or chifrudo ("horned") are
used to spite or mock the cheated male partner. The expression corno manso
("tame horned") is used to indicate those men who, although cheated by their
partners, come to accept it as a fact of their lives.

The Spanish word cornudo is used to describe a male partner whose female
partner is sexually unfaithful. A consenting cuckold, cabrÃ³n, has such an
offensive nuance that it is a taboo word rarely used with its original
meaning, "billy goat". However, according to the tone and the relation to the
addressed, it can be even laudatory.

The Chinese term for "cuckold" is literally translated to "wearing a green
hat" (æ´ç¶ å¸½, dÃ i lÇ mÃ o).[1] It is because of this that it is extremely
rare to see any Chinese man wearing a green hat.[2] Chinese Roman Catholic
bishops, who in ecclesiastical heraldry would normally have a green galero
above their arms, have dispensation to use some other color of galero on
account of this custom. Violet is mostly used for Chinese bishops.

In Trinidad & Tobago the term "horn" is used in conjunction with cuckolds, or
anyone of either sex who has a cheating spouse. Other uses include "to horn"
(to sleep with someone else's spouse), "horning" (the act of cheating on your
spouse), "horner-man" (a man who is sleeping with someone else's spouse) and
"horner-woman" (a woman who is sleeping with someone else's spouse), "to get
horn", "to take (a) horn". It is usually used in a pejorative sense. Numerous
calypsoes have been written about the topic; the most famous being "Horn Me
Sandra" by the calypsonian known as Lord Kitchener.

This horn analogy extends to Turkey, where the cuckolded husband is termed
boynuzlu, "horned one".

## [edit] Cuckoldry as a fetish

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(September 2007)  
Cuckoldry as a fetish has been around since at least the time of Leopold von
Sacher-Masoch (the writer after whom the term masochism is coined). Sacher-
Masoch's wife, Aurora RÃ¼melin, recounts in her memoirs multiple instances of
Sacher-Masoch asking, begging and even threatening her to make her cuckold him
so he could experience the pain and humiliation of the act. To that end,
Sacher-Masoch created multiple opportunities for the adulterous act to occur,
none of which were successful. While RÃ¼melin indulged her husband in many of
his masochistic requests, due in large part because of her dependence on him
to financially support her and her children, she steadfastly refused to
cuckold him. RÃ¼melin's refusal to succumb to Sacher-Masoch's cuckolding
fantasies was one of the causes of their separation and her subsequent descent
into poverty.[citation needed]

The term has acquired additional meanings within certain sub-cultures,
referring to couples wherein the female is dominant and she takes on
additional partners, while the male takes on a submissive role where he is
monogamous to her, or only becoming involved sexually when it is felt to be
emotionally supportive of her and her lover, or remaining altogether celibate.

The wife who enjoys cuckoldry is sometimes referred to as a hotwife or
cuckoldress. In a broader context, the contrast between a cuckold and the
additional male participant is sometimes used to summarize an individual's
personality or behavior and the variability commonly seen in male libidos: the
cuckold or beta male suggesting a lack of masculinity or alpha male
representing that missing masculinity.

Cuckolding among female-dominant couples differs from the original definition
of cuckolding in that many of these men are willing to be cuckolded by their
wives, sometimes as part of the their sexual fantasy and sometimes because
they gain genuine sexual arousal through being humiliated by his wife being
better sexually fulfilled with a potentially superior male, or by the wife's
domination of her husband by forcing him to give her oral sex after she has
had unprotected intercourse with her lover, a process known as 'cleaning up'.

The desire for the male to enjoy being cuckolded is more related to sexual
gratification and less about interpersonal ideals (respect, commisary, between
the partners).

In most modern cases of cuckolding, the husband usually finds pleasure through
that of his wife and they (the wife and extramarital participant) may both
enjoy attempting to actively include him in the act of cuckolding as much as
possible through serving her. Some common themes include praising her
appearance, attempting to stimulate her sexually at the same time as the
additional participant, and generally being engrossed in her enjoyment. It is
common for the male to be more absorbed with the females pleasure than his
own.

While the word defines the cuckold husband as being submissive, powerless
and/or in need of humiliation to receive stimulation, contemporary practice
suggests that many in such a relationship are experiencing something
altogether different from cuckoldry. Rather than passively acceding to the
infidelity and desires of an errant wife, this cuckold is more in keeping with
the male partners defined in polyamorous, open, or swinging relationships.
[3][4][5]

### [edit] Cuckquean

The term "cuckold" is exclusively used for a male whose wife takes other
partners; a woman whose husband strays in such fashion is known as a
cuckquean. [6]

## [edit] See also

  * Adultery
  * Cuckoo
  * Candaulism
  * Crime of passion
  * Dominant cuckold
  * Erotic humiliation
  * Female dominance
  * Humiliation
  * Human sexual behavior
  * Human sexuality
  * Open marriage
  * Paternity fraud
  * Paternity test
  * Polyamory
  * Swinging

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Sommer, Matthew Harvey (2002). Sex, Law, and Society in Late Imperial China. Stanford: Stanford University Press. pp. 218\. ISBN 0804745595. http://books.google.ca/books?id=E6ClbegXuWUC. Retrieved on 2008-07-27.
  2. ^ Gee, Marcus (29 August 2007). "Green hats and other ways to blow a deal in China". Scripps Newspaper Group Online. http://www.scrippsnews.com/node/26365. Retrieved on 2007-11-22.
  3. ^ http://blogs.myfirstthreesome.co.uk/2008/10/11/cuckold-basics-part-1-an-overiew/
  4. ^ http://blogs.myfirstthreesome.co.uk/2008/09/25/cuckold-basics/
  5. ^ http://blogs.myfirstthreesome.co.uk/2008/04/06/a-further-definition-of-cuckold/
  6. ^ Savage, Dan (2007-12-27). "Savage Love: Risky Business". http://www.thestranger.com/seattle/SavageLove?oid=469975. Retrieved on 2008-06-02.

## [edit] External links

  * Take My Wife, Please: The Rise of Cuckolding Culture.
  * Hotwives, Cuckold Husbands.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuckold"

Categories: Marriage | Sexual fidelity

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles
needing additional references from April 2008 | Cleanup from October 2006 |
All pages needing cleanup | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles
with unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles that may contain
original research since September 2007 | All articles that may contain
original research | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Walon

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 13:15.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



