
# Vivienne Westwood

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2008)  
Vivienne Westwood  
<IMG>  
Born 8 April 1941 (1941-04-08) (age 67)  
Tintwistle, Derbyshire, England, United Kingdom  
Nationality British  
Education University of Westminster, Middlesex University  
Labels Vivienne Westwood  
Awards British Fashion Designer of the year (In her second Life) 1990, 1991
and 2006.  
Dame Vivienne Westwood, DBE, RDI (born 8 April 1941) is a British fashion
designer largely responsible for bringing modern punk and new wave fashions
into the mainstream.[1]

She is linked with the Sex Pistols via Malcolm McLaren and their SEX boutique
on Kings Road, Chelsea in London during the 1970s. The shop was at 430 Kings
Road.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life
  * 2 Malcolm McLaren
  * 3 Punk
  * 4 Artistic collections
  * 5 Artistic influence
  * 6 Sex and the City
  * 7 Political involvement
  * 8 Recognition
  * 9 Children
  * 10 Controversy
  * 11 References
  * 12 External links

  
### [edit] Early life

Westwood was born Vivienne Isabel Swire in the village of Tintwistle, Cheshire
(now in the county of Derbyshire) on 8 April 1941. She studied at the Harrow
School of Art, later to become the University of Westminster for one term.
Vivienne went on to attend Middlesex University Trent Park College and later
taught at a primary school in North London. She loved teaching.

### [edit] Malcolm McLaren

Vivienne's first husband was Derek Westwood, with whom she had one child, Ben.
Their marriage lasted three years. She then met Malcolm McLaren, later known
for being the manager for punk band The Sex Pistols. The two lived in a
council flat in Clapham and had a son named Joseph. Westwood continued to
teach until 1971, when Malcolm decided to open a shop, Let It Rock (also known
as Sex, Too Fast To Live Too Young To Die, Seditionaries) where Westwood began
to sell her outrageous designs. During this period, Westwood, McLaren, and
artist Jamie Reid were influenced by the Situationists. She still owns the
shop, which is at 430 King's Road, and sells her Anglomania label from there.
The shop is now known as World's End.

### [edit] Punk

The Punk style began to gain notoriety when the Sex Pistols wore clothes from
Westwood and McLaren's shop at their first gig. The "punk style" included BDSM
fashion, bondage gear, safety pins, razor blades, bicycle or lavatory chains
on clothing and spiked dog collars for jewelry, as well as outrageous make-up
and hair. The inclusion of more traditional elements of Scottish design, such
as tartan fabric, amongst the more unusual elements of her style only served
to make the overall effect of her designs more shocking.

Together, Westwood and McLaren worked to revolutionise fashion, and the impact
is still felt today. She has only a few exclusive shops, including three in
London, three in Manchester, and one each in Liverpool, Newcastle, Glasgow and
Leeds. A ninth opened in FH Mall, Nottingham, on 20 March 2008, and a tenth in
Blake street, York, on 11 September 2008. Westwood modernised historical 17th
and 18th century cutting principles. Her latest collection was about "gold and
treasure, adventure and exploration". Other influences in Westwood's work have
included Peru, feminine figure, velvet and knitwear.

### [edit] Artistic collections

The first major Retrospective of her work was shown in 2004â5 at the
Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and the National Gallery of Australia. The
exhibition was made up of around 145 complete outfits, grouped into the
themes, from the early 1970s to the present day, drawn from her own personal
archive and the V&A's extensive collection. They range from early punk
garments to glamorous "historical" evening gowns. The retrospective is touring
the world and is set to continue until 2008.

Her Autumn/Winter 2005/06 Propaganda Collection drew inspiration from her
archive, reinterpreting designs using Wolfordâs exclusive knitting
technology, who she has worked in close collaboration with since 2003. In
2006, collaborated with Nine West. These shoes are not designed directly by
Westwood, however, the Nine West brand name shares its label with Westwood.
Her hats for Gold Label and MAN are created by Prudence Millinery for Vivienne
Westwood.

In December 2003, she and the Wedgwood pottery company launched a series of
tea sets featuring her designs.

### [edit] Artistic influence

Throughout her carer, Westwood has been influential in launching the careers
of other designers into the British fashion industry. Most notably, she
employed the services of Patrick Cox to design shoes for her Clint Eastwood
collection in 1984. The result was a prototype of the nine inch heeled shoes
in which supermodel Naomi Campbell famously fell during a Westwood fashion
show in Paris in 1994.

In May 2006, Westwood wrote a poem and provided personal photographs
eulogising Swallows Wood, a Nature Reserve near Tintwistle where she was born
and grew up. The Reserve is threatened with destruction by the construction of
the Longdendale Bypass.

### [edit] Sex and the City

Demonstrating the impact of her long career, Westwood's designs were featured
in the 2008 film adaptation of the award winning television series Sex and the
City.

In the movie, Carrie Bradshaw becomes engaged to long term lover Mr. Big.
Being a writer at Vogue, her editor invites her to model wedding dresses for
an upcoming article called "The Last Single Girl". One of the dresses featured
in the photo shoot is a design made by Vivienne Westwood and it is
subsequently sent to Carrie as a gift, with a handwritten note from Westwood
herself. Although she has already picked an outfit for the wedding, Carrie
immediately decides to wear the Westwood gown instead.

Despite being invited to participate in the making of the movie, Westwood was
unimpressed with the costuming by renowned stylist Patricia Field. She walked
out of the film's London premiere after 10 minutes, publicly criticising the
clothing featured as being frumpy and boring. The wedding dress has
subsequently become widely recognised as one of the movie's most iconic
features and has led Westwood to approach the producers about being involved
in making a sequel. [2]

### [edit] Political involvement

Westwood is also widely known as a political activist. On Easter Sunday 2008,
she campaigned in person at the biggest Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament
demonstration in ten years, at the Atomic Weapons Establishment, Aldermaston
in Berkshire, UK.[3]

In September 2005, Westwood joined forces with the British civil rights group
Liberty and launched exclusive limited design T-shirts and baby wear bearing
the slogan I AM NOT A TERRORIST, please don't arrest me. Westwood said she was
supporting the campaign and defending habeas corpus. "When I was a schoolgirl
my history teacher, Mr. Scott, began to take classes in civic affairs. The
first thing he explained to us was the fundamental rule of law embodied in
habeas corpus. He spoke with pride of civilisation and democracy. The hatred
of arbitrary arrest by the lettres de cachet of the French monarchy caused the
storming of the Bastille. We can only take democracy for granted if we insist
on our liberty", she said.[4] The sale of the Â£50 T-shirts raised funds for
the organisation. Dame Vivienne has recently stated on television that she has
transferred her long standing support for the Labour Party to the Conservative
Party, over the issues of civil liberties and human rights.[5]

### [edit] Recognition

In 2007 Glossopdale Community College named one of its newly created houses,
Westwood, after Vivienne. Westwood accepted a DBE in the 2006 New Year's
Honours List for services to fashion, and has thrice earned the award for
British Designer of the Year. On a more personal level, Westwood is the
godmother of highfashion model and socialite lady Elissa Spencer-Wilhelmsen
Ainsworth, and was the one who discovered designer Rosamund Lodge-Ainsworth
who happens to be Lady Elissa's sister in law, after marrying lord Philip
Spencer-Wilhelmsen Ainsworth. Westwood designed the wedding dress together
with the bride, and attended the wedding along with her sons like normal
guests.

## [edit] Children

  * Ben Westwood, son of Vivienne and Derek Westwood, is a photographer of erotica.
  * Joseph Corre, son of Vivienne Westwood and Malcolm McLaren, founder of lingerie brand Agent Provocateur.

## [edit] Controversy

Notorious for going knicker-less, she caused a stir in 1992 when she came to
collect the OBE, and twirled to reveal all. After being made a Dame in 2006 by
the Prince of Wales she disclosed that she was knicker-less again. [6]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://www.metmuseum.org/TOAH/HD/vivw/hd_vivw.htm
  2. ^ http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/daily/090107-vivienne-westwood-to-write-satc-seq.aspx
  3. ^ Vivienne Westwood rallies at CND's Easter Monday demonstration in Berkshire (Vogue.com UK)
  4. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4287446.stm
  5. ^ New Conservative Vivienne Westwood has something to get off her chest (Vogue.com UK)
  6. ^ "Vivienne Westwood collects royal honour wearing no knickers - again". http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in_article_id=389954&in_page_id=1770.

## [edit] External links

  * Vivienne Westwood Official Vivienne Westwood website
  * Hervia - Leading Franchise and Authorised Online store for Vivienne Westwood
  * Paris Fashion Show 2007: Vivienne Westwood catwalk
  * The Incomplete Sordid works of Vivienne Westwood & Malcolm McLaren for their stores SEX and Seditionaries
  * "Vivienne Westwood exhibition website, featuring resources and activities". Victoria and Albert Museum. http://www.vam.ac.uk/vastatic/microsites/1231_vivienne_westwood/.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vivienne_Westwood"

Categories: 1941 births | Living people | Alumni of Middlesex University |
Alumni of the University of Westminster | English fashion designers | Shoe
designers | Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire | Sex Pistols |
People from Cheshire | People from Derbyshire

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Brezhoneg
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 06:24.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



