
# Clara Rockmore

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Clara Rockmore (born Clara Reisenberg, March 9, 1911 â May 10, 1998[1]) is
generally considered to be the most accomplished performer ever of the
theremin electronic musical instrument.

## Contents

  * 1 Biography
  * 2 Albums
  * 3 Film and video
  * 4 References
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Biography

Born Clara Reisenberg, in Vilnius, Lithuania, Rockmore was a child prodigy on
the violin and entered the Imperial conservatory of Saint Petersburg at the
age of five. She studied violin under the virtuoso Leopold Auer, and remains
to this day the youngest student ever to be admitted to the institution.
Unfortunately, bone problems due to childhood malnutrition forced her to
abandon violin performance past her teen years. That however led her to
discover the newborn electronic instrument and arguably become the greatest
ever virtuosa of the theremin.

Rockmore had several gifts that enabled her to play the theremin so well. Her
classical training gave her an advantage over the many theremin performers who
lacked this background. She possessed absolute pitch from birth, helpful in
playing an instrument that generates tones of any pitch throughout its entire
range, including those that lie between the conventional notes. She had
extremely precise, rapid control of her movements, important in playing an
instrument that depends on the performer's motion and proximity rather than
touch. She also had the advantage of working directly with LÃ©on Theremin from
the early days of the instrument's commercial development in the United
States. Rockmore, as the mature musician she was, saw the limitations of the
original instrument and helped to develop the instrument to fulfill her needs,
making several suggestions to improve the theremin as a performing instrument.
Such suggestions, like a faster volume antenna, wider musical range, and
control over the instrument's tone colour were incorporated by the inventor in
later versions. She had a special theremin tailored by Leon Theremin himself
to meet her unique requirements.

She developed a whole technique for playing the instrument, including a
fingering system, which allowed her to accurately perform fast passages and
large note leaps without the much known portamento on theremin.

Rockmore was without peer as a performer in the early decades of the
instrument's use. While many listeners have heard the theremin played poorly
or used mostly as a spooky special-effects device, Rockmore used it to perform
classical works. Under her control, the theremin sounded like a blend of the
cello, violin and human voice.

She died in New York City on May 10, 1998.

## [edit] Albums

<IMG>

The Art of the Theremin  
1977

<IMG>

Clara Rockmore's Lost Theremin Album  
2006  
## [edit] Film and video

  * Martin, Steven M. (Director). (1995). Theremin: An Electronic Odyssey [Film and DVD]. MGM.
  * Moog, Robert (Producer). (1998). Clara Rockmore: The Greatest Theremin Virtuosa [Videotape (VHS)]. Moog Music and Little Big Films.
  * Moog, Robert (Producer). (2005). Two Theremin Classics [DVD]. Moog Music and Little Big Films.

## [edit] References

  * Glinsky, Albert (2000). Theremin: Ether Music and Espionage. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02582-2.
  * Moog, Robert (2002-10-27). ""In Clara's Words: An Interview with Clara Rockmore"". http://www.thereminvox.com/article/articleview/21/1/22/. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.
  * Strauss, D. (2006-06-01). ""Clara Rockmore"". http://remixmag.com/artists/remix_clara_rockmore/. Retrieved on 2006-10-19.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Glinsky p340

## [edit] External links

  * The Official Nadia Reisenberg Clara Rockmore Foundation Website
  * A Short Photo-biography of Clara Rockmore
  * In Clara's Words \- An interview Clara Rockmore gave to Bob Moog in 1977.
  * In Claraâs Home â Her Last Years, and the Summer of 1997 \- An essay, written by Steve J. Sherman, Clara Rockmore's great-nephew and Nadia Reisenberg's grandson, providing an in-depth account of Clara Rockmoreâs life during her last decade, up until her death in 1998.
  * A MySpace page devoted to Clara Rockmore
  * Nadia Reisenberg / Clara Rockmore Foundation
  * Streamable NPR "All Songs Considered" show featuring 'Summertime' performed by Clara Rockmore
  * Clara Rockmore at ThereminWorld

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clara_Rockmore"

Categories: 1911 births | 1998 deaths | Electronic musicians | Theremin
players

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 March 2009, at 13:29 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



