
# Gaia (mythology)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Gaia.

Gaia  
<IMG>  
Goddess of the Earth  
Abode Earth  
Consort Uranus  
Parents Chaos  
Children Uranus, Oceanus, Coeus, Crius, Hyperion  
Roman equivalent Terra  
This box: view â¢ talk  
Greek deities  
series  
  * Titans and Olympians
  * Aquatic deities
  * Personified concepts
  * Other deities

  
Primordial deities  
  * Chaos
  * Aether
  * Gaia
  * Uranus

  * Eros
  * Erebus
  * Nyx
  * Tartarus

  
Chthonic deities  
Hades and Persephone,  
Gaia, Demeter, Hecate,  
Iacchus, Trophonius,  
Triptolemus, Erinyes  
Gaia (pronounced /ËgeÉªÉ/ or /ËgaÉªÉ/) ("land" or "earth", from the
Ancient Greek ÎÎ±Ã®Î±; also GÃ¦a or Gea (Modern Greek Îá¿)[1] is the primal
Greek goddess personifying the Earth.

Gaia is a primordial and chthonic deity in the Ancient Greek pantheon and
considered a Mother Goddess or Great Goddess.

Her equivalent in the Roman pantheon was Terra.

## Contents

  * 1 In Greek mythology
  * 2 Family Tree
  * 3 Argive genealogy in Greek mythology
  * 4 Interpretations
  * 5 In other cultures
  * 6 In Neopaganism
  * 7 In modern ecological theory
  * 8 In Literature
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] In Greek mythology

<IMG>

<IMG>

Tellus Mater, the Roman equivalent of Gaia, steps out of her chariot \- detail
of a sarcophagus in Glyptotheck in Munich

Hesiod's Theogony (116ff) tells how, after Chaos, arose broad-breasted Gaia
the everlasting foundation of the gods of Olympus. She brought forth Uranus,
the starry sky, her equal, to cover her, the hills, and the fruitless deep of
the Sea, Pontus, "without sweet union of love," out of her own self through
parthenogenesis. But afterwards, as Hesiod tells it, she lay with her son,
Uranus, and bore the World-Ocean Oceanus, Coeus and Crius and the Titans
Hyperion and Iapetus, Theia and Rhea, Themis, Mnemosyne, and Phoebe of the
golden crown, and lovely Tethys. "After them was born Cronus the wily,
youngest and most terrible of her children, and he hated his lusty sire."

Hesiod mentions Gaia's further offspring conceived with Uranus: first the
giant one-eyed Cyclopes: Brontes ("thunderer"), Steropes ("lightning") and the
"bright" Arges: "Strength and might and craft were in their works." Then he
adds the three terrible hundred-handed sons of Earth and Heaven, the
Hecatonchires: Cottus, Briareos and Gyges, each with fifty heads. Uranus hid
the Hecatonchires and the Cyclopes in Tartarus so that they would not see the
light, rejoicing in this evil doing. This caused pain to Gaia (Tartarus was
her bowels) so she created grey flint (or adamantine) and shaped a great flint
sickle, gathering together Cronos and his brothers to ask them to obey her.
Only Cronos, the youngest, had the daring to take the flint sickle she made,
and castrate his father as he approached Gaia to have intercourse with her.
And from the drops of blood and semen, Gaia brought forth still more progeny,
the strong Erinyes and the armoured Gigantes and the ash-tree Nymphs called
the Meliae.

From the testicles of Uranus in the sea came forth Aphrodite. For this, a
Greek etymologist urged, Uranus called his sons "Titans," meaning "strainers"
for they strained and did presumptuously a fearful deed, for which vengeance
would come afterwards; for, as Uranus had been deposed by his son, Cronos, so
was Cronos destined to be overthrown by Zeus, the son born to him by his
sister-wife Rhea. In the meantime, the Titans released the Cyclopes from
Tartarus, and Cronos was awarded the kingship among them, beginning a Golden
Age.

After Uranus's castration, Gaia gave birth to Echidna and Typhon by Tartarus.
By Pontus, Gaia birthed the sea-deities Nereus, Thaumas, Phorcys, Ceto, and
Eurybia. Aergia, a goddess of sloth and laziness, is the daughter of Aether
and Gaia.

Zeus hid Elara, one of his lovers, from Hera by hiding her under the earth.
His son by Elara, the giant Tityas, is therefore sometimes said to be a son of
Gaia, the earth goddess, and Elara.

Gaia also made Aristaeus immortal.

Gaia is believed by some sources (Joseph Fontenrose 1959 and others) to be the
original deity behind the Oracle at Delphi. She passed her powers on to,
depending on the source, Poseidon, Apollo or Themis. Apollo is the best-known
as the oracle power behind Delphi, long established by the time of Homer,
having killed Gaia's child Python there and usurped the chthonic power. Hera
punished Apollo for this by sending him to King Admetus as a shepherd for nine
years.

Oaths sworn in the name of Gaia, in ancient Greece, were considered the most
binding of all.

In classical art Gaia was represented in one of two ways. In Athenian vase
painting she was shown as a matronly woman only half risen from the earth,
often in the act of handing the baby Erichthonius (a future king of Athens) to
Athena to foster (see example below).

Later in mosaic representations she appears as a woman reclining upon the
earth surrounded by a host of Carpi, infant gods of the fruits of the earth
(see example below under Interpretations).

  

## [edit] Family Tree

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gaia hands her newborn, Erichtonius, to Athena as Hephaestus watches - an
Attic red-figure stamnos, 470â460 BC

<IMG>

<IMG>

Aion and Gaia with four children, perhaps the personified seasons, mosaic from
a Roman villa in Sentinum, first half of the 3rd century BC, (Munich
Glyptothek, Inv. W504)

Gaia is the titan of Earth and these are her offspring as related in various
myths. Some are related consistently, some are mentioned only in minor
variants of myths, and others are related in variants that are considered to
reflect a confusion of the subject or association.

  * Through parthenogenesis
    * Uranus
    * Pontus
    * Ourea
  * With Elara
    * Tityas
  * With Oceanus
    * Creusa
    * Spercheus
  * With Pontus
    * Ceto
    * Eurybia
    * Phorcys
    * Nereus
    * Thaumas
  * With Aether
    * Aergia
  * With Poseidon
    * Antaeus
    * Charybdis
  * With Tartarus
    * Echidna
    * Typhon
  * With Uranus
    * Cyclopes
      * Arges
      * Brontes
      * Steropes
    * Hecatonchires
      * Briareus
      * Cottus
      * Gyes
    * Elder Muses 
      * Mneme
      * Melete
      * Aoide
    * Titans
      * Coeus
      * Crius
      * Cronus
      * Hyperion
      * Iapetus
      * Mnemosyne
      * Oceanus
      * Phoebe
      * Rhea
      * Tethys
      * Theia
      * Themis
  * With Hephaestus
    * Erichthonius of Athens
  * With Zeus
    * Manes father of Atys
  * Unknown father? or Through Parthenogenesis
    * Mimas
    * Cranaus
    * Pheme
    * Kekrops
    * Amphictyon
    * Python

  

## [edit] Argive genealogy in Greek mythology

Argive genealogy in Greek mythology  
Uranus

Gaia  
Cronus

Rhea

Oceanus

Tethys  
Memphis

Libya

Poseidon

Nilus

Inachus

Melia  
Belus

Agenor

Telephassa

Phoroneus

Io

Zeus  
Cadmus

Cilix

Europa

Phoenix

Achiroe

Epaphus  
Harmonia

Danaus

Aegyptus  
Polydorus  
Agave

Hypermnestra

Lynceus  
AutonoÃ«  
Ino

Abas  
Semele  
Proetus  
  

## [edit] Interpretations

Etymologically Gaia is a compound word of two elements. Ge, meaning "Earth",
is found in many neologisms, such as Geography (Ge/graphos = writing about
Earth) and Geology (Ge/logos = words about the Earth). *Ge is a pre-Greek
substrate word that some relate to the Sumerian Ki, also meaning Earth. Aia is
a derivative of an Indo-European stem meaning "Grandmother". The full
etymology of Gaia would, therefore, appear to have been "Grandmother Earth"
[2]. Some sources, such as anthropologists James Mellaart, Marija Gimbutas and
Barbara Walker, claim that Gaia as the Mother Earth is a later form of a pre-
Indo-European Great Mother who had been venerated in Neolithic times, but this
point is controversial in the academic community. Belief in a nurturing Earth
Mother is often a feature of modern Neopagan "Goddess" worship, which is
typically linked by practitioners of this religion to the Neolithic goddess
theory. For more information, see the article Goddess.

Hesiod's separation of Rhea from Gaia was not rigorously followed, even by the
Greek mythographers themselves. Modern mythographers like Karl Kerenyi or Carl
A. P. Ruck and Danny Staples, as well as an earlier generation influenced by
Frazer's The Golden Bough, interpret the goddesses Demeter the "mother,"
Persephone the "daughter" and Hecate the "crone," as understood by the Greeks,
to be three aspects of a former Great Goddess, who could be identified as Rhea
or as Gaia herself. Such tripartite goddesses are also a part of Celtic
mythology and may stem from the Proto-Indo-Europeans. In Anatolia (modern
Turkey), Rhea was known as Cybele, a goddess derived from Mesopotamian Kubau,
Hurrian Kebat or Kepa. The Greeks never forgot that the Mountain Mother's
ancient home was Crete, where a figure some identified with Gaia had been
worshipped as Potnia Theron (the "Mistress of the Animals") or simply Potnia
("Mistress"), an appellation that could be applied in later Greek texts to
Demeter, Artemis or Athena. In Rome the imported Phrygian goddess Cybele was
venerated as Magna Mater, the "Great Mother" or as Mater Nostri, "Our Mother"
and identified with Roman Ceres, the grain goddess who was an approximate
counterpart of Greek Demeter, but with differing aspects and venerated with a
different cult. Her worship was brought to Rome following an Augury of the
Cumaean Sibyl that Rome could not defeat Hannibal the Carthaginian until the
worship of Cybele came to Rome. As a result she was a favoured divinity of
Roman legionaries, and her worship spread from Roman military encampments and
military colonies.

  

## [edit] In other cultures

The idea that the fertile earth itself is female, nurturing mankind, was not
limited to the Greco-Roman world. These traditions themselves were greatly
influenced by earlier cultures in the Central area of the ancient Middle East.
In Sumerian mythology Tiamat influenced Biblical notions of The Deeps in
Genesis 1\. The title "The mother of life" was later given to the Akkadian
Goddess Kubau, and hence to Hurrian Hepa, emerging as Hebrew Eve (Heva) and
Phygian Kubala (Cybele). In Norse mythology the earth is personified as
JÃ¶rÃ°, HlÃ¶Ã°yn, and FjÃ¶rgyn and FjÃ¶rgynn. The Irish Celts worshipped Danu,
whilst the Welsh Celts worshipped DÃ´n. Dana played an important part in Hindu
mythology and hints of their names throughout Europe, such as the Don river,
the Danube River, the Dnestr and Dnepr, suggest that they stemmed from an
ancient Proto-Indo-European goddess [3]. In Lithuanian mythology Gaia - Å½emÄ
is daughter of Sun and Moon. Also she is wife of Dangus (Varuna). In Pacific
cultures, the Earth Mother was known under as many names and with as many
attributes as cultures who revered her for example MÄori whose creation myth
included Papatuanuku, partner to Ranginui - the Sky Father. In South America
in the Andes a cult of the Pachamama still survives (in regions of Bolivia,
Peru, Ecuador, Argentina and Chile). The name comes from Pacha (Quechua for
change, epoch) and Mama (mother). While ancient Mexican cultures referred to
Mother Earth as Tonantzin Tlalli that means "Revered Mother Earth".

In Indian religions, the Mother of all creation is called "Gayatri", a
surprisingly close form of Gaia.

Only in Egyptian Mythology is the reverse true - Geb is the Earth Father while
Nut is the Sky Mother.

Carl Gustav Jung suggested that the archetypal mother was a part of the
collective unconscious of all humans, and various Jungian students, e.g. Erich
Neumann and Ernst Whitmont have argued that such mother imagery underpins many
mythologies, and precedes the image of the paternal "father", in such
religious systems. Such speculations help explain the universality of such
mother goddess imagery around the world.

The Upper Paleolithic Venus figurines have been sometimes explained as
depictions of an Earth Goddess similar to Gaia[4]

  

## [edit] In Neopaganism

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2006)  
Many Neopagans actively worship Gaia. Beliefs regarding Gaia vary, ranging
from the common Wiccan belief that Gaia is the Earth (or in some cases the
spiritual embodiment of the earth, or the Goddess of the Earth), to the
broader Neopagan belief that Gaia is the goddess of all creation, a Mother
Goddess from which all other gods spring. Gaia is sometimes thought to embody
the planets and the Earth, and sometimes thought to embody the entire
universe. Worship of Gaia is varied, ranging from prostration to druidic
ritual.

Unlike Zeus, a roving nomad god of the open sky, Gaia was manifest in enclosed
spaces: the house, the courtyard, the womb, the cave. Her sacred animals are
the serpent, the lunar bull, the pig, and bees. In her hand the narcotic poppy
may be transmuted to a pomegranate.

Some who worship Gaia attempt to get closer to Mother Earth by becoming
unconcerned with material things and more in tune with nature. Others who
worship Gaia recognize Gaia as a great goddess and practice rituals commonly
associated with other forms of worship. Many sects worship Gaia, even more
than worship Themis, Artemis, and Hera.[citation needed] Some common forms of
worship may include prostration, attempting to reach a greater connection to
the earth, shamanistic practices, tithing, praising and praying, creating
inspired works of art dedicated to the goddess, burning oils and incense,
rearing plants and gardens, the creation and maintaining of Sacred Groves.
Other forms of worship may indeed be common, as worship of Gaia is very broad
and can take many forms.

  

## [edit] In modern ecological theory

Main article: Gaia hypothesis

The mythological name was revived in 1979 by James Lovelock, in Gaia: A New
Look at Life on Earth; his Gaia hypothesis was supported by Lynn Margulis. The
hypothesis proposes that living organisms and inorganic material are part of a
dynamic system that shapes the Earth's biosphere, and maintains the Earth as a
fit environment for life. In some Gaia theory approaches the Earth itself is
viewed as an organism with self-regulatory functions. Further books by
Lovelock and others popularized the Gaia Hypothesis, which was widely embraced
and passed into common usage as part of the heightened awareness of
environmental concerns of the 1990s.

  

## [edit] In Literature

Gaia (Gaea) is referenced through the re-naming of a character in Ayn Rand's
science fiction novella, "Anthem."

Gaia, a preternaturally beautiful and highly skilled teenaged girl born
without the fear gene, is also the protagonist of Francine Pascal's young
adult series, "Fearless."

Gaia is described as the Earth Mother and aids the protagonists in Chris D'
Lacey's The Fire Within series. She takes on many animal forms, such as an
albino hedgehog (dubbed 'Spikey') and the legendary mate of one of the seven
bears that ruled the ice, Sunasala.

  

## [edit] See also

  * Dewi Shri
  * Gaia hypothesis
  * Gaia philosophy
  * Terra (mythology)

  

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The spelling Gea is not normally used in modern English.
  2. ^ This topic has been discussed on various Indo-European fora such as cybalist
  3. ^ Indo-European scholars at sybalist suggest *Don may come from a Proto-Indo-European root meaning "Swift" as applied to the flowing rivers mentioned
  4. ^ Christopher L. C. E. Witcombe, "Women in the Stone Age," in the essay "The Venus of Willendorf" (accessed March 13, 2008)

  * Joseph Fontenrose, Python: A Study of Delphic Myth and its Origins, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1959; reprint 1980
  * Karl Kerenyi, The Gods of the Greeks 1951
  * Carl A.P. Ruck and Danny Staples, The World of Classical Myth, 1994.
  * Gaia's voice is heard throughout the first God of War, voiced by Linda Hunt, telling the story of the main character's, Kratos, journey from Spartan general all the way through to his becoming the new god of war. She also appears in God of War 2 and helps Kratos get out of Hades and on his way to exacting revenge against Zeus

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Gaia  
  * Theoi Project, Gaia references to Gaia in classical literature and art

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaia_(mythology)"

Categories: Greek mythology | Creator goddesses | Greek goddesses | Nature
goddesses | Earth goddesses | Oracular goddesses | Names of God | Greek
loanwords

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles
needing additional references from June 2006 | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 05:27.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



