
# Grey's Anatomy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article's introduction section may not adequately summarize its contents.
To comply with Wikipedia's lead section guidelines, please consider expanding
the lead to provide an accessible overview of the article's key points. (April
2009)  
This article is about the television series. For the anatomy textbook, see
Gray's Anatomy. For the 1996 film, see Gray's Anatomy (film).

Greyâs Anatomy  
<IMG>  
Greyâs Anatomy intertitle  
Genre Medical drama  
Created by Shonda Rhimes  
Starring Ellen Pompeo  
Sandra Oh  
Katherine Heigl  
Justin Chambers  
T. R. Knight  
Chandra Wilson  
James Pickens, Jr.  
Sara RamÃ­rez  
Eric Dane  
Chyler Leigh  
Kevin McKidd  
Patrick Dempsey  
Narrated by Ellen Pompeo  
(as Meredith), occasionally narrated by other main cast characters  
Theme music composer Psapp  
Opening theme "Cosy in the Rocket"  
Country of origin <IMG> United States  
Language(s) English  
No. of seasons 5  
No. of episodes 97 (List of episodes)  
Production  
Executive producer(s) Shonda Rhimes  
Betsy Beers  
Mark Gordon  
Krista Vernoff  
Rob Corn  
Mark Wilding  
Location(s) Los Angeles  
Running time approx. 43 minutes  
Broadcast  
Original channel ABC  
Picture format 480i (SDTV)  
720p (HDTV)  
Audio format Stereo, Dolby Digital 5.1  
Original run March 27, 2005 â present  
Chronology  
Related shows Private Practice  
External links  
Official website  
Greyâs Anatomy is an American primetime medical drama. It debuted on ABC as
a mid-season replacement for Boston Legal on March 27, 2005, immediately
following Desperate Housewives.

The title of the show is inspired by the classic medical textbook Gray's
Anatomy. The series revolves around Dr. Meredith Grey, played by Ellen Pompeo,
who began the show as a surgical intern at Seattle Grace Hospital in Seattle,
Washington.

## Contents

  * 1 Name
  * 2 Cast and characters
  * 3 Seasons
    * 3.1 Season One: 2005
    * 3.2 Season Two: 2005-2006
    * 3.3 Season Three: 2006-2007
    * 3.4 Season Four: 2007-2008
    * 3.5 Season Five: 2008-2009
  * 4 Production
    * 4.1 Locations
    * 4.2 Rise to prominence
  * 5 Dismissals
    * 5.1 Isaiah Washington
    * 5.2 Brooke Smith
  * 6 Private Practice
    * 6.1 Reception
  * 7 Video game
  * 8 Reception
    * 8.1 U.S. television ratings
    * 8.2 Awards
  * 9 DVD releases
  * 10 Other releases
  * 11 Music
  * 12 References
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] Name

Meredith Grey, a surgical resident, is the title character of the series
Grey's Anatomy; her name is a reference to Henry Gray, the original author of
the textbook Gray's Anatomy. Printed under the current title, "Henry Gray's
Anatomy of the Human Body", as the 40th British edition in September 2008, the
textbook on human anatomy has become a classic in medical schools, since first
being published in 1858.

## [edit] Cast and characters

Main article: List of characters from Grey's Anatomy

The characters of the series include a group of surgical interns and the
various physicians who serve as mentors to the interns in their professional
and personal lives. The show's producers used a "blind-casting" technique,
resulting in a racially diverse cast. All roles for Greyâs Anatomy are cast
without the characters' races being pre-specified, in keeping with creator
Shonda Rhimes's vision of diversity.[1] The five characters who serve as the
series' focal point are Meredith Grey (Ellen Pompeo), Alex Karev (Justin
Chambers), George O'Malley (T. R. Knight), Izzie Stevens (Katherine Heigl) and
Cristina Yang (Sandra Oh). They begin the series as interns at Seattle Grace
Hospital, progressing to residency after their first year in the surgical
program. They are initially mentored by Miranda Bailey (Chandra Wilson), a
general surgeon who becomes the hospital's Chief Resident and later applies
for a pediatric surgery fellowship. The surgical program is run by Chief of
Surgery Richard Webber (James Pickens, Jr.) who has a pre-existing personal
relationship with Meredith, having dated her mother when Meredith was a child.
In Webber's employ are attending physicians Derek Shepherd (Patrick Dempsey)
and Preston Burke (Isaiah Washington), who specialise in neurosurgery and
cardiothoracic surgery respectively. Derek is introduced as Meredith's love
interest, while Preston begins a relationship with Cristina, but ultimately
leaves her at the altar. Washington was written out of the show after
allegedly directing homophobic slurs at Knight.

Introduced in the show's second season are OB-GYN and neonatal surgeon Addison
Montgomery (Kate Walsh), plastic surgeon Mark Sloan (Eric Dane), orthopedic
surgeon Callie Torres (Sara Ramirez) and cardiothoracic surgeon Erica Hahn
(Brooke Smith). Addison is Derek's ex-wife who arrives in Seattle seeking a
reconciliation with him. Walsh left the series in its third season to star in
spin-off Private Practice, but continues to make occasional guest appearances
in Grey's Anatomy. Mark is Derek's former best friend, who aided in the
breakdown of his marriage by having an affair with Addison. Callie is
introduced as a love-interest for George, who she later marries, but
ultimately divorces. Erica replaces Preston as head of cardiothoracic surgery
and begins a lesbian relationship with Callie, however leaves abruptly in the
show's fifth series. Smith's removal from the show was criticized in the media
as revealing an anti-homosexual agenda on the part of ABC.

The fourth season introduces intern Lexie Grey (Chyler Leigh), Meredith's
half-sister. She forms a fast friendship with George, and harbours romantic
feelings towards him which go unreciprocated. She later embarks on a
relationship with Mark. A second intern, Sadie Harris (Melissa George) is
introduced in the show's fifth season, however George's did not go on to
become a series regular, criticizing the show's writers for severely
restricting her character's growth. Also introduced in the show's fifth season
are trauma surgeon Owen Hunt (Kevin McKidd), cardiothoracic surgeon Virginia
Dixon (Mary McDonnell) and pediatric surgeon Arizona Robbins (Jessica
Capshaw). Owen becomes a love-interest for Cristina, Richard attempts to
convince Virginia to replace Erica as head of cardiothoracics, and Arizona
becomes a love-interest for Callie.

## [edit] Seasons

See also: List of Grey's Anatomy episodes

### [edit] Season One: 2005

Main article: Grey's Anatomy (season 1)

    Nielsen Ranking (2004-05 U.S. TV season; based on average total viewers per episode): #9 (18.5 million viewers)[2]
<IMG>

<IMG>

The season 1 cast of Greyâs Anatomy

Season one began airing Sunday, March 27, 2005 and ended on May 22, 2005. The
first season was shortened by the network to nine episodes instead of 14. (The
original season finale was "Bring the Pain.")

Meredith Grey, the daughter of the once-renowned surgeon Ellis Grey, becomes
an intern at the Seattle Grace Hospital. She meets fellow interns Cristina
Yang, Isobel "Izzie" Stevens, and George O'Malley, who become her closest
friends during the intern program. Other characters include Dr. Miranda
Bailey, Alex Karev, an intern who is not very popular with the others
(especially Izzie), and renowned surgeons Dr. Derek Shepherd and Dr. Preston
Burke. The chief of surgery is Richard Webber, who was once more than close
friends with Meredith's mother.

The season chronicles the first few months of the internship program and the
day-to-day life of a surgical intern. Recurring plots include Meredith's
battle to keep her mother's Alzheimer's disease a secret and her relationship
with Dr. Shepherd. Others include George's infatuation with Meredith, Izzie
dealing with the criticism of being a former model, Cristina's relationship
with Burke and her miscarriage, and a power struggle between Dr. Burke and Dr.
Shepherd in the hospital. The season's end introduces Kate Walsh as Dr.
Addison Montgomery-Shepherd, Derek's estranged wife, although for other areas
where the season was aired, Meredith waiting (Season 2, Episode 5) was the
season finale instead.

### [edit] Season Two: 2005-2006

Main article: Grey's Anatomy (season 2)

    Nielsen Ranking (2005-06 U.S. TV season; based on average total viewers per episode): #5 (21.3 million viewers)[3]
<IMG>

<IMG>

The season 2 cast of Greyâs Anatomy

The second season aired Sunday, September 25, 2005, and ended on May 14 and
May 15, 2006 with a three-hour finale spanning both nights. The first season
had originally contained 14 episodes, representing ABC's original midseason
order for the show. However, it was decided to end the season early because
ABC executives wished for the show's first season to end with ABC's Desperate
Housewives (which had the time slot before Greyâs Anatomy for the first two
seasons).

Rather than condensing or throwing out plot lines, Greyâs Anatomy producers
chose to end the first season with the ninth episode and save the following
episodes for the second season. Episodes 10-14 were then held and broadcast as
the first five episodes of Season 2. ABC ordered 22 episodes in addition to
the five being carried over, bringing the total number of episodes for the
second season to 27. Bring the Pain, which aired as the series' 14th episode,
has been cited in series creator Shonda Rhimes' blog as having been originally
intended as the first season finale.[4]

The second season focuses on Meredith and Derek's relationship, which comes to
an abrupt halt when it is revealed that Derek is married to neo-natal surgeon
Addison Montgomery. Izzie and Alex embark on a relationship of their own
(although this is cut short when Izzie falls for heart patient Denny
Duquette), as do Cristina Yang and Preston Burke. Doctor Bailey becomes
pregnant, and more is revealed about her personal life. On some of the weeks
airing after its highly-watched February 5, 2006 post-Super Bowl episode, the
program attracted more viewers than its lead-in, Desperate Housewives.

Once the second season ended on May 15, 2006, the show had two previously
recurring actors, Sara Ramirez (Callie Torres) and Eric Dane (Mark Sloan),
join the regular cast. The series' opening credit sequence was also dropped by
the last half of the second season, replaced by a title card displayed at the
end of the first act and credits displayed over the opening of the second act
of each episode.

### [edit] Season Three: 2006-2007

Main article: Grey's Anatomy (season 3)

    Nielsen Ranking (2006-07 U.S. TV season; based on average total viewers per episode): #4 (22.3 million viewers)[5]
<IMG>

<IMG>

The season 3 cast of Greyâs Anatomy

On May 16, 2006, the morning following the close of the second season, ABC
announced plans for a third season of Greyâs Anatomy to anchor the network's
Thursday evening programming,[6] set to air at 9 p.m. ET. ABC first tested the
series' potential for Thursday audiences on February 9, 2006, as it aired an
encore of the Super Bowl XL-leadout episode titled "It's the End of the
World." The following Thursday, February 16, 2006, the network repeated the
second part of the story arc, "(As We Know It)." Both airings began at 9:30
p.m. ET, and thus positioned Greyâs Anatomy against CBS' CSI: Crime Scene
Investigation and Without a Trace, Fox Network's The OC, and NBC's long-
running medical drama ER. Solid performance on these nights, with the repeat
airings maintaining a strong second-place finish, may have been influential in
the fall scheduling decision.

The move to Thursdays was viewed as a vote of confidence in the series from
ABC, as well as a bid to attract more advertising dollars, since movie studios
heavily advertise movies on Thursday evenings for that weekend's box office.
The move was cited as one factor for competing network NBC's decision to move
its own Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip, originally intended to air Thursdays at
9 p.m. ET. ABC announced on July 18, 2006, that the third season would
premiere on September 21, 2006.

The series assumed its new Thursday slot on July 6, 2006, as part of a two-
hour event featuring a repeat of the pilot episode, "A Hard Day's Night." The
season focused on Izzie's struggle to let go of Denny, Meredith's choice
between Finn and Derek, the ramifications of Burke's injury and the decision
between the four attending surgeons as to the new Chief of Surgery and between
the residents for Chief Resident. Throughout July and August, the series aired
twice weekly â once in the new Thursday time period, and once in its
previous Sunday time period. Greyâs Anatomy performed strongly in the show's
new timeslot in its season premiere. It was able to snatch away the No. 1
position from CSI: Crime Scene Investigation during the 9 p.m. hour, bringing
in an impressive 25.14 million viewers throughout the hour and a strong 10.9
rating in the vital 18-49 demographic. In comparison, CSI's season premiere
earned a competitive 22.04 million total viewership and a 7.5 rating in the
18-49 demographic.[7]

The third season ended on May 17, 2007. As the season came to a close, Burke
called off his wedding to Cristina at the church, Chief Webber stayed on as
the Chief of Surgery, Callie was appointed Chief Resident, and George learned
he failed the final intern exam. The character of Preston Burke was
permanently written out of the show and Isaiah Washington made his final
appearance in the season finale. The relationship between Derek and Meredith,
as well as the triangle between Callie, George, and Izzie were left
unresolved. Addison decides to start a new life in Los Angeles in the spin-off
Private Practice, and her character has since returned twice to Grey's
Anatomy, once in season four and in a multi-episode crossover arc between
Private Practice and Grey's Anatomy during season five of Grey's Anatomy.

### [edit] Season Four: 2007-2008

Main article: Grey's Anatomy (season 4)

    Nielsen Ranking (2007â08 U.S. TV season; based on average total viewers per episode): #8 (15.9 million viewers) [8]
<IMG>

<IMG>

The season 4 cast of Greyâs Anatomy

The show was renewed for a fourth season, with the first episode airing on
September 27, 2007.

In the official blog, creator Shonda Rhimes gave a few clues as to plot lines
for season four, indicating that Mark Sloan will be given a bigger role and in
the aftermath of the finale, events for Derek Shepherd and Cristina Yang will
be "interesting to watch."[9] Due to her producing responsibilities on both
Greyâs and the spin-off, Rhimes assigned the day-to-day showrunning duties
to writer and executive producer Krista Vernoff.[10]

For the first time in the show's history, two of the series regulars were not
returning. Kate Walsh's character was transferred to the Greyâs Anatomy
spin-off, Private Practice. On June 7, 2007, it was announced that Isaiah
Washington's contract had not been renewed.[11] Former Reunion star, Chyler
Leigh, guest starred in the final two episodes of season three as Lexie Grey,
a new intern and Meredith Greyâs younger half-sister. On June 11, 2007, it
was announced that Leigh would become a series regular, instead of a 13
episode story arc as previously planned.[12]

The character Dr. Erica Hahn (The Silence of the Lambs fame actress Brooke
Smith) joined the main cast, reprising her antagonizing role in the season's
fifth episode. She replaces Preston Burke as head of Cardiothoracics. Upon her
return, she makes Sandra Oh's character, Cristina Yang work harder for her
success in Cardiothoracics.

It was once reported that a new male character would be introduced in season
four.[13] This character would somehow be in "competition" with Dr. Derek
Shepherd. This idea was obviously not put into fruition until the next season,
with the arrival of Dr. Owen Hunt. Fourth season guest stars included former
Gilmore Girls actor Edward Herrmann who appeared in three episodes. Seth Green
of Buffy the Vampire Slayer fame guest starred in a two-part episode.[14]
Lauren Stamile plays a scrub nurse named Rose, who became a potential love
interest for Derek.[15] Dawson's Creek alumnus Joshua Jackson was scheduled to
make his return to television in a multi-episode arc as a doctor with his
first appearance in the season's eleventh episode.[16] Jackson's appearance
was cancelled due to the 2007â2008 Writers Guild of America strike.[17] Kate
Walsh returned as Dr. Addison Montgomery for the May 1 episode, Piece of My
Heart. Her appearance played a pivotal role in the burgeoning romance between
Dr. Erica Hahn and Dr. Callie Torres, as she was the first one to suggest that
perhaps they were an item.

On February 20, 2008, it was confirmed that Greyâs Anatomy would return on
April 24, 2008 for five new episodes.[18] Where the Wild Things Are was the
first episode shown after the incubation resulted from WGA strike. The double
episode finale (Freedom) aired May 22, 2008. It was centered around Meredith
having a huge breakthrough with her personal life including Derek and her
mother. Meredith and Derek performed clinical trials on patients with brain
tumors. They lost all of their patients except for one whose boyfriend died
just before her life saving surgery. After finally succeeding, Meredith took a
risk and reunited with Derek. Almost all the cast had a kiss, including
Meredith and Derek, George and Lexie, Richard and Adele, Alex and Izzie, and,
Erica and Callie. To prepare for the lesbian story line, which continued
momentarily in season five, Greyâs consulted with GLAAD.[19] At the end,
Derek goes to his camper in search of Meredith, only to find her waiting on
his land with candles dividing each room of their could-be "home". They kiss,
and Derek leaves her long enough to break up with Rose.

### [edit] Season Five: 2008-2009

Main article: Grey's Anatomy (season 5)

The fifth season premiered with a two-hour episode on September 25, 2008,
directly after the third season premiere of Ugly Betty. Regular one-hour
episodes of the series began airing in the U.S. on October 9, 2008, following
the October 2 coverage of the 2008 Vice Presidential Debate. OK! magazine
reported that Katherine Heigl was remaining with Grey's Anatomy,[20] and that
Kevin McKidd and Melissa George were being added to the cast. On November 3,
2008 it was announced that Brooke Smith (Erica Hahn) had been written out of
the show.[21] Before the announcement of Smith's departure, it was announced
that Mary McDonnell would appear as Virginia Dixon a cardiothoracic surgeon
with Asperger's Syndrome.[22]. It has also been announced that Melissa George
would not be remaining as a series regular, and her run on the show would end
after her character, Sadie Harris, decides to leave the hospital.

On November 6, 2008, TV Guide reported that Greyâs Anatomy will feature a
multi-episode crossover arc with spin-off Private Practice in time for
February sweeps.[23]

Unlike previous seasons, this season has not prominently featured the romance
of Meredith and Derek until later in the season. The season has focused on
several different things--Derek's discovery of Meredith's mother's journals
from when she was a resident; Meredith's reaction to the journals;Lexie and
her fellow interns performing procedures on each other (from injections to
surgeries) in an attempt to learn things they believe they are not learning
from their residents; the appearance of Meredith's old friend, Sadie, back
into Meredith's life and Christina's reaction to this; the reappearance of
Denny Duquette, who is appearing to Izzie Stevens as a hallucination of some
sort; the intensity rising between the residents as an opportunity for a solo
surgery comes into play; the new-found romances in other characters' lives
such as McSteamy and Callie; and the increasing amount of involvement there is
with the patients coming into Seattle Grace. Rhimes has announced that
contrary to popular speculation,[24] the appearance of 'Dead Denny' is not due
to a brain tumor.[25] In fact, recent episodes reveal what exactly he is doing
back in Izzie's life and what is to happen in the next ones to come. After
learning of her disease, she lets the interns diagnose a "patient x", unaware
that it is her. The interns diagnose her with a malignant melanoma that has
spread to the brain, skin and liver, giving her only a 5% survival rate. Derek
is set to operate on her, being one of the few doctors in the world that can
save her.

A new romance for Dr. Calliope Torres was also a plotline on recent episodes,
as she met new head of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. Arizona Robbins (Jessica
Capshaw), who is apparently attracted to her. They shared a kiss in the
bathroom of Joe's bar, as they met almost for the very first time. However,
Callie's lack of experience with homosexual relationships seemed to make
Arizona hesitate in the following episodes, stating she didn't want to deal
also with "babies" in her personal life.

It was announced[26] that Jessica Capshaw has made a deal with ABC, giving her
the opportunity to be featured as Dr. Robbins on all Season 5 episodes to
come, and to even become a series' regular next year.

Dr. Bailey also made new experiences this season. As the Chief announced her
he had made the request to promote her as an attending in General Surgery, one
of Dr. Dixon's comments about the way she cared about kids made her change her
mind, choosing Pediatric Surgery as a specialty instead. Convinced by Dr.
Robbins, she made an application for a Pediatric Surgery fellowship. However,
she was unsatisfied with the Chief's recommendation letter.

Cristina had to deal with the reappearance of Dr. Hunt's old fiancÃ©e, with
whom he had briefly broke up without telling her he was coming back from war.
However, he showed her he would stick with her after a case they shared with
an older surgeon who was asked to retire, saying he hoped to still be there
for Cristina during the years to come.

The new relationship between Dr. Sloan and Lexie, Meredith's younger sister,
was also a plotline. They kept the secret for a moment, Lexie being even
covered by Sadie after Mark's "injury" caused while they were in bed together,
but Lexie asked him to go public with her. During the last episode of the
crossover between Grey's Anatomy and Private Practice, Mark told Derek about
his new love, but Derek, upset over the day's proceedings, begins to throw
punches.

On March 26, 2009 (one day before the 4th anniversary of the first episode),
in the episode entitled "Elevator Love Letter", Derek proposes to Meredith,
and she accepts, after he has operated on Izzie's brain.

## [edit] Production

### [edit] Locations

Fisher Plaza, which houses Seattle's ABC affiliate KOMO-TV, is used for some
exterior shots of Seattle Grace Hospital, such as air ambulances landing on
the KOMO-TV news helicopter helipad. This puts Seattle Grace conveniently
close to the Space Needle, the Seattle Monorail, and other local landmarks.
However, the hospital used for most other exterior and many interior shots is
not in Seattle; these scenes are shot at the VA Sepulveda Ambulatory Care
Center in North Hills, California.[27] While the interior of Meredith's house
is a built set, the actual home used for exterior shots is in Seattle.

### [edit] Rise to prominence

In 2005, ABC gave the hit show a vote of confidence by announcing that
Greyâs Anatomy would receive the coveted post-Super Bowl time slot which
aired on February 5, 2006.[28] The special episode pulled in a record 38.1
million viewers. The network's faith in the show was proven further when it
removed it from its comfortable post-Desperate Housewives berth and scheduled
it opposite the CBS ratings blockbuster CSI: Crime Scene Investigation in fall
2006. The gamble paid off, with the season premiere drawing 3 million more
viewers than CSI.

## [edit] Dismissals

### [edit] Isaiah Washington

In October 2006, as season 3 began, the show's actors attracted media
attention when Isaiah Washington allegedly called T.R. Knight a "faggot"
during an on-set altercation with Patrick Dempsey. Afterward, Knight came out
about his sexual orientation, following the attendant media speculation. While
Washington denied using the word, he issued a public statement apologizing for
his "unfortunate use of words."

The controversy was reignited at the 2007 Golden Globe Awards, after the show
won for Best Drama Series, the cast and crew appeared in the press room to
answer reporters' questions. While creator Shonda Rhimes was being asked about
the incident, Washington unexpectedly stepped in front of the microphone and
responded: "No, I did not call T.R. a faggot." (The Hollywood Foreign Press
Association placed the footage on their website.)

Afterward, in an interview with Access Hollywood, Katherine Heigl criticized
Washington for revisiting the incident publicly and using the slur in the
press room, and said "he needs to just not speak in public. Period." Later
that week, Knight appeared on Ellen DeGeneres' daytime talk show and said he
and others had heard Washington use the slur during the October incident.

The Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation then called on Washington to
apologize.[29] Network executives went on to reprimand Washington, who then
agreed to undergo counseling and issued a statement saying: "I can neither
defend nor explain my behavior...I can also no longer deny to myself that
there are issues I obviously need to examine within my own soul, and I've
asked for help." In an effort to try to come clean with the viewers,
Washington surprisingly checked into a residential treatment facility to
undergo a psychological assessment for the slur.

Nevertheless, on June 7, 2007, ABC announced they had decided not to renew
Washington's contract, and that he would be dropped from the show.
Washington's response, in a statement released by his publicist, was "I'm mad
as hell and I'm not going to take it anymore."[30] He has also spoken out
about the controversy and said that "I have to clear my name. I'll start from
the beginning. I'm telling everything. So here's the truth ... I used the word
during a disagreement with Patrick Dempsey. I apologized for that. We shook
hands and went back to work." He has also stated that it was Knight who spun
the slur into a personal attack, alleging it may have been to increase his
salary or story lines; Washington has also said he is considering legal
action. He has stated that Patrick Dempsey will support him in saying the
previous statement.[31]

Since then Isaiah Washington has spoken about the firing and has said that he
was not mad but "saddened" by his firing. He also said that if he was asked to
make a cameo appearance on the show, he would not hesitate to say "yes".[32]

The image of Washington's character (Preston Burke) was used in advertisements
for the May 9, 2008 episode entitled "The Becoming". The picture was shown in
a newspaper article announcing a medical award he (Burke) had received. After
this aired, Washington's attorney Peter Nelson contacted ABC and SAG and cited
this as an unlawful use of his client's image. His publicist, Howard Bragman,
pointed out to the Hollywood Reporter that "they have the rights of the
character to advance the story, but not the image" and stated he expected this
to result in a "financial settlement".[33]

### [edit] Brooke Smith

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)  
On November 3, 2008, it was reported by Entertainment Weekly's Michael
Ausiello that Erica would depart from Grey's Anatomy on November 6.[21] Series
creator Shonda Rhimes issued the statement that "Brooke Smith was obviously
not fired for playing a lesbian. Clearly it's not an issue as we have a
lesbian character on the show -- Calliope Torres. Sara Ramirez is an
incredible comedic and dramatic actress and we wanted to be able to play up
her magic. Unfortunately, we did not find that the magic and chemistry with
Brooke's character would sustain in the long run. The impact of the
Callie/Erica relationship will be felt and played out in a story for Callie. I
believe it belittles the relationship to simply replace Erica with 'another
lesbian.' If you'll remember, Cristina mourned the loss of Burke for a full
season."[21]

E! Online's Kristin Dos Santos reported that Smith's dismissal from the show
was enforced by the ABC network, as part of an attempt to "de-gay" Grey's
Anatomy.[34] She revealed that as well as writing out the character Erica
Hahn, Grey's Anatomy newcomer Melissa George would no longer be playing a
bisexual character as announced.[34] Brooke Smith, interviewed by Michael
Ausiello, stated that:"I was very excited when they told me that Erica and
Callie were going to have this relationship. And I really hoped we were going
to show what happens when two women fall in love and that they were going to
treat it like any heterosexual couple on TV. And so I was surprised and
disappointed when they just suddenly told me that they couldn't write for my
character anymore. [...] I found out in mid-September soon after shooting the
monologue that aired last week where Erica has the revelation that she's gay.
They even came down and told me it was a great scene -- one of the best they
ever shot on the show. So I was really, really shocked. I was floored when
they told me [I was being let go]. It was the last thing I expected. In fact,
when they told me I asked, "When is this happening?" And they said, "The [next
episode] is your last," which is the one that airs this Thursday. So it was
very sudden."[21]

Smith explained that the script for her final episode did not involve her
character being written out, and that Erica's final scene on the show is "just
[her] heading to [her] car."[21] She agreed with the assessment that her
dismissal originated from ABC and not Shonda Rhimes herself, stating: "It
definitely seemed like [Shonda's] hands were tied."[21]

Fan reaction was followed by a flow of articles from critics and reporters who
felt the need to take a stand. Kristin Dos Santos of E! online reported that
"Grey's has been de-gayed", Entertainment Weekly's Michael Slezak wrote the
article "Brooke Smith's Grey's Anatomy ouster is not right and not okay" and
while TV guide's Matt Mitovich reported "Grey's Actress "Really, Really
Shocked" by Ouster from Show" in his other piece "GLAAD Sad about Grey's
Lesbian-ectomy; Plus the Latest Scoop on Erica's Exit" he reports that
"Contrary to some online accounts, Erica will not simply hop in her car and
ride away at the end of this Thursday's episode. Rather, sources tell me,
"significant events" transpiring during the episode will make very clear her
reasons for leaving...". In the same article Mitovich makes known that The Gay
and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation in its president's statement said that
"[W]e are disheartened that the burgeoning relationship between Callie and
Erica on Grey's Anatomy has come to an end," GLAAD president Neil G. Giuliano
said in a statement. "Because there are so few lesbian characters on network
television, we hope that ABC and Grey's Anatomy will commit to further
developing Callie's character and her relationships, and continue providing
this important representation on one of TV's most-watched shows." The Los
Angeles Times in its Critic's Notebook titled "Brooke Smith's firing is bad
for Grey's Anatomy, and the world" also spoke of the issue as did many other
publications.

On November 4, Grey's star Patrick Dempsey appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres
Show and read a statement from ABC that said that they had a great time
working with Brooke and he said her storyline came to an end. Due to this
decision, Erica Hahn made her last appearance on November 6, 2008. Brooke
Smith claimed that her character was not even given a customary send off. She
states, "I'm not written out. My final scene is just me heading to my car."
This means that although her exit is ambiguous which could mean a guest
appearance later on, Brooke Smith will no longer be a member of the cast after
the November 6 episode airs. [35]

## [edit] Private Practice

Main article: Private Practice

On February 21, 2007, The Wall Street Journal reported that ABC was pursuing a
spin-off of Greyâs Anatomy featuring the character Addison Montgomery.[36]
On May 3, 2007, a two-hour episode of Greyâs Anatomy doubled as a backdoor
pilot for the proposed spinoff. ABC officially picked up Private Practice for
its fall 2007 lineup on May 11. The series aired its first nine episodes
during fall 2007 on Wednesday nights on 9:00PM Eastern/8:00PM Central,
premiering on September 26, 2007 on ABC. The premiere episode followed the
second part of the season debut of Dancing with the Stars and provided a lead-
in to fellow freshman series Dirty Sexy Money. Pushing Daisies, a third new
series for the evening, rounded out the evening's lineup as a lead-in to
Private Practice on October 3, 2007.[37]

### [edit] Reception

While the series garnered generally favorable ratings and a full-season
episode order from ABC, production was halted on Private Practice after the
ninth episode, due to the WGA strike which similarly halted the fourth season
of Greyâs Anatomy. Upon resolution of the strike, ABC announced Private
Practice would resume broadcasts of new episodes at the start of the 2008-2009
season, retaining its time slot alongside the other two series it had
accompanied on Wednesday evenings during the previous season. The trio of
programs had second season premieres on October 1, 2008.

## [edit] Video game

Main article: Grey's Anatomy: The Video Game

In January 2008, Gameloft released an official mobile game based on the first
three seasons of the drama series. Players can play as Meredith Grey and meet
many other characters from the show.[citation needed]

In January 7, 2009 Ubisoft announced that it has signed a licensing agreement
with ABC Studios to develop a video game based Greyâs Anatomy. Designed for
the Wii, the Nintendo DS and PC, Greyâs Anatomy: The Video Game was released
on March 10, 2009. The game is a cross between Trauma Center and an adventure
game, with players taking on the roles of the characters.[citation needed] It
has been receiving low review scores, such as a 2 out of 10 from
DigitalSomething.com [3]

## [edit] Reception

### [edit] U.S. television ratings

Seasonal rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of Greyâs
Anatomy.

Note: Each U.S. network television season starts in late September and ends in
late May, which coincides with the completion of May sweeps.

Season Timeslot Season Premiere Season Finale TV Season Ranking Viewers  
(in millions)  
1st Sunday 10:00PM 27 March 2005 22 May 2005 2005 #9 18.5  
2nd Sunday 10:00PM 25 September 2005 15 May 2006 2005â2006 #5 21.3  
3rd Thursday 9:00PM 20 September 2006 17 May 2007 2006â2007 #4 22.3  
4th Thursday 9:00PM 27 September 2007 22 May 2008 2007â2008 #10 15.9  
5th Thursday 9:00PM 25 September 2008 14 May 2009 2008â2009 TBA TBA  
### [edit] Awards

Among many others, Greyâs Anatomy is an Emmy and Golden Globe award-winning
television show.

Main article: List of Grey's Anatomy awards and nominations

## [edit] DVD releases

Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment (formerly Buena Vista Home
Entertainment) has released seasons 1, 2 3, and 4 of Greyâs Anatomy on DVD
in Region 1 & region 2 except season 4 as of yet. [38]

Season releases

DVD Name Release Date Ep # Discs Additional Information  
Season 1 14 February 2006 9 (R2-14) 2 Alternate title sequence, audio
commentaries, an extended pilot episode and a making-of featurette, Easter Egg
(disc 2).  
Season 2 12 September 2006 27 (R2-22) 6 The Doctors Are In and The Softer Side
of Dr. Bailey featurette, Exclusive set tour, deleted scenes, audio
commentaries, Extended episodes for Thanks for the Memories, It's The End of
the World, What Have I Done To Deserve This? and Losing My Religion.  
Season 3 11 September 2007 25 7 Seriously Extended edition: 4 extended
episodes, a "one-on-one with Ellen Pompeo", a visit to the race track with
star Patrick Dempsey, Cast and Crew favorite scenes featurette, and a cast
commentary on selected episodes.  
Season 4 9 September 2008 17 5 Expanded Edition: Extended episode of "Forever
Young", the cast of Greyâs tell of their favorite scenes from Season 4,
audio commentaries, deleted scenes and bloopers. [38]  
## [edit] Other releases

The producers of Greyâs Anatomy recently released a novel depicting the
lives and minglings of two bit-part characters; Joe the bartender and Nurse
Debbie. The book is double sided written in blog and IM form, while gossiping
on the actions of the Greyâs characters. The events discussed give
background information for Joe and Debbie themselves and give insight on the
events and cases the doctors deal with in the show.

A bi-monthly magazine has also been produced and is currently being sold in
stores across Canada, the United States, and the United Kingdom. The title of
the magazine is GREYâS ANATOMY and it is a published work through Titan
Magazines, and ExpressMag (for subscriptions). The first issue was released in
March 2007.

In January 2008, Grey's Anatomy was made into a mobile game on behalf of video
game publisher Gameloft. A Reuters.com article states that it "gives players
and fans the chance to experience intense emotions and drama unique to their
favorite show in unlimited different skill-based surgery mini-games taken from
actual episodes of the show".[39]

On March 10, 2009, Ubisoft will release Grey's Anatomy: The Video Game for the
Wii, Nintendo DS, and PC. [4]

## [edit] Music

See also: Grey's Anatomy (soundtrack)

The show's main title theme during its first two seasons is an excerpt of
"Cosy in the Rocket", by British artist Psapp. It is featured on the
soundtrack album released via ABC corporate cousin Hollywood Records on
September 27, 2005. A list of all the songs featured in each episode, which
are all selected, mixed and supervised by Alexandra Patsavas, can be found on
the program's official website.[5] Patsavas similarly gained acclaim for
selecting the music used for the FOX series The O.C. prior to her work with
the ABC series.[citation needed] A second soundtrack, featuring songs from the
series' second season, was released September 12, 2006, followed by a third
soundtrack with music from the third season.

In addition to use within the series, certain songs have been become key to
promotion of Greyâs Anatomy. Prior to the series debut, The Postal Service's
song "Such Great Heights" was used as part of series previews aired on ABC. As
the series has continued, it has been instrumental to the success of songs
such as Snow Patrolâs âChasing Carsâ and The Frayâs âHow to Save a
Lifeâ, both of which became top 5 hits after appearing in the show. Anna
Nalick's "Breathe (2 A.M.)" also regained popularity after appearing in the
"As We Know It" episode (the second of a two-part episode which premiered
after Super Bowl XL).[citation needed] âChasing Carsâ gained in popularity
after its use late in the second season, and was used in a video of second
season clips. âHow to Save a Lifeâ was the song used for the series' third
season promotional music video, and all Greyâs Anatomy previews for the
season. Brandi Carlileâs âThe Storyâ and Mat Kearneyâs âBreathe In,
Breathe Outâ have also been featured prominently.

Music plays a key role in the creation of Greyâs Anatomy. Each episode of
the show is uniquely named after a song. The episode titles usually have
something to do with the theme or moral of the episode's storyline and this
moral is reproduced by the voice-overs heard at the beginning and end of each
episode. Artists featured on Greyâs Anatomy include Meiko, Gomez, Adele,
Beck, Tegan and Sara, The Boy Least Likely To, Nouvelle Vague (band), Kate
Havnevik, RÃ³isÃ­n Murphy, Gemma Hayes, Snow Patrol, Kanye West, Interpol,
Maria Taylor, Mat Kearney, Medeski Martin & Wood, Ingrid Michaelson, Joshua
Radin, Jem, Brandi Carlile, Anya Marina, Erin McCarley, Duffy, Corinne Bailey
Rae, Chris Garneau, Devics, KT Tunstall, Sia, Anna Nalick, Santigold, and
Missy Higgins.

Icelandic singer Emiliana Torrini specifically wrote the song "Beggar's
Prayer" for use in the show, as did Ingrid Michaelson, whose song Keep
Breathing was written specifically for Grey's Anatomy and was featured
prominently in the third season finale. During the season five premiere,
Taylor Swift debuted "White Horse" from her sophomore album, Fearless.
Recently, the band Great Northern previewed the song "Driveway" from their
upcoming album, Remind Me Where the Light Is for use in the episode "Stand By
Me."

## [edit] References

  1. ^ 'Grey's Anatomy' Goes Colorblind, The New York Times, May 8, 2005
  2. ^ "2004-05 Final audience and ratings figures". Hollywood Reporter. May 27, 2005. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr/television/feature_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1000937471.
  3. ^ "2005-06 primetime wrap". Hollywood Reporter. May 26, 2006. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr/television/feature_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1002576393.
  4. ^ Grey Matter
  5. ^ "Hollywood Reporter: 2006-07 primetime wrap". May 25, 2007. http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/television/features/e3ifbfdd1bcb53266ad8d9a71cad261604f.
  6. ^ ABC Fall 2006 Schedule, Zap2It.com, July 11, 2006
  7. ^ Media Life Magazine
  8. ^ "ABC Medianet: Season Program Rankings". May 28, 2008. http://www.abcmedianet.com/web/progcal/dispDNR.aspx?id=052808_06.
  9. ^ "Shonda Rhimes on Burning Down The House...". Grey Matter. (May 17, 2007). http://www.greyswriters.com/2007/05/shonda_rhimes_o_1.html.
  10. ^ 'Grey' shifts for Vernoff, Noxon The Hollywood Reporter
  11. ^ Ausiello, Michael. "Exclusive! Greyâs Fires Isaiah Washington" Dr. Erica Hahn replaced Burke as head of cardiothoracic surgery, dubbed "the new Burke" and it is likely a new character will replace Addison Montgomery in the field of pediatric surgery. Ausiello-Report. TV Guide (June 7, 2007)
  12. ^ Glitterati Gossip: Doomed? Chyler Leigh Added to Greyâs Anatomy
  13. ^ "ABC's 'Greyâs Anatomy' planning to add several new cast members". http://www.realitytvworld.com/news/abc-grey-anatomy-planning-add-several-new-cast-members-1012516.php.
  14. ^ Seth Green calls in sick for "Greyâs", Yahoo!, October 11, 2007
  15. ^ "Greyâs Anatomy" Casts Mystery Woman, Zap2It.com, October 5, 2007
  16. ^ Casting: 'Greyâs Anatomy' Picks Up Pacey, Zap2It.com, October 22, 2007
  17. ^ Jackson's TV Comeback Derailed By Strikes, TeenTelevision.com, December 14, 2007
  18. ^ Lost New Timeslot Confirmed/ ABC also announces return dates for Boston Legal, Desperate Housewives, Greyâs Anatomy and more, IGN.com, February 20, 2008
  19. ^ Behind the Lesbian Story Line on "Grey's Anatomy" | AfterEllen.com
  20. ^ "Katherine Heigl is staying on Grey's Anatomy". OK!magazine.com. http://www.okmagazine.com/news/view/7889/Denied:-Katherine-Heigl-Not-Leaving-Grey's-Anatomy. Retrieved on 2008-08-28.
  21. ^ a b c d e f Ausiello, Michael (2008-11-03). "Grey's Anatomy Discharges Erica Hahn". Entertainment Weekly. http://ausiellofiles.ew.com/2008/11/brooke-smith-le.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-03.
  22. ^ Ausiello, Michael (2008-11-03). "'Grey's Anatomy' Exclusive: Mary McDonnell's Secret Revealed!". Entertainment Weekly. http://ausiellofiles.ew.com/2008/10/mary-mcdonnells.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-03.
  23. ^ Exclusive: Multi-Episode Grey's Anatomy/Private Practice Crossover Is in the Works TV Guide. November 6, 2008
  24. ^ "Katherine Heigl's Character May Get Fatal Brain Tumor on Grey's". Us Magazine. 2008-07-16. http://www.usmagazine.com/katherine-heigls-greys-anatomy-character-could-be-killed-off. Retrieved on 2008-12-13.
  25. ^ Rice, Lynette (2008-11-26). "'Grey's Anatomy': ABC testing Denny-Izzie romance". Entertainment Weekly. http://hollywoodinsider.ew.com/2008/11/abc-testing-den.html. Retrieved on 2008-12-13.
  26. ^ . http://www.buddytv.com/articles/greys-anatomy/jessica-capshaw-inks-greys-ana-26630.aspx.
  27. ^ Greyâs Anatomy Season 1 DVD cast commentary
  28. ^ "'Anatomy' Lesson Follows on Super Bowl" Zap2It, October 31, 2005.
  29. ^ Greyâs Stars Still Seeing Red over Slur, January 17, 2007, eonline.com
  30. ^ "Washington Out of `Grey's Anatomy'". The Washington Post. 2007-06-08. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/06/08/AR2007060800015.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-08.
  31. ^ edmontonsun.com - Other Entertainment - Greyâs star sees red over firing
  32. ^ "WASHINGTON: 'I'D CONSIDER A GREY'S ANATOMY CAMEO'". http://www.pr-inside.com/washington-i-d-consider-a-grey-s-anatomy-r155519.htm.
  33. ^ "Actor Washington files complaint over 'Anatomy'", Reuters.com, Retrieved October 8, 2008. http://www.reuters.com/article/televisionNews/idUSN1155789020080512
  34. ^ a b Dos Santos, Kristin (2008-11-03). "Grey's De-Gayed: Brooke Smith Axed; Melissa George's Role Rewritten". E! Online. http://www.eonline.com/uberblog/watch_with_kristin/b66996_greys_de-gayed_brooke_smith_axed.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-03.
  35. ^ [1]
  36. ^ Barnes, Brooks (2007-02-21). "Delicate Surgery on 'Greyâs Anatomy'". The Wall Street Journal. http://online.wsj.com/article_email/SB117203280453414676-lMyQjAxMDE3NzIyMTAyMzEyWj.html. Retrieved on 2007-02-22.
  37. ^ [2], ABC MediaNet, May 15, 2007
  38. ^ a b Joint Press Release for 4th Seasons of Lost & Greyâs Anatomy TVOnMedia.com - Jeff Hodges (04/28/2008)
  39. ^ http://www.reuters.com/article/pressRelease/idUS223051+17-Jan-2008+BW20080117

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Grey's
Anatomy  
  * Official Website
  * Grey Matter Writers' Blog
  * Grey's Anatomy at the Internet Movie Database
  * Greyâs Anatomy at the Internet Movie Database
  * Grey's Anatomy at TV.com
  * Greyâs Anatomy Wiki
  * Grey's Anatomy at CTV (Canada)
  * [6]

v â¢ d â¢ e

Grey's Anatomy  
Episodes Â· Quotes Â· Category Â· Project  
Characters

Meredith Grey Â· Cristina Yang Â· Izzie Stevens Â· Alex Karev Â· George
O'Malley Â· Miranda Bailey Â· Richard Webber Â· Addison Montgomery Â· Callie
Torres Â· Mark Sloan Â· Lexie Grey Â· Erica Hahn Â· Owen Hunt Â· Preston Burke
Â· Derek Shepherd Â· Arizona Robbins  
Cast  
Ellen Pompeo Â· Sandra Oh Â· Katherine Heigl Â· Justin Chambers Â· T. R.
Knight Â· Chandra Wilson Â· James Pickens, Jr. Â· Kate Walsh Â· Sara RamÃ­rez
Â· Eric Dane Â· Chyler Leigh Â· Brooke Smith Â· Kevin McKidd Â· Isaiah
Washington Â· Patrick Dempsey Â· Jessica Capshaw  
Soundtrack ("Chasing Cars" â¢ "How to Save a Life" â¢ "The Story" â¢
"Breathe In, Breathe Out") Â· Awards and nominations Â· Shonda Rhimes
(creator) Â· Private Practice Â· Video Game  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Private Practice  
Episodes

List of Private Practice episodes Â· The Other Side of This Life, Parts One
and Two  
Character

Addison Montgomery Â· Peter Wilder Â· Naomi Bennett Â· Sam Bennett Â· Violet
Turner Â· Cooper Freedman Â· Dell Parker Â· Charlotte King Â· Meg Curtis  
Cast

Kate Walsh Â· Timothy Daly Â· Audra McDonald Â· Taye Diggs Â· Amy Brenneman Â·
Paul Adelstein Â· Chris Lowell Â· KaDee Strickland Â· Jayne Brook  
Shonda Rhimes Â· Grey's Anatomy Â· Official Site  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grey%27s_Anatomy"

Categories: 2005 television series debuts | 2000s American television series |
American Broadcasting Company network shows | American drama television series
| Five television programmes | Grey's Anatomy | Medical television series |
Serial drama television series | Television series by Buena Vista Television |
Television shows set in Washington (U.S. state) | Television shows set in
Seattle | Dyslexia in fiction

Hidden categories: Cleanup from April 2009 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles needing additional references from January 2009 | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 |
Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 | Articles with unsourced
statements since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 23:22 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



