
# Angelina Jolie

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

"Jolie" redirects here. For other uses, see Jolie (disambiguation).

Angelina Jolie  
<IMG>  
Jolie at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, January 2005  
Born Angelina Jolie Voight  
June 4, 1975 (1975-06-04) (age 33)  
Los Angeles, California, U.S.  
Occupation Film actor  
Years active 1982; 1993âpresent  
Spouse(s) Jonny Lee Miller (1996â1999)  
Billy Bob Thornton (2000â2003)  
Domestic partner(s) Brad Pitt (2005âpresent)  
Angelina Jolie (born Angelina Jolie Voight on June 4, 1975) is an American
film actor and a Goodwill Ambassador for the UN Refugee Agency. She has been
cited as one of the world's most beautiful women and her off-screen life is
widely reported.[1] Jolie has received three Golden Globe Awards, two Screen
Actors Guild Awards, and an Academy Award.

Though she made her screen debut as a child alongside her father Jon Voight in
the 1982 film Lookin' to Get Out, Jolie's acting career began in earnest a
decade later with the low-budget production Cyborg 2 (1993). Her first leading
role in a major film was in Hackers (1995). She starred in the critically
acclaimed biographical films George Wallace (1997) and Gia (1998), and won an
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in the drama
Girl, Interrupted (1999). Jolie achieved international fame as a result of her
portrayal of video game heroine Lara Croft in Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001),
and since then has established herself as one of the best-known and highest-
paid actresses in Hollywood.[2] She has had her biggest commercial successes
with the action-comedy Mr. & Mrs. Smith (2005) and the animated film Kung Fu
Panda (2008).[3]

Divorced from actors Jonny Lee Miller and Billy Bob Thornton, Jolie currently
lives with actor Brad Pitt, in a relationship that has attracted worldwide
media attention.[4] Jolie and Pitt have three adopted children, Maddox, Pax,
and Zahara, as well as three biological children, Shiloh, Knox, and Vivienne.
Jolie has promoted humanitarian causes throughout the world, and is noted for
her work with refugees through UNHCR.

## Contents

  * 1 Early life and family
  * 2 Early work, 1993â1997
  * 3 Breakthrough, 1997â2000
  * 4 International success, 2001âpresent
  * 5 Humanitarian work
  * 6 Relationships
  * 7 Children
  * 8 In the media
  * 9 Tattoos
  * 10 Filmography
  * 11 Awards
  * 12 References
  * 13 Further reading
  * 14 External links

  
## Early life and family

Born in Los Angeles, California, Jolie is the daughter of actors Jon Voight
and Marcheline Bertrand. She is the niece of Chip Taylor, sister of James
Haven and the god-daughter of Jacqueline Bisset and Maximilian Schell. On her
father's side, Jolie is of Slovak and German descent,[5][6] and on her
mother's side she is French Canadian and is said to be part Iroquois.[7][8]
However, Voight has claimed Bertrand was "not seriously Iroquois", and they
merely said it to enhance his ex-wife's exotic background.[9]

After her parents' separation in 1976, Jolie and her brother were raised by
their mother, who abandoned her acting ambitions and moved with them to
Palisades, New York.[10] As a child, Jolie regularly saw movies with her
mother and later explained that this had inspired her interest in acting; she
had not been influenced by her father.[11] When she was eleven years old, the
family moved back to Los Angeles and Jolie decided she wanted to act and
enrolled at the Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute, where she trained for two
years and appeared in several stage productions. She later recalled her time
as a student at Beverly Hills High School (later Moreno High School), and her
feeling of isolation among the children of some of the area's more affluent
families. Jolie's mother survived on a more modest income, and Jolie often
wore second-hand clothes. She was teased by other students who also targeted
her for her distinctive features, for being extremely thin, and for wearing
glasses and braces.[11] Her self-esteem was further diminished when her
initial attempts at modeling proved unsuccessful. She started to cut herself;
later commenting, "I collected knives and always had certain things around.
For some reason, the ritual of having cut myself and feeling the pain, maybe
feeling alive, feeling some kind of release, it was somehow therapeutic to
me."[12]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jon Voight at the 1988 Oscar ceremony, Jolie can be seen behind him

At the age of 14, she dropped out of her acting classes and dreamed of
becoming a funeral director.[13] During this period, she wore black, dyed her
hair purple and went out moshing with her live-in boyfriend.[11] Two years
later, after the relationship had ended, she rented an apartment above a
garage a few blocks from her mother's home.[10] She returned to theatre
studies and graduated from high school, though in recent times she has
referred to this period with the observation, "I am still at heartâand
always will beâjust a punk kid with tattoos".[14]

Jolie has been long estranged from her father. The two tried to reconcile and
he appeared with her in Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001).[10] In July 2002,
Jolie filed a request to legally change her name to "Angelina Jolie", dropping
Voight as her surname; the name change was made official on September 12,
2002.[15] In August of the same year, Voight claimed that his daughter had
"serious mental problems" on Access Hollywood. Jolie later indicated that she
no longer wished to pursue a relationship with her father, and said, "My
father and I don't speak. I don't hold any anger toward him. I don't believe
that somebody's family becomes their blood. Because my son's adopted, and
families are earned." She stated that she did not want to publicize her
reasons for her estrangement from her father, but because she had adopted her
son, she did not think it was healthy for her to associate with Voight.[16]

## Early work, 1993â1997

Jolie began working as a fashion model when she was 14 years old, modeling
mainly in Los Angeles, New York and London. At that time she also appeared in
numerous music videos, including those of Meat Loaf ("Rock & Roll Dreams Come
Through"), Antonello Venditti ("Alta Marea"), Lenny Kravitz ("Stand by My
Woman"), and The Lemonheads ("It's About Time"). At the age of 16, Jolie
returned to theatre and played her first role as a German dominatrix. She
began to learn from her father, as she noticed his method of observing people
to become like them. Their relationship during this time was less strained,
with Jolie realizing that they were both "drama queens".[11]

Jolie appeared in five of her brother's student films, made while he attended
the USC School of Cinematic Arts, but her professional movie career began in
1993, when she played her first leading role in the low-budget film Cyborg 2,
as Casella "Cash" Reese, a near-human robot, designed to seduce her way into a
rival manufacturer's headquarters and then self-detonate. Following a
supporting role in the independent film Without Evidence, Jolie starred as
Kate "Acid Burn" Libby in her first Hollywood picture, Hackers (1995), where
she met her first husband Jonny Lee Miller. The New York Times wrote, "Kate
(Angelina Jolie) stands out. That's because she scowls even more sourly than
[her co-stars] and is that rare female hacker who sits intently at her
keyboard in a see-through top. Despite her sullen posturing, which is all this
role requires, Ms. Jolie has the sweetly cherubic looks of her father, Jon
Voight."[17] The movie failed to make a profit at the box-office, but
developed a cult following after its video release.[18]

She appeared as Gina Malacici in the 1996 comedy Love Is All There Is, a
modern-day loose adaptation of Romeo and Juliet set among two rival Italian
family restaurant owners in the Bronx, New York. In the road movie Mojave Moon
(1996) she was a youngster, named Eleanor Rigby, who falls for Danny Aiello's
character, while he takes a shine to her mother, played by Anne Archer. In
1996, Jolie also portrayed Margret "Legs" Sadovsky, one of five teenage girls
who form an unlikely bond in the film Foxfire after they beat up a teacher who
has sexually harassed them. The Los Angeles Times wrote about her performance,
"It took a lot of hogwash to develop this character, but Jolie, Jon Voight's
knockout daughter, has the presence to overcome the stereotype. Though the
story is narrated by Maddy, Legs is the subject and the catalyst."[19]

In 1997, Jolie starred with David Duchovny in the thriller Playing God, set in
the Los Angeles underworld. The movie was not received well by critics and
Roger Ebert noted that "Angelina Jolie finds a certain warmth in a kind of
role that is usually hard and aggressive; she seems too nice to be [a
criminal's] girlfriend, and maybe she is."[20] She then appeared in the
television movie True Women, a historical romantic drama set in the American
West, and based on the book by Janice Woods Windle. That year she also
appeared in the music video for "Anybody Seen My Baby?" by the Rolling Stones.

## Breakthrough, 1997â2000

Jolie's career prospects began to improve after her performance as Cornelia
Wallace in the 1997 biographical film George Wallace for which she won a
Golden Globe Award and was nominated for an Emmy Award. Gary Sinise starred as
Alabama Governor George Wallace The film, directed by John Frankenheimer, was
praised by critics and, among other awards, received the Golden Globe for Best
Miniseries/Motion Picture made for TV. She played the second wife of the
former segregationist governor who was shot and paralyzed while running in
1972 for U.S. President.

In 1998, Jolie starred in HBO's Gia, portraying supermodel Gia Carangi. The
film depicted a world of sex, drugs and emotional drama, and chronicled the
destruction of Carangi's life and career as a result of her drug addiction,
and her decline and death from AIDS. Vanessa Vance from Reel.com noted,
"Angelina Jolie gained wide recognition for her role as the titular Gia, and
it's easy to see why. Jolie is fierce in her portrayalâfilling the part with
nerve, charm, and desperationâand her role in this film is quite possibly
the most beautiful train wreck ever filmed."[21] For the second consecutive
year, Jolie won a Golden Globe Award and was nominated for an Emmy Award. She
also won her first Screen Actors Guild Award. In accordance with Lee
Strasberg's method acting, Jolie reportedly preferred to stay in character in
between scenes during many of her early films, and as a result had gained a
reputation for being difficult to deal with. While shooting Gia, she told her
then-husband Jonny Lee Miller that she would not be able to phone him: "I'd
tell him: 'I'm alone; I'm dying; I'm gay; I'm not going to see you for
weeks.'"[22]

Following Gia, Jolie moved to New York and stopped acting for a short period
of time, because she felt that she had "nothing else to give". She enrolled at
New York University to study filmmaking and attended writing classes. She
described it as "just good for me to collect myself" on Inside the Actors
Studio.[23]

Jolie returned to film as Gloria McNeary in the 1998 gangster movie Hell's
Kitchen, and later that year appeared in Playing by Heart, part of an ensemble
cast that included Sean Connery, Gillian Anderson, Ryan Phillippe and Jon
Stewart. The film received predominantly positive reviews and Jolie was
praised in particular. The San Francisco Chronicle wrote, "Jolie, working
through an overwritten part, is a sensation as the desperate club crawler
learning truths about what she's willing to gamble."[24] Jolie won the
Breakthrough Performance Award by the National Board of Review.

In 1999, she starred in Mike Newell's comedy-drama Pushing Tin, co-starring
John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, and Cate Blanchett. Jolie played Thornton's
seductive wife. The film received a mixed reception from critics and Jolie's
character was particularly criticized. The Washington Post wrote, "Mary
(Angelina Jolie), a completely ludicrous writer's creation of a free-spirited
woman who weeps over hibiscus plants that die, wears lots of turquoise rings
and gets real lonely when Russell spends entire nights away from home."[25]
She then worked with Denzel Washington in The Bone Collector (1999), an
adapted crime novel written by Jeffery Deaver. Jolie played Amelia Donaghy, a
police officer haunted by her cop father's suicide, who reluctantly helps
Washington track down a serial killer. The movie grossed $151 million
worldwide,[3] but was a critical failure. The Detroit Free Press concluded,
"Jolie, while always delicious to look at, is simply and woefully
miscast."[26]

"Jolie is emerging as one of the great wild spirits of current movies, a loose
cannon who somehow has deadly aim."

âRoger Ebert on Jolie's performance in Girl, Interrupted (1999)[27]  
Jolie next took the supporting role of the sociopathic Lisa Rowe in Girl,
Interrupted (1999), a film that tells the story of mental patient Susanna
Kaysen, and which was adapted from Kaysen's original memoir Girl, Interrupted.
While Winona Ryder played the main character in what was hoped to be a
comeback for her, the film instead marked Jolie's final breakthrough in
Hollywood.[28] She won her third Golden Globe Award, her second Screen Actors
Guild Award and an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. Variety noted,
"Jolie is excellent as the flamboyant, irresponsible girl who turns out to be
far more instrumental than the doctors in Susanna's rehabilitation".[29]

In 2000, Jolie appeared in her first summer blockbuster, Gone In 60 Seconds,
in which she played Sarah "Sway" Wayland, ex-girlfriend of car-thief Nicolas
Cage. The role was small, and the Washington Post criticized that "all she
does in this movie is stand around, cooling down, modeling those fleshy,
pulsating muscle-tubes that nest so provocatively around her teeth."[30] She
later explained that the film was a welcome relief after the heavy role of
Lisa Rowe, and it became her highest grossing movie up until then, earning
$237 million internationally.[3]

## International success, 2001âpresent

Although highly regarded for her acting abilities, Jolie's films to date had
often not appealed to a wide audience, but Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001) made
her an international superstar. An adaptation of the popular Tomb Raider
videogame, Jolie was required to learn a British accent and undergo extensive
martial arts training to play the title role of Lara Croft. She was generally
praised for her physical performance, but the movie generated mostly negative
reviews. Slant Magazine commented, "Angelina Jolie was born to play Lara Croft
but [director] Simon West makes her journey into a game of Frogger."[31] The
movie was a international success nonetheless, earning $275 million
worldwide,[3] and launched her global reputation as a female action star.

Jolie then starred opposite Antonio Banderas as the mail-order bride Julia
Russell in Original Sin (2001), a thriller based on the novel Waltz into
Darkness by Cornell Woolrich. The film was a major critical failure, with The
New York Times noting, "The story plunges more precipitously than Ms. Jolie's
neckline."[32] In 2002, she played Lanie Kerrigan in Life or Something Like
It, a film about an ambitious TV reporter who is told that she will die in a
week. The film was poorly received by critics, though Jolie's performance
received positive reviews. CNN's Paul Clinton wrote, "Jolie is excellent in
her role. Despite some of the ludicrous plot points in the middle of the film,
this Academy Award-winning actress is exceedingly believable in her journey
towards self-discovery and the true meaning of fulfilling life."[33]

Jolie reprised her role as Lara Croft in Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of
Life in 2003. The sequel, while not as lucrative as the original, earned $156
million at the international box-office.[3] Later that year Jolie starred in
Beyond Borders, a film about aid workers in Africa. Although reflecting
Jolie's real-life interest in promoting humanitarian relief, the film was
critically and financially unsuccessful. The Los Angeles Times wrote, "Jolie,
as she did in her Oscar-winning role in Girl, Interrupted, can bring
electricity and believability to roles that have a reality she can understand.
She can also, witness the Lara Croft films, do acknowledged cartoons. But the
limbo of a hybrid character, a badly written cardboard person in a fly-
infested, blood-and-guts world, completely defeats her."[34]

In 2004, Jolie starred alongside Ethan Hawke in the thriller Taking Lives. She
portrayed Illeana Scott, an FBI profiler summoned to help Montreal law
enforcement hunt down a serial killer. The movie received mixed reviews and
The Hollywood Reporter concluded, "Angelina Jolie plays a role that definitely
feels like something she has already done, but she does add an unmistakable
dash of excitement and glamour."[35] She also provided the voice of Lola, an
angelfish in the animated DreamWorks movie Shark Tale (2004) and she had a
brief appearance in Kerry Conran's Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow
(2004), a science fiction adventure film shot with actors entirely in front of
a bluescreen. Also in 2004, Jolie played Olympias in Alexander, Oliver Stone's
biographical film about the life of Alexander the Great. The film failed
domestically, with Stone attributing its poor reception to disapproval of the
depiction of Alexander's bisexuality,[36] but it succeeded internationally,
with revenue of $139 million outside the United States.[3]

Jolie's only movie in 2005 was the action-comedy Mr. & Mrs. Smith. The film,
directed by Doug Liman, tells the story of a bored married couple who find out
that they are both secret assassins. Jolie starred as Jane Smith opposite Brad
Pitt. The film received mixed reviews, but was generally lauded for the
chemistry between the two leads. The Star Tribune noted, "While the story
feels haphazard, the movie gets by on gregarious charm, galloping energy and
the stars' thermonuclear screen chemistry."[37] The movie earned $478 million
worldwide, one of the biggest hits of 2005.[3]

She next appeared in Robert De Niro's The Good Shepherd (2006), a film about
the early history of the CIA, as seen through the eyes of Edward Wilson,
played by Matt Damon. Jolie played the supporting role of Margaret Russell,
Wilson's neglected wife. According to the Chicago Tribune, "Jolie ages
convincingly throughout, and is blithely unconcerned with how her brittle
character is coming off in terms of audience sympathy."[38]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jolie as Christine Collins on the set of Changeling, November 2007

In 2007, Jolie made her directorial debut with the documentary A Place in
Time, which captures the life in 27 locations around the globe during a single
week. The film was screened at the Tribeca Film Festival and is intended to be
distributed through the National Education Association, mainly in high
schools.[39] Jolie starred as Mariane Pearl in Michael Winterbottom's
documentary-style drama A Mighty Heart (2007), about the kidnap and murder of
Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl in Pakistan. The picture is based on
Mariane Pearl's memoirs A Mighty Heart and had its premiere at the Cannes Film
Festival. The Hollywood Reporter described Jolie's performance as "well-
measured and moving", played "with respect and a firm grasp on a difficult
accent."[40] The film earned her a fourth Golden Globe Award and a third
Screen Actors Guild Award nomination. Jolie also played Grendel's mother in
Robert Zemeckis' animated epic Beowulf (2007) which was created through the
motion capture technique.

Jolie co-starred alongside James McAvoy and Morgan Freeman in the 2008 action
movie Wanted, an adaptation of a graphic novel by Mark Millar. The film
received predominately favorable reviews and proved to be an international
success, earning $342 million worldwide.[3] She also provided the voice of
Master Tigress in the DreamWorks animated movie Kung Fu Panda (2008). With
revenue of $632 million internationally, it became her highest grossing film
to date.[3] The same year, Jolie played Christine Collins, the lead in Clint
Eastwood's drama Changeling (2008), which had its premiere at the Cannes Film
Festival.[41] It is based on the true story of a woman in 1928 Los Angeles who
is reunited with her kidnapped sonâonly to realize he is an impostor. Jolie
received her second Academy Award nomination, and also was nominated for a
BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, and the Screen Actors Guild Award.[42] The
Chicago Tribune noted, "Jolie really shines in the calm before the storm, the
scenes [...] when one patronizing male authority figure after another
belittles her at their peril."[43]

## Humanitarian work

Jolie first became personally aware of worldwide humanitarian crises while
filming Tomb Raider in Cambodia. She eventually turned to UNHCR for more
information on international trouble spots.[44] In the following months she
visited refugee camps around the world to learn more about the situation and
the conditions in these areas. In February 2001, Jolie went on her first field
visit, an 18-day mission to Sierra Leone and Tanzania; she later expressed her
shock at what she had witnessed.[44] In the coming months she returned to
Cambodia for two weeks and later met with Afghan refugees in Pakistan where
she donated $1 million for Afghan refugees in response to an international
UNHCR emergency appeal.[45] She insisted on covering all costs related to her
missions and shared the same rudimentary working and living conditions as
UNHCR field staff on all of her visits.[44] Jolie was named a UNHCR Goodwill
Ambassador on August 27, 2001 at UNHCR headquarters in Geneva.[46]

"We cannot close ourselves off to information and ignore the fact that
millions of people are out there suffering. I honestly want to help. I don't
believe I feel differently from other people. I think we all want justice and
equality, a chance for a life with meaning. All of us would like to believe
that if we were in a bad situation someone would help us."

âJolie on her motives for joining UNHCR in 2001[44]  
Jolie has been on field missions around the world and met with refugees and
internally displaced persons in more than 20 countries.[47] Asked what she
hoped to accomplish, she stated, "Awareness of the plight of these people. I
think they should be commended for what they have survived, not looked down
upon."[48] In 2002, Jolie visited the Tham Hin refugee camp in Thailand and
Colombian refugees in Ecuador.[49] Jolie later went to various UNHCR
facilities in Kosovo and paid a visit to Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya with
refugees mainly from Sudan. She also met with Angolan refugees while filming
Beyond Borders in Namibia.

In 2003, Jolie embarked on a six-day mission to Tanzania where she traveled to
western border camps, hosting Congolese refugees and she paid a week-long
visit to Sri Lanka. She later concluded a four-day mission to Russia as she
traveled to North Caucasus. Concurrently with the release of her movie Beyond
Borders she published Notes from My Travels, a collection of journal entries
that chronicle her early field missions (2001â2002). During a private stay
in Jordan in December 2003 she asked to visit Iraqi refugees in Jordan's
eastern desert and later that month she went to Egypt to meet Sudanese
refugees.

On her first U.N. trip within the United States, Jolie went to Arizona in
2004, visiting detained asylum seekers at three facilities and the Southwest
Key Program, a facility for unaccompanied children in Phoenix. She flew to
Chad in June 2004, paying a visit to border sites and camps for refugees who
had fled fighting in western Sudan's Darfur region. Four months later she
returned to the region, this time going directly into West Darfur. Also in
2004, Jolie met with Afghan refugees in Thailand and on a private stay to
Lebanon during the Christmas holidays, she visited UNHCR's regional office in
Beirut, as well as some young refugees and cancer patients in the Lebanese
capital.[50]

In 2005, Jolie visited Pakistani camps containing Afghani refugees, and she
also met with Pakistan's President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat
Aziz; she returned to Pakistan with Brad Pitt during the Thanksgiving weekend
in November to see the impact of the 2005 Kashmir earthquake. In 2006, Jolie
and Pitt flew to Haiti and visited a school supported by YÃ©le HaÃ¯ti, a
charity founded by Haitian-born hip hop musician Wyclef Jean. While filming A
Mighty Heart in India, Jolie met with Afghan and Burmese refugees in New
Delhi. She spent Christmas Day 2006 with Colombian refugees in San JosÃ©,
Costa Rica where she handed out presents. In 2007, Jolie returned to Chad for
a two-day mission to assess the deteriorating security situation for refugees
from Darfur; Jolie and Pitt subsequently donated $1 million to three relief
organizations in Chad and Darfur.[51] Jolie also made her first visit to Syria
and twice went to Iraq, where she met with Iraqi refugees as well as multi-
national forces and U.S. troops.[52]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jolie and Condoleezza Rice at World Refugee Day, June 2005

Over time, Jolie became more involved in promoting humanitarian causes on a
political level. She has regularly attended World Refugee Day in Washington,
D.C., and she was an invited speaker at the World Economic Forum in Davos in
2005 and 2006. Jolie also began lobbying humanitarian interests in the U.S.
capital, where she met with members of Congress at least 20 times from
2003.[46] She explained in Forbes: "As much as I would love to never have to
visit Washington, that's the way to move the ball."[46]

In 2005, Jolie took part at a National Press Club luncheon, where she
announced the founding of the National Center for Refugee and Immigrant
Children, an organization that provides free legal-aid to asylum-seeking
children with no legal representation which Jolie personally funded with a
donation of $500,000 for its first two years.[53] Jolie also pushed for
several bills to aid refugees and vulnerable children in the Third World.[46]
In addition to her political involvement, Jolie began using her public profile
to promote humanitarian causes through the mass media. She filmed an MTV
special, The Diary Of Angelina Jolie & Dr. Jeffrey Sachs in Africa, portraying
her and noted economist Dr. Jeffrey Sachs on a trip to a remote group of
villages in Western Kenya. In 2006, Jolie announced the founding of the
Jolie/Pitt Foundation which made initial donations to Global Action for
Children and Doctors Without Borders of $1 million each.[54] Jolie also co-
chairs the Education Partnership for Children of Conflict, founded at the
Clinton Global Initiative in 2006, which helps fund education programs for
children affected by conflict.[55]

Jolie has received wide recognition for her humanitarian work. In 2003, she
was the first recipient of the newly created Citizen of the World Award by the
United Nations Correspondents Association, and in 2005, she was awarded the
Global Humanitarian Award by the UNA-USA.[56] Cambodia's King Norodom Sihamoni
awarded Jolie Cambodian citizenship for her conservation work in the country
on August 12, 2005; she has pledged $5 million to set up a wildlife sanctuary
in the north-western province of Battambang and owns property there.[57] In
2007, Jolie became a member of the Council on Foreign Relations,[58] and she
received the Freedom Award by the International Rescue Committee.[59]

## Relationships

On March 28, 1996, Jolie married British actor Jonny Lee Miller, her co-star
in the film Hackers (1995). She attended her wedding in black rubber pants and
a white shirt, upon which she had written the groom's name in her blood.[60]
Jolie and Miller separated the following year and subsequently divorced on
February 3, 1999. They remained on good terms and Jolie later explained, "It
comes down to timing. I think he's the greatest husband a girl could ask for.
I'll always love him, we were simply too young."[22]

She then married American actor Billy Bob Thornton, whom she had met on the
set of Pushing Tin (1999), on May 5, 2000. As a result of their frequent
public declarations of passion and gestures of loveâmost famously wearing
one another's blood in vials around their necksâtheir relationship became a
favorite topic of the entertainment media.[61] Jolie and Thornton divorced on
May 27, 2003. Asked about the sudden dissolution of their marriage, Jolie
stated, "It took me by surprise, too, because overnight, we totally changed. I
think one day we had just nothing in common. And it's scary but... I think it
can happen when you get involved and you don't know yourself yet."[62]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jolie and Brad Pitt at the Deauville American Film Festival in 2007

Jolie has said in interviews that she is bisexual and has long acknowledged
that she had a sexual relationship with her Foxfire (1996) co-star Jenny
Shimizu, "I would probably have married Jenny if I hadn't married my husband.
I fell in love with her the first second I saw her."[63] In 2003, asked if she
was bisexual, Jolie responded, "Of course. If I fell in love with a woman
tomorrow, would I feel that it's okay to want to kiss and touch her? If I fell
in love with her? Absolutely! Yes!"[64]

In early 2005, Jolie was involved in a well-publicized Hollywood scandal when
she was accused of being the reason for the divorce of actors Brad Pitt and
Jennifer Aniston. The allegation was that she and Pitt had started an affair
during filming of Mr. & Mrs. Smith (2005). She denied this on several
occasions, but admitted that they "fell in love" on the set.[65] In an
interview in 2005, she explained, "To be intimate with a married man, when my
own father cheated on my mother, is not something I could forgive. I could not
look at myself in the morning if I did that. I wouldn't be attracted to a man
who would cheat on his wife."[64]

While Jolie and Pitt never publicly commented on the nature of their
relationship, speculations continued throughout 2005. The first intimate
paparazzi photos emerged in April, one month after Aniston had filed for
divorce; they showed Pitt, Jolie and her son Maddox at a beach in Kenya.
During the summer Jolie and Pitt were seen together with increasing frequency
and most of the entertainment media considered them a couple, dubbing them
"Brangelina". On January 11, 2006, Jolie confirmed to People that she was
pregnant with Pitt's child and thereby confirmed their relationship for the
first time in public.[61]

## Children

Angelina Jolie's children

  * Maddox Chivan Jolie-Pitt (born August 5, 2001 in Cambodia; adopted March 10, 2002)
  * Pax Thien Jolie-Pitt (born November 29, 2003 in Vietnam; adopted March 15, 2007)
  * Zahara Marley Jolie-Pitt (born January 8, 2005 in Ethiopia; adopted July 6, 2005)
  * Shiloh Nouvel Jolie-Pitt (born May 27, 2006 in Swakopmund, Namibia)
  * Knox LÃ©on Jolie-Pitt (born July 12, 2008 in Nice, France)
  * Vivienne Marcheline Jolie-Pitt (born July 12, 2008 in Nice, France)

On March 10, 2002, Jolie adopted her first child, seven-month-old Maddox
Chivan Jolie-Pitt (originally Maddox Chivan Thornton Jolie).[15] He was born
on August 5, 2001 as Rath Vibol in Cambodia, and he initially lived in a local
orphanage in Battambang. Jolie decided to apply for adoption after she had
visited Cambodia twice, while filming Tomb Raider and on a UNHCR field trip in
2001. After her divorce from her second husband, Billy Bob Thornton, Jolie
received sole custody of Maddox. Like Jolie's other children, Maddox has
gained considerable celebrity and appears regularly in the tabloid media.[66]

Jolie adopted a six-month-old girl from Ethiopia, Zahara Marley Jolie-Pitt
(originally Zahara Marley Jolie), on July 6, 2005. Zahara was born on January
8, 2005. She was originally named Yemsrach by her mother,[67] and was later
given the legal name Tena Adam at an orphanage.[68] Jolie adopted her from
Wide Horizons For Children orphanage in Addis Ababa. Shortly after they
returned to the United States, Zahara was hospitalized for dehydration and
malnutrition. In 2007, media outlets reported Zahara's biological mother,
Mentewabe Dawit, was still alive and wanted her daughter back, but she later
denied these reports, saying she thought Zahara was "very fortunate" to be
adopted by Jolie.[67]

Brad Pitt was reportedly present when Jolie signed the adoption papers and
collected her daughter;[61] later Jolie indicated that she and Pitt made the
decision to adopt Zahara together.[69] On January 19, 2006, a judge in
California approved Pitt's request to legally adopt Jolie's two children.
Their surnames were formally changed to "Jolie-Pitt".[70]

Jolie gave birth to a daughter, Shiloh Nouvel Jolie-Pitt, in Swakopmund,
Namibia, by a scheduled caesarean section, on May 27, 2006. Pitt confirmed
that their newly-born daughter would have a Namibian passport,[71] and Jolie
decided to sell the first pictures of Shiloh through the distributor Getty
Images herself, rather than allowing paparazzi to make these valuable
photographs. People paid more than $4.1 million for the North American rights,
while British magazine Hello! obtained the international rights for roughly
$3.5 million.[72] All profits were donated to an undisclosed charity by Jolie
and Pitt. Madame Tussauds in New York unveiled a wax figure of two-month-old
Shiloh; it was the first infant re-created in wax by Madame Tussauds.[73]

On March 15, 2007, Jolie adopted a three-year-old boy from Vietnam, Pax Thien
Jolie-Pitt (originally Pax Thien Jolie),[74] who was born on November 29, 2003
and abandoned at birth at a local hospital, where he was initially named Pham
Quang Sang.[75] Jolie adopted the boy from the Tam Binh orphanage in Ho Chi
Minh City.[76] She revealed that his first name, Pax, was suggested by her
mother before her death.[77]

Following months of tabloid speculation, Jolie confirmed she was expecting
twins at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival. She gave birth to a boy, Knox LÃ©on
Jolie-Pitt, and a girl, Vivienne Marcheline Jolie-Pitt, by caesarean section
at the Lenval hospital in Nice, France, on July 12, 2008.[78] The rights for
the first images of Knox and Vivienne were jointly sold to People and Hello!
for $14 millionâthe most expensive celebrity pictures ever taken. The money
went to the Jolie/Pitt Foundation.[79]

## In the media

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jolie at a photo op in Washington, D.C. in 2005

Jolie appeared in the media from an early age due to her famous father Jon
Voight. At seven she had a small part in Lookin' to Get Out, a movie co-
written by and starring her father, and in 1986 and 1988 she attended the
Academy Awards as a teenager with him. However, when she started her acting
career, Jolie decided not to use "Voight" as a stage name, because she wished
to establish her own identity as an actress.[61] Jolie was never shy about
controversy and integrated her teenage "wild girl" image into her public
persona in the first years of her career. During her acceptance speech at the
2000 Academy Awards, Jolie declared, "I'm so in love with my brother right
now", which, combined with her affectionate behavior towards him that night,
sparked speculation in the tabloid media of an incestuous relationship with
her brother James Haven. She has denied those rumors vehemently, and Jolie and
Haven later explained in interviews that after their parents' divorce they
relied on one another and because of that they hold on to each other as a
means of emotional support.[61]

Jolie does not employ a publicist or an agent.[80] She quickly became a
tabloid's favorite, since she presented herself as very outspoken in
interviews, discussing her love life and her interest in BDSM openly,[8] and
once claiming to be "most likely to sleep with a female fan".[64] As one of
her most distinctive physical features, Jolie's lips have attracted notable
media attention and she has been described as "the current gold standard of
beauty in the West" among women seeking cosmetic surgery.[81] She also created
headlines with her much publicized marriage to Billy Bob Thornton and her
subsequent change into an advocate for global humanitarian problems. As she
took on the role of UNHCR Goodwill Ambassador she started to use her celebrity
to highlight humanitarian causes worldwide. Jolie has been taking flying
lessons since 2004 and she has a private pilot license (with an instrument
rating) and owns a Cirrus SR22 airplane.[82] The media speculated that Jolie
is a Buddhist, but she said that she teaches Buddhism to her son Maddox
because she considers it part of his culture. Jolie has not stated
definitively whether or not she believes in God. When asked in 2000 if there
was a God, she said, "For the people who believe in it, I hope so. There
doesn't need to be a God for me."[83]

Starting in 2005, her relationship with Brad Pitt became one of the most
reported celebrity stories worldwide. After Jolie confirmed her pregnancy in
early 2006, the unprecedented media hype surrounding them "reached the point
of insanity" as Reuters described it in their story "The Brangelina fever".[4]
Trying to avoid the media attention, the couple went to Namibia for the birth
of Shiloh, "the most anticipated baby since Jesus Christ", as it had been
described.[84] Two years later, Jolie's second pregnancy again fueled a media
frenzy. For the two weeks she spent in a seaside hospital in Nice, reporters
and photographers camped outside on the promenade to report on the birth.[85]

Today, Jolie is one of the best known celebrities around the world. According
to the Q Score, in 2000, subsequent to her Oscar win, 31 % of respondents in
the United States said Jolie was familiar to them, by 2006 she was familiar to
81 % of Americans.[46] In a 2006 global industry survey by ACNielsen in 42
international markets Jolie, together with Brad Pitt, was found to be the
favorite celebrity endorser for brands and products worldwide.[86] Jolie was
among the Time 100, a list of the 100 most influential people in the world, in
2006 and 2008.[87][88] She was described as the world's most beautiful woman
in the 2006 "100 Most Beautiful" issue of People,[1] and she was voted the
greatest sex symbol of all time in the British Channel 4 television show The
100 Greatest Sex Symbols in 2007.[89] On Forbes' annual Celebrity 100 list,
Jolie was ranked at No. 35 in 2006,[90] No. 14 in 2007,[91] and she was the
highest listed actor at No. 3 in 2008.[92] According to The Hollywood Reporter
Jolie was the highest paid actress in 2008.[93]

## Tattoos

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jolie in New York with several of her tattoos visible, June 2007

Jolie's numerous tattoos have been the subject of much media attention and
have often been addressed by interviewers. Jolie stated that, while she is not
opposed to film nudity, the large number of tattoos on her body has forced
filmmakers to become more creative when planning nude or love scenes.[94]
Make-up has been used to cover up the tattoos in many of her productions.
Jolie currently has thirteen known tattoos, among them the Tennessee Williams
quote "A prayer for the wild at heart, kept in cages", which she got together
with her mother, the Arabic language phrase "Ø§ÙØ¹Ø²ÙÙ Ø©" (strength of
will), the Latin proverb "quod me nutrit me destruit" (what nourishes me
destroys me),[95] and a Yantra prayer written in the ancient Khmer script for
her son Maddox.[96] She also has six sets of geographical coordinates on her
upper left arm indicating the birthplaces of her children.[97] Over time she
covered or lasered several of her tattoos, including "Billy Bob", the name of
her former husband Billy Bob Thornton, a Chinese character for death (æ­»),
and a window on her lower back; she explained that she removed the window,
because, while she used to spend all of her time looking out through windows
wishing to be outside, she now lives there all of the time.[23]

## Filmography

Year Film Role Notes and awards  
1982 Lookin' to Get Out Tosh  
1993 Cyborg 2 Casella "Cash" Reese  
1995 Without Evidence Jodie Swearingen  
Hackers Kate "Acid Burn" Libby  
1996 Mojave Moon Eleanor "Elie" Rigby  
Love Is All There Is Gina Malacici  
Foxfire Margret "Legs" Sadovsky  
1997 True Women (TV) Georgia Virginia Lawshe Woods  
George Wallace (TV) Cornelia Wallace Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting
Actress â Series/Miniseries/TV Movie  
Nominated â Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a
Movie  
Playing God Claire  
1998 Gia (TV) Gia Marie Carangi Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Mini-
Series or Motion Picture Made for TV  
Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress in a TV Movie or Miniseries  
Nominated â Emmy Award for Best Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie  
Hell's Kitchen Gloria McNeary  
Playing by Heart Joan National Board of Review Award â Breakthrough
Performance  
Pushing Tin Mary Bell  
1999 The Bone Collector Amelia Donaghy  
Girl, Interrupted Lisa Rowe Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress  
Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actress  
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress â Motion Picture  
Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Supporting Actress â Motion Picture  
Nominated â Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting
Actress  
2000 Gone in Sixty Seconds Sara "Sway" Wayland  
2001 Lara Croft: Tomb Raider Lara Croft  
Original Sin Julia Russell  
2002 Life or Something Like It Lanie Kerrigan  
2003 Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life Lara Croft  
Beyond Borders Sarah Jordan  
2004 Taking Lives Illeana Scott  
Shark Tale Lola Voice  
Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow Francesca "Franky" Cook People's Choice
Award â Favorite Female Action Star  
The Fever (TV) Revolutionary Cameo  
Alexander Olympias  
2005 Mr. & Mrs. Smith Jane Smith MTV Movie Award for Best Fight  
Nominated â MTV Movie Award for Best Kiss  
Nominated â People's Choice Award â Favorite Female Movie Star  
Nominated â People's Choice Award â Favorite Female Action Star  
Nominated â People's Choice Award â Favorite On-Screen Match-Up (with Brad
Pitt)  
2006 The Good Shepherd Margaret Russell  
2007 A Mighty Heart Mariane Pearl Nominated â Broadcast Film Critics
Association Award for Best Actress  
Nominated â Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress  
Nominated â Golden Globe Award for Best Actress â Motion Picture Drama  
Nominated â Independent Spirit Award for Best Lead Female  
Nominated â London Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress  
Nominated â Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Actress  
Nominated â Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress â Motion Picture  
Beowulf Grendel's mother Nominated â MTV Movie Award for Best Villain  
2008 Kung Fu Panda Master Tigress Voice  
Wanted Fox People's Choice Award â Favorite Female Action Star  
Nominated â People's Choice Award â Favorite Female Movie Star  
Changeling Christine Collins Nominated â Academy Award for Best Actress  
Nominated â BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role  
Nominated â Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress  
Nominated â Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress  
Nominated â Golden Globe Award for Best Actress â Motion Picture Drama  
Nominated â London Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress  
Nominated â Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress â Motion Picture  
2010 Salt Evelyn Salt (in production)  
## Awards

Year Award Category Film Result  
1998 Emmy Award Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie
George Wallace Nominated  
Golden Globe Award Best Supporting Actress â Series/Miniseries/TV Movie Won  
National Board of Review Award Breakthrough Performance â Female Playing by
Heart Won  
Emmy Award Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie Gia Nominated  
1999 Golden Globe Award Best Performance by an Actress in a Mini-Series or
Motion Picture Made for TV Won  
Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a TV
Movie or Miniseries Won  
2000 Golden Globe Award Best Supporting Actress â Motion Picture Girl,
Interrupted Won  
Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a
Supporting Role Won  
Academy Award Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role Won  
2004 People's Choice Award Favourite Female Action Star Sky Captain And The
World Of Tomorrow Won  
2008 Golden Globe Award Best Performance by an Actress in a Motion Picture â
Drama A Mighty Heart Nominated  
Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a
Leading Role Nominated  
2009 Golden Globe Award Best Performance by an Actress in a Motion Picture â
Drama Changeling Nominated  
Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a
Leading Role Nominated  
BAFTA Award Best Actress in a Leading Role Nominated  
Academy Award Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role Nominated  
(Source: IMDb.com)  
## References

  1. ^ a b 2006's Most Beautiful Star: Angelina Jolie. People. April 26, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  2. ^ Grabicki, Michelle. Witherspoon is Hollywood's highest-paid actress. Reuters. November 30, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  3. ^ a b c d e f g h i Angelina Jolie Movie Box Office Results. Box Office Mojo. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  4. ^ a b The Brangelina fever. Reuters. February 6, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  5. ^ Will the real Jon Voight please stand up?. Interview. May 1, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  6. ^ Joseph Kamp. New York Times. June 20, 1944. p. 19.
  7. ^ Nevin, Charles. The glamour of Swindon: Billie Piper, Melinda. The Independent. July 18, 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  8. ^ a b Sessums, Kevin. Wild at heart. Allure. November 2004. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  9. ^ Telegraph interview with Jon Voight. Telegraph. October 2, 2001. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  10. ^ a b c Van Meter, Jonathan. Angelina Jolie: Body Beautiful. Vogue. April 2002. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  11. ^ a b c d Wills, Dominic. Angelina Jolie Biography. Tiscali.co.uk. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  12. ^ Paula Zahn Now. CNN.com. June 9, 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  13. ^ Heath, Chris. Blood, Sugar, Sex, Magic. Rolling Stone. July 2001. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  14. ^ Strejcek, Ginger. Attracting the Eyes of the World. Season Magazine. Summer 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  15. ^ a b Grossberg, Josh. Angelina Jolie's Name Interrupted. E! Online. September 17, 2002. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  16. ^ Schruers, Fred. Angelina Jolie. Premiere Magazine. October 2004. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  17. ^ Maslin, Janet. Hackers - Review. The New York Times. September 15, 1995. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  18. ^ Brandt, Andrew. How Hollywood portrays hackers. PC World. May 4, 2001. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  19. ^ Mathews, Jack. Movie Review - Foxfire. The Los Angeles Times. August 23, 1996. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  20. ^ Ebert, Roger. Reviews: Playing God. Chicago Sun-Times. October 17, 1997. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  21. ^ Vance, Vanessa. Gia (1998). Reel.com. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  22. ^ a b Angelina Jolie interviews featuring Jonny Lee Miller. JonnyLeeMiller.co.uk. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  23. ^ a b Inside the Actors Studio, Episode 169. Bravo. June 5, 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  24. ^ Stack, Peter. `Heart' Barely Misses a Beat. San Francisco Chronicle. January 22, 1999. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  25. ^ Howe, Desson. 'Pushing Tin'. Washington Post. April 23, 1999. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  26. ^ Lawson, Terry. The Bone Collector. Detroit Free Press. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  27. ^ Ebert, Roger. Reviews : Girl, Interrupted. Chicago Sun-Times. January 14, 2000. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  28. ^ IMDb Movie of the Day. IMDb.com. March 7, 2003. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  29. ^ Levy, Emanuel. Variety.com - Reviews - Girl, Interrupted. Variety. December 10, 1999. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  30. ^ Hunter, Stephen. 'Gone in 60 Seconds': Lost in the Exhaust. Washington Post. June 9, 2000. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  31. ^ Gonzalez, Ed. Film Review - Lara Croft: Tomb Raider. Slant Magazine. 2001. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  32. ^ Mitchell, Elvis. Original Sin - Review. The New York Times. August 3, 2001. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  33. ^ Clinton, Paul. Jolie shines in up-and-down 'Life'. CNN.com. April 25, 2002. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  34. ^ Turan, Kenneth. "Beyond Borders" turns out to be an unreal film about a too-real situation. Los Angeles Times. October 24, 2003. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  35. ^ Honeycutt, Kirk. Taking Lives. The Hollywood Reporter. March 15, 2004. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  36. ^ Stone blames 'moral fundamentalism' for US box office flop. The Guardian. January 6, 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  37. ^ Covert, Colin. Mr. & Mrs. Smith. Minneapolis Star Tribune. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  38. ^ Phillips, Michael. Movie review: 'The Good Shepherd'. Chicago Tribune. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  39. ^ Angelina Jolie screens her film at the Tribeca Film Festival. Eitb24.com. April 29, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  40. ^ Bennett, Ray. Review: 'A Mighty Heart'. The Hollywood Reporter. May 22, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  41. ^ Foundas, Scott. Clint Eastwood: The Set Whisperer. LA Weekly. December 19, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  42. ^ "Oscar nominations 2009." BBC News. February 23, 2009. Accessed March 9, 2009.
  43. ^ Phillips, Michael. âChangelingâ stars Angelina Jolie, John Malkovich, Jeffrey Donovan. Chicago Tribune. October 24, 2008. Accessed March 26, 2009.
  44. ^ a b c d UNHCR. Angelina Jolie named UNHCR Goodwill Ambassador for refugees, UNHCR.org. August 23, 2001. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  45. ^ UNHCR. Angelina Jolie responds to UNHCR emergency appeal. UNHCR.org. September 27, 2001. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  46. ^ a b c d e Swibel, Matthew. Bad Girl Interrupted. Forbes. June 12, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  47. ^ UNHCR. Angelina Jolie UNHCR Goodwill Ambassador Fact Sheet. UNHCR.org. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  48. ^ UNHCR. Interview with Angelina Jolie. UNHCR.org. October 21, 2002. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  49. ^ UNHCR. Goodwill Ambassador Angelina Jolie ends Ecuador mission. UNHCR.org. June 10, 2002 Accessed September 8, 2008.
  50. ^ UNHCR. Jolie shares festive cheer with refugees in Lebanon, UNHCR.org. December 29, 2004. Accessed November 22, 2008.
  51. ^ UNHCR. Jolie-Pitt Foundation donates US$1 million to groups working in Darfur. Reuters AlertNet. May 10, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  52. ^ CNN. Jolie in Iraq: 2M refugees need help, CNN.com. February 7, 2008. Accessed December 3, 2008.
  53. ^ UNHCR. Angelina Jolie launches centre for unaccompanied children. UNHCR.org. March 9, 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  54. ^ Green, Mary. Brad & Angelina Start Charitable Group. People. September 20, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  55. ^ About the Founders. Education Partnership for Children of Conflict. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  56. ^ Jolie honoured for refugee role. BBC News. October 12, 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  57. ^ Jolie given Cambodian citizenship. BBC News. August 12, 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  58. ^ Green, Mary. Angelina Jolie Joins Council on Foreign Relations. People. June 07, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  59. ^ UNHCR. High Commissioner and Angelina Jolie to receive IRC Freedom Award . UNHCR.org. November 6, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  60. ^ * Bandon, Alexandra. Following, Ambivalently, in Mom or Dad's Footsteps. The New York Times. August 25, 1996. Accessed February 25, 2009.
  61. ^ a b c d e WENN. News for Angelina Jolie. IMDb.com. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  62. ^ Van Meter, Jonathan. Learning To Fly. Vogue. March 2004. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  63. ^ 'Tis the Season to Be Jolie. Girlfriends Magazine. December 1997.
  64. ^ a b c Kesner, Julian & Megna Michelle. Angelina, saint vs. sinner. New York Daily News. February 2, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  65. ^ Harris, Mark. The Mommy Track. The New York Times. October 15, 2008. Accessed October 18, 2008.
  66. ^ BANG Media International. Maddox cutest kid. Life Style Extra. July 20, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  67. ^ a b Pflanz, Mike. Angelina Jolie's adopted baby 'result of rape'. Telegraph. November 20, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  68. ^ Bell, John. Angelina's Baby Zahara: Her touching family story. Yahoo Movies. July 14, 2005. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  69. ^ Anderson Cooper 360 - Angelina Jolie: Her Mission and Motherhood. CNN.com. June 20, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  70. ^ Judge says Jolie's children can take Pitt's name. Associated Press. January 19, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  71. ^ Roschlau, Frauke. Little Shiloh will be Namibian: Angelina and Brad. Deutsche Presse-Agentur. June 7, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  72. ^ Jolie's twins to set new record. The Times. June 8, 2008. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  73. ^ NYC Wax Museum Shows Off Jolie-Pitt Baby. USA Today. July 27, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  74. ^ Ken Lee. Angelina Jolie's Son Legally Named Pax Thien Jolie-Pitt People. May 31, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  75. ^ AFP. Jolie sorry to throw media spotlight on adopted boy. National Nine News. March 17, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  76. ^ Angelina Jolie adopts Vietnam boy. BBC News. March 15, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  77. ^ Norman, Pete. Angelina Jolie: Brad and I May Want Up to 14 Kids. People. June 15, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  78. ^ AP. It's a boy and a girl for Jolie and Pitt. MSNBC.com. July 13, 2008. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  79. ^ Carlson, Erin. Person close to deal: Jolie-Pitt pix for $14 mil. Associated Press. August 1, 2008. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  80. ^ Barnes, Brooks. Angelina Jolieâs Carefully Orchestrated Image . The New York Times. November 20, 2008. Accessed November 24, 2008.
  81. ^ AAP. Everyone wants to look like Jolie. The Sydney Morning Herald . April 12, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  82. ^ Norman, Pete. Angelina Jolie Taking a Year Off Work. People. May 22, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  83. ^ Thompson, Stephen. Is there a God?. The A.V. Club. September 6, 2000. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  84. ^ Leonard, Terry. Namibia Shielding Pitt and Jolie. Associated Press. May 25, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  85. ^ Gruber, Ben. Jolie twins doctor admits to pre-birth pressure. Reuters. July 15, 2008. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  86. ^ ACNielsen. Angelina Jolie, Brad Pitt top the charts, as favourite celebrity endorsers. Agency Facts. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  87. ^ Brown, Malloch. The Time 100. Time. April 30, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  88. ^ Clooney, George. The Time 100. Time. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  89. ^ Jolie named 'sexiest person ever'. BBC News. February 24, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  90. ^ The Celebrity 100. Forbes. June 15, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  91. ^ The Celebrity 100. Forbes. June 14, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  92. ^ The Celebrity 100. Forbes. June 11, 2008. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  93. ^ Women In Entertainment. The Hollywood Reporter. Accessed March 26, 2009.
  94. ^ Kirkland, Bruce. The new Angelina Jolie. Jam! Showbiz. October 19, 2003. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  95. ^ Thomas, Karen. Angelina Jolie, tattoo diarist. USA Today. July 7, 2003. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  96. ^ Jolie adds Thai tattoo. BBC News. April 24, 2003. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  97. ^ Angelina shows off her new geo-tattoos. The Sydney Morning Herald. October 7, 2008. Accessed October 22, 2008.

## Further reading

  * McFay, Edgar. Angelina Jolie: Angel in Disguise. Icon Press, 2005. ISBN 1-894864-25-5
  * Jolie, Angelina. Notes from My Travels. Pocket Books, 2003. ISBN 0-7434-7023-0.
  * Wills, Dominic. Angelina Jolie biography. Tiscali.co.uk. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * UNHCR. Angelina Jolie UNHCR Goodwill Ambassador Fact Sheet. UNHCR.org. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * UNHCR. Field Missions. UNHCR.org. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Bandon, Alexandra. Following, Ambivalently, in Mom or Dad's Footsteps. The New York Times. August 25, 1996. Accessed February 25, 2009.
  * Rochlin, Margy. Angelina Jolie: For a Fighting Machine, a 'Bad Girl' Image Is Good. The New York Times. June 17, 2001. Accessed January 16, 2009.
  * Heath, Chris . Blood, Sugar, Sex, Magic. Rolling Stone. July 2001. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Van Meter, Jonathan. Body Beautiful. Vogue. April 2002. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Van Meter, Jonathan. Learning to Fly. Vogue. March 2004. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Schruers, Fred. Angelina Jolie. Premiere Magazine. October 2004. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Sessums, Kevin. Wild at heart. Allure. November 2004. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Swibel, Matthew. Bad Girl Interrupted. Forbes. June 12, 2006. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Van Meter, Jonathan. The Bold and the Beautiful. Vogue. January 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Palmer, Martin. Angelina Almighty. The Times. September 8, 2007. Accessed September 8, 2008.
  * Harris, Mark. The Mommy Track. The New York Times. October 15, 2008. Accessed January 16, 2009.
  * Barnes, Brooks. Angelina Jolieâs Carefully Orchestrated Image. The New York Times. November 20, 2008. Accessed November 24, 2008.

## External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Angelina Jolie  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Angelina
Jolie  
  * Angelina Jolie at the Internet Movie Database
  * Angelina Jolie at Yahoo! Movies
  * Angelina Jolie at Allmovie
  * Angelina Jolie at People.com
  * UNHCR Goodwill Ambassador Angelina Jolie, official homepage at UNHCR.org
  * Angelina Jolie's Refugee Journals, Jolie's journals (2002â2004) at UNHCR.org
  * Journey Through Eastern Congo, multimedia journal, narrated by Jolie

v â¢ d â¢ e

Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress  
Maureen Stapleton (1981) Â· Jessica Lange (1982) Â· Linda Hunt (1983) Â· Peggy
Ashcroft (1984) Â· Anjelica Huston (1985) Â· Dianne Wiest (1986) Â· Olympia
Dukakis (1987) Â· Geena Davis (1988) Â· Brenda Fricker (1989) Â· Whoopi
Goldberg (1990) Â· Mercedes Ruehl (1991) Â· Marisa Tomei (1992) Â· Anna Paquin
(1993) Â· Dianne Wiest (1994) Â· Mira Sorvino (1995) Â· Juliette Binoche
(1996) Â· Kim Basinger (1997) Â· Dame Judi Dench (1998) Â· Angelina Jolie
(1999) Â· Marcia Gay Harden (2000)

* * *
Complete list Â· (1928â1940) Â· (1941â1960) Â· (1961â1980) Â·
(1981â2000) Â· (2001-present)  
Featured article

  

Persondata  
NAME Jolie, Angelina  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES Voight, Angelina Jolie (birth name)  
SHORT DESCRIPTION film actress  
DATE OF BIRTH June 4, 1975  
PLACE OF BIRTH Los Angeles, California  
DATE OF DEATH  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angelina_Jolie"

Categories: 1975 births | Living people | Actors from California | American
aviators | American film actors | American film producers | American
humanitarians | American female models | American voice actors | American
writers | Best Miniseries or Television Movie Actress Golden Globe winners |
Best Supporting Actress Academy Award winners | Best Supporting Actress Golden
Globe (film) winners | Best Supporting Actress Golden Globe (television)
winners | Bisexual actors | French Canadian Americans | German-Americans | Lee
Strasberg Theatre Institute alumni | LGBT people from the United States |
People from Los Angeles, California | People of Iroquois descent | Slovak
Americans | United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Goodwill Ambassadors

Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism |
Wikipedia protected pages without expiry | Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KaszÃ«bsczi
  * Kiswahili
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Latina
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 02:26.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



