
# Socialist realism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Not to be confused with Social realism or Real socialism.

<IMG>

<IMG>

"Roses for Stalin", Boris Vladimirski, 1949

Socialist realism is a teleologically-oriented style of realistic art which
has as its purpose the furtherance of the goals of socialism and communism.
Although related, it should not be confused with social realism, a type of art
that realistically depicts subjects of social concern.

## Contents

  * 1 In the Soviet Union
  * 2 In other states
  * 3 Roots
  * 4 Characteristics
  * 5 Notable works and artists
  * 6 Consequences
  * 7 Gallery
    * 7.1 Architecture
    * 7.2 Sculpture
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References and further reading
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] In the Soviet Union

Socialist realism was the officially approved type of art in the Soviet Union
for nearly sixty years. Communist doctrine decreed that all material goods and
means of production belonged to the community as a whole. This included means
of producing art, which were also seen as powerful propaganda tools. During
the October Revolution of 1917, the Bolsheviks established an institution
called Proletkult (the Proletarian Cultural and Enlightenment Organizations)
which sought to put all arts into the service of the dictatorship of the
proletariat.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Moscow State University

In the early years of the Soviet Union, Russian and Soviet artists embraced a
wide variety of art forms under the auspices of Proletkult. Revolutionary
politics and radical non-traditional art forms were seen as complementary. In
art, constructivism flourished. In poetry, the nontraditional and the avant-
garde were often praised.

This, however, was rejected by some members of the Communist party, who did
not appreciate modern styles such as impressionism and cubism, since these
movements existed before the revolution and hence were associated with
"decadent bourgeois art." Socialist realism was thus to some extent a reaction
against the adoption of these "decadent" styles. Also, it was thought that the
non-representative forms of art were not understood by the proletariat and
thus could not be used by the state for propaganda.

Socialist realism became state policy in 1932 when Soviet leader Joseph Stalin
promulgated the decree "On the Reconstruction of Literary and Art
Organizations". The Union of Soviet Writers was founded to control the output
of authors, and the new policy was rubber-stamped at the Congress of Socialist
Writers in 1934. It was enforced ruthlessly in all spheres of artistic
endeavour. Artists who strayed from the official line were severely punished.

The restrictions were loosened somewhat after Stalin's death in 1953 but the
state still kept a tight rein on personal artistic expression. This caused
many artists to choose to go into exile, for example the Odessa Group from the
city of that name. Independent-minded artists that remained continued to feel
the hostility of the state. In 1974, for instance, a show of unofficial art in
a field near Moscow was broken up, and the artworks destroyed with a water
cannon and bulldozers (see Bulldozer Exhibition). Mikhail Gorbachev's policy
of glasnost and perestroika facilitated an explosion of interest in
alternative art styles in the late 1980s, but socialist realism remained in
limited force as the official state art style until as late as 1991. It was
not until after the fall of the Soviet Union that artists were finally freed
from state censorship[citation needed].

## [edit] In other states

<IMG>

<IMG>

The people of Wuhan fighting the flood of 1954, as depicted on a monument
erected in 1969

After the Russian Revolution, socialist realism became an international
literary movement. Socialist trends in literature were established in the
1920s in Germany, France, Czechoslovakia, and Poland. Writers who helped
develop socialist realism in the West included Louis Aragon, Johannes Becher,
Jaroslav Hasek, and Pablo Neruda. [1]

The doctrine of socialist realism in other Soviet-controlled new People's
Republics, was legally enforced from 1949 to 1956. It involved all domains of
visual and literary arts, though its most spectacular achievements were made
in the field of architecture, considered a key weapon in the creation of a new
social order, intended to help spread the communist doctrine by influencing
citizens' consciousness as well as their outlook on life. During this massive
undertaking, a crucial role fell to architects perceived not as merely
engineers creating streets and edifices, but rather as "Engineers of the human
soul". The general theme, extending beyond simple aesthetics into an urban
design, was meant to express grandiose ideas and arouse feelings of stability,
persistence and political power.

Today, arguably the only countries still focused on these aesthetic principles
are North Korea, Laos, and to some extent Vietnam. The People's Republic of
China occasionally reverts to socialist realism for specific purposes, such as
idealised propaganda posters to promote the Chinese space program. Socialist
realism had little mainstream impact in the non-Communist world, where it was
widely seen as a totalitarian means of imposing state control on artists.

The former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was an important exception
among the communist countries, because after the Tito-Stalin split in 1948, it
abandoned socialist realism along with other elements previously imported from
the Soviet system and allowed greater artistic freedom.[2] Miroslav KrleÅ¾a,
one of the leading Yugoslav intellectuals, held a speech at the Third Congress
of the Writers Alliance of Yugoslavia in Ljubljana in 1952, which is
considered a turning point in the Yugoslav dennouncement of dogmatic socialist
realism.

## [edit] Roots

The initial tendencies toward socialist realism date from the mid-19th
century. They include revolutionary literature in Great Britain (the poetry of
the Chartist movement), Germany (Herwegh, Freiligrath, and G. Weerth), and
France (the literature of the Paris Commune and Pottier's "Internationale.")
Socialist realism emerged as a literary method in the early 20th century in
Russia, especially in the works of Gorky. It was also apparent in the works of
writers like Kotsiubinsky, Rainis, Akopian, and Edvoshvili. Following Gorky,
writers in several countries combined the realistic depiction of life with the
expression of a socialist world view. They included Barbusse, Andersen Nexo,
and John Reed. [3]

The political aspect of socialist realism was, in some respects, a
continuation of pre-Soviet state policy. Censorship and attempts to control
the content of art did not begin with the Soviets, but were a long-running
feature of Russian life. The Tsarist government also appreciated the
potentially disruptive effect of art and required all books to be cleared by
the censor. Writers and artists in 19th century Imperial Russia became quite
skilled at evading censorship by making their points without spelling it out
in so many words. However, Soviet censors were not easily evaded.

Socialist realism had its roots in neoclassicism and the traditions of realism
in Russian literature of the 19th century that described the life of simple
people. It was exemplified by the aesthetic philosophy of Maxim Gorky. The
work of the Peredvizhniki ("Wanderers," a Russian realist movement of the late
19th / early 20th centuries), Jacques-Louis David and Ilya Yefimovich Repin
were notable influences.

Socialist Realism was a product of the Soviet system. Whereas in market
societies professional artists earned their living selling to, or being
commissioned by rich individuals or the Church, in Soviet society not only was
the market suppressed, there were few if any individuals able to patronise the
arts and only one institution - the State itself. Hence artists became state
employees. As such the State set the parameters for what it employed them to
do. What was expected of the artist was that s/he be formally qualified and to
reach a standard of competence. However, whilst this rewarded basic
competency, it did not provide an incentive to excel, resulting in a
stultification similar to that in other spheres of Soviet society. The State,
after the Congress of 1934, laid down four rules for what became known as
"Socialist Realism"-

That the work be;

<IMG>

<IMG>

13 May 1967.Cinemacenter Avrora. Architect E.A. Serdjukov.1300 Seats.

1\. Proletarian- art relevant to the workers and understandable to them.

2\. Typical- scenes of every day life of the people.

3\. Realistic - in the representational sense.

4\. Partisan - supportive of the aims of the State and the Party.

Even so, many of the art works glorifying Joseph Stalin and other leaders are
hardly in keeping with these ideals and the charge that art be understandable
to the whole people negated the Western notion of the avant garde (despite the
Bolsheviks casting themselves as a political "vanguard") and discouraged
experimental approaches. The realism achieved was often technically very good
and similar to many Western works intended as magazine illustration or
bookjackets, rather than High Art. The partisan quality tends to attract the
most criticism, in that it often predominated to the exclusion of the other
tenets, so that paintings of peasants feasting after bumper harvests was
neither real nor typical of the lot of many of those depicted, especially in
the Ukrainian Famine.[citation needed]

## [edit] Characteristics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Socialist-Realist allegories surrounding the Palace of Culture and Science in
Warsaw

Socialist realism held that successful art depicts and glorifies the
proletariat's struggle toward socialist progress. The Statute of the Union of
Soviet Writers in 1934 stated that socialist realism

    is the basic method of Soviet literature and literary criticism. It demands of the artist the truthful, historically concrete representation of reality in its revolutionary development. Moreover, the truthfulness and historical concreteness of the artistic representation of reality must be linked with the task of ideological transformation and education of workers in the spirit of socialism.
Its purpose was to elevate the common worker, whether factory or agricultural,
by presenting his life, work, and recreation as admirable. In other words, its
goal was to educate the people in the goals and meaning of Communism. The
ultimate aim was to create what Lenin called "an entirely new type of human
being": New Soviet Man. Stalin described the practitioners of socialist
realism as "engineers of souls".

The "realism" part is important. Soviet art at this time aimed to depict the
worker as he truly was, carrying his tools. In a sense, the movement mirrors
the course of American and Western art, where the everyday human being became
the subject of the novel, the play, poetry, and art. The proletariat was at
the center of communist ideals; hence, his life was a worthy subject for
study. This was an important shift away from the aristocratic art produced
under the Russian tsars of previous centuries, but had much in common with the
late-19th century fashion for depicting the social life of the common people.

Compared to the eclectic variety of 20th century Western art, socialist
realism often resulted in a fairly bland and predictable range of artistic
products (indeed, Western critics wryly described the principles of socialist
realism as "girl meets tractor").[4] Painters would depict happy, muscular
peasants and workers in factories and collective farms; during the Stalin
period, they also produced numerous heroic portraits of the dictator to serve
his cult of personality. Industrial and agricultural landscapes were popular
subjects, glorifying the achievements of the Soviet economy. Novelists were
expected to produce uplifting stories in a manner consistent with the Marxist
doctrine of dialectical materialism. Composers were to produce rousing, vivid
music that reflected the life and struggles of the proletariat.

Socialist realism thus demanded close adherence to party doctrine, and has
often been criticized as detrimental to the creation of true, unfettered art
â or as being little more than a means to censor artistic expression.
CzesÅaw MiÅosz, writing in the introduction to Sinyavsky's On Socialist
Realism, describes the products of socialist realism as "inferior", ascribing
this as necessarily proceeding from the limited view of reality permitted to
creative artists.

Not all Marxists accepted the necessity of socialist realism (Marx, Engels and
Trotsky's views on art and culture were very liberal and may have baulked at
the propagandism of Socialist realism themselves). Its establishment as state
doctrine in the 1930s had rather more to do with internal Communist Party
politics than classic Marxist imperatives. The Hungarian Marxist essayist
Georg LukÃ¡cs criticized the rigidity of socialist realism, proposing his own
"critical realism" as an alternative. However, such critical voices were a
rarity until the 1980s.

## [edit] Notable works and artists

Maxim Gorky's novel Mother is usually considered to have been the first work
of socialist realism. Gorky was also a major factor in the school's rapid
rise, and his pamphlet, On Socialist Realism, essentially lays out the needs
of Soviet art. Other important works of literature include Fyodor Gladkov's
Cement (1925) and Mikhail Sholokhov's two volume epic, And Quiet Flows the Don
(1934) and The Don Flows Home to the Sea (1940).

Martin Andersen NexÃ¸ developed socialist realism in his own way. His creative
method was characterized by a combination of publicistic passion, a critical
view of capitalist society, and a steadfast striving to bring reality into
accord with socialist ideals. The novel "Pelle, the Conqueror" is considered
to be a classic of socialist realism. The novel "Ditte, Daughter of Man" had a
working-class woman as its heroine. He battled against the enemies of
socialism in the books "Two Worlds", and "Hands Off!".

The novels of Louis Aragon such as "The Real World" depicts the working class
as a rising force of the nation. He published two books of documentary prose,
"The Communist Man." In the collection of poems "A Knife in the Heart Again",
Aragon criticizes the penetration of American imperialism into Europe. The
novel "The Holy Week" depicts the artist's path toward the people against a
broad social and historical background.

Hanns Eisler composed many workers' songs, marches, and ballads on current
political topics such as "Song of Solidarity", "Song of the United Front", and
"The Cominten." He was a founder of a new style of revolutionary song for the
masses. He also composed works in larger forms such as "Requiem for Lenin".
Eisler's most important works include the cantatas "German Symphony",
"Serenade of the Age" and "Song of Peace." Eisler combines features of
revolutionary songs with varied expression. His symphonic music is known for
its complex and subtle orchestration.

Closely associated with the rise of the labor movement was the development of
the revolutionary song, which was performed at demonstrations and meetings.
Among the most famous of the revolutionary songs are "The Internationale",
"Warszawianka", and "Riego Hymn." Notable songs from Russia include "Boldly,
Comrades, in Step", "Workers' Marseillaise", and "Rage, Tyrants". Folk and
revolutionary songs influenced the Soviet mass songs. The mass song was a
leading genre in Soviet music, especially during the 1930s and the war. The
mass song influenced other genres, including the art song, opera, and film
music. The most popular mass songs include Dunaevsky's "Song of the Homeland",
Blanter's "Katiusha", Novikov's "Hymn of Democratic Youth of the World", and
Aleksandrov's "Sacred War".

In the early 1930s, Soviet filmmakers applied socialist realism in their work.
Notable films include "Chapaev", which shows the role of the people in the
history-making process. The theme of revolutionary history was developed in
films like "The Youth of Maksim", by Kozintsev and Trauberg, "Shchors" by
Dovzhenko, and "We are from Kronstadt" by E. Dzigan. The shaping of the new
man under socialism was a theme of films like "A Start Life" by N. Ekk, "Ivan"
by Dovzhenko, and "Valerii Chkalov" by M. Kalatozov. Some films depicted the
part of peoples of the Soviet Union against foreign invaders: "Alexander
Nevsky" by Eisenstein, "Minin and Pozharsky" by Pudvokin, and "Bogdan
Khmelnitsky" by Savchenko. Soviet politicians were the subjects in films such
as Iutkevich's trilogy of movies about Lenin.

Socialist realism was also applied to Hindi films of the 1940s and 1950s.
These include Chetan Anand's Neecha Nagar (1946), which won the Grand Prize at
the 1st Cannes Film Festival, and Bimal Roy's Two Acres of Land (1953), which
won the International Prize at the 7th Cannes Film Festival.

The painter Aleksandr Deineka provides a notable example for his expressionist
and patriotic scenes of the Second World War, collective farms, and sports.
Yuri Pimenov, Boris Ioganson and Geli Korzev have also been described as
"unappreciated masters of twentieth-century realism".[5] Another well-known
practitioner was Fyodor Pavlovich Reshetnikov.

## [edit] Consequences

<IMG>

<IMG>

A relief from the Soviet military cemetery in Warsaw showing workers greeting
victorious soldiers.

Socialist realism's rigid precepts and enforcement greatly hindered the
freedom of Soviet artists. Many artists and authors found their works
censored, ignored, or rejected. Mikhail Bulgakov, for instance, was forced to
write his masterwork, The Master and Margarita, in secret, despite earlier
successes such as White Guard. Sergei Prokofiev found his musical language
increasingly restricted in the years after his permanent return to the Soviet
Union in 1935 (especially in the wake of the 1948 Zhdanov Decree), although he
continued to compose until the end of his life five years later.

The political doctrine behind socialist realism also underlay the pervasive
censorship of Communist societies. Apart from obvious political considerations
that saw works such as those of George Orwell being banned, access to foreign
art and literature was also restricted on aesthetic grounds. Bourgeois art and
all forms of experimentalism and formalism were denounced as decadent,
degenerate and pessimistic, and therefore anti-Communist in principle. The
works of James Joyce were particularly harshly condemned. The net effect was
that it was not until the 1980s that the general public in the Communist
countries were able to freely access many works of Western art and literature.
Many then joined Western observers in denouncing socialist realism as mere
propaganda.

The Sots Art paintings of Komar and Melamid can be viewed as a parody of
socialist realism.

## [edit] Gallery

Click on each image for more details. An asterisk indicates that more
information is available.

Lenin Stalin  
"Lenin" by Alexei Nesterenko  
by Alexei Nesterenko "Lenin" by Stepan Karpov  
by Stepan Karpov "Vladimir Ilyich Lenin" by Isaac Brodskiy  
by Isaac Brodskiy Gigantic monument to Stalin in Prague - LetnÃ¡ \(1955-1962\)  
Monument in Prague-LetnÃ¡ (1955-1962)  
Ordinary life  
"Miner" by Boris Vladimirski  
"Miner" by  
Boris Vladimirski "Female Worker" by Boris Vladimirski  
"Female Worker"  
by Vladimirski "In a Girls' School" by Ivan Vladimirov  
"In a Girls' School"  
by Ivan Vladimirov "Lenin's Room in Simbirsk 1878 to 1887" by Vladimir
Krikhatzkij  
"Lenin's Room in Simbirsk 1878  
to 1887" by Vladimir Krikhatzkij "Wedding on a Tomorrow Street" by Yury
Pimenov  
""Wedding on a Tomorrow Street"  
by Yury Pimenov  
Revolution and War Technology  
"Meeting of a Village Party Cell" by Efim Cheptsov  
"Meeting of a Village Party Cell"  
by Efim Cheptsov The First Tractor by Vladimir Krikhatsky  
The First Tractor  
by Vladimir Krikhatsky  
"In the Stalin Factory"  
by Mikhail Kostin  
### [edit] Architecture

Main article: Stalinist architecture

<IMG>

Unrealized project of Zaryadye skyscraper (Eight Sister) in Moscow

<IMG>

Palace of Culture and Science in Warsaw

<IMG>

All-Soviet Exhibition Centre in Moscow

<IMG>

Railway station, Petrozavodsk  
<IMG>

Palace of cultures, Rostov on Don

<IMG>

Centre of Nowa Huta

<IMG>

Centre of new part of Ostrov town in the west of Czech Republic

<IMG>

House in the centre of Krasnoyarsk  
### [edit] Sculpture

<IMG>

Kiev's monumental statue of the Mother Motherland. (See Museum of the Great
Patriotic War, Kiev)

<IMG>

Soc-Realist allegories surrounding the Palace of Culture and Science

<IMG>

A relief from the Soviet military cemetery in Warsaw showing workers greeting
victorious soldiers.

<IMG>

A figure of a worker over the main entrance to the skyscraper on Rebellions
Square in Moscow  
<IMG>

The 85-meter-tall statue of Mother Motherland crowns the Mamayev Kurgan in
Volgograd

<IMG>

Worker and Kolkhoz Woman sculpture in Moscow (1935-37)

<IMG>

The construction and industry statue on the Green Bridge, Vilnius; it is one
of the few remaining in its original place in Lithuania.  
## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ D.F. Markov and L.I. Timofeev, "Socialist Realism"
  2. ^ Library of Congress Country Studies \- Yugoslavia: Introduction of Socialist Self-Management
  3. ^ Markov and L.I. Timofeev, "Socialist Realism"
  4. ^ Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Cultural Front: Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia, Published 1992 by Cornell University Press, ISBN 0801495164.
  5. ^ Marek Bartelik, Concerning Socialist Realism: Recent Publications on Russian Art, book review. Art Journal, Winter, 1999.

## [edit] See also

  * Engineers of the human soul
  * The First Tractor
  * Formalism
  * Heroic realism, a term which embraces both Socialist realism and Nazi heroic realism, the very similar art style associated with Fascism.
  * List of statues of Lenin
  * Palace of Culture and Science in Warsaw
  * Seven Sisters (Moscow)
  * Social realism
  * Socialist realism in Poland
  * Socialist realism in Romania
  * Stalin Monument in Budapest
  * Stalin's Monument (Prague)
  * Worker and Parasite, from the Simpsons tv series episode Krusty Gets Kancelled for a supposed parody of socialist realism
  * Andrei Zhdanov

## [edit] References and further reading

  * Bek, MikulÃ¡Å¡, Geoffrey Chew, and Petr Macek (eds.). Socialist Realism and Music. Musicological Colloquium at the Brno International Music Festival 36. Prague: KLP; Brno: Institute of Musicology, Masaryk University, 2004. ISBN 8086791181
  * Golomstock, Igor. Totalitarian Art in the Soviet Union, the Third Reich, Fascist Italy and the People's Republic of China, Harper Collins, 1990.
  * James, C. Vaughan. Soviet Socialist Realism: Origins and Theory. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1973.
  * Prokhorov, Gleb. Art under Socialist Realism: Soviet Painting, 1930-1950. East Roseville, NSW, Australia: Craftsman House; G + B Arts International, 1995. ISBN 9768097833
  * Sinyavsky, Andrei [writing as Abram Tertz]. "The Trial Begins", and "On Socialist Realism", translated by Max Hayward and George Dennis, with an introduction by CzesÅaw MiÅosz. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1960â1982. ISBN 0-520-04677-3

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Socialist realism  
  * Marxists.org Socialist Realism page
  * Socialist Realism art gallery
  * Virtual Museum of Political Art - Socialist Realism

v â¢ d â¢ e

Russian art movements  
Stroganov School Â· Peredvizhniki Â· Abramtsevo Colony Â· Russian Symbolism Â·
Mir iskusstva Â· Cubo-Futurism Â· Suprematism Â· Constructivism Â· Russian
avant-garde Â· Socialist realism Â· Nonconformism  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Joseph Stalin  
Politics

Stalin before the Revolution Â· Stalin in the Revolution and early wars Â·
Stalin's rise to power Â· The Stalin Era as Soviet Leader Â· Collectivization
in the Soviet Union Â· Stalin in World War II Â· Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact Â·
Winter War Â· Occupation of the Baltic states Â· Soviet invasion of Poland Â·
GermanâSoviet Axis talks Â· Tehran Conference Â· Yalta Conference Â· Potsdam
Conference Â· The Cold War Â· Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship Â· Eastern Bloc
Â· TitoâStalin split

<IMG>  
Concepts

Stalinism Â· Neo-Stalinism Â· Socialism in One Country Â· Socialist realism Â·
Stalinism in Architecture Â· Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Â·
Stalin's plan for the transformation of nature  
Controversies

Great Purge Â· Holodomor Â· Dekulakization Â· Gulag Â· Decossackization Â·
Population transfer in the Soviet Union Â· Forced settlements in the Soviet
Union Â· Soviet war crimes Â· Rootless cosmopolitan Â· Doctors' plot Â· Moscow
Trials Â· Stalin's antisemitism Â· NKVD prisoner massacres Â· Katyn massacre
Â· NaziâSoviet population transfers Â· Soviet Census (1937) Â· Soviet
deportations from Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina Â· Operation North Â·
Mingrelian Affair Â· Leningrad Affair Â· Lysenkoism Â· Censorship of images in
the Soviet Union Â· Operation Lentil (Caucasus) Â· Operation Priboi Â·
Vinnytsia massacre Â· Kurapaty Â· Deportation of Koreans in the Soviet Union  
Works

Ten Blows speech Â· Alleged August 19, 1939 speech Â· Falsifiers of History Â·
Stalin Note  
De-Stalinization

Pospelov Commission Â· De-Stalinization Â· Rehabilitation (Soviet) Â·
Khrushchev Thaw Â· On the Personality Cult and its Consequences Â· Gomulka
thaw Â· Soviet Nonconformist Art Â· Shvernik Commission  
Criticism

Stalin Epigram Â· Lenin's Testament Â· Leon Trotsky Â· Ryutin Affair Â·
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn Â· Vladimir Bukovsky Â· Andrei Sakharov Â· Anti-
Stalinist left Â· The Black Book of Communism  
Remembrances

Stalin Monument in Budapest Â· Stalin's Monument (Prague) Â· Joseph Stalin
Museum, Gori Â· List of places named after Joseph Stalin Â· Yanks for Stalin
Â· Stalin Society Â· Stalin Prize Â· Stalin Peace Prize  
Personal

Besarion Jughashvili (father) Â· Ketevan Geladze (mother) Â· Ekaterina
Svanidze (first wife) Â· Yakov Dzhugashvili (son) Â· Constantine Kuzakov (son)
Â· Nadezhda Alliluyeva (second wife) Â· Vasily Dzhugashvili (son) Â· Svetlana
Alliluyeva (daughter)  
Category  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socialist_realism"

Categories: Communism | Film styles | Socialism | Socialist realism | Soviet
art | Realism (art movement) | Art movements | Propaganda examples

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 07:31.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



