
# Generative art

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (November 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Picture produced by Drawing Machine 2

Generative art refers to art that has been generated, composed, or constructed
in an algorithmic manner through the use of systems defined by computer
software algorithms, or similar mathematical or mechanical or randomised
autonomous processes.

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Examples
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Description

Generative art is a system oriented art practice where the common denominator
is the use of systems as a production method. To meet the definition of
generative art, an artwork must be self-contained and operate with some degree
of autonomy. The workings of systems in generative art might resemble, or rely
on, various scientific theories such as Complexity science and Information
theory. The systems of generative artworks have many similarities with systems
found in various areas of science. Such systems may exhibit order and/or
disorder, as well as a varying degree of complexity, making behavioral
prediction difficult. However, such systems still contain a defined
relationship between cause and effect. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's
"Musikalisches WÃ¼rfelspiel" (Musical Dice Game) 1757 is an early example of a
generative system based on randomness. The structure was based on an element
of order on one hand, and disorder on the other.

An artist or creator will usually set down certain ground-rules or formulae
and/or templates materials, and will then set a random or semi-random process
to work on those elements. The results will remain somewhat within set limits,
but may also be subject to subtle or even startling mutations. The idea of
putting the art making process in the place of a pre-generated artwork is a
key feature in generative art, highlighting the process-orientation as an
essential characteristic. Generative artists such as Hans Haacke have explored
processes of physical and biological systems in artistic context.

Generative art can also evolve in real-time, by applying feedback and
generative processes to its own created states. A generative work of art would
in this case never be seen to play in the same way twice. Different types of
graphical programming environments (e.g. Max/Msp, Pure Data or vvvv) are used
in real-time for generative audiovisual artistic expressions for instance in
the Demoscene and in VJ-culture.

Artificial intelligence and automated behavior have introduced new ways of
seeing generative art. The term behavior is particularly useful when
describing generative qualities in art because of the associations to biology
and evolution, for example with the virus models used by the digital artist
Joseph Nechvatal. Autopoiesis by Ken Rinaldo includes fifteen musical and
robotic sculptures that interact with the public and modify their behaviors
based on both the presence of the participants and each other.

The term generative art does not describe any art-movement or ideology. It's a
method of making art. The term refers to how the art is made, and does not
take into account why it was made or what the content of the artwork is.

## [edit] Examples

<IMG>

<IMG>

Initial image of a Mandelbrot set zoom sequence with continuously coloured
environment

<IMG>

<IMG>

Installation view of generative art by Pascal Dombis

  
Composers such as John Cage and Brian Eno have used generative principles and
systems in their works. Eno collaborated on the development of SSEYO's Koan
generative music system and this software was used in the creation of the
album Generative Music 1.

Cut-up technique by Tristan Tzara and William Burroughs, AARON by Harold
Cohen, Conway's Game of Life, visual software by Scott Draves and Karl Sims,
artwork by Sol LeWitt, and architectures by Celestino Soddu are examples of
generative art in different disciplines.

A specific research on unconventional algorithms to create paintings according
to generative principles have been proposed by the Protoquadro project.

In 1999 Sergio Maltagliati writes the autom@tedVisualMusiC software from
experiences of programs realized from Pietro Grossi. This generative visual
music software, creates images and sounds in relation to precise
correspondences sound-symbol-color, producing multiple variations.[1]

## [edit] See also

  * Algorithmic art
  * Computer art
  * Evolutionary art
  * Generative music
  * Generative systems
  * Interactive art
  * Media art
  * Software art
  * Systems art
  * Systems theory
  * Dynamic Painting
  * Conway's Game of Life

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "GA2001 Politecnico di Milano University". http://www.generativeart.com/program2001.htm. Retrieved on 2001.

  * Donald Kuspit The Matrix of Sensations VI: Digital Artists and the New Creative Renaissance
  * GA definitions [1]
  * Joline Blais and Jon Ippolito The Edge of Art, Thames & Hudson Ltd
  * Christine Buci-Glucksmann, "Lâart Ã lâÃ©poque virtuel", in FrontiÃ¨res esthÃ©tiques de lâart, Arts 8, Paris: LâHarmattan, 2004
  * Christiane Paul Digital Art, Thames & Hudson Ltd
  * Donald Kuspit "Del Atre Analogico al Arte Digital" in Arte Digital Y Videoarte, Kuspit, D. ed., Consorcio del Circulo de Bellas Artes, Madrid
  * Robert C. Morgan Digital Hybrids, Art Press volume #255
  * Frank Popper From Technological to Virtual Art, MIT Press/Leonardo Books
  * Alan Liu The Laws of Cool, Chicago Press
  * Bruce Wands Art of the Digital Age, London: Thames & Hudson
  * Margot Lovejoy Digital Currents: Art in the Electronic Age Routledge 2004
  * Frank Popper Ecrire sur l'art : De l'art optique a l'art virtuel, L'Harmattan 2007
  * Fred Forest Art et Internet, Editions Cercle D'Art / Imaginaire Mode d'Emploi

## [edit] External links

  * Generator.x. A conference and exhibition on software and generative strategies in art and design.
  * Generative Art International Conference. A yearly event in Milan, Italy.
  * generative.net. A collaborative collection of artworks, research and experiments.
  * processing.org. Open source software used to create artwork based on algorithms.
  * Playing with Time. A conversation between Will Wright and Brian Eno on generative creation.
  * Logic and Evolution in Computing by Emmanuel Ruffo. A simple evolutionary network system based on natural and physical systems.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generative_art"

Categories: Art genres | Artistic techniques | Digital art | Cellular automata
| Genetic programming | Contemporary art | New media

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 9 April 2009, at 19:16 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



