
# Internet art

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may require copy-editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone or
spelling. You can assist by editing it now. A how-to guide is available.
(November 2008)  
<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (April 2008)  
<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(April 2008)  
Internet art (often called net art) is art which uses the Internet as its
primary medium or platform. The Internet and its connections to the world are
the basis of the work. Artists working this way are sometimes referred to as
net artists.

The term Internet art is often used incorrectly. It does not, for example,
necessarily entail a work that can be viewed over the internet through a
browser. Nor is a work 'internet art' simply because it is viewable online
(such as work uploaded for viewing in an online gallery, portfolio, or
archive). Rather, the artwork must be created specifically from the phenomenon
of the Internet (elements such as its abundance of technological, social, and
economic cultures and micro-cultures) to qualify as Internet art rather than
as online documentation.

> Internet art projects are art projects for which the Net is both a
sufficient and necessary condition of viewing/expressing/participating.
Internet art can also happen outside the purely technical structure of the
internet, when artists use specific social or cultural traditions from the
internet in a project outside of it. Internet art is often, but not always,
interactive, participatory and based on multimedia in the broadest sense.

> â definition by Steve Dietz, former curator in new media at the Walker Art
Center in Minneapolis

## Contents

  * 1 Forms and presentation
  * 2 History and context
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Forms and presentation

Internet art can be actualized in a variety of ways: for example, through
websites; e-mail projects; Internet-based original software projects
(especially games); Internet-linked networked installations; interactive
and/or streaming video, audio, or radio works; and networked performances
(using multi-user domains, virtual worlds, chatrooms, and other networked
environments). It can also include completely offline events, like the
performance by Alexei Shulgin 'Real Cyberknowledge for Real People' in Vienna
in 1997, in which he handed out printed matter from the mailing list nettime
to Viennese shoppers. Some would argue that online environments such as Second
Life are themselves a form of Internet art, as is a proportion of what happens
in or through those environments. Net-poetry, networked narrative, and
cyberformance are well-developed areas of Internet art. Internet art overlaps
with other computer-mediated genres such new media art, electronic art,
software art, and generative art.

In literature, the terms Internet art, net-based art, net art, net.art, Web
art, and even networked art are all used somewhat interchangeably for this
type of work. However, networked art also has a history of usage for artworks
that were connected through local networks rather than through the Internet
(especially before the advent of the Web). Net.art (with a period) is also
problematic: some culture producers treat the term as a pun, a tongue-in-cheek
recapitulation of the consumerist ideals of Pop Art. Others, however, use
net.art in a narrow sense, applicable only to a specific group of artists
working in the medium in the period 1994-1999; these are usually referenced as
Vuk ÄosiÄ, Jodi, Alexei Shulgin and Olia Lialina.[citation needed].

Other net artists working in the 1990s include: Amy Alexander, Mark Amerika,
Margaret Crane & John Winet, Jaromil, Superbad (Ben Benjamin), Ursula
Endlicher, etoy, mez, G. H. Hovagimyan, Agricola de Cologne, ValÃ©ry Grancher,
Sergio Maltagliati, Fred Forest, Bob Holmes, MTAA, Cary Peppermint, Plaintext
Players, Antiorp, Vivian Selbo, and Thomson & Craighead

Earlier works of net art were created by artist and theorist Roy Ascott.

## [edit] History and context

Internet art is rooted in often quite disparate artistic traditions and
movements, ranging from Dada to conceptual art, Fluxus, pop art, kinetic art,
performance art and art sociologique . The earliest Internet art was created
in an institutional context, partly in the traditional art world and partly in
the media art world. Early projects were performed in collaboration with
museums and other art institutions, such as Roy Ascott's work La Plissure du
Texte which was created for an exhibition at the MusÃ©e d'Art Moderne de la
Ville de Paris in 1983. Media art institutions such as Ars Electronica
Festival in Linz or the Paris-based IRCAM, a research center for electronic
music would also support or present early net art. However, with the advent of
the Web and the spread of the desktop computer, a much broader spectrum of
artists entered the field, often completely independent from art
institutions.[original research?]

Between 1995 to 1998, when the Internet became popular with general audiences,
several public venues kept Internet art on the map. Key organizations included
Adaweb, directed by Benjamin Weil; Alt-X, founded by artist Mark Amerika;
Rhizome, initiated by artist and curator Mark Tribe; and the Dx web site
documentaX curated by Simon Lamuniere.[citation needed] The dot-com mania at
the time created a double edged sword: it created a lot of attention for this
type of art, but at the same time connected it to the soap bubble of online
commerce in the mind's eye of part of the audience.[original research?]
Currently, there is a strong tendency to look at Internet-related artworks in
a wider context of contemporary arts and technology; likewise, artists working
with networks usually prefer to be contextualized within a general
contemporary art discourse.[original research?]

## [edit] See also

  * Digital art
  * Tradigital art
  * Cyberculture
  * Net.art
  * Net-poetry
  * Cyberformance
  * art sales

## [edit] References

  * Forest Fred 1998,Â¨Pour un art actuel, l'art Ã l'heure d'Internet" l'Harmattan, Paris
  * BaumgÃ¤rtel, Tilman (2001). net.art 2.0 â Neue Materialien zur Netzkunst / New Materials towards Net art. NÃ¼rnberg: Verlag fÃ¼r moderne Kunst. ISBN 3-933096-66-9.
  * Wilson, Stephen (2001). Information Arts: Intersections of Art, Science and Technology. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-23209-X.
  * Amerika, Mark (2001). How To Be An Internet Artist. [1]
  * Net Art Review a daily updated site that tries to keep pace with what is happening in the world of netart: netartreview
  * Christine Buci-Glucksmann, "Lâart Ã lâÃ©poque virtuel", in FrontiÃ¨res esthÃ©tiques de lâart, Arts 8, Paris: LâHarmattan, 2004
  * Greene, Rachel (2004). "Internet Art". Thames and Hudson. ISBN-10: 0500203768, ISBN-13: 978-0500203767.
  * Stallabras, Julian (2003). "Internet Art: the online clash of culture and commerce". Tate Publishing. ISBN-10: 1854373455, ISBN-13: 978-1854373458.
  * The syndicate network for media culture and media art : http://anart.no/~syndicate
  * JIP - JavaMuseum Interview Project: [2]
  * WB05 e-symposium published as ISEA Newsletter #102 - ISSN 1488-3635 #102 [3]
  * Ascott, R.2003. Telematic Embrace: visionary theories of art, technology and consciousness. (Edward A. Shanken, ed.) Berkeley: University of California Press.
  * Roy Ascott 2002\. Technoetic Arts (Editor and Korean translation: YI, Won-Kon), (Media & Art Series no. 6, Institute of Media Art, Yonsei University). Yonsei: Yonsei University Press
  * Ascott, R. 1998. Art & Telematics: toward the Construction of New Aesthetics. (Japanese trans. E. Fujihara). A. Takada & Y. Yamashita eds. Tokyo: NTT Publishing Co.,Ltd.
  * Fred Forest 2008\. Art et Internet, Paris Editions Cercle D'Art / Imaginaire Mode d'Emploi

## [edit] External links

  * http://www.webnetmuseum.org
  * netzwissenschaft \- collection of net-art links
  * [4] \- Digital Studies: Being in Cyberspace - 1997 exhibition curated by Mark Amerika and Alexander R. Galloway
  * Annotated links \- annotated links to net art sites
  * net-art Community Congress
  * File Festival\- collection of net-art
  * Feature on Net Art Commissions \- Artkrush.com, July 2006
  * JavaMuseum - Forum for Internet Technology in Contemporary Art-comprehensive collections of Internet-based art
  * JavaMuseum Interview Project\- collection of interviews on Internet based art
  * net-art.org \- portal to web related art
  * [5] \- Whitney Biennial 2000
  * whitneybiennial \- Online exhibition dedicated to web-art
  * Rhizome Artbase \- Archive of Internet-based art at the New Museum in NYC
  * Turbulence \- Commissions, archives and promotes net art
  * IASLonline Lessons in NetArt Articles by Thomas Dreher on internet art
  * WebCanvas A web-based Infinite Canvas
  * autom@ted Interactive net >Visu@lMusiC by Sergio Maltagliati
  * Net-Art objects by Sergey Kotsun

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_art"

Categories: Computer art | Digital art | Internet culture | Contemporary art

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from November 2008 |
All articles needing copy edit | Articles lacking in-text citations from April
2008 | Articles that may contain original research since April 2008 | All
articles that may contain original research | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 16:52 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



