
# Pop art

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

    This is about the art movement. For other uses see Pop art (disambiguation).
<IMG>

<IMG>

Richard Hamilton. Just What Is It That Makes Todayâs Homes So Different, So
Appealing? (1956) is one of the earliest works to be considered "pop art".

Pop art is a visual art movement that emerged in the mid 1950s in Britain and
in the late 1950s in the United States.[1] Pop art challenged tradition by
asserting that an artist's use of the mass-produced visual commodities of
popular culture is contiguous with the perspective of Fine Art. Pop removes
the material from its context and isolates the object, or combines it with
other objects, for contemplation.[1][2] The concept of pop art refers not as
much to the art itself as to the attitudes that led to it.[2]

Pop art is an art movement of the twentieth century. Characterized by themes
and techniques drawn from popular mass culture, such as advertising, comic
books and mundane cultural objects, pop art is widely interpreted as a
reaction to the then-dominant ideas of Abstract Expressionism, as well as an
expansion upon them.[3] Pop art, aimed to employ images of popular as opposed
to elitist culture in art, emphasizing the banal or kitschy elements of any
given culture, most often through the use of irony.[2] It is also associated
with the artists' use of mechanical means of reproduction or rendering
techniques.

Much of pop art is considered incongruent, as the conceptual practices that
are often used make it difficult for some to readily comprehend. Pop art and
Minimalism are considered to be the last Modern Art movements and thus the
precursors to Postmodern art, or some of the earliest examples of Postmodern
Art themselves.[4]

Pop art often takes as its imagery that which is currently in use in
advertising.[5] Product labeling and logos figure prominently in the imagery
chosen by pop artists. Consider the Campbell's Soup Cans labels, by Andy
Warhol. Even the labeling on the shipping carton containing retail items has
been used as subject matter in pop art. Consider Warhol's Campbell's Tomato
Juice Box 1964, (pictured below), or his Brillo Soap Box sculptures.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Andy Warhol, Campbell's Tomato Juice Box, 1964, Synthetic polymer paint and
silkscreen ink on wood, 10 inches x 19 inches x 9 1/2 inches (25.4 x 48.3 x
24.1 cm), Museum of Modern Art, New York City

  

## Contents

  * 1 Origins
  * 2 In Britain: The Independent Group
  * 3 In the United States
  * 4 In Spain
  * 5 In Japan
  * 6 In Italy
  * 7 Painting and sculpture examples
  * 8 Notable artists
  * 9 See also
  * 10 Notes and references
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Origins

The origins of pop art in America and Great Britain developed slightly
differently.[2] In America, it marked a return to hard-edged composition and
representational art as a response by artists using impersonal, mundane
reality, irony and parody to defuse the personal symbolism and "painterly
looseness" of Abstract Expressionism.[3][6] By contrast, the origin in post-
War Britain, while employing irony and parody, was more academic with a focus
on the dynamic and paradoxical imagery of American popular culture as
powerful, manipulative symbolic devices that were affecting whole patterns of
life, while improving prosperity of a society.[6] Early pop art in Britain was
a matter of ideas fueled by American popular culture viewed from afar, while
the American artists were inspired by the experiences of living within that
culture.[6] However, pop art also was a continuation of certain aspects of
Abstract Expressionism, such as a belief in the possibilities for art,
especially for large-scale artwork.[3] Similarly, pop art was both an
extension and a repudiation of Dadaism.[3] While pop art and Dadaism explored
some of the same subjects, pop art replaced the destructive, satirical, and
anarchic impulses of the Dada movement with detached affirmation of the
artifacts of mass culture.[3] Among those artists seen by some as producing
work leading up to Pop art are Pablo Picasso, Marcel Duchamp, Kurt Schwitters,
and Man Ray.

## [edit] In Britain: The Independent Group

<IMG>

<IMG>

Eduardo Paolozzi. I was a Rich Man's Plaything (1947) is considered the
initial standard bearer of âpop artâ and first to display the word "pop".
Paolozzi showed the collage in 1952 as part of his groundbreaking Bunk! series
presentation at the initial Independent Group meeting in London.

The Independent Group (IG), founded in London in 1952, is regarded as the
precursor to the pop art movement.[1][7] They were a gathering of young
painters, sculptors, architects, writers and critics who were challenging
prevailing modernist approaches to culture as well as traditional views of
Fine Art. The group discussions centered around popular culture implications
from such elements as mass advertising, movies, product design, comic strips,
science fiction and technology. At the first Independent Group meeting in
1952, co-founding member, artist and sculptor Eduardo Paolozzi presented a
lecture using a series of collages titled Bunk! that he had assembled during
his time Paris between 1947-1949.[1][7] This material consisted of 'found
objects' such as, advertising, comic book characters, magazine covers and
various mass produced graphics that mostly represented American popular
culture. One of the images in that presentation was Paolozzi's 1947 collage, I
was a Rich Man's Plaything, which includes the first use of the word
âpopâ³, appearing in a cloud of smoke emerging from a revolver.[1][8]
Following Paolozzi's seminal presentation in 1952, the IG focused primarily on
the imagery of American popular culture, particularly mass advertising.[6]

Subsequent coinage of the complete term âpop artâ was made by John McHale
for the ensuing movement in 1954. âpop artâ as a moniker was then used in
discussons by IG members in the Second Session of the IG in 1955, and the
specific term âpop artâ first appeared in published print in an article by
IG members Alison and Peter Smithson in Arc, 1956 [9]. However, the term is
often credited to British art critic/curator, Lawrence Alloway in a 1958 essay
titled The Arts and the Mass Media, although the term he uses is "popular mass
culture" [10] Nevertheless, Alloway was one of the leading critics to defend
the inclusion of the imagery found in mass culture in fine art.

## [edit] In the United States

<IMG>

<IMG>

Roy Lichtenstein's Drowning Girl (1963) on display at the Museum of Modern
Art, New York

Begun in the late 1950s, Pop Art in America was given its greatest impetus
during the 1960s. By this time, American advertising had adopted many elements
and inflections of modern art and functioned at a very sophisticated level.
Consequently, American artists had to search deeper for dramatic styles that
would distance art from the well-designed and clever commercial materials.[6]
As the British viewed American popular culture imagery from a somewhat removed
perspective, their views were often instilled with romantic, sentimental and
humorous overtones. By contrast, American artists being bombarded daily with
the diversity of mass produced imagery, produced work that was generally more
bold and aggressive.[7]

Two of the most important painters in the establishment of America's pop art
vocabulary were Jasper Johns and in particular Robert Rauschenberg.[7] While
the paintings of Rauschenberg have obvious relationships to the earlier work
of Kurt Schwitters and other Dadaists, his concern was with society of the
moment. His approach to create unity out of ephemeral materials and topical
events in the life of everyday America gave his work a unique quality.[7][11]

Of equal importance to American pop art is Roy Lichtenstein. His work probably
defines the basic premise of pop art better than any other through parody.[7]
Selecting the old-fashioned comic strip as subject matter, Lichtenstein
produces a hard-edged, precise composition that documents while it parodies in
a soft manner. The paintings of Lichtenstein, like those of Andy Warhol, Tom
Wesselmann and others, share a direct attachment to the commonplace image of
American popular culture, but also treat the subject in an impersonal manner
clearly illustrating the idealization of mass production.[7]

It should also be noted that while the British pop art movement predated the
American pop art movement, there were some earlier American proto-Pop origins
which utilized 'as found' cultural objects.[3] During the 1920s American
artists Gerald Murphy, Charles Demuth and Stuart Davis created paintings
prefiguring the pop art movement that contained pop culture imagery such as
mundane objects culled from American commercial products and advertising
design.[12][13][14]

## [edit] In Spain

In Spain, the study of pop art is associated with the "new figurative." which
arose from the roots of the crisis of informalism. Eduardo Arroyo could be
said to fit within the pop art trend, on account of his interest in the
environment, his critique of our media culture which incorporates icons of
both mass media communication and the history of painting, and his scorn for
nearly all established artistic styles. However, the Spaniard who could be
considered the most authentically âpopâ artist is Alfredo AlcaÃ­n, because
of the use he makes of popular images and empty spaces in his compositions.

Also in the category of Spanish pop art is the âChronicle Teamâ (El Equipo
CrÃ³nica), which existed in Valencia between 1964 and 1981, formed by the
artists Manolo ValdÃ©s and Rafael Solbes. Their movement can be characterized
as Pop because of its use of comics and publicity images and its
simplification of images and photographic compositions. Filmmaker Pedro
Almodovar emerged from Madrid's "La Movida" subculture (1970s) making low
budget super 8 pop art movies and was subsequently called the Andy Warhol of
Spain by the media at the time. In the book "Almodovar on Almodovar" he is
quoted saying that the 1950s film "Funny Face" is a central inspiration for
his work. One Pop trademark in Almodovar's films is that he always produces a
fake commercial to be inserted into a scene.

## [edit] In Japan

Pop art in Japan is unique and identifiable as Japanese because of the regular
subjects and styles. Many Japanese pop artists take inspiration largely from
anime, and sometimes ukiyo-e and traditional Japanese art. The best-known pop
artist currently in Japan is Takashi Murakami, whose group of artists, Kaikai
Kiki, is world-renowned for their own mass-produced but highly abstract and
unique superflat art movement, a surrealist, post-modern movement whose
inspiration comes mainly from anime and Japanese street culture, is mostly
aimed at youth in Japan, and has made a large cultural impact. Some artists in
Japan, like Yoshitomo Nara, are famous for their graffiti-inspired art, and
some, such as Murakami, are famous for mass-produced plastic or polymer
figurines. Many pop artists in Japan use surreal or obscene, shocking images
in their art, taken from Japanese hentai. This element of the art catches the
eye of viewers young and old, and is extremely thought-provoking, but is not
taken as offensive in Japan. A common metaphor used in Japanese pop art is the
innocence and vulnerability of children and youth. Artists like Nara and Aya
Takano use children as a subject in almost all of their art. While Nara
creates scenes of anger or rebellion through children, Takano communicates the
innocence of children by portraying nude girls.

## [edit] In Italy

In Italy, Pop Art was known from 1964, and took place in different forms, such
as the "Scuola di Piazza del Popolo" in Rome, with artists such as Mario
Schifano, Franco Angeli, Giosetta Fioroni, Tano Festa and also some artworks
by Piero Manzoni and Mimmo Rotella. During the Nineties, NeoPop developed in
Italy and Europe as a contemporary remake of Pop Art.

## [edit] Painting and sculpture examples

<IMG>

Jasper Johns, 1954-1955 Flag

<IMG>

Andy Warhol, 1962 Campbell's Soup Cans

<IMG>

Tom Wesselmann, 1962 Still Life

<IMG>

Wayne Thiebaud, 1963 Three Machines  
<IMG>

Claes Oldenburg, 1966 Soft Bathtub

<IMG>

David Hockney, 1967 A Bigger Splash

<IMG>

Alex Katz, 1970 Vincent with Open Mouth

<IMG>

Jim Dine, 1984-1985 The Robe Following Her  
## [edit] Notable artists

  * Billy Apple
  * Sir Peter Blake
  * Derek Boshier
  * Patrick Caulfield
  * Alan DâArcangelo
  * Jim Dine
  * William Eggleston
  * ErrÃ³
  * Marisol Escobar
  * Red Grooms
  * Richard Hamilton

  * Keith Haring
  * David Hockney
  * Robert Indiana
  * Jasper Johns
  * Allen Jones
  * Alex Katz
  * Corita Kent
  * Nicholas Krushenick
  * Yayoi Kusama
  * Roy Lichtenstein
  * Richard Lindner

  * John McHale
  * Peter Max
  * Takashi Murakami
  * Yoshitomo Nara
  * Claes Oldenburg
  * Julian Opie
  * Eduardo Paolozzi
  * Peter Phillips
  * Sigmar Polke
  * Hariton Pushwagner
  * Mel Ramos

  * Robert Rauschenberg
  * Larry Rivers
  * James Rosenquist
  * Ed Ruscha
  * George Segal
  * Colin Self
  * Aya Takano
  * Wayne Thiebaud
  * Andy Warhol
  * John Wesley
  * Tom Wesselmann

  
## [edit] See also

  * Op art
  * Plop art
  * Lowbrow (art movement)
  * Figuration Libre (art movement)
  * Superflat
  * Nouveau rÃ©alisme
  * NeoPop

## [edit] Notes and references

  1. ^ a b c d e Livingstone, M., Pop Art: A Continuing History, New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1990
  2. ^ a b c d de la Croix, H.; Tansey, R., Gardner's Art Through the Ages, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1980.
  3. ^ a b c d e f Piper, David. The Illustrated History of Art, ISBN 0753701790, p486-487.
  4. ^ Harrison, Sylvia (2001-08-27). Pop Art and the Origins of Post-Modernism. Cambridge University Press.
  5. ^ http://www.the-artists.org/movement/Pop_Art.html
  6. ^ a b c d e Gopnik, A.; Varnedoe, K., High & Low: Modern Art & Popular Culture, New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1990
  7. ^ a b c d e f g Arnason, H., History of Modern Art: Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 1968.
  8. ^ Tate Collection image: I was a Rich Man's Plaything [1]
  9. ^ Alison and Peter Smithson, "But Today We Collect Ads" , reprinted on page 54 in Modern Dreams The Rise and Fall of Pop, published by ICA and MIT, ISBN-N-O-262-73081-2
  10. ^ Lawrence Alloway, "The Arts and the Mass Media," Architectural Design & Construction, February 1958.
  11. ^ Sandler, Irving H. The New York School: The Painters and Sculptors of the Fifties, New York: Harper & Row, 1978. ISBN 0-06-438505-1 pp.174-195, Rauschenberg and Johns; pp. 103-111, Rivers and other gestural realists;
  12. ^ New Yorker article, accessed online August 28, 2007
  13. ^ Wayne Craven, American Art: History and Culture, p.464.
  14. ^ accessed online August 28, 2007

## [edit] External links

v â¢ d â¢ e

Western art movements by century  
14th to 18th century

International Gothic \- Renaissance (14th) Â· Mannerism (16th) Â· Baroque
(17th) Â· Rococo \- Neoclassicism \- Romanticism (18th)  
19th century

Realism Â· Pre-Raphaelites Â· Academic Â· Impressionism Â· Post-Impressionism
Â· Neo-impressionism Â· Chromoluminarism Â· Pointillism Â· Cloisonnism Â· Les
Nabis Â· Synthetism Â· Symbolism Â· Hudson River School  
20th century

Modernism Â· Avant-garde Â· Cubism Â· Expressionism Â· Abstract expressionism
Â· Abstract Â· Neue KÃ¼nstlervereinigung MÃ¼nchen Â· Der Blaue Reiter Â· Die
BrÃ¼cke Â· Dada Â· Fauvism Â· Neo-Fauvism Â· Art Nouveau Â· Bauhaus Â· De
Stijl Â· Art Deco Â· Pop art Â· Futurism Â· Suprematism Â· Surrealism Â· Color
Field Â· Minimalism Â· Installation art Â· Lyrical Abstraction Â·
Postmodernism Â· Conceptual art Â· Land art Â· Performance art Â· Video art Â·
Neo-expressionism Â· Outsider art Â· Lowbrow Â· New media art Â· Young British
Artists Â· Stuckism Â· Systems art  
21st century

Relational art Â· Videogame art  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Avant-garde movements  
Visual art

Abstract expressionism Â· Art Nouveau Â· Conceptual art Â· Constructivism Â·
Cubism Â· De Stijl Â· Expressionism Â· Fauvism Â· Impressionism Â· Post-
Impressionism Â· Color Field Â· Incoherents Â· Lyrical Abstraction Â· Mail art
Â· Neue Slowenische Kunst Â· Suprematism

<IMG>  
Music

Ars subtilior Â· Avant-garde jazz Â· Avant-garde metal Â· Avant-progressive
rock Â· Krautrock Â· Free jazz Â· Industrial music Â· Musique concrÃ¨te Â· No
Wave Â· Noise music Â· Post-rock  
Literature and poetry

Angry Penguins Â· Asemic writing Â· Cyberpunk Â· Flarf poetry Â· Language
poets Â· Neoteric  
Cinema and theatre

Cinema pur Â· Dogme 95 Â· Drop Art Â· Epic theatre Â· Remodernist film Â·
Theatre of Cruelty  
General

Bauhaus Â· Dada Â· Fluxus Â· Futurism Â· Lettrism Â· Neo-Dada Â· Neoism Â·
Minimalism Â· Postminimalism Â· Primitivism Â· Situationist International Â·
Social realism Â· Surrealism Â· Symbolism  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Modernism  
Modernism Â· Late Modernism Â· Modernity Â· Late modernity Â· History Â· Music
Â· Literature Â· Poetry Â· Art Â· Dance Â· Architecture  
Â« Romanticism

Postmodernism Â»  
v â¢ d â¢ e

1966â1968 Batman television series  
Cast

Adam West (Batman/Bruce Wayne) Â· Burt Ward (Robin/Dick Grayson) Â· Alan
Napier (Alfred) Â· Neil Hamilton (Commissioner James Gordon) Â· Madge Blake
(Aunt Harriet Cooper) Â· Yvonne Craig (Barbara Gordon/Batgirl) Â· Cesar Romero
(The Joker) Â· Burgess Meredith (The Penguin) Â· Julie Newmar/Lee Meriwether
(movie only)/Eartha Kitt (Catwoman) Â· Frank Gorshin/John Astin (The Riddler)
Â· George Sanders/Otto Preminger/Eli Wallach (Mr. Freeze) Â· Maurice Evans
(The Puzzler) Â· Walter Slezak (Clock King) Â· David Wayne (Mad Hatter) Â· Van
Williams (The Green Hornet) Â· Bruce Lee (Kato)  
Characters created  
for the series

Egghead (Vincent Price) Â· King Tut (Victor Buono) Â· Chief O'Hara (Stafford
Repp)  
Crew

Harve Bennett Â· Edgar J. Scherick Â· William Dozier Â· Eric Ambler Â· Lorenzo
Semple, Jr. Â· Stanley Ralph Ross Â· Charles Hoffman Â· Leslie H. Martinson Â·
Harry W. Gerstad Â· Charles B. Fitzsimons Â· Jack Martin Smith Â· Walter M.
Scott Â· Ben Nye Â· L. B. Abbott Â· George Barris  
Vehicles and gadgetry

Batmobile Â· Batboat Â· Batcopter Â· Batcycle Â· Batsuit Â· Bat phone Â·
Batcomputer  
Sets and locations

Gotham City Â· Batcave Â· Wayne Manor Â· Notable sites of Gotham City Â·
Londinium  
Related shows and films

Batman (1966 film) Â· Legends of the Superheroes Â· Return to the Batcave: The
Misadventures of Adam and Burt Â· The New Adventures of Batman Â· The Green
Hornet  
Music

"Batman Theme" Â· Neal Hefti Â· Nelson Riddle Â· Billy May Â· Warren Barker Â·
Lionel Newman  
Related articles

Batman franchise media Â· Episodes (List) Â· Joker's appearances in other
media Â· Robin in other media Â· Barbara Gordon in other media Â· Batusi Â·
Camp Â· Deathtrap Â· Pop art  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pop_art"

Categories: Avant-garde art | Pop art | Pop artists | Modern art | Art
movements | Western art | British art | Modernism | Culture | Contemporary art

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 09:47 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



