
# Ashcan School

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Ashcan Painters were honored on a series of American commemorative stamps.
This image: George Bellows' Stag at Sharkey's.

"The Eight" redirects here. For the novel by Katherine Neville, see The Eight
(novel).

The Ashcan School, also called the Ash Can School, is defined as a realist
artistic movement that came into prominence in the United States during the
early twentieth century, best known for works portraying scenes of daily life
in New York's poorer neighborhoods. The movement is most associated with a
group known as The Eight, whose members included five painters associated with
the Ashcan school: William Glackens (1870-1938), Robert Henri (1865-1929),
George Luks (1867-1933), Everett Shinn (1876-1953) and John French Sloan
(1871-1951), along with Arthur B. Davies (1862-1928), Ernest Lawson
(1873-1939) and Maurice Prendergast (1859-1924).

## Contents

  * 1 Origin with The Eight
  * 2 See also
  * 3 Notes
  * 4 References

  
## [edit] Origin with The Eight

The Eight was a group of artists, many of whom had experience as newspaper
illustrators in Philadelphia, who exhibited as a group only once, at the
Macbeth Gallery in New York in 1908. The show, which created a sensation,
subsequently toured the US under the auspices of the Pennsylvania Academy of
the Fine Arts. The Eight are remembered as a group, despite the fact that
their work was very diverse in terms of style and subject matterâonly five
of the artists (Henri, Sloan, Glackens, Shinn, and Luks) painted the gritty
urban scenes that characterized the Ashcan School.

As noted, the Ashcan School was not an organized group. The first known use of
the "ash can" terminology in describing the movement was by Art Young, in
1916,[1] but the term was applied later to a group of artists, including
Henri, Glackens, Edward Hopper (a student of Henri), Shinn, Sloan, Luks,
George Bellows (another student of Henri), Mabel Dwight, and others such as
photographer Jacob Riis, who portrayed urban subject matter, also primarily of
New York's working class neighborhoods. (Hopper's inclusion in the group
[which he forswore] is ironic: his depictions of city streets are almost
entirely free of the usual minutiae, with not a single incidental ashcan in
sight.)[2]

The artists of the Ashcan School rebelled against the genteel American
Impressionism that represented the vanguard of American art at the time. Their
works, generally dark in tone, captured the spontaneous moments of life and
often depicted such subjects as prostitutes, drunks, butchered pigs,
overflowing tenements with laundry hanging on lines, boxing matches, and
wrestlers. It was their frequent, although not total, focus upon poverty and
the daily realities of urban life that prompted American critics to consider
them the fringe of modern art.

## [edit] See also

American realism

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Loughery, 1997, pp. 218â19
  2. ^ Wells, Walter, Silent Theater: The Art of Edward Hopper, London/New York: Phaidon, 2007

## [edit] References

  * Loughery, John (1997). John Sloan: Painter and Rebel. New York: Holt. ISBN 0-8050-5221-6

  

<IMG> This art-movement-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by
expanding it.  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashcan_School"

Categories: American art | Cultural history of the United States | Modern art
| American art movements | Art movements stubs

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 18:32 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



