
# Jasper Johns

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Jasper Johns  
<IMG>  
Flag, Encaustic, oil and collage on fabric mounted on plywood,1954-55  
Born 1930 (1930)  
Augusta, Georgia  
Nationality American  
Field Painting, Printmaking  
Movement Abstract Expressionism, Neo-Dada, Pop Art  
Works Flag, Numbers, Map, stenciled words  
Influenced Pop Art  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Detail of Flag (1954-55). Museum of Modern Art, New York City. This image
illustrates Johns' early technique of painting with thick, dripping encaustic
over a collage made from found materials such as newspaper. This rough method
of construction is rarely visible in photographic reproductions of his work.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jasper Johns, Map, 1961. Museum of Modern Art New York City. Flags, maps,
targets, stenciled words and numbers were themes used by Johns in the 1960s.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Numbers by Jasper Johns at the David H. Koch Theater.

Jasper Johns, Jr. (born May 15, 1930 in Augusta, Georgia) is an American
contemporary artist who works primarily in painting and printmaking. He is
represented by the Matthew Marks Gallery.

## Contents

  * 1 Life
  * 2 Work
  * 3 Other work
  * 4 Appearance in popular culture
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Life

Jasper Johns grew up in Allendale, South Carolina. Recounting this period in
his life, he says, "In the place where I was a child, there were no artists
and there was no art, so I really didn't know what that meant. I think I
thought it meant that I would be in a situation different than the one that I
was in."

Johns studied at the University of South Carolina from 1947 to 1948, a total
of three semesters.[1] He then moved to New York City and studied briefly at
the Parsons School of Design in 1949.[1] While in New York, Johns met Robert
Rauschenberg, with whom he had a relationship,[2] as well as Merce Cunningham
and John Cage. Working together they explored the contemporary art scene, and
began developing their ideas on art. In 1952 and 1953 he was stationed in
Sendai, Japan during the Korean War.[1]

In 1958, gallery owner Leo Castelli discovered Johns while visiting
Rauschenberg's studio.[1]

Johns currently lives in Sharon, Connecticut.[citation needed]

## [edit] Work

He is best known for his painting Flag (1954-55), which he painted after
having a dream of the American flag. His work is often described as a Neo-
Dadaist, as opposed to pop art, even though his subject matter often includes
images and objects from popular culture. Still, many compilations on pop art
include Jasper Johns as a pop artist because of his artistic use of classical
iconography.

Early works were composed using simple schema such as flags, maps, targets,
letters and numbers. Johns' treatment of the surface is often lush and
painterly; he is famous for incorporating such media as encaustic (wax-based
paint), and plaster relief in his paintings. Johns played with and presented
opposites, contradictions, paradoxes, and ironies, much like Marcel Duchamp
(who was associated with the Dada movement). Johns also produces intaglio
prints, sculptures and lithographs with similar motifs.

Johns' breakthrough move, which was to inform much later work by others, was
to appropriate popular iconography for painting, thus allowing a set of
familiar associations to answer the need for subject. Though the Abstract
Expressionists disdained subject matter, it could be argued that in the end,
they had simply changed subjects. Johns neutralized the subject, so that
something like a pure painted surface could declare itself. For twenty years
after Johns painted Flag, the surface could suffice - for example, in Andy
Warhol's silkscreens, or in Robert Irwin's illuminated ambient works.

Abstract Expressionist figures like Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning
ascribed to the concept of a macho "artist hero", and their paintings are
indexical in that they stand effectively as a signature on canvas. In
contrast, Neo-Dadaists like Johns and Rauschenberg seemed preoccupied with a
lessening of the reliance of their art on indexical qualities, seeking instead
to create meaning solely through the use of conventional symbols. Some have
interpreted this as a rejection of the hallowed individualism of the Abstract
Expressionists. Their works also imply symbols existing outside of any
referential context. Johns' Flag, for instance, is primarily a visual object,
divorced from its symbolic connotations and reduced to something in-itself.

In 1998, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York bought Johns' White Flag.
While the Met would not disclose how much was paid, "experts estimate [the
painting's] value at more than $20 million."[3] In 2006, private collectors
Anne and Kenneth Griffin (founder of the Chicago-based hedge fund Citadel
Investment Group) bought Johns' False Start for $80 million, making it the
most expensive painting by a living artist.[4]

The National Gallery of Art acquired about 1,700 of Johns' proofs in 2007.
This made the Gallery home to the largest number of Johns' works held by a
single institution. The exhibition showed works from many points in Johns'
career, including recent proofs of his prints. [5]

## [edit] Other work

  * White Flag (1955)[6]
  * False Start (1959)
  * Study for Skin (1962)
  * Figure Five (1963-64)
  * Seasons (1986)
  * Three Flags (1958)
  * Painting With Two Balls (1960)

In spring 2008, a ten-year retrospective of Johns' drawings was mounted at New
York City's Matthew Marks Gallery.

## [edit] Appearance in popular culture

In 1999, Jasper Johns guest-starred in the animated television series The
Simpsons, as himself. In the episode "Mom and Pop Art", Homer Simpson
accidentally becomes an artist, and Johns attends one of his exhibitions.
Johns is portrayed as a kleptomaniac, stealing food items, lightbulbs, a
motorboat, and a painting which Marge is working on.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d Jasper Johns (born 1930); The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York
  2. ^ 365gay.com. "Pop Artist Robert Rauschenberg Dies." My 13, 2008. Accessed May 13, 2008.
  3. ^ Vogel, Carol (October 29, 1998). "Met Buys Its First Painting by Jasper Johns". New York Times (New York Times). http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9E07E6D6113CF93AA15753C1A96E958260. Retrieved on 2008-02-28.
  4. ^ Vogel, Carol. "The Gray Areas of Jasper Johns". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/03/arts/design/03voge.html?ref=arts. Retrieved on 2008-02-03.
  5. ^ Brett Zongker (March 6, 2007), National Gallery to Get Jasper Johns Prints, The Associated Press, http://www.artinfo.com/news/story/24455/national-gallery-to-get-jasper-johns-prints/, retrieved on 2008-04-16
  6. ^ Works of Art: Modern Art Metropolitan Museum of Art, online June 15, 2007

  * Busch, Julia M., A Decade of Sculpture: the New Media in the 1960s (The Art Alliance Press: Philadelphia; Associated University Presses: London, 1974) ISBN 0-87982-007-1

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Jasper
Johns  
  * Jasper Johns at the Matthew Marks Gallery
  * VAGA - To clear rights to reproduce works by Johns
  * Jasper Johns: An Allegory of Painting, 1955â1965, National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC
  * States and Variations: Prints by Jasper Johns at the National Gallery of Art
  * Jasper Johns (born 1930) Timeline of Art History | The Metropolitan Museum of Art
  * Jasper Johns bio at artchive.com
  * Flag at the Museum of Modern Art
  * White Flag at the Metropolitan Museum of Art
  * Collecting Jasper Johns's signature
  * False Start Act out a Jasper Johns painting.
  * Jasper Johns: An Allegory of Painting, 1955â1965, Kunstmuseum Basel. Video at VernissageTV.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Laureates of the Wolf Prize in Arts  
Architecture

Ralph Erskine (1983/4) Â· Fumihiko Maki & Giancarlo De Carlo (1988) Â· Frank
Gehry/JÃ¸rn Utzon/Denys Lasdun (1992) Â· Frei Otto & Aldo van Eyck (1996/7) Â·
Ãlvaro Siza Vieira (2001) Â· Jean Nouvel (2005)  
Music

Vladimir Horowitz/Olivier Messiaen/Joseph Tal (1982) Â· Isaac Stern/Krzysztof
Penderecki (1987) Â· Yehudi Menuhin/Luciano Berio (1991) Â· Zubin
Mehta/GyÃ¶rgy Ligeti (1995/6) Â· Pierre Boulez/Riccardo Muti (2000) Â·
Mstislav Rostropovich/Daniel Barenboim (2004) Â· Giya Kancheli/Claudio Abbado
(2008)  
Painting

Marc Chagall/Antoni TÃ pies (1981) Â· Jasper Johns (1986) Â· Anselm Kiefer
(1990) Â· Gerhard Richter (1994/5) Â· Louise Bourgeois (2002/3) Â·
Michelangelo Pistoletto (2006/7)  
Sculpture

Eduardo Chillida (1984/5) Â· Claes Oldenburg (1989) Â· Bruce Nauman (1993) Â·
James Turrell (1998) Â· Louise Bourgeois (2002/3) Â· Michelangelo Pistoletto
(2006/7)  
Agriculture Â· Arts Â· Chemistry Â· Mathematics Â· Medicine Â· Physics  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jasper_Johns"

Categories: 1930 births | American painters | American printmakers |
Contemporary painters | Living people | Members of The American Academy of
Arts and Letters | Artists from New York | People from Augusta, Georgia |
People from South Carolina | Pop artists | Postmodern artists | Artists from
South Carolina | LGBT visual artists | United States National Medal of Arts
recipients | Parsons the New School of Design alumni

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 10 April 2009, at 21:19 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



