
# Kitsch

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(March 2009)  
<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (March 2009)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Garden Gnomes and other lawn ornaments are often considered kitsch.

Kitsch (/kÉªtÊ/) is the German and Yiddish word denoting art that is
considered an inferior, tasteless copy of an extant style of art. The term
kitsch was a response to the 19th century art whose aesthetics convey
exaggerated sentimentality and melodrama, hence, kitsch art is closely
associated with sentimental art. Moreover, kitsch (art) also denotes the types
of art that are like-wise Ã¦sthetically deficient (whether or not it is
sentimental, glamorous, theatrical, or creative) making it a creative gesture
that merely imitates the superficial appearances of art (via repeated
conventions and formulae), thus, it is uncreative and unoriginal; it is not
Art. Contemporaneously, kitsch also (loosely) denotes art that is
Ã¦sthetically pretentious to the degree of being in poor taste, and to
industrially-produced art-items that are considered trite and crass.

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 18th and 19th centuries
    * 2.2 Avant-garde and kitsch
    * 2.3 Totalitarian kitsch
    * 2.4 Academic art
    * 2.5 Postmodernism
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
    * 4.1 Notes
    * 4.2 Further reading
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Etymology

The etymology is uncertain, but, as a descriptive term, kitsch originated in
the art markets of Munich in the 1860s and the 1870s, describing cheap,
popular, and marketable pictures and sketches [1] (the English term,
mispronounced by Germans, and elided with the German dialect verb kitschen
(âto scrape mud from the streetâ, âto smearâ).[citation needed] In Das
Buch vom Kitsch (The Book of Kitsch), Hans Reimann defines it as a
professional expression âborn in a painter's studioâ. Analogously, the
writer Edward Koelwel rejects that kitsch derives from the English word
sketch, noting how the sketch was then not in vogue, and argues that kitsch
art pictures were well-executed, finished paintings.

## [edit] History

### [edit] 18th and 19th centuries

Kitsch appealed to the crass tastes of the newly moneyed Munich bourgeoisie,
who allegedly thought they could achieve the status they envied in the
traditional class of cultural elites by aping, however clumsily, the most
apparent features of their cultural habits.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kitsch postcards of Lohengrin were circulated around 1900.

The word eventually came to mean "a slapping together" (of a work of art).
Kitsch became defined as an aesthetically impoverished object of shoddy
production, meant more to identify the consumer with a newly acquired class
status than to invoke a genuine aesthetic response.

Kitsch was considered aesthetically impoverished and morally dubious and to
have sacrificed aesthetic life to a pantomime of aesthetic life, usually, but
not always, in the interest of signaling one's class status.

However, there is a philosophical background to kitsch criticism which is
largely ignored. An exception is Gabrielle Thuller, pointing to how kitsch
criticism is based on Immanuel Kant's philosophy of aesthetics. Kant describes
the direct appeal to the senses as "barbaric". Thuller's point is supported by
Mark A. Cheetham, who points out that kitsch "is his Clement Greenberg's
barbarism". A source book on texts critical of kitsch underlines this by
including excerpts from Kant's and Schiller's writings.

One, thus, has to keep in mind two things: a) Kant's enormous influence on the
concept of "fine art" (the focus of Cheetham's book), as it came into being in
the mid to late 18th century, and b) how "sentimentality" or "pathos", which
are the defining traits of kitsch, do not find room within Kant's "aesthetical
indifference". Kant also identified genius with originality. One could say he
was implicitly rejecting kitsch, the presence of sentimentality and the lack
of originality being the main accusations against it. This stands in stark
contrast to for example the Baroque period, when a painter was hailed for his
ability to imitate other masters, one such imitator being Luca Giordano.

Another influential philosopher on fine art was Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel,
who emphasized the idea of the artist belonging to the spirit of his time, or
zeitgeist. As an effect of these aesthetics, working with emotional and
"unmodern" or "archetypical" motifs was referred to as kitsch from the second
half of the 19th century on. Kitsch is thus seen as "false".

As Thomas Kulka writes, "the term kitsch was originally applied exclusively to
paintings", but it soon spread to other disciplines, such as music. The term
has been applied to painters, such as Ilya Repin,[2] and composers, such as
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, whom Hermann Broch refers to as "genialischer
kitsch", or "kitsch of genius".[3][4]

### [edit] Avant-garde and kitsch

The word was popularized in the 1930s by the theorists Theodor Adorno, Hermann
Broch, and Clement Greenberg, who each sought to define avant-garde and kitsch
as opposites. To the art world of the time, the immense popularity of kitsch
was perceived as a threat to culture. The arguments of all three theorists
relied on an implicit definition of kitsch as a type of false consciousness, a
Marxist term meaning a mindset present within the structures of capitalism
that is misguided as to its own desires and wants. Marxists believe there to
be a disjunction between the real state of affairs and the way that they
phenomenally appear.

Adorno perceived this in terms of what he called the "culture industry," where
the art is controlled and formulated by the needs of the market and given to a
passive population which accepts itâwhat is marketed is art that is non-
challenging and formally incoherent, but which serves its purpose of giving
the audience leisure and something to watch. It helps serve the oppression of
the population by capitalism by distracting them from their alienation.
Contrarily, art for Adorno is supposed to be subjective, challenging, and
oriented against the oppressiveness of the power structure. He claimed that
kitsch is parody of catharsis and a parody of aesthetic experience. Broch
called kitsch "the evil within the value-system of art"âthat is, if true art
is "good", kitsch is "evil". While art was creative, Broch held that kitsch
depended solely on plundering creative art by adopting formulas that seek to
imitate it, limiting itself to conventions and demanding a totalitarianism of
those recognizable conventions. Broch accuses kitsch of not participating in
the development of art, having its focus directed at the past, and Greenberg
speaks of its concern with previous cultures. To Broch, kitsch was not the
same as bad art; it formed a system of its own. He argued that kitsch involved
trying to achieve "beauty" instead of "truth" and that any attempt to make
something beautiful would lead to kitsch. Consequently, he opposed the
Renaissance to Protestantism.

Greenberg held similar views to Broch concerning the beauty/truth division,
believing that the avant-garde style arose in order to defend aesthetic
standards from the decline of taste involved in consumer society and that
kitsch and art as opposites, which he outlined in his essay "Avant-Garde and
Kitsch".

### [edit] Totalitarian kitsch

Other theorists over time have also linked kitsch to totalitarianism. The
Czech writer Milan Kundera, in his book The Unbearable Lightness of Being
(1984), defined it as "the absolute denial of shit". He wrote that kitsch
functions by excluding from view everything that humans find difficult with
which to come to terms, offering instead a sanitized view of the world, in
which "all answers are given in advance and preclude any questions".

In its desire to paper over the complexities and contradictions of real life,
kitsch, Kundera suggested, is intimately linked with totalitarianism. In a
healthy democracy, diverse interest groups compete and negotiate with one
another to produce a generally acceptable consensus; by contrast, "everything
that infringes on kitsch," including individualism, doubt, and irony, "must be
banished for life" in order for kitsch to survive. Therefore, Kundera wrote,
"Whenever a single political movement corners power we find ourselves in the
realm of totalitarian kitsch."

For Kundera, "Kitsch causes two tears to flow in quick succession. The first
tear says: How nice to see children running on the grass! The second tear
says: How nice to be moved, together with all mankind, by children running on
the grass! It is the second tear that makes kitsch kitsch."

### [edit] Academic art

One of Greenberg's more controversial claims was that kitsch was equivalent to
academic art: "All kitsch is academic, and conversely, all that is academic is
kitsch." He argued this based on the fact that academic art, such as that in
the 19th century, was heavily centered in rules and formulations that were
taught and tried to make art into something learnable and easily expressible.
He later came to withdraw from his position of equating the two, as it became
heavily criticized.

Nineteenth century academic art is still often seen as kitsch, though this
view is coming under attack from modern art critics. Broch argued that the
genesis of kitsch was in Romanticism, which wasn't kitsch itself but which
opened the door for kitsch taste by emphasizing the need for expressive and
evocative art work. Academic art, which continued this tradition of
Romanticism, has a twofold reason for its association with kitsch.

<IMG>

<IMG>

This antique kitsch writing set allows the user to rest writing utensils in
the buck's antlers.

It is not that it was found to be accessible. In fact, it was under its reign
that the difference between high art and low art was first defined by
intellectuals. Academic art strove towards remaining in a tradition rooted in
the aesthetic and intellectual experience. Intellectual and aesthetic
qualities of the work were certainly thereâgood examples of academic art
were even admired by the avant-garde artists who would rebel against it. There
was some critique, however, that in being "too beautiful" and democratic it
made art look easy, non-involving, and superficial. According to Tomas Kulka,
any academic painting made after the time of academism is kitsch by nature.

Many academic artists tried to use subjects from low art and ennoble them as
high art by subjecting them to interest in the inherent qualities of form and
beauty, trying to democratize the art world. In England, certain academics
even advocated that the artist should work for the marketplace. In some sense
the goals of democratization succeeded, and the society was flooded with
academic art, with the public lining up to see art exhibitions as they do to
see movies today. Literacy in art became widespread, as did the practice of
art making, and there was a blurring between high and low culture. This often
led to poorly made or conceived artwork being accepted as high art. Often, art
which was found to be kitsch showed technical talent, such as in creating
accurate representations, but lacked good taste.

Secondly, the subjects and images presented in academic art, though original
in their first expression, were disseminated to the public in the form of
prints and postcards, which was often actively encouraged by the artists, and
these images were endlessly copied in kitschified form until they became well
known clichÃ©s.

The avant-garde reacted to these developments by separating itself from the
aspects of art such as pictorial representation and harmony that were
appreciated by the public in order to make a stand for the importance of the
aesthetic. Many modern critics try not to pigeonhole academic art into the
kitsch side of the art/kitsch dichotomy, recognizing its historical role in
the genesis of both the avant-garde and kitsch.

### [edit] Postmodernism

With the emergence of postmodernism in the 1980s, the borders between kitsch
and high art again became blurred. One development was the approval of what is
called "camp taste" - which can be related to but is not the same as camp as a
"gay sensibility".[5] Camp, in some circles, refers to an ironic appreciation
of that which might otherwise be considered corny, such as singer/dancer
Carmen Miranda with her tutti-frutti hats, or otherwise kitsch, such as
popular culture events that are particularly dated or inappropriately serious,
such as the low-budget science fiction movies of the 1950s and 1960s.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Some create their own, simple kitsch decorations, such as this angel
sculpture.

A hypothetical example from the world of painting would be a kitsch image of a
deer by the lake. In order to make this camp, one could paint a sign beside
it, saying "No Swimming". The majestic or romantic impression of a stately
animal would be punctured by humor; the notion of an animal receiving a
punishment for the breach of the rule is patently ludicrous. The original,
serious sentimentality of the motif is neutralized, and, thus, it becomes
camp. "Camp" is derived from the French slang term camper, which means "to
pose in an exaggerated fashion". Susan Sontag argued in her 1964 Notes on
"Camp" that camp was an attraction to the human qualities which expressed
themselves in "failed attempts at seriousness", the qualities of having a
particular and unique style, and of reflecting the sensibilities of the era.
It involved an aesthetic of artifice rather than of nature. Indeed, hard-line
supporters of camp culture have long insisted that "camp is a lie that dares
to tell the truth".

Much of pop art attempted to incorporate images from popular culture and
kitsch, and artists were able to maintain legitimacy by saying they were
"quoting" imagery to make conceptual points, usually with the appropriation
being ironic. In Italy, a movement arose called the Nuovi Nuovi ("new new"),
which took a different route: instead of quoting kitsch in an ironic stance,
it founded itself in a primitivism which embraced the ugliness and garishness,
emulating it as a sort of anti-aesthetic.

Conceptual art and deconstruction posed as interesting challenges, because,
like kitsch, they downplayed the formal structure of the artwork in favor of
elements that enter it by relating to other spheres of life.

Despite this, many in the art world continue to have an adherence to some
sense of the dichotomy between art and kitsch, excluding all sentimental and
realistic art from being considered seriously. This has come under attack by
critics, who argue for a reappreciation of academic art and traditional
figurative painting, without the concern for it appearing innovative or new.
As in the surreal and figurative paintings of Lawrence Hollien. A different
approach is taken by the Norwegian painter Odd Nerdrum, who, in 1998, for the
first time, argued for kitsch as a positive term and a superstructure for
figurative, non-ironic and narrative painting. In 2000, together with several
other authors, he composed a book entitled On Kitsch, where he advocated the
concept of "Kitsch" as a more correct name than "art" on this type of
painting. As a result of this, an increasing number of figurative painters are
referring to themselves as "kitsch painters".

In any case, whatever difficulty there is in defining its boundaries with art,
the word "kitsch" is still in common usage to label anything felt in poor
taste.

## [edit] See also

  * Camp (style)
  * Chintz
  * Fine art
  * Folk art
  * Jeff Koons
  * Popular culture/popular culture studies
  * Retro
  * Vladimir Tretchikoff
  * Hipster (contemporary subculture)

## [edit] References

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Calinescu, Matei. Five Faces of Modernity. Kitsch, pg 234.
  2. ^ Clement Greenberg, "Avantgarde and Kitsch"
  3. ^ Theodor Adorno, "Musikalische Warenanalysen"
  4. ^ Carl Dahlhaus, "Ãber musikalischen Kitsch"
  5. ^ Cf. Fabio Cleto, ed. Queer Aesthetics and the Performing Subject: A Reader. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2002.

### [edit] Further reading

  * Adorno, Theodor (2001). The Culture Industry. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-25380-2
  * Braungart, Wolfgang (2002). âKitsch. Faszination und Herausforderung des Banalen und Trivialenâ. Max Niemeyer Verlag. ISBN 3-484-32112-1/0083-4564.
  * Broch, Hermann (2003). Geist and Zeitgeist: The Spirit in an Unspiritual Age. Counterpoint Press. ISBN 1-58243-168-X
  * Cheetham, Mark A (2001). âKant, Art and Art History: moments of disciplineâ. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-80018-8.
  * Dorfles, Gillo (1969, translated from the 1968 Italian version, Il Kitsch). Kitsch: The world of Bad Taste, Universe Books. LCCN 78-93950
  * Elias, Norbert. (1998[1935]) âThe Kitsch Style and the Age of Kitsch,â in J. Goudsblom and S. Mennell (eds) The Norbert Elias Reader. Oxford: Blackwell .
  * Gelfert, Hans-Dieter (2000). âWas ist Kitsch?â. Vendenhoeck & Ruprecht in GÃ¶ttingen. ISBN 3-525-34024-9.
  * Giesz, Ludwig (1971). PhÃ¤nomenologie des Kitsches. 2. vermehrte und verbesserte Auflage MÃ¼nchen: Fink Verlag. [Partially translated into English in Dorfles (1969)]. Reprint (1994): UngekÃ¼rzte Ausgabe. Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag. ISBN 3596120349 / ISBN 9783596120345.
  * Greenberg, Clement (1978). Art and Culture. Beacon Press. ISBN 0-8070-6681-8
  * Karpfen, Fritz (1925). âKitsch. Eine Studie Ã¼ber die Entartung der Kunstâ. Weltbund Verlag.
  * Kristeller, Paul Oskar (1990). âThe Modern System of the Artsâ (In âRenaissance Thought and the Artsâ). Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-02010-1. (pbk.) / 0-691-07253-1.
  * Kulka, Tomas (1996). Kitsch and Art. Pennsylvania State Univ Pr. ISBN 0-271-01594-2
  * Kundera, Milan (1999). The Unbearable Lightness of Being: A Novel. (Perennial. ISBN 0-06-093213-9
  * Moles, Abraham (nouvelle Ã©dition 1977). Psychologie du Kitsch: Lâart du Bonheur, DenoÃ«l-Gonthier
  * Nerdrum, Odd (Editor) (2001). On Kitsch. Distributed Art Publishers. ISBN 82-489-0123-8
  * Olalquiaga, Celeste (2002). The Artificial Kingdom: On the Kitsch Experience. Univ. of Minnesota ISBN 0-8166-4117-X
  * Reimann, Hans (1936). âDas Buch vom Kitschâ. R.Piper&Co / Verlag, MÃ¼nchen.
  * Richter, Gerd, (1972). Kitsch-Lexicon, Bertelsmann Lexicon-Verlag. ISBN 3-570-03148-9
  * Shiner, Larry (2001). âThe Invention of Artâ. The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75342-5.
  * Thuller, Gabrielle (2006 and 2007). "Kunst und Kitsch. Wie erkenne ich?", ISBN 3-7630-2463-8. "Kitsch. Balsam fÃ¼r Herz und Seele", ISBN 978-3-7630-2493-3. (Both on Belser Verlag.)
  * Ward, Peter (1994). Kitsch in Sync: A Consumerâs Guide to Bad Taste, Plexus Publishing. ISBN 0-85965-152-5
  * "Kitsch. Texte und Theorien", (2007). Reclam Publishing Company. ISBN 978-3-15-018476-9. (Includes classic texts of kitsch criticism from authors like Theodor Adorno, Ferdinand Avenarius, Edward Koelwel, Walter Benjamin, Ernst Bloch, Hermann Broch, Richard Egenter, etc.).

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Kitsch  
  * Avant-Garde and Kitschâessay by Clement Greenberg
  * On Kitschâselections from Odd Nerdrumâs manifesto
  * Kitsch and the Modern Predicamentâessay by Roger Scruton
  * Museum of Bad Art
  * World Of Kitsch
  * Kitsch or Not?âlike Hot or Not, but for kitsch.
  * world wide kitschâkitsch painters and writers
  * Kitsch Magazineâfeature publication based in Ithaca

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kitsch"

Categories: Art genres | German loanwords | Cultural appropriation | Social
class subcultures

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since March
2009 | All articles that may contain original research | Articles lacking in-
text citations from March 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Brezhoneg
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * Esperanto
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ido
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 April 2009, at 08:38 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



