
# Creative nonfiction

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Topics in journalism  
Professional issues  
News â¢ Writing â¢ Ethics â¢ Objectivity â¢ Values â¢ Attribution â¢
Defamation â¢ Editorial independence â¢ Education â¢ Other topics  
Fields  
Arts â¢ Business â¢ Entertainment â¢ Environment â¢ Fashion â¢ Medicine
â¢ Politics â¢ Science â¢ Sports â¢ Tech â¢ Trade â¢ Traffic â¢ Weather  
Genres  
Advocacy â¢ Citizen â¢ Civic â¢ Collaborative â¢ Community â¢ Conspiracy
â¢ Gonzo â¢ Investigative â¢ Literary â¢ Muckraker â¢ New â¢ Narrative
â¢ Peace â¢ Visual â¢ Watchdog  
Social impact  
Fourth Estate â¢ Fifth Estate â¢ Freedom of the press â¢ Infotainment â¢
Media bias â¢ Public relations â¢ Yellow journalism  
News media  
Newspapers â¢ Magazines â¢ News agencies â¢ Broadcast â¢ Online â¢
Photojournalism â¢ Alternative media  
Roles  
Journalist â¢ Reporter â¢ Editor â¢ Columnist â¢ Commentator â¢
Photographer â¢ Presenter â¢ Meteorologist â¢ Production Manager â¢ Intern  
* * *
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Creative nonfiction (also known as literary or narrative nonfiction) is a
genre of writing truth which uses literary styles and techniques to create
factually accurate narratives. Creative nonfiction contrasts with other
nonfiction, such as technical writing or journalism, which is also rooted in
accurate fact, but is not primarily written in service to its craft. As a
genre, creative nonfiction is still relatively young, and is only beginning to
be scrutinized with the same critical analysis given to fiction and poetry.

## Contents

  * 1 Characteristics and definition
  * 2 Ethics
  * 3 Literary criticism
  * 4 References
  * 5 Further reading
  * 6 External links
  * 7 Audio/video links

  
## [edit] Characteristics and definition

For a text to be considered creative nonfiction, it must be factually
accurate, and written with attention to literary style and technique.
âUltimately, the primary goal of the creative nonfiction writer is to
communicate information, just like a reporter, but to shape it in a way that
reads like fiction.â [1] Forms within this genre include personal essays,
memoir, travel writing, food writing, biography, literary journalism, and
other hybridized essays. Critic Chris Anderson claims that the genre can be
understood best by splitting it into two subcategories--the personal essay and
the journalistic essay--but the genre is currently defined by its lack of
established conventions. [2]

Literary critic Barbara Lounsberry in her book The Art of Fact suggests four
constitutive characteristics of the genre, the first of which is
âDocumentable subject matter chosen from the real world as opposed to
âinventedâ from the writerâs mind.â [3] By this, she means that the
topics and events discussed in the text verifiably exist in the natural world.
The second characteristic is âExhaustive research,â [3] which she claims
allows writers ânovel perspectives on their subjectsâ and âalso permits
them to establish the credibility of their narratives through verifiable
references in their texts.â [4] The third characteristic that Lounsberry
claims is crucial in defining the genre is âThe sceneâ. She stresses the
importance of describing and revivifying the context of events in contrast to
the typical journalistic style of objective reportage. [5] The fourth and
final feature she suggests is âFine writing: a literary prose styleâ.
âVerifiable subject matter and exhaustive research guarantee the nonfiction
side of literary nonfiction; the narrative form and structure disclose the
writerâs artistry; and finally, its polished language reveals that the goal
all along has been literature.â [6]

Creative nonfiction may be structured like traditional fiction narratives, as
is true of Fenton Johnson's story of love and loss, "Geography of the Heart,"
and Virginia Holman's "Rescuing Patty Hearst." When book-length works of
creative nonfiction follow a story-like arc, they are sometimes called
narrative nonfiction. Creative nonfiction often escapes traditional boundaries
of narrative altogether, as happens in the bittersweet banter of Natalia
Ginzburg's essay, "He and I," and in John McPhee's hypnotic tour of Atlantic
City, "In Search of Marvin Gardens."

## [edit] Ethics

In recent years, several well-publicized incidents within the United States
have called into question the truthfulness and factual standards of creative
nonfiction. Given its different styles and characteristics, it is not held to
the same journalistic ethics and standards as direct reporting or news
publications. Its allowances of artistic license to authors are not
standardized, and some have accused writers of glorification of
interpretation, and even of fabrication. A recent example of these incidents
is the James Frey controversy in regards to his memoir A Million Little
Pieces, published in 2003. In his memoir, Frey claimed to have had certain
experiences, which were revealed in 2006 to be fabrications.[7]

## [edit] Literary criticism

To date, there is very little published literary criticism of nonfiction
works, despite the fact that the genre is often published in respected
publications such as The New Yorker, Vanity Fair, and others. A handful of the
most widely recognized writers in the genre such as Gay Talese, Tom Wolfe,
John McPhee, Joan Didion and Norman Mailer, have seen some criticism on their
more prominent works. âCritics to date, however, have tended to focus on
only one or two of each writerâs works, to illustrate particular critical
points.â [8] These analyses of a few key pieces are hardly in-depth or as
comprehensive as the criticism and analyses of their fictional contemporaries.
As the popularity of the genre continues to expand, many nonfiction authors
and a handful of literary critics are calling for more extensive literary
analysis of the genre.

> âIf, these four features delimit an important art form of our time, a
discourse grounded in fact but artful in execution that might be called
literary nonfiction, what is needed is serious critical attention of all kinds
to this work: formal criticism (both Russian Formalism and New Criticism),
historical, biographical, cultural, structuralist and deconstructionist,
reader-response criticism and feminist (criticism).â [8]

> âNonfiction is no longer the bastard child, the second class citizen;
literature is no longer reified, mystified, unavailable. This is the
contribution that poststructuralist theory has to make to an understanding of
literary nonfiction, since poststructuralist theorists are primarily concerned
with how we make meaning and secure authority for claims in meaning of
language.â [9]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Gutkind, Lee (2007). The Best Creative Nonfiction, Vol. 1. New York: W. W. Norton. pp. xi. ISBN 0393330036.
  2. ^ Anderson, page ix.
  3. ^ a b Lounsberry, Barbara (1990). The art of fact: contemporary artists of nonfiction. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press. xiii. ISBN 0313268932.
  4. ^ Lounsberry, page xiii-xiv
  5. ^ Lounsberry, page xiv-xv
  6. ^ Lounsberry, page xv
  7. ^ Wyatt, Edward (2006-01-10). "Best-Selling Memoir Draws Scrutiny". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/01/10/books/10frey.html. Retrieved on 2008-01-24.
  8. ^ a b Lounsberry, page xvi
  9. ^ Anderson, Chris (1989). Literary nonfiction: theory, criticism, pedagogy. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press. xix-x. ISBN 0809314053.

## [edit] Further reading

Chronological order of publication (oldest first)

  * Johnson, E. L.; Wolfe, Tom (1975). The New Journalism. London: Pan Books. ISBN 0330243152.
  * Gutkind, Lee (1997). The Art of Creative Nonfiction: Writing and Selling the Literature of Reality. New York: Wiley. ISBN 0471113565.
  * Associated Writing Programs; Forche, Carolyn; Gerard, Philip (2001). Writing Creative Nonfiction: Instruction and Insights from Teachers of the Associated Writing Programs. Cincinnati: Writer's Digest Books. ISBN 1884910505.
  * Dillard, Annie; Gutkind, Lee (2005). In Fact: The Best of Creative Nonfiction. New York: W.W. Norton & Co. ISBN 0393326659.
  * Gutkind, Lee, ed. (2008). Keep It Real: Everything You Need to Know About Researching and Writing Creative Nonfiction. New York: W.W. Norton & Co. ISBN 9780393065619.

## [edit] External links

  * Creative Nonfiction â a journal devoted exclusively to the genre
  * What is creative non-fiction? Phil Druker, University of Idaho
  * Bruce Dobler's Creative Nonfiction Compendium, Bruce Dobler, University of Pittsburgh
  * Charles Taylor Prize for Literary Non-Fiction, Canada
  * Scholarship as an Act of Discovery

## [edit] Audio/video links

  * Audio CSPAN - Interview with Lee Gutkind gives a definition of the genre
  * Audio CSPAN - Interview with Lee Gutkind gives examples of authors who write in the genre

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creative_nonfiction"

Categories: Literary genres | Journalism genres | Newswriting | Non-fiction
literature

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 19:03 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



