
# Gehenna

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Main article: Jewish eschatology

This article is about the Jewish equivalent to the Christian understanding of
"Hell.". For other uses, see Gehenna (disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Valley of Hinnom, c. 1900

Gehenna (also gehenom or gehinom) (Hebrew:×××× ××) is equated in
Christian theology with the concept of hell. The name is derived from a
geographical site in Jerusalem known as the Valley of Hinnom, one of the two
principal valleys surrounding the Old City.

Gehenna is cited in the New Testament and in early Christian writing to
represent the place where evil will be destroyed. It lends its name to Islam's
hell, Jahannam. In both Rabbinical Jewish and Christian writing, Gehenna as a
destination of the wicked is different from Sheol, the abode of the dead.

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology
  * 2 Geography
  * 3 History
  * 4 Christian New Testament references
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Etymology

"Gehenna" is the Christian rendering of "Ge Hinnom," literally "Valley of
Hinnom," known in Hebrew as Gai Ben-Hinnom, literally the "Valley of Hinnom's
son." In the Qur'an, gehenna (Gehennem, Jahannam) is a place of torment for
sinners or the Islamic equivalent of hell.  
In the Hebrew Bible, Gai Ben-Hinnom does not refer to hell but rather to a
real valley in Jerusalem (Joshua 15:8, Joshua 18:16, 2nd Kings 23:10, 2
Chronicles 28:3, 2nd Chronicles 33:6,Nehemiah 11:30, Jeremiah 7:31~32,
Jeremiah 19:2, Jeremiah 19:6, Jeremiah 32:35). Garbage from the walled city
was burned there.

## [edit] Geography

The Valley of Hinnom is located below the southern wall of ancient Jerusalem.
It stretches from the foot of Mount Zion eastward to Kidron Valley.In the King
James Version of the Bible, the term appears 13 times in 11 different verses
as "valley of Hinnom," "valley of the son of Hinnom" or "valley of the
children of Hinnom."

## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Valley of Hinnom, 2007

In ancient times, it is believed that children were sacrificed to the pagan
god Molech in Gehenna, a practice that was outlawed by King Josiah (2 Kings,
23:10). Biblical commentator Rashi explains that priests would bang on drums
(Hebrew: tof, tupim) (Hebrew: ×ª××¤××â) so fathers would not hear the
groans of children being sacrificed. Hence the name Topheth. Fires were kept
burning and the valley became the garbage dump of the city. The dead bodies of
criminals, and the carcasses of animals were also thrown there.  

## [edit] Christian New Testament references

<IMG>

<IMG>

Tombs in the Valley of Hinnom

In the synoptic gospels Jesus uses the word Gehenna 11 times to describe the
opposite to the life during the promised, coming Kingdom.[1] It is a place
where both soul and body could be destroyed (Matthew 10:28) in "unquenchable
fire" (Mark 9:43).

In the Gospel of Matthew 23:33, Jesus observes, "Ye serpents, ye generation of
vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of gehenna?â. The word gehenna is
also found in the epistle of James, where it is said to set the tongue on
fire. Many Christians understand gehenna to be a place of eternal punishment
called hell.[2] On the other hand, annihilationists understand gehenna to be a
place where sinners are utterly destroyed, not tormented forever. Christian
Universalists, who believe that God will eventually save all souls, interpret
the New Testament references to Gehenna in the context of the Old Testament,
and conclude that it always refers to the imminent divine judgment of Israel
and not to eternal torment for the unsaved.

The New Testament refers to Hades as a destination of the dead. Hades is
portrayed as a different place from gehenna. Yet, even so, the Book of
Revelation describes the final destination of hades as the Lake of Fire
(Revelation 20:14), which many Christians today interpret as meaning the same
thing as gehenna.

## [edit] See also

  * Hell in Christian beliefs
  * Spirit prison
  * Outer darkness

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Blue Letter Bible. "Dictionary and Word Search for geenna (Strong's 1067)".
  2. ^ Metzger & Coogan (1993) Oxford Companion to the Bibleââ, p243.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Gehenna  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Valley of Hinom  
  * Daily Bible Study page on the Valley of Hinnom
  * Columbia Encyclopedia on the Valley of Hinnom
  * Biblical Proper Names on the Valley of Hinnom
  * Gehenna from the 1901-1906 Jewish Encyclopedia
  * The Jewish view of Hell on chabad.org
  * A Christian Universalist perspective from Tentmaker.org

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Underworlds  
<IMG>

Buddhism (Naraka) Â· Chinese mythology (Diyu) Â· Christianity (Limbo Â· Hell)
Â· Ancient Egyptian religion (Duat) Â· Germanic and Norse paganism (Hel Â·
Niflheim) Â· Greek mythology (Hades Â· Tartarus) Â· Hinduism (Naraka) Â· Islam
(Jahannam) Â· Judaism (Gehennom Â· Sheol) Â· Shinto (Yomi)

<IMG>  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gehenna"

Categories: Christian eschatology | Islamic eschatology | Jewish mysticism |
Hebrew Bible places | Geography of Jerusalem | Christian cosmology | Hell

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 22 March 2009, at 17:41.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



