
# New Left

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (December 2007)  
The New Left were the left-wing movements in different countries in the 1960s
and 1970s that, unlike the earlier leftist focus on union activism, instead
adopted a broader definition of political activism commonly called social
activism. The U.S. "New Left" is associated with the Hippie movement, college
campus mass protest movements and a broadening of focus from protesting class-
based oppression to include issues such as gender, race, and sexual
orientation. The British "New Left" was an intellectually driven movement
which attempted to correct the perceived errors of "Old Left" parties in the
post-World War II period. The movements began to wind down in the 1970s, when
activists either committed themselves to party projects, developed social
justice organizations, moved into identity politics or alternative lifestyles
or became politically inactive.

## Contents

  * 1 Origins
  * 2 In Britain
  * 3 1960s in the United States
    * 3.1 Students for a Democratic Society
    * 3.2 Left Libertarianism, Murray Rothbard, and the New Left
  * 4 International movements
  * 5 Criticism of the legacy
  * 6 Inspirations and influences
  * 7 Key figures
  * 8 Other associated people
  * 9 See also
  * 10 External links
    * 10.1 British New Left periodicals
    * 10.2 British New Left articles
  * 11 Further reading
    * 11.1 General
    * 11.2 UK
    * 11.3 U.S.
    * 11.4 Canada
  * 12 References

  
## [edit] Origins

The confused response of the Communist Party of the USA and the Communist
Party of Great Britain to the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 created a crisis of
confidence in party decision making. Independent Marxist intellectuals began
to develop a more individualistic approach to leftist politics, which was
opposed to the perceived bureaucratic and inflexible politics of the pre-war
leftist parties. In Western Europe, these new developments occurred both
inside and outside social democratic and Communist parties, contributing
toward the development of eurocommunism. The New Left in the U.S. was
primarily a continuation of the progressive movement[citation needed] and
fueled by grass roots movements on college campuses. The New Left in the
United Kingdom emerged through the links between dissenting Communist Party
intellectuals and campus groups.

## [edit] In Britain

As a result of Khrushchev's Secret Speech denouncing Stalin and the Soviet
invasion of Hungary in 1956, many left the Communist Party of Great Britain
(CPGB) for various Trotskyist groupings or the Labour Party.

The British New Left concentrated on the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and
global justice. Some within the British New Left joined the International
Socialists, which later became Socialist Workers Party while others became
involved with groups such as the International Marxist Group. Trotskyist Tariq
Ali, who played a role in some of the New Left protests of this era, documents
his involvement in his book Street Fighting Years.

The Marxist historian E. P. Thompson established a dissenting journal within
the CPGB called Reasoner. Once expelled from the party, he began publishing
the New Reasoner from 1957. In 1960, this journal merged with the Universities
and Left Review to form the New Left Review. These journals attempted to
synthesise a theoretical position of a revisionist, humanist, socialist
marxism, departing from orthodox Marxist theory. This publishing effort made
the ideas of culturally oriented theorists available to an undergraduate
reading audience. Under the long-standing editorial leadership of Perry
Anderson, the New Left Review popularised the Frankfurt School, Antonio
Gramsci, Louis Althusser and other forms of Marxism. Other periodicals like
Socialist Register, started in 1964, and Radical Philosophy, started in 1972,
have also been associated with New Left theory and published a range of
important writings in this field.

As the campus orientation of the American New Left became clear in the mid to
late 1960s, the student sections of the British New Left began taking action
in these areas. The London School of Economics became a key site of British
student militancy (Hoch and Schoenbach, 1969). The influence of the May 1968
events in France were also felt strongly throughout the British New Left. The
politics of the British New Left can be contrasted with Solidarity, UK, which
continued to focus primarily on industrial issues.

## [edit] 1960s in the United States

In the United States, the "New Left" was the name loosely associated with
liberal, sometimes radical, political movements that took place during the
1960s, primarily among college students. The origin of the movement is largely
based on the original progressive movement[citation needed]. The term "New
Left" can be traced to an open letter written in 1960 by sociologist C. Wright
Mills entitled Letter to the New Left. Mills argued for a new leftist
ideology, moving away from the traditional ("Old Left") focus on labor issues,
towards more personalized issues such as opposing alienation, anomie, and
authoritarianism. Put differently, Mills argued for a shift from traditional
leftism, toward the values of the Counterculture.

The New Left opposed the prevailing authority structures in society, which it
termed "The Establishment", and those who rejected this authority became known
as "anti-Establishment." The New Left did not seek to recruit industrial
workers, but rather concentrated on a social activist approach to
organization. Many in the New Left were convinced that they could be the
source for a better kind of social revolution.

Most New Left thinkers in the U.S., to varying degrees, were influenced by the
Vietnam War and the Chinese Cultural Revolution. Like the British New Left,
they also believed that the Secret Speech drew attention to problems with the
Soviet Union, but unlike the British New Left, they did not turn to Trotskyism
or social democracy as a result. Some in the U.S. New Left argued that since
the Soviet Union could no longer be considered the world center for
proletarian revolution, new revolutionary Communist thinkers had to be
substituted in its place â Mao Zedong, Ho Chi Minh and Fidel Castro were
identified as key contributors to this new framework.

Other elements of the U.S. New Left were anarchist and looked to libertarian
socialist traditions of American radicalism, and investigated the Industrial
Workers of the World and previous union militancy. This group coalesced around
the historical journal Radical America and in grouplets. American Autonomist
Marxism was also a child of this stream the U.S. New Left, for instance in the
thought of Harry Cleaver.

The U.S. New Left both influenced and drew inspiration from black radicalism,
particularly the Black Power movement and the more explicitly left-wing Black
Panther Party. The Panthers in turn influenced other similar militant groups,
like the Young Lords, the Brown Berets and the American Indian Movement.

### [edit] Students for a Democratic Society

Main article: Students for a Democratic Society (1960 organization)

The organization that really came to symbolize the core of the New Left was
the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). In 1962, Tom Hayden wrote its
founding document, the Port Huron Statement, which issued a call for
"participatory democracy" based on nonviolent civil disobedience. The SDS
marshalled anti-war, pro-civil rights and free speech concerns on campuses,
and managed to bring together liberals and more revolutionary leftists. The
SDS became the leading organization of the antiwar movement on college
campuses during the Vietnam War, and during the course of the war became
increasingly militant. As opposition to the war grew stronger, the SDS became
a nationally prominent political organization, but opposing the war became an
overriding concern that overshadowed many of the original issues that had
inspired SDS.

In 1968 and 1969, as its radicalism reached a fever pitch, the SDS began to
split under the strain of internal dissension and increasing turns toward
Maoism. Along with adherents known as the New Communist Movement, some
extremist illegal factions also emerged, such as the Weather Underground
Organization.

### [edit] Left Libertarianism, Murray Rothbard, and the New Left

Several libertarian theorists, like Murray Rothbard and Karl Hess attempted to
bridge the gap between libertarianism, anarcho-capitalism, and the New
Left.[1] Rothbard's main reason for allying himself with the New Left was
their opposition to the Vietnam War.[2] Another reason to ally libertarianism
and the New Left was their opposition to big business and how it benefited
from government intervention.[3]

## [edit] International movements

The Prague Spring was legitimised by the Czech government as a reformist
movement to revitalise Czechoslovak socialism. The 1968 events in the Czech
Republic were driven forward by industrial workers, and were explicitly
theorized by active Czech unionists as a revolution for workers' control.

The driving force of near-revolution in France in May 1968 were students
inspired by the ideas of the Situationist International, which in turn had
been inspired by Socialisme ou Barbarie. Both of these French groups placed an
emphasis on cultural production as a form of production. Unlike the New Left,
the sphere of culture was not unrelated to productivity.

While the Autonomia in Italy have been called New Left, it is more appropriate
to see them as a unique response to the failure of the Italian PCI and PSI to
deal with the new Italian industrial working class in the 1950s. The Autonomia
was a result of traditional, industrially oriented, communism retheorising its
ideology and methods. Unlike most of the New Left, Autonomia had a strong
blue-collar arm, active in regularly occupying factories.

The Provos were a Dutch counter-cultural movement of mostly young people with
anarchist influences.

## [edit] Criticism of the legacy

As many of those who supported the New Left in the 1960s are now in charge of
the kinds of institutions they once opposed, conservative opponents argue that
their assumptions - which are sometimes described as politically correct
multiculturalism \- are now the establishment orthodoxy. In what has been
described as the culture wars, conservative critics of this orthodoxy such as
Allan Bloom and Roger Scruton assert that New Left radical egalitarianism is
motivated by anti-Western nihilism.

## [edit] Inspirations and influences

  * Otto Bauer
  * Leon Trotsky
  * Albert Camus
  * Guy Debord
  * Frantz Fanon
  * Allen Ginsberg
  * Antonio Gramsci
  * Mao Zedong
  * Che Guevara
  * Ho Chi Minh
  * R.D. Laing
  * Henri Lefebvre
  * Vladimir Lenin
  * Rosa Luxemburg
  * Herbert Marcuse in particular and the Frankfurt School in general
  * Non-conformists of the 1930s
  * C. Wright Mills
  * George Orwell
  * Jean-Paul Sartre
  * Malcolm X

## [edit] Key figures

  * Tariq Ali
  * Perry Anderson
  * Rudolf Bahro
  * Noam Chomsky
  * Daniel Cohn-Bendit
  * Angela Davis
  * Mike Davis (scholar)
  * RÃ©gis Debray
  * Rudi Dutschke
  * AndrÃ© Gorz
  * Tom Hayden
  * Abbie Hoffman
  * David Horowitz
  * Tom Nairn
  * Carl Oglesby
  * Ronald Radosh
  * Jerry Rubin
  * Mark Rudd
  * E.P. Thompson
  * Raymond Williams
  * Mario Savio
  * Deniz GezmiÅ

## [edit] Other associated people

  * Salvador Allende
  * Louis Althusser
  * Murray Bookchin
  * CÃ©sar ChÃ¡vez
  * David Dellinger
  * Michel Foucault
  * Alain Geismar
  * Karl Hess
  * John Lennon
  * Ben Morea
  * Jacques Sauvageot
  * Charles Taylor
  * William Mandel

## [edit] See also

  * Austromarxism
  * Chinese New Left
  * Left and Right: A Journal of Libertarian Thought
  * New Communist Movement
  * Civil rights movement
  * Drug, Hospital, and Health Care Employees Union
  * Free Speech Movement
  * Lithuanian New Left (New Left 95) [1]
  * New social movements
  * New Left Review
  * New Right
  * The Sixties
  * Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers
  * Yippies
  * Young Lords origins [2]

## [edit] External links

### [edit] British New Left periodicals

  * "The New Reasoner" (HTML and PDF). indexed articles online. 1957-1959. http://www.amielandmelburn.org.uk/collections/nr/index_frame.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.
  * "Marxism Today" (HTML and PDF). indexed articles online. Communist Party of Great Britain and Marxism Today. 1980-1991 & 1998 special issue. http://www.amielandmelburn.org.uk/collections/mt/index_frame.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.
  * "New Left Review" (HTML and PDF). indexed articles online. http://newleftreview.org/. Retrieved on 2007-03-24.
  * "Socialist Register" (HTML and PDF). indexed articles online. 1964-1999. http://socialistregister.com/epublish/8. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.
  * "Universities & Left Review" (HTML and PDF). indexed articles online. 1957-1959. http://www.amielandmelburn.org.uk/collections/ulr/index_frame.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.

### [edit] British New Left articles

  * Mills, C. Wright (September-October 1960). "Letter to the New Left". New Left Review (No. 5). http://www.marxists.org/subject/humanism/mills-c-wright/letter-new-left.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.
  * Novack, George; writing as "William F. Warde" (1961). "Who Will Change The World? The New left and the Views of C. Wright Mills". International Socialist Review (USFI) 22 (No. 3): pp. 67â79. http://www.marxists.org/archive/novack/works/1961/x01.htm. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.
  * "Placating Mr. Jenkins" (HTML). Article discussing online archiving of four British New Left publications Universities & Left Review, Marxism Today, The New Reasoner and Socialist Register. October 16, 2006. http://readingthemaps.blogspot.com/2006/10/placating-mr-jenkins.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-16.

## [edit] Further reading

### [edit] General

  * Interview with AndrÃ© Gorz, about The New Left
  * Teodori, Massimo, ed., The New Left: A documentary History. London: Jonathan Cape (1970).
  * Oglesby, Carl (ed.) The New Left Reader Grove Press (1969). ISBN 83-456-1536-8. Influential collection of texts by Mills, Marcuse, Fanon, Cohn-Bendit, Castro, Hall, Althusser, Kolakowski, Malcolm X, Gorz & others.
  * Michael R. KrÃ¤tke,Otto Bauer and the early "Third Way" to Socialism
  * Detlev Albers u.a. (Hg.), Otto Bauer und der "dritte" Weg. Die Wiederentdeckung des Austromarxismus durch Linkssozialisten und Eurokommunisten, Frankfurt/M 1979

### [edit] UK

  * Ali, Tariq. Street fighting years: a autobiography of the sixties London: Collins, 1987. ISBN 0-00-217779-X
  * Hock, Paul and Vic Schoenbach. LSE: the natives are restless, a report on student power in action London: Sheed and Ward, 1969. ISBN 0-7220-0596-2
  * Scruton, Roger Thinkers of the New Left (Claridge Press, 1985).
  * The New Left's renewal of Marxism an account by Paul Blackledge from International Socialism journal

### [edit] U.S.

  * Archives 
    * New Left Movement: 1964-1973. Archive # 88-020. Title: New Left Movement fonds. 1964-1973. 51 cm of textual records. Trent University Archives. Peterborough, Ontario, Canada. Online guide retrieved April 12, 2005.
    * Russ Gilbert "New Left" Pamphlet Collection: An inventory of the collection at the University of Illinois at Chicago. Online guide retrieved October 8, 2005
  * Reference 
    * Albert, Judith Clavir, and Albert, Stewart Edward. The Sixties Papers: Documents of a Rebellious Decade (New York: Praeger, 1984). ISBN 0-275-91781-9
    * Breines, Wini. Community Organization in the New Left, 1962-1968: The Great Refusal, reissue edition (Rutgers University Press, 1989). ISBN 0-8135-1403-7.
    * Cohen, Mitchell, and Hale, Dennis, eds. The New Student Left (Boston: Beacon Press, 1966).
    * Evans, Sara. Personal Politics: The Roots of Women's Liberation in the Civil Rights Movement & the New Left (Vintage, 1980). ISBN 0-394-74228-1.
    * Frost, Jennifer. "An Interracial Movement of the Poor": Community Organizing & the New Left in the 1960s (New York University Press, 2001). ISBN 0-8147-2697-6.
    * Gosse, Van. The Movements of the New Left, 1950-1975: A Brief History with Documents (Bedford/St. Martin's, 2004). ISBN 0-312-13397-9.
    * Isserman, Maurice. If I had a Hammer: the Death of the Old Left and the Birth of the New Left, reprint edition (University of Illinois Press, 1993). ISBN 0-252-06338-4.
    * Long, Priscilla, ed. The New Left: A Collection of Essays (Boston: Porter Sargent, 1969).
    * Mattson, Kevin, Intellectuals in Action: The Origins of the New Left and Radical Liberalism, 1945-1970 (Penn State Press, 2002). ISBN 0-271-02206-X
    * McMillian, John and Buhle, Paul (eds.). The New Left Revisited (Temple University Press, 2003). ISBN 1-56639-976-9.
    * Rossinow, Doug. The Politics of Authenticity: Liberalism, Christianity, and the New Left in America (Columbia University Press, 1998). ISBN 0-231-11057-x
    * Rubenstein, Richard E. Left Turn: Origins of the Next American Revolution (Boston: Little Brown, (1973).
    * Young, C. A. Culture, Radicalism, and the Making of a US Third Wold Left (Duke University Press, 2006).
  * Publications 
    * Munk, Michael. The New Left: What It Is ... Where It's Going ... What Makes it Move. 22pp A National Guardian Pamphlet. New York. n.d. [1965]. Stapled softcover. Photos.

### [edit] Canada

For a discussion on the rise and fall of the 60s movement in Canada, USA and
Germany see: Levitt. C (1984) Children of Privilege. University of Toronto
Press, Toronto, Ontario.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://mises.org/journals/jls/19_1/19_1_2.pdf
  2. ^ http://mises.org/story/2762
  3. ^ http://mises.org/story/2099

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Left"

Categories: Political movements | Politics of the United Kingdom | Politics of
the United States | Left-wing politics

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Eesti
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 15:02.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



