
# Alastair Reynolds

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Alastair Reynolds  
<IMG>  
  
Born 1966 (1966)  
Barry, Wales,  
United Kingdom  
Occupation Novelist,  
former research astronomer with the European Space Agency  
Nationality Welsh  
Genres Science fiction  
Influences

    
    
    Larry Niven, John Varley,  
Bruce Sterling, Gregory Benford, Samuel R. Delany,  
Joan D. Vinge,  
Michael Swanwick, Star Trek[1]  
Official website  
Alastair Preston Reynolds (born in 1966 in Barry, Wales) is a Welsh science
fiction author. He specialises in dark hard science fiction and space opera.
He spent his early years in Cornwall, moved back to Wales before going to
Newcastle, where he read Physics and Astronomy. Afterwards, he earned a PhD
from St Andrews, Scotland. In 1991, he moved to Noordwijk in the Netherlands
where he met his wife Josette (who is from France). There, he worked for the
European Space Research and Technology Centre, part of the European Space
Agency, until 2004 when he left to pursue writing full time. He returned to
Wales in 2008 and lives near Cardiff.

## Contents

  * 1 Works
  * 2 Bibliography
    * 2.1 Novels
      * 2.1.1 Revelation Space
      * 2.1.2 Other
    * 2.2 Collections
    * 2.3 Novellas
      * 2.3.1 Revelation Space
      * 2.3.2 Other
    * 2.4 Short Fiction
      * 2.4.1 Revelation Space
      * 2.4.2 Other
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links
    * 5.1 Interviews

  
## [edit] Works

Reynolds wrote his first four published science fiction short stories while
still a graduate student, in 1989-1991; they appeared in 1990-1992. In 1991
Reynolds graduated and moved from Scotland to the Netherlands to work at ESA.
He then started spending much of his writing time on a first novel, which
eventually turned into Revelation Space, while the few short stories he
submitted from 1991-1995 were rejected. This ended in 1995 when his story
"Byrd Land Six" was published, which he says marked the beginning of a more
serious phase of writing. As of 2008[update] he has published over thirty
shorter works and eight novels. His works are hard science fiction veiled
behind space opera and noir toned stories, and reflect his professional
expertise with physics and astronomy, included by extrapolating future
technologies in terms that are consistent, for the most part, with current
science. Reynolds has said he prefers to keep the science in his books to what
he personally believes will be possible, and he does not believe faster-than-
light travel will ever be possible, but that he adopts science he believes
will be impossible when it is necessary for the story.[2] Most of Reynolds's
novels contain multiple storylines that originally appear to be completely
unrelated, but merge later in the story.

Five of his novels and several of his short stories take place within one
consistent future universe, usually now called the Revelation Space universe
after the first novel published in it, although it was originally developed in
short stories for several years before the first novel. Although most
characters appear in more than one novel, the works set within this future
timeline rarely have the same protagonists twice. Often the protagonists from
one work belong to a group that is regarded with suspicion or enmity by the
protagonists of another work. While a great deal of science fiction reflects
either very optimistic or dystopian visions of the human future, Reynolds's
future worlds are notable in that human societies have not departed to either
positive or negative extremes, but instead are similar to those of today in
terms of moral ambiguity and a mixture of cruelty and decency, corruption and
opportunity, despite their technology being dramatically advanced.

The Revelation Space series includes five novels, two novellas, and eight
short stories set over a span of several centuries, spanning approximately
2200 to 40 000, although the novels are all set in a 300 year period spanning
from 2427 to 2727. In this universe, extraterrestrial sentience exists but is
elusive, and interstellar travel is primarily undertaken by a class of vessel
called a lighthugger which only approaches the speed of light (faster than
light travel is possible, but it is so dangerous that no race uses it).
Fermi's paradox is explained as resulting from the activities of an inorganic
alien race referred to by its victims as the Inhibitors, which exterminates
sentient races if they proceed above a certain level of technology. The
trilogy consisting of Revelation Space, Redemption Ark and Absolution Gap deal
with humanity coming to the attention of the inhibitors and the resultant war
between them.

Century Rain takes place in a future universe independent of the Revelation
Space universe and has different rules, such as faster-than-light travel being
possible through a system of portals similar to wormholes. Century Rain also
departs substantially from Reynolds's previous works, both in having a
protagonist who is much closer to the perspective of our real world (in fact
he is from a version of our past), serving as a proxy for the reader in
confronting the unfamiliarity of the advanced science fiction aspects and in
having a much more linear storytelling process. Reynolds's previous
protagonists started out fully absorbed in the exoticisms of the future
setting and his previous Revelation Space works have several interlinked story
threads, not necessarily contemporaneous.

Pushing Ice is also a standalone story, with characters from much less distant
in the future than in any of his other novels, set into a framework storyline
that extends much further into the future of humanity than any of his previous
novels. It contains an alternative interpretation of the Fermi paradox,
intelligent sentient life in this universe is extremely scarce.

The Prefect marked a return to the Revelation Space universe. Like Chasm City,
it is a stand-alone novel within the Revelation Space universe. It is set
prior to any of the other Relevation Space novels, though still 200 years
after the original human settlement of the Epsilon Eridani system. It was
published in the United Kingdom on 2 April 2007.

On 7 June 2007, Reynolds announced that his next novel would be entitled House
of Suns, and that it would be set in the same universe as his novella
"Thousandth Night" from the One Million A.D. anthology. This novel was
released in the UK on 17 April 2008 with an American release to follow.[3] He
is presently working on a new novel which he has confirmed will be a
standalone and is due for publication in October 2009, titled Terminal
World.[4] It is described by Reynolds in a recent interview as "it's SF, it's
weird and it doesn't have spaceships."[5] Reynolds further elaborated on the
book in a recent interview ,[6] saying it would be "a kind of steampunk-tinged
planetary romance, set in the distant future".

## [edit] Bibliography

### [edit] Novels

#### [edit] Revelation Space

  1. Revelation Space. London: Gollancz, 2000. ISBN 0-575-06875-2
  2. Chasm City. London: Gollancz, 2001. ISBN 0-575-06877-9
  3. Redemption Ark. London: Gollancz, 2002. ISBN 0-575-06879-5
  4. Absolution Gap. London: Gollancz, 2003. ISBN 0-575-07434-5
  5. The Prefect. London: Gollancz, 2007, ISBN 0-575-07716-6

#### [edit] Other

  * Century Rain. London: Gollancz, 2004. ISBN 0-575-07436-1
  * Pushing Ice. London: Gollancz, 2005. ISBN 0-575-07438-8
  * House of Suns. London: Gollancz, 2008, ISBN 0-575-07717-4

### [edit] Collections

  * Diamond Dogs, Turquoise Days. London: Gollancz, 2003. ISBN 0-575-07526-0
  * Zima Blue and Other Stories. San Francisco, CA: Night Shade Books, 2006. ISBN 1-59780-058-9
  * Galactic North. London: Gollancz, 2006. ISBN 0-575-07910-X (Contains all current novellas and short stories in the Revelation Space universe except those in Diamond Dogs, Turquoise Days)

### [edit] Novellas

#### [edit] Revelation Space

  * "Great Wall of Mars" - Originally published in Spectrum SF #1 (February 2000); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Eighteenth Annual Collection (2001, ISBN 0-312-27465-3), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Galactic North
  * "Glacial" - Originally published in Spectrum SF #5 (March 2001); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Nineteenth Annual Collection (2002, ISBN 0-312-28879-4), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Galactic North
  * Diamond Dogs \- Originally published as a chapbook from PS Publishing (2001, ISBN 1-902880-27-7); reprinted in Infinities (2002), Peter Crowther, ed.; and in Diamond Dogs, Turquoise Days
  * Turquoise Days \- Originally published as a chapbook from Golden Gryphon (2002, no ISBN); reprinted in the The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twentieth Annual Collection (2003, ISBN 0-312-30860-4), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Best of the Best Volume 2: 20 Years of the Year's Best Short Science Fiction Novels (2007, ISBN-10: 0312363427), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Diamond Dogs, Turquoise Days
  * "Weather" - Originally published in Galactic North (2006)
  * "Grafenwalder's Bestiary" - Originally published in Galactic North (2006)
  * "Nightingale" - Originally published in Galactic North (2006); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Fourth Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 978-0312363352), Gardner Dozois, ed.

#### [edit] Other

  * "Thousandth Night" - Originally published in One Million A.D. (2005), Gardner Dozois, ed.
  * "Understanding Space and Time" - Originally published in a limited edition of 400 copies for the Novacon 35 Sci Fi convention; reprinted in Science Fiction: The Best of the Year, 2006 Edition (2006, ISBN 978-0809556496), Rich Horton, ed.; and in Science Fiction: The Very Best of 2005 (2006), Jonathan Strahan, ed.; and in Zima Blue and Other Stories
  * "Minla's Flowers" - Originally published in The New Space Opera (2007, ISBN 978-0060846756), Gardner Dozois and Jonathan Strahan, eds.
  * "The Six Directions of Space" - Originally published in Galactic Empires (September 2007[7]), Gardner Dozois, ed.; to be reprinted as a stand-alone chapbook by Subterranean Press[8]
  * "Troika": originally published in Godlike Machines (2009), Jonathan Strahan, (forthcoming as of 2008).

### [edit] Short Fiction

#### [edit] Revelation Space

  * "Dilation Sleep" - Originally published in Interzone #39 (September 1990); reprinted in Galactic North
  * "A Spy in Europa" - Originally published in Interzone #120 (June 1997); reprinted in the The Year's Best Science Fiction: Fifteenth Annual Collection (1998, ISBN 0-312-19033-6), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Galactic North; and posted free online at Infinity Plus [2]
  * "Galactic North" - Originally published in Interzone #145 (July 1999); reprinted in Space Soldiers (2001, ISBN 978-0441008247), Jack Dann and Gardner Dozois, eds.; and in the The Year's Best Science Fiction: Seventeenth Annual Collection (2000, ISBN 0-312-26417-8), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Hayakawa's SF magazine; and in Galactic North

#### [edit] Other

  * "Nunivak Snowflakes" - Originally published in Interzone #36 (June 1990)
  * "Enola" - Originally published in Interzone #54 (December 1991); reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories
  * "Digital to Analogue" - Originally published in In Dreams (1992), Paul McAuley and Kim Newman, eds.; reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories, Limited Edition
  * "Byrd Land Six" - Originally published in Interzone #96 (June 1995); reprinted in The Ant Men of Tibet and Other Stories (2001, ISBN 1-903468-02-7), David Pringle, ed.
  * "Spirey and the Queen" - Originally published in Interzone #108 (June 1996); reprinted in Future War (1999, ISBN 0-441-00639-6), Gardner Dozois and Jack Dann, eds.; and in Zima Blue and Other Stories; and in The Space Opera Renaissance (2006), David G. Hartwell & Kathryn Cramer, eds.; and posted free online at Infinity Plus [3]
  * "On the Oodnadatta" - Originally published in Interzone #128 (February 1998)
  * "Stroboscopic" - Originally published in Interzone #134 (August 1998); reprinted in Dangerous Games (2007, ISBN 978-0441014903), Gardner Dozois and Jack Dann, eds.
  * "Angels of Ashes" - Originally published in Asimov's Science Fiction (July 1999); reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories
  * "Viper" - Originally published in Asimov's Science Fiction (December 1999)
  * "Merlin's Gun" - Originally published in Asimov's Science Fiction (May 2000); reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories; and in The Mammoth Book of Extreme Science Fiction (2006, ISBN 978-0-78671-727-9), Mike Ashley, ed.
  * "Hideaway" - Originally published in Interzone #157 (July 2000); reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories
  * "Fresco" - Originally published in the UNESCO Courier (May 2001); posted free online at UNESCO website [4]
  * "The Big Hello" - Originally published in German translation in a convention program; also posted free online at Alastair Reynolds's website [5]
  * "The Real Story" - Originally published in Mars Probes (2002), Peter Crowther, ed.; reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories
  * "Everlasting" - Originally published in Interzone #193 (Spring 2004)
  * "Beyond the Aquila Rift" - Originally published in Constellations (2005), Peter Crowther, ed.; reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Third Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 0-312-35334-0), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Year's Best SF 11 (2006, ISBN 978-0060873417), David G. Hartwell and Kathryn Cramer, eds.; and in Zima Blue and Other Stories
  * "Zima Blue" - Originally published in Postscripts # 4 (Summer 2005); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Third Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 0-312-35334-0), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Zima Blue and Other Stories
  * "Feeling Rejected" - Originally published in the journal Nature (2005)
  * "Tiger, Burning" - Originally published in Forbidden Planets (2006, ISBN 0-7564-0330-8), Peter Crowther, ed.; reprinted in Year's Best SF 12 (2007, ISBN 978-0061252082), David G. Hartwell and Kathryn Cramer, eds.
  * "Signal to Noise" - Originally published in Zima Blue and Other Stories, (2006); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Fourth Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 978-0312363352), Gardner Dozois, ed.
  * "The Sledge-Maker's Daughter" - Originally published in Interzone No. 209 (April 2007); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Fifth Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 978-0312378608), Gardner Dozois, ed.
  * "The Star-Surgeon's Apprentice" - Originally published in The Starry Rift (April 2008), Jonathan Strahan, ed.
  * "Fury"- Originally published in Eclipse Two: New Science Fiction and Fantasy, (November 2008).
  * "The Manastodon Broadcasts" - Originally published in Aberrant Dreams I: The Awakening (December 2008[9]), Joe Dickerson, Ernest G. Saylor and Lonny Harper, eds.
  * The Fixation \- Originally published in a Finnish language, limited edition booklet of about 200 copies in tribute to Hannu Blomilla in Finland (2007); to be reprinted in The Solaris Book of New Science Fiction, Volume 3 (February 2009), George Mann, ed.
  * "The Receivers" - Originally published in Other Earths (April 2009), Nick Gevers and Jay Lake, eds.

  

## [edit] See also

  * Revelation Space universe

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Main influences discussed extensively in Alastair Reynolds, Essay: "Future Histories", Locus, Vol. 57, No. 5, Issue 550, November 2006, p. 39; also included as afterword to Galactic North
  2. ^ Science fiction 'thrives in hi-tech world' BBC News Monday, 30 April 2007
  3. ^ www.alastairreynolds.com, as retrieved in February 2008[update].
  4. ^ www.alastairreynolds.com, as retrieved in November 2008[update]
  5. ^ [1] Interview with Reynolds in April 2008
  6. ^ http://www.conceptscifi.com/iareynolds.htm Interview with Reynolds in January 2009
  7. ^ Science Fiction Book Club
  8. ^ Subterranean Press website
  9. ^ Skull on a Shelf ("the Aberrant Dreams and HD-IMAGE store"), as linked from this Aberrant Dreams news post

## [edit] External links

  * Personal homepage
  * Alastair Reynolds at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
  * Alastair Reynolds' online fiction at Free Speculative Fiction Online
  * Golden Gryphon Press official site \- About chapbook Turquoise Days
  * Revelation Space The Alastair Reynolds Forum. Alastair Reynolds chat forum.
  * Night Shade Books publisher of Zima Blue and Other Stories

### [edit] Interviews

  * Interview conducted by Roger Deforest (2006)
  * Science fiction 'thrives in hi-tech world', interview by the BBC (2007)

<IMG> Biography portal  
  

Persondata  
NAME Reynolds, Alastair Preston  
ALTERNATIVE NAMES  
SHORT DESCRIPTION Novelist and astronomer  
DATE OF BIRTH 1966  
PLACE OF BIRTH Barry, South Wales, United Kingdom  
DATE OF DEATH  
PLACE OF DEATH  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alastair_Reynolds"

Categories: 1966 births | Living people | Welsh science fiction writers |
British science fiction writers | Alumni of Newcastle University | Revelation
Space | People from Barry, Vale of Glamorgan

Hidden categories: Articles containing potentially dated statements from
February 2008 | All articles containing potentially dated statements |
Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2008 | Articles
containing potentially dated statements from 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 22:33.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



