
# The Mother of All Demos

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Mother of All Demos is a name given to Douglas Engelbart's December 9,
1968 demonstration at the Convention Center in San Francisco. At the Fall
Joint Computer Conference (FJCC), Engelbart, with the help of his
geographically distributed team, demonstrated the workings of the NLS (which
stood for oNLine System) to the 1,000 computer professionals in attendance.
The project was the result of work done at SRI International's Augmentation
Research Center. The demo featured the first computer mouse the public had
ever seen, as well as introducing interactive text, video conferencing,
teleconferencing, email and hypertext.

The title of the FJCC 1968 session which was devoted to this demo is: A
research center for augmenting human intellect, Douglas Engelbart, Session
Chairman. Bill English is listed as the co-author of the FJCC conference paper
of the same name, and acknowledged as one of the principal engineers
responsible for NLS and the demo. A copy of the original session flyer is
posted here

The first known usage of the phrase "Mother of All Demos" was in journalist
Steven Levy's 1994 book, Insanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the
Computer That Changed Everything ISBN 978-0140291773:

> "... a calming voice from Mission Control as the truly final frontier
whizzed before their eyes. It was the mother of all demos. Engelbart's support
staff was as elaborate as one would find at a modern Grateful Dead concert.
..." - Insanely Great, page 42

Subsequently, Andries van Dam repeated the phrase in a speech at the 1998
Engelbart's Unfinished Revolution Conference (opening of Session 3), and the
phrase was also cited in John Markoff's 2005 book What the Dormouse Said: How
the 60s Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer ISBN 978-0670033829.

## [edit] External links

  * Google streaming video of 1968 Demo
  * "The Demo", a website with video archives of the event
  * Engelbart's 1968 demo a brief review of What the Dormouse Said followed by an authorized excerpt focused on the Demo.
  * Published citations for Engelbart, D. & English, W. (1968). A research center for augmenting human intellect. AFIPS Fall Joint Computer Conference. p. 295-410
  * The programming languages behind "the mother of all demos"
  * A copy of the original 1968 Engelbart 1968 FJCC session flyer
  * The Invisible Revolution is a documentary about Doug Engelbart.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mother_of_All_Demos"

Categories: History of human-computer interaction

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 April 2009, at 22:58 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



