
# Flammarion woodcut

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Image and caption from page 163 of L'atmosphÃ¨re: mÃ©tÃ©orologie populaire, by
Camille Flammarion, 1888.

The Flammarion woodcut is an anonymous wood engraving (once thought to be a
woodcut), so named because its first documented appearance is in Camille
Flammarion's 1888 book L'atmosphÃ¨re: mÃ©tÃ©orologie populaire ("The
Atmosphere: Popular Meteorology").[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 History
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Description

The print depicts a man dressed as a medieval pilgrim and carrying a pilgrim's
staff, peering through the sky as if it were a curtain to look at the hidden
workings of the universe. One of the elements of the cosmic machinery bears a
strong resemblance to traditional pictorial representations of the "wheel in
the middle of a wheel" described in the visions of the prophet Ezekiel (see
Merkabah). The caption in Flammarion's book translates as "A missionary of the
Middle Ages tells that he had found the point where the sky and the Earth
touched..." The image accompanies a text which reads, in part, "What, then, is
this blue sky, which certainly does exist, and which veils from us the stars
during the day? ... And yet this dome does not exist. In a balloon, I myself
have risen higher than where the Greek gods were supposed to live without
getting to this point, which of course disappears at the same rate in which we
approach it."[2] The print is often described as being medieval due to its
visual style, its fanciful vision of the world, and what appears to be a
depiction of a flat Earth. It was, however, likely intended as an illustration
that what the wanderer does in the picture cannot be possible, since there is
no dome, nor is the Earth flat.

## [edit] History

In 1957, astronomer Ernst Zinner claimed that the image dated to the German
Renaissance, but he was unable to find any version published earlier than
1906.[3] Further investigation, however, revealed that the work was a
composite of images characteristic of different historical periods, and that
it had been made with a burin, the engraver's tool, used on wood for wood
engraving only from the late 18th century. The image was traced to
Flammarion's book by Arthur Beer, an astrophysicist and historian of German
science at Cambridge and, independently, by Bruno Weber, the curator of rare
books at the ZÃ¼rich central library.[4]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Universum â Flammarion woodcut, Paris 1888, colored by Hugo Heikenwaelder,
Vienna 1998

According to Weber and to astronomer Joseph Ashbrook,[5] the depiction of a
spherical heavenly vault separating the earth from an outer realm is similar
to an illustration in Sebastian MÃ¼nster's Cosmographia of 1544, a book which
Flammarion, an ardent bibliophile and book collector, might have owned [1].
The idea of a pilgrim finding the place where the Earth and sky meet might
have been inspired by a legend associated with Saint Macarius of Rome, a
legend which Flammarion recounts in detail in his book Les mondes imaginaires
et les mondes rÃ©els ("The Imaginary Worlds and the Real Worlds", 1865).
Flammarion had been apprenticed at the age of twelve to an engraver in Paris
and it is believed that many of the illustrations for his books were engraved
from his own drawings, probably under his supervision. Therefore it is
plausible that Flammarion himself created the image, though this has not been
conclusively ascertained. There is no reason to believe that this earliest
version was intended to be deceptive as to its date of creation.

The image was used as an illustration in C. G. Jung's "Flying Saucers: A
Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies", published in 1959, and also as the
cover illustrations for Daniel J. Boorstin's The Discoverers (1983), an
account of the history of science and for The Mathematical Experience by
Philip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh. The Flammarion woodcut has also been used in
many other contexts to illustrate either the scientific or the mystical quests
for knowledge.

## [edit] See also

  * Woodcut
  * Wood engraving

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Flammarion, Camille (1888). L'atmosphÃ¨re: mÃ©tÃ©orologie populaire ("The Atmosphere: Popular Meteorology"). Paris. p. 163.
  2. ^ [http://www.georgpeez.de/texte/flamku.htm Quotation from "The atmosphere", p. 163]
  3. ^ E. Zinner, in BÃ¶rsenblatt fÃ¼r den Deutschen Buchhandel, Frankfurt, 18 March 1957
  4. ^ B. Weber, in Gutenberg Jahrbuch, p. 381, 1973
  5. ^ J. Ashbrook, Sky & Telescope, p. 356, May 1977

## [edit] External links

  * (German) Georg Peez: "Zum Beispiel; Anonymer und undatierter Holzschnitt".

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flammarion_woodcut"

Categories: Prints (art) | Hoaxes | 1880s works | Art forgery

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Tagalog

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 10:44.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



