
# Book of Revelation

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Book of Revelation (disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Visions of John of Patmos, as depicted in the TrÃ¨s Riches Heures du Duc de
Berry. Four seraphim surround the throne; the twenty-four elders sit to the
left and right. They are dressed in white robes, representing pureness, and
have crowns of gold on their heads, denoting royalty and honor (Rev 4:4). The
book of Revelation does not specifically identify who the twenty-four elders
are, though they are thought to be the twelve sons of Jacob and the twelve
Disciples of Jesus.

The Book of Revelation, also called Revelation to John, Apocalypse of John
(pronounced /ÉËpÉkÉlÉ¨ps/, from the Greek: á¼ÏÎ¿ÎºÎ¬Î»Ï ÏÎ¹Ï
á¼¸ÏÎ¬Î½Î½Î¿Ï , ApokÃ¡lypsis IÅÃ¡nnou), and Revelation of Jesus Christ is
the last canonical book of the New Testament in the Christian Bible. It is the
only biblical book that is wholly composed of apocalyptic literature.[1]

The Bible  
New Testament  
  * Matthew
  * Mark
  * Luke
  * John
  * Acts
  * Romans
  * 1 Corinthians
  * 2 Corinthians
  * Galatians
  * Ephesians
  * Philippians
  * Colossians
  * 1 Thessalonians
  * 2 Thessalonians
  * 1 Timothy
  * 2 Timothy
  * Titus
  * Philemon
  * Hebrews
  * James
  * 1 Peter
  * 2 Peter
  * 1 John
  * 2 John
  * 3 John
  * Jude
  * Revelation

* * *
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit

* * *
<IMG> Bible portal  
## Contents

  * 1 Title
  * 2 Introduction
  * 3 Authorship
    * 3.1 Traditional view
    * 3.2 Early views
    * 3.3 Modern views
  * 4 Dating
  * 5 Chronology
  * 6 Interpretations
    * 6.1 Preterist view
    * 6.2 Historicist view
    * 6.3 Futurist view
    * 6.4 Eastern Orthodox view
    * 6.5 Anglican view
    * 6.6 Paschal Liturgical view
    * 6.7 Esoteric view
    * 6.8 Radical Discipleship view
    * 6.9 Spiritual or Idealist view
    * 6.10 Aesthetic and Literary view
    * 6.11 The Historical-Critical view
    * 6.12 Dismissal
  * 7 Footnotes
  * 8 Book references
    * 8.1 Commentaries
  * 9 See also
    * 9.1 Directly related
    * 9.2 General
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Title

A series of articles on  
  
"John" in the Bible  
Johannine literature  
Gospel of John Â· First Epistle of John Â· Second Epistle of John Â· Third
Epistle of John Â· Revelation Â· Authorship  
Names  
John the Apostle Â· Disciple whom Jesus loved Â· John the Presbyter Â· John
the Evangelist Â· John of Patmos  
Communities  
Twelve Apostles Â· The Early Church  
Related literature  
Apocryphon of John Â· Acts of John Â· Logos Â· Signs Gospel  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Though now known as the Book of Revelation, the title found on some of the
earliest manuscripts is "The Apocalypse of John" (á¼ÏÎ¿ÎºÎ¬Î»Ï ÏÎ¹Ï
á¼¸ÏÎ¬Î½Î½Î¿Ï ), and the most common title found on later manuscripts is "The
Apocalypse of the theologian" (á¼ÏÎ¿ÎºÎ¬Î»Ï ÏÎ¹Ï ÏÎ¿á¿¦ ÎÎµÎ¿Î»ÏÎ³Î¿Ï
). (In English, apocalypse is often rendered as revelation and the literal
meaning of the Greek word is "unveiling".)[2] Some later manuscripts add
Evangelist or Apostle to the title.[3] The first words of the book are
effectively self-titled, "The Revelation of Jesus Christ".

## [edit] Introduction

After a short introduction (ch. 1:1â10)[4], the book presents a brief
account of the author. The first vision (1:11â3:22), related by "one like
unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about
the paps with a golden girdle", speaking with "a great voice, as of a
trumpet", is a statement addressing the seven churches of Asia. The second
vision, which makes up the rest of the book (chs. 4â22)[5], begins with "a
door â¦ opened in the sky" and describes what some might call the end of the
worldâ or more properly, the end of the age, in which Satan's rule through
Man is destroyed by the Messiah. These events are foreseen: the Great
Tribulation, the Campaign of Armageddon, the Second Coming of the Messiah with
the restoration of peace to the world and His 1,000 year reign, the
imprisonment of Satan (portrayed as a dragon) until he is 'loosed' for the
final rebellion, God's final judgment over Satan, the Great White throne
judgment, and the ushering in of the New Heavens and New Earth. Alternatively,
according to the Preterist theory, the events of the latter part of the
Apocalypse of John are interpreted as being fulfilled by events in the 1st
century.

Revelation is considered by some to be one of the most controversial and
difficult books of the Bible, with many diverse interpretations of the
meanings of the various names and events in the account. Protestant founder
Martin Luther at first considered Revelation to be "neither apostolic nor
prophetic" and stated that "Christ is neither taught nor known in it",[6] and
placed it in his Antilegomena. John Calvin believed the book to be canonical,
yet it was the only New Testament book on which he did not write a
commentary.[7]

In the 4th century, Gregory of Nazianzus and other bishops argued against
including this book in the New Testament canon, chiefly because of the
difficulties of interpreting it and the danger for abuse.[8] Christians in
Syria also reject it because of the Montanists' heavy reliance on it.[9] In
the 9th century, it was included with the Apocalypse of Peter among "disputed"
books in the Stichometry of St. Nicephorus, Patriarch of
Constantinople.[citation needed] In the end it was included in the accepted
canon, although it remains the only book of the New Testament that is not read
within the Divine Liturgy of the Eastern Orthodox Church.

Artists throughout the centuries have portrayed the visions described by John.

## [edit] Authorship

Main article: Authorship of the Johannine works

### [edit] Traditional view

The author of Revelation identifies himself several times as "John" (1:1, 4,
9; 22:8). The author also states that he was on the island of Patmos when he
received his first vision (1:9; 4:1â2). As a result, the author of
Revelation is referred to as John of Patmos. John explicitly addresses
Revelation to seven churches of Asia Minor: Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos,
Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea (1:4, 11). All of these sites are
located in what is now Turkey. The traditional view holds that John the
Apostleâconsidered to have written the Gospel and epistles by the same
nameâwas exiled on Patmos in the Aegean archipelago during the reign of
Emperor Domitian, and wrote the Revelation there. Those in favor of a single
common author point to similarities between the Gospel and Revelation. For
example, both works are soteriological (e.g., referring to Jesus as a lamb)
and possess a high Christology, stressing Jesus' divine side as opposed to the
human side stressed by the Synoptic Gospels. In the Gospel of John and in
Revelation, Jesus is referred to as "the Word of God" ([[logos|á½ Î»ÏÎ³Î¿Ï
ÏÎ¿á¿¦ ÎÎµÎ¿á¿¦]]), although the context in Revelation is very different
from John. The Word in Rev 19:13 is involved in judgment but in John 1:1, the
image is used to speak of a role in creation and redemption.[10] Explanations
of the differences between John's work by proponents of the single-author view
include factoring in underlying motifs and purposes, authorial target
audience, the author's collaboration with or utilization of different scribes
and the advanced age of John the Apostle when he wrote Revelation. Like his
Old Testament counterpart Daniel, John was kept alive to receive the prophetic
vision.

A natural reading of the text would reveal that John is writing literally as
he sees the vision (Rev 1:11; 10:4; 14:3; 19:9; 21:5) and that he is warned by
an angel not to alter the text through a subsequent edit (Rev 22:18-19), in
order to maintain the textual integrity of the book.[11]

### [edit] Early views

A number of Church Fathers weighed in on the authorship of Revelation. Justin
Martyr avows his belief in its apostolic origin. Irenaeus (178) assumes it as
a conceded point. At the end of the 2nd century, we find it accepted at
Antioch, by Theophilus, and in Africa by Tertullian. At the beginning of the
3rd century, it is adopted by Clement of Alexandria and by Origen of
Alexandria, later by Methodius, Cyprian, and Lactantius. Dionysius of
Alexandria (247) rejected it, upon doctrinal rather than critical grounds.
Eusebius (315) inclined to class the Apocalypse with the spurious books.[12]
Jerome relegated it to second class.[12] Most canons included it, but some,
especially in the Eastern Church, rejected it. It is wholly absent from the
Peshitta.[12]

### [edit] Modern views

Modern scholarship[13] suggests that John the Apostle, John the Evangelist,
and John of Patmos refer to three separate individuals. This can be determined
via new means of inquiry such as textual criticism. Certain lines of evidence
suggest that John of Patmos wrote only Revelation, not the Gospel of John nor
the Epistles of John. For one, the author of Revelation identifies himself as
"John" several times, but the author of the Gospel of John never identifies
himself directly. While both works liken Jesus to a lamb, they consistently
use different words for lamb when referring to himâthe Gospel uses amnos,
Revelation uses arnion.[14] Lastly, the Gospel is written in nearly flawless
Greek, but Revelation contains grammatical errors and stylistic abnormalities
which indicate its author may not have been as familiar with the Greek
language as the Gospel's author.[15]

In the Anchor Bible volume on Revelation, J. Massynberde Ford contends that
the core verses of the book, in general chapters 4 through 22, are surviving
records of the prophecies of John the Baptist.[16] She notes, for example,
that the Lamb of God references in the Gospels are all associated with John
the Baptist, and she ties other hallmarks of Revelation to what is known of
the Baptist.

## [edit] Dating

According to early tradition, the writing of this book took place near the
very end of Domitian's reign, around 95 or 96. Others contend for an earlier
date, 68 or 69, in the reign of Nero or shortly thereafter.[17] The majority
of modern scholars also use these dates.[18] Those who are in favor of the
later date appeal to the external testimony of the Christian father Irenaeus
(d. 185), who stated that he had received information relative to this book
from those who had seen John face to face. He says that "it was not seen very
long time since, but almost in our day, towards the end of Domitian's reign"
(A.H. 5.30.3), who according to Eusebius had started the persecution referred
to in the book; however, recent scholars dispute that the book is situated in
a time of ongoing persecution and have also doubted the reality of a large-
scale Domitian persecution.[19]

According to Epiphanius of Salamis, the Revelation of John was written in the
time of Claudius (PG, XLI 909-910).

Some exegetes (Paul Touilleux, Albert Gelin, AndrÃ© Feuillet) distinguish two
dates: publication (under Domitian) and date of the visions (under Vespasian).
Various editors would have a hand in the formation of the document, according
to these theories. The dating of the work is still widely debated in the
scholarly community.

## [edit] Chronology

Main article: Chronology of Revelation

Revelation is divided into seven cycles of events. The number seven appears
frequently as a symbol within the text. The chapters of Revelation present a
series of events, full of imagery, and metaphor; which detail the chronology
of God's judgment on the world.

Exact interpretations of the chronology of Revelation vary extensively. The
work may be interpreted literally, as a chronological list of events that will
occur as the time of Revelation grows near. At the same time, the imagery can
be seen to contain symbolic commentaries on the world during the historical
period in which Revelation was written, or "pre-commentaries" on our world
today.

## [edit] Interpretations

<IMG>

John the Revelator  
Play sound  
A Gospel interpretation by the Spiritual Four Quartet.  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
See also: Christian eschatological differences

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)  
These interpretations are not mutually exclusive and many Christians adopt a
combination of these approaches. Some churches have also established their own
specific positions on Revelation.

### [edit] Preterist view

Preterism holds that the contents of Revelation constitute a prophecy of
events that were fulfilled in the 1st century[20]. Preterist interpretations
generally identify either Jerusalem or Pagan Rome as the persecutor of the
Church, "Babylon", the "Mother of Harlots", etc. They see Armageddon as God's
judgment on the Jews, carried out by the Roman army, which is identified as
"the beast". Some preterists see the second half of Revelation as changing
focus to Rome, its persecution of Christians, and the fall of the Roman
Empire. It sees the Revelation being fulfilled in 70, thereby bringing the
full presence of God to dwell with all humanity. It also holds that the
Emperor Nero was possibly the number of the beast mentioned in the book as his
name equals 666 in Hebrew[21] if using the Greek spelling of Nero's name
(Neron Caesar), but using the Hebrew symbols with their assigned numeric
values (an ancient method known as gematria). However, a few ancient
manuscripts of the Revelation say the number is 616, fifty less than the more
well known numeral. A possible method to this problem lies in early
translation. In the assumption that the Revelation was meant to be distributed
among the early Christians, it could very well be assumed that occasionally
someone may have used the Latin spelling of Nero's name (Nero Caesar), so the
total value of the gematria would be 616[22][23].

### [edit] Historicist view

The historicist view regards the prophecy as spanning the time from the end of
the first century through the second coming of Christ.

Politically, historicist interpretations apply the symbols of Revelation to
the gradual division and collapse of the Roman Empire, the emergence of a
divided Europe in the West and a Arabic empire in the East, and the collapse
of the Eastern Empire while Europe attempts to reunite and recreate the Roman
Empire.

Ecclesiastically, historicist interpretations see Revelation as teaching that
the Church would expand, despite persecution, until it "conquered" the whole
worldâbut in the process, would gradually evolve into an apostate system
within which true Christians would be a persecuted minority. The apostate
Church is associated with the symbols of the "Mother of Harlots" and with
"Babylon". It is seen as an "Antichrist system" which exists for much of
history rather than expecting a single "Antichrist" in the last days, as
futurist interpretations do.

The exact constitution of this confederacy differs between interpretations: in
some it is mainly composed of Eastern European countries, notably Russia; in
others, Western European; some include Britain, while others suggest that
Britain and former Commonwealth nations will oppose the confederacy. In all
historicist interpretations, Christ defeats this confederacy, rescues Israel
from certain destruction, judges apostate Christianity and vindicates the true
believers, and sets up a kingdom on earth.

The earliest Christian writers adopted a historicist viewpoint, though at such
an early date, the distinction between historicist and futurist views was less
pronounced. Historicist interpretations tend to be millenarian, emphasizing
the literal reign of Christ on earth, and as that doctrine receded in
importance, so too did the historicist focus in interpretation. Today,
historicist interpretations are favored in the most ardently millenarian
sects.

Some Protestant writers today use this school of interpretation as the
foundation for an anti-Catholic polemic, but it should be noted that such is
not an inherent property of historical interpretations. Many Catholic writers
in the fourth and fifth centuries applied the notion of future apostasy to
their own church, in various ways. Some argued that an apostasy would arise
within the church. Others argued that this had already happened, and cited one
or another sect which arose over some theological dispute. What differs
between interpretations is the identity of the apostasy.

### [edit] Futurist view

The futurist view assigns all or most of the prophecy to the future, shortly
before the second coming; especially when interpreted in conjunction with
Daniel, Isaiah 2:11-22, 1 Thessalonians 4:15-5:11, and other eschatological
sections of the Bible.

Futurist interpretations generally predict a resurrection of the dead and a
Rapture of the living, wherein all true Christians and those who have not
reached an age of accountability are gathered to Christ at the time God's
kingdom comes on earth. They also believe a Great Tribulation will occur - a
seven year (this is only one view, and does not reflect what the bible
actually teaches. Instead in is a man made doctrine) period of time when
believers will experience worldwide persecution and martyrdom, and be purified
and strengthened by it. Futurists differ on when believers will be raptured
("caught up"), but there are three primary views: 1) before the Tribulation;
2) near or at the midpoint of the Tribulation; or 3) at the end of the
Tribulation. There is also a fourth view of multiple raptures throughout the
Tribulation, but this view does not have a mainstream following.

Pretribulationists believe that all Christians then alive will be taken up to
meet Christ before the Tribulation begins. In this manner, Christians are
"kept" from the Tribulation, much as Noah was removed before God judged the
antediluvian world.

Midtribulationists believe that the rapture of the faithful will occur
approximately halfway through the Tribulation, after it begins but before the
worst part of it occurs. Some midtribulationists, particularly those holding
to a "pre-wrath rapture" of the church, believe that God's wrath is poured out
during a "Great Tribulation" that is limited to the last 3-1/2 years of the
Tribulation, after believers have been caught up to Christ.

Post-tribulationists believe that Christians will not be taken up into Heaven,
but will be received into the Kingdom at the end of the Tribulation.
(Pretribulationist Tim LaHaye admits a post-tribulation rapture is the closest
of the three views to that held by the early church.)

All three views hold that Christians will return with Christ at the end of the
Tribulation. Proponents of all three views also generally portray Israel as
unwittingly signing a seven year peace treaty with the Antichrist, which
initiates the seven year Tribulation. Many also tend to view the Antichrist as
head of a revived Roman Empire, but the geographic location of this empire is
unknown. Hal Lindsey suggests that this revived Roman Empire will be centered
in western Europe, with Rome as its capital. Tim LaHaye promotes the belief
that Babylon will be the capital of a worldwide empire. Joel Richardson and
Walid Shoebat have both recently written books proposing a revived eastern
Roman Empire, which will fall with the boundaries of the Ottoman Empire.
(Istanbul also has seven hills, was a capital of the Roman Empire and is known
as the Golden Horn \- notable given the eschatological references to the
"Little Horn"Daniel 7:8,8:9.)

There is also a variant futuristic view that the Tribulation can occur in any
generation, meaning Satan always has an antichrist in the wings and there is
always a nation-state that can become the revived Roman Empire. This variant
view is developed by Angela Hunt in her fictional work, The Immortal.

The futurist view was first proposed by two Catholic writers, Manuel Lacunza
and Ribera. Lacunza wrote under the pen name "Ben Ezra", and his work was
banned by the Catholic Church. It has grown in popularity in the 19th and 20th
centuries, so that today it is probably most readily recognized. Books about
the "rapture" by authors like Hal Lindsey, and the more recent Left Behind
novels (by Jerry Jenkins and Tim LaHaye) and movies, have done much to
popularize this school of thought.

The Rastafarians hold a futurist view of the book of Revelation, relating it
both to 20th-century events such as the crowning of Ethiopian Emperor Haile
Selassie and the Second Italo-Ethiopian War, and also to future events such as
the second coming of Selassie on the day of judgment.

The various views on tribulation are actually a subset of theological
interpretations on the Millennium, mentioned in Revelation 20. There are three
main interpretations: Premillennialism, Amillennialism, and Postmillennialism.

Premillennialism believes that Christ will return to the earth, bind Satan,
and reign for a literal thousand years on earth with Jerusalem as his capital.
Thus Christ returns before ("pre-") the thousand years mentioned in chapter
20. There are generally two subclasses of Premillennialism: Dispensational and
Historic. Some form of premillennialism is thought to be the oldest millennial
view in church history.[citation needed] Papias, believed to be a disciple of
the Apostle John, was a premillenialist, according to Eusebius.

Amillennialism, the traditional view for Roman Catholicism, believes that the
thousand years mentioned are not ("a-") a literal thousand years, but is
figurative for what is now the church age, usually, the time between Christ's
first ascension and second coming. This view is often associated with
Augustine of Hippo. Amillennialists differ on the time frame of the
millennium. Some say it started with Pentecost, others say it started with the
fulfillment of Jesus' prophecy regarding the destruction of the temple in
Jerusalem (70), and other starting points have also been proposed. Whether
this eschatology is the result of caesaropapism, which may have also been the
reason that premillennialism was condemned, is sharply disputed.

Postmillennialism believes that Christ will return after ("post-") a
literal/figurative thousand years, in which the world will have essentially
become a Christendom. This view was held by Jonathan Edwards. This view gained
momentum through the nineteenth century, but World Wars I and II dealt a
setback to this approach.

### [edit] Eastern Orthodox view

<IMG>

<IMG>

Orthodox icon of the Apocalypse of St. John (16th century).

Eastern Orthodoxy treats the text as simultaneously describing contemporaneous
events and as prophecy of events to come, for which the contemporaneous events
were a form of foreshadow. It rejects attempts to determine, before the fact,
if the events of Revelation are occurring by mapping them onto present-day
events, taking to heart the Scriptural warning against those who proclaim "He
is here!" prematurely. Instead, the book is seen as a warning to be
spiritually and morally ready for the end times, whenever they may come ("as a
thief in the night"), but they will come at the time of God's choosing, not
something that can be precipitated nor trivially deduced by mortals.[24]

Book of Revelation is the only book of the New Testament that is not read
during services by the Eastern Orthodox Church. In the Coptic Orthodox Church
(which is not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox church but is
liturgically similar), the whole book of revelation is read during apocalypse
night or bright Saturday (the eve of the resurrection).

### [edit] Anglican view

The Anglican/Episcopal view is that this book should be seen as a book of hope
and also a book of warning. It gives hope to those Christians who are being
persecuted, assuring them that their suffering is not in vain. It also warns
those non-Christians of the coming events and what will happen to them.
Revelation is an example of typical Jewish Apocalyptic literature. It uses
symbolic imagery to communicate hope to those in the midst of persecution.

### [edit] Paschal Liturgical view

This view, which has found expression among both Catholic and Protestant
theologians, considers the liturgical worship, particularly the Easter rites,
of early Christianity as background and context for understanding the Book of
Revelation's structure and significance. This perspective is explained in The
Paschal Liturgy and the Apocalypse (new edition, 2004) by Massey H. Shepherd,
an Episcopal scholar, and in Scott Hahn's The Lamb's Supper: The Mass as
Heaven on Earth, in which he states that Revelation in form, is structured
after creation, fall, judgment and redemption. Those who hold this view say
that the Templeâs destruction (A.D. 70) had a profound effect on the Jewish
people, not only in Jerusalem but among the Greek-speaking Jews of the
Mediterranean.[25]. They believe The Book of Revelation provides insight into
the early Eucharist, saying that it is the new Temple worship in the New
Heaven and Earth. The idea of the Eucharist as a foretaste of the heavenly
banquet is also explored by British Methodist Geoffrey Wainwright in his book
Eucharist and Eschatology (Oxford University Press, 1980).

### [edit] Esoteric view

The esoterist views Revelation as bearing multiple levels of meaning, the
lowest being the literal or "dead-letter." Those who are instructed in
esoteric knowledge enter gradually into more subtle levels of understanding of
the text. They see the book as delivering both a series of warnings for
humanity and a detailed account of internal, spiritual processes of the
individual soul.

The Gnostic Kabbalist believes that Revelation (like Genesis) is a very
profound book of Kabbalistic symbolism. This view is held by teachers such as
H.P. Blavatsky, Eliphas Levi, Rudolf Steiner and Samael Aun Weor.[citation
needed] Edgar Cayce held the view that the Book of Revelation is symbolic of
the body and that each emblem, emotion and condition relate to self. For
example, the 24 elders of Revelation 4:4 relate to the 12 pairs (24) of
cranial nerves; and the seven churches of Asia in Revelation Ch. 1 are
symbolic of the 7 chakras or spiritual centers.

The seven seals also are also seen to represent the seven chakras and the
consequence of opening them is the unleashing of the physiological forces that
reside there. The Second Coming is thus a personal event, the integration of
your spiritual self with your animal self, resulting in a fully conscious
human.[26]

Some scholars have noted the rider on a white horse as being similar to the
Buddhist and Hindu myths of Kalki who is considered the last avatar in the
cycle of ages and is also associated with the end of time.[26]

The esoteric view also presents the Book as the Christian yoga (union)
practices text on death and rebirth in Christ. The four horsemen are described
as the four elemental forces (fire, water, air, earth) and are used in the
spiritual purification of the body and mind. The characters of Revelation are
considered anthropomorphized aspects of human consciousness. [27]

### [edit] Radical Discipleship view

The radical discipleship view asserts that the Book of Revelation is best
understood as a handbook for radical discipleship; i.e. how to remain faithful
to the spirit and teachings of Jesus and avoid simply assimilating to
surrounding society. In this view, the primary agenda of the book is to expose
the worldly powers as impostors which seek to oppose the ways of God. The
chief temptation for Christians in the 1st Century, and today, is to fail to
hold fast to the teachings of Jesus and instead be lured into unquestioning
adoption of national or cultural values, imperialism being the most dangerous
and insidious. This perspective (closely related to Liberation theology) draws
on the approach of radical Bible scholars such as Ched Myers, William
Stringfellow, Richard Horsley, Daniel Berrigan, Wes Howard-Brook [28] and
Joerg Reiger [29]

### [edit] Spiritual or Idealist view

The Spiritual view (also called Idealist by some writers) does not see the
book of Revelation as predicting specific events in history. Rather it sees
the visions as expressing eternal spiritual truths that find expression
throughout history. Only in the last few chapters are specifically predictive
eschatological issues taken up. An example of this view can be found in
Revelation: The Road to Overcoming by Charles A. Neal, which in turn is based
on the work of Charles Fillmore.

### [edit] Aesthetic and Literary view

Recently aesthetic and literary modes of interpretation have developed, which
focus on Revelation as a work of art and imagination, viewing the imagery as
symbolic depictions of timeless truths and the victory of good over evil.

### [edit] The Historical-Critical view

The historical-critical method treats Revelation as a text and attempts to
understand Revelation in its first century historical context within the genre
of Jewish and Christian apocalyptic literature.

This approach considers the text as an address to seven historical communities
in Asia Minor. Under this view, assertions that "the time is near" are to be
taken literally by those communities. Consequently the work is viewed as a
warning not to conform to contemporary Greco-Roman society which John
"unveils" as beastly, demonic and subject to divine judgment. There is further
information on these topics in the entries on higher criticism and apocalyptic
literature.

The acceptance of Revelation into the canon is itself the result of a
historical process, essentially no different from the career of other texts.
The eventual exclusion of other contemporary apocalyptic literature from the
canon may throw light on the unfolding historical processes of what was
officially considered orthodox, what was heterodox, what was even heretical.
Interpretation of meanings and imagery are anchored in what the historical
author intended and what his contemporary audience inferred; a message to
Christians not to assimilate into the Roman Imperial Culture was John's
central message. Thus, his letter (written in the apocalyptic genre) is
pastoral in nature, and the symbolism of Revelation is to be understood
entirely within its historical, literary and social context. Critics study the
conventions of apocalyptic literature and events of the 1st century to make
sense of what the author may have intended.

During a discussion about Revelation on 23 August 2006, Pope Benedict XVI
remarked: "The seer of Patmos, identified with the apostle, is granted a
series of visions meant to reassure the Christians of Asia amid the
persecutions and trials of the end of the first century."[30]

### [edit] Dismissal

Nineteenth-century agnostic Robert G. Ingersoll branded Revelation "the
insanest of all books".[31] Thomas Jefferson omitted it entirely from the
Bible he edited, and wrote that he "considered it as merely the ravings of a
maniac, no more worthy nor capable of explanation than the incoherences of our
own nightly dreams." [32] "Martin Luther found it an offensive piece of work"
and "John Calvin had grave doubts about its value."[33]

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ Other apocalypses popular in the early Christian era did not achieve canonical status, except for 2 Esdras (Apocalypse of Ezra), which is canonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox Churches.
  2. ^ The former is found in Codex Sinaiticus and Codex Alexandrinus, among other manuscripts, while the latter is found in the Majority Text and others; however a number of other variations of the title do exist. Nestle-Aland. Novum Testamentum Graece. 27th ed. Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, Druck: 1996, p. 632.
  3. ^ "Apocalypse", Encyclopedia Biblica
  4. ^ "Revelation 1:1-10 (King James Version)". BibleGateway.com. http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Revelation%201:1-10&version=9.
  5. ^ "Revelation 4-22 (King James Version)". BibleGateway.com. http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Revelation%204-22;&version=9;.
  6. ^ Luther's Treatment of the 'Disputed Books' of the New Testament
  7. ^ Anthony A. Hoekema,The Bible and the future, P.297. ISBN 0802835163 ISBN 9780802835161, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1979.
  8. ^ Poems I, 11, 5.
  9. ^ see N. B. Stonehouse, Apocalypse in the Ancient Church, (c. 1929), pp. 139-142, esp. p. 138
  10. ^ Revelation By Ben Witherington III, p. 32
  11. ^ Guthrie, D: "New Testament Introduction - Hebrews to Revelation", page 260ff. The Tyndale Press: London, 1966
  12. ^ a b c "Apocalypse", Encyclopedia Biblica
  13. ^ Griggs, C. Wilfred. "John the Beloved" in Ludlow, Daniel H., ed. Selections from the Encyclopedia of Mormonism: Scriptures of the Church (Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, 1992) p. 379. Griggs favors the "one John" theory but mentions that some modern scholars have hypothesized that there are multiple Johns.
  14. ^ New Testament Greek Lexicon based on Strong's Concordance
  15. ^ Ehrman 2004, p. 467ff
  16. ^ Ford, p. 30.
  17. ^ Before Jerusalem Fell, ISBN 0930464206. Powder Springs, GA: American Vision, 1989.
  18. ^ Robert Mounce. The Book of Revelation. Cambridge: Eerdman's.
  19. ^ Brown 1997, p. 806-809
  20. ^ "The Whore of Babylon". Catholic Answers. http://www.catholic.com/library/Whore_of_Babylon.asp. Retrieved on 2007-05-11.
  21. ^ "Apocalypse". Catholic encyclopeadia. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/01594b.htm. Retrieved on 2007-05-11.
  22. ^ Grout, James. "Nero as the Antichrist". Encyclopaedia Romana. http://penelope.uchicago.edu/~grout/encyclopaedia_romana/gladiators/nero.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-13.
  23. ^ Hanegraaff, Hank. 2007. The Apocalypse Code (ISBN 0-8499-0184-7) Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson, Inc.
  24. ^ Averky (Taushev), Archbishop (1996-Eng. tr. Fr. Seraphim Rose), The Apocalypse: In the Teachings of Ancient Christianity, Platina CA: St. Herman of Alaska Brotherhood, ISBN 978-0938635673
  25. ^ Scott Hahn, The Lamb's Supper: The Mass as Heaven on Earth, ISBN 0385496591. New York, NY: Doubleday, 1999.
  26. ^ a b Aun Weor, 1960
  27. ^ Hudson, 2006
  28. ^ Howard-Brook, Wes; Gwyther, Anthony (1999). Unveiling Empire: Reading Revelation Then and Now. Orbis Books. ISBN 9781570752872.
  29. ^ {{cite book title=Christ & Empire: From Paul to Postcolonial Times last=Rieger first=Joerg publisher=Fortress Press year=2007 isbn=978-0800620387}}<
  30. ^ Pope Benedict: Read Book of Revelation as Christ's victory over evil - Catholic Online
  31. ^ Robert Green Ingersoll. "The Devil". http://www.infidels.org/library/historical/robert_ingersoll/devil.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-30.
  32. ^ Bergh: Writings of Thomas Jefferson, Vol. 16
  33. ^ Drane, John. An Introduction to The Bible. ISBN 0745919103 p 778

## [edit] Book references

  * The Holy Bible: New Testament: Revelation.

### [edit] Commentaries

  * Aune D.E., Revelation 6-16, WBC, t. 52B, Thomas Nelson Publishers, Nashville 1998.
  * Bass, Ralph E., Jr. (2004) Back to the Future: A Study in the Book of Revelation Greenville, SC: Living Hope Press, ISBN 0-9759547-0-9.
  * Beale G.K., The Book of Revelation, NIGTC, Grand Rapids â Cambridge 1999. = ISBN 0-8028-2174-X
  * Bousset W., Die Offenbarung Johannis, GÃ¶ttingen 18965, 19066.
  * Boxall, Ian, (2006) The Revelation of Saint John (Black's New Testament Commentary) London: Continuum, and Peabody, MA: Hendrickson. ISBN 0-8264-7135-8 U.S. edition: ISBN 1-5656-3202-8
  * Boxall, Ian (2002)Revelation: Vision and Insight - An Introduction to the Apocalypse London: SPCK ISBN 0-2810-5362-6
  * Brown, Raymond E. (1997-10-03). Introduction to the New Testament. Anchor Bible. ISBN 0-385-24767-2.
  * Ehrman, Bart D. (2004). The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings. New York: Oxford. ISBN 0-19-515462-2.
  * Ford, J. Massyngberde (1975) Revelation, The Anchor Bible, New York: Doubleday ISBN 0-385-00895-3.
  * Gentry, Kenneth L., Jr. (1998) Before Jerusalem Fell: Dating the Book of Revelation Powder Springs, GA: American Vision, ISBN 0-915815-43-5.
  * Gentry, Kenneth L., Jr. (2002) The Beast of Revelation Powder Springs, GA: American Vision, ISBN 0-915815-41-9.
  * Hudson, Gary W. (2006) Revelation: Awakening The Christ Within, Vesica Press, ISBN 0977851729
  * Kiddle M., The Revelation of St. John (The Moffat New Testament Commentary), New York â London 1941.
  * Lohmeyer E., Die Offenbarung des Johannes, TÃ¼bingen 1953.
  * Mounce R.H., The Book of Revelation, Michigan 19771, 19982.
  * Prigent P., LâApocalypse, Paris 1981.
  * MÃ¼ller U.B., Die Offenbarung des Johannes, GÃ¼ttersloh 1995.
  * Roloff J., Die Offenbarung des Johannes, ZÃ¼rich 19872.
  * Samael Aun Weor (2004) [1960]. The Aquarian Message: Gnostic Kabbalah and Tarot in the Apocalypse of St. John. Thelema Press. ISBN 0-9745916-5-3.
  * Hahn, Scott (1999) The Lamb's Supper: Mass as Heaven on Earth, Darton, Longman, Todd, ISBN 0-232-52500-5
  * Shepherd, Massey H. (2004) The Paschal Liturgy and the Apocalypse, James Clarke, ISBN 0-227-17005-9
  * Stonehouse, Ned B., (c. 1929) The Apocalypse in the Ancient Church. A Study in the History of the New Testament Canon, n.d., Goes: Oosterbaan & Le Cointre. [Major discussion of the controversy surrounding the acceptance/rejection of Revelation into the New Testament canon.]
  * Sweet, J. P. M., (1979, Updated 1990) Revelation, London: SCM Press, and Philadelphia: Trinity Press International. ISBN 0-3340-2311-4.
  * Wikenhauser A., Offenbarung des Johannes, Regensburg 1947, 1959.
  * Zahn Th., Die Offenbarung des Johannes, t. 1-2, Leipzig 1924-1926.

## [edit] See also

### [edit] Directly related

  * Laodicean Church
  * Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse
  * Seven seals
  * The Two Witnesses of Apocalypse
  * Woman of the Apocalypse
  * Number of the Beast
  * Whore of Babylon
  * Apocalypse
  * Fifth Monarchy Men
  * Christian eschatological differences
  * Apocalypse of John - dated astronomically
  * Second Coming
  * The book with seven seals (oratorio)
  * Beast and the Harlot (Song)- Avenged Sevenfold

### [edit] General

  * Caesaropapism
  * Christian eschatology
  * Abomination of Desolation
  * Apocalyptic literature
  * Apocalypse of Peter
  * Apocalypticism
  * Bible code
  * End times
  * Millennialism
  * Left Behind
  * Endtime Ministries
  * New World Order (conspiracy)
  * Oracle of Damascus

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Revelation (KJV)

  * Early Christian Writings: Apocalypse of John: text, introduction, context
  * Apocalypse, Book of \- Article from the Catholic Encyclopedia
  * Understanding the Book of Revelation \- Article by L. Michael White from PBS Frontline program "Apocalypse!"
  * Jewish Encyclopedia: REVELATION (BOOK OF)

Book of Revelation

Apocalyptic Epistle  
Preceded by  
Jude New Testament  
Books of the Bible Succeeded by  
â  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Books of the Bible  
Major Divisions

Old Testament  
(Hebrew Protocanon)

Genesis Â· Exodus Â· Leviticus Â· Numbers Â· Deuteronomy Â· Joshua Â· Judges
Â· Ruth Â· 1-2 Samuel Â· 1-2 Kings Â· 1-2 Chronicles Â· Ezra Â· Nehemiah Â·
Esther Â· Job Â· Psalms Â· Proverbs Â· Ecclesiastes Â· Song Â· Isaiah Â·
Jeremiah Â· Lamentations Â· Ezekiel Â· Daniel Â· Hosea Â· Joel Â· Amos Â·
Obadiah Â· Jonah Â· Micah Â· Nahum Â· Habakkuk Â· Zephaniah Â· Haggai Â·
Zechariah Â· Malachi  
Deuterocanon  
& Apocrypha

Catholic, Orthodox: Baruch & Letter of Jeremiah Â· Additions to Daniel
(Susanna, Song of the Three Children, Bel & the Dragon)  Â· Additions to
Esther Â· Judith Â· 1 Maccabees Â· 2 Maccabees Â· Sirach Â· Tobit Â· Wisdom Â·
Orthodox: Prayer of Manasseh Â· 1 Esdras Â· 2 Esdras Â· Orthodox: 3 Maccabees
Â· 4 Maccabees Â· Odes Â· Psalm 151 Â· Syriac Peshitta only: 2 Baruch Â·
Psalms 152â155 Â· Ethiopian Orthodox only: 4 Baruch Â· Enoch Â· Jubilees Â·
1-3 Meqabyan  
New Testament

Matthew â¢ Mark â¢ Luke â¢ John â¢ Acts â¢ Romans â¢ 1 Corinthians â¢ 2
Corinthians â¢ Galatians â¢ Ephesians â¢ Philippians â¢ Colossians â¢ 1
Thessalonians â¢ 2 Thessalonians â¢ 1 Timothy â¢ 2 Timothy â¢ Titus â¢
Philemon â¢ Hebrews â¢ James â¢ 1 Peter â¢ 2 Peter â¢ 1 John â¢ 2 John
â¢ 3 John â¢ Jude â¢ Revelation  
Canon

Development: Old Testament Â· New Testament Â· Christian Canon  
Others: Deuterocanon Â· Apocrypha: Biblical Â· New Testament  
More divisions

Chapters and verses Â· Pentateuch Â· History Â· Wisdom Â· Major & Minor
prophets Â· Gospels (synoptic) Â· Epistles (Pauline, Johannine, pastoral,
general) Â· Apocalyptic literature  
Translations

Vulgate Â· Luther Â· Wyclif Â· Tyndale Â· KJV Â· Modern English Bibles Â·
Debate Â· Dynamic v. Formal Â· JPS Â· RSV Â· NASB Â· Amp Â· NAB Â· NEB Â· TLB
Â· GNB Â· NIV Â· NJB Â· NRSV Â· REB Â· NLT Â· ESV Â· Msg  
Manuscripts

Septuagint Â· Samaritan Pentateuch Â· Dead Sea scrolls Â· Targum Â·
Diatessaron Â· Muratorian fragment Â· Peshitta Â· Vetus Latina Â· Masoretic
Text Â· New Testament manuscripts  
See also

Authorship Â· Esdras Â· Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible Â· Studies
Â· Synod of Hippo Â· Textual criticism  
Category Â· Portal Â· WikiProject  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_Revelation"

Categories: Book of Revelation | Christian apocalyptic writings | Christian
eschatology | New Testament books | New Testament narrative | Abrahamic
prophecy

Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek language text | Articles
containing non-English language text | All articles with unsourced statements
| Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles needing
additional references from November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * chiShona
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Furlan
  * Hak-kÃ¢-fa
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * Kiswahili
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * Latina
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Gagana Samoa
  * Sardu
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 22:56.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



