
# Apocrypha

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the section found in some bibles called Apocrypha, see Biblical apocrypha.
For the X-Files episode, see Apocrypha (The X-Files).

Apocrypha (from the Greek word á¼ÏÏÎºÏÏ ÏÎ±, meaning "those having been
hidden away"[1]) are texts of uncertain authenticity, or writings where the
authorship is questioned. When used in the specific context of Judeo-Christian
theology, the term apocrypha refers to any collection of scriptural texts that
falls outside the canon. Given that different denominations have different
ideas about what constitutes canonical scripture, there are several different
versions of the apocrypha. During sixteenth-century controversies over the
biblical canon the word "apocrypha" acquired a negative connotation, and it
has become a synonym for "spurious" or "false." This usage usually involves
fictitious or legendary accounts that are plausible enough to be commonly
considered as truth. For example, Laozi's alleged authorship of the Tao Te
Ching, Napoleon Bonaparte's self-coronation rather than at the hands of Pope
Pius VII, and the Parson Weems account of George Washington and the cherry
tree, are all considered 'apocryphal'.

## Contents

  * 1 Denotation and connotation
    * 1.1 Esoteric writings
    * 1.2 Writings of questionable value
    * 1.3 Spurious writings
    * 1.4 Other meanings
  * 2 Apocryphal texts by denomination
    * 2.1 Jewish apocrypha
    * 2.2 Biblical books called apocrypha
    * 2.3 New Testament apocryphal literature
  * 3 The Shakespeare Apocrypha
  * 4 Zbigniew Herbert's Apocrypha
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 See also
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Denotation and connotation

The term "apocrypha" has evolved in meaning somewhat, and its associated
implications have ranged from positive to pejorative. The term apocryphal,
according to Merriam-Webster, means "writings or statements of dubious
authenticity."

### [edit] Esoteric writings

The word "apocryphal" (á¼ÏÏÎºÏÏ ÏÎ¿Ï) was first applied, in a positive
sense, to writings which were kept secret because they were the vehicles of
esoteric knowledge considered too profound or too sacred to be disclosed to
anyone other than the initiated. It is used in this sense to describe A Holy
and Secret Book of Moses, called Eighth, or Holy (ÎÏÏ ÏÎ­ÏÏ á¼±ÎµÏá½°
Î²Î¯Î²Î»Î¿Ï á¼ÏÏÎºÏÏ ÏÎ¿Ï á¼ÏÎ¹ÎºÎ±Î»Î¿ÏÎ¼ÎµÎ½Î· á½Î³Î´ÏÎ· á¼¢
á¼Î³Î¯Î±), a text taken from a Leiden papyrus of the third or fourth century
AD, but which may be as old as the first century. In a similar vein, the
disciples of the Gnostic Prodicus boasted that they possessed the secret
(á¼ÏÏÎºÏÏ ÏÎ±) books of Zoroaster. The term in general enjoyed high
consideration among the Gnostics (see Acts of Thomas, 10, 27, 44).[2]

### [edit] Writings of questionable value

"Apocrypha" was also applied to writings that were hidden not because of their
divinity but because of their questionable value to the church. Many in
Protestant traditions cite Revelation 22:18-19 as a potential curse for those
who attach any canonical authority to extra-biblical writings such as the
Apocrypha. However, a strict exegesis of this text would indicate it was meant
for only the Book of Revelation. Revelation 22:18-19 (KJV) states: "(18) For I
testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If
any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that
are written in this book: (19) And if any man shall take away from the words
of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this
book." In this case, if we hold to a strict hermeneutic, this "book of
prophecy" does not refer to the Bible as a whole but to the Book of
Revelation. However, the Book of Revelation is considered to be the completion
of the Bible, the ribbon around the package, if you will. Origen, in
Commentaries on Matthew, X. 18, XIII. 57, distinguishes between writings which
were read by the churches and apocryphal writings: Î³ÏÎ±Ïá½´ Î¼á½´
ÏÎµÏÎ¿Î¼Î­Î½Î· Î¼Î­Î½ á¼Î½ ÏÎ¿á¿Ï ÎºÎ¿Î¹Î½Î¿á¿Ï ÎºÎ±á½¶
Î´ÎµÎ´Î·Î¼Î¿ÏÎ¹ÎµÏ Î¼Î­Î½Î¿Î¹Ï Î²Î¹Î²Î»Î¯Î¿Î¹Ï Îµá¼°Îºá½¸Ï Î´' á½ ÏÎ¹
á¼Î½ á¼ÏÎ¿ÎºÏÏÏÎ¿Î¹Ï ÏÎµÏÎ¿Î¼Î­Î½Î· (writing not found on the common
and published books in one hand, actually found on the secret ones on the
other). The meaning of Î±ÏÎ¿ÎºÏÏ ÏÎ¿Ï is here practically equivalent to
"excluded from the public use of the church", and prepares the way for an even
less favourable use of the word.[2]

### [edit] Spurious writings

In general use, the word "apocrypha" came to mean "false, spurious, bad, or
heretical." This meaning also appears in Origen's prologue to his commentary
on the Song of Songs, of which only the Latin translation survives: De
scripturis his, quae appellantur apocryphae, pro eo quod multa in iis corrupta
et contra fidem veram inveniuntur a majoribus tradita non placuit iis dari
locum nec admitti ad auctoritatem.[2] "Concerning these scriptures, which are
called apocryphal, for the reason that many things are found in them corrupt
and against the true faith handed down by the elders, it has pleased them that
they not be given a place nor be admitted to authority." (Translation by a
Wikipedia editor.)

### [edit] Other meanings

Other uses of apocrypha developed over the history of Western Christianity.
The Gelasian Decree refers to religious works by church fathers Eusebius,
Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria as apocrypha. Augustine defined the word
as meaning simply "obscurity of origin," implying that any book of unknown
authorship or questionable authenticity would be considered as apocrypha. On
the other hand, Jerome (in Protogus Galeatus) declared that all books outside
the Hebrew canon were apocryphal.[2] In practice, Jerome treated some books
outside the Hebrew canon as if they were canonical, and the Western Church did
not accept Jerome's definition of apocrypha, instead retaining the word's
prior meaning (see: Deuterocanon). As a result, various church authorities
labeled different books as apocrypha, treating them with varying levels of
regard.

Some apocryphal books were included in the Septuagint with little distinction
made between them and the rest of the Old Testament. Origen, Clement and
others cited some apocryphal books as "scripture", "divine scripture",
"inspired", and the like. On the other hand, teachers connected with Palestine
and familiar with the Hebrew canon excluded from the canon all of the Old
Testament not found there. This view is reflected in the canon of Melito of
Sardis, and in the prefaces and letters of Jerome.[2] A third view was that
the books were not as valuable as the canonical scriptures of the Hebrew
collection, but were of value for moral uses, as introductory texts for new
converts from paganism, and to be read in congregations. They were referred to
as "ecclesiastical" works by Rufinus.[2]

These three opinions regarding the apocryphal books prevailed until the
Protestant Reformation, when the idea of what constitutes canon became a
matter of primary concern for Roman Catholics and Protestants alike. In 1546
the Catholic Council of Trent reconfirmed the canon of Augustine, dating to
the second and third centuries, declaring "He is also to be anathema who does
not receive these entire books, with all their parts, as they have been
accustomed to be read in the Catholic Church, and are found in the ancient
editions of the Latin Vulgate, as sacred and canonical." The whole of the
books in question, with the exception of 1st and 2nd Esdras and the Prayer of
Manasses, were declared canonical at Trent.[2] The Protestants, in comparison,
were diverse in their opinion of the deuterocanon. Some reckoned them among
the inspired books, others rejected them. Anglicans took a middle way between
the Catholic Church and the Protestant sects; they kept them as Christian
intertestamental readings, and while a part of the Bible, no doctrine should
be based on them. John Wycliffe, a 14th century humanist, had declared in his
Biblical translation that "whatever book is in the Old Testament besides these
twenty-five shall be set among the apocrypha, that is, without authority or
belief."[2] Nevertheless, his translation of the Bible included the apocrypha
and the Epistle of the Loadiceans.[3]

The respect accorded to apocryphal books varied between Protestant
denominations. In both the German (1537) and English (1535) translations of
the Bible, the apocrypha are published in a separate section from the other
books, although the Lutheran and Anglican lists are different. In some
editions, (like the Westminster), readers were warned that these books were
not "to be any otherwise approved or made use of than other human writings." A
milder distinction was expressed elsewhere, such as in the "argument"
introducing them in the Geneva Bible, and in the Sixth Article of the Church
of England, where it is said that "the other books the church doth read for
example of life and instruction of manners," though not to establish
doctrine.[2]

According to The Apocrypha, Bridge of the Testaments at orthodoxanglican.net:

> On the other hand, the Anglican Communion emphatically maintains that the
Apocrypha is part of the Bible and is to be read with respect by her members.
Two of the hymns used in the American Prayer Book office of Morning Prayer,
the Benedictus es and Benedicite, are taken from the Apocrypha. One of the
offertory sentences in Holy Communion comes from an apocryphal book (Tob. 4:
8-9). Lessons from the Apocrypha are regularly appointed to be read in the
daily, Sunday, and special services of Morning and Evening Prayer. There are
altogether 111 such lessons in the latest revised American Prayer Book
Lectionary [The books used are: II Esdras, Tobit, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
Baruch, Three Holy Children, and I Maccabees.] The position of the Church is
best summarized in the words of Article Six of the Thirty-nine Articles: âIn
the name of Holy Scripture we do understand those canonical Books of the Old
and New Testament, of whose authority there was never any doubt in the
Churchâ¦ And the other Books (as Hierome [St. Jerome] saith) the Church doth
read for example of life and instruction of manners; but yet doth it not apply
them to establish any doctrineâ¦â

On a side note, Apocrypha is also the name of the March 2009 Expansion to Eve
Online [4].

## [edit] Apocryphal texts by denomination

### [edit] Jewish apocrypha

Main article: Jewish apocrypha

Although traditional rabbinical Judaism insists on the exclusive canonization
of the current 24 books in the Tanakh, it also claims to have an oral law
handed down from Moses. The Sadducees \- unlike the Pharisees but like the
Samaritans \- seem to have maintained an earlier and smaller number of texts
as canonical, preferring to hold to only what was written in the Law of
Moses[5] (making most of the presently accepted canon, both Jewish and
Christian, apocryphal in their eyes). Certain circles in Judaism, such as the
Essenes in Judea and the Therapeutae in Egypt, were said to have a secret
literature (see Dead Sea scrolls). Other traditions maintained different
customs regarding canonicity.[6] The Ethiopic Jews, for instance, seem to have
retained a spread of canonical texts similar to the Ethiopian Orthodox
Christians,[7] cf Encyclopedia Judaica, Vol 6, p 1147. A large part of this
literature consisted of the apocalypses. Based on prophecies, these
apocalyptic books were not considered scripture by all, but rather part of a
literary form that flourished from 200 BC to AD 100.[citation needed]

### [edit] Biblical books called apocrypha

Main article: Biblical apocrypha

During the birth of Christianity, some of the Jewish apocrypha that dealt with
the coming of the Messianic kingdom became popular in the rising Jewish-
Christian communities. Occasionally these writings were changed or added to,
but on the whole it was found sufficient to reinterpret them as conforming to
a Christian viewpoint. Christianity eventually gave birth to new apocalyptic
works, some of which were derived from traditional Jewish sources. Some of the
Jewish apocrypha were part of the ordinary religious literature of the early
Christians. This was not strange, as the large majority of Old Testament
references in the New Testament are taken from the Greek Septuagint, which is
the source of the deuterocanonical books[8] as well as most of the other
biblical apocrypha.[9]

Slightly varying collections of additional Books (called deuterocanonical by
the Roman Catholic Church) form part of the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox
and Oriental Orthodox canons.

The Book of Enoch is included in the biblical canon only of the Oriental
Orthodox churches of Ethiopia and Eritrea. The Epistle of Jude quotes the book
of Enoch, and some believe the use of this book also appears in the four
gospels and 1 Peter. The genuineness and inspiration of Enoch were believed in
by the writer of the Epistle of Barnabas, Irenaeus, Tertullian and Clement of
Alexandria and much of the early church. The epistles of Paul and the gospels
also show influences from the Book of Jubilees, which is part of the Ethiopian
canon, as well as the Assumption of Moses and the Testaments of the Twelve
Patriarchs, which are included in no biblical canon.

The high position which some apocryphal books occupied in the first two
centuries was undermined by a variety of influences in the Christian church.
All claims to the possession of a secret tradition (as held by many Gnostic
sects) were denied by the influential theologians like Irenaeus and
Tertullian, the timeframe of true inspiration was limited to the apostolic
age, and universal acceptance by the church was required as proof of apostolic
authorship. As these principles gained currency, books deemed apocryphal
tended to become regarded as spurious and heretical writings, though books now
considered deuterocanonical have been used in liturgy and theology from the
first century to the present.

### [edit] New Testament apocryphal literature

Main article: New Testament apocrypha

New Testament apocrypha â books similar to those in the New Testament but
almost universally rejected by Catholics, Orthodox and Protestants â include
several gospels and lives of apostles. Some of these were clearly produced by
Gnostic authors or members of other groups later defined as heterodox. Many
texts believed lost for centuries were unearthed in the 19th and 20th
centuries, producing lively speculation about their importance in early
Christianity among religious scholars, while many others survive only in the
form of quotations from them in other writings; for some, no more than the
title is known. Artists and theologians have drawn upon the New Testament
apocrypha for such matters as the names of Dismas and Gestas and details about
the Three Wise Men. The first explicit mention of the perpetual virginity of
Mary is found in the pseudepigraphical Infancy Gospel of James.

The Gnostic tradition was a prolific source of apocryphal gospels. While these
writings borrowed the characteristic poetic features of apocalyptic literature
from Judaism, Gnostic sects largely insisted on allegorical interpretations
based on a secret apostolic tradition. With them, as with most Christians of
the first and second centuries, apocryphal books were highly esteemed. A well-
known Gnostic apocryphal book is the Gospel of Thomas, the only complete text
of which was found in the Egyptian town of Nag Hammadi in 1945. The Gospel of
Judas, a Gnostic gospel, also received much media attention when it was
reconstructed in 2006.

Roman Catholics and Orthodox Christians as well as Protestants generally agree
on the canon of the New Testament. However there is one notable exception,
although the order is not always the same. The Ethiopian Orthodox have in the
past also included I & II Clement, and Shepherd of Hermas in their New
Testament canon. This is no longer the case.

## [edit] The Shakespeare Apocrypha

Main article: Shakespeare Apocrypha

"The Shakespeare Apocrypha" is the name given to a group of plays that have
sometimes been attributed to William Shakespeare, but whose attribution is
questionable for various reasons. This is separate from the debate on
Shakespearean authorship, which addresses the authorship of the works
traditionally attributed to Shakespeare.

## [edit] Zbigniew Herbert's Apocrypha

The Polish poet and writer Zbigniew Herbert chose to use the name "Apocrypha"
for his writings about historical periods, such as the Dutch Golden Age of the
17th Century. As used in his case, Herbert made no pretense that such
"apocrypha" were anything but his own creation.

Critic John Carpenter noted that "the term 'apocrypha' is Herbert's own label
to designate an event from history that he himself interprets, feeling that he
must re-present history because conventional historians have misled us" [1]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Specifically, á¼ÏÏÎºÏÏ ÏÎ± is the neuter plural of á¼ÏÏÎºÏÏ ÏÎ¿Ï, a participle derived from the verb á¼ÏÎ¿ÎºÏÏÏÏÏ [infinitive: á¼ÏÎ¿ÎºÏÏÏÏÎµÎ¹Î½], "to hide something away."
  2. ^ a b c d e f g h i 1911 EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica
  3. ^ Wyclif's Bible
  4. ^ http://www.eveonline.com
  5. ^ Jewish Encyclopedia: Sadducees
  6. ^ The Old Testament Canon
  7. ^ Ethiopian Orthodox Old Testament
  8. ^ Deuterocanonical books literally means books of the second canon. The term was coined in the 16th century.
  9. ^ The Style Manual for the Society of Biblical Literature recommends the use of the term deuterocanonical literature instead of apocrypha in academic writing, although not all apocryphal books are properly deuterocanonical.

  * This article incorporates text from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

Information concerning the Hellenist Jews was incorporated from the Catholic
Encyclopedia at newadvent.com.

## [edit] See also

  * Biblical canon
  * Biblical apocrypha
  * Deuterocanonical

  * Table of books of Judeo-Christian Scripture
  * Pseudepigraphy

  
## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up apocrypha in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Apocrypha  
  * Read the Apocrypha Free online downloadable version of the Apocrypha.
  * Bel and the Dragon online text which is included in the longer version of the Septuagint in the book of Daniel but is apocryphal to the Masoretic texts.
  * Ethiopian Orthodox Canon Cowley, R.W. "The Biblical Canon Of The Ethiopian Orthodox Church Today." Ostkirchliche Studien, 1974, Volume 23, pp. 318-323. Accessed online via islamicawareness.org.
  * Complete NT Apocrypha Claims to be the largest collection of New Testament apocrypha online
  * Major collection of pseudepigrapha Large number of NT and OT apocrypha and general pseudepigrapha
  * German Apocrypha research Scholarly research site on individual manuscripts.
  * Deuterocanonical books \- Full text from Saint Takla Haymanot Church Website (also presents the full text in Arabic)
  * The Unknown Lives of Jesus and Mary from the Apocrypha and other little-known sources.
  * LDS Bible Dictionary > Apocrypha Definition & LDS POV, including brief book descriptions.
  * Noncanonical Literature
  * Dark Mirrors of Heaven A look at Biblical creation from non-canonical literature.
  * Christian Cyclopedia article on Apocrypha
  * New Testament Allusions to Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha

v â¢ d â¢ e

Books of the Bible  
Major Divisions

Old Testament  
(Hebrew Protocanon)

Genesis Â· Exodus Â· Leviticus Â· Numbers Â· Deuteronomy Â· Joshua Â· Judges
Â· Ruth Â· 1-2 Samuel Â· 1-2 Kings Â· 1-2 Chronicles Â· Ezra Â· Nehemiah Â·
Esther Â· Job Â· Psalms Â· Proverbs Â· Ecclesiastes Â· Song Â· Isaiah Â·
Jeremiah Â· Lamentations Â· Ezekiel Â· Daniel Â· Hosea Â· Joel Â· Amos Â·
Obadiah Â· Jonah Â· Micah Â· Nahum Â· Habakkuk Â· Zephaniah Â· Haggai Â·
Zechariah Â· Malachi  
Deuterocanon  
& Apocrypha

Catholic, Orthodox: Baruch & Letter of Jeremiah Â· Additions to Daniel
(Susanna, Song of the Three Children, Bel & the Dragon)  Â· Additions to
Esther Â· Judith Â· 1 Maccabees Â· 2 Maccabees Â· Sirach Â· Tobit Â· Wisdom Â·
Orthodox: Prayer of Manasseh Â· 1 Esdras Â· 2 Esdras Â· Orthodox: 3 Maccabees
Â· 4 Maccabees Â· Odes Â· Psalm 151 Â· Syriac Peshitta only: 2 Baruch Â·
Psalms 152â155 Â· Ethiopian Orthodox only: 4 Baruch Â· Enoch Â· Jubilees Â·
1-3 Meqabyan  
New Testament

Matthew â¢ Mark â¢ Luke â¢ John â¢ Acts â¢ Romans â¢ 1 Corinthians â¢ 2
Corinthians â¢ Galatians â¢ Ephesians â¢ Philippians â¢ Colossians â¢ 1
Thessalonians â¢ 2 Thessalonians â¢ 1 Timothy â¢ 2 Timothy â¢ Titus â¢
Philemon â¢ Hebrews â¢ James â¢ 1 Peter â¢ 2 Peter â¢ 1 John â¢ 2 John
â¢ 3 John â¢ Jude â¢ Revelation  
Canon

Development: Old Testament Â· New Testament Â· Christian Canon  
Others: Deuterocanon Â· Apocrypha: Biblical Â· New Testament  
More divisions

Chapters and verses Â· Pentateuch Â· History Â· Wisdom Â· Major & Minor
prophets Â· Gospels (synoptic) Â· Epistles (Pauline, Johannine, pastoral,
general) Â· Apocalyptic literature  
Translations

Vulgate Â· Luther Â· Wyclif Â· Tyndale Â· KJV Â· Modern English Bibles Â·
Debate Â· Dynamic v. Formal Â· JPS Â· RSV Â· NASB Â· Amp Â· NAB Â· NEB Â· TLB
Â· GNB Â· NIV Â· NJB Â· NRSV Â· REB Â· NLT Â· ESV Â· Msg  
Manuscripts

Septuagint Â· Samaritan Pentateuch Â· Dead Sea scrolls Â· Targum Â·
Diatessaron Â· Muratorian fragment Â· Peshitta Â· Vetus Latina Â· Masoretic
Text Â· New Testament manuscripts  
See also

Authorship Â· Esdras Â· Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible Â· Studies
Â· Synod of Hippo Â· Textual criticism  
Category Â· Portal Â· WikiProject  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apocrypha"

Categories: Apocrypha | Greek loanwords

Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
February 2007 | Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911
EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Furlan
  * GÃ idhlig
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Interlingua
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 15 March 2009, at 00:56.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



