
# Colophon (publishing)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about publishing colophons. For other uses, see Colophon
(disambiguation).

This article is part of the series on:

Book design  
  * General page layout and typography choices
  * Front and back covers
  * Endpapers
  * Front matter 
    * Half title or Bastard title
    * Frontispiece
    * Title page
    * Edition notice
    * Dedication
    * Table of contents
    * List of figures
    * List of tables
    * Foreword
    * Preface
    * Acknowledgments
    * Introduction
    * Prologue
  * Body matter, which may include: 
    * Chapters
    * Parts
  * Back matter 
    * Epilogue
    * Extro/Outro
    * Afterword
    * Conclusion
    * Postscript
    * Appendix/Addendum
    * Glossary
    * Bibliography
    * Index
    * Colophon

  
A colophon, in publishing can refer to:

  * A brief description usually located at the end of a book, describing production notes relevant to the edition
  * A printer's mark or logotype

## Contents

  * 1 Production notes
  * 2 Printer's mark
  * 3 Web use
  * 4 History
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links
  * 7 References

  
## [edit] Production notes

In most cases it is a description of the text typography, often titled A note
about the type. This will identify the names of the primary typefaces used,
provide a brief description of the type's history, and a brief statement about
its most identifiable physical characteristics. A colophon may also identify
the book's designer, software used, printing method if letterpress, the
printing company, and the kind of ink, paper and its cotton content. Detailed
colophons are a characteristic feature of limited edition and private press
printing. Books publishers Alfred A. Knopf and O'Reilly Media are notable for
their substantial colophons.

If a book has a colophon, it may appear either on the same page as the
copyright information, or at the back of the volume. In early printed books
the colophon follows the explicit, the final words of the text.

## [edit] Printer's mark

A less frequent use of the term is for a printer's mark or logotype. This
originated in Renaissance printing shops, where a title page would feature the
printer's mark (colophon) near the bottom of the page, usually above the
printer's name and city.

## [edit] Web use

Some Web pages also have colophons, which frequently contain (X)HTML, CSS, or
usability standards compliance information and links to Web site validation
tests.

## [edit] History

The term "colophon" derives from the Late Latin colophon, from the Greek
ÎºÎ¿Î»Î¿ÏÏÎ½ (meaning "summit", "top", or "finishing"). It should not be
confused with Colophon, an ancient city in Asia Minor, after which
"colophony", or rosin (ronnel) is named.

The term derives from a tablet inscription appended by a scribe to the end of
an ancient Near East (e.g., Early/Middle/Late Babylonian, Assyrian, Canaanite)
text such as a chapter, book, manuscript, or record. In the ancient Near East,
scribes typically recorded information on clay tablets. The colophon usually
contained facts relative to the text such as associated person(s) (e.g., the
scribe, owner, or commissioner of the tablet), literary contents (e.g., a
title, "catch" phrase, number of lines), and occasion or purpose of writing.
Colophons and "catch phrases" (repeated phrases) helped the reader organize
and identify various tablets, and keep related tablets together.

Positionally, colophons on ancient tablets are comparable to a signature line
in our own times. Bibliographically, however, they more closely resemble the
imprint page in a modern book.

Examples of colophons in ancient literature may be found in the compilation
Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament.[1] Colophons are
also found in the Pentateuch, where an understanding of this ancient literary
convention illuminates passages that are otherwise unclear or incoherent.
Examples are Numbers 3:1, where a later (and incorrect) chapter division makes
this verse a heading for the following chapter instead of interpreting it
properly as a colophon or summary for the preceding two chapters, and Genesis
37:2a, a colophon that concludes the histories (toledoth) of Jacob. What
follows Genesis 37:2a is the story of Joseph, not the histories or
"generations" of Jacob; these were given in the text that preceded the
colophon. Genesis 2:4a is so obviously a title to what precedes that James
Moffatt, translating the Scripture but not understanding the principle of
colophons, pulled the text out of place and put it as a title at the head of
Genesis chapter 1.[2] Another example of the fundamental misunderstanding of
the Biblical text that results when scholars are ignorant of this ancient
literary device is found in Jacob Milgrom's exhaustive commentary on
Leviticus. When dealing with the colophon that is the final sentence of
Leviticus, "These are the commandments which the Lord commanded Moses for the
sons of Israel at Mount Sinai" (Leviticus 27:34, NASB), Milgrom writes, "The
fact that this subscript follows and resembles the one in Lev 26 renders the
entire chapter as a glaring appendix."[3] A proper understanding of the verse,
one that is consistent with ancient literary practice, sees this not as an
awkward "subscript," but as the kind of ending to a major work, naming the
author and place of composition, that was well known in the second millennium
BC. Other examples of colophons in the Pentateuch are found in Leviticus
(eight times),[4] Numbers (four times),[5] and Deuteronomy (twice).[6] An
extensive study of the eleven colophons found in the book of Genesis was done
by Percy Wiseman.[7] Wiseman's study of the Genesis colophons, sometimes
described as the Wiseman hypothesis, has a detailed examination of the "catch
phrases" mentioned above that were used in literature of the second millennium
BC and earlier in tying together the various accounts in a series of tablets.

## [edit] See also

  * Jerusalem Colophon
  * Wiseman hypothesis

## [edit] External links

Examples:

  * The colophon page from Stephen Wolfram's book A New Kind of Science

## [edit] References

  1. ^ James B. Pritchard, ed., (3rd. ed.; Princeton NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1969) pp. 101, 305, 331, 338, 340, and 341.
  2. ^ James Moffatt, tr., A New Translation of the Bible (New York: Harper and Row, 1922).
  3. ^ Jacob Milgrom, Leviticus 23-27: A New Translation and Commentary (New York: Doubelday, 2001) p. 2401.
  4. ^ Leviticus 14:32 and at the end of chapters 7, 11, 13, 14, 15, 26, and 27.
  5. ^ Numbers 3:1, 6:21, 30:16, 36:13.
  6. ^ Deuteronomy 4:44-46, 29:1.
  7. ^ P. J. Wiseman, ed. by D. J. Wiseman, Ancient Records and the Structure of Genesis (Nashville TN: Thomas Nelson, 1985). Original title, New Discoveries in Babylonian about Genesis by P. J. Wiseman, C.B.E. (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1953.)

  * Fiedl, Frederich, Nicholas Ott and Bernard Stein. Typography: An Encyclopedic Survey of Type Design and Techniques Through History. Black Dog & Leventhal: 1998. ISBN 1-57912-023-7.
  * Hamilton, Victor P. (1990). The Book of Genesis 1-17, pp. 5-6. New International Commentary on the Old Testament Series, Eerdmans.
  * Glaister, Geoffrey Ashall (1960 & 2nd edition 1979) "An Encyclopedia of the Book". ISBN 9781884718151

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colophon_(publishing)"

Categories: Book design | Graphic design | Printing | Scribes | Scribal works
| Typography

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 11:05.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



