
# Pseudoephedrine

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>  
<IMG>  
Pseudoephedrine  
Systematic (IUPAC) name  
(1S,2S)-2-methylamino-1-phenylpropan-1-ol  
Identifiers  
CAS number 90-82-4  
ATC code R01BA02  
PubChem 7028  
DrugBank APRD00634  
ChemSpider 6761  
Chemical data  
Formula C10H15NO  
Mol. mass 165.23  
Pharmacokinetic data  
Bioavailability unknown  
Metabolism hepatic (10â30%)  
Half life 9â16 hours  
Excretion 70-90% renal  
Therapeutic considerations  
Pregnancy cat.

B2(AU) ?(US)  
Legal status

Pharmacist Only (S3)(AU) P(UK)  
Routes oral  
Pseudoephedrine (commonly abbreviated as PSE) is a sympathomimetic amine
commonly used as a decongestant. The salts pseudoephedrine hydrochloride and
pseudoephedrine sulfate are found in many over-the-counter preparations either
as single-ingredient preparations, or more commonly in combination with
antihistamines, paracetamol (acetaminophen) and/or ibuprofen. Sudafed is a
trademark for a common brand which contains pseudoephedrine hydrochloride,
though Sudafed PE does not. Cirrus contains Pseudoephedrine in conjunction
with Cetirizine (an antihistamine).

Unlike antihistamines, which modify the systemic histamine-mediated allergic
response, pseudoephedrine only relieves nasal congestion commonly associated
with colds or allergies.

The advantage of oral pseudoephedrine over topical nasal preparations, such as
oxymetazoline, is that it does not cause rebound congestion (rhinitis
medicamentosa); however, it is more likely to cause adverse effects including
hypertension.

Pseudoephedrine is being phased out as an over-the-counter drug in some
countries and replaced by less effective[1] alternative decongestants such as
phenylephrine, due to pseudoephedrine's notable popularity as a precursor in
the illicit synthesis of methamphetamine. Internationally, pseudoephedrine is
listed as a Table I precursor under the United Nations Convention Against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Chemistry
  * 2 Mode of action
  * 3 Clinical uses
    * 3.1 Indications
    * 3.2 Adverse effects
    * 3.3 Precautions and contraindications
  * 4 Chiral auxiliary
  * 5 Manufacture
    * 5.1 Common brand names
  * 6 Alternative and illicit use
    * 6.1 Sports
    * 6.2 United States federal law
    * 6.3 United States state law
    * 6.4 Mexico
    * 6.5 Australia
    * 6.6 New Zealand
    * 6.7 United Kingdom
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Chemistry

Pseudoephedrine is a phenethylamine, and a diastereomer of ephedrine.
Pseudoephedrine is a chiral molecule, meaning it occurs in both "left-handed"
and "right-handed" configurations which are not superimposable.

Pseudoephedrine is the International Nonproprietary Name (INN) of the (1S,2S)-
diastereomer of ephedrine (which has 1R,2S\- configuration). Other names are
(+)-pseudoephedrine and D-pseudoephedrine.[3]

L-Pseudoephedrine, also known as (-)-(1R,2R)-pseudoephedrine or
(-)-pseudoephedrine, is the optical isomer of D-pseudoephedrine. It has fewer
side-effects, fewer central nervous system (CNS) stimulatory effects, does not
reduce to D-methamphetamine (which is the enantiomer used as a recreational
drug), and yet it retains its efficacy as a decongestant.[citation needed]
However, the patent holder for L-pseudoephedrine (Pfizer/Warner-Lambert)[4]
has not yet sought or received government approval for its sale to the public.
[5]

## [edit] Mode of action

Pseudoephedrine is a sympathomimetic amineâthat is, its principal mechanism
of action relies on its indirect action on the adrenergic receptor system.
While it may have weak agonist activity at Î±- and Î²-adrenergic receptors,
the principal mechanism is to cause the release of endogenous norepinephrine
(noradrenaline) from storage vesicles in presynaptic neurons. The displaced
noradrenaline is released into the neuronal synapse where it is free to
activate the aforementioned postsynaptic adrenergic receptors.

These adrenergic receptors are located on the muscles lining the walls of
blood vessels. When activated by pseudoephedrine, the muscles contract,
causing the blood vessels to constrict (vasoconstriction). These constricted
blood vessels now allow less fluid to leave the blood vessels and enter the
nose, throat and sinus linings, which results in decreased inflammation of
nasal membranes as well as decreased mucus production. Thus, by constriction
of blood vessels, mainly those located in the nasal passages, pseudoephedrine
causes a decrease in the symptoms of nasal congestion.

The vasoconstriction that pseudoephedrine produces is believed to be
principally an Î±-adrenergic receptor response. While all sympathomimetic
amines, to some extent, have decongestant action, pseudoephedrine shows
greater selectivity for the nasal mucosa and a lower affinity for central
nervous system (CNS) adrenergic-receptors than other sympathomimetic amines.

Vasoconstriction in the nasal mucosa shrinks swollen nasal mucous membranes,
reduces tissue hyperemia, edema, and nasal congestion. Other beneficial
effects may include increasing the drainage of sinus secretions, and opening
of obstructed Eustachian tubes. The same vasoconstriction action can also
result in hypertension, which is a noted side effect of pseudoephedrine.

## [edit] Clinical uses

### [edit] Indications

Pseudoephedrine is indicated for the treatment of:

  * nasal congestion
  * sinus congestion
  * Eustachian tube congestion.[6]

Pseudoephedrine is also indicated for vasomotor rhinitis, and as an adjunct to
other agents in the optimum treatment of allergic rhinitis, croup, sinusitis,
otitis media, and tracheobronchitis.[6]

Pseudoephedrine is also used as first-line therapy of priapism. Erection is
largely a parasympathetic response, so the sympathetic action of
pseudoephedrine may serve to relieve this condition.

Treatment for urinary incontinence is an off-label use (aka "unlabeled use")
for these medications.[citation needed]

### [edit] Adverse effects

Common adverse drug reactions (ADRs) associated with pseudoephedrine therapy
include: CNS stimulation, sleeplessness, nervousness, excitability, dizziness
and anxiety. Infrequent ADRs include: tachycardia and/or palpitations. Rarely,
pseudoephedrine therapy may be associated with hallucinations, arrhythmias,
hypertension, seizures and ischemic colitis;[7] as well as severe skin
reactions known as recurrent pseudo-scarlatina, systemic contact dermatitis,
and nonpigmenting fixed drug eruption.[8] Pseudoephedrine, particularly in
high doses, may also cause episodes of paranoid psychosis. [9] It has also
been reported that pseudoephedrine, amongst other sympathomimetic agents, may
be associated with the occurrence of stroke.[10]

### [edit] Precautions and contraindications

It is recommended that pseudoephedrine not be used in patients with: diabetes
mellitus, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, prostatic hypertrophy,
hyperthyroidism, closed angle glaucoma and/or pregnancy.[7]

Since nasal congestion is considered to be a relatively minor ailment,
alternatives are preferred in patients with these conditions. Appropriate
alternatives may include topical decongestants or saline sprays/instillations,
depending on the patient's condition.

Contraindications for the use of pseudoephedrine include: concomitant or
recent (previous fourteen days) monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI), or
serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) therapy , severe or uncontrolled
hypertension, and/or severe coronary artery disease.[7]

People with bipolar disorder should use care when taking pseudoephedrine, as
it can cause insomnia and thus trigger a manic episode.

## [edit] Chiral auxiliary

Both (R,R)- and (S,S)-pseudoephedrine are used as a chiral auxiliary.[11]
Pseudoephedrine is reacted with a carboxylic acid, acid anhydride, or acyl
chloride to give a pseudoephedrine amide.

The Î±-proton of the carbonyl compound is easily deprotonated by a non-
nucleophilic base to give the enolate, which can further react. The
configuration of the addition compound, such as with an alkyl halide, is
directed by the methyl group. Thus, any addition product will be anti to the
methyl and syn with the hydroxyl group.

The pseudoephedrine chiral auxiliary is subsequently removed by cleaving the
amide bond with an appropriate nucleophile.

## [edit] Manufacture

Although pseudoephedrine occurs naturally as an alkaloid in certain plant
species (for example, as a constituent of extracts from the ephedra species,
also known as Ma Huang, in which it occurs together with other isomers of
ephedrine), the majority of pseudoephedrine produced for commercial use is
derived from yeast fermentation of dextrose in the presence of benzaldehyde.
In this process, specialized strains of yeast (typically a variety of Candida
utilis or Saccharomyces cerevisiae) are added to large vats containing water,
dextrose and the enzyme pyruvate decarboxylase (such as found in beets and
other plants). After the yeast has begun fermenting the dextrose, the
benzaldehyde is added to the vats, and in this environment the yeast convert
the precursor ingredients to l-phenylacetylcarbinol (L-PAC). L-PAC is then
chemically converted to pseudoephedrine via reductive amination.[12]

The bulk of pseudoephedrine is produced by commercial pharmaceutical
manufacturers in India and China, where economic and industrial conditions
favor the mass production of pseudoephedrine for export.[13]

### [edit] Common brand names

The following are some brand names of medications containing pseudoephedrine.
Some of them no longer contain it and have phenylephrine instead.

  * Sudafed (Johnson & Johnson (formerly Pfizer))
  * Actifed (Burroughs Wellcome)
  * Claritin-D Contains Loratadine along with Pseudoephedrine.

## [edit] Alternative and illicit use

<IMG>

This section is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(March 2009)  
There have also been reports of off-label uses of pseudoephedrine for its
stimulant properties. Some people, long-distance truck drivers and sports
athletes for example, have reportedly used pseudoephedrine as a stimulant to
increase their state of alertness/awareness.[weasel words] It is doubtful that
pseudoephedrine would be of significant benefit, except in sensitive
individuals, because of its minimal effect in the central nervous system (see
Mode of Action above).[original research?]

The similarity in chemical structure to the amphetamines has made
pseudoephedrine a sought-after chemical precursor in the illicit manufacture
of methamphetamine and methcathinone. As a result of the increasing regulatory
restrictions on the sale and distribution of pseudoephedrine, many
pharmaceutical firms have reformulated, or are in the process of reformulating
medications to use alternative decongestants, such as phenylephrine. Many
retailers such as Target, Wal-Mart, CVS, and Winn-Dixie have created corporate
policies restricting the sale of pseudoephedrine-containing products. Their
policies restrict sales by limiting purchase quantities and requiring a
minimum age with proper identification. These requirements are similar to and
sometimes more stringent than existing law. Internationally, pseudoephedrine
is listed as a Table I precursor under the United Nations Convention Against
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.[2]

### [edit] Sports

Pseudoephedrine is on the banned substances IOC list. Andreea RÄducan was
stripped of her gold medal at the 2000 Sydney Olympics after testing positive.
She took two pills given to her by the team coach for a cold. Although she was
stripped of the overall gold medal she kept her other medals, unlike in most
other doping cases was not banned from competing again, only the team doctor
was banned for a number of years. Ion Å¢iriac, the president of the Romanian
Olympic Committee, resigned over the scandal.[14][15]

### [edit] United States federal law

The United States Congress has recognized the use of pseudoephedrine in the
illicit manufacture of methamphetamine. In late 2005, the Committee on
Education and the Workforce heard testimony concerning education programs and
state legislation designed to curb the use and manufacture of methamphetamine
with pseudoephedrine-containing products. State laws in Oregon and Kansas were
particularly influential in the proposed legislation.[citation needed] The
House passed the Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005 ("CMEA") as an
amendment to the renewal of the Patriot Act. Signed into law by president
George W. Bush on March 6, 2006, the act amended Title 21 of the United States
Code (21 USC 830) concerning the sale of pseudoephedrine-containing products.
The Federal statute included the following requirements for merchants
("regulated seller") who sell these products (pseudoephedrine is defined as a
"scheduled listed chemical product under 21 U.S.C. Â§ 802(45(A)):

  * A retrievable record of all purchases identifying the name and address of each party to be kept for two years.
  * Required verification of proof of identity of all purchasers
  * Required protection and disclosure methods in the collection of personal information
  * Reports to the Attorney General of any suspicious payments or disappearances of the regulated products
  * Required training of employees with regard to the requirements of the CMEA; Retailer must self-certify as to training and compliance
  * Non-liquid dose form of regulated product may only be sold in unit dose blister packs
  * Regulated products are to be stored behind the counter or in a locked cabinet in such a way as to restrict public access
  * Daily sales of regulated products not to exceed 3.6 grams without regard to the number of transactions
  * 30 day (not monthly) sales limit not to exceed 7.5 grams if sold by mail-order or "mobile retail vendor"
  * 30 day purchase limit not to exceed 9 grams of pseudoephedrine base in regulated products (misdemeanor possession offense under 21 U.S.C. Â§ 844a for the individual who buys it)

### [edit] United States state law

Thirty-seven individual states also have varying laws on the matter: Alabama,
Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida,
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana,Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New
York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, West Virginia, Wisconsin
and Washington laws require pharmacies to sell pseudoephedrine behind-the-
counter and to collect personal information from the purchaser. Oregon
requires a prescription to purchase products containing pseudoephedrine.

### [edit] Mexico

On November 23, 2007, the use and trade of Pseudoephedrine in Mexico was made
illicit, as it was argued that pseudoephedrine was extremely popular as a
precursor in the synthesis of methamphetamine.

### [edit] Australia

Illicit diversion of pseudoephedrine in Australia has caused significant
changes to the way pseudoephedrine products are regulated. As of 2006, all
products containing pseudoephedrine have been rescheduled as "Pharmacist Only
Medicines" (Schedule 3). As a result, a pharmacist must be directly involved
in every transaction involving the sale of pseudoephedrine to members of the
public, and such medicines will be kept behind the counter, away from public
access. Such measures are designed to ensure that the medicines are needed for
a legitimate purpose. Pharmacists are also required to log the purchase with
an online database called PROJECTSTOP. This database records each purchase of
pseudoephedrine products, tracking the customers drivers license or 18+ card.
This system was put in place to stop drug mules driving from Sydney to Cairns
(a trip of 3000 km or 1875mi) purchasing a small box of pseudoephedrine at
every pharmacy along the way. When the database is used 3 modes of sale can be
used. One allows the sale (as "no match" was found), one denies the sale and
the third, called a safety sale, is when the product was sold under duress.
Certain preparations containing significantly high amounts of pseudoephedrine
are further restricted as "Prescription Only Medicines" (Schedule 4).

As of April 2007, the Australian government is considering the prohibition of
all medications containing pseudoephedrine.[16]

### [edit] New Zealand

In New Zealand, from 15 October 2004, as a result of large intercepts of
pseudoephedrine and ephedrine, any product containing these substances e.g.
cold and flu medicines were classified as Class C Part III (partially
exempted) controlled drugs in the Misuse of Drugs Act 1975.[citation needed]
New Zealand Customs and police officers are continuing to make large
interceptions of precursor substances believed to be destined for
methamphetamine production.

### [edit] United Kingdom

In the UK pseudoephedrine has only ever been available on prescription or over
the counter[clarification needed], and as of 2007 pharmacies are required to
sell only in limited pack sizes.[17]

## [edit] See also

  * Amphetamine
  * Ephedrine
  * Methamphetamine
  * Methcathinone
  * Phenethylamines
  * Phenylephrine \- a substitute used where pseudoephedrine sale is restricted by law
  * Phenylpropanolamine

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Hatton RC, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Oral Phenylephrine: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Ann Pharmacother. 2007 Mar;41(3):381-90. Epub 2007 Jan 30.
  2. ^ a b Microsoft Word - RedListE2007.doc
  3. ^ Edited by Reynolds JEF, ed (1989). Martindale: The complete drug reference (29th edition ed.). London: Pharmaceutical Press. ISBN 0-85369-210-6.
  4. ^ U.S. Patent 6,495,529, (-)-Pseudoephedrine as a Sympathomimetic Drug, Warner-Lambert (2002)
  5. ^ (U.S. Patent 6,495,529 )
  6. ^ a b Bicopoulos D, editor. AusDI: Drug information for the healthcare professional, 2nd edition. Castle Hill: Pharmaceutical Care Information Services; 2002.
  7. ^ a b c Rossi S, editor. Australian Medicines Handbook 2006\. Adelaide: Australian Medicines Handbook; 2006. ISBN 0-9757919-2-3
  8. ^ Vidal C, Prieto A, PÃ©rez-Carral C, ArmisÃ©n M (April 1998). "Nonpigmenting fixed drug eruption due to pseudoephedrine". Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 80 (4): 309â10. PMID 9564979.
  9. ^ Adco-Tussend
  10. ^ Cantu C, Arauz A, Murillo-Bonilla LM, LÃ³pez M, Barinagarrementeria F (July 2003). "Stroke associated with sympathomimetics contained in over-the-counter cough and cold drugs". Stroke 34 (7): 1667â72. doi:10.1161/01.STR.0000075293.45936.FA. PMID 12791938.
  11. ^ Myers, A. G., et al, Pseudoephedrine as a Practical Chiral Auxiliary for the Synthesis of Highly Enantiomerically Enriched Carboxylic Acids, Alcohols, Aldehydes, and Ketones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6460-6651.doi:10.1021/ja970402f
  12. ^ Oliver AL, Anderson BN, Roddick FA (1999). "Factors affecting the production of L-phenylacetylcarbinol by yeast: a case study". Adv. Microb. Physiol. 41: 1â45. PMID 10500843.
  13. ^ Suo, Steve. Clamp down on shipments of raw ingredients. The Oregonian; 6 October 2004. From a version reprinted on a U.S. congressional caucus website.
  14. ^ http://assets.espn.go.com/oly/summer00/news/2000/0925/776388.html
  15. ^ http://web.archive.org/web/20010715112418/http://www.intlgymnast.com/news2000/oct3.html
  16. ^ "Govt considers banning pseudoephedrine products. 16/04/2007. ABC News Online". http://www.abc.net.au/news/newsitems/200704/s1898059.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-31.
  17. ^ Pseudoephedrine.co.uk

## [edit] External links

  * Oregon House Bill 2485

v â¢ d â¢ e

Adrenergic agonists (models/most important in small caps)  
Î±

Î±1

METHOXAMINE Â· Methylnorepinephrine Â· Oxymetazoline Â· PHENYLEPHRINE Â·
Metaraminol  
Î±2

4-NEMD Â· CLONIDINE Â· Guanfacine Â· Guanabenz Â· Guanoxabenz Â· Guanethidine
Â· Xylazine Â· METHYLDOPA Â· Apraclonidine Â· Brimonidine Â· Detomidine Â·
Dexmedetomidine Â· Lofexidine Â· Romifidine Â· Tizanidine Â· Xylometazoline  
Undetermined/  
unsorted

Amidephrine Â· Amitraz Â· Anisodamine Â· Ergotamine Â· Indanidine Â·
Medetomidine Â· Mephentermine Â· Midodrine Â· Mivazerol Â· Naphazoline Â·
Norfenefrine Â· Octopamine Â· Phenylpropanolamine Â· Rilmenidine Â· Synephrine
Â· Talipexole Â· Tetrahydrozoline Â· Xylometazoline  
Î²

Î²1

DOBUTAMINE Â· Dopamine Â· Denopamine Â· Xamoterol  
Î²2

Short acting Î²2-agonists: SALBUTAMOL (ALBUTEROL)/Levosalbutamol Â· Fenoterol
Â· TERBUTALINE Â· Pirbuterol Â· Procaterol Â· Bitolterol Â· Rimiterol Â·
Carbuterol Â· Tulobuterol Â· Reproterol Â· Dopexamine

Long acting Î²2-agonists (LABA): Arformoterol Â· Bambuterol Â· Clenbuterol Â·
Formoterol Â· Salmeterol

Orciprenaline (metaproterenol) Â· Ritodrine Â· Hexoprenaline Â· Indacaterol  
Î²3

Amibegron Â· Solabegron  
Undetermined/  
unsorted

Arbutamine Â· Befunolol Â· Isoetarine Â· Isoxsuprine Â· Nylidrin Â· Oxyfedrine
Â· Prenalterol Â· Ractopamine Â· Bromoacetylalprenololmenthane Â· Broxaterol
Â· Cimaterol Â· Higenamine Â· Mabuterol Â· Methoxyphenamine Â· Tretoquinol Â·
Zinterol  
Nonselective Î²

ISOPRENALINE (ISOPROTERENOL)  
Î± and Î²

Epinephrine (Î±1+2, Î²1+2) Â· Norepinephrine (Î±1+2, Î²1) Â· Cirazoline Â·
Etilefrine Â· Ephedrine Â· Pseudoephedrine  
Indirect

presynaptic norepinephrine release: Amphetamine Â· Tyramine Â· Ephedrine Â·
Pseudoephedrine  
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor: Cocaine  
see also monoamine oxidase inhibitor  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Decongestants and other nasal preparations (R01)  
Topical

Sympathomimetics, plain

Cyclopentamine â¢ Ephedrine â¢ Phenylephrine â¢ Oxymetazoline â¢
Tetryzoline â¢ Xylometazoline â¢ Naphazoline â¢ Tramazoline â¢ Metizoline
â¢ Tuaminoheptane â¢ Fenoxazoline â¢ Tymazoline â¢ Epinephrine  
Antiallergic agents,  
excluding corticosteroids

Spaglumic acid

histamine antagonists (Levocabastine, Antazoline, Thonzylamine)

mast cell stabilizer (some are also antihistamines) (Cromoglicic acid,
Nedocromil, Azelastine, Olopatadine)  
Corticosteroids

Beclometasone â¢ Prednisolone â¢ Dexamethasone â¢ Flunisolide â¢
Budesonide â¢ Betamethasone â¢ Tixocortol â¢ Fluticasone â¢ Mometasone
furoate â¢ Triamcinolone â¢ Ciclesonide  
Other nasal preparations

Calcium hexamine thiocyanate â¢ Retinol â¢ Ipratropium bromide â¢
Ritiometan â¢ Mupirocin â¢ Hexamidine â¢ Framycetin â¢ Hyaluronic acid  
Systemic use:  
Sympathomimetics

Phenylpropanolamine â¢ Pseudoephedrine â¢ Phenylephrine â¢
Phenylpropylamine  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudoephedrine"

Categories: Amphetamines | Amphetamine alkaloids | Decongestants |
Sympathomimetic amines | DEA List I chemicals

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2009 |
All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded
phrases since March 2009 | All articles that may contain original research |
Articles that may contain original research since March 2009 | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2007 | Wikipedia articles needing
clarification from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * à¹à¸à¸¢

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 12:06.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



