
# List of smoking bans

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This is a list of smoking bans by country.

## Contents

  * 1 Argentina
  * 2 Armenia
  * 3 Australia
  * 4 Bahrain
  * 5 Bangladesh
  * 6 Belgium
  * 7 Bermuda
  * 8 Bhutan
  * 9 Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * 10 Brazil
  * 11 Canada
  * 12 Chile
  * 13 China
  * 14 Croatia
  * 15 Cuba
  * 16 Czech Republic
  * 17 Denmark
  * 18 England
  * 19 Estonia
  * 20 Faroe Islands
  * 21 Finland
  * 22 France
  * 23 Germany
  * 24 Greece
  * 25 Guernsey
  * 26 Hong Kong
  * 27 Hungary
  * 28 Iceland
  * 29 India
  * 30 Indonesia
  * 31 Republic of Ireland
  * 32 Isle of Man
  * 33 Israel
  * 34 Italy
  * 35 Japan
  * 36 Jersey
  * 37 Kazakhstan
  * 38 Kenya
  * 39 Lithuania
  * 40 Luxembourg
  * 41 Madagascar
  * 42 Malta
  * 43 Malaysia
  * 44 Mexico
  * 45 Monaco
  * 46 Montenegro
  * 47 Mozambique
  * 48 Netherlands
  * 49 New Zealand
  * 50 Niger
  * 51 Nigeria
  * 52 Northern Ireland
  * 53 Norway
  * 54 Pakistan
  * 55 Peru
  * 56 Philippines
  * 57 Portugal
  * 58 Puerto Rico
  * 59 Romania
  * 60 Russia
  * 61 Singapore
  * 62 Serbia
  * 63 Slovenia
  * 64 South Africa
  * 65 Spain
  * 66 Sweden
  * 67 Switzerland
  * 68 Taiwan
  * 69 Thailand
  * 70 Turkey
  * 71 Uganda
  * 72 United Arab Emirates
  * 73 United Kingdom
    * 73.1 Wales
    * 73.2 Scotland
  * 74 United Nations
  * 75 United States
  * 76 Uruguay
  * 77 Vatican City
  * 78 Vietnam
  * 79 Zambia
  * 80 Outdoor smoking bans
  * 81 Other bans
  * 82 Other restrictions
  * 83 Proposed bans
  * 84 Lack of smoking bans
  * 85 See also
  * 86 References
  * 87 External links

  
<IMG>

<IMG>

A pictogram often used where a smoking ban is in order.

## [edit] <IMG> Argentina

A 2006 smoking ban in Buenos Aires city prohibits smoking in public areas
including bars and restaurants except if the bar is more 100 m2 where it is
possible to have area for smoking customers. Similar bans in other Argentine
cities require bigger establishments to provide a separate, contained area for
smoking customers. The rule is not nationwide.

## [edit] <IMG> Armenia

A law went into effect in March 2005 banning smoking in hospitals, cultural
and educational institutions and on public transportation. On 1 March 2006 new
rules came into effect requiring all public and private institutions,
including bars and restaurants, to allow smoking only in special secluded
areas. Absence of any legal sanctions against those who violate the smoking
laws have made them completely ineffectual.[1]

## [edit] <IMG> Australia

Main article: List of smoking bans in Australia

In Australia smoking bans are determined on a state-by-state basis. In
chronological order by state:

  * South Australia: Smoking prohibited in all indoor dining areas since January 1999[2]. Total enclosed public place smoking ban in force since November 2007
  * Western Australia: Incremental restrictions introduced from January 2005 with a total ban on smoking in all enclosed public spaces taking effect from July 2006[3]
  * Tasmania: Total indoor smoking ban in force since January 2006[citation needed]. From January 2008 the ban was extended to include smoking in cars with passengers under the age of 18[4]
  * Queensland: Comprehensive ban in effect since July 2006. Smoking is prohibited in all pubs, clubs, restaurants and workplaces, commercial outdoor eating and drinking areas, outdoor public places, and within 4 meters of non-residential building entrances[citation needed]
  * Australian Capital Territory: A ban on smoking in enclosed public places has been in effect since December 2006[citation needed]
  * Victoria: : A ban on smoking in enclosed public places has been in effect since July 2007[citation needed]
  * New South Wales: A ban on smoking in all enclosed areas of restaurants, licensed clubs and pubs came into force in July 2007. In July 2008 the government announced plans to introduce new legislation that will prohibit smoking in private cars that carry children less than 16 years old.[citation needed]
  * Northern Territory: The Territory government has announced its long awaited timeframe for banning smoking inside clubs and pubs, saying new restrictions will come into place from the start of 2010.

## [edit] <IMG> Bahrain

Bahrain outlawed smoking in public places on 27 February 2008.

## [edit] <IMG> Bangladesh

Smoking restricted in pubs, cafÃ©s, offices and other public places since
March 2005.

## [edit] <IMG> Belgium

  * 2005: Companies should have implemented smoking plans to discourage smoking.
  * January 2006: Smoking prohibited in the work area.
  * January 2007: Smoking banned in restaurants and bars, except in the ones that serve "light meals" (e.g. cold meals, pizzas and warm meals that are served with bread instead of french fries) and have less of 30% of their sales from food servings. Small bars are also not included in the ban. Most large bars, such as concert venues, do little to enforce the ban.
  * September 2008: Smoking no longer allowed in schools.
  * July 2010 (planned): General smoking ban, all types of bars included. [5]

## [edit] <IMG> Bermuda

As of October 1, 2006, all enclosed workplaces in Bermuda are smokefree,
including restaurants, bars, private clubs and hotels.

## [edit] <IMG> Bhutan

On 17 December 2004, a national ban on the sale of tobacco products went into
effect, but importing limited tobacco would still be permitted with very heavy
taxes.[6] Smoking in all public places in Bhutan became illegal on 22 February
2005. It thus became the first nation in the world to outlaw this practice
outright.

## [edit] <IMG> Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the nation has banned smoking
in public buildings since 1 September 2007.

## [edit] <IMG> Brazil

In Brazil, smoking is forbidden in all enclosed public spaces, such as
shopping malls and libraries, except for specifically- designated smoking
areas. [7] In restaurants there should be a non smoking section but in reality
most restaurants end up having tables side by side, one for non-smokers and
another where smoking is allowed. Tobacco advertising is restricted to posters
in shops. [8]

## [edit] <IMG> Canada

Smoking in indoor (and in some cases outdoors - see below by province)
workplaces and public places is banned in all territories, provinces and in
federally regulated buildings. However, some jurisdictions allow specific
exemptions to the smoking ban.

Parliament has banned smoking in the federal government and in federally
regulated businesses, including places such as airports. Smoking rooms are
disallowed.

By province (east to west):

  * Newfoundland and Labrador: smoking has been banned in all public places, including bars and bingo halls, since 2005 under the province's Smoke-Free Environment Act.[9]
  * Prince Edward Island has banned smoking in public places and workplaces since 2003. Ventilated smoking rooms are allowed, however, but food cannot be served in them.[10]
  * Nova Scotia: From 1 December 2006 onwards, smoking is banned in public places, with the exception of special rooms in nursing homes and care facilities. Tobacco products cannot be displayed prominently in stores.[10] From 1 April 2008, smoking in a car with passengers under 19 inside is illegal.[11]
  * New Brunswick has banned smoking in all public areas since October 2004 and does not allow specially ventilated rooms. Since January 1, 2009 tobacco products cannot be displayed prominently in stores.
  * Quebec eliminated designated smoking rooms and retail tobacco displays 31 May 2008. There has been a comprehensive ban on smoking in public places, including bars and restaurants, since 2006.[10]
  * Ontario banned retail displays of tobacco in 2008. Since 2006, all workspaces and enclosed spaces open to the public ban smoking.[10] Since January 21, 2009 smoking is banned in all vehicles if anyone under the age of 16 is present.
  * Manitoba's Non-Smoker's Health Protection Act has banned all smoking in public spaces since October 2004. Non-smoking areas, or specially ventilated rooms, are not allowed in bars and restaurants.[12]
  * Saskatchewan's reinstated 'shower curtain law' (2005) requires shop owners to keep tobacco sales out of sight. There are fines of up to $10 000 for violation of the Tobacco Control Act which bans smoking in all public areas, indoor and outdoor, including clubs for veterans.[10]
  * Alberta has had a public smoking ban since January 1, 2008[13] and a "shower curtain" (or "powerwall") law requiring shop owners to keep tobacco sales out of sight since July 1, 2008.[14] The City of Calgary has legislated that bars and restaurants must be smoke free (since 2007); in the city of Edmonton there has been a smoking ban since 2005.[15] As of 1 January 2009, cigarette sales in Alberta have been banned in all stores containing a pharmacy as well as post-secondary institutions, the final phase of the province's Tobacco Reduction Act which started with the 1 January 2008 public smoking ban. [16]
  * British Columbia's smoking ban, updated in March 2008, bans smoking in all public spaces such as restaurants, pubs and private clubs, offices, malls, conference centres, sports arenas, community halls, government buildings and schools, and within a 3 meter radius of doors, open windows and air intakes. [17] Additionally, all commercial displays of tobacco that visible to members in public areas under the age of 19 was banned under the same legislation.

By territory (east to west):

  * Nunavut has banned smoking in public spaces since 1 May 2004, including bars.[18]
  * The Northwest Territories banned smoking as of 1 May 2004, in all public places and workplaces, including restaurants, bars, bingo and bowling facilities, and casinos.[19]
  * The Yukon implemented a smoking ban on 15 May 2008. It was the last of the provinces and territories to implement a ban.

## [edit] <IMG> Chile

Chile bans smoking in schools, hospitals, government offices, shopping
centres, supermarkets, pharmacies, airports, buses, subway networks and other
indoor public places. Smoking in universities indoors is banned, however,
smoking is allowed outdoors. Restaurants, with large eateries (over 100 mÂ²)
must have fully partitioned nonsmoking sections. Smaller restaurants can
choose between being smoke free or being for smokers. The same with cafes and
pubs. Clubs, despite their size, are able to choose between being smoke free
or being for smokers, however, in practice all clubs are "for smokers".[20]

## [edit] <IMG> China

Guangzhou and Jiangmen has banned smoking in public places, including
restaurants, entertainment outlets, schools, supermarkets, and governmental
offices on a trial run in 2007, however this is rarely policed. [21]

## [edit] <IMG> Croatia

The Croatian Government decided to ban smoking in early 2008. The ban came
into for on 7 November 2008\. People are no longer able to smoke freely in
public institutions such as hospitals, clinics, schools, nursery's and
universities will be punishable with 1000 kunas (140 euro), while the only
place in which smoking will remain permitted are psychiatric wards in
Croatiaâs hospitals. The ban will go further in May 2009 when smoking will
be forbidden in all closed public places including bars, restaurants and
cafes. The smoking ban will apply to all public areas where nonsmokers could
suffer from second-hand smoking against their will including open public areas
like sport stadiums, arenas, open air theaters, tram and bus stations etc.[22]
It is estimated that 30 percent of Croatiaâs adult population smoke.[23][24]

## [edit] <IMG> Cuba

Cuba has banned smoking in most work places, cigarette machines removed and it
has been illegal to sell tobacco products close to schools since February
2005.[25]

## [edit] <IMG> Czech Republic

Currently, there is a law in force that bans smoking in all public places such
as institutions, hospitals, bus stops and other public service stops, but not
in restaurants, bars and clubs. Every restaurant must have separated room for
non-smokers.

## [edit] <IMG> Denmark

As of 15 August 2007, smoking in hospitality facilities, restaurants, bars,
clubs, public transport, and all private and public workplaces is banned.
Exemptions to the law are bars with a floor space less than 40 mÂ² and offices
only used by a single employee. Separate smoking rooms are allowed in
hospitality facilities as long as no food or beverage is served there. The law
has caused much controversy and is as of November 2007 not fully enforced.
Freetown Christiania is exempt from the ban. The law is set for revision in
2009.[26]

## [edit] <IMG> England

Main article: Smoking ban in England

Smoking was banned in indoor public places in England, including workplaces,
bars, clubs and restaurants, on 1 July 2007. Some places, such as certain
smoking hotel rooms, nursing homes, prisons, submarines, offshore oil rigs,
and stages/television sets (if needed for the performance) are excluded.
Palaces were also excluded,[27] although members of the House of Commons and
the House of Lords agreed to ban all smoking in the Palace of Westminster.[28]
The on-the-spot fine for smoking in a workplace is Â£50 (~â¬70/~$100), Â£30
(~â¬45/~$60) if one pays within 15 days, while a business that allows it can
be fined Â£2,500 (~â¬3,700/~$5,000). Smoking will be allowed to continue
anywhere outdoors.[29] However, a confidential government briefing obtained by
The Independent on Sunday newspaper reveals that provisions are in place for
extending the ban to outdoor areas.[30]

## [edit] <IMG> Estonia

Smoking has been banned within indoor public areas and workplaces since 4 June
2005, except in restaurants. Later a ban on smoking in bars, restaurants,
coffee shops and nightclubs started on 5 June 2007 (however still allowed in
isolated smoking rooms).

## [edit] <IMG> Faroe Islands

Smoking banned in all enclosed public spaces 1 July 2008.

## [edit] <IMG> Finland

Smoking has been banned in indoor public areas and workplaces from 1 March
1995, except in specially designated smoking rooms; restaurants were included
in 2007. Legislation aimed towards voluntary prevention of secondary smoking
was enacted, but it was not successful. Few establishments installed
ventilation systems capable of eliminating secondhand smoke. Dividing a
restaurant into a smoking and non-smoking section was also an ineffective
measure. Thus, smoking has been banned in all indoor public and workplaces,
including bars, cafes, clubs and restaurants from 1 June 2007, except in those
places which have been permitted a transition period of up to two years.
Smoking in bars and trains is still allowed in enclosed smoking booths, where
you can't serve or take any food or drink. Many smaller bars have not been
able to build such smoking booths and patrons have to smoke outside. The bans
are respected by the general population.

## [edit] <IMG> France

France, on 1 February 2007, tightened the existing ban on smoking in public
places found in the 1991 Ãvin law,[31] which contains a variety of measures
against alcoholism and tobacco consumption. It is named after Claude Ãvin,
the minister who pushed for it. The law leaves certain important criteria on
what is allowed or not with respect to smoking sections to executive-issued
regulations, and it is those regulations that were altered in 2007.

Smoking is now banned in all public places (stations, museums, etc.); an
exception exists for special smoking rooms fulfilling strict conditions, see
below. However, a special exemption was made for cafÃ©s and restaurants,
clubs, casinos, bars, etc. until 1 January 2008,[32] although the French
government allowed a day of reflection on New Year's Day.[33] Opinion polls
suggest 70% of people support the ban.[34]

Under the new regulations, smoking rooms are allowed, but are subjected to
very strict conditions: they may occupy at most 20% of the total floor space
of the establishment and their size may not be more than 35 mÂ²; they need to
be equipped with separate ventilation which replaces the full volume of air
ten times per hour; the air pressure of the smoking room must constantly be
lower than the pressure in the contiguous rooms; they must have doors that
close automatically; no service can be provided in the smoking rooms; and
cleaning and maintenance personnel may enter the room only one hour after it
was last used for smoking[citation needed].

Previously, under the former implementation rules of the 1991 Ãvin law,
restaurants, cafÃ©s etc. just had to provide smoking and non-smoking sections,
which in practice were often not well separated. In larger establishments,
smoking and non-smoking sections could be separate rooms, but often they were
just areas within the same room.

A legal challenge against the new regulations was filed before the Conseil
d'Ãtat in 2007, but was rejected.[35]

## [edit] <IMG> Germany

With some of Europe's highest smoking rates, Germany's patchwork of smoking
bans continue to be contested.

In Berlin, the non-smoking law came into effect on 1 January 2008. The Federal
Constitutional Court ruled on the legislation at the end of July, and decided
that small bars (often called corner bars) were at a disadvantage in the
legislation, as they could not provide a separate smoking area. The senate
must now submit a new law by the end of 2009. In the transition period,
smoking is permitted in bars under certain conditions (provided it is not
larger than 75 square metres and has only one guest room). In addition, the
bar may not serve meals (only snacks), may not allow minors to enter and must
post a sign saying that the bar is for smokers. In practice, the smoking ban
is generally observed in cafÃ©s, theatres and restaurants (where food is
served), but not in bars. Clubs and discos must, officially, have a separate
smoking room, but as controllers do not work past 10pm, these laws are not
enforced. [36]

In August 2007, the states of Baden-WÃ¼rttemberg and Lower Saxony banned
smoking in restaurants, bars and clubs. In October 2007 Hesse also passed a
law with similar regulations. Most of the other German states followed in
January 2008, though many of these bans still allow smoking in separate
ventilated rooms.

Certain states, Nordrhein-Westphalia being one, were given a reprieve, and the
imposition of the ban was extended to 1 July 2008. However since then, many
bars are attempting to make themselves smoking "clubs", whereby the members
sign up, and are allowed to smoke. Whether this tactic will succeed long term
remains to be seen.

The strongest non-smoker rules has been in Bavaria. Discontent against the new
rules was blamed for the disappointing electoral results of the long-time
leading party - CSU - in the 2008 election. As a result, there are now new
rules allowing for more smoking in bars and restaurants. In Bavaria, there are
examples of employers who recruit only non-smokers [37].

Smoking is banned on public transport, hospitals, airports and in public and
federal buildings, including the parliament.

In Germany, the tobacco industry lobby has a strong influence in politics.[38]

## [edit] <IMG> Greece

According to a law passed in 2002, smoking is not allowed in all public and
private workplaces, all areas related to health care and education and in
public transport vehicles. This law, however, provides a loophole where
business owners can choose to follow the law. Smoking is therefore virtually
allowed everywhere, except for the Athens Metro. Since the legislation is not
very efficient a new, stricter law is under consideration. Currently (December
2008) this law is in the final voting-stage in the Greek Parliament. Effective
from July 1 2009, it will ban smoking and consumption of tobacco products by
other means, in all working places, transportation stations, in taxis and
passenger ships (in trains, buses and airplanes smoking is already
prohibited), as well as in all enclosed public places including restaurants,
night clubs etc. Small establishments (under 70 m2 area) will have the option
to be designated as "smoking areas". In larger establishments, separate
enclosed smoking rooms with special air conditioning can be created.
Regulations making the above options more specific are pending.

## [edit] <IMG> Guernsey

Smoking was banned in all public places in the British Crown dependency of
Guernsey, including workplaces, bars, clubs and restaurants, on 2 July 2006,
under the "Smoking (Prohibition in Public Places and Workplaces) (Guernsey)
Law 2005". Anyone who breaks the law, upon conviction, could be fined up to
the maximum of Â£1000 (~â¬1090, ~$1370). Smoking is allowed anywhere outside
and in whatever company.[39] The neighbouring Channel Island of Alderney
agreed in March 2007 to implement the ban, but no date has been set. Smoking
in indoor public places remains legal on just one of the Channel Islands,
Sark.

## [edit] <IMG> Hong Kong

Smoking in public places was banned by the Hong Kong Government commencing on
1 January 2007 under The Smoking (Public Health) Ordinance (Cap. 371) which
was first enacted in 1982 with several amendments subsequently. The ban was
placed in most public places including restaurants, Internet cafÃ©s, public
lavatories, beaches and public parks. Bars, karaoke parlors, and other adult-
only businesses are required to go smoke-free by 2009. Smoking bans in lifts,
public transport, cinemas, concert halls, airport terminal were introduced
between 1982 and 1997. The ban in shopping centres, department stores,
supermarkets, banks, game arcades has been in place since July 1998.

Any person who smokes or carries a lighted tobacco product in a statutory no
smoking area commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of HK$5,000. A new law, made in 2008 pending activation, provides
for fixed-penalty arrangement on par with that for littering.

## [edit] <IMG> Hungary

In 2009, smoking will be banned in most public places including restaurants,
bars, etc.[40]

## [edit] <IMG> Iceland

Smoking and the use of other tobacco products is banned in most public spaces
in Iceland. This includes all enclosed spaces in common ownership, all public
land intended for use by children, all public transport and all services;
including restaurants, bars, clubs and cafÃ©s.[41]

## [edit] <IMG> India

A ban on workplace, restaurants, hotels and other public smoking nationwide
came into effect from October 2 2008. Smoking in open areas like road, park
etc. and inside one's home and car is however allowed. Anybody violating this
law will be charged with a fine of Rs 200/-(INR). [42] In 2007, Chandigarh
became the first city in India to become 'smoke-free'. However despite some
early success, Chandigarh's ban is often ignored and enforcement has been
found to be difficult with authorities showing indifference. [43]

## [edit] <IMG> Indonesia

In Jakarta's restaurants, hotels, schools, office buildings, airports and
public transport, smoking is banned. Restaurants who want to allow smoking
have to provide a separate smoking space starting 4 February 2006. [44] Like
many Asian nations, it remains to be seen whether it can be enforced or not.
Building separate facilities for smokers has only taken place in half of
establishments by June 2007.[45]

## [edit] <IMG> Republic of Ireland

The Republic of Ireland became the first country in the world to institute an
outright ban on smoking in workplaces on 29 March 2004. From that date
onwards, under the Public Health (Tobacco) Acts, it has been illegal to smoke
in all enclosed workplaces. The ban is strictly enforced. The ban includes
bars, restaurants, clubs, offices, public buildings, company cars, trucks,
taxis and vans - and within a three metre radius to the entrances of these
locations. The maximum on-the-spot fine is â¬3,000, while a prison sentence
can also be given later. The law does not apply to prisons, nursing homes,
psychiatric wards and some hotel rooms. Stadia like Croke Park also ban
smoking anywhere in the grounds.

Before the total ban, smoking was already outlawed in public buildings,
hospitals, schools, restaurant kitchens, and on aircraft and trains. [46]

Premises must display a sign to inform patrons of the ban (in Irish or
English), and the contact person for any complaints. A workplace can be fined
â¬3,000 per person found smoking. Smoking rooms are not allowed. Any
shelter's surface must have at least 50 per cent uncovered. There is also a
Compliance Line set up by the Office of Tobacco Control, that people can call
to report people smoking in a workplace or retail outlets selling tobacco to
under-18s.

On the 1st July, 2009 [47], the country will ban tobacco advertising and
displays at point of sale in retail outlets (advertising is already banned in
print, on radio and television and on billboards) and ensure that cigarettes
and other tobacco products remain out of sight and under the counter - they
are already "behind the counter" products.

The ban has been widely hailed as a success by both the Irish government and
public, and following the ban cigarette consumption fell by 7.5% in the first
six months.[48] The ban has also had social and cultural impacts upon Ireland,
for instance the emergence of "smirting" since the ban.

On 18 July 2008, Irish Fine Gael MEP Avril Doyle proposed in a committee in
the European Parliament, that she would like to see an EU-wide ban on
cigarettes and cigars by 2025. [49]

## [edit] <IMG> Isle of Man

The Isle of Man was the last part of the British Isles to introduce a smoking
ban, save for the Crown dependency of Sark where it remains legal, with a
similar ban to the one introduced in England. The ban came into effect on 30
March 2008.

The smoking ban also saw Europe's first smoke-free prison. [50]

## [edit] <IMG> Israel

In Israel it is forbidden to smoke in public closed places since 1983[51]. The
law was amended in 2007 so that owners are held accountable for smoking in
premises under their responsibility. The ban includes cafÃ¨s, restaurants
discos, pubs and bars, and it is illegal for owners of such places to put
ashtrays anywhere inside closed spaces. Also, owners of public places must put
"no smoking" signs and prevent visitors from smoking. They can also designate
a well ventilated and completely separate area for smokers, as long as the non
smokers area does not fall below 75% of the whole area. The fine for owners of
public places is âª 10,000 (around US$2,800) and for smokers - âª 5000.

## [edit] <IMG> Italy

Italy was the fourth country in the world to enact a nationwide smoking ban.
Since January 10, 2005 it is forbidden to smoke in all public indoor spaces,
including bars, cafÃ¨s, restaurants and discos. However, special smoking rooms
are allowed. In such areas food can be served, but they are subjected to
strict conditions: they need to be separately ventilated, with high air
replacement rates; their air pressure must constantly be lower than the
pressure in the surrounding rooms; they must be equipped with automatic
sliding doors to prevent smoke from spreading to tobacco-free areas. Only 1%
of all public establishments have opted for setting up a smoking room.

Perhaps unexpectedly, the ban turned out to be highly popular and it is
strictly enforced and respected by the general population.[citation needed]

On the other hand, some clever restaurants and bars found a loophole. It is
indeed allowed to smoke outdoors, which means that since Italy has sunshine
more than half of the year, people can still smoke at restaurants and bars as
long as they sit on the comfortable outside tables. And in winter, the
establishment simply covers the outside tables with plastic sheeting, making
them like a verandah, so that although they are technically indoors, they are
legally still outdoors, and people can still smoke there, as in a separate
smoking area.[citation needed]

## [edit] <IMG> Japan

Although there are no consistent nationwide smoking bans in Japan and all
moves to introduce such laws are strongly opposed by the powerful lobby
groups, there are a growing number of local ordinances banning smoking.
Smoking is forbidden on the streets of the Chiyoda, Shinagawa, Shinjuku and
Nakano wards of Tokyo[52] for reasons of child safety (not health). Smoking is
banned on most public transport and on many train station platforms. Kanagawa
prefecture has announced plans for the first public smoking ban[53]. Although
still relatively few, there is a growing number of private businesses
implementing smoking bans in restaurants, taxis, buildings and bars[54][55].

## [edit] <IMG> Jersey

Smoking is restricted in public places in Jersey (a British Crown dependency).

The Restriction on Smoking (Jersey) Law 1973[56] enabled the States of Jersey
to pass regulations prohibiting or restricting smoking in places of
entertainment and public transport. In pursuance of this law, smoking was
banned on public transport by the Smoking (Public Transport) (Jersey)
Regulations 1982[57].

The Restriction on Smoking (Jersey) Law 1973 was amended by the Restriction on
Smoking (Amendment No. 2) (Jersey) Law 2006[58] adopted 16 May 2006 which
enabled the States to make regulations to prohibit or restrict smoking tobacco
or a substance (or a mixture of substances) other than tobacco, or the use of
tobacco, in a workplace or other defined places.

## [edit] <IMG> Kazakhstan

Kazakhstan outlawed smoking in public places on 1 April 2003. [59]

## [edit] <IMG> Kenya

Smoking in public indoor areas is banned in Nairobi, Kenya since July
2007.[60] Small private bars will be exempted. Mombasa already has a similar
preexisting ban on smoking.

## [edit] <IMG> Lithuania

Smoking has been banned in restaurants, bars, places where food is served,
clubs (except for special cigar and pipe clubs), and nightclubs since 1
January 2007. Furthermore, smoking on public transportation is forbidden
except on long-distance trains with special facilities.

## [edit] <IMG> Luxembourg

Smoking is banned in all indoor public places, like hospitals, shopping
centres, schools and restaurants. However, cafÃ©s and bars that only serve
snacks are exempt from the law. There is a smoking prohibition from 12 noon to
2pm and 7pm to 9pm in cafÃ©s in which meals are served.

## [edit] <IMG> Madagascar

By official law, smoking is prohibited in taxi-brousses, but it is not
enforced. The only places where they banned smoking is at Antananarivo
International Airport and on Air Madagascar flights.

## [edit] <IMG> Malta

In April 2004, smoking was banned in all enclosed public spaces, including
public transportation, clubs and restaurants although smoking areas are
allowed.

## [edit] <IMG> Malaysia

In all, 19 areas are banned, including hospitals/clinics, public lifts and
toilets, air-conditioned restaurants, public transport, government premises,
educational institutions, petrol stations, Internet cafes and shopping
complexes. However, enforcement is an issue, and the government plans to get
tougher on offenders.[61]

[62]

## [edit] <IMG> Mexico

Smoking in hospitals and airports has been banned for at least 15 years.
Smoking is allowed in designated areas at the Cancun Airport. Mexico City's
current smoking policy, passed in April 2004, requires physically separate
smoking and non-smoking areas, and for non-smoking areas to make up at least
30% of all space in restaurants and bars. [63] A proposal debated early in
2007 to extend Mexico City's smoking policy into a complete ban for all
restaurants, bars, schools, taxis, and buses, did not pass. [64]. It was
proposed again in the middle of 2007.

Since April 2008 the law has covered Mexico City, and since August 28, 2008
the law has been extended nationwide.

Advertisement of tobacco products has been banned from T.V. and radio for
roughly 6 years.

## [edit] <IMG> Monaco

There has been a ban on smoking in Monaco since 1 November 2008, but does not
extend to bars, restaurants and nightclubs.

## [edit] <IMG> Montenegro

Smoking in public places is banned in Montenegro. The ban also forbids smoking
advertising and the display of people smoking on television. [65]

## [edit] <IMG> Mozambique

Since 2007, smoking has been banned in indoor public places including public
transport, government buildings, schools, hospitals, libraries, cinemas,
theatres, restaurants and bars, with the exception of specially designated
smoking rooms.[66][67]

## [edit] <IMG> Netherlands

Since 1 July 2008, smoking has been banned in restaurants, cafÃ©s, bars,
festival tents and nightclubs.[68][69] Smoking is allowed only in separate,
enclosed, designated smoking spaces which are not serviced by employees. Staff
may only be required to enter such smoking rooms in emergency situations. But
the smoking ban especially in small cafÃ©s and bars (who can't create a
separate smoking space) will be ignored in large-scale. [70] [71]

These rules apply only to the smoking of tobacco. In coffee shops (cafÃ©s that
sell cannabis), they therefore apply to the smoking of cigarettes which
contain a blend of tobacco and cannabis, but not to cigarettes containing only
cannabis.

Other workplaces, public buildings and public transport have been smoke-free
since 1 January 2004. Since 1 January 2008, smoking has been completely banned
at Amsterdam's Schiphol Airport, including its cafes and restaurants. [72]

Smoking is no longer permitted in shopping malls, tobacco shops, gaming
establishments and convention centres since 1 July 2008.

The law is enforced by the Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority (Voedsel
en Waren Autoriteit, VWA). Fines for violating the smoking ban range from
â¬300 to â¬16,000. Any establishment which persistently flouts the ban faces
the loss of its business license.

## [edit] <IMG> New Zealand

The first building in the world to have a smoke-free policy was the Old
Government Building in Wellington, New Zealand in 1876. This was over concerns
about the threat of fire, as it is the second largest wooden building in the
world [73].

New Zealand passed an amendment to the Smoke-free Environments Act 1990 law on
3 December 2003 (effective in 2004) which covers all indoor public workplaces
and inside hospitality venues (pubs, bars, restaurants and casinos). Studies
have shown very high levels of compliance with the law. Also the air quality
inside hospitality venues is very good compared to similar settings in other
countries where smoking is still permitted. In New Zealand, tobacco cannot be
sold to anyone under 18.[74]

Outdoor smoke-free laws cover the grounds of all schools, the grounds of some
hospitals, stadiums and one university campus (Massey University). The
government has not moved to restrict smoking in cars but has run mass media
campaigns that promote smoke-free cars and homes.

There are also increasing numbers of local councils implementing educative
smokefree policies. South Taranaki District Council was the first. In May 2005
the Council made its playgrounds, parks and swimming pools smokefree, as well
as ensuring that all Council events held in South Taranaki parks were to be
promoted as smoke-free events. At least 20 of New Zealand's other Councils
have followed suit. (Source: www.smokefreecouncils.org.nz).

On 5 September 2007, Action on Smoking and Health (ASH) New Zealand called for
the removal of tobacco from sale by 2017.[75]

See also: Tobacco in New Zealand

## [edit] <IMG> Niger

A decree banning smoking in public places in Niger was issued in September
2008. Fines range from 5,000 to 1 million CFA francs, whilst there is also the
possibility of a prison term.[76]

## [edit] <IMG> Nigeria

Smoking is prohibited in public places in Nigeria and is punishable by a fine
of not less than N200 and not exceeding N1000 or to imprisonment to a term of
not less than one month and not exceeding two years or to both such fine and
imprisonment.[77][78]

## [edit] Northern Ireland

In Northern Ireland, a smoking ban has been in effect since 30 April 2007. It
is illegal to smoke in all enclosed workplaces. This includes bars,
restaurants, offices (even if the smoker is the only person in the office) and
public buildings. Like Scotland, the smoking ban is more comprehensive in that
places, such as phone boxes and enclosed bus/train shelters are included. The
on-the-spot fine for smoking in a workplace is Â£50 (~â¬70/~$100), while a
business that allows it can be fined Â£2,500 (~â¬3,700/~$5,000).

A Â£200 fine may be levied by local councils if businesses fail to show signs.
An opinion poll showed that 91% of people supported the ban.[79][80]

## [edit] <IMG> Norway

In Norway, smoking has been banned in public buildings and in private
buildings that are open to the public (like restaurants, bars, cafes) since 1
June 2004.

## [edit] <IMG> Pakistan

The Prohibition of Smoking and Protection of Non-Smokers Health Ordinance-2002
came into effect on June 30, 2003. The law had the following aspects: Ban on
tobacco use in public buildings and transportation, Limiting tobacco
advertising, banning tobacco sale within 50 meters from educational
institutions, and requiring âno smokingâ signs displayed in public places.

However, implementation of the ordinance does not appear strong.

## [edit] <IMG> Peru

In Peru, it is nominally illegal to smoke in any public place (indoors),
according to Law 25357. The ban is normally not enforced.

## [edit] <IMG> Philippines

Davao has banned smoking in a large number of public places, including public
buildings, entertainment venues, hospitals, shopping malls, concerts since
2002. Smoking at gasoline stations outdoors in banned.[81]

Manila has banned smoking in large public areas like hospitals, malls, public
transport, as well as Makati in 2002 Ordinance 2002-090, banning all public
transport and enclosed indoor smoking.[82]

However, the rule for the banning of indoor smoking is not followed for a vast
majority of bars and pubs in Makati and other places in Metro Manila, examples
of which are Embassy bar in Taguig, bars in Tomas Morato, and the Alchemy bar
in Pasig City, among others.

## [edit] <IMG> Portugal

On May 3, 2007, the Portuguese parliament made a law banning smoking in all
public places, except when proper air-ventilation systems are provided. It
went into effect January 1, 2008. Smokers who break the law face a fine of up
to â¬1000 (~US$1300) and establishments that break the law will face a fine
of up to â¬2500 (~US$3400). The legal age to purchase tobacco is 18.[83]

## [edit] <IMG> Puerto Rico

The Law Num. 40 from 1993, the Law to Regulate the Smoking Practice in Public
Places, and its later 1996 amendment Law 133, regulate smoking in private and
public places. The most recent modification established in [March 2, 2007],
Law 66, amended articles 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 11 of Law Num. 40, forbids this
practice inside jails, pubs, restaurants (including open-air terraces with one
or more employees), bars, casinos, workplaces, educational institutions, cars
with children under age 13 and most public places. Smoking sections are not
allowed. Fines start at $250.

## [edit] <IMG> Romania

Since January 1, 2009, restaurants, cafes, bars and clubs can only allow
smoking in clearly delimitated smoking areas, which need to be completely
separated from non-smoking areas and fitted with adequate ventilation. Smoking
areas cannot constitute more than 50% of the total floor area of the
venue.[84]

## [edit] <IMG> Russia

Russia does not yet have a smoking ban in force, however there is some
proposed legislation in the Duma. The legislation, passed by the State Duma
406-0, bans smoking in workplaces, on aircraft, trains and municipal transport
as well as in schools, hospitals, cultural institutions and government
buildings. It requires specially designated smoking areas to be set up and
also requires restaurants and cafes to set up no-smoking areas. Russia's no
smoking bill must go through two more readings in the Duma before being sent
to the Federation Council for approval and to President Dmitry Medvedev for
his signature.[85]

  

## [edit] <IMG> Singapore

<IMG>

<IMG>

A sign in Singapore to indicate that smoking is allowed

Smoking was banned in hawker centres, coffee-shops, cafes and fast-food
outlets beginning 1 July 2006. For establishments with an outdoor area, 10-20%
of the area can be set aside for smoking, although they would have to be
clearly marked to avoid confusion. Gradually, the ban has been extended to bus
interchanges and shelters, public toilets and public swimming complexes.[86]

On 1 July 2007, the ban was extended to entertainment nightspots. The rule
allows for the construction of designated smoking rooms which can take up to
10% of the total indoor space.

From 1 January 2009, the ban will be extended to all children's playgrounds,
exercise areas, markets, underground and multi-storey carparks, ferry
terminals and jetties. It will also be extended to non-air conditioned areas
in offices, factories, shops, shopping complexes and lift lobbies.[87]

Smokers found flouting the rules are fined S$200 while the owners of the
establishments are fined S$200 and S$500 for a subsequent offence.

## [edit] <IMG> Serbia

In Serbia, smoking is prohibited in some enclosed public spaces such as
hospitals since 2005 but the ban does not cover restaurants, bars, internet
cafes, etc.

## [edit] <IMG> Slovenia

On 22 June 2007, the Slovenian National Assembly approved a law prohibiting
smoking in all indoor public and work places, effective 5 August 2007.
Exempted from the ban are "open public areas, special smoking hotel rooms,
special smoking areas in elderly care centres and jails, and special smoking
chambers in bars and other work places. The smoking chambers, which will have
to meet strict technical standards, will however not be allowed to occupy more
than 20% of an establishment."[88] The law also raised the minimum age to
purchase tobacco products from 15 to 18 and mandated that tobacco labels carry
the telephone number of a quit-smoking hotline.

## [edit] <IMG> South Africa

The South African Government passed the first Tobacco Products Control Act in
1993 and started implementing the act in 1995. The act regulated smoking in
public areas and prohibited tobacco sales to people under the age of 16. Some
aspects of tobacco advertising was also regulated for example labelling. "[89]
The 1993 act was not considered to be comprehensive enough and the Tobacco
Products Control Amendment Act was passed in 1999. This act bans all
advertising and promotion of tobacco products, including sponsorship and free
distribution of tobacco products. The act also restricts smoking in public
places which includes the workplace, restaurants and bars and public
transport. The act also stipulates penalties for transgressors of the law, and
specifies the maximum permissible levels of tar and nicotine. The regulations
were implemented in 2001. "[90]

The government proposed further amendments to the bill in 2007 which will seek
to deal with new practices designed to circumvent the provisions of the Act.
These amendments will also aim to bring the current law into compliance with
the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC).
This framework has been ratified by the South African government. "[91]

The South African government is currently looking at increasing the minimum
legal age for smokers to 18. "[92]

## [edit] <IMG> Spain

From 1 January 2006, the law bans smoking in offices, shops, schools,
hospitals, cultural centres and on public transport, including stations and
airports. The law also states that restaurants and bars over 100 mÂ² can
designate a smoking area, but it has to be physically separated and may occupy
at most 30% of the total floor space of the establishment. Establishments
smaller than 100 sq.m. may choose whether to allow or prohibit smoking (most
have allowed it). Additionally, the law prohibits the sale of tobacco products
to persons under 18 years of age and limits the places in which tobacco can be
sold.[93]

Months later, the community of Madrid made a decree which states that
restaurants over 100 mÂ² are not required to make complete physical separation
of the smoking and non-smoking areas. Three other autonomous communities made
similar decrees watering down the law, so that smoking areas are only required
to be separated with ventilation systems.[94] See Spanish Antismoking Law.
(Spanish)

Since Spain is a somewhat decentralised country, a few autonomous communities,
such as Madrid, Valencia, La Rioja, and Balearic Islands, have started an
official but undeclared boycott of the Law, approved in the Spanish Parliament
by unanimity. These communities are also using the courts to even make the law
lighter, something impossible as the smoking ban law is a Spanish Basic Law
that can't be modified by local or autonomous governments.

## [edit] <IMG> Sweden

In Sweden, smoking was banned in restaurants, cafes, bars and nightclubs in
June 2005. Smoking rooms are, however, allowed in these institutions. The
smoking rooms contains a few restrictions; no serving or consumption of food
or beverages are allowed in the smoking rooms and it may not cover more than
25% of the institution's total area. The ban was very popular amongst the
population and even the industries affected.[95] In January 2008, The Swedish
Prison and Probation Service banned smoking indoors in prisons.[96]

## [edit] <IMG> Switzerland

  * Canton of Appenzell (district) R/E, for all closed public area. (See Airpur.ch[97])
  * Canton of Geneva, 1 July 2008, banned in public places by February referendum,[98] but overturned by the Federal Supreme Court of Switzerland as unconstitutional on 30 September 2008.[99]
  * Canton of Grisons, for all closed public area.
  * Canton of Saint-Gallen, for all closed public area.
  * Canton of Soleure, for all closed public area.
  * Canton of Ticino, 12 April 2007, banned in restaurants, cafes, bars, nightclubs and public places [100]
  * Canton of Uri, decision on 1 June 2008, will start 1 September 2009.
  * Canton of Valais, for all closed public area.

## [edit] <IMG> Taiwan

Smoking is prohibited in the following places:[101]

  * schools under the level of senior high school and other places in which the main purpose is to provide education or a venue for activities to children and teenagers
  * the indoor places of colleges or universities, libraries, museums, art galleries, and other institutions for cultural or social education
  * the places of medical treatment centers, nursing institutions, other medical institutions, and social welfare organizations, with the exception of the indoor smoking rooms of welfare organizations for the elderly with independent ventilation systems and that are completely separated from the non-smoking areas (rooms), or the outdoor places of said social welfare organizations for the elderly
  * the indoor places of governmental agencies and state-owned enterprises
  * mass transportation vehicles, taxicabs, tour buses, the MRT system, stations, and traveler waiting areas
  * places where flammable or explosive articles are manufactured, stored, or sold
  * business places of financial institutions, post offices, and telecommunication enterprises
  * places providing indoor physical training, sports, or body fitness
  * inside classrooms, reading rooms, laboratories, performance halls and auditoriums, exhibition halls, conference halls (rooms) and elevators
  * the indoor places of opera houses, movie theaters, audiovisual singing businesses, information leisure businesses, and other public leisure entertainment places
  * the indoor places of hotels, shopping malls, dining and drinking establishments, and other places for public consumption, except for those places with indoor smoking rooms that have independent ventilation systems and that are completely separated from the non-smoking areas (rooms), semi-open-air restaurants and places that provide drinks, cigar bars, and pubs and audiovisual singing businesses that open business after nine oâclock in the evening and are restricted to those 18 years of age or older
  * indoor workplaces shared by more than three persons
  * other indoor places for public use and places or transportation vehicles designated by the competent authorities at each level.

Conspicuous non-smoking signs shall be placed at all entrances of the places
prescribed in the preceding paragraph. No smoking paraphernalia shall be
supplied or displayed therein.

Guidelines for related measures of space, equipment and establishment of the
indoor smoking rooms prescribed in the preceding Subparagraph 3 of Paragraph 1
and the provision of the preceding Subparagraph 11 of Paragraph 1 shall be
enacted by the central competent authority in charge.

As per the authorization of the Tobacco Hazards Prevention Act (âthe Actâ
hereafter) promulgated on July 11, 2007, the guidelines for related measures
of space, equipment and establishment of the indoor smoking rooms (âthe
roomâ hereafter) prescribed in the Actâs Subparagraph 3 of Paragraph 1 in
Article 15 and the provision of the Actâs Subparagraph 11 of Paragraph 1 in
Article 15 were enacted by Department of Health, Executive Yuan, and are
summarized as follows[102]:

  * The area shall be above 6 m2 and below 35 m2. It may occupy at most 20% of the total floor space of the establishment.
  * No services other than smoking, cleaning or maintenance shall be provided.
  * The room shall be fully separated with physical barriers from other areas of the building.
  * The entrance shall be sliding door type with automatic closing mechanism. It shall remain closed except when people enter or leave the room.
  * The requirements of the independent air-conditioning and ventilation systems of the room are as follows: 
    * equipped with fresh air and exhaust ductwork directly connecting to outdoor area and independent to any other indoor spaces, air-conditioning or ventilation systems;
    * negative pressure of 8 Pa;
    * ventilation rate of 30 m3/hour per m2 of floor area of the room and replaces the full volume of air 10 times per hour;
    * distance between the exhaust vent of the room and the entrance of the building or any other buildings or nonsmoking areas shall be above 5 m.
  * The room shall not be in operation 1 hour before and after the cleaning or maintenance work and the independent air-conditioning and ventilation system shall remain on during this period.

## [edit] <IMG> Thailand

Indoor smoking ban effective in all indoor air conditioned establishments
throughout Thailand since November 2002, with entertainment areas exempted.
Cigarettes have graphic pictures since 2005, and advertising is banned.
Enforcement and compliance have been strong.

On 10 January 2008, Thailand announced that smoking would be banned in
restaurants, bars, and open-air markets effective 10 February 2008. In
addition to fines, those who fail to comply may be arrested. Many bars ignore
the ban.

## [edit] <IMG> Turkey

Smoking was first banned in 1997 in public buildings with more than four
workers, as well as planes and public buses. [103]

On 3 January 2008, Turkey passed a law banning smoking in all indoor spaces
including bars, cafÃ©s and restaurants. It also bans smoking in sports stadia,
and the gardens of mosques and hospitals. The smoking ban came into force on
May 19, 2008, however bars, restauntants and cafes are exempted until July
2009 [104]

## [edit] <IMG> Uganda

In March 2004, smoking was banned in public places, including workplaces, and
restaurant & bars. An extension to private homes is being considered.

## [edit] <IMG> United Arab Emirates

States in the United Arab Emirates recently started banning smoking in
shopping malls and public places. States leading the ban on smoking include
Abu Dhabi [105] , Ajman [106] , Dubai [107] and Sharjah [108].

## [edit] <IMG> United Kingdom

Smoking bans were introduced in each country of the United Kingdom separately
as decided by the devolved administrations in Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland, and the UK Parliament acting for England. Since 1 July 2007 smoking
bans have been in effect across the whole of the UK. For details, see (in
chronological order of bans): Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and England.

### [edit] <IMG> Wales

Smoking was banned across all enclosed public premises and work premises in
Wales on 2 April 2007. Adherence is widespread and public houses report
increases in takings since the ban came into place.[109] However, six months
after the ban's implementation, the Licensed Victuallers Association (LVA),
which represents pub operators across Wales, claims that pubs have lost up to
20% of their trade. The LVA says some businesses are on the brink of closure,
others have already closed down, and there is little optimism that trade will
eventually return to pre-ban levels.[110]

Public places must display a special bilingual no smoking sign:

  * "Mae ysmygu yn y fangre hon yn erbyn y gyfraith" (Welsh)
  * "It is against the law to smoke in these premises" (English)

### [edit] <IMG> Scotland

Main article: Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Act 2005

On 26 March 2006, Scotland prohibited smoking in enclosed (more than 50%
covered) public places, which includes public buildings, workplaces, sports
stadiums, bars and restaurants. Exemptions are in place to allow hotel guests
to smoke in their own rooms, as long as the hotel has designated them as
smoking rooms. The law also bans smoking in bus shelters, phone boxes or other
shelters that are more than 50% enclosed. It also prohibits smoking in trucks
and vans which are owned by a company whether or not the driver is the only
person inside. Businesses covered by the smoking ban must display a statutory
smoking sign at the entrance to, and around the building [111] as well as a
Smoke-Free policy. Opinion Polls at its introduction showed a clear majority
of the Scottish public were in favour of the ban[112]

As in New Zealand, the ban was initially criticised by certain interested
groups (e.g. publicans, cafe and bingo hall owners etc.) who feared that it
would adversely impact their businesses. A survey published by the Scottish
Beer & Pubs Association one year on from the ban concluded that "the number of
pub licensed premises in Scotland has remained more or less constant over the
last year"[113] indicating fears of an adverse impact of the ban on the
hospitality industry were unfounded. Widespread concerns prior to the ban
about its impact on Bingo Halls[114] prove harder to objectively assess: As at
May 2008 there is anecdotal evidence[115] to suggest an increase in closures
of Bingo Halls since implementation of the ban. However no statistical
analysis has been conducted and speculation within the betting and gaming
industry is that a decline could also be the result of demographic changes and
increases in online gaming[116].

The NHS Scotland Quit Smoking Line reported it received an additional 50,000
calls from people wishing to give up in the six months after the ban was
introduced.[117]. In September 2007 a study of nine Scottish hospitals over
the 12 months following the ban reported positively on its impact on the
country's health, including a 17% drop in admissions for heart attacks,
compared with average reductions of 3% per year for the previous decade [118].

## [edit] <IMG> United Nations

As United Nations buildings are not the subject of any national jurisdiction,
the United Nations has its own smoking and non-smoking policies. Following the
gradual introduction of partial smoking bans between 1985 and 2003, Secretary-
General Kofi Annan introduced in 2003 a total ban on smoking at United Nations
Headquarters.[119] Similar bans have not been introduced in field offices of
the United Nations worldwide.

Some specialized agencies of the United Nations, such as the United Nations
Children's Fund and the World Health Organization have their own strict
smoking bans which apply to their offices worldwide, but the same is not
necessarily true for entities of the Secretariat, such as the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA). Only on 13 December 2007, OCHA introduced a smoking ban
applicable to all its field offices.

For more information visit http://www.nosmokinglaw.co.uk

## [edit] <IMG> United States

Main article: List of smoking bans in the United States

In the United States, the question of smoking is determined at the state or
municipal level, not by the federal government; therefore, smoking policies
are instituted at the state or local level. Over 50% of Americans are covered
by a ban ordinance of some degree.[120] Coverage varies from total smoking
bans (even outdoors), to no ban at all.

The West Coast and its cities tend to have the earliest and most prohibitive
bans. One notable exception was Portland, Oregon. Portland (and all of
surrounding Multnomah County) allowed smoking in bars and truck stops.[121]
Oregon's state-wide smoking ban went into effect in January 2009.[122] Other
Oregon cities, such as Eugene have already passed smoking bans.[123]

## [edit] <IMG> Uruguay

Main article: Smoking in Uruguay

In March 2006, it became illegal in Uruguay to smoke in enclosed public
spaces. Now bars, restaurants or offices where people are caught smoking face
fines of more than $1,100 or a three-day closure. This makes Uruguay the first
country in South America to ban smoking in enclosed public spaces.[124]

Anti-smoking groups estimate that as many as a third of Uruguay's 3.4 million
people smoke. President TabarÃ© VÃ¡zquez, a practicing oncologist, has cited
reports suggesting about seven people die each day in Uruguay (an estimated
5,000 people a year) from smoking-related causes including lung cancer,
emphysema and other illnesses.[125]

## [edit] <IMG> Vatican City

On July 1, 2002 a law signed by Pope John Paul II became effective which
banned smoking on all places accessible to the public and in all closed places
of work within the Vatican City and within all extraterritorial properties of
the Holy See. Smoking bans in museums, libraries and churches on Vatican
territory were already in force before that date for a long time.[126]

## [edit] <IMG> Vietnam

The Vietnamese government has banned smoking and cigarette sales in offices,
production facilities, schools, hospitals, and on public transport nationwide
[127] Smoking was banned in enclosed indoor spaces and public facilities in Ho
Chi Minh City in 2005 with the exception of entertainment areas.

A ban has also been imposed on all forms of advertisement, trade promotion,
and sponsorship by tobacco companies, as well as cigarette sales through
vending machines, or over the telephone and on the Internet.

  

## [edit] <IMG> Zambia

Smoking is prohibited in public places in Zambia and is punishable by a fine
of K400,000 or imprisonment of up to two years. [128] [129]

## [edit] Outdoor smoking bans

  * It is illegal to smoke on a bus or in a bus shelter in Ireland it is also the first country in the world to impose a ban on smoking outdoor within 3-meters of a public building.
  * In the Australian state of Queensland, smoking is prohibited within four metres of entrances to public buildings, within 10 metres of children's playground equipment, in commercial outdoor eating or drinking areas, at patrolled beaches, and at all major sports stadiums.[130]
    * Some beaches in Sydney, Australia have smoking bans in place.
    * Smoking indoors or outdoors on land owned by the NSW Department of Education is banned
    * From 1 March 2006, in Victoria, Australia smoking is banned from all covered train platforms, bus and tram stops.[131]
  * Cambridge Memorial Hospital in Cambridge, Ontario, Canada enacted a total (outdoor) smoking ban, believed to be the first in the entire province if not country, as of October 2004. At the same time, Wilfrid Laurier University in the nearby City of Waterloo, Ontario proposed a similar total smoking ban on its property, after its 10 metre outdoor proximity ban (enacted in 2002) failed. WLU was presumed to be the third Canadian (public) post-secondary institution to consider such measures, after Carleton and Acadia. 
    * Smoking is prohibited in Hamilton Street Railway bus shelters in Hamilton, Ontario.
    * It is illegal to smoke on a bus or in a bus shelter in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
    * It is illegal to smoke on a bus or in a bus shelter as well as any less than 4 metres from any entrance in Halifax, Nova Scotia
    * Calgary, Alberta banned all outdoor patio smoking at bars, restaurants and casinos on July 1, 2005. Nova Scotia did the same on 1 December 2006.
  * Calabasas, California, United States banned smoking in almost all indoor and outdoor public places in 2006. Believed to be the strictest ban in the United States. At least 13 California cities (including Los Angeles) have banned smoking on their beaches, at least 4 other California cities (including San Francisco) ban smoking in parks or outdoor venues. For more info see List of smoking bans in the United States#Outdoor smoking bans. 
    * Belmont, California banned smoking in outdoor places on September 25, 2007. This ban also applies inside condos, apartments and other kinds of multi-unit housing.[132][133]
    * California has banned smoking within 20 feet (6.1 m) of entrances to any public building.
  * Selected wards in Tokyo, Japan prohibit smoking on the streets. This ban is enforced and violators are fined. In response, free smoking cafes have been provided by Japan Tobacco. 
    * 56% of Chiyoda ward's land area is a no smoking zone as of April 2007.
    * Kyoto, Japan has banned smoking on 7.1 km of its streets in 2007, including busy areas along Kawaramachi, Karasuma-dori and Shijo Street avenues.
    * Railway stations in Japan are no-smoking except for a few remaining long distance services.
  * Many English NHS PCTs ban smoking on it premises both inside and outside hospitals, even places such as the car park and bus stations.
  * Smoking is banned on all railway platforms in England, regardless of whether they are covered or not. [134]
  * It is illegal to smoke on the outdoor property of the institutions of public education in Slovenia, penalties are dictated by internal orders of the concerned institutions.
  * It is illegal to smoke in some bus shelters (complex rules determine which leading to them being largely ignored) and phone boxes in Scotland.

## [edit] Other bans

  * Turkmenistan, under decree from President for life Saparmurat Niyazov, has banned the chewing of tobacco.
  * All public and Catholic schools in the Region of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada banned smoking on school property in Autumn 1994. A province wide smoking ban on school property is slated to begin for the 2007/2008 school year in British Columbia, Canada
  * Tobacco fatwa, Iran (1891), Egypt (2000)
  * Australia has a federal law prohibiting the manufacture and sale of all smokeless tobacco products. The sale of oral snuff and chewing tobacco has been banned since 1989 under the Trade Practices Act 1974.[135]

## [edit] Other restrictions

In some countries, such as Germany and Russia, bans enacted earlier allow for
smoking sections in restaurants, as well as possible special rooms for use by
smokers in other workplaces (though many employers prefer not to incur the
costs of building and maintaining such rooms).

## [edit] Proposed bans

In 2008, the Irish (Ireland) Government will impose a ban on tobacco
advertising in shops (advertising is already banned in print, on radio and
television and on billboards) and ensure that cigarettes and other tobacco
products remain out of sight in shops - they are already "behind the counter"
products.

In the Czech Republic, there is a bill to prohibit smoking in all public areas
and in all enclosed areas in pubs, restaurants, bars and others that do not
have a separate room designated for smoking that has permanent ventilation and
does not have an effect on smoke-free sections. There have recently been
several bills proposing similar smoking restrictions, but these have never
been enacted by the Chamber of Deputies.[136]

New Caledonia is likely to introduce restrictions on smoking in public places
following a recent 25-nation global air-quality monitoring initiative.[137]

The Canadian province of Ontario has introduced legislation to ban smoking in
vehicles carrying passengers below the age of 16.[5][6]

The government of Kanagawa Prefecture in Japan has compiled a basic plan for
an ordinance to ban smoking in hotels, restaurants and other public places to
be submitted to legislature in March 2009. It would be the first such local
ordinance in Japan.

In Bulgaria the Ministry of Health is considering a ban on tobacco smoking in
all public places by the summer of 2010. Bulgaria has an engagement to
restrict tobacco smoking by 2011 with the World Health Organization. [138]

Niue is considering banning tobacco completely, and is seeking the cooperation
of Australia and New Zealand to ensure that no tobacco can be imported into
the country. [139]

## [edit] Lack of smoking bans

Some countries have no legislation against smoking whatsoever. These countries
include Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, and many other countries in
Central and Western Africa, where people can smoke wherever they want. Cyprus
is another notable country where smoking is not banned in public.

## [edit] See also

  * Smokeasy

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Smoking Restrictions Widened In Armenia
  2. ^ Tobaccolaws.sa.gov.au
  3. ^ WA Government media statement, 28th November 2004
  4. ^ The Australian, 31st December 2007
  5. ^ General smoking ban on July 1st 2010
  6. ^ Slate Magazine: The First Nonsmoking Nation by Eric Weiner
  7. ^ Article 2 of Brazil Federal law no. 9294
  8. ^ Law 9294, 15th July, 1996
  9. ^ SNL2005 CHAPTER S-16.2 - SMOKE-FREE ENVIRONMENT ACT, 2005
  10. ^ a b c d e In Depth: Smoking CBC News
  11. ^ Nova Scotia bans smoking in cars with children as of April 1 21 March 2008
  12. ^ Non-Smokers Health Protection Act Manitoba
  13. ^ Smoke Free Alberta | News & Information
  14. ^ http://www.smokefreealberta.com/news__information/bill_45.html
  15. ^ Albertan city bans
  16. ^ [1]
  17. ^ TOBACCO-FREE \- Ministry of Health, Province of British Columbia, Canada
  18. ^ Public Smoking Bans by Province and Territory - Factsheets
  19. ^ Canada - no-smoke.org
  20. ^ Chile: New Smoking Ban in Effect [08/15/06-1]
  21. ^ Guangdong to launch stricter smoking ban at public places - Guangdong - News Brief - Newsgd
  22. '^ Law on restriction of tobacco products usage Narodne novine 125/08
  23. ^ "Croatia Bans Smoking" balkaninsight.com 7 November 2008 Link accessed 07/11/08
  24. '^ Croatia banning smoking vecernji.hr
  25. ^ In a country famed for its cigars, Cuba adds no-smoking rules
  26. ^ http://www.jp.dk/kbh/artikel:aid=4307326/
  27. ^ "Parliamentary Privilege First Report". The Stationery Office. 4 September 2007. http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/jt199899/jtselect/jtpriv/43/4309.htm. Retrieved on 2007-09-04.
  28. ^ "MPs 'smoking in Commons toilets'". BBC News Online. 5 July 2007. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/6273830.stm. Retrieved on 2007-08-12.
  29. ^ Smoking ban information website (smokefreeengland.co.uk)
  30. ^ Going for smoke: Today's ban is just the start. Could your home be next? - Health News, Health & Wellbeing - Independent.co.uk
  31. ^ Law nÂ°91-32 of 10 January 1991
  32. ^ Decree nÂ°2006-1386 of 15 November 2006 taken as application of article L3511-7 of the Public Health Code, banning smoking in public places.
  33. ^ "French cafes set to ban smoking". http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7163178.stm. Retrieved on 2007-12-28.
  34. ^ "France to ban smoking in public". http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/6032125.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-09.
  35. ^ Ruling of 19th March, 2007 of the Conseil d'Ãtat (copy on LÃ©gifrance)
  36. ^ http://www.berlinonline.de/berliner-zeitung/spezial/dossiers/rauchverbot/117452/index.php
  37. ^ http://www.ubema.com
  38. ^ Why Germany balks at EU smoking bans
  39. ^ Information about the Guernsey smoking ban
  40. ^ http://index.hu/politika/belfold/0530hrvthgns/ http://index.hu/politika/bulvar/0402smoke/
  41. ^ 2002 nr. 6 31. janÃºar/ LÃ¶g um tÃ³baksvarnir
  42. ^ India to declare all places of work as smoke free
  43. ^ Sarin, Jaideep, "Chandigarhâs âsmoke-free cityâ campaign loses steam", Indo-Asian News Service, New Delhi, July 13th, 2008
  44. ^ A smoking ban fires up Jakarta - International Herald Tribune
  45. ^ Buildings in hot seat over smoking ban
  46. ^ EU 2004 - "Smoking ban is first in world"
  47. ^ [ http://www.otc.ie/article.asp?article=421]
  48. ^ RTÃ News - Huge drop in cigarette sales
  49. ^ EUObserver MEP calls for EU ban on cigarettes by 2025 18 July 2008
  50. ^ Exact Date Set For Smoking Ban - Isle Of Man Today
  51. ^ "Law for the restriction of smoking in public places". (in Hebrew). http://www.linshom.com/law/public.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-21.
  52. ^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/2292007.stm
  53. ^ http://www.japaninc.com/node/3116
  54. ^ http://en.wa-shoi.com/?page=100595
  55. ^ http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/7083.php
  56. ^ Jersey Smoking Law
  57. ^ Jersey Regulations
  58. ^ Jersey Law | RESTRICTION ON SMOKING (AMENDMENT NO. 2) (JERSEY) LAW 2006
  59. ^ Articles:Listing Kazakhstan
  60. ^ Reuters AlertNet - Kenyan capital Nairobi starts smoking ban
  61. ^ Smoking ban to be extended
  62. ^ Status Of Tobacco Use And Its Control - Malaysia Report Card
  63. ^ Mexico City Imposes Tougher Smoking Laws [04/07/04
  64. ^ Mexican Smoking Bans
  65. ^ BBC NEWS | Europe | Montenegro bans smoking in public
  66. ^ [2] Blog of Francisco Cabo
  67. ^ [3] Blog of Jackie Tumwine
  68. ^ nu.nl/algemeen | Horeca in juli 2008 rookvrij
  69. ^ BBC Dutch smoking ban goes into force 1 July 2008
  70. ^ Smoking ban ignored(in Dutch)
  71. ^ Government plans for smoke free hospitality sector(in Dutch)
  72. ^ Smoking ban at Schiphol
  73. ^ Department of Conservation
  74. ^ Smokefree Law
  75. ^ Welcome to ASH - Action on Smoking and Health
  76. ^ Niger cabinet passes smoking ban BBC News, 12 September 2008
  77. ^ Nigeria: Smoking - Top Officials Defy Govt Order Leadership], 3 June 2008
  78. ^ Nigeria's capital city bans smoking in public Afrique en ligne, 1 June 2008
  79. ^ Northern Irish Smoking Ban
  80. ^ Smoking ban information website (spacetobreathe.org.uk)
  81. ^ PIA Information Services - Philippine Information Agency
  82. ^ Makati (Phillipines) government news bulletin
  83. ^ Portugal bans smoking inside public places
  84. ^ Bucharest In Your Pocket Guide, p. 4
  85. ^ Smoking ban advances in Russia, Germany - USATODAY.com
  86. ^ Smoking Ban in Singapore
  87. ^ Smoking ban to be extended to more areas from January 2009
  88. ^ Slovenia Gets Tough Anti-Smoking Legislation
  89. ^ Tobacco Products Control Act 1993
  90. ^ The Great South African Smokeout: Anna White, 2001
  91. ^ Madlala-Routledge: Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill (29/03/2007)
  92. ^ News 24: Smoking ban for under 18's?
  93. ^ Spain: going smoke free - FernÃ¡ndez 15 (2): 79 - Tobacco Control
  94. ^ BBC NEWS | Europe | Spain sees smoking ban take hold
  95. ^ Swedish snuff â not just for men - SWEDEN.SE
  96. ^ "'RÃ¶kfri kriminalvÃ¥rd'" (in Swedish). Swedish Prison and Probation Service. 2008-01-01. http://www.kriminalvarden.se/templates/KVV_InfopageGeneral.aspx?id=4846. Retrieved on 2008-03-28.
  97. ^ "AirPur.ch (fr)"
  98. ^ La fumÃ©e sera bannie des lieux publics avant l'Ã©tÃ©
  99. ^ "Swiss high court strikes down Geneva smoking ban", Reuters, 30 September 2008
  100. ^ Divieto di fumare nel Cantone
  101. ^ Tobacco Hazards Prevention Act (Taiwan) (Promulgated on July 11, 2007)
  102. ^ Guidelines for Indoor Smoking Room Establishment http://tobacco.bhp.doh.gov.tw/doc/law06.pdf
  103. ^ "New era begins in Turkish social life with smoking ban". Turkish Daily News. http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/article.php?enewsid=92824.
  104. ^ "Turkey expands curbs on smoking". BBC News. 2008-05-19. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/7407985.stm.
  105. ^ Khaleej Times - Abu Dhabi plans ban on smoking in malls
  106. ^ Gulf News - Ajman bans smoking in malls and markets
  107. ^ Khaleej Times - Stricter smoking ban in Dubai
  108. ^ Khaleej Times - Smoking ban to be in place next year
  109. ^ Smoking ban information website (smokingbanwales.co.uk)
  110. ^ ic Wales (icwales.icnetwork.co.uk)
  111. ^ Standard no smoking sign in Scotland
  112. ^ [4] 'Widespread support for smoking ban in Scotland'
  113. ^ 'Research on liquor licenses for Scotland, March 2007, SBPA'
  114. ^ 'Half of Scottish bingo halls threatened by smoking ban'
  115. ^ 'Bingo related News, the Smokers Club inc.'
  116. ^ 'Smoking Ban, bingo.co.uk'
  117. ^ Smoking ban information website (clearingtheairscotland.com)
  118. ^ 'Smoking ban brings positive results, the Scottish Government'
  119. ^ "Smoking ban at United Nations Headquarters". http://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N03/468/96/doc/N0346896.DOC?OpenElement.
  120. ^ News release, Americans for Non-smokers' Rights, 6 December 2006
  121. ^ CodeMaster Template
  122. ^ Governor Ted Kulongoski Press Release
  123. ^ LaserFiche WebLink
  124. ^ Uruguay curbs smoking in public
  125. ^ Public smoking ban takes effect in Uruguay \- TobacoFree.org
  126. ^ "Smoking Banned in Public Areas of Vatican". Zenit. 2002-06-28. http://www.zenit.org/article-4800?l=english. Retrieved on 2008-03-26.
  127. ^ Xinhua - English
  128. ^ allAfrica.com: Zambia: The Move by the Government to Ban Smoking in Public Places (Page 1 of 1)
  129. ^ The Times - Zambia gets tough on smokers
  130. ^ Outdoor public areas Queensland Government
  131. ^ Tobacco reforms Victorian Government Health Information
  132. ^ Welcome to Belmont The City of Belmont
  133. ^ Belmont to hold meeting about proposed anti-smoking law San Francisco Chronicle, 12 March 2007
  134. ^ Non-smoking train platforms
  135. ^ Please Refer To Anzfa'S Guide To Applications And Proposals For A More Detailed Explanation Of The Process On How To Undertake
  136. ^ Restaurants oppose smoking bill
  137. ^ New Caledonia in line for anti-smoking law
  138. ^ http://www.novinar.net/?act=news&act1=det&stat=center&mater=Mjc2MDs1OQ==&sql=Mjc2MDszNQ== ÐÑÐ»Ð½Ð° Ð·Ð°Ð±ÑÐ°Ð½Ð° Ð½Ð° Ð¿ÑÑÐµÐ½ÐµÑÐ¾ ÑÐ»ÐµÐ´ ÐµÐ´Ð½Ð° Ð³Ð¾Ð´Ð¸Ð½Ð° (in Bulgarian)
  139. ^ http://www.nzherald.co.nz/world/news/article.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=10520567

Technische Zukunft - Elektronisches Rauchen ohne Rauch fÃ¼r jeden Platz dieser
Erde in German-Deutsch or

Technical future - Electronic smoking without smoke for anyplace this world in
English

## [edit] External links

  * Smoking bans around the world(updated)
  * List of countries with smoking bans (Yahoo)
  * Interactive map on some global smoking bans
  * Interactive map on prevalence of smoking among men and women
  * Late-breaking smoking ban news
  * Anti-Smoking Ad

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_smoking_bans"

Categories: Tobacco control | Lists by country

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles
with unsourced statements since June 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 02:37 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



