
# Habeas corpus

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the Living Things CD, see Habeas Corpus (Living Things Album).

For the Angel episode, see Habeas Corpses.

Habeas corpus (IPA: /ËheÉªbiËÃ¦sËkÉËpÉs/) (Latin: You (shall) have the
body) is a legal action, or writ, through which a person can seek relief from
the unlawful detention of him or herself, or of another person. It protects
the individual from harming him or herself, or from being harmed by the
judicial system. The writ of habeas corpus has historically been an important
instrument for the safeguarding of individual freedom against arbitrary state
action.

Also known as "The Great Writ," a writ of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum is a
summons with the force of a court order addressed to the custodian (such as a
prison official) demanding that a prisoner be brought before the court,
together with proof of authority, allowing the court to determine whether that
custodian has lawful authority to hold that person; if not, the person shall
be released from custody. The prisoner, or another person on their behalf (for
example, where the prisoner is being held incommunicado), may petition the
court or an individual judge for a writ == of habeas corpus.

The right to petition for a writ of habeas corpus has long been celebrated as
the most efficient safeguard of the liberty of the subject. Albert Venn Dicey
wrote that the Habeas Corpus Acts "declare no principle and define no rights,
but they are for practical purposes worth a hundred constitutional articles
guaranteeing individual liberty." In most countries, however, the procedure of
habeas corpus can be suspended in time of national emergency. In most civil
law jurisdictions, comparable provisions exist, but they may not be called
"habeas corpus."[1] The reach of habeas corpus is currently being tested in
the United States. Oral arguments on a consolidated Guantanamo Bay detention
camp detainee habeas corpus petition, Al Odah v. United States were heard by
the Supreme Court of the United States on December 5 , 2007. On June 12, 2008,
the Supreme Court ruling in Boumediene v. Bush recognized habeas corpus rights
for the Guantanamo prisoners. On October 7, 2008, the first Guantanamo
prisoners were ordered released by a court considering a habeas corpus
petition.[2]

The writ of habeas corpus is one of what are called the "extraordinary,"
"common law," or "prerogative writs," which were historically issued by the
courts in the name of the monarch to control inferior courts and public
authorities within the kingdom. The most common of the other such prerogative
writs are quo warranto, prohibito, mandamus, procedendo, and certiorari. When
the original 13 American Colonies declared independence and became a
constitutional republic in which the people are the sovereign, any person, in
the name of the people, acquired authority to initiate such writs.

The due process for such petitions is not simply civil or criminal, because
they incorporate the presumption of nonauthority. The official who is the
respondent has the burden to prove his authority to do or not do something.
Failing this, the court must decide for the petitioner, who may be any person,
not just an interested party. This differs from a motion in a civil process in
which the movant must have standing, and bears the burden of proof.

## Contents

  * 1 Derivation and form
  * 2 History of habeas corpus in England
  * 3 Scotland's approach
  * 4 Australia
  * 5 Canada
  * 6 Ireland
  * 7 India
  * 8 Malaysia
  * 9 New Zealand
  * 10 Philippines
  * 11 Poland
  * 12 Portugal
  * 13 Spain
  * 14 United States
    * 14.1 Scope
    * 14.2 Suspension during the Civil War and Reconstruction
    * 14.3 Suspension during World War II and its aftermath
    * 14.4 AEDPA
    * 14.5 War on Terror
    * 14.6 Differences in post-trial actions
  * 15 Notes and references
  * 16 Further reading on historical background and other topics
  * 17 See also
  * 18 External links

  
## [edit] Derivation and form

The right of habeas corpus is referred to in full in legal texts as habeas
corpus ad subjiciendum or more rarely ad subjiciendum et recipiendum. The name
derives from the operative words of the writ in Medieval Latin:

â Praecipimus tibi quod corpus A.B. in prisona nostra sub custodia tua
detentum, ut dicitur, una cum die et causa captionis et detentionis suae,
quocumque nomine praedictus A.B. censeatur in eadem, habeas coram nobis ... ad
subjiciendum et recipiendum ea quae curia nostra de eo adtunc et ibidem
ordinare contigerit in hac parte. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis periculo
incumbente. Et habeas ibi hoc breve.'

We command you, that the body of A.B. in Our prison under your custody
detained, as it is said, together with the day and cause of his taking and
detention, by whatsoever name the said A.B. may be known therein, you have at
our Court ... to undergo and to receive that which our Court shall then and
there consider and order in that behalf. Hereof in no way fail, at your peril.
And have you then there this writ.

â  
The word habeas in the writ is not in the indicative mood ("You have ..."),
but in the subjunctive (specifically the volitive subjunctive): "We command
that you have ...". The full name of the writ is often used to distinguish it
from similar ancient writs:

  * Habeas corpus ad deliberandum et recipiendum, a writ for bringing an accused from a different county into a court in the place where a crime had been committed for purposes of trial, or more literally to return holding the body for purposes of âdeliberation and receiptâ of a decision;
  * Habeas corpus ad faciendum et recipiendum, also called habeas corpus cum causa, a writ of a superior court to a custodian to return with the body being held by the order of a lower court "with reasons", for the purpose of âreceivingâ the decision of the superior court and of âdoingâ what it ordered;
  * Habeas corpus ad prosequendum, a writ ordering return with a prisoner for the purpose of âprosecutingâ him before the court;
  * Habeas corpus ad respondendum, a writ ordering return in order to allowing the prisoner to âanswerâ to new proceedings before the court;
  * Habeas corpus ad satisfaciendum, a writ ordering return with the body of a prisoner for âsatisfactionâ or execution of a judgment of the issuing court; and
  * Habeas corpus ad testificandum, a writ ordering return with the body of a prisoner for the purposes of âtestifyingâ.

That the basic form of the writs of habeas corpus, now written in English, has
changed little over the centuries can be seen from the following examples:

â VICTORIA, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland Queen, Defender of the Faith, to J.K., Keeper of our Gaol of Jersey,
in the Island of Jersey, and to J.C. Viscount of said Island, Greeting.

We command you that you have the body of C.C.W. detained in our prison under
your custody, as it is said, together with the day and cause of his being
taken and detained, by whatsoever name he may be called or known, in our Court
before us, at Westminster, on the 18th day of January next, to undergo and
receive all and singular such matters and things which our said Court shall
then and there consider of him in this behalf; and have there then this Writ.

Witness Thomas, Lord DENMAN, at Westminster, the 23rd day of December in the
8th year of Our reign.

â  
â The United States of America, Second Judicial Circuit, Southern District
of New York, ss.:

We command you that the body of Charles L. Craig, in your custody detained, as
it is said, together with the day and cause of his caption and detention, you
safely have before Honorable Martin T. Manton, United States Circuit Judge for
the Second Judicial Circuit, within the circuit and district aforesaid, to do
and receive all and singular those things which the said judge shall then and
there consider of him in this behalf; and have you then and there this writ.

Witness the Honorable Martin T. Manton, United States Circuit Judge for the
Second Judicial Circuit, this 24th day of February, 1921, and in the 145th
year of the Independence of the United States of America.

â  
## [edit] History of habeas corpus in England

Blackstone cites the first recorded usage of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum in
1305, during the reign of King Edward I. However, other writs were issued with
the same effect as early as the reign of Henry II in the 12th century.
Blackstone explained the basis of the writ, saying:

â The King is at all times entitled to have an account, why the liberty of
any of his subjects is restrained, wherever that restraint may be inflicted.
â  
The procedure for the issuing of writs of habeas corpus was first codified by
the Habeas Corpus Act 1679, following judicial rulings which had restricted
the effectiveness of the writ. A previous act had been passed in 1640 to
overturn a ruling that the command of the King was a sufficient answer to a
petition of habeas corpus.

Then, as now, the writ of habeas corpus was issued by a superior court in the
name of the Sovereign, and commanded the addressee (a lower court, sheriff, or
private subject) to produce the prisoner before the Royal courts of law. A
habeas corpus petition could be made by the prisoner himself or by a third
party on his behalf and, as a result of the Habeas Corpus Acts, could be made
regardless of whether the court was in session, by presenting the petition to
a judge.

Since the 18th century the writ has also been used in cases of unlawful
detention by private individuals, most famously in Somersett's Case (1771),
where the black slave Somersett was ordered to be freed, the famous words
being quoted (or misquoted, see Somersett's Case):

â The air of England has long been too pure for a slave, and every man is
free who breathes it. â  
The privilege of habeas corpus has been suspended or restricted several times
during English history, most recently during the 18th and 19th centuries.
Although internment without trial has been authorised by statute since that
time, for example during the two World Wars and the Troubles in Northern
Ireland, the procedure of habeas corpus has in modern times always technically
remained available to such internees. However, as habeas corpus is only a
procedural device to examine the lawfulness of a prisoner's detention, so long
as the detention was in accordance with an Act of Parliament, the petition for
habeas corpus would be unsuccessful. Since the passage of the Human Rights Act
1998, the courts have been able to declare an Act of Parliament to be
incompatible with the European Convention on Human Rights. However, such a
declaration of incompatibility has no immediate legal effect until it is acted
upon by the government.

The wording of the writ of habeas corpus implies that the prisoner is brought
to the court in order for the legality of the imprisonment to be examined.
However, rather than issuing the writ immediately and waiting for the return
of the writ by the custodian, modern practice in England is for the original
application to be followed by a hearing with both parties present to decide
the legality of the detention, without any writ being issued. If the detention
is held to be unlawful, the prisoner can usually then be released or bailed by
order of the court without having to be produced before it. It is also
possible for individuals held by the state to petition for judicial review,
and individuals held by non-state entities to apply for an injunction.

## [edit] Scotland's approach

The Parliament of Scotland passed law to have similar effect to Habeas Corpus
in 1701, the Act for preventing wrongful imprisonment and against undue delays
in trials, now known as the Criminal Procedure Act 1701 c.6 (being the short
title given by Statute Law Revision (Scotland) Act 1964). This Act is still in
force although certain parts have been repealed.

## [edit] Australia

The writ of habeas corpus as a procedural remedy is part of Australia's
English law inheritance.[3]

In 2005, the Australian parliament passed the Australian Anti-Terrorism Act
2005. Some legal experts questioned the constitutionality of the act, due in
part to limitations it placed on habeas corpus.[4]

## [edit] Canada

Habeas corpus rights were enshrined in the Constitution Act 1982, via Section
Ten of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms:[5]

> Everyone has the right to on arrest or detention... c) to have the validity
of the detention determined by way of habeas corpus and to be released if the
detention is not lawful.

Suspension of the writ in Canadian history occurred famously during the
October Crisis, during which the War Measures Act was invoked by Prime
Minister Pierre Trudeau at the request of the Quebec and Montreal governments.
The Act was also used to justify German, Slavic, and Ukrainian Canadian
internment during the First World War, and Japanese Canadian internment during
the Second World War. Both internments were eventually recognized by acts of
parliament as historical wrongs.

## [edit] Ireland

In Ireland the principle of habeas corpus is guaranteed by Article 40, Section
4 of the Irish constitution. This guarantees "personal liberty" to each
individual and outlines a detailed habeas corpus procedure, without actually
mentioning the Latin term. However it also provides that habeas corpus is not
binding on the Defence Forces during a state of war or armed rebellion.

The state inherited habeas corpus as part of the common law when it seceded
from the United Kingdom in 1922, but the principle was also guaranteed by
Article 6 of the Constitution of the Irish Free State in force from 1922 to
1937. A similar provision was included when the current constitution was
adopted in 1937. Since that date habeas corpus has been restricted by two
constitutional amendments, the Second Amendment in 1941 and the Sixteenth
Amendment in 1996.

Before the Second Amendment, an individual detained had the constitutional
right to apply to any High Court judge for a writ of habeas corpus and to as
many High Court judges as they wished. Since the Second Amendment, a prisoner
has a right to apply to only one judge, and, once a writ has been issued, the
President of the High Court has authority to choose the judge or panel of
three judges who will decide the case. The amendment also added a requirement
that when the High Court believed someone's detention to be invalid due to the
unconstitutionality of a law, it must refer the matter to the Irish Supreme
Court and may release the individual on bail only in the interim.

In 1965, the Supreme Court ruled in the O'Callaghan case that the provisions
of the constitution meant that an individual charged with a crime could be
refused bail only if they were likely to flee or to interfere with witnesses
or evidence. Since the Sixteenth Amendment, it has been possible for a court
to take into account whether a person has committed serious crimes while on
bail in the past.

## [edit] India

The Indian judiciary in a catena of cases has effectively resorted to the writ
of habeas corpus only in order to secure release of a person from illegal
detention.

The Indian judiciary has dispensed with the traditional doctrine of locus
standi. If a detained person is not in a position to file a petition, it can
be moved on his behalf by any other person. The scope of habeas relief has
expanded in recent times by actions of the Indian judiciary.[6] The habeas
writ was used in the Rajan criminal case.

## [edit] Malaysia

In Malaysia, the right of habeas corpus, short of the name, is enshrined in
the Federal Constitution. Article 5(2) provides that "Where complaint is made
to a High Court or any judge thereof that a person is being unlawfully
detained the court shall inquire into the complaint and, unless satisfied that
the detention is lawful, shall order him to be produced before the court and
release him."

As there are several statutes, for example, the Internal Security Act 1960,
that still permit detention without trial, the procedure is usually effective
in such cases only if it can be showed that there was a procedural error in
the way that the detention was ordered.

## [edit] New Zealand

While habeas corpus is generally used on the government, it can also be used
on individuals. In 2006, a child was allegedly kidnapped by his mother's
father after a custody dispute. The father filed habeas corpus against the
mother, the grandfather, the grandmother, the great grandmother, and another
person alleged to have assisted in the kidnap of the child. The mother did not
present the child to the court and was imprisoned for contempt of court.[7]
She was released when the child's grandfather came forward with him in late
January 2007.

## [edit] Philippines

In the Bill of Rights in the Filipino Constitution, habeas corpus is listed
near-identically to the U.S. Constitution in Article 3, Section 15:

"The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended except in
cases of invasion or rebellion when the public safety requires it."

In 1971, The Marcos Administration lifted the writ of Habeas Corpus, in an
attempt to curb insurgency, and as a prelude to Martial Law.

## [edit] Poland

An act similar to Habeas corpus was adopted in Poland as early as in 1430.
Neminem captivabimus, short for neminem captivabimus nisi iure victum, (Latin,
"We shall not arrest anyone without a court verdict") was one of the basic
rights in Poland and Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, stating that the king can
neither punish nor imprison any member of the szlachta without a viable court
verdict. Its purpose is to release someone who has been arrested unlawfully.
Neminem captivabimus has nothing to do with whether the prisoner is guilty,
only with whether due process has been observed.

## [edit] Portugal

The Constitution of Portugal states that Habeas corpus shall be available to
counter the misuse of power in the form of illegal arrest, imprisonment or
detention. According to the Portuguese Penal Process Code, the application for
it shall be made to the judge conducting the preliminary investigations or to
the Portuguese Supreme Court of Justice.

The reasons that may justify an habeas corpus are: exceeded the period to
deliver the detainee to judicial power; exceeded the detention period stated
by law or judicial decision; detention outside the legally allowed places;
detention ordered by an incompetent authority; and detention motivated for
fact for which the law does not allow detention.

## [edit] Spain

The Spanish Constitution states that A habeas corpus procedure shall be
provided for by law in order to ensure the immediate handing over to the
judicial authorities of any person illegally arrested. The law which regulates
the procedure is the Law of Habeas Corpus of 24 May 1984 which provides that a
person imprisoned may, on his own or through a third person, allege his Habeas
Corpus right and request to appear before a judge. The request must specify
the grounds on which the detention is considered to be unlawful which can be,
for example, that the imprisoner does not have the legal authority, or that
the prisoner's constitutional rights were violated or that he was subject to
mistreatment, etc. The judge may then request additional information if needed
and may issue an Habeas Corpus order at which point the holding authority has
24 hours to bring the prisoner before the judge.

## [edit] United States

Main article: Habeas corpus in the United States

The United States Constitution specifically included the English common law
procedure in the Suspension Clause, located in Article One, Section 9. It
states:

â The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless
when in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it. â  
The writ of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum is a civil, not criminal, ex parte
proceeding in which a court inquires as to the legitimacy of a prisoner's
custody. Typically, habeas corpus proceedings are to determine whether the
court which imposed sentence on the defendant had jurisdiction and authority
to do so, or whether the defendant's sentence has expired. Habeas corpus is
also used as a legal avenue to challenge other types of custody such as
pretrial detention or detention by the United States Bureau of Immigration and
Customs Enforcement pursuant to a deportation proceeding.

### [edit] Scope

The writ of Habeas Corpus was originally understood to apply only to those
held in custody by officials of the Executive Branch of the federal government
and not to those held by state governments, which independently afford habeas
corpus pursuant to their respective constitutions and laws. The United States
Congress granted all federal courts jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. Â§ 2241 to
issue writs of habeas corpus to release prisoners held by any government
entity within the country from custody in the following circumstances:

    
  * Is in custody under or by color of the authority of the United States or is committed for trial before some court thereof; or
  * Is in custody for an act done or omitted in pursuance of an Act of Congress, or an order, process, judgment or decree of a court or judge of the United States; or
  * Is in custody in violation of the Constitution or laws or treaties of the United States; or
  * Being a citizen of a foreign state and domiciled therein is in custody for an act done or omitted under any alleged right, title, authority, privilege, protection, or exemption claimed under the commission, order or sanction of any foreign state, or under color thereof, the validity and effect of which depend upon the law of nations; or
  * It is necessary to bring said persons into court to testify or for trial.

In the 1950s and 1960s, decisions by the Warren Supreme Court greatly expanded
the use and scope of the federal writ, and the most publicized use of the writ
of Habeas corpus in modern times has been to allow federal courts to review
death penalty proceedings; however, far more non-capital habeas petitions are
reviewed by the federal courts. In the last thirty years, decisions by the
Burger and Rehnquist Courts have somewhat narrowed the writ, though the number
of habeas petitions filed has continued to rise.

The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 further limited the
use of the federal writ by imposing a one-year statute of limitations and
dramatically increasing the federal judiciary's deference to decisions
previously made in state court proceedings either on direct appeal from the
conviction and sentence, or in a state court habeas corpus action and the
associated second round of state appeal (both of which, in the usual case,
occur before a federal habeas petition is filed).

### [edit] Suspension during the Civil War and Reconstruction

On April 27, 1861, habeas corpus was suspended by President Abraham Lincoln in
Maryland and parts of midwestern states.

> Whereas, It has become necessary to call into service, not only volunteers,
but also portions of the militia of the States by draft, in order to suppress
the insurrection existing in the United States, and disloyal persons are not
adequately restrained by the ordinary processes of law from hindering this
measure, and from giving aid and comfort in various ways to the insurrection.
Now, therefore, be it ordered, that during the existing insurrection, and as a
necessary measure for suppressing the same, all rebels and insurgents, their
aiders and abettors within the United States, and all persons discouraging
volunteer enlistments, resisting militia drafts, or guilty of any disloyal
practice affording aid and comfort to the rebels against the authority of the
United States, shall be subject to martial law, and liable to trial and
punishment by courts-martial or military commission.

> Second: That the writ of habeas corpus is suspended in respect to all
persons arrested, or who are now, or hereafter during the rebellion shall be,
imprisoned in any fort, camp, arsenal, military prisons, or other place of
confinement, by any military authority, or by the sentence of any court-
martial or military commission.

> In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused the seal of the
United States to be affixed. Done at the City of Washington, this Twenty-
fourth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and sixty-two, and of the Independence of the United States the eighty-
seventh.

> ABRAHAM LINCOLN. By the President.

> WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of State.

In the early 1870s, President Ulysses S. Grant suspended habeas corpus in nine
counties in South Carolina, as part of federal civil rights action against the
Ku Klux Klan under the 1870 Force Act and 1871 Ku Klux Klan Act.

### [edit] Suspension during World War II and its aftermath

In 1942, the Supreme Court ruled in Ex parte Quirin that unlawful combatant
saboteurs could be denied habeas corpus and tried by military commission,
making a distinction between lawful and unlawful combatants. The writ was
suspended in Hawaii during World War II, pursuant to a section of the Hawaiian
Organic Act, when martial law was declared in Hawaii in the aftermath of the
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The period of martial law in Hawaii ended in
October 1944, and the Organic Act's authorization of martial law was ruled not
to include the power to close civilian courts in Duncan v. Kahanamoku, 327
U.S. 304 (1946).

The 1950 case Johnson v. Eisentrager denied access to habeas corpus for
nonresident aliens captured and imprisoned abroad in a US-administered foreign
court.

### [edit] AEDPA

In 1996, following the Oklahoma City bombing, Congress passed (91-8-1 in the
Senate, 293-133-7 in the House) and President Clinton signed into law the
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA). The AEDPA was
to "deter terrorism, provide justice for victims, provide for an effective
death penalty, and for other purposes."

The AEDPA contained one of the few limitations on habeas corpus. For the first
time, its Section 101 set a statute of limitations of one year following
conviction for prisoners to seek the writ. It limits the power of federal
judges to grant relief unless the state court's adjudication of the claim
resulted in a decision that was (1) contrary to, or involved an unreasonable
application of clearly established federal law as determined by the Supreme
Court of the United States; or (2) resulted in a decision that was based on an
unreasonable determination of the facts in light of the evidence presented in
the state court proceeding. It generally but not absolutely barred second or
successive petitions, with several exceptions. Petitioners who had already
filed a federal habeas petition were required to first secure authorization
from the appropriate United States Court of Appeals, to ensure that such an
exception was at least facially made out.

### [edit] War on Terror

The November 13, 2001, Presidential Military Order gave the President of the
United States the power to detain suspects, suspected of connection to
terrorists or terrorism as an unlawful combatant. As such, it was asserted
that a person could be held indefinitely without charges being filed against
him or her, without a court hearing, and without entitlement to a legal
consultant. Many legal and constitutional scholars contended that these
provisions were in direct opposition to habeas corpus and the United States
Bill of Rights.

In Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U.S. 507 (2004), the Supreme Court reaffirmed the
right of United States citizens to seek writs of habeas corpus even when
declared enemy combatants.

In Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006), Salim Ahmed Hamdan petitioned for
a writ of habeas corpus, challenging that the military commissions set up by
the Bush administration to try detainees at GuantÃ¡namo Bay âviolate both
the Uniform Code of Military Justice and the four Geneva Conventions.â In a
5-3 ruling, the Supreme Court rejected Congress's attempts to strip the courts
of jurisdiction over habeas corpus appeals by detainees at GuantÃ¡namo Bay.
Congress had previously passed the Department of Defense Appropriations Act of
2006 which stated in Section 1005(e), âProcedures for Status Review of
Detainees Outside the United Statesâ:

    â(1) Except as provided in section 1005 of the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005, no court, justice, or judge shall have jurisdiction to hear or consider an application for a writ of habeas corpus filed by or on behalf of an alien detained by the Department of Defense at GuantÃ¡namo Bay, Cuba.
    â(2) The jurisdiction of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit on any claims with respect to an alien under this paragraph shall be limited to the consideration of whether the status determination â¦ was consistent with the standards and procedures specified by the Secretary of Defense for Combatant Status Review Tribunals (including the requirement that the conclusion of the Tribunal be supported by a preponderance of the evidence and allowing a rebuttable presumption in favor of the Government's evidence), and to the extent the Constitution and laws of the United States are applicable, whether the use of such standards and procedures to make the determination is consistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States.â
On 29 September 2006, the House and Senate approved the Military Commissions
Act of 2006 (MCA), a bill that would remove habeas corpus for any person
determined to be an âunlawful enemy combatant" engaged in hostilities or
having supported hostilities against the United Statesâ[8][9] by a vote of
65â34. (This was the result on the bill to approve the military trials for
detainees; an amendment to remove the unavailability of habeas corpus failed
48â51.[10]) President Bush signed the Military Commissions Act of 2006 into
law on October 17, 2006. The declaration of a person as an "unlawful enemy
combatant" is at the discretion of the US executive branch of the
administration, and there is no right of appeal, with the result that this
potentially eliminates habeas corpus for any non-citizen.

With the MCA's passage, the law altered the language from âalien detained
â¦ at GuantÃ¡namo Bayâ:

    âExcept as provided in section 1005 of the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005, no court, justice, or judge shall have jurisdiction to hear or consider an application for a writ of habeas corpus filed by or on behalf of an alien detained by the United States who has been determined by the United States to have been properly detained as an enemy combatant or is awaiting such determination.â Â§1005(e)(1), 119 Stat. 2742.
On 20 February 2007, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit upheld this provision of the MCA in a 2-1 decision of the Case
Boumediene v. Bush. The Supreme Court let the Circuit Court's decision stand
by refusing to hear the detainees' appeal. On June 29, 2007, the U.S. Supreme
Court reversed its April 2007 decision and agreed to hear the appeals of
Guantanamo detainees who are seeking habeas corpus review of their
detentions.[11]

Under the MCA, the law restricts habeas appeals for only those aliens detained
as "enemy combatants," or awaiting such determination. Left unchanged is the
provision that, after such determination is made, it is subject to appeal in
U.S. Court, including a review of whether the evidence warrants the
determination. If the status is upheld, then their imprisonment is deemed
lawful.

There is, however, no legal time limit which would force the government to
provide a Combatant Status Review Tribunal (CSRT) hearing. Prisoners are
legally prohibited from petitioning any court for any reason before a CSRT
hearing takes place.

On January 17, 2007, Attorney General Gonzales asserted in Senate testimony
that while habeas corpus is "one of our most cherished rights," the United
States Constitution does not expressly guarantee habeas rights to United
States residents or citizens.[12] As such, the law could be extended to U.S.
citizens and held[citation needed] if left unchecked.[citation needed]

As Robert Parry writes in the Baltimore Chronicle & Sentinel:

â Applying Gonzalesâs reasoning, one could argue that the First Amendment
doesnât explicitly say Americans have the right to worship as they choose,
speak as they wish or assemble peacefully.

Ironically, Gonzales may be wrong in another way about the lack of specificity
in the Constitutionâs granting of habeas corpus rights. Many of the legal
features attributed to habeas corpus are delineated in a positive way in the
Sixth Amendment...[13]

â  
To date, there has been at least one confirmed case in which non-American
civilians have been incorrectly classified as enemy combatants.[14]

On June 7, 2007, the Habeas Corpus Restoration Act of 2007 was approved by the
Senate Judiciary Committee with an 11-8 vote split along party lines, with all
but one Republican voting against it.[15] Although the Act would restore
statutory habeas corpus to enemy combatants, it would not overturn the
provisions of the AEDPA which set a statute of limitations on habeas corpus
claims from ordinary civilian federal and state prisoners.[citation needed]

On June 11, 2007, a federal appeals court ruled that Ali Saleh Kahlah al-
Marri, a legal resident of the United States, could not be detained
indefinitely without charge. In a two-to-one ruling by the Fourth Circuit
Court of Appeals, the Court held the President of the United States lacks
legal authority to detain al-Marri without charge; all three judges ruled that
al-Marri is entitled to traditional habeas corpus protections which give him
the right to challenge his detainment in a U.S. Court.

On June 12, 2008, the United States Supreme Court ruled 5-4 in Boumediene v.
Bush that terror suspects detained by the United States in Guantanamo Bay
detainment camp have the right to seek a writ of habeas corpus in US Federal
Court.[16]

In July 2008, the Richmond-based 4th Circuit Court rules: "if properly
designated an enemy combatant pursuant to the legal authority of the
President, such persons may be detained without charge or criminal proceedings
for the duration of the relevant hosilities."[17]

On October 7, 2008, US District Court judge Ricardo M. Urbina ruled that 17
Uyghurs, Muslims from China's northwestern Xinjiang region, must be brought to
appear in his court in Washington, DC, three days later: "Because the
Constitution prohibits indefinite detentions without cause, the continued
detention is unlawful." [18]

On January 21, 2009, US President Barack Obama issued an executive order
regarding the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base and the individuals held there. This
order asserted that "[they] have the constitutional privilege of the writ of
habeas corpus". [19]

### [edit] Differences in post-trial actions

Habeas Corpus is an action taken after sentencing by a defendant who seeks
relief for some perceived error in his criminal trial. There are a number of
such post-trial actions, their differences being potentially confusing, thus
bearing some explanation. Three of the most common are an appeal to which the
defendant has as a right, a writ of certiorari and a writ of habeas corpus.

An appeal to which the defendant has a right cannot be abridged by the court
which is, by designation of its jurisdiction, obligated to hear the appeal. In
such an appeal, the appellant feels that some error has been made in his
trial, necessitating an appeal. A matter of importance is the basis on which
such an appeal might be filed: generally appeals as a matter of right may only
address issues which were originally raised in trial (as evidenced by
documentation in the official record). Any issue not raised in the original
trial may not be considered on appeal and will be considered estoppel. A
convenient test for whether a petition is likely to succeed on the grounds of
error is confirming that (1) a mistake was indeed made (2) an objection to
that mistake was presented by counsel and (3) that mistake negatively affected
the defendantâs trial.

A writ of certiorari, otherwise know as simply as cert, is an order by a
higher court directing a lower court to send record of a case for review, and
is the next logical step in post-trial procedure. While states may have
similar processes, a writ of cert is usually only issued, in the United
States, by the Supreme Court, although some states retain this procedure.
Unlike the aforementioned appeal, a writ of cert is not a matter of right. A
writ of cert will have to be petitioned for, the higher court issuing such
writs on limited bases according to constraints such as time. In another
sense, a writ of cert is like an appeal in its constraints; it too may only
seek relief on grounds raised in the original trial.

A writ of habeas corpus is the last opportunity for the defendant to find
relief against his guilty conviction. Habeas corpus may be pursued if a
defendant is unsatisfied with the outcome of his appeal and has been refused
(or did not pursue) a writ of cert, at which point he may petition one of
several courts for a writ of habeas corpus. Again, these are granted at the
discretion of the court and require a petition. Like appeals or writs of cert,
a writ of habeas corpus may overturn a defendant's guilty conviction by
finding some error in the original trial. The major difference is that writs
of habeas corpus may, and often, focus on issues that lay outside the original
premises of the trial, i.e., issues that could not be raised by appeal or
writs of cert. These often fall in two logical categories: (1) that the trial
lawyer was ineffectual or incompetent or (2) that some constitutional right
has been violated.

As one moves farther down the chain of post-trial actions, relief becomes
progressively more unlikely. Knowing the differences between these actions and
their intended use are an important tool in increasing one's chances for a
favorable outcome. Use of a lawyer is therefore often considered advisable to
aid one attempting to traverse the complex post-trial landscape.

## [edit] Notes and references

  1. ^ Google books scan of book Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution By Albert Venn Dicey[http://books.google.com/books?pg=PR3&dq=INTRODUCTION+TO+THE+STUDY+OF+THE+LAW+OF+THE+CONSTITUTION+A.+V.+Dicey&ei=Y2YfR-rMApGepgKuqZWzBg&id=kz40AAAAIAAJ&output=text == ]
  2. ^ http://www.rfa.org/english/news/uyghur/Guantanamo-10072008123140.html
  3. ^ Clark, David and Gerard McCoy (1998), "Habeas Corpus" (Federation Press)
  4. ^ Submission to the Australian Senate [1]
  5. ^ "The Constitution Act, 1982; Part I, Section 7: Legal Rights". Canadian Department of Justice. http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/const/annex_e.html#legal. Retrieved on 2008-06-29.
  6. ^ Writ Of Habeas Corpus For Securing Liberty - Author - Puneet Vyas
  7. ^ New Zealand Herald newspaper [2]
  8. ^ Search Results - THOMAS (Library of Congress)
  9. ^ Klein, Rick (29 September). "Senate's passage of detainee bill gives Bush a win: Democrats say GOP capitulate". Boston Globe. http://www.boston.com/news/nation/washington/articles/2006/09/29/senates_passage_of_detainee_bill_gives_bush_a_win/.
  10. ^ Search Results - THOMAS (Library of Congress)
  11. ^ "Supreme Court to hear Guantanamo Bay detainee habeas cases". JURIST. 2007-06-29. http://jurist.law.pitt.edu/paperchase/2007/06/supreme-court-to-hear-guantanamo-bay.php. Retrieved on 2008-06-29.
  12. ^ "Gonzales says the Constitution doesn't guarantee habeas corpus". San Francisco Chronicle. 2007-01-24. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2007/01/24/MNGDONO11O1.DTL&hw=gonzales+habeas+corpus&sn=001&sc=1000. Retrieved on 2008-06-29.
  13. ^ Gonzales Questions Habeas Corpus | BaltimoreChronicle.com
  14. ^ "Guantanamo prisoner 'incorrectly' detained". ABC News. 2004-09-09. http://www.abc.net.au/news/newsitems/200409/s1195161.htm. Retrieved on 2008-06-29.
  15. ^ "Panel OKs Bill For Guantanamo Detainees". CBS News. 2007-06-07. Archived from the original on 2007-06-14. http://web.archive.org/web/20070614212445/http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2007/06/07/ap/politics/main2900699.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-06-30.
  16. ^ "Boumediene et al. v. Bush, President of the United States, et al." (PDF). Supreme Court of the United States. 2008-06-12. http://supremecourtus.gov/opinions/07pdf/06-1195.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-29.
  17. ^ "Al-Marri and the power to imprison U.S. citizens without charges". Salon.com. 2008-07-16. http://www.salon.com/opinion/greenwald/2008/07/16/al_marri/. Retrieved on 2008-07-16.
  18. ^ http://in.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idINIndia-35845620081008?sp=true
  19. ^ http://www.whitehouse.gov/the_press_office/ClosureOfGuantanamoDetentionFacilities/

## [edit] Further reading on historical background and other topics

  * Asha Bandele "Habeas Corpus is a legal Entitlement", a poem in Absence in the Palms of My Hands & Other Poems. New York: Harlem River Press. 1996.
  * A.H. Carpenter. "Habeas Corpus in the Colonies." The American Historical Review. Vol. 8., No. 1 (October 1902), pages 18-27.
  * Louis Fisher. 2003. Nazi Saboteurs on Trial: A Military Tribunal and American Law. University Press of Kansas. ISBN 0-7006-1238-6.
  * Michael Dobbs. 2004. Saboteurs: The Nazi Raid on America. Vintage. ISBN 1-4000-3042-0.
  * Peter Irons. 1999. A People's History of the Supreme Court. Viking. ISBN 0-670-87006-4. Political context for Ex Parte Milligan explained on Pp. 186-189.
  * Helen A. Nutting. "The Most Wholesome Law--The Habeas Corpus Act of 1679." The American Historical Review. Vol. 65., No. 3 (April 1960), pages 527-543.
  * Geoffrey R. Stone. 2004. Perilous Times, Free Speech in Wartime From the Sedition Act to the War on Terrorism. Norton. ISBN 0-393-05880-8.
  * Cary Federman. 2006. The Body and the State: Habeas Corpus and American Jurisprudence. SUNY. ISBN 0-7914-6703-1.
  * Eric M. Freedman. 2001. Habeas Corpus: Rethinking the Great Writ of Liberty (NYU Press) ISBN 0-8147-2717-4
  * Donald E. Wilkes, Jr., The Georgia Death Penalty Habeas Corpus Reform Act of 1995 (1995) & Habeas Corpus: The Great Writ Hit (2006) & Habeas Corpus Uncorpsed (2008) & Habeas Corpus and Baseball (2006).

## [edit] See also

  * Habeas Corpus Restoration Act of 2007
  * Military Commissions Act of 2006
  * Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon
  * Neminem captivabimus
  * Arbitrary arrest and detention
  * Philippine Habeas Corpus Cases
  * Habeas Corpus (play) The Play by the English author Alan Bennett
  * List of legal Latin terms
  * subpoena duces tecum
  * subpoena ad testificandum

## [edit] External links

  * Amnesty International page on Habeas Corpus Restoration Act of 2007
  * Barristermagazine.com
  * Inmatelaw.org
  * LectLaw.com
  * Petition for Habeas Corpus April 16, 1843 From Texas Tides
  * This American Life: 331: Habeas Schmabeas 2007
  * Find Habeas

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Habeas_corpus"

Categories: Constitutional law | Emergency laws | Latin legal phrases |
Liberalism | Prerogative writs | Political philosophy | Philosophy of law |
Human rights | Habeas corpus

Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin language text | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008
| Articles with unsourced statements since September 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Latina
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 21:14.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



