
# United Fruit Company

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Entrance facade of old United Fruit Building on St. Charles Avenue, New
Orleans, Louisiana

The United Fruit Company was a major United States corporation that traded in
vegetables like carrots, potatoes, beans & tropical fruit (primarily bananas
and pineapples) grown in Third World plantations and sold in the United States
and Europe. The company was formed in 1899 from the merger of Minor C. Keith's
banana-trading concerns with Andrew W. Preston's Boston Fruit Company. It
flourished in the early and mid-20th century and came to control vast
territories and transportation networks in Central America, the Caribbean
coast of Colombia, Ecuador, and the West Indies. Though it competed with the
Standard Fruit Company for dominance in the international banana trade, it
maintained a virtual monopoly in certain regions.

The company had a deep and long-lasting impact in the economic and political
development of several Latin American countries. Critics often accused it of
exploitative neocolonialism and described it as the archetypal example of the
influence of a multinational corporation on the internal politics of the so-
called "banana republics" (a term coined by O. Henry). After a period of
financial decline, United Fruit was merged with Eli M. Black's AMK in 1970 to
become the United Brands Company. In 1984, Carl Lindner, Jr. transformed
United Brands into the present-day Chiquita Brands International.

## Contents

  * 1 Corporate history
  * 2 Reputation
  * 3 Ships of United Fruit Company's Great White Fleet
  * 4 History in Central America
  * 5 Banana massacre
  * 6 Footnotes
  * 7 References
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Corporate history

In 1871, U.S. railroad entrepreneur Henry Meiggs signed a contract with the
government of Costa Rica to build a railroad connecting the capital city of
San JosÃ© to the port of LimÃ³n in the Caribbean. Meiggs was assisted in the
project by his young nephew Minor C. Keith, who took over Meiggs's business
concerns in Costa Rica after Meiggs's death in 1877. Because he was looking
for cheap food to give to his workers, Keith had begun planting bananas along
the train route in 1873. Soon after, he learned how successful was the
importation of bananas to the United States, and, once the railroad was
complete, decided to transport the bananas to his natal country. It did not
take him too long to see the success of his idea, but his ambition led him to
take advantage of the workers by paying them extremely low wages. The workers
left when exposed to very low quality conditions. This was not exposed until
years later, when the United Fruit Company took possession of almost all the
lands in Guatemala.

When the Costa Rican government defaulted on its payments in 1882, Keith had
to borrow Â£1.2 million from London banks and from private investors in order
to continue the difficult engineering project. In 1884, the government of
President PrÃ³spero FernÃ¡ndez Oreamuno agreed to give Keith 800,000 acres
(3,200 square kilometers) of tax-free land along the railroad, plus a 99-year
lease on the operation of the train route. The railroad was completed in 1890
but the flow of passengers proved insufficient to finance Keith's debt. On the
other hand, the sale of bananas grown in his lands and transported first by
train to LimÃ³n and then by ship to the United States proved very lucrative.
Keith soon came to dominate the banana trade in Central America and along the
Caribbean coast of Colombia.

In 1899, Keith lost $1.5 million when the New York City broker Hoadley and Co.
went bankrupt. He then traveled to Boston, Massachusetts, where he arranged
the merger of his banana trading concerns with the rival Boston Fruit Company.
Boston Fruit had been established by Lorenzo Dow Baker, a sailor who, in 1870,
had bought his first bananas in Jamaica, and by Andrew W. Preston. The merger
formed the United Fruit Company, based in Boston, with Preston as president
and Keith as vice-president. Preston brought to the partnership his
plantations in the West Indies, a fleet of steamships, and his market in the
U.S. Northeast. Keith brought his plantations and railroads in Central America
and his market in the U.S. South and Southeast. At its founding, United Fruit
was capitalized at $11,230,000.

In 1901, the government of Guatemala hired the United Fruit Company to manage
the country's postal service. By 1930, the Company had absorbed more than 20
rival firms, acquiring a capital of $215,000,000 and becoming the largest
employer in Central America. In 1930, Sam Zemurray (nicknamed "Sam the Banana
Man") sold his Cuyamel Fruit Co. to United Fruit and retired from the fruit
business. In 1933, concerned that the company was mismanaged and that its
market value had plunged, he staged a hostile takeover. Zemurray moved the
company's headquarters to New Orleans, Louisiana, where he was based. United
Fruit went on to prosper under Zemurray's management; Zemurray resigned as
president of the company in 1951.

Corporate raider Eli M. Black bought 733,000 shares of United Fruit in 1968,
becoming the company's largest shareholder. In June 1970, Black merged United
Fruit with his own public company, AMK (owner of meat packer John Morrel), to
create the United Brands Company. United Fruit had far less cash than Black
had counted on and Black's mismanagement led to United Brands becoming
crippled with debt. The company's losses were exacerbated by Hurricane Fifi in
1974, which destroyed many banana plantations in Honduras. On February 3,
1975, Black committed suicide by jumping out of his office on the 44th floor
of the Pan Am Building in New York City. Later that year, the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission exposed a scheme by United Brands to bribe Honduran
President Oswaldo LÃ³pez Arellano with $1.25 million, and the promise of
another $1.25 million upon the reduction of certain export taxes. Trading in
United Brands stock was halted and LÃ³pez was ousted in a military coup.

After Black's suicide, Cincinnati-based American Financial, one of billionaire
Carl H. Lindner, Jr.'s companies, bought into United Brands. In August 1984,
Lindner took control of the company and renamed it Chiquita Brands
International. The headquarters was moved to Cincinnati in 1985.

Throughout most of its history, United Fruit's main competitor was the
Standard Fruit Company, now the Dole Food Company.

## [edit] Reputation

The United Fruit Company was frequently accused of bribing government
officials in exchange for preferential treatment, exploiting its workers,
contributing little by way of taxes to the countries in which it operated, and
working ruthlessly to consolidate monopolies. Latin American journalists
sometimes referred to the company as el pulpo ("the octopus"), and leftist
parties in Central and South America encouraged the Company's workers to
strike. Criticism of the United Fruit Company became a staple of the discourse
of the communist parties in several Latin American countries, where its
activities were often interpreted as illustrating Lenin's theory of capitalist
imperialism. Major Latin American writers sympathetic to more independence
from foreign governments and corporations, such as Carlos Luis Fallas of Costa
Rica, RamÃ³n Amaya Amador of Honduras, Miguel Ãngel Asturias of Guatemala,
Eduardo Galeano of Uruguay, Gabriel GarcÃ­a MÃ¡rquez of Colombia, and Pablo
Neruda of Chile, denounced the Company in their literature.

The business practices of United Fruit were also frequently criticized by
journalists, politicians, and artists in the United States. Little Steven
released a song called "Bitter Fruit" about the company's misdeeds. In 1950,
Gore Vidal published a novel (Dark Green, Bright Red), in which a thinly
fictionalized version of United Fruit supports a military coup in a thinly
fictionalized Guatemala.

## [edit] Ships of United Fruit Company's Great White Fleet

<IMG>

<IMG>

SS Abangarez, a United Fruit Company banana carrier, c. 1945

  * Admiral Dewey , Admiral Schley , Admiral Sampson & Admiral Farragut (1899) U.S. Navy surplus after Spanish-American War \- Each carried 53 passengers & 35000 bunches of bananas.[1]
  * Venus (1903) United Fruit Company's first refrigerated banana reefer ship[1]
  * San Jose, Limon & Esparta (1904) first banana reefers built to United Fruit design - San Jose & Esparta were sunk by U-boats during World War II.[1]
  * Atenas (1909) class of thirteen 5000-ton banana reefers built in Ireland[1]
  * Pastores (1912) 7241-ton cruise liner became USS Pastores (AF-16)[2]
  * Calamares (1913) 7622-ton banana reefer became USS Calamares (AF-18)[2]
  * Toloa (1917) 6494-ton banana reefer[1]
  * Ulua (1917) 6494-ton banana reefer became USS Octans (AF-26)[2]
  * San Benito (1921) 3724-ton banana reefer became USS Taurus (AF-25)[2]
  * Mayari & Choluteca (1921) 3724-ton banana reefers[1]
  * La Playa (1923) banana reefer[1]
  * Telda, Iriona, Castilla & Tela (1927) banana reefers[1]
  * Aztec (1929) banana reefer[1]
  * Platano & Musa (1930) banana reefers[1]
  * Chiriqui (1932) 6963-ton turbo-electric cruise liner became USS Tarazed (AF-13)[2]
  * Jamaica (1932) 6968-ton turbo-electric cruise liner became USS Ariel (AF-22)[2]
  * Veraqua (1932) 6982-ton turbo-electric cruise liner became USS Merak (AF-21)[2]
  * Talamanca (1932) 6963-ton turbo-electric cruise liner became USS Talamanca (AF-15)[2]
  * Quiriqua (1932) 6982-ton turbo-electric cruise liner became USS Mizar (AF-12)[2]
  * Antigua (1932) Turbo-electric cruise liner providing 2-week cruises of Cuba, Jamaica, Colombia, Honduras and the Panama Canal Zone.[1]
  * Oratava (1936) banana reefer[1]
  * Comayagua, Junior, Metapan, Yaque & Fra Berlanga (1946) banana reefers[1]
  * Manaqui (1946) bulk sugar ship[1]

## [edit] History in Central America

The United Fruit Company (UFCO) owned vast tracts of land in the Caribbean
lowlands. It also dominated regional transportation networks through its
International Railways of Central America and its Great White Fleet of
steamships. In addition, UFCO branched out in 1913 by creating the Tropical
Radio and Telegraph Company. One of the company's primary tactics for
maintaining market dominance was to control the distribution of banana lands.
UFCO claimed that hurricanes, blight and other natural threats required them
to hold extra land or reserve land. In practice, what this meant was that UFCO
was able to prevent the government from distributing banana lands to peasants
who wanted a share of the banana trade. The fact that the UFCO relied so
heavily on manipulation of land use rights in order to maintain their market
dominance had a number of long-term consequences for the region. For the
company to maintain its unequal land holdings it often required government
concessions. And this in turn meant that the company had to be politically
involved in the region even though it was an American company. In fact, the
heavy-handed involvement of the company in governments which often were or
became corrupt created the term "Banana republic" representing a "servile
dictatorship".[3]

UFCO had a mixed record on promoting the development of the nations in which
it operated. In Central America, the Company built extensive railroads and
ports and provided employment and transportation. UFCO also created numerous
schools for the people who lived and worked on Company land. On the other
hand, it allowed vast tracts of land under its ownership to remain
uncultivated and, in Guatemala and elsewhere, it discouraged the government
from building highways, which would lessen the profitable transportation
monopoly of the railroads under its control.

In 1954, the democratically elected Guatemalan government of Colonel Jacobo
Arbenz GuzmÃ¡n was toppled by U.S.- backed forces lead by Colonel Carlos
Castillo Armas[4] who invaded from Honduras. Assigned by the Eisenhower
administration, this Arbenz governmentâs military opposition was armed,
trained and organized by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency[5] (see
Operation PBSUCCESS). The directors of United Fruit Company (UFCO) had lobbied
to convince the Truman and Eisenhower administrations that Colonel Arbenz
intended to align Guatemala with the Soviet Bloc. Besides the disputed issue
of Arbenz's allegiance to Communism, UFCO was being threatened by the Arbenz
governmentâs agrarian reform legislation and new Labor Code.[6] UFCO was the
largest Guatemalan landowner and employer, and the Arbenz governmentâs land
reform included the expropriation of 40% of UFCO land.[7] U.S. officials had
little proof to back their claims of a growing communist threat in
Guatemala[8], however the relationship between the Eisenhower administration
and UFCO demonstrated the influence of corporate interest on U.S. foreign
policy.[9] The American Secretary of State John Foster Dulles was an avowed
opponent of Communism whose law firm of Sullivan and Cromwell[10] had
represented United Fruit. His brother Allen Dulles was the director of the
CIA. The brother of the Assistant Secretary of State for InterAmerican Affairs
John Moors Cabot had once been president of United Fruit. Ed Whitman who was
United Fruitâs principal lobbyist was married to President Eisenhower's
personal secretary, Ann C. Whitman.[11] Many individuals who directly
influenced U.S. policy towards Guatemala in the 1950s also had direct ties to
UFCO.[12] The overthrow of Arbenz, however, failed to benefit the Company. Its
stock market value declined along with its profit margin. The Eisenhower
administration proceeded with antitrust action against the company, which
forced it to divest in 1958. In 1972, the company sold off the last of their
Guatemalan holdings after over a decade of decline.

Company holdings in Cuba, which included sugar mills in the Oriente region of
the island, were expropriated by the 1959 revolutionary government led by
Fidel Castro. By April 1960 Castro was accusing the company of aiding Cuban
exiles and supporters of former leader Fulgencio Batista in initiating a
seaborn invasion of Cuba directed from the United States.[13] Castro warned
the U.S. that "Cuba is not another Guatemala" in one of many combative
diplomatic exchanges before the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961. Despite
significant economic pressure on Cuba, the company was unable to recoup cost
and compensation from the Cuban government.[13]

## [edit] Banana massacre

See also: Banana massacre

One of the most notorious strikes by United Fruit workers broke out on 12
November 1928 on the Caribbean coast of Colombia, near Santa Marta. Historical
estimates place the number of strikers somewhere between 11,000 and 30,000. On
6 December, Colombian Army troops under the command of General CortÃ©s Vargas
opened fire on a crowd of strikers gathered in the central square of the town
of CiÃ©naga. The military justified this action by claiming that the strike
was subversive and its organizers were Communist revolutionaries. Congressman
Jorge EliÃ©cer GaitÃ¡n claimed that the army had acted under instructions from
the United Fruit Company. The ensuing scandal contributed to President Miguel
AbadÃ­a MÃ©ndez's Conservative Party being voted out of office in 1930,
putting an end to 44 years of Conservative rule in Colombia. The first novel
of Ãlvaro Cepeda Samudio, La Casa Grande, focuses on this event, and the
author himself grew up in close proximity to the incident. The climax of
GarcÃ­a MÃ¡rquez's novel One Hundred Years of Solitude is based on the events
in CiÃ©naga, though the author himself has acknowledged that the death toll of
3,000 that he gives there is greatly inflated.[14]

General CortÃ©s Vargas, who issued the order to shoot, argued later that he
had issued the order because he had information that U.S. boats were poised to
land troops on Colombian coasts to defend American personnel and the interests
of the United Fruit Company. Vargas issued the order so the US would not
invade Colombia. This position was strongly criticized in the Senate,
especially by Jorge EliÃ©cer GaitÃ¡n, who argued that those same bullets
should have been used to stop the foreign invader.[citation needed]

The telegram from BogotÃ¡ Embassy to the U.S. Secretary of State, dated
December 5, 1928, stated: âI have been following Santa Marta fruit strike
through United Fruit Company representative here; also through Minister of
Foreign Affairs who on Saturday told me government would send additional
troops and would arrest all strike leaders and transport them to prison at
Cartagena; that government would give adequate protection to American
interests involved.â[15]

The telegram from BogotÃ¡ Embassy to Secretary of State, date December 7,
1928, stated: âSituation outside Santa Marta City unquestionably very
serious: outside zone is in revolt; military who have orders "not to spare
ammunition" have already killed and wounded about fifty strikers. Government
now talks of general offensive against strikers as soon as all troopships now
on the way arrive early next week.â[16]

The Dispatch from US BogotÃ¡ Embassy to the US Secretary of State, dated
December 29, 1928, stated: âI have the honor to report that the legal
advisor of the United Fruit Company here in BogotÃ¡ stated yesterday that the
total number of strikers killed by the Colombian military authorities during
the recent disturbance reached between five and six hundred; while the number
of soldiers killed was one.â[17]

The Dispatch from US BogotÃ¡ Embassy to the US Secretary of State, dated
January 16, 1929, stated: âI have the honor to report that the BogotÃ¡
representative of the United Fruit Company told me yesterday that the total
number of strikers killed by the Colombian military exceeded one
thousand.â[18]

Guerrilla movements in Colombia like the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia have argued that the development of communism in Colombia was
triggered in part by events like these, which it calls "state terrorism". The
Banana massacre is said to be one of the main events that preceded the
Bogotazo, the subsequent era of violence known as La Violencia, and the
guerrillas who developed during the bipartisan National Front period, creating
the ongoing armed conflict in Colombia.[citation needed]

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Carl, Robert, CAPT USNR "The Banana Navy" United States Naval Institute Proceedings December 1976 pp. 50-56
  2. ^ a b c d e f g h i Silverstone, Paul H., U. S. Warships of World War II Doubleday and Company (1968) p.329
  3. ^ Big-business greed killing the banana \- Independent, via The New Zealand Herald, Saturday 24 May 2008, Page A19
  4. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 343. Harvard University Press, 1998.
  5. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 340. Harvard University Press, 1998.
  6. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 337. Harvard University Press, 1998.
  7. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 337 Harvard University Press, 1998.
  8. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 342. Harvard University Press, 1998.
  9. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 340. Harvard University Press, 1998.
  10. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 338. Harvard University Press, 1998.
  11. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 338. Harvard University Press, 1998.
  12. ^ Shoultz, Lars: "Beneath the United States", page 337. Harvard University Press, 1998.
  13. ^ a b Thomas, Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom, 867
  14. ^ Bucheli, Bananas and Business: The United Fruit Company in Colombia, 1899-2000, 132
  15. ^ Telegram from BogotÃ¡ Embassy to the U.S. Secretary of State, dated December 5, 1928
  16. ^ Telegram from BogotÃ¡ Embassy to Secretary of State, date December 7, 1928
  17. ^ Dispatch from US BogotÃ¡ Embassy to the US Secretary of State, dated December 29, 1928
  18. ^ Dispatch from US BogotÃ¡ Embassy to the US Secretary of State, dated January 16, 1929

## [edit] References

  * Bucheli, Marcelo (2005). Bananas and Business: The United Fruit Company in Colombia: 1899-2000. New York: New York University Press. http://books.google.com/books?id=kUfnWhn6H7gC.
  * Stanley, Diane K. (1994). For the Record: The United Fruit Company's Sixty-six Years in Guatemala. Guatemala City: Editorial Antigua. ISBN 99922-722-0-1.
  * Thomas, Hugh (1971). Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom. New York: Harper & Row.

## [edit] See also

  * Chiquita Brands International
  * One Hundred Years of Solitude

## [edit] Further reading

  * Bucheli, Marcelo (2005). Bananas and Business: The United Fruit Company in Colombia: 1899-2000. New York: New York University Press. http://books.google.com/books?id=kUfnWhn6H7gC.

  * Bucheli, Marcelo (July 2008). "Multinational Corporations, Totalitarian Regimes, and Economic Nationalism: United Fruit Company in Central America, 1899-1975". Business History 50 (4): 433â454. doi:10.1080/00076790802106315.

  * Bucheli, Marcelo (November 2005). "Banana Wars Maneuvers". Harvard Business Review 83 (11): 22â24. http://harvardbusinessonline.hbsp.harvard.edu/b02/en/common/item_detail.jhtml?id=F0511E&referral=2340.
  * Bucheli, Marcelo; Geoffrey Jones (2005). "The Octopus and the Generals: The United Fruit Company in Guatemala". Harvard Business School Case (9-805-146). http://harvardbusinessonline.hbsp.harvard.edu/b01/en/common/item_detail.jhtml?id=805146.
  * Bucheli, Marcelo (Summer 2004). "Enforcing Business Contracts in South America: The United Fruit Company and the Colombian Banana Planters in the Twentieth-Century". Business History Review 78 (2): 181â212. http://www.hbs.edu/bhr/archives/vol78/vol78-2004summer.html.
  * Bucheli, Marcelo, "The United Fruit Company in Latin America: Business Strategies in a Changing Environment", in Jones, Geoffrey; Wadhwani, R. Daniel, Entrepreneurship and Global Capitalism, 2, Cheltenham (UK): Edward Elgar, 2006, pp. 342â383, http://www.e-elgar.co.uk/Bookentry_contents.lasso?id=3844 .
  * Bucheli, Marcelo; Read, Ian, "Banana Boats and Baby Food: The Banana in U.S. History", in Topik, Steven; Marichal, Carlos; Frank, Zephyr, From Silver to Cocaine: Latin American Commodity Chains and the Building of the World Economy, 1500-2000, Durham: Duke University Press, 2006, http://books.google.com/books?id=mnvBYQqpJbQC&dq=from+silver+to+cocaine&source=gbs_summary_s&cad=0 .
  * Bucheli, Marcelo, "United Fruit Company in Latin America", in Moberg, Mark; Striffler, Steve, Banana Wars: Power, Production, and History in the Americas, Durham: Duke University Press, 2003, http://books.google.com/books?id=Fv2VH9LGQqoC&dq=banana+wars&source=gbs_summary_s&cad=0 .
  * Bucheli, Marcelo, "United Fruit Company", in Geisst, Charles, Encyclopedia of American Business History, London: Facts on File, 2005, http://books.google.com/books?id=KfuAGwAACAAJ&dq=charles+geisst+encyclopedia .
  * Bucheli, Marcelo, "United Fruit Company", in McCusker, John, History of World Trade Since 1450, New York: Macmillan, 2004, http://books.google.com/books?id=49T1AQAACAAJ&dq=john+mccusker .

  * Cepeda Samudio, Ãlvaro (1962). La Casa Grande.
  * Chapman, Peter (2007). Jungle Capitalists. Canongate.
  * Chapman, Peter (2007). Bananas: How the United Fruit Company Shaped the World. Canongate Books Ltd..
  * Chomsky, Aviva. West Indian Workers and the United Fruit Company in Costa Rica, 1870-1940. Louisiana State University Press.

  * Fallas, Carlos Luis (1940). Mamita Yunai.

  * McCann, Thomas P (1987). On the Inside. Beverly, Massachusetts: Quinlan Press. Revised edition of An American Company (1976).
  * McWhirter, Cameron; Michael Gallagher (May 3 1998). "How 'el pulpo' became Chiquita Banana". The Cincinnati Enquirer.
  * Neruda, Pablo. Canto General. "La United Fruit Co."
  * Schlesinger, Stephen; Kinzer, Stephen (1982). Bitter Fruit: The Untold Story of the American Coup in Guatemala.
  * Striffler, Steve (2002). In the Shadows of State and Capital: The United Fruit Company, Popular Struggle, and Agrarian Restructuring in Ecuador, 1900-1995. Durham, N.C.; London: Duke Univ. Press.
  * Vandermeer, John; Perfecto, Ivette (2005). Breakfast of Biodiversity. Oakland, California: Institute of Food an Development Poliy. ISBN 0-935038-96-X.

## [edit] External links

  * United Fruit Historical Society Chronology of United Fruit by Marcelo Bucheli and Ian Read
  * "Our Complex History", from the Chiquita Brands International 2000 Corporate Responsibility Report
  * Banana Republic: The United Fruit Company
  * Financial Times Article on United Fruit's legacy in Latin America: "Rotten Fruit"
  * Bibliography on United Fruit extensive biography from the United Fruit Historical Society, Inc.
  * Documentary Propaganda on United Fruit

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Fruit_Company"

Categories: Defunct agriculture companies of the United States | History of
Honduras | History of Guatemala | History of Colombia | History of Panama |
History of Costa Rica | Companies established in 1899 | Banana Wars

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 17:10.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



