
# President of the United States

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008)  
For other uses, see President of the United States (disambiguation).

President of the  
United States of America  
  
<IMG>  
Official seal  
<IMG>

Incumbent  
Barack Obama  
since January 20, 2009  
Residence White House  
Term length Four years, renewable once  
Inaugural holder George Washington  
April 30, 1789  
Formation U.S. Constitution  
March 4, 1789  
Website whitehouse.gov/president  
The President of the United States is the head of state and head of government
of the United States and is the highest political official in the United
States by influence and recognition. The President leads the executive branch
of the federal government and is one of only two elected members of the
executive branch (the other being the Vice President of the United States).[1]

Among other powers and responsibilities, Article II of the U.S. Constitution
charges the President to "faithfully execute" federal law, makes the President
commander-in-chief of the armed forces, allows the President to nominate
executive and judicial officers with the advice and consent of the Senate, and
allows the President to grant pardons or reprieves.

The President is elected by the people indirectly through the Electoral
College to a four-year term, with a limit of two terms imposed by the Twenty-
second Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1951. Under this system,
each state is allocated a number of electoral votes equal to the size of the
state's combined delegation in both houses of the Congress. The District of
Columbia is also granted electoral votes, per the Twenty-third Amendment to
the Constitution. Voters in nearly all states choose, through a plurality
voting system, a Presidential candidate who receives all of that state's
electoral votes. An absolute majority of electoral votes is needed to become
President; if no candidate receives a majority, the choice is given to the
House of Representatives, which votes by state delegation.

Since the adoption of the Constitution, forty-three individuals have been
elected or succeeded to the office of President, serving a total of fifty-six
four-year terms. Grover Cleveland served two non-consecutive terms and is
counted as both the 22nd and the 24th President.[2] Because of this, all
presidents after the 23rd have their official listing increased by one. As of
January 20, 2009, Barack Obama is the forty-fourth President. The president's
annual salary is $400,000.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 Origin
  * 2 Qualification, disqualification and common practice
    * 2.1 Religious affiliations
  * 3 Election
    * 3.1 History
    * 3.2 Campaign
    * 3.3 Electoral College
    * 3.4 Rationale
  * 4 Oath of office
  * 5 Term of office and the Twenty-second Amendment
  * 6 Vacancies and disabilities
  * 7 Powers and duties
  * 8 Models of Presidential Power
  * 9 Privileges of office
    * 9.1 Salary
    * 9.2 Secret Service
    * 9.3 Presidential libraries
  * 10 After the presidency
  * 11 See also
  * 12 References
  * 13 Further reading
  * 14 External links
    * 14.1 Official
    * 14.2 Presidential histories
    * 14.3 Miscellaneous

  
## Origin

United States  
<IMG>  

This article is part of the series:  
Politics and government of  
the United States  
* * *  
Federal government

  * Constitution
  * Taxation

Legislature

  * Congress
    * House
      * Speaker
      * Party Leaders
      * Congressional districts
    * Senate
      * President pro tempore
      * Party Leaders

Presidency

  * President
  * Vice President
  * Cabinet
  * Federal agencies

Judiciary

  * Federal courts
    * Supreme Court
    * Circuit Courts of Appeal
    * District Courts

Elections

  * Presidential elections
  * Midterm elections

Political Parties

  * Democratic
  * Republican
  * Third parties

Subdivisions

  * State government
    * Governors
    * Legislatures (List)
    * State Courts
  * Local Government

  
* * *
Other countries Â· Atlas  
US Government Portal  

view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The Standard of the President of the United States

The Treaty of Paris in 1783 left the United States independent and at peace
but with an unsettled governmental structure. The Second Continental Congress
had drawn up Articles of Confederation in 1777, describing a permanent
confederation, but granting to the Congressâthe only federal
institutionâlittle power to finance itself or to ensure that its resolutions
were enforced. In part, this reflected the anti-monarchy view of the
Revolutionary period, and the new American system was explicitly designed to
prevent the rise of an American tyrant to replace the British King.

However, during the economic depression due to the collapse of the continental
dollar following the American Revolution, the viability of the American
government was threatened by political unrest in several states, efforts by
debtors to use popular government to erase their debts, and the apparent
inability of the Continental Congress to redeem the public obligations
incurred during the war. The Congress also appeared unable to become a forum
for productive cooperation among the States encouraging commerce and economic
development. In response a Constitutional Convention was convened, ostensibly
to reform the Articles of Confederation, but that subsequently began to draft
a new system of government that would include greater executive power while
retaining the checks and balances thought to be essential restraints on any
imperial tendency in the office of the President.

Individuals who presided over the Continental Congress during the
Revolutionary period and under the Articles of Confederation had the title
"President of the United States in Congress Assembled," often shortened to
"President of the United States". The office had little distinct executive
power. With the 1788 ratification of the Constitution, a separate executive
branch was created, headed by the President of the United States.

The President's executive authority under the Constitution, tempered by the
checks and balances of the judicial and legislative branches of the federal
government, was designed to solve several political problems faced by the
young nation and to anticipate future challenges, while still preventing the
rise of an autocrat over a nation wary of royal authority.

The official Presidential anthem is "Hail to the Chief," preceded by "Ruffles
and Flourishes" and is primarily played to announce the arrival of the
president at state functions.[4]

## Qualification, disqualification and common practice

Article II, Section 1, Clause 5 of the Constitution sets the principal
qualifications to be eligible for election as President. A Presidential
candidate must:

  * be a natural born citizen of the United States;
  * be at least thirty-five years old;
  * have been a permanent resident in the United States for at least fourteen years.

<IMG>

<IMG>

George Washington, the first President of the United States of America

Additionally, the Constitution disqualifies some people from the Presidency.
Under Article I, Section 3, Clause 7, the Senate has the option, upon
conviction, of disqualifying impeached individuals from holding other federal
offices, including the Presidency.[5] Under the Twenty-second Amendment, no
one can be elected President more than twice. The Twenty-second Amendment also
specifies that anyone who serves more than two years as President or Acting
President, of a term for which someone else was elected President, can only be
elected President once. Scholars disagree whether a person no longer eligible
to be elected President could be elected Vice President, pursuant to the
qualifications set out under the Twelfth Amendment.[6]

Foreign-born Americans at the time the Constitution was adopted were also
eligible to become President, provided they met the age and residency
requirements.

The United States government was non-partisan before 1792, so the Constitution
says nothing about political parties. From 1796 to the Civil War, it was
common for political parties to fracture and put forward more than one
candidate. The classic example is the 1824 election, in which political
parties officially played no role because all of the candidates were from the
same party. This also was the only election in which the recipient of the most
Electoral College votes (Andrew Jackson) did not become President (as he did
not have a majority). The election was then decided by the House of
Representatives, which elected John Quincy Adams instead.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Abraham Lincoln, the 16th and first Republican President of the United States
of America

The Civil War showed how dangerous political fracture could be for the nation,
with the result that the two largest parties at the time â Democratic and
Republican â remade themselves into broad coalitions of liberals and
conservatives. Consequently, all Presidents since the Civil War have been
nominees of one of these two major political parties.

Finally, while they are not in any way requirements:

  * Of the forty-three[7] persons to have been President, thirty-one had prior military service; of those thirty-one, all but oneâJames Buchananâserved as an officer.
  * Every President has had prior experience as a Representative, Senator, Cabinet Secretary, Governor, General in the United States Army or as Vice President of the United States.

Although the Presidency entails numerous foreign obligations and policy
issues, many Presidents have had limited or no understanding of a language
other than English. Early 19th century Presidents such as John Adams, Thomas
Jefferson, James Monroe and John Quincy Adams were fluent in French, the
diplomatic language of the time (John Quincy Adams spoke Dutch and German as
well). However, since the 1840 defeat of Martin Van Buren (whose first
language was actually Dutch), few Presidents have had the ability to speak a
second language fluently; one notable exception, Theodore Roosevelt, spoke
French and German. Written Latin and Greek were once commonly known to
Presidents as hallmarks of a classical education, but their influence has
declined over time.

### Religious affiliations

Main article: Religious affiliations of United States Presidents

The religious affiliations and beliefs of United States Presidents have been
subject to considerable speculation and controversy. Most Presidents have been
Trinitarian Christians; of these, all but one have been Protestant: John F.
Kennedy has been the only Catholic President. More than one quarter of
Presidents have been affiliated with the Episcopal Church, the most common
denomination for U.S. Presidents.

The list of Presidents has included four Unitarians (John Adams, John Quincy
Adams, Millard Fillmore and William Howard Taft) and two Quakers (Herbert
Hoover and Richard Nixon). Dwight D. Eisenhower was raised in a household of
Jehovah's Witnesses and was baptized Presbyterian twelve days after his
inauguration as President in 1953.

## Election

<IMG>

<IMG>

A map of the United States showing the number of electoral votes allocated to
each state; 270 electoral votes are required for a majority out of 538 overall

Main article: United States presidential election

Unlike most other countries using the presidential system, Presidents are
elected indirectly in the United States. A number of electors, collectively
known as the Electoral College, officially select the President. Each state is
allocated a number of electors, equal to the size of its delegation in both
Houses of Congress combined. Additionally, the Twenty-third Amendment grants
electors to the District of Columbia as if it were a state, with the
restriction that it may not have more representation than the least populated
state. Electoral apportionment is adjusted every ten years, in alignment with
the census. State legislatures are constitutionally empowered to appoint
electors; however, all of the fifty states have established their popular
selection.

### History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mount Rushmore depicting the faces of presidents George Washington, Thomas
Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt and Abraham Lincoln.

Article II, Section 1, Clause 3 of the Constitution established the original
method used by which the Electoral College elected the President. Each elector
cast two votes for President. Originally, both votes were to be for people
that elector would like to be the President; in 1796 and 1800, each elector
voted for his party's presidential and vice presidential candidates. The
candidate with the highest number of votes would become the President, with
the second-place candidate becoming the Vice President.

However, the 1796 and 1800 elections highlighted flaws in the electoral system
in use at the time. In particular, the tie in the electoral vote which
resulted from the lack of separation between Presidential and Vice
Presidential votes in the latter election was an issue. The Democratic-
Republican Party's candidates, who won the election, were tied with each
other, and as a result, the election was thrown to the House of
Representatives in the outgoing Federalist Party-controlled 6th Congress.
Federalist Representatives attempted to elect Aaron Burr, the Democratic-
Republican vice presidential candidate, over Thomas Jefferson, the
Presidential candidate. Jefferson eventually won after Alexander Hamilton
managed to swing Delaware's state delegation's vote to him. As a result, the
Congress proposed the Twelfth Amendment in 1803 and it was ratified in 1804.
This amendment provides the current method by which the Electoral College
elects the President and Vice President.

Since the adoption of the Constitution, there have been forty-three
individuals sworn into office as President, including those who succeeded to
the office of President, serving fifty-five four-year terms altogether. Grover
Cleveland served two non-consecutive terms and is officially counted as both
the 22nd and the 24th President. Because of this, all Presidents after the
23rd have their official listing increased by one; i.e., sitting President
Barack Obama is the forty-fourth president of the United States, but the
forty-third person to hold the office.

The White House in Washington, D.C. serves as the official place of residence
for the President; he is entitled to use its staff and facilities, including
medical care, recreation, housekeeping, and security services. One of two
Boeing VC-25 aircraft, which are extensively modified versions of Boeing
747-200B airliners, serve as long distance travel for the President, and are
referred to as Air Force One while the president is on board.[8] A salary of
$400,000, along with other benefits, is paid to the President annually.[9]

After World War II, the United States' status as a superpower transformed the
President into one of the world's most well-known and influential public
figures. The appellation "Leader of the Free World", frequently used in
reference to Presidents since the Cold War, symbolizes the President's
elevated role in world affairs.

### Campaign

Main articles: United States presidential primary, United States presidential
nominating convention, and United States presidential election debates

The modern Presidential campaign begins before the primary elections, which
the two major political parties use to clear the field of candidates in
advance of their national nominating conventions, where the most successful
candidate is made the party's nominee for President. The party's Presidential
candidate chooses a Vice Presidential nominee and this choice is rubber-
stamped by the convention. In addition, the party establishes a platform on
which to base its campaign. Although nominating conventions have a long
history in the United States, their substantive importance in the political
process has greatly diminished; however, they remain important as a way of
energizing the parties for the general election and focusing public attention
on the nominees.[citation needed]

Nominees participate in nationally televised debates, and while the debates
are usually restricted to the Democratic and Republican nominees, third party
candidates may be invited, such as Ross Perot in the 1992 debates. Nominees
campaign across the country to explain their views, convince voters and
solicit contributions. Much of the modern electoral process is concerned with
winning swing states through frequent visits and mass media advertising
drives.

### Electoral College

Main article: Electoral College (United States)

Voters in each of the states elect the President on Election Day, set by law
as the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, once every four
years. Each state holds a number of electoral votes that correspond to
electors in the Electoral College. Tickets of presidential and vice
presidential candidates are shown on the ballot; each vote for a ticket
actually corresponds to a vote for a slate of electors chosen by that
ticketâs political party. In most states, the ticket that wins the most
votes in a state wins all of that state's electoral votes and thus has its
slate of electors chosen to vote in the Electoral College. Maine and Nebraska
do not use this method, opting instead to give two electoral votes to the
statewide winner and one electoral vote to the winner of each Congressional
district. Neither state had split electoral votes between candidates as a
result of this system in modern elections until 2008, when Barack Obama
received one electoral vote by winning Nebraska's 2nd congressional district.
In any case, the winning slate of electors meet at its state's capital on the
first Monday after the second Wednesday in December, a few weeks after the
election, to vote and sends a vote count to Congress.

The President is elected by the people indirectly through the Electoral
College to a four-year term, with a limit of two terms imposed by the Twenty-
second Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1951. Under this system,
each state is allocated a number of electoral votes equal to the size of the
state's combined delegation in both houses of the Congress. The District of
Columbia is also granted electoral votes, per the Twenty-third Amendment to
the Constitution. Voters in nearly all states choose, through a plurality
voting system, a presidential candidate who receives all of that state's
electoral votes. An absolute majority of electoral votes is needed to become
President; if no candidate receives a majority, the choice is given to the
House of Representatives, which votes by state delegation.

The vote count is opened by the sitting Vice President, acting in his capacity
as President of the Senate and read aloud to a joint session of the incoming
Congress, which was elected at the same time as the President. Members of
Congress can object to any state's vote count, provided that the objection is
supported by at least one member of each house of Congress. A successful
objection will be followed by debate; however, objections to the electoral
vote count are rarely raised.

In the event that no candidate receives a majority of the electoral vote, the
House of Representatives chooses the President from among the top three
contenders. However, the House does not vote normally; instead, each state
delegation is given only one vote, marginalizing the importance of more
populous states. The Vice President is chosen through normal voting in the
Senate, where each state delegation is already of equal size.

### Rationale

When the Constitution was written, the framers disagreed on the selection of
the President: some favored national popular vote, while others wanted
Congress to choose the President. The Electoral College was created as a
compromise between the two proposals. It gave rural areas and smaller states a
slightly larger role in determining the outcome of the election and it
continues to do so today; for example, the largest state by population,
California, only has about one electoral vote for every 660,000 residents,
while the smallest, Wyoming, has an electoral vote for about every 170,000.

Today, most of the electoral process after the popular vote is a formality in
the public eye, as the choice of electors normally determines the result of
the election (however see faithless elector). However, the Constitution was
written in a time when voters at large had little knowledge of candidates
outside their state. As a result, the amendment accommodated this; the
electors that voters had chosen were supposed to learn about the other
candidates and make an informed decision that represented the wishes of their
constituents. Modern communication has rendered this unnecessary and, as a
result, voters now choose between electors who are already pledged to a
Presidential candidate.

## Oath of office

Further information: Oath of office of the President of the United Statesâ

<IMG>

<IMG>

From left: 41st President George H. W. Bush, 44th President Barack Obama, 43rd
President George W. Bush, 42nd President Bill Clinton and 39th President Jimmy
Carter.

Pursuant to the Twentieth Amendment, the President's term of office begins at
noon on January 20 of the year following the election. This date, known as
Inauguration Day, marks the beginning of the four-year terms of both the
President and Vice President. Before executing the powers of the office, the
President is constitutionally required to take the presidential oath:

â I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office
of President of the United States, and will to the best of my Ability,
preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.[10] â  
Although not required, Presidents have traditionally used a Bible to take oath
of office (some exceptions: Franklin Pierce in 1853, Chester A. Arthur in
1881, and Theodore Roosevelt in 1901 did not use a Bible, while Lyndon B.
Johnson in 1963 used a Roman Catholic missal, because there were no Bibles
aboard Air Force One). George Washington began this practice, borrowing a
Bible from St. John's Lodge No. 1.

In addition, no law requires that the oath of office be administered by any
specific person; however, Presidents are traditionally sworn in by the Chief
Justice of the United States. Washington was sworn in by Chancellor of New
York Robert Livingston, there being no federal judges before Washington took
office. The oath of office was administered upon John Tyler, Millard Fillmore,
Chester A. Arthur, Theodore Roosevelt, and Lyndon B. Johnson by lesser-
capacity judges and Calvin Coolidge was sworn by his father, a notary public.

Another tradition is to finish the oath of office with the words "So help me
God." It is commonly believed that George Washington began this practice at
his first inauguration, though evidence for this is circumstantial at best.
While this phrase is not part of the oath, many presidents have said it
immediately after the oath.

## Term of office and the Twenty-second Amendment

The term of office for President and Vice President is four years. George
Washington, the first president, set an unofficial term limit of two terms, a
precedent that subsequent presidents followed until 1940. Before Franklin D.
Roosevelt, several presidents had unsuccessfully campaigned for a third term.
However, Roosevelt was elected four times, but died shortly after beginning
his fourth term. In response, the Twenty-second Amendment was ratified,
barring anyone from being elected president more than twice, or once if that
person served more than half of another president's term. Harry S. Truman, who
was President at the time of the amendment's ratification, and by the
amendment's provisions exempt from its limitation, also briefly sought a third
term before withdrawing from the 1952 election.

Since the amendment's ratification, four presidents have served two full
terms: Dwight D. Eisenhower, Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton and George W. Bush.
Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush sought a second term, but were defeated.
Richard Nixon was elected to a second term, but resigned before completing it.
Lyndon B. Johnson was the only president under the amendment to be eligible to
serve more than two terms in total, having served for only fourteen months
following John F. Kennedy's assassination. However, he chose not to run in the
1968 election.

Gerald Ford sought a full term after serving out the last two years and five
months of Nixon's second term, but was not elected. He therefore became the
fifth person to have served as President, but never been elected President. In
addition, because Ford was not elected as Vice President (he became Vice
President via Section 2 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment), Ford is also the only
person to have served as President and Vice President, but never have been
elected to either office.

## Vacancies and disabilities

See also: Impeachment in the United States and United States presidential line
of succession

<IMG>

<IMG>

Presidents Gerald Ford, Richard Nixon, George H. W. Bush, Ronald Reagan and
Jimmy Carter dedicate the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in 1991.

Vacancies in the office of President may arise because of death, resignation
or removal from office. Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution allows the
House of Representatives to impeach high federal officials, including the
President, for "treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors."
Article I, Section 3, Clause 6 gives the Senate the power to remove impeached
officials from office, given a two-thirds vote to convict. Two Presidents have
thus far been impeached by the House, Andrew Johnson in 1868 and Bill Clinton
in 1998. Neither was subsequently convicted by the Senate; however, Johnson
was acquitted by just one vote.

Under Section 3 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment, the President may transfer the
presidential powers and duties to the Vice President, who then becomes Acting
President, by transmitting a statement to the Speaker of the House and the
President pro tempore of the Senate stating the reasons for the transfer. The
President resumes the discharge of the presidential powers and duties when he
transmits, to those two officials, a written declaration stating that
resumption.

Under Section 4 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment, the Vice President and a
majority of the Cabinet may transfer the presidential powers and duties from
the President to the Vice President once they transmit to the Speaker of the
House and the President pro tempore of the Senate a statement declaring the
President's incapacity to discharge the presidential powers and duties. If
this occurs, then the Vice President will assume the presidential powers and
duties as Acting President; however, the President can declare that no such
inability exists and resume the discharge of the presidential powers and
duties. If the Vice President and Cabinet contest this claim, it is up to
Congress, which must meet within two days if not already in session, to decide
the merit of the claim.

The United States Constitution mentions the resignation of the President but
does not regulate the form of such a resignation or the conditions for its
validity. By Act of Congress, the only valid evidence of the President's
decision to resign is a written instrument declaring the resignation signed by
the President and delivered to the office of the Secretary of State.[11] The
only President to resign was Richard Nixon on August 9, 1974; he was facing
likely impeachment in the midst of the Watergate scandal. Just before his
resignation, the House Judiciary Committee had reported favorably on articles
of impeachment against him.

The Constitution states that the Vice President is to be the President's
successor in the case of a vacancy. If the offices of President and Vice
President both are either vacant or have a disabled holder of that office, the
next officer in the Presidential line of succession, the Speaker of the House,
becomes Acting President. The line extends to the President pro tempore of the
Senate after the Speaker, followed by every member of the Cabinet in a set
order.

## Powers and duties

<IMG>

<IMG>

President George W. Bush delivering the 2007 State of the Union Address, with
Vice President Dick Cheney and Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi behind him.

Main article: Powers of the President of the United States

The President is the chief executive of the United States, putting him at the
head of the executive branch of the government, whose responsibility is to
"take care that the laws be faithfully executed." To carry out this duty, he
is given control of the four million employees of the federal executive
branch, including one million active duty personnel in the military. Both the
legislative and judicial branches maintain checks and balances on the powers
of the President and vice versa.

Various executive and judicial branch appointments are made by Presidents. Up
to 6,000 appointments may be made by an incoming President before he takes
office and 8,000 more may be made while in office. Ambassadors, judges of the
federal court system, members of the Cabinet, and other federal officers, are
all appointed by the President with the "advice and consent" of the Senate,
granted by a simple majority. Appointments made while the Senate is in recess
are temporary and expire at the end of the next session of the Senate. He may
also grant pardons and reprieves, as is often done just before the end of a
presidential term.

In addition, while the President cannot directly introduce legislation, he can
play an important role in shaping it, especially if the President's political
party has a majority in one or both houses of Congress. While members of the
executive branch are prohibited from simultaneously holding seats in Congress,
they often write legislation and allow a member of Congress to introduce it
for them. The President can further influence the legislative branch through
the annual constitutionally-mandated report to Congress, which may be written
or oral but in modern times is the State of the Union Address, which often
outlines the President's legislative proposals for the coming year. If
Congress passes a bill of which the President disapproves, he may veto it; the
veto can be overridden only by two-thirds of both houses of Congress, making
it substantially more difficult to enact the law.

Perhaps the most important of all presidential powers is command of the armed
forces as commander-in-chief. The framers of the Constitution took care to
limit the President's powers regarding the military; Alexander Hamilton
explains this in Federalist No. 69:

â The President is to be commander-in-chief of the army and navy of the
United States. [...] It would amount to nothing more than the supreme command
and direction of the military and naval forces [...] while that [the power] of
the British king extends to the DECLARING of war and to the RAISING and
REGULATING of fleets and armies, all [of] which [...] would appertain to the
legislature.[12] â  
While the power to declare war is constitutionally vested in Congress, the
President commands and directs the military and is responsible for planning
military strategy. The Congress, pursuant to the War Powers Resolution, must
authorize any troop deployments more than 60 days in length. Congress,
providing a check to presidential power, also governs military spending and
regulations. Along with the armed forces, foreign policy is also directed by
the President, including the ability to negotiate treaties, which are ratified
with the consent by two-thirds of the Senate.

Since Franklin D. Roosevelt's Fireside chats, the President has given a weekly
Presidential radio address usually every Saturday.[13]

## Models of Presidential Power

James MacGregor Burns, noted presidential scholar, has categorized Presidents
into three categories based on how each enacts policy:

  * Madisonian Model: The President relies on Congress to lead in setting policy. The President mainly administers policies set by Congress.
  * Hamiltonian Model: The President should be heroic and above partisanship. He should rely on the Constitution and public opinion for support. The President should lead in all areas and ignore Congress if necessary.
  * Jeffersonian Model: The President should lead through his party. He should act similar to a Prime Minister in a parliamentary system. The party, influenced and led by the President, sets policy. The President assists the party with getting their platform enacted.

Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. theorized his own model of the modern presidency
centering on the President, which he called The Imperial Presidency. President
Gerald Ford, in office at the time, called it the Imperilled presidency,
arguing that the enlarged bureaucracy around the President was difficult to
control.

## Privileges of office

<IMG>

<IMG>

A USAF Boeing VC-25A flying over Mount Rushmore.

The White House in Washington, D.C. serves as the official place of residence
for the President; he (or she) is entitled to use its staff and facilities,
including medical care, recreation, housekeeping, and security services. One
of two Boeing VC-25 aircraft, which are extensively modified versions of
Boeing 747-200B airliners, serve as long distance travel for the President,
and are referred to as Air Force One while the president is on board.[8][14] A
salary of $400,000, along with other benefits, is paid to the President
annually.[9]

The president also uses a United States Marine Corps helicopter, designated
Marine One when the president is aboard. Similarly, "Navy One", "Army One",
and "Coast Guard One" are the call signs used if the president is aboard a
craft belonging to these services.[15] For ground travel, the president uses
an armored presidential limousine, built on a heavily modified Cadillac-based
chassis.[16]

### Salary

The First U.S. Congress voted to pay George Washington a salary of $25,000 a
year, about $566,000 in 2008 terms. Washington, already a wealthy man, refused
to accept his salary; however, he asked for his living expenses to be covered.
Theodore Roosevelt spent his entire $50,000 salary on entertaining guests at
the White House.[17] John F. Kennedy donated his salary to charities.[18]

Date established Salary Salary in 2008

dollars  
September 24, 1789 $25,000 $566,000  
March 3, 1873 $50,000 $865,000  
March 4, 1909 $75,000 $1,714,000  
January 19, 1949 $100,000 $875,000  
January 20, 1969 $200,000 $1,135,000  
January 20, 2001 $400,000 $471,000  
President Obama currently earns $400,000 per year, along with a $50,000
expense account, a $100,000 nontaxable travel account and $19,000 for
entertainment.[9] The most recent raise in salary was approved by Congress and
President Bill Clinton in 1999 and went into effect in 2001; prior to the
change, the President earned $200,000, plus expense accounts.

Before passage by Congress of the Former Presidents Act (FPA) in 1958, retired
Presidents did not receive a pension. All living Presidents in 1959 began to
receive a pension of $25,000 per year, an office and a staff. The pension has
increased numerous times with Congressional approval. Retired Presidents now
receive a pension based on the salary of the current administration's cabinet
secretaries (Executive Level I), which is $191,300 as of 2008.[22] Some former
Presidents have also collected congressional pensions.[23] The FPA, as
amended, also provides former presidents with travel funds and mailing
privileges.

### Secret Service

Main article: United States Secret Service

The United States Secret Service is charged with protecting the sitting
President and his or her family. Until 1997, all former Presidents, and their
families, were protected by the Secret Service until the President's death.
The last president to have lifetime Secret Service protection is Bill Clinton;
George W. Bush and all subsequent Presidents will be protected by the Secret
Service for a maximum of ten years after leaving office.[24] However, Congress
has debated the wisdom of this law. Following the increase in terrorism and
threats to the President in general since 1997, lifetime protection is being
reconsidered.[citation needed] As part of their protection, Presidents, First
Ladies, their children and other immediate family members, and other prominent
persons and locations are assigned Secret Service codenames.[25] The use of
such names was originally for security purposes and dates to a time when
sensitive electronic communications were not routinely encrypted; today, the
names simply serve for purposes of brevity, clarity and tradition.[26][27]

### Presidential libraries

Main article: Presidential library

Each President since Herbert Hoover has created a repository known as a
presidential library for preserving and making available his papers, records
and other documents and materials. Completed libraries are deeded to and
maintained by the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA); the
initial funding for building and equipping each library must come from
private, non-federal sources. There are currently twelve presidential
libraries in the NARA system. There are also a number of presidential
libraries maintained by state governments and private foundations, such as the
Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by the State of
Illinois.

## After the presidency

Some Presidents have had significant careers after leaving office. Prominent
examples include William Howard Taft's tenure as Chief Justice of the United
States and Herbert Hoover's work on government reorganization after World War
II. Grover Cleveland, whose bid for reelection failed in 1888, was elected
president again four years later in 1892. Two former presidents served in
Congress after leaving the White House; John Quincy Adams was elected to the
House of Representatives, serving there for seventeen years, and Andrew
Johnson returned to the Senate in 1875. John Tyler served in the provisional
Congress of the Confederate States during the Civil War and was elected to the
Confederate House of Representatives, but died before it convened. More
recently, Jimmy Carter has become a global human rights campaigner,
international arbiter and election monitor, and a recipient of the Nobel Peace
Prize.

## See also

  * Category:Lists relating to the United States presidency
  * Category:United States presidential history
  * Curse of Tippecanoe
  * Executive privilege
  * Fiction regarding United States presidential succession
  * Historical rankings of United States Presidents
  * Imperilled presidency
  * List of Presidents of the United States
  * List of United States Presidents by military rank
  * List of U.S. presidential faux-pas, gaffes, and unfortunate incidents
  * President of the Continental Congress
  * Presidential $1 Coin Program
  * Religious affiliations of United States Presidents
  * Vice President of the United States

## References

  1. ^ http://www.whitehouse.gov/our_government/executive_branch/
  2. ^ "The Executive Branch". Whitehouse.gov. http://www.whitehouse.gov/our_government/executive_branch/. Retrieved on 2009-01-27.
  3. ^ Current salary information from University of Michigan library [1]
  4. ^ "'The President's Own': United States Marine Band". United States Marine Band. http://www.marineband.usmc.mil/learning_tools/discover_american_band_music/1801.htm. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  5. ^ see GPO Annotated U.S. Constitution, 2002 Ed., at 611 & nn.772-73.
  6. ^ See: Peabody, Bruce G.; Gant, Scott E. (1999). "The Twice and Future President: Constitutional Interstices and the Twenty-Second Amendment". Minnesota Law Review (Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Law Review) 83 (565). ; alternatively, see: Albert, Richard (2005). "The Evolving Vice Presidency". Temple Law Review (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University of the Commonwealth System of Higher Education) 78 (811, at 856-9).
  7. ^ Grover Cleveland was both the twenty-second and twenty-fourth President
  8. ^ a b Air Force One. White House Military Office. Retrieved June 17, 2007.
  9. ^ a b c "How much does the U.S. president get paid?". Howstuffworks. Retrieved July 24, 2007.
  10. ^ U.S. Const. art. II, Â§ 1, cl. 8.
  11. ^ 3 U.S.C. Â§ 20
  12. ^ Hamilton, Alexander. The Federalist #69 (reposting). Retrieved June 15, 2007.
  13. ^ White House Radio
  14. ^ Any U.S. Air Force aircraft carrying the president will use the call sign "Air Force One."
  15. ^ "Executive One" becomes the call sign of any civilian aircraft when the president boards.
  16. ^ New Presidential Limousine enters Secret Service Fleet US Secret Service Press Release (January 14, 2009) Retrieved on 2009-01-20
  17. ^ Morris, Edmund. The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt (1986). ISBN 0-3453-3902-9.
  18. ^ Richard Reeves. President Kennedy: Profile of Power. (1993)
  19. ^ Presidential and Vice Presidential Salaries. Retrieved June 17, 2007.
  20. ^ Relative Value in US Dollars. Measuring Worth. Retrieved May 30, 2006.
  21. ^ Dept. of Labor Inflation Calculator. Inflation Calculator. Retrieved July 26, 2007.
  22. ^ "Former Presidents Act (FPA)". U.S. Senate. 1958. http://www.senate.gov/reference/resources/pdf/98-249.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-01-05.
  23. ^ "Former presidents cost U.S. taxpayers big bucks". Toledo Blade. 2007-01-07. http://toledoblade.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070107/NEWS09/70107004. Retrieved on 2007-05-22.
  24. ^ 18 U.S.C. Â§ 3056
  25. ^ "Junior Secret Service Program: Assignment 7. Code Names". National Park Service. http://www.nps.gov/archive/eise/secret16.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-18.
  26. ^ "Candidate Code Names Secret Service Monikers Used On The Campaign Trail". CBS. 2008-09-16. http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2008/09/16/earlyshow/main4452073.shtml?source=RSSattr=Politics_4452073. Retrieved on 2008-11-12.
  27. ^ "Obama's Secret Service Code Name revealed". Eurweb. 2008-09-16. http://www.eurweb.com/story/eur48530.cfm.

## Further reading

  * Couch, Ernie. Presidential Trivia. Rutledge Hill Press. March 1, 1996. ISBN 1-55853-412-1
  * Lang, J. Stephen. The Complete Book of Presidential Trivia. Pelican Publishing. September 2001. ISBN 1-56554-877-9
  * Leonard Leo, James Taranto, and William J. Bennett. Presidential Leadership: Rating the Best and the Worst in the White House. Simon and Schuster, June, 2004, hardcover, 304 pages, ISBN 0-7432-5433-3
  * Presidential Studies Quarterly, published by Blackwell Synergy, is a quarterly academic journal on the President.
  * Waldman, Michael, and George Stephanopoulos. My Fellow Americans: The Most Important Speeches of America's Presidents, from George Washington to George W. Bush. Sourcebooks Trade. September 2003. ISBN 1-4022-0027-7
  * Winder, Michael K. Presidents and Prophets: The Story of America's Presidents and the LDS Church. Covenant Communications. September 2007. ISBN 1-59811-452-2

## External links

<IMG>

Hail to the Chief  
Play sound  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

President of the United States

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Presidents of the
United States  
### Official

  * "Executive Office of the President". http://www.whitehouse.gov/president/. Retrieved on 2005-10-07.
  * "White House". http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/. Retrieved on 2009-01-21.

### Presidential histories

  * A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns, 1787â1825 â Presidential Election Returns including town and county breakdowns.
  * "Life Portraits of the American Presidents". C-SPAN. http://www.americanpresidents.org/. Retrieved on 2005-10-07. â A companion website for the C-SPAN television series: American Presidents: Life Portraits
  * "Presidential Documents from the National Archives". http://www.footnote.com/us-presidents.php. Retrieved on 2007-03-21. â A collection of letters, portraits, photos, and other documents from the National Archives
  * "The American Presidency Project". UC Santa Barbara. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/. Retrieved on 2005-10-07. â A collection of over 67,000 Presidential documents

### Miscellaneous

  * "All the President's Roles". Ask Gleaves. http://www.gvsu.edu/hauenstein/index.cfm?id=600041AC-93E7-4378-305E5A2BF6EC3C57. Retrieved on 2006-10-20. â An article analyzing the president's many hats.
  * "Allpresidents.org". Hauenstein Center for Presidential Studies. http://www.gvsu.edu/hauenstein/. Retrieved on 2006-10-18. â An educational site on the American presidency.
  * "Presidents' Occupations". http://www.factmonster.com/ipka/A0768854.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-20. Listing of every President's occupation(s) before and after becoming the Commander in Chief
  * "Presidential Rankings". Wall Street Journal. http://www.opinionjournal.com/hail/print_rankings.html. Retrieved on 2005-10-07. â Opinion poll of how great each President is believed to be.
  * The Great Republic: Presidents and States of the United States of America, and Comments on American History Classical liberal perspective of Presidential history.
  * "The Masonic Presidents Tour". The Masonic Library and Museum of Pennsylvania. http://www.pagrandlodge.org/mlam/presidents/index.html. Retrieved on 2005-10-07. â Brief histories of the Masonic careers of Presidents who were members of the Freemasons.
  * "The Presidents". American Experience. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/presidents/. Retrieved on 2007-03-04. â A PBS site on the American presidency.
  * Presidents of the United States: Resource Guides from the Library of Congress

v â¢ d â¢ e

Presidents of the United States  
George Washington Â· John Adams Â· Thomas Jefferson Â· James Madison Â· James
Monroe Â· John Quincy Adams Â· Andrew Jackson Â· Martin Van Buren Â· William
Henry Harrison Â· John Tyler Â· James K. Polk Â· Zachary Taylor Â· Millard
Fillmore Â· Franklin Pierce Â· James Buchanan Â· Abraham Lincoln Â· Andrew
Johnson Â· Ulysses S. Grant Â· Rutherford B. Hayes Â· James A. Garfield Â·
Chester A. Arthur Â· Grover Cleveland Â· Benjamin Harrison Â· Grover Cleveland
Â· William McKinley Â· Theodore Roosevelt Â· William Howard Taft Â· Woodrow
Wilson Â· Warren G. Harding Â· Calvin Coolidge Â· Herbert Hoover Â· Franklin
D. Roosevelt Â· Harry S. Truman Â· Dwight D. Eisenhower Â· John F. Kennedy Â·
Lyndon B. Johnson Â· Richard Nixon Â· Gerald Ford Â· Jimmy Carter Â· Ronald
Reagan Â· George H. W. Bush Â· Bill Clinton Â· George W. Bush Â· Barack Obama

Seal of the President of the United States  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Chief executive branch authorities in the United States  
President

President of the United States  
State governors

Alabama â¢ Alaska â¢ Arizona â¢ Arkansas â¢ California â¢ Colorado â¢
Connecticut â¢ Delaware â¢ Florida â¢ Georgia â¢ Hawaii â¢ Idaho â¢
Illinois â¢ Indiana â¢ Iowa â¢ Kansas â¢ Kentucky â¢ Louisiana â¢ Maine
â¢ Maryland â¢ Massachusetts â¢ Michigan â¢ Minnesota â¢ Mississippi â¢
Missouri â¢ Montana â¢ Nebraska â¢ Nevada â¢ New Hampshire â¢ New Jersey
â¢ New Mexico â¢ New York â¢ North Carolina â¢ North Dakota â¢ Ohio â¢
Oklahoma â¢ Oregon â¢ Pennsylvania â¢ Rhode Island â¢ South Carolina â¢
South Dakota â¢ Tennessee â¢ Texas â¢ Utah â¢ Vermont â¢ Virginia â¢
Washington â¢ West Virginia â¢ Wisconsin â¢ Wyoming  
Territorial executives

American Samoa â¢ District of Columbia â¢ Guam â¢ Northern Mariana Islands
â¢ Puerto Rico â¢ Virgin Islands  
  
Defunct

Pre-state territories â¢ Panama Canal Zone â¢ Philippine Islands  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Lists of Presidents and Vice Presidents of the United States  
Presidential lists by order

Service Â· Age Â· Birth Â· Death Â· Historical rankings Â· Military rank Â·
Number living Â· Oldest Â· Time in office Â· Timeline  
Professional life

Political affiliation Â· Political occupation Â· Elected office Â· Executive
experience Â· Inaugurations Â· Doctrines Â· Judicial appointments Â· Pardons
Â· Vetoes Â· Control of Congress Â· Assassination attempts Â· Currency
appearances Â· Libraries  
Personal life

Nicknames Â· Name origins and statistics Â· Genealogical relationship Â·
College education Â· Military service Â· Pets Â· Place of birth Â· Place of
primary affiliation Â· Previous occupation Â· Religious affiliation Â·
Residences Â· Handedness Â· Deaths in office  
Vice presidential lists

Order of service Â· Time in office Â· Age of ascension Â· Political occupation
Â· Birth Â· Tie-breaking votes Â· Longevity, place of death, burial Â·
Vacancies Â· Place of primary affiliation Â· Religious affiliation  
Succession

Line of succession Â· Designated survivor  
Elections

Electoral College margin Â· Popular vote margin Â· 2000 Electors Â· 2004
Electors Â· 2008 Electors  
Candidates

1789â1852 Â· 1856âpresent Â· Democratic tickets Â· Republican tickets Â·
Height Â· African American Â· Female Â· Lost their home state Â· Former
presidents who ran again Â· Unsuccessful but received at least one electoral
vote  
Fictional

Presidents Â· Vice Presidents Â· Candidates Â· Succession  
Families

First ladies (List Â· Longevity Â· Number living) Â· Second ladies Â· Children  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Military of the United States  
Portal (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG) Â· Category (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG Â· PHS
Â· NOAA) Â· Navbox (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG)  
Leadership

Commander-in-chief Â· Secretary of Defense Â· Deputy Secretary of Defense Â·
Joint Chiefs of Staff (Chairman) Â· Senate Committee on Armed Services Â·
House Committee on Armed Services Â· Active duty four-star officers Â· Highest
ranking officers in history Â· Goldwater-Nichols Act  
Organization

Service Departments

Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary) Â· Navy (Secretary) Â· Air
Force (Secretary)  
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard  
Branches

Army (Chief of Staff) Â· Marine Corps (Commandant) Â· Navy (Chief of Naval
Operations) Â· Air Force (Chief of Staff) Â· Coast Guard (Commandant)  
Other Uniformed Services

U.S. PHS Commissioned Corps (Surgeon General) Â· NOAA Commissioned Corps
(Director)  
Reserve Components

Reserves: (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG) Â· National Guard: (A Â· AF)  
Civilian Auxiliaries

Military Affiliate Radio System Â· Merchant Marine Â· Maritime Service Â·
Civil Air Patrol Â· Coast Guard Auxiliary  
Unified Combatant Command

Northern Â· Central Â· European Â· Pacific Â· Southern Â· Africa Â· Joint
Forces Â· Special Operations Â· Strategic Â· Transportation  
Structure

Title 10 of the United States Code Â· The Pentagon Â· Bases Â· Budget Â·
Units: (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG) Â· Logistics Â· Media  
Operations & History

Current Deployments Â· Conflicts Â· History: (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG) Â·
Historical Events  
Personnel

Training

MEPS Â· ASVAB Â· Recruit training: (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG) Â· Officer
Candidate School: (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF) Â· Service Academies: (A (prep) Â· N
(prep) Â· AF (prep) Â· CG Â· Merchant Marine Â· PHS) Â· Junior/Reserve
Officers' Training Corps: (A Â· MC/N Â· AF) Â· Other Education  
Uniforms

Uniforms: (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG) Â· Awards & Decorations: (Inter-service
Â· A Â· MC/N Â· AF Â· CG Â· Foreign Â· International Â· Devices) Â· Badges:
(Identification Â· A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG)  
Ranks

Enlisted: (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG) Â· Warrant Officers Â· Officer: (A Â· MC
Â· N Â· AF Â· CG Â· PHS Â· NOAA)  
Other

Oath: (Enlistment Â· Office) Â· Code of Conduct Â· Military Occupational
Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code Â· Pay Â· Uniform Code of Military
Justice Â· Judge Advocate General's Corps Â· Military Health System/TRICARE Â·
Separation Â· Veterans Affairs  
Equipment

Land

Individual Weapons Â· Crew-Served Weapons Â· Vehicles (active)  
Sea

All watercraft Â· Ships: (A Â· N (active) Â· AF Â· CG Â· MSC Â· NOAA) Â·
Weapons: (N Â· CG) Â· Aircraft: (N Â· CG Â· NOAA) Â· Reactors  
Air

Aircraft (active) Â· Aircraft Designation Â· Missiles Â· Helicopter Arms  
Other

Electronics (designations) Â· Flags: (A Â· MC Â· N Â· AF Â· CG Â· Ensign Â·
Jack Â· Guidons) Â· Food Â· WMDs: (Nuclear Â· Biological Â· Chemical)  
Legend: A=Army, MC=Marine Corps, N=Navy, AF=Air Force, CG=Coast Guard,
PHS=Public Health Service, NOAA=National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, MSC=Military Sealift Command  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Flag of the United States United States presidential elections  
1789 Â· 1792 Â· 1796 Â· 1800 Â· 1804 Â· 1808 Â· 1812 Â· 1816 Â· 1820 Â· 1824
Â· 1828 Â· 1832 Â· 1836 Â· 1840 Â· 1844 Â· 1848 Â· 1852 Â· 1856 Â· 1860 Â·
1864 Â· 1868 Â· 1872 Â· 1876 Â· 1880 Â· 1884 Â· 1888 Â· 1892 Â· 1896 Â· 1900
Â· 1904 Â· 1908 Â· 1912 Â· 1916 Â· 1920 Â· 1924 Â· 1928 Â· 1932 Â· 1936 Â·
1940 Â· 1944 Â· 1948 Â· 1952 Â· 1956 Â· 1960 Â· 1964 Â· 1968 Â· 1972 Â· 1976
Â· 1980 Â· 1984 Â· 1988 Â· 1992 Â· 1996 Â· 2000 Â· 2004 Â· 2008 Â· 2012

* * *
Electoral College Â· Electoral vote changes Â· Results by Electoral College
margin Â· Results by popular vote margin Â· Results by state Â· Voter turnout
Â· Presidential primaries

House elections Â· Senate elections Â· Gubernatorial elections  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States topics  
History

Timeline

Pre-Columbian Â· Colonial era (Thirteen Colonies) Â· Declaration of
Independence Â· American Revolution Â· Territorial changes Â· American Civil
War Â· Reconstruction era Â· African-American Civil Rights Movement
(1896â1954) Â· World War I Â· Great Depression Â· World War II (Home front)
Â· Cold War Â· Korean War Â· African-American Civil Rights Movement
(1955â1968) Â· Feminist Movement Â· Vietnam War Â· Post-Cold War
(1991-present) Â· War on Terrorism (War in Afghanistan Â· Iraq War)  
By topic

Demographic Â· Economic Â· Military Â· Postal Â· Technological and industrial
Â· Inventions and discoveries  
Federal  
government

Law  
U.S. Constitution  
Bill of Rights  
Civil liberties  
Federalism  
Separation of powers

Law Enforcement  
Department of Justice (DOJ)  
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)

Legislature \- Congress  
House of Representatives  
Senate  
Vice President

Executive \- President  
Executive Office of the President  
Cabinet/Executive departments  
Independent agencies  
Policies

Judiciary \- Supreme Court  
Federal courts  
Courts of appeal  
District courts

Intelligence  
U.S. Intelligence Community  
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)  
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)  
National Security Agency (NSA)

Military  
Army  
Marine Corps  
Navy  
Air Force  
Coast Guard  
Politics

State governments Â· Local governments Â· Elections (Electoral College) Â·
Political divisions Â· Political ideologies Â· Political parties (Democratic
Party Â· Republican Party Â· Third parties) Â· Political scandals Â· Political
status of Puerto Rico Â· Red states and blue states Â· Uncle Sam  
Geography

Cities, towns and villages Â· Counties Â· Extreme points Â· Islands Â·
Mountains (Appalachian Â· Rocky) Â· National Park System Â· Regions (New
England Â· Mid-Atlantic Â· Southern Â· Midwestern Â· Great Plains Â·
Northwestern Â· Southwestern) Â· Rivers (Mississippi Â· Missouri Â· Colorado)
Â· States Â· Territory Â· Water supply and sanitation  
Economy

Banking Â· Communications Â· Companies Â· Federal Reserve System Â· Insurance
Â· Standard of living (Personal income Â· Household income Â· Homeownership Â·
Income inequality) Â· Tourism Â· Transportation (Airports Â· Highways Â·
Interstate Highway System Â· Passenger vehicles Â· Railroads Â· Trucking
industry) Â· U.S. dollar Â· Wall Street Â· Total debt  
Society

Adolescent sexuality Â· Crime Â· Demographics Â· Education Â· Health care Â·
Health insurance Â· Incarceration Â· Languages (American English Â· Spanish)
Â· Media Â· People Â· Public holidays Â· Religion Â· Social class (Affluence
Â· American Dream Â· American middle class Â· Educational attainment Â·
Poverty Â· Professional and working class conflict) Â· Sports  
Culture

American literature (Beat Generation Â· Folklore Â· Harlem Renaissance Â·
Poetry Â· Transcendentalism) Â· Architecture Â· Cuisine Â· Dance Â· Fashion Â·
Flag Â· Music (American classical music Â· American folk music Â· American
popular music Â· Country music Â· Blues Â· Jazz Â· Rock and roll) Â· Radio Â·
Television / Cinema (Hollywood) Â· Visual arts (Abstract expressionism)  
Issues

Abortion Â· Affirmative action Â· American exceptionalism Â· Anti-Americanism
Â· Capital punishment Â· Drug policy / Prohibition Â· Energy policy Â·
Environmental movement Â· Gun politics Â· Health care reform Â· Human rights
Â· Immigration (United StatesâMexico barrier Â· Third Border Initiative) Â·
Obesity Â· Racism Â· Same-sex marriage  
Portal  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/President_of_the_United_States"

Categories: Presidents of the United States | Presidency of the United States
| Lists of presidents

Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Wikipedia indefinitely
move-protected pages | Articles needing additional references from July 2008 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * á áá­á
  * Asturianu
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bosanski
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * æè¨
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Nouormand
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 15:11.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



