
# United States copyright law

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

United States copyright law governs the legally enforceable rights of creative
and artistic works under the laws of the United States.

Copyright law in the United States is part of federal law, and is authorized
by the U.S. Constitution. The power to enact copyright law is granted in
Article I, Section 8, Clause 8, also known as the Copyright Clause, which
states:

    The Congress shall have Power [. . .] To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries.
This clause forms the basis for U.S. copyright law ("Science", "Authors",
"Writings") and patent law ("useful Arts", "Inventors", "Discoveries"), and
includes the limited terms (or durations) allowed for copyrights and patents
("limited Times"), as well as the items they may protect ("exclusive Right to
their respective Writings and Discoveries").

In the U.S., registrations of claims of copyright, recordation of copyright
transfers, and other administrative aspects of copyright are the
responsibility of the United States Copyright Office, a part of the Library of
Congress.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Federalism concerns
  * 2 Scope of copyright law
    * 2.1 Idea/expression
    * 2.2 Compilations and the sweat of the brow doctrine
    * 2.3 Authorship
    * 2.4 Useful articles
    * 2.5 Definition of "copy"
    * 2.6 Works by the federal government
    * 2.7 Federal and state laws are not copyrighted
  * 3 Exclusive rights
    * 3.1 Transfers and licenses
  * 4 Duration of copyright
  * 5 Procedural issues
    * 5.1 Registration of copyright
    * 5.2 Deposit requirement
    * 5.3 Subject matter jurisdiction
    * 5.4 Copyright notices
    * 5.5 Enforcement
  * 6 Infringement
    * 6.1 Parodies
    * 6.2 Defenses and limitations
    * 6.3 Government infringement
    * 6.4 Provisions for the handicapped
  * 7 Relief available for infringement
    * 7.1 Civil remedies
      * 7.1.1 Equitable relief
      * 7.1.2 Monetary damages
      * 7.1.3 Attorneyâs fees
    * 7.2 Criminal penalties
  * 8 See also
    * 8.1 Cases
      * 8.1.1 Fixation
      * 8.1.2 Originality
      * 8.1.3 Idea/expression dichotomy
      * 8.1.4 Fair use
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links
    * 10.1 United States

  
## [edit] History

The U.S. Congress first exercised its power to enact copyright legislation
with the Copyright Act of 1790. The Act secured an author the exclusive right
to publish and vend "maps, charts and books" for a term of 14 years, with the
right of renewal for one additional 14 year term if the author was still
alive. The act did not regulate other kinds of writings, such as musical
compositions or newspapers and specifically noted that it did not prohibit
copying the works of foreign authors. The vast majority of writings were never
registered â between 1790 and 1799, of 13,000 odd titles published in the
United States, only 556 works were registered.

Copyright law has been modified many times since to encompass new technologies
such as music recording, to extend the duration of protection, and to make
other changes. U.S. courts have interpreted this clause of the Constitution to
say that the ultimate purpose of copyrights is to encourage the production of
creative works for the public benefit, and that therefore the interests of the
public are primary over the interests of the author when the two conflict.
These rulings have since been formalized into fair use laws and decisions.
Certain attempts by copyright owners to restrict uses beyond the rights
provided for by copyright law may also subject them to the copyright misuse
doctrine, preventing enforcement against infringers.

Key laws regulating U.S. copyrights and their key effects include:

  * Copyright Act of 1790 \- established U.S. copyright with term of 14 years with 14-year renewal
  * Copyright Act of 1909 \- extended term to 28 years with 28-year renewal
  * Copyright Act of 1976 \- extended term to either 75 years or life of author plus 50 years; extended copyright to unpublished works; preempted state copyright laws; codified much copyright doctrine that had originated in case law
  * Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988 \- established copyrights of U.S. works in Berne Convention countries
  * Uruguay Round Agreements Act (URAA) of 1994 \- restored U.S. copyright for certain foreign works
  * Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998 \- extended terms to 95/120 years or life plus 70 years
  * Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998 \- criminalized some cases of copyright infringement
  * Family Entertainment and Copyright Act of 2005 \- criminalized more cases of copyright infringement, permitted technology to "sanitize" works

Statutory provisions relating to copyright currently in effect are codified in
Title 17 of the United States Code. Key international agreements affecting
U.S. copyright law include:

  * Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
  * Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights

The United States became a Berne Convention signatory in 1988, and the treaty
entered into force with respect to the U.S. on March 1, 1989. The U.S. is also
a party to TRIPS, which itself requires compliance with Berne provisions, and
is enforceable under the WTO dispute resolution process. To meet the treaty
requirements, protections were extended to architecture (where previously only
building plans were protected from copying, not buildings, though currently
the law makes exception for reproduction of buildings in photographs or
paintings if they are ordinarily visible from a public place), and certain
moral rights of visual artists.

### [edit] Federalism concerns

Historically, copyright protection was provided by a dual system under both
federal and state laws. Federal law provided what was commonly called
"statutory copyright" and the laws of each state would provide what was called
"common-law copyright," even though many states have statutes governing
copyright as well.

Roughly speaking, the old "statutory copyright" protected works that were
registered and the old "common-law copyright" protected works that were not.

In 1976, however, Congress abolished all state copyright laws by declaring a
complete federal preemption of state laws. The federal preemption provision is
codified at 17 U.S.C. Â§ 301(a), which states, in relevant parts:

    On and after January 1, 1978, all legal or equitable rights that are equivalent to any of the exclusive rights within the general scope of copyright ... in works of authorship that ... come within the subject matter of copyright ... are governed exclusively by this title. Thereafter, no person is entitled to any such right or equivalent right in any such work under the common law or statutes of any State.
The preemption is complete in all aspects of copyright protection. It covers
protection so that a work that falls generally within the subject matter of
copyright (such as, a writing) must either qualify to be protected under
federal law, or it cannot be protected at all. State law cannot provide
protection for a work that federal law does not protect.[1] It covers
enforcement too. A person accused of copyright infringement cannot be
prosecuted in state courts.[2]

It should be noted that the preemption clause only applies to works that are
covered by the Copyright Act. Works that have "not been fixed in any tangible
medium of expression are not covered."[3] "Examples would include choreography
that has never been filmed or notated, an extemporaneous speech, original
works of authorship communicated solely through conversations or live
broadcasts, a dramatic sketch or musical composition improvised or developed
from memory and without being recorded or written down."[4]

## [edit] Scope of copyright law

The purpose of copyright law is to stimulate the creation of as many works of
art, literature, music, and other "works of authorship" as possible, in order
to benefit the public. The United States recognizes no absolute, natural right
in an author to prevent others from copying or otherwise exploiting his work.
The copyright laws give authors limited property rights in their works, but
for the ultimate purpose of benefiting the public by encouraging the creation
and dissemination of more works. The author's interest is secondary to that of
the public.

As is the case with other intellectual property doctrines, copyright law
attempts to reach an optimal balance between the potential conflicting public
interests of:

  1. Encouraging creativity by giving exclusive property rights in creations
  2. Fostering a competitive marketplace by giving the freest possible public access to works of authorship and the ideas they encompass.

The balance in copyright is drawn by limiting property rights to the author's
particular method of expressing an idea or information. Copyright never gives
rights in the idea being expressed, or in facts or other elements of the
public domain which an author may incorporate into his work. Others are free
to express the same idea as the author did, or use the same facts, as long as
they do not copy the author's original way of expressing the ideas or facts.
In addition, even those rights granted in the author's expression are limited
in duration and are subject to certain exceptions permitting public use under
limited circumstances.

The United States copyright law protects "original works of authorship,"[5]
including literary, dramatic, musical, artistic, and certain other
intellectual works. This protection is available to both published and
unpublished works.

Copyright law includes the following types of works

  * Literary
  * Musical
  * Dramatic
  * Pantomimes and choreographic works
  * Pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works
  * Audiovisual works
  * Sound recordings
  * Derivative works
  * Compilations
  * Architectural works

### [edit] Idea/expression

An important limitation on the scope of copyright protection is the
idea/expression dichotomy: While copyright law protects the expression of an
idea, it does not protect the idea itself.

The distinction between "idea" and "expression" is a fundamental part of U.S.
law, but it is not always clear. From the 1976 Copyright Act (17 U.S.C. Â§
102):

    In no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship extend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery, regardless of the form in which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.
A paper describing a political theory, for example, is copyrightable; it may
not be reproduced by anyone else without the author's permission. But the
theory itself (which is an idea rather than a specific expression) is not
copyrightable. Another author is free to describe the same theory in his or
her own words without violating copyright law, and in fact need not even give
credit to the original author (although failing to do so may be considered
plagiarism, an ethical transgression). Courts disagree on how much of the
story and characters of a copyrighted novel or film should be considered
copyrightable expression.

### [edit] Compilations and the sweat of the brow doctrine

Facts are considered synonymous to "ideas" or "discoveries" under this law and
are not copyrightable. By extension, a compilation of uncopyrightable facts is
also uncopyrightable. However, Â§ 103 of the Copyright Act allows for the
protection of "compilations," provided there is a "creative" or "original" act
involved in such a compilation, such as in the selection (deciding which
things to include or exclude), and arrangement (how they are shown and in what
order). The protection is limited only to the selection and arrangement, not
to the facts themselves, which may be freely copied.

The Supreme Court decision in Feist v. Rural further made clear the
requirements that a compilation be original in its composition, in denying
protection to telephone "white pages". The Feist court rejected what was known
as the "sweat of the brow" doctrine, in ruling that no matter how much work
was necessary to create a compilation, a non-selective collection of facts
ordered in a non-creative way is not subject to copyright protection.

### [edit] Authorship

Sometimes the identification of a work's "author" is unclear, and there are
many court rulings applying to those situations as well. For example, by Â§
201, work done "for hire", that is, specifically at the direction of an
employer who pays for the work, is, by default, the property of the employer.
In other words, if a company hires a writer to write something specific, the
company, not the writer, is considered the "author" of that work and owns the
copyrights. Any other work done by that writer on his own without compensation
and without using company resources usually is still owned by the writer
(though employers often try to claim ownership of such work).

The author of a work is the initial owner of the copyright in it, and may
exploit the work herself or transfer some or all the rights conferred by the
copyright to others. 17 U.S.C. Â§ 201 . The author generally is the person who
conceives of the copyrightable expression and fixes it or causes it to be
fixed in a tangible form. "Works made for hire" are an important exception of
this rule: When a work is "made for hire", within the meaning of the Copyright
Act, the employer or commissioning party, who pays for creation of the work,
is deemed the author, rather than the employee or commissioned party who
actually conceives and fixes the expression (or causes its fixation).

1\. Ownership of copyright in joint works. The authors of a "joint works" are
co-owners of a single copyright in the work. 17 U.S.C. Â§ 101 defines a joint
work as "a work prepared by two or more authors with the intention that their
contributions be merged into inseparable or independent parts of a unitary
whole."

2\. Works for hire: If a work is made "for hire" within the meaning of the
Copyright Act, the employer or commissioning party, who paid for the work and
took the economic risk of it, is deemed the author for copyright purposes and
is the initial owner of the copyright. 17 U.S.C. Â§ 101 sets forth the two
circumstances under which a work may be found to be a work for hire.

a) Work prepared by an employee within the scope of his employment. In
Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid, 490 U.S. 730 (1989), the Supreme
Court held that the term "employee" in this context should be interpreted
according to common law agency principles. If the person doing the work is an
"employee" within the meaning of the common law, and the work was done within
the scope of his employment (whether the work is the kind he was employed
prepare; whether the preparation takes place primarily within the employer's
time and place specifications; and whether the work was activated, at least in
part, by a purpose to serve the employer), then the work is a work for hire
and the employer is the initial owner of the copyright, rather than the
employee who actually conceived and fixed the expression.

b) Specially ordered or commissioned works. Works created by independent
contractors (rather than employees) can be deemed works for hire only if two
conditions are satisfied. First, the work must fit into one of nine categories
of works enumerated in 17 U.S.C. Â§ 101. Second, the parties must expressly
agree in a written, signed instrument that the work will be considered a work
made for hire.

3\. Ownership of copyright in collective works: a collective work is a
collection of independent, separately copyrightable works of authorship, such
as a newspaper, magazine, or encyclopedia. In the absence of an express
assignment of copyright, the author of each individual work in the collection
retains copyright in that work. The compiler, or author of the collection,
owns copyright in the expression he or she contributed, which is primarily the
selection and arrangement of the separate contributions, but may include such
things as a preface, advertisements, etc., that the collective author created.

### [edit] Useful articles

If a pictorial, graphic or sculptural work is a "useful article", it is
copyrighted only if its aesthetic features are separable from its utilitarian
features. A useful article is an article having an intrinsic utilitarian
function that is not merely to portray the appearance of the article or to
convey information. They must be separable from the functional aspect to be
copyrighted.[6]

There are several different tests available for conceptual separability. The
first, the Primary Use test, asks how is the thing primarily used: art or
function? The second, the Marketable as Art test, asks can the article be sold
as art, whether functional or not. This test does not have much backing, as
almost anything can be sold as art. The third test, Temporal Displacement,
asks could an individual conceptualize the article as art without
conceptualizing functionality at the same time. Finally, the Denicola test
says that copyrightability should ultimately depend on the extent to which the
work reflects the artistic expression inhibited by functional consideration.
If something came to have a pleasing shape because there were functional
considerations, the artistic aspect was constrained by those
concerns.[citation needed]

### [edit] Definition of "copy"

Several important rights under United States copyright law exist only for
âcopiesâ of worksâmaterial objects in which the work is embodied.[7]
Section 106(1) prohibits the reproduction only of copies of works, and section
106(3) prohibits the distribution only of copies of works.[8] Thus, as the
Ninth Circuit held in the Perfect 10 case, a link (even a deep link or inline
link) to an image does not involve reproduction of a copy of the image by the
person on whose Web page the link appears.[9] An instruction to a browser to
jump to a URL is not a reproduction or distribution of a copy of what is at
the referenced URL.[10]

Furthermore, a three-dimensional counterpart of a two-dimensional drawing is
usually not a âcopyâ of the drawing, under United States copyright law.
Thus, the copyright in a drawing of the approach to the Triboro Bridge is not
infringed when the bridge approach is built.[11] On the other hand, however,
because the essence of what is protected in a cartoon is captured by a doll
depicting the cartoon figure, courts have repeatedly held unauthorized dolls
to infringe the copyright in the underlying cartoons.[12]

### [edit] Works by the federal government

For more details on this topic, see Work of the United States Government.

17 U.S.C. Â§ 105 withholds copyright from most publications produced by the
United States Government, and its agents or employees while in their
employment. All such work is therefore in the public domain in some sense. The
specific language is as follows:

    Copyright protection under this title is not available for any work of the United States Government, but the United States Government is not precluded from receiving and holding copyrights transferred to it by assignment, bequest, or otherwise.
The intent of the section is to place in the public domain all work of the
United States Government, which is defined in 17 U.S.C. Â§ 101 as work
prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of
that person's official duties. In most cases, contractors are not employees.

The government may restrict access to works it has produced through other
mechanisms. For instance, confidential or secret materials are not protected
by copyright, but are restricted by other applicable laws. However, even in
case of non-secret materials there are specific prohibitions against automatic
access to work otherwise covered under 17 U.S.C. Â§ 105 for commercial
purposes.

### [edit] Federal and state laws are not copyrighted

Federal statutes are in the public domain and no copyright attaches to them.
The same is true of court decisions. It is not difficult to see the
motivations behind this:

    The citizens are the authors of the law, and therefore its owners, regardless of who actually drafts the provisions, because the law derives its authority from the consent of the public, expressed through the democratic process. (State of Georgia v Harrison Co, 548 F Supp 110, 114 (ND Ga 1982))
    Edicts of government, such as judicial opinions, administrative rulings, legislative enactments, public ordinances, and similar official legal documents are not copyrightable for reasons of public policy. This applies to such works whether they are Federal, State, or local as well as to those of foreign governments. (Compendium II: Copyright Office Practices section 206.01[1] Paragraph 3.6 at 14 February 2006)
In the United States the exclusion of legislation from the scope of copyright
laws dates to 1834, when the Supreme Court interpreted the first federal
copyright laws and held that "no reporter has or can have any copyright in the
written opinions delivered by this Court". In the same case it was argued â
and accepted by the Court â that "it would be absurd, for a legislature to
claim the copyright; and no one else can do it, for they are the authors, and
cause them to be published without copyright â¦ Statutes were never
copyrighted." Further, "it is the bounden duty of government to promulgate its
statutes in print". "[A]ll countries ... subject to the sovereignty of the
laws" hold the promulgation of the laws, from whatever source, "as essential
as their existence." "If either statutes or decisions could be made private
property, it would be in the power of an individual to shut out the light by
which we guide our actions." (Wheaton v. Peters, 33 US (8 Pet) 591, 668
(1834))

That the public interest is the primary determinant is clear from Banks v
Manchester (128 US 244, 9 S Ct 36 (1888)). In this the United States Supreme
Court denied a copyright to a court reporter in opinions of the Ohio Supreme
Court, on the grounds that "There has always been a judicial consensus, from
the time of the decision in the case of Wheaton v. Peters, that no copyright
could, under the statutes passed by Congress, be secured in the products of
the labor done by judicial officers in the discharge of their judicial duties.
The whole work done by the judges constitutes the authentic exposition and
interpretation of the law, which, binding every citizen, is free for
publication to all, whether it is a declaration of unwritten law, or an
interpretation of a constitution or statute."

The law, as thus (widely) defined, is in the public domain, and therefore not
amenable to copyright. In Howell v Miller, (91 F 129 (1898)) Justice Harlan
denied an injunction sought for the compiler of Michigan statutes, holding
that "no one can obtain the exclusive right to publish the laws of the state
in a book prepared by him." The question of formal ownership of the text of
laws and decisions is perhaps secondary to the question of the dissemination
of the law.

## [edit] Exclusive rights

There are five basic rights protected by copyright, sometimes called the five
"pillars" of copyright. The owner of copyright has the exclusive right to do
and to authorize others to do the following:

  * To reproduce the work in copies or phonorecords;
  * To prepare derivative works based upon the work;
  * To distribute copies or phonorecords of the work to the public by sale or other transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease, or lending;
  * To publicly perform the work, in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works, pantomimes, and motion pictures and other audiovisual works, and sound recordings by means of digital audio transmission;
  * To publicly display the work, in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works, pantomimes, and pictorial, graphic, or sculptural works, including the individual images of a motion picture or other audiovisual work.

A violation of any of the exclusive rights of the copyright holder is said to
be a copyright infringement.

### [edit] Transfers and licenses

Three types of transfers exist for copyrighted works.

  * Assignment
  * Exclusive License
  * Non-exclusive License

The first two, assignment and exclusive licenses, require the transfer to be
in writing. Nonexclusive licenses need not be in writing and they may be
implied by the circumstances. Transfers of copyright always involve one or
more of the exclusive rights of copyright. For instance, a license may provide
a right to perform a work, but not to reproduce it or to prepare a derivative
work (adaptation right).

The terms of the license is governed by the applicable contract law, however
there is substantial academic debate about to what extent the Copyright Act
preempts state contract law principles.

An author, after transferring a copyright, can terminate the transfer under
certain circumstances. This right to terminate the transfer is absolute and
cannot be waived.

## [edit] Duration of copyright

Works created in or after 1978 are extended copyright protection for a term
defined in 17 U.S.C. Â§ 302. With the passage of the Sonny Bono Copyright Term
Extension Act, these works are granted copyright protection for a term ending
70 years after the death of the author. If the work was a work for hire (e.g.,
those created by a corporation) then copyright persists for 120 years after
creation or 95 years after publication, whichever is shorter.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Expansion of U.S. copyright law

Copyrightable works created before 1978 that had not entered the public domain
in 1978 received protection for the 17 U.S.C. Â§ 302 term above with the
exception that those copyrights would not expire before 2003. Prior to 1978,
works had to be published or registered to receive copyright protection. Upon
the effective date of the 1976 Act (January 1, 1978) this requirement was
removed and these works received protection despite having not been published
or registered. However, Congress intended to provide an incentive for these
authors to publish their unpublished works. To provide that incentive these
works, if published before 2003, will not have their protection expire until
2048.

All copyrightable works published in the United States before 1923 are in the
public domain;[13] works created before 1978 but not published until recently
may be protected until 2047.[14] For works that received their copyright
before 1978, a renewal had to be filed in the work's 28th year with the
Library of Congress Copyright Office for its term of protection to be
extended. The need for renewal was eliminated by the Copyright Renewal Act of
1992, but works that had already entered the public domain by non-renewal did
not regain copyright protection. Therefore, works published before 1964 that
were not renewed are in the public domain. No additional copyrights will
expire (thus entering the public domain) until at least 2019 due to changes in
the applicable laws.

Before 1972, sound recordings were not subject to federal copyright, but
copying was nonetheless regulated under various state torts and statutes, some
of which had no duration limit. The Sound Recording Amendment of 1972 extended
federal copyright to recordings fixed on or after February 15, 1972 (the
effective date of the act), and declared that recordings fixed before that
date would remain subject to state or common law copyright. The Copyright Act
of 1976 maintained this until February 15, 2047, which was subsequently
extended by the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act to the same date in
2067.[15] As a result, no sound recording can reliably be considered in the
public domain in the United States before that date, even if the recording was
in existence before 1923 and even if it originated in another country where it
has entered the public domain.[16]

## [edit] Procedural issues

### [edit] Registration of copyright

While copyright in the United States automatically attaches upon the creation
of an original work of authorship, registration with the Copyright Office puts
a copyright holder in a better position if litigation arises over the
copyright. A copyright holder desiring to register his or her copyright should
do the following:

  1. Obtain and complete appropriate form.
  2. Prepare clear rendition of material being submitted for copyright
  3. Send both documents to U.S. Copyright Office in Washington, D.C.

Registration of copyright refers to the act of registering the work with the
United States Copyright Office, which is an office of the Library of Congress.
As the United States has joined the Berne Convention, registration is no
longer necessary to provide copyright protection. However, registration is
still necessary to obtain statutory damages in case of infringement.

Copyright Act Â§407 provides that the owner of copyright in a published or
unpublished work may, at any time during the copyright, register the work with
the Copyright Office. The purpose of the registration provisions is to create
as comprehensive a record of U.S. copyright claims as is possible. To
register, the registrant must complete an application form and send it, along
with the filing fee and copies or phonorecords of the work, to the Copyright
Office.

The Copyright Office reviews applications for obvious errors or lack of
copyrightable subject matter, and then issues a certificate of registration.

Registration as a prerequisite to claim of moral rights violation: it's not
necessary for any author to register prior to bringing suit for violation of
the rights of attribution or integrity in a work of visual art, pursuant to
Copyright Act Â§106A.

### [edit] Deposit requirement

The United States Copyright Office requires that applicants for registration
must deposit with that office copies of the work for which protection is
sought. This requirement serves two purposes. First, if an action arises from
the infringement of the work, the owner may prove that the material that is
infringed is exactly the same material for which the owner has secured a
registration. Second, this requirement assists the Library of Congress in
building its collection of works.

The Copyright Office has authority to make some exceptions to this rule by
regulation, and has done so. Failure to comply with the deposit requirement,
as modified by Copyright Office regulations, is punishable by fine, but does
not result in forfeiture of copyright.

### [edit] Subject matter jurisdiction

The United States district courts have exclusive subject-matter jurisdiction
over copyright cases.[17]

### [edit] Copyright notices

Prior to 1989, use of a copyright notice â consisting of the copyright
symbol (Â©, the letter C inside a circle), the abbreviation "Copr.", or the
word "Copyright", followed by the year of the first publication of the work
and the name of the copyright holder â was part of United States statutory
requirements.[18][19] Several years may be noted if the work has gone through
substantial revisions. The proper copyright notice for sound recordings of
musical or other audio works is a sound recording copyright symbol (â, the
letter P inside a circle), which indicates a sound recording copyright.
Similarly, the phrase All rights reserved was once required to assert
copyright.

In 1989, the U.S. enacted the Berne Convention Implementation Act, amending
the 1976 Copyright Act to conform to most of the provisions of the Berne
Convention. As a result, the use of copyright notices has become optional to
claim copyright, because the Berne Convention makes copyright automatic.[20]
However, the lack of notice of copyright using these marks may have
consequences in terms of reduced damages in an infringement lawsuit â using
notices of this form may reduce the likelihood of a defense of "innocent
infringement" being successful.[21]

### [edit] Enforcement

Main article: United States civil copyright enforcement procedure

Enforcement procedure usually follows this path:

  * Send a cease-and-desist letter
  * File lawsuit
  * Seek a preliminary injunction to prevent further or continuing infringement during the trial
  * Proceed through trial to arrive at a final decree on permanent injunction and damages

## [edit] Infringement

Infringement is defined in 17 U.S.C. Â§ 501. Infringement requires

  * a protected work
  * that the defendant copied the protected work
  * that the defendant's copying of the protected work was an infringement

If a work is not protectable it cannot be infringed upon. For instance, spoken
conversations that are unrecorded ("fixed in a tangible medium of expression")
are not protectable. Similarly, if two individuals both create a story that by
pure coincidence is nearly identical, but each without knowledge of the other,
there is no infringement since there is no copying. Typically this is referred
to as the defense of independent creation; however, technically this is not a
defense since without copying there is not an infringement to begin with. Even
if a defendant copied protected works that act might be permissible under one
of the defenses or limitations. Fair use is one such defense. Quoting from a
book in a review might be a copying of protected material, however this
copying may well be permissible under 17 U.S.C. Â§ 107. The fair use factors
are described below.

### [edit] Parodies

Although a parody can be considered a derivative work under United States
Copyright Law, and thus within the exclusive rights of the copyright owner, it
may qualify for the "fair use" exception to the exclusive rights, which is
codified at 17 U.S.C. Â§ 107. Parodic works are not automatically fair use of
the material parodied, however. The Supreme Court of the United States stated
that parody "is the use of some elements of a prior author's composition to
create a new one that, at least in part, comments on that author's works."
That commentary function provides some justification for use of the older
work; in contrast, a satire (which is not targeted at the work borrowed from)
does not require use of the original work to make its point. (See Campbell v.
Acuff-Rose Music, Inc.)

### [edit] Defenses and limitations

US copyright law includes numerous defenses, exceptions, and limitations.
These protect both the boundary with the free expression guarantees of the
First Amendment and establish carve-outs to address specific situations.

Some of the most important include:

  * Subject matter limitations and the "idea/expression dichotomy". Copyright applies only to certain subject matter, codified within 17 USC 102. Works that are not "original works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression" are not subject to copyright. 17 U.S.C. Â§ 102(b) codifies that copyright protection does not extend to ideas, procedures, processes, systems, etc. Facts may not be copyrighted. Feist.
  * The "fair use" exception is codified at 17 U.S.C. Â§ 107, and states that "the fair use of a copyrighted work ... is not an infringement of copyright." The section lists four factors that must be assessed to determine whether a particular use is fair.
  * The first sale doctrine is codified at 17 U.S.C. Â§ 109, and limits the rights of copyright holders to control the distribution and display of copies of their works. The owner of a particular copy is entitled to "sell or otherwise dispose of the possession of that copy" and to "display the copy publicly ... to viewers present at the place where the copy is located."
  * The "good faith" defense (Section 504(c)(2)) protects educational institutions, libraries, archives, and public broadcasters, by permitting the court to limit statutory damages to only $200 if they reasonably believed their infringement was a fair use under 17 U.S.C. Â§ 107.
  * 17 U.S.C. Â§ 108 and Â§ 110-122 include specific exemptions for types of works and particular entities, such as libraries (Â§ 108), public broadcasters (Â§ 110 and Â§ 118), braille (Â§ 121), software backup copies (Â§ 117), "cover license" permitting sound recording covers (Â§ 115), and jukebox compulsory licenses (Â§ 116).
  * Section 512 ("OCILLA", passed as part of the DMCA in 1998) provides a contingent "safe harbor" for online service providers from secondary liability for their users' copy infringements.

### [edit] Government infringement

The U.S. government, its agencies and officials, and corporations owned or
controlled by it, are subject to suit for copyright infringement. All
infringement claims against the U.S. that did not arise in a foreign country
must be filed with the United States Court of Federal Claims within three
years of the infringing action.[22] Claims filed in the wrong court are
dismissed for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction. The government and its
agencies are also authorized to settle the infringement claims out of court.

### [edit] Provisions for the handicapped

There is specific statutory provision for reproduction of material for the
blind or other persons with disabilities. Specific legislation permits the
reproduction of copyright works in Braille, audio, electronic, Web-Braille, or
other necessary formats. The program is administered by the National Library
Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (NLS).

## [edit] Relief available for infringement

A person whose copyright has been violated (infringed upon) may pursue relief.
These remedies, however, require the copyright holder to actively enforce his
or her rights. There is no "copyright police" that enforces copyright without
the right holder complaining. For example, the FBI investigates cases of
criminal infringement (mostly audio and video products), but even then, it
does not do so on its own, only on cases where a complaint is received from
the copyright holder. The FBI has its own guidelines on which cases to
investigate.

### [edit] Civil remedies

Barring investigation by law enforcement, therefore, a copyright holder must
file a lawsuit in federal court to pursue his or her remedies. These remedies
fall into two general categories: Injunctions and damages.

Injunctions: Copyright Act Â§502 authorizes courts to grant both preliminary
and permanent injunctions against copyright infringement and against
violations of the author's rights of attribution and integrity in works of
visual art. There are also provisions for impounding allegedly infringing
copies, phonorecords, and other materials used to infringe, and for their
ultimate destruction upon a final judgment of infringement.

Damages and/or profits: Section Â§504 of the 1976 Act gives the copyright
owner/author a choice of recovering: (1) their actual damages and any
additional profits of the defendant; or (2) statutory damages.

#### [edit] Equitable relief

Both temporary and permanent injunctions are available to prevent or restrain
infringement of a copyright.[23] Where the infringer is the government,
however, injunctions are not available and the copyright holder can only seek
monetary damages.[23]

One form of equitable relief that is available in copyright cases is a seizure
order. At any time during the lawsuit, the court may order the impoundment of
any and all copies of the infringing products. The seizure order may include
materials used to produce such copies, such as master tapes, film negatives,
printing plates, etc. Items that are impounded during the course of the
lawsuit can, if the plaintiff wins, be ordered destroyed as part of the final
decree.

#### [edit] Monetary damages

A copyright holder can also seek monetary damages. Injunctions and damages are
not mutually exclusive. One can have injunctions and no damages, or damages
and no injunctions, or both injunctions and damages. There are two types of
damages: actual damages and profits, or statutory damages.[24] During the
course of the lawsuit, the copyright holder can ask the court for both, in the
alternative. However, at the end of the case, they are mutually exclusive:
Only one can be awarded and not the other.[25]

Actual damages are the actual losses suffered by the copyright holder as a
result of the infringement. Profits are the profits gained by the wrongdoer as
a result of the infringement. In theory, the copyright holder can recover both
his or her own actual damages, and also the wrongdoerâs profits.

Statutory damages are available as an alternative to actual damages and
profits.[25] This is sometimes preferable if actual damages and profits are
either too small, or too difficult to prove, or both. There are, however,
situations where statutory damages are not available. 17 U.S.C. Â§ 412
provides:

  * Statutory damages are not available if the work is unpublished and the infringement began before the effective date of its registration.
  * Statutory damages are not available if the work is published but the infringement commenced after the first publication and before the effective date of its registration, unless registration is made within three months after the first publication.

Statutory damages are calculated per work infringed.[25] Statutory damages
range from a few hundred dollars to hundreds of thousands:

  * Statutory damages range from $750 per work to $150,000 per work
  * In case of âinnocent infringementâ, the range is $200 to $150,000 per work. "Innocent" is a technical term. In particular, if the work carries a copyright notice, the infringer cannot claim innocence.[26]
  * In case of âwillful infringementâ (again, âwillfulâ is a technical term), the range is $750 to $300,000 per work.

Damages in copyright cases can be very high. In Lowryâs Reports, Inc. v.
Legg Mason Inc.,[27] a 2003 lawsuit between a publisher of stock analysis
newsletters against a company that buys one copy of the newsletters and makes
multiple copies for use in-house, the jury awarded damages - actual damages
for some newsletters and statutory damages for other newsletters - totaling
$20 million.

#### [edit] Attorneyâs fees

Cost and attorney fees: Copyright Act Â§505 permits courts, in their
discretion, to award costs against either party and to award reasonable
attorney fees to the prevailing party.

The court may (but is not required to) award to the "prevailing party" a
reasonable attorneyâs fees.[28] This applies to both the winning plaintiff
(right holder) and the winning defendant (accused infringer).[29] However,
attorneyâs fees award is not available against the government. Like
statutory damages, attorneyâs fees are not available if the work infringed
is not registered at the time of infringement.

### [edit] Criminal penalties

In addition to the civil remedies, the Copyright Act provides for criminal
prosecution in some cases of willful copyright infringement. There are also
criminal sanctions for fraudulent copyright notice, fraudulent removal of
copyright notice, and false representations in applications for copyright
registration. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act imposes criminal sanctions
for certain acts of circumvention and interference with copyright management
information. There are not criminal sanctions for violating the rights of
attribution and integrity held by the author of a work of visual art.

Criminal penalties for copyright infringement include:

  * A fine of not more than $500,000 or imprisonment for not more than five years, or both, for the first offense.
  * A fine of not more than $1 million and imprisonment for not more than 10 years, or both, for repeated offenses.

Nonprofit libraries, archives, education institutions and public broadcasting
entities are exempt from criminal prosecution.

## [edit] See also

  * Copyright Clearance Center
  * Digital Millennium Copyright Act
  * International Copyright Act
  * Public Domain Enhancement Act
  * Sweat of the brow
  * United States copyright law in the performing arts
  * United States No Electronic Theft Act
  * United States patent law
  * United States trademark law
  * Fair Use Project

### [edit] Cases

  * List of copyright case law

#### [edit] Fixation

  * White-Smith Music Publishing Company v. Apollo Company (1908)
  * Midway Manufacturing Co. v. Artic International, Inc. (1982)

#### [edit] Originality

  * Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony (1884)
  * Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service (1991)
  * Bridgeman Art Library, Ltd. v. Corel Corp. (1999)

#### [edit] Idea/expression dichotomy

  * Baker v. Selden (1880)
  * Computer Associates Int. Inc. v. Altai Inc. (1992)

#### [edit] Fair use

  * Suntrust v. Houghton Mifflin (11th Cir. 2001) (re. Parody)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ H.R. Rep. No. 1476, 94th Cong., 2d Sess., at 131 (1976)
  2. ^ Crow v. Wainwright, 720 F.2d 1224 (11th Cir. 1983), cert. denied, 469 U.S. 819 (1984). But see New Hampshire v. Nelson 150 N.H. 569 (2004). In Nelson, the defendant's conviction for receiving stolen property was affirmed. The "property" at issue was scanned copies of photographs that the defendant had removed from another's home. The defendant had returned the photographs, and the lack of any intent to permanently deprive the owner of the photos prevented prosecution based on removal of the physical photographs themselves. Thus, Nelson's conviction was based upon making and retaining the scanned copies.
  3. ^ S. Rpt. 94-473
  4. ^ S. Rpt. 94-473. See also Legislative history of Pub.L. 94-553
  5. ^ 17 U.S.C. 102
  6. ^ U.S. Copyright Office - Copyright Law: Chapter 1
  7. ^ See 17 U.S.C. Â§ 101 (defining "copy").
  8. ^ 17 U.S.C. Â§Â§ 106(1) and 106(3).
  9. ^ See Copyright aspects of hyperlinking and framing.
  10. ^ See Transformativeness.
  11. ^ See Muller v. Triboro Bridge Authority, 43 F. Supp. 298 (S.D.N.Y. 1942).
  12. ^ See King Features Syndicate v. Fleischer, 299 F. 533 (2d Cir. 1924) (finding copying in defendant's creating three-dimensional "Sparky" figure based on copyrighted two-dimensional cartoon); Geisel v. Poynter Prods. Inc., 295 F. Supp. 331 (S.D.N.Y. 1968) (according copyright protection to three-dimensional Dr. Seuss dolls based upon two-dimensional cartoon); Fleischer Studios, Inc. v. Freundlich, 5 F. Supp. 808 (S.D.N.Y. 1934) (according copyright protection to three-dimensional Betty Boop doll based upon two-dimensional cartoon).
  13. ^ "Copyright Term and the Public Domain in the United States 1 January 2008.", Cornell University.
  14. ^ 17 U.S.C. Â§ 303
  15. ^ 17 U.S.C. Â§ 301
  16. ^ Capitol Records v. Naxos of America (2005). New York Court of Appeals.
  17. ^ 28 U.S.C. Â§ 1338
  18. ^ Copyright Act of 1976, Pub.L. 94-553, 90 Stat. 2541, Â§ 401(a) (October 19, 1976)
  19. ^ The Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988 (BCIA), Pub.L. 100-568, 102 Stat. 2853, 2857. One of the changes introduced by the BCIA was to section 401, which governs copyright notices on published copies, specifying that notices "may be placed on" such copies; prior to the BCIA, the statute read that notices "shall be placed on all" such copies. An analogous change was made in section 402, dealing with copyright notices on phonorecords.
  20. ^ U.S. Copyright Office - Information Circular
  21. ^ 17 U.S.C. Â§ 401(d)
  22. ^ 28 U.S.C. Â§ 1498(b)-(c).
  23. ^ a b 17 U.S.C. Â§ 502
  24. ^ 17 U.S.C. Â§ 504
  25. ^ a b c 17 U.S.C. Â§ 504(c)
  26. ^ 17 U.S.C. Â§ 402(d)
  27. ^ Lowryâs Reports, Inc. v. Legg Mason Inc., 271 F. Supp. 2d 737 (D. Md. 2003)
  28. ^ 17 U.S.C. Â§ 505
  29. ^ Fogerty v. Fantasy, 510 U.S. 517 (1994)

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

US Copyright Law (Title 17, U.S. Code)

Sister project Wikibooks has a book on the topic of

US Copyright Law  
### [edit] United States

  * Cornell University: Guide to copyright terms in the U.S.
  * United States Copyright Office
  * Copyright Office list of circulars
    * Circular 21, Reproduction of copyrighted Works by Educators and Librarians
  * USPTO Stopfakes.gov Small Business Resources
  * Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding copyright
  * Copyright Timeline: A History of Copyright in the U.S.
  * Copyright and Culture by Christopher D. Hunter
  * Text of every version of U.S. Copyright Act for 1909 to the present
  * Flow-charts and tables to determine copyright status of a work
  * Digital copyright slider to determine copyright status of a work

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_copyright_law"

Categories: United States copyright law

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Alemannisch
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * Hrvatski
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 19:11 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



