
# Separation of powers

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Not to be confused with Balance of power or Division of powers.  
This article is part of the  
Politics series  
Politics  
  * List of political topics
  * Politics by country
  * Politics by subdivision
  * Political economy
  * Political history
  * Political history of the world
  * Political philosophy
  * Political science
  * Political systems
    * Parliamentary  

    * Presidential  

    * Semi-presidential

  * International relations (theory)
  * Political scientists
  * Comparative politics
  * Public administration
    * Bureaucracy (street-level)
    * Adhocracy

  * Public Policy
  * Separation of powers
    * Legislature  

    * Executive  

    * Judiciary

  * Sovereignty
  * Theories of political behavior

  
Subseries  
  * Elections
Electoral systems  
Voting

  * Federalism
  * Forms of government
  * Ideology
  * Political campaigning
  * Political parties

  
Politics portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Separation of powers, a term ascribed to French Enlightenment political
philosopher Baron de Montesquieu,[1][2] is a model for the governance of
democratic states. The model is also known as trias politica. The model was
first developed in ancient Greece and came into widespread use by the Roman
Republic as part of the uncodified Constitution of the Roman Republic. Under
this model, the state is divided into branches or estates, each with separate
and independent powers and areas of responsibility. The normal division of
estates is into an executive, a legislature, and a judiciary.

Parliamentary democracies do not have distinct separation of powers. The
executive, which often consists of a prime minister and cabinet
("government"), is drawn from the legislature (parliament). This is the
principle of responsible government. However, although the legislative and
executive branches are connected, in parliamentary systems there is usually an
independent judiciary.

No democratic system exists with an absolute separation of powers or an
absolute lack of separation of powers. Nonetheless, some systems are clearly
founded on the principle of separation of powers, while others are clearly
based on a fusion of powers.

## Contents

  * 1 Origins in the Constitution of the Roman Republic
  * 2 Montesquieu's tripartite system
  * 3 Separation of powers vs. fusion of powers
  * 4 Other branches
    * 4.1 Auditory
    * 4.2 Civil examination
    * 4.3 Data
    * 4.4 Electoral
    * 4.5 The people
    * 4.6 Independent executive agencies
    * 4.7 The press
      * 4.7.1 The press around the world
  * 5 Various models around the world
    * 5.1 Australia: three branches
    * 5.2 People's Republic of China
    * 5.3 Costa Rica: five branches
    * 5.4 European Union
    * 5.5 France
    * 5.6 Germany: three branches and six bodies
    * 5.7 Republic of China ("Taiwan"): five branches of government
    * 5.8 United Kingdom
    * 5.9 United States: three branches
      * 5.9.1 Checks and balances
      * 5.9.2 Maintaining balance
      * 5.9.3 State and local governments
    * 5.10 Venezuela: five branches
  * 6 Criticisms
  * 7 Related restraint-of-power concepts
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Origins in the Constitution of the Roman Republic

The government of the Roman Republic divided power into three independent
branches: the senate, the legislative branch, and the executive branch. The
Senate made military and foreign policy, and directed domestic policy. It also
issued orders to executive branch officials, which were usually obeyed. The
Senate was not a legislative body and it did not pass laws. The legislative
branch had two primary functions. First, it elected all executive officials.
Election to such office usually meant automatic membership in the senate
(senate terms were for life). The second major function of the legislative
branch was to pass domestic laws. These legislative assemblies were not bodies
of elected representatives. Rather, they were bodies of citizens,
participating in a direct-democracy legislative system. The laws (Latin: lex)
passed by these assemblies were called plebiscites, the modern equivalent of
popular referendums. Members of the executive branch commanded the military,
enforced the laws, and acted as high judges. A network of checks and balances
existed between the three branches. This system of checks and balances was
designed to prevent the accumulation of too much power into the hands of a
lonely person.

## [edit] Montesquieu's tripartite system

<IMG> This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.  
Montesquieu described division of political power among an executive, a
legislature, and a judiciary. He based this model on the British
constitutional system, in which he perceived a separation of powers among the
monarch, Parliament, and the courts of law. Subsequent writers have noted that
this was misleading, because Great Britain had a very closely connected
legislature and executive, with further links to the judiciary (though
combined with judicial independence). But in Montesquieu's time, the political
connection between Britain's Parliament and the monarch's Ministry was not as
close as it would later become.

Montesquieu did specify that "the independence of the judiciary has to be
real, and not apparent merely".[3] "The judiciary was generally seen as the
most important of powers, independent and unchecked", and also considered the
least dangerous.[3] Some politicians decry judicial action against them as a
"criminalization" of their behavior, but such "criminalization" may be seen as
a response to corruption, collusion, or abuse of power by these
politicians.[4]

## [edit] Separation of powers vs. fusion of powers

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008)  
In democratic systems of governance, a continuum exists between "Presidential
government" and "Parliamentary government". "Separation of powers" is a
feature more inherent to presidential systems, whereas "fusion of powers" is
characteristic of parliamentary ones. "Mixed systems" fall somewhere in
between, usually near the midpoint; the most notable example of a mixed system
is France's (current) Fifth Republic.

In fusion of powers, one government (invariably the elected legislature) is
supreme, and the other estates are subservient to it. In separation of powers,
each estate is largely (although not necessarily entirely) independent of the
others. Independent in this context means either that selection of each estate
happens independently of the other estates or at least that each estate is not
beholden to any of the others for its continued existence.

Accordingly, in a fusion of powers system such as that of the United Kingdom,
first described as such by Walter Bagehot, the people elect the legislature,
which in turn "creates" the executive. As Professor Cheryl Saunders writes,
"...the intermixture of institutions [in the UK] is such that it is almost
impossible to describe it as a separation of powers."[5] In a separation of
powers, the national legislature does not select the person or persons[6] of
the executive; instead, the executive is chosen by other means (direct popular
election, electoral college selection, etc.) In a parliamentary system, when
the term of the legislature ends, so too may the tenure of the executive
selected by that legislature. Although in a presidential system the
executive's term may or may not coincide with the legislature's, their
selection is technically independent of the legislature. However, when the
executive's party controls the legislature, the executive often reaps the
benefits of what is, in effect, a "fusion of powers". Such situations may
thwart the constitutional goal or normal popular perception that the
legislature is the more democratic branch or the one "closer to the people",
reducing it to a virtual "consultative assembly", politically or procedurally
unableâor unwillingâto hold the executive accountable in the event of
blatant, even boldly admitted, "high crimes and misdemeanors."

## [edit] Other branches

### [edit] Auditory

With the title Comptroller General, Auditor General or Comptroller and Auditor
General, the European Union's Court of Auditors and Taiwan's Control Yuan are
individual or bodies of independent ombudsmen. They are often independent of
the other branches of government.

Their purpose is to audit government expenditure and general activity. Also
non as checks and balance

### [edit] Civil examination

Sun Yat Sen proposed a branch of government based on the Imperial examination
system used in China. The "Examination Yuan" (Traditional Chinese: èè©¦é¢;
pinyin: KÇoshÃ¬ YuÃ n), as it is called in Taiwan, is in charge of validating
the qualification of civil servants. This structure has been implemented in
the Republic of China.

### [edit] Data

In Germany, as in the rest of the EU, there is a notion of data protection. In
Germany it is represented by its own commissioners. Additionally there is the
BStU dealing with the Stasi archives and the German Federal Archives, each
providing access to data only in accordance with special laws.

### [edit] Electoral

Costa Rica's Supreme Elections Tribunal is a branch of government that manages
elections. Similar independent institutions exist in many other democratic
countries, however they are not seen as a branch of government. In many
countries, these are known as Electoral Commissions.

### [edit] The people

Many philosophers and political scientists believe that democratic governments
are created and constitutions exist to serve the people. The people have their
own system of checks and balances by electing the legislative and executive
branches. The government also draws its power directly from the people.
Without the people, there is no government, just as without the legislative
branch, there can be no judicial branch.

In the Constitution of Venezuela, the "citizen's power" is a formal branch of
government, though it acts like auditors' branches in other jurisdictions.

See also:

  * Direct democracy
  * Initiative
  * Referendum
  * Recall election

### [edit] Independent executive agencies

The federal executive of the United States is a very large bureaucracy, and
due to civil service rules, most middle- and low-level government workers do
not change when a new President is elected. (New high-level officials are
usually appointed and must be confirmed by the United States Senate.)
Moreover, semi-independent agencies (such as the Federal Reserve or the
Federal Communications Commission) may be created within the executive by the
legislature. These agencies exercise legally defined regulatory powers. High-
level regulators are appointed by the President and confirmed by the
legislature; they must follow the law and certain lawful executive orders. But
they often sit for long, fixed terms and enjoy reasonable independence from
other policy makers. Because of its importance to modern governance, the
regulatory bureaucracy of the executive is sometimes referred to as a "fourth"
branch of government.

This separation is even more pronounced in the United Kingdom. The separation
was a prominent element of the Yes Minister comedy television series.

### [edit] The press

The press has been described as a "fourth power" because of its considerable
influence over public opinion (which in turn affects the outcome of
elections), as well as its indirect influence in the branches of government
by, for example, its support or criticism of pending legislation or policy
changes. It has rarely, however, been a formal branch of democratic
government; nor have political philosophers suggested that it become one.

The press is also sometimes referred to as the Fourth Estate, a term of French
origin, which is not related to the modern three-branch system of government.

Originally, the First Amendment of the United States Constitution explicitly
guaranteed freedom of the press only against interference by the federal
government. Later this right was extended by the United States Supreme Court
in the Incorporation Cases to cover state and local governments.

Traditionally, the press has been the "voice of the people", keeping
government somewhat in check. Examples of this were the Watergate scandal,
where two Washington Post reporters exposed corruption and coverup at the
highest levels of government, or the Adscam (Sponsorship scandal) which was
uncovered by the press in Canada. This exposure caused the resignation,
firing, or prosecution of many officials.

There exist situations where the press can affect public opinion in ways that
are contrary to the spirit of separation of powers. One of the most compelling
of these situations is when the state controls the content and distribution of
the information disseminated by the press. However, even if the press is
immune to censorship and compulsion from the government, the controlling
entity of a press association or media outlet must almost always edit, and may
editorialize, providing opportunities to affect public opinion in ways that
may contradict public interest. In all cases, the "voice of the people" (as
perceived by some) is modified by the opinions of those producing the stories.

#### [edit] The press around the world

Main articles: Freedom of the press and public broadcasting

Freedom of the reporting media is generally considered to be essential for the
perpetuation of democratic governments, and it is found in all strong
democracies, regardless of the organizational principle of the "branches" of
government.

Many governments financially support public broadcasting in some way, but in
strong democracies these media outlets can enjoy wide editorial latitude.

An independent press acts as a powerful check on all forms of government by
providing information about governmental activities to the public. There are
weighty arguments to suggest that the press is the external 4th branch which
continuously scrutinizes a government's operations, with David Blunkett's two
resignations as both Home Secretary(2004) and Secretary of State for Work and
Pensions (2005) as particular examples.

## [edit] Various models around the world

Constitutions with a high degree of separation of powers are found worldwide.
The UK system is distinguished by a particular entwining of powers. India's
democratic system also offers a clear separation of power under Lok Sabha
(lower house of parliament), Rajya Sabha (upper house of Parliament), and the
President of India, who overlooks independent governing branches such as the
Election commission and the Judiciary. Under the Indian constitution, just as
in the British system, the Prime Minister is a head of the governing party and
functions through a selected group of ministers. In Italy the powers are
completely separated, even if Council of Ministers need the vote of confidence
from both chambers of Parliament, that's however formed by a wide number of
members (almost 1,000).

Countries with little separation of power include New Zealand and Canada.
Canada makes limited use of separation of powers in practice, although in
theory it distinguishes between branches of government.

Complete separation-of-powers systems are almost always presidential, although
theoretically this need not be the case. There are a few historical
exceptions, such as the Directoire system of revolutionary France. Switzerland
offers an example of non-Presidential separation of powers today: It is run by
a seven-member executive branch, the Federal Council. However, some might
argue that Switzerland does not have a strong separation of powers system, as
the Federal Council is appointed by parliament (but not dependent on
parliament), and the judiciary has no power of review.

### [edit] Australia: three branches

Main article: Separation of powers in Australia

### [edit] People's Republic of China

Main article: Government of the People's Republic of China

### [edit] Costa Rica: five branches

After eight years of social conflict, the question of who would lead Costa
Rica and which transformational model the State would use was decided by who
killed the president. A constituent assembly followed and drew up a new
constitution, approved in 1949. This document was an edit of the constitution
of 1871, as the constituent assembly rejected more radical corporatist ideas
proposed by the ruling junta. Nonetheless, the new constitution increased
centralization of power at the expense of municipalities and eliminated
provincial government altogether.

It established the three supreme powers as the legislature, executive, and
judicial branches, but also created two other autonomous state organs that
have equivalent power but not equivalent rank. The first is the Supreme
Elections Tribunal (electoral branch) which controls elections and makes
unique, unappealable decisions on their outcomes.

The second is the office of the Comptroller General (auditory branch), an
autonomous and independent organ nominally subordinate to the unicameral
legislative assembly. All budgets of ministries and municipalities must pass
through this agency, including the execution of budget items such as
contracting for routine operations. The Comptroller also provides financial
vigilance over government offices and office holders, and routinely brings
actions to remove mayors for malfeasance, firmly establishing this
organization as the fifth branch of the Republic.

### [edit] European Union

The branches of the European Union are slightly mixed due to the complex
nature of the EU's design. There are five institutions of the European Union.
The functioning of the EU is split into intergovernmental and supranational
spheres (see three pillars of the European Union). In intergovernmental
matters, most power is concentrated in the Council of the European Union \-
giving it the characteristics of a normal international organization. Here,
all power at EU level is in one branch. In the latter there are four main
actors. The European Commission acts as an independent executive which is
appointed by the Council in conjunction with the European Parliament. The
European Parliament is one half of the legislative branch and is directly
elected. The Council itself acts both as the second half of the legislative
branch and also holds some executive functions (some of which are exercised by
the related European Council in practice). The European Court of Justice acts
as the independent judicial branch, interpreting EU law and treaties. The
remaining institution, the European Court of Auditors, is an independent
auditory authority (due to the sensitive nature of fraud in the EU).

  * European Commission \- executive
  * European Parliament \- legislative
  * Council of the European Union \- legislative and executive
  * European Court of Justice \- judicial
  * European Court of Auditors \- auditory

### [edit] France

Main article: Government of France

### [edit] Germany: three branches and six bodies

The six main bodies enshrined in the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of
Germany are:

  * Federal President (BundesprÃ¤sident) - executive
  * Federal Cabinet (Bundesregierung) - executive
  * Federal Diet (Bundestag) & Federal Council (Bundesrat) - legislative
  * Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung) - presidential electoral college
  * Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht) - judiciary

The Bundesversammlung is primiraliy constituted of members of the Bundestag
and Bundesrat.

Besides the constitutional court the judicial branch at the federal level is
made up of five supreme courts - one for civil and criminal cases
(Bundesgerichtshof), and one each for administrative, tax, labour, and social
security issues. There are also state (LÃ¤nder / BundeslÃ¤nder) based courts
beneath them, and a rarely used senate of the supreme courts.

### [edit] Republic of China ("Taiwan"): five branches of government

Some countries take the doctrine further than the three-branch system. The
politics of the Republic of China, for example, has five branches: the
Executive Yuan, Legislative Yuan, Judicial Yuan, Control Yuan, and Examination
Yuan.

Due in part to the Republic's youth, the relationship between its executive
and legislative branches are poorly defined. An example of the problems this
causes is the near complete political paralysis that results when the
president, who has neither the power to veto nor the ability to dissolve the
legislature and call new elections, cannot negotiate with the legislature when
his party is in the minority.[7]

### [edit] United Kingdom

<IMG> This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.  
Although the principle of separation of power plays a role in the United
Kingdom's constitutional doctrine, the UK constitution is often described as
having "a weak separation of powers"[citation needed], despite its
constitution being the one to which Montesquieu originally referred. For
example, in the United Kingdom, the executive forms a subset of the
legislature, as doesâto a lesser extentâthe judiciary. The Prime Minister,
the chief executive, must by convention be a Member of the House of Commons
and can effectively be removed from office by a simple majority vote.
Furthermore, while the courts in Britain are undoubtedly amongst the most
independent in the world, the Law Lords, who are the final arbiters of
judicial disputes in the UK, sit simultaneously in the House of Lords, the
upper house of the legislature, although this arrangement will cease in 2009
when the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom comes into existence.
Furthermore, because of the existence of Parliamentary sovereignty, while the
theory of separation of powers may be studied in Britain, a system such as
that of the UK is more accurately described as a "fusion of powers."[citation
needed]

The development of the British constitution, which is not written down in one
document, is based on this fusion in the person of the Monarch, who has a
formal role to play in the legislature (Parliament, which is where legal and
political sovereignty lies, is the Crown-in-Parliament, and is summoned and
dissolved by the Queen who must give her Royal Assent to all Bills so that
they become Acts), the executive (the Queen appoints all ministers of Her
Majesty's Government, who govern in the name of the Crown) and the judiciary
(the Queen, as the fount of justice, appoints all senior judges, and all
public prosecutions are brought in her name).

The British legal system is based on common law traditions which require:

  * Police or regulators cannot initiate complaints under criminal law but can only investigate (prosecution is mostly reserved for the Crown Prosecution Service), which prevents selective enforcement, e.g. the 'fishing expedition' which is often specifically forbidden.
  * Prosecutors cannot withhold evidence from attorneys for the defendant; to do so results in mistrial or dismissal. Accordingly, their relation to police is no advantage.
  * Defendants convicted can appeal, but no new evidence can usually be introduced, restricting the power of the court of appeal to the process of law applied.

### [edit] United States: three branches

Main article: Separation of powers under the United States Constitution

In the United States Constitution, Article I Section I gives Congress only
those "legislative powers herein granted" and proceeds to list those
permissible actions in Article I Section 8, while Section 9 lists actions that
are prohibited for Congress. The vesting clause in Article II places no limits
on the Executive branch, simply stating that, "The Executive Power shall be
vested in a President of the United States of America."[8] The Supreme Court
holds "The judicial Power" according to Article III, and it established the
implication of Judicial review in Marbury vs Madison.[9] The federal
government refers to the branches as "branches of government", while some
systems use "government" to describe the executive. The Executive branch has
attempted to usurp power from Congress arguing for Separation of powers to
include being the Commander in Chief of a standing army since the Civil war,
executive orders, emergency powers and security classifications since WWII,
national security, signing statements, and now the concept of a unitary
executive.

#### [edit] Checks and balances

To prevent one branch from becoming supreme, and to induce the branches to
cooperate, governance systems that employ a separation of powers need a way to
balance each of the branches. Typically this was accomplished through a system
of "checks and balances", the origin of which, like separation of powers
itself, is specifically credited to Montesquieu. Checks and balances allows
for a system based regulation that allows one branch to limit another, such as
the power of Congress to alter the composition and jurisdiction of the federal
courts.

Legislative  
Executive  
Judicial  
  
  * Also known as Congress
  * Makes all laws.
  * Controls all the money; taxes, borrows, and sets the budget.
  * Has sole power to declare war.
  * Oversees, investigates, and makes the rules for the government and its officers.
  * Appoints the heads of the executive branch.
  * Confirms federal judicial appointments.
  * Ratifies treaties.
  * Originates cases of impeachment.

  * Preserves, protects and defends the Constitution
  * Faithfully executes the laws of the United States
  * Executes the instructions of Congress
  * May veto laws but the veto may be overridden by Congress by a 2/3 majority.
  * Executes the spending authorized by Congress
  * Executes the instructions of Congress when it declares war or makes rules for the military
  * Declares states of emergency and publishes regulations and executive orders
  * Appoints judges with the advice and consent of the Senate
  * President and Vice-President can be impeached and removed from office by Congress
  * Has the power to grant pardons for crimes against the United States

  * Determines which jurisdiction any given case falls under
  * Judges when a law is unconstitutional
  * Has the responsibility to administer Constitutional law and to apply it to constitutional disputes
  * Determines the disposition of prisoners
  * May legally compel testimony and the production of evidence as the law provides.
  * Judges and competently administers uniform policies via the appeals process, but gives discretion in individual cases to low-level judges. (The amount of discretion depends upon the standard of review, determined by the type of case in question.)
  * Oversees and administers members of the judiciary
  * Is subject to impeachment by Congress

  
#### [edit] Maintaining balance

The theoretical independence of the executive and legislative branches is
partly maintained by the fact that they are separately elected and are held
directly accountable to the public. There are also judicial prohibitions
against certain types of interference in each others' affairs. (See
"separation of powers" cases in the List of United States Supreme Court
cases.) Judicial independence is maintained by life appointments of judges,
with voluntary retirement, and a high threshold for removal by the
legislature. In recent years, there have been accusations that the power to
interpret the law is being misused (judicial activism) by some judges in the
US. In the checks and balances system, the judicial branch has the right to
say that something is unconstitutional, like a law or a bill (Credited to an
opinion piece by Chief Justice John Marshall presiding over the case of
Marbury v. Madison (1803)).

The legal mechanisms constraining the powers of the three branches depend a
great deal on the sentiment of the people. A common perception is that popular
support establishes legitimacy and makes possible the actual implementation of
legal authority. National crises (such as the Civil War, the Great Depression,
pre-Pearl Harbor World War II, the Vietnam War) have been the times at which
the principle of separation of powers has been most endangered, either through
official "misbehavior" or through the willingness of the public to sacrifice
such principles if more pressing problems are solved. The system of checks and
balances is also self-reinforcing. Potential abuse of power may be deterred,
and the legitimacy and sustainability of any power grab is hindered by the
ability of the other two branches to take corrective action; though they still
must actually do so, therefore accountability is not automatic. This is
intended to reduce opportunities for tyranny sometimes.

However, as James Madison wrote in Federalist No. 51 regarding the ability of
each branch to defend itself from actions by the others, "But it is not
possible to give to each department an equal power of self-defense. In
republican government, the legislative authority necessarily predominates."
Bicameralism was, in part, intended to reduce the relative power of the
legislature by turning it against itself, by having "different modes of
election and different principles of action." (This is one of the arguments
against the popular election of Senators, which was instituted by the
Seventeenth Amendment.) But when the legislature is unified, it can obtain
dominance over the other branches.

#### [edit] State and local governments

The American states mirror the executive/legislative/judicial division of the
federal government. Major cities tend to do so as well, but the arrangements
of local and regional governments vary widely. Because the judicial branch is
often a part of a state or county government, the geographic jurisdiction of
local judges is often not coterminous with municipal boundaries.

In many American states and local governments, executive authority and law
enforcement authority are separated by allowing citizens to directly elect
public prosecutors (district attorneys and state attorneys-general). In some
states, judges are also directly elected.

Many localities also separate special powers from their executive and
legislative branches through the direct election of sheriffs, school boards,
transit agency boards, park commissioners, etc.

Juries (groups of randomly selected citizens) also have an important role in
the checks-and-balances system. They have the sole authority to not only
determine the facts in most criminal and civil cases, but to judge the law,
acting as a powerful buffer against arbitrary enforcement by the executive and
judicial branches. In many jurisdictions they are also used to determine
whether or not a trial is warranted, and in some places Grand Juries have
independent investigative powers with regard to government operations.

### [edit] Venezuela: five branches

Main article: Constitution of Venezuela

The constitution establish that the government of Venezuela has five branches:
the executive, the legislature, the judiciary, an electoral branch, and a
citizen's branch that acts as an auditor.

## [edit] Criticisms

<IMG>

This article contains weasel words, vague phrasing that often accompanies
biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or
removed. (December 2007)  
It can be argued that there is no natural distinction between executive and
legislative forms of government: legislation that is passed must always be
executed, and much executive action requires new laws. This argument might be
compared to the arrangement between Architect, Contractor and Owner, where the
architect designs a plan, the contractor executes it, and the owner pays. Not
all plans are built as designed, but where there are change orders its the
architect who writes them, where there are requisitions for payment its the
architect who approves them, and where there are disputes its the architect
who decides them.

As such, while the division can be said to be an artificial one, the roles
defined by the division have different degrees of power and responsibility.In
the United States the Legislative branch has all the power, the Executive
branch has the responsibility to preserve, protect and defend the constitution
and the laws of the United States and the Judicial branch decides.

There is currently no constitutional system which has a complete separation of
powers where there is a distribution of functions among three independent
organs with no overlapping or cross-coordination except for the United States
as described above. Some of the early American States and the French
Constitution of 1791 tried to enforce this doctrine strictly, but they failed.
Instead, most constitutions give slightly overlapping powers to each branch,
such as the US president's ability to veto legislation, or the power of
judicial appointment.

Some observers believe that no obvious case exists in which such instability
was prevented by the separation of powers. In parliamentary systems such as
the United Kingdom the three "powers" are not separated (although the
judiciary is independent). However, this has not threatened British stability,
because the strong tradition of parliamentary sovereignty serves the purpose
of limiting executive power.

In contrast, many countries which have adopted separation of powers
(especially in Latin America) have suffered from instability (coups d'Ã©tat,
military dictatorships, civil war and unrest, etc). If the separated executive
is granted strong powers, it may well encourage instability, because it is
less consensus-oriented than a parliamentary system, and because it inures the
population and political elite to the influence of a dominant leader. In times
of instability, competing political groups can become obsessed with
controlling the executive office, and it is often the loss of a presidential
election which triggers greater instability. In a presidential system, there
can only be one winning party, and all others fail entirely to gain power. In
contrast, a parliamentary system can allow all political groups to have some
share in control of the executive by participating in a coalition.

Some are concerned that where the executive branch is granted few powers,
there is the danger of political gridlock. When the executive cannot operate
without waiting for the legislature to deliberate, then government action to
solve problems can be delayed. Others are concerned that where there is
deciciveness without deliberation the consequences can be grave.

Some political scientists have wondered whether there is a tendency for
separation-of-power systems, especially those with strong executives, to
develop into two-party systems[citation needed]. As the executive is as a
"winner-take-all" position, voters and lobby groups might tend to adopt a
strategy of supporting their preferred choice from the two leading candidates,
the perception being that a vote or donation to a third-party candidate is a
waste. As the executive is usually considered the most important position in
government, members of the legislature will coalesce into groups supporting
the two dominant executive candidates. Recently we have seen an alternative to
this partisan schism may be offered when there is a competent and cooperative
relationship established between branches respecting their established roles.

The categories of the functions and corresponding powers of government are
inclined to become blurred when it is attempted to apply them to the details
of a particular constitution. Some hold that the true distinction lies not in
the nature of the powers themselves, but rather in the procedure by which they
are exercised.

Sometimes systems with clearly defined separation of powers are complex and
difficult for any person to understand, resulting in a nebulous political
process and leading to a lack of engagement. Proponents of parliamentary
systems and the legislative process claim that they make it easier to
understand how "politics is done" by providing a clearer view of who does
what, who is responsible for what, and who is to blame. This is important when
it comes to engaging the people in political debate and increasing citizens'
interest and participation in politics. However, for a parliamentary system to
work effectively, institutional arrangements such as fair electoral laws,
freedom of the press, independent courts, due process, and the independence of
the Houses of Parliament must be so designed as to prevent executive supremacy
over the legislative and judicial branches while also encouraging a culture of
public debate, open government, accountable office holders, and policy
contest-ability and compromise, rather than a culture of "winner takes all"
political domination.

## [edit] Related restraint-of-power concepts

  * Federalism, also known as vertical separation of powers â Prevents abuse by dividing governing powers, usually by separating municipal, provincial, and national governments. See also subsidiarity.
  * Rule of law \- Prevents arbitrary exercise of the executive power, preserves general and minority rights, and promotes stability and predictability.
  * Democracy and civil society \- Attempts to constrain elected branches of government to act in the public interest, not in self-interest.
  * Separation of church and state or LaÃ¯citÃ© \- Ensures freedom of religion by preventing government interference in its practice. Also constrains the power of government by maintaining freedom of conscience and belief.
  * Civilian control of the military \- Helps prevent dictatorship that otherwise might occur through military rule.
  * In some systems, an independent central bank.
  * Separation of duties in organizations.
  * Independent Civil Service.
  * Negarchy \- The self-interests of separate powers canceling one another via indirect yet interdependent means.
  * Multicameralism \- The division of legislature into separate autonomous chambers.

## [edit] See also

  * Constitution of the Roman Republic
  * Absolute power
  * Balance of power
  * Corruption Perceptions Index \- Parliamentary systems are, in general, perceived as less corrupt than other systems
  * Judicial activism
  * List of democracy and elections-related topics
  * Signing statement
  * Unitary executive theory
  * Fifth power

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ "Baron de Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)". Plato.stanford.edu. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/montesquieu/#4. Retrieved on 2008-10-29.
  2. ^ "K-Zone law - Separation of Powers: the reality". Kevinboone.com. http://www.kevinboone.com/separation.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-29.
  3. ^ a b Przeworski 2003, p.26, p.13, p.223-4
  4. ^ Przeworski 2003, p.14 [1]
  5. ^ Cheryl Saunders. "Separation of Powers and the Judicial Branch" (doc). http://www.adminlaw.org.uk/docs/Professor%20Cheryl%20Saunders%20-%20July%202006.doc.
  6. ^ Two examples of executives of more than one person are a triumvirate (three rulers) and a constitutional monarchy (two rulers).
  7. ^ "E-Notes: Why Taiwan's Political Paralysis Persists - FPRI". Fpri.org. http://www.fpri.org/enotes/asia.20020418.rigger.taiwanpoliticalparalysis.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-29.
  8. ^ Constitution of the United States. [2]
  9. ^ Madison, James. (8 February 1788) "The Structure of the Government Must Furnish the Proper Checks and Balances Between the Different Departments" The Federalist Papers No. 51

## [edit] References

  * Alec Stone Sweet, Governing With Judges: Constitutional Politics in Europe 2000 Oxford University Press ISBN 978-0-19-829730-7
  * Adam Przeworski, JM Maravall, I NetLibrary Democracy and the Rule of Law (2003)
  * The Invention of the Modern Republic (March 2007) ISBN 978-0-521-03376-3
  * Manin, Bernard Principles of Representative Government (English version 1997)
  * MJC Vile Constitutionalism and the Separation of Powers (1967, Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1998) Second edition.

## [edit] External links

  * Polybius and the Founding Fathers: the separation of powers
  * Arbitrary Government Described and the Government of the Massachusetts Vindicated from that Aspersion (1644)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_powers"

Categories: Government | Political science terms | Constitutional law

Hidden categories: Cleanup from October 2008 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles needing additional references from December 2008 | Cleanup from April
2007 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since January 2009 | Articles with weasel words from December 2007
| Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Asturianu
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 03:46.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



