
# United States House of Representatives

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to
improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate.
(February 2009)  
United States House of Representatives  
111th United States Congress  
<IMG>  
Type  
Type Lower house  
Leadership  
Speaker  
Nancy Pelosi, (D)  
since January 4, 2007  
Majority Leader Steny Hoyer, (D)  
since January 4, 2007  
Minority Leader John Boehner, (R)  
since January 4, 2007  
Structure  
Members 435 plus 6 non-voting members  
<IMG>  
Political groups Democratic Party (graphed in blue)  
Republican Party (graphed in red)  
Election  
Last election November 4, 2008  
Meeting place  
<IMG>  
United States Capitol  
Web site  
www.house.gov  
The United States House of Representatives, commonly referred to as "the
House", is one of the two chambers of the United States Congress; the other is
the Senate. Each state receives representation in the House in proportion to
its population but is entitled to at least one Representative. The most
populous state, California, currently has 53 representatives. The total number
of voting representatives is currently fixed at 435.[1] Each representative
serves for a two-year term. The presiding officer of the House is the speaker,
and is elected by the members of the house.

Because its members are generally elected from smaller (an average of 693,000
residents as of 2007) and more commonly homogeneous districts than those from
the Senate, the House is generally considered to be a more partisan chamber.
The House was granted its own exclusive powers: the power to initiate revenue
bills, impeach officials, and elect the president in electoral college
deadlocks.

The House meets in the south wing of the United States Capitol.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Membership and qualifications
    * 2.1 Apportionment
    * 2.2 Redistricting
    * 2.3 Qualifications
    * 2.4 Elections
    * 2.5 Terms
  * 3 Comparison to the Senate
  * 4 Salary and benefits
    * 4.1 Salaries
    * 4.2 Titles
  * 5 Officers
    * 5.1 Member Officials
    * 5.2 Non-member officials
  * 6 Procedure
    * 6.1 Daily Procedures
    * 6.2 Passage of legislation
  * 7 Committees
  * 8 Legislative functions
  * 9 Checks and balances
  * 10 Latest election results and party summary
  * 11 See also
  * 12 References
    * 12.1 Surveys
    * 12.2 Before 1945
    * 12.3 Since 1945
  * 13 Notes
  * 14 External links

  
## History

United States  
<IMG>  

This article is part of the series:  
Politics and government of  
the United States  
* * *  
Federal government

  * Constitution
  * Taxation

Legislature

  * Congress
    * House
      * Speaker
      * Party Leaders
      * Congressional districts
    * Senate
      * President pro tempore
      * Party Leaders

Presidency

  * President
  * Vice President
  * Cabinet
  * Federal agencies

Judiciary

  * Federal courts
    * Supreme Court
    * Circuit Courts of Appeal
    * District Courts

Elections

  * Presidential elections
  * Midterm elections

Political Parties

  * Democratic
  * Republican
  * Third parties

Subdivisions

  * State government
    * Governors
    * Legislatures (List)
    * State Courts
  * Local Government

  
* * *
Other countries Â· Atlas  
US Government Portal  

view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Main article: History of the United States House of Representatives

Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress was a unicameral body in which
each state held one vote. The ineffectiveness of the federal government under
the Articles led Congress to summon a Constitutional Convention in 1787; all
states except Rhode Island agreed to send delegates. The issue of how Congress
was to be structured was one of the most divisive among the founders during
the Convention. James Madison's Virginia Plan called for a bicameral Congress:
the lower house would be "of the people," elected directly by the people of
the United States and representing public opinion, and a more deliberative
upper house that would represent the individual states, and would be less
susceptible to variations of mass sentiment, would be elected by the lower
house.

The House is often considered to be the "lower house," with the Senate as the
"upper house," although the United States Constitution does not use such
language. Both houses' approval is necessary for the passage of legislation.
The Virginia Plan drew the support of delegates from large states such as
Virginia, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania, as it called for representation
based on population. The smaller states, however, favored the New Jersey Plan,
which called for a unicameral Congress with equal representation for the
states.

Eventually, the Convention reached the Connecticut Compromise, or the Great
Compromise, under which one house of Congress (the House of Representatives)
would provide representation proportional to each state's population, whereas
the other (the Senate) would provide equal representation amongst the states.
The Constitution was ratified by the requisite number of states (nine out of
the 13) in 1788, but its implementation was set for March 4, 1789. The House
began work on April 1, 1789, when it achieved a quorum for the first time.

During the first half of the 19th Century, the House was frequently in
conflict with the Senate over regionally divisive issues, including slavery.
The North was much more populous than the South, and therefore dominated the
House of Representatives. However, the North held no such advantage in the
Senate, where the equal representation of states prevailed.

Regional conflict was most pronounced over the issue of slavery. One example
of a provision repeatedly supported by the House but blocked by the Senate was
the Wilmot Proviso, which sought to ban slavery in the land gained during the
Mexican-American War. Conflict over slavery and other issues persisted until
the Civil War (1861â1865), which began soon after several southern states
attempted to secede from the Union. The war culminated in the South's defeat
and in the abolition of slavery. Because all southern senators except Andrew
Johnson resigned their seats at the beginning of the war, the Senate did not
have the balance of power between North and South during the war.

The years of Reconstruction that followed witnessed large majorities for the
Republican Party, which many Americans associated with the Union's victory in
the Civil War. The Reconstruction period ended in about 1877; the ensuing era,
known as the Gilded Age, was marked by sharp political divisions in the
electorate. Both the Democratic and the Republican Party held majorities in
the House at various times.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Republican Thomas Brackett Reed, occasionally ridiculed as "Czar Reed," was a
U.S. Representative from Maine, and Speaker of the House from 1889â1891 and
from 1895â1899.

The late 19th and early 20th Centuries also saw a dramatic increase in the
power of the Speaker of the House. The rise of the Speaker's influence began
in the 1890s, during tenure of Republican Thomas Brackett Reed. "Czar Reed,"
as he was nicknamed, attempted to put into effect his view that "The best
system is to have one party govern and the other party watch." The leadership
structure of the House also developed during approximately the same period,
with the positions of Majority Leader and Minority Leader being created in
1899. While the Minority Leader was the head of the minority party, the
Majority Leader remained subordinate to the Speaker. The Speakership reached
its zenith during the term of Republican Joseph Gurney Cannon, 1903 to 1911.
The powers of the Speaker included chairmanship of the influential Rules
Committee and the ability to appoint members of other House committees. These
powers, however, were curtailed in the "Revolution of 1910" because of the
efforts of Democrats and dissatisfied Republicans who opposed Cannon's
arguably heavy-handed tactics.

The Democratic Party dominated the House of Representatives during the
administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933â1945), often winning
over two-thirds of the seats. Both Democrats and Republicans were in power at
various times during the next decade. The Democratic Party maintained control
of the House from 1954 until 1995. In the mid-1970s, there were major reforms
of the House, strengthening the power of sub-committees at the expense of
committee chairmen and allowing party leaders to nominate committee chairs.
These actions were taken to undermine the seniority system, and to reduce the
ability of a small number of senior members to obstruct legislation they did
not favor. There was also a shift from the 1970s to greater control of the
legislative program by the majority party; in particular, the power of party
leaders (especially the Speaker) grew considerably.

The Republicans took control of the House in 1995, under the leadership of
Speaker Newt Gingrich. Gingrich attempted to pass a major legislative program,
the Contract with America on which the House Republicans had been elected, and
made major reforms of the House, notably reducing the tenure of committee
chairs to three two-year terms. Many elements of the Contract did not pass
Congress, were vetoed by President Bill Clinton, or were substantially altered
in negotiations with Clinton. The Republicans held on to the House until the
United States Congressional elections, 2006, during which the Democrats won
back control of both the House of Representatives and the Senate. Nancy Pelosi
was subsequently elected by the House as the first female Speaker.

## Membership and qualifications

### Apportionment

Further information: United States congressional apportionment

Under Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution, seats in the House of
Representatives are apportioned among the states by population, as determined
by the census conducted every ten years. Each state, however, is entitled to
at least one Representative.

The only constitutional rule relating to the size of the House says: "The
Number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty Thousand."[2]
Congress has regularly increased the size of the House to account for
population growth; but Congress fixed the number of voting House members at
435 in 1911.[1] The number was temporarily increased to 437 in 1959 upon the
admission of Alaska and Hawaii (seating one representative from each of those
states without changing existing apportionment), and returned to 435 four
years later, after the reapportionment consequent to the 1960 census.

The Constitution does not provide for the representation of the District of
Columbia or of territories. However, those places elect non-voting delegates
or, in the case of Puerto Rico a Resident Commissioner. The District of
Columbia and the territories of American Samoa, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands are represented by one delegate each. Puerto Rico elects a Resident
Commissioner, but other than having a four-year term, the Resident
Commissioner's role is identical to the delegates from the other territories.
The Northern Mariana Islands elected their first delegate in November 2008,
who took office in January 2009. Delegates and Resident Commissioners may
participate in debates and vote in committees. They may vote in the Committee
of the Whole when their votes would not be decisive.[3]

### Redistricting

States that are entitled to more than one Representative are divided into
single-member districts. This has been a federal statutory requirement since
1967.[4] Prior to that law, general ticket representation was used by some
states. Typically, states redraw these district lines (see redistricting)
after each census, though they may do so at other times (see 2003 Texas
redistricting). Each state determines its own district boundaries, either
through legislation or through non-partisan panels. "Malapportionment" is
unconstitutional and districts must be approximately equal in population (see
Wesberry v. Sanders). The Voting Rights Act prohibits states from
"gerrymandering" districts to reduce racial minorities' voting power.

Using gerrymandering for political gain is not prohibited, even when political
gerrymandering incidentally involves the creation of racially concentrated
districts. Because of gerrymandering, fewer than 10% of all House seats are
seriously contested in most election cycles. Since over 90% of House members
are nearly guaranteed reelection every two years because of lack of electoral
competition, elections have been criticized as being contrary to fair
competition, one of the principles of democracy.

### Qualifications

Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution sets three qualifications for
representatives. Each representative must: (1) be at least twenty-five years
old, (2) have been a citizen of the United States for the past seven years,
and (3) be (at the time of the election) an inhabitant of the state they
represent. Members need not live in their districts. The age and citizenship
qualifications for representatives are less than those for senators. The
constitutional requirements of Article I, Section 2 for election to Congress
are the maximum requirements that can be imposed on a candidate.[5] Therefore,
Article I, Section 5, which permits each House to be the judge of the
qualifications of its own members does not permit either House to establish
additional qualifications.

Disqualification. Under the Fourteenth Amendment, any federal or state officer
who takes the requisite oath to support the Constitution, but later engages in
rebellion or aids the enemies of the United States, is disqualified from
becoming a representative. This post-Civil War provision, was intended to
prevent those who sided with the Confederacy from serving. However,
disqualified individuals may serve if they gain the consent of two-thirds of
both houses of Congress.

### Elections

Elections for representatives are held in every even-numbered year, on the
first Tuesday after the first Monday in November (see Election Day (United
States)). Generally, the Republican and Democratic parties choose their
candidates for each district in primary elections, which are typically held
several months before. Ballot access rules for independent and third-party
candidates vary greatly from state to state.

Since 1967, Federal law requires that House Members be elected from single-
member-districts, thereby not permitting the use of proportional
representation.[6] Louisiana was unique in that it held an all-party "primary
election" on the general Election Day, with a subsequent runoff election
between the top two finishers (regardless of party) if no candidate receives a
majority in the primary. The state now has a system similar to most other
states whereby each party nominates candidates in closed primaries, though the
state of Washington now uses a similar (though not identical) system. Seats
vacated during a term are filled through special elections, though that
election will sometimes not take place until the next general election date. A
member chosen in a special election usually takes office as soon thereafter as
possible.

### Terms

Representatives and delegates serve for two-year terms, while the Resident
Commissioner serves for four years. Once elected, a representative continues
to serve until the expiry of their term, death, or resignation. Furthermore,
the Constitution permits the House to expel any member with a two-thirds vote.
In the history of the United States, only five members have been expelled from
the House; three of them, John Bullock Clark (D-MO), John William Reid (D-MO),
and Henry Cornelius Burnett (D-KY), were removed in 1861 for supporting the
Confederate States' secession, which led to the Civil War. Michael Myers
(D-PA) was expelled for accepting bribes in 1980, and James Traficant (D-OH)
was expelled in 2002 following his conviction for corruption. The House also
has the power to formally censure or reprimand its members; censure or
reprimand requires only a simple majority, but does not remove a member from
office.

## Comparison to the Senate

Many of the Founding Fathers intended the Senate (whose members were
originally chosen by the state legislatures) to be a check on the popularly
elected House, just as the House was to be a check on the Senate. The "advice
and consent" powers (such as the power to approve treaties) were therefore
granted to the Senate alone. The House, however, can initiate spending bills
and has exclusive authority to impeach officials and choose the President in
an electoral college deadlock. The Senate and its members generally have
greater prestige than the House because Senators serve longer terms (six
years), are less numerous, and (in all but seven states) represent larger
constituencies than Representatives, serving to represent entire states rather
than largely-arbitrary districts. Additionally, the Senate has traditionally
been considered a less partisan chamber; senators have greater potential to
broker compromises and act more unilaterally than Representatives, and hence
hold greater national stature.

## Salary and benefits

### Salaries

As of January 1, 2008, the annual salary of each Representative is
$169,300.[7] The Speaker of the House and the Majority and Minority Leaders
earn more. The Speaker earned $212,100 during the 109th Congress (January 4,
2005-January 3, 2007) while the party leaders earned $183,500 (the same as
Senate leaders). A cost-of-living-adjustment (COLA) increase takes effect
annually unless Congress votes to not accept it. Congress sets members'
salaries; however, the Twenty-seventh Amendment to the United States
Constitution prohibits a change in salary (but not COLA[8]) from taking effect
until after the next general election. Representatives are eligible for
lifetime benefits after serving for five years, including a pension, health
benefits, and social security benefits.[9]

### Titles

Representatives use the prefix "The Honorable" before their names. A member of
the House is referred to as a "Representative," " "Congressman," or
"Congresswoman." While Senators are technically "Congressman" or
"Congresswomen," that term is generally used to refer to Members of the House
of Representatives exclusively. The Delegates and the Resident Commissioner
use the same styles and titles as Members of the House.

## Officers

<IMG>

<IMG>

Republican Dennis Hastert, U.S. Representative from Illinois who served as
Speaker of the House from January 1999 until January 2007, calling the House
to order at the beginning of a session of Congress.

### Member Officials

The party with a majority of seats in the House is known as the majority
party. The next-largest party is the minority party. The Speaker, committee
chairmen, and some other officials are generally from the majority party; they
have counterparts (for instance, the "ranking members" of committees) in the
minority party.

The Constitution provides that the House may choose its own Speaker. Although
not explicitly required by the Constitution, every Speaker has been a member
of the House. The Constitution does not specify the duties and powers of the
Speaker, which are instead regulated by the rules and customs of the House.
The Speaker has a role both as a leader of the House and the leader of his or
her party (which need not be the majority party; theoretically, a member of
the minority party could be elected as Speaker with the support of a fraction
of members of the majority party). Under the Presidential Succession Act
(1947), the Speaker is second in the line of presidential succession behind
the Vice President.

The Speaker is the presiding officer of the House but does not preside over
every debate. Instead, he or she delegates the responsibility of presiding to
other members in most cases. The presiding officer sits in a chair in the
front of the House chamber. The powers of the presiding officer are extensive;
one important power is that of controlling the order in which members of the
House speak. No member may make a speech or a motion unless he or she has
first been recognized by the presiding officer. Moreover, the presiding
officer may rule on any "point of order" (a member's objection that a rule has
been breached), but the decision is subject to appeal to the whole House.

The Speaker is the chair of his or her party's steering committee, which
chooses the chairmen of standing committees. The Speaker determines which
committees consider bills, appoints most of the members of the Rules
Committee, and appoints all members of conference committees. When the
Presidency and Senate are controlled by a different party from the one
controlling the House, the Speaker can become the de facto "leader of the
opposition." Since the Speaker is a partisan officer with substantial power to
control the business of the House, the position is often used for partisan
advantage.

Each party elects a floor leader, who is known as the Majority Leader or
Minority Leader. While the Minority Leader is the full leader of his party,
the same is not true of the Majority Leader. Instead, the Speaker is the head
of the majority party; the Majority Leader is only the second-highest
official. Party leaders decide what legislation members of their party should
either support or oppose. Each party also elects a whip, who works to ensure
that the party's members vote as the party leadership desires. The current
majority whip in the House of Representatives is James E. Clyburn, who is a
member of the Democratic Party. The current minority whip is Eric Cantor, who
is a member of the Republican Party. Representatives are generally less
independent of party leaders than senators, and usually vote as the leadership
directs. Incentives to cooperate include the leadership's power to select
committee chairmen. As a result, the leadership plays a much greater role in
the House than in the Senate, an example of why the atmosphere of the House is
regarded by many as more partisan.

### Non-member officials

The House is also served by several officials who are not members. The House's
chief officer is the Clerk, who maintains public records, prepares documents,
and oversees junior officials, including pages. The Clerk also presides over
the House at the beginning of each new Congress pending the election of a
Speaker. Another officer is the Chief Administrative Officer, responsible for
the day-to-day administrative support to the House of Representatives. This
includes everything from payroll to food service.

The position of chief administrative officer (CAO) was created following the
1994 Republican Revolution and replaced the positions of Doorkeeper and
Director of Non-Legislative and Financial Services (which had been created
only two years prior to provide a nonpartisan management body to administer
those functions of the House that should not be under partisan control). The
CAO also assumed some of the responsibilities of the House Information
Services, which previously had been controlled directly by the Committee on
House Administration, at the time headed by Representative Charlie Rose of
North Carolina, along with the House "Folding Room."

The Chaplain leads the House in prayer at the opening of the day. There is
also a Sergeant at Arms, who as the House's chief law enforcement officer,
maintains order and security on House premises. Finally, routine police work
is handled by the United States Capitol Police, which is supervised by the
Capitol Police Board, a body to which the Sergeant at Arms belongs.

## Procedure

<IMG>

<IMG>

The chamber of the United States House of Representatives is located in the
south wing of the Capitol building, in Washington, D.C. This photograph shows
a rare glimpse of the four vote tallying boards (the blackish squares across
the top), which display each member's name and vote while votes are in
progress. The screens are notably used by Congressional leaders to identify
which members are voting against party lines.

Main article: Procedures of the United States House of Representatives

### Daily Procedures

Like the Senate, the House of Representatives meets in the United States
Capitol in Washington, D.C. At one end of the chamber of the House is a
rostrum from which the Speaker presides. The lower tier of the rostrum is used
by clerks and other officials. Members' seats are arranged in the chamber in a
semicircular pattern; the seats are divided by a wide central aisle. By
tradition, Democrats sit on the right of the center aisle, while Republicans
sit on the left, as viewed from the presiding officer's chair. Sittings are
normally held on weekdays; meetings on Saturdays and Sundays are rare.
Sittings of the House are generally open to the public and are broadcast live
on television by C-SPAN.

The procedure of the House depends not only on the rules, but also on a
variety of customs, precedents, and traditions. In many cases, the House
waives some of its stricter rules (including time limits on debates) by
unanimous consent. Any member may block a unanimous consent agreement, but in
practice, objections are rare. The presiding officer enforces the rules of the
House, and may warn members who deviate from them. The presiding officer uses
a gavel to maintain order. The box in which legislation is placed to be
considered by the House is called the hopper.

In one of its first resolutions, the U.S. House of Representatives established
the Office of the Sergeant at Arms. In an American tradition adopted from
English custom in 1789 by the first Speaker of the House, Frederick Muhlenberg
of Pennsylvania, the House of Representativesâ mace is used both to open all
sessions of the House and during the inaugural ceremonies for all Presidents
of the United States. For daily sessions of the House, the sergeant at Arms
carries the mace in front of the Speaker in procession to the rostrum. It is
placed on a green marble pedestal to the Speaker's right. When the House is in
committee, the mace is moved to a pedestal next to the desk of the Sergeant at
Arms.

The Constitution provides that a majority of the House constitutes a quorum to
do business. Under the rules and customs of the House, a quorum is always
assumed to be present unless a quorum call explicitly demonstrates otherwise.
House rules prevent any member from making a point of order that a quorum is
not present unless a question is being voted upon; the presiding officer will
not accept a point of order of no quorum during general debate or when a
question is not before the House.

During debates, a member may only speak if called upon by the presiding
officer. The presiding officer may determine which members to recognize, and
may therefore control the course of debate. All speeches must be addressed to
the presiding officer, using the words "Mr. Speaker" or "Madam Speaker." Only
the presiding officer may be directly addressed in speeches; other members
must be referred to in the third person. In most cases, members do not refer
to each other by name, but by state, using forms such as "the gentleman from
Virginia" or "the gentlewoman from California."

### Passage of legislation

Before legislation reaches the floor of the House, the Rules Committee
normally passes a rule to govern debate on that measure. For instance, the
committee determines if amendments to the bill are permitted. An "open rule"
permits all germane amendments, but a "closed rule" restricts or even
prohibits amendment. Debate on a bill is generally restricted to one hour,
equally divided between the majority and minority parties. Each side is led
during the debate by a "floor manager," who allocates debate time to members
who wish to speak. On contentious matters, many members may wish to speak;
thus, a member may receive as little as one minute, or even thirty seconds, to
make his/her point.

When debate concludes, the motion in question is put to a vote. In many cases,
the House votes by voice vote; the presiding officer puts the question, and
Members respond either "Yea" (in favor of the motion) or "Nay" (against the
motion). The presiding officer then announces the result of the voice vote.
Any member, however, may challenge the presiding officer's assessment and
"request the yeas and nays" or "request a recorded vote." The request may be
granted only if it is seconded by one-fifth of the members present. In
practice, however, members of congress second requests for recorded votes as a
matter of courtesy. Recorded votes are automatically held in some cases, such
as votes on the annual budget.

The House may vote in three manners. First, the House may vote by electronic
device; each member uses a personal identification card to record his vote at
one of 46 voting stations in the chamber. Votes are almost always held by
electronic device. Secondly, the House may conduct a teller vote. Members hand
in colored cards to indicate their votes: green for "Yea," red for "Nay," and
orange for "Present" (i.e., to abstain). Teller votes are normally held only
when the computer system breaks down. Finally, the House may conduct a roll
call vote. The Clerk reads the list of members of the House, each of whom
announces his vote when his name is called. This procedure is reserved for
very formal votes (such as the election of a Speaker) because of the time
consumed by calling over four hundred names.

Voting traditionally lasts for fifteen minutes, but it may be extended if the
leadership needs to "whip" more Congressmen into alignment. The 2003 vote on
the Prescription Drug Benefit was open for three hours, from 3:00 to 6:00
a.m., to receive four additional votes, three of which were necessary to pass
the legislation. The 2005 vote on the Central American Free Trade Agreement
was open for one hour, from 11:00 p.m. to midnight. An October 2005 vote on
facilitating refinery construction was kept open for forty minutes.

The presiding officer may vote, like any other member. If a vote is tied, the
presiding officer does not have a casting vote (unless he has not yet cast his
vote). Instead, motions are decided in the negative when ties arise.

## Committees

Main articles: United States Congressional committee and List of United States
House committees

The House uses committees (as well as their subcommittees) for a variety of
purposes, including the review of bills and the oversight of the executive
branch. The appointment of committee members is formally made by the whole
House, but the choice of members is actually made by the political parties.
Generally, each party honors the preferences of individual congressmen and
congresswomen, giving priority on the basis of seniority. Historically,
membership on committees has been in rough proportion to the party's strength
in the House as a whole, with two exceptions: on the Rules Committee, the
majority party fills nine of the thirteen seats;[10] and on the Ethics
Committee, each party has an equal number of seats.[11] However, when party
control in the House is closely divided, extra seats on committees are
sometimes allocated to the majority party (For example in the 109th Congress,
the Republicans controlled about 53% of the House as a whole, but had 54% of
the Appropriations Committee members, 55% of the members on the Energy and
Commerce Committee, 58% of the members on the Judiciary Committee, and 69% of
the members on the Rules Committee).

The largest committee of the House is the Committee of the Whole, which, as
its name suggests, consists of all members of the House. The Committee meets
in the House chamber; it may consider and amend bills, but may not grant them
final passage. Generally, the debate procedures of the Committee of the Whole
are more flexible than those of the House itself. One advantage of the
Committee of the Whole is its ability to include otherwise non-voting members
of Congress.

Most committee work is performed by twenty standing committees, each of which
has jurisdiction over a specific set of issues, such as Agriculture or Foreign
Affairs. Each standing committee considers, amends, and reports bills that
fall under its jurisdiction. Committees have extensive powers with regard to
bills; they may block legislation from reaching the floor of the House.
Standing committees also oversee the departments and agencies of the executive
branch. In discharging their duties, standing committees have the power to
hold hearings and to subpoena witnesses and evidence.

The House also has one permanent committee that is not a standing committee,
the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and from time to time may
establish committees that are temporary and advisory in nature, such as the
Select Committee on Energy Independence and Global Warming. This latter
committee, created in the 110th Congress and reauthorized for the 111th, has
no jurisdiction over legislation and must be chartered anew at the start of
every Congress. The House also appoints members to serve on joint committees,
which include members of both the Senate and the House. Some joint committees
oversee independent government bodies; for instance, the Joint Committee on
the Library oversees the Library of Congress. Other joint committees serve to
make advisory reports; for example, there exists a Joint Committee on
Taxation. Bills and nominees are not referred to joint committees. Hence, the
power of joint committees is considerably lower than those of standing
committees.

Each House committee and subcommittee is led by a chairman (always a member of
the majority party). From 1910 to the 1970s, committee chairmen were very
powerful. Woodrow Wilson in the 1880s suggested:[citation needed]

> Power is nowhere concentrated; it is rather deliberately and of set policy
scattered amongst many small chiefs. It is divided up, as it were, into forty-
seven seigniories, in each of which a Standing Committee is the court-baron
and its chairman lord-proprietor. These petty barons, some of them not a
little powerful, but none of them within the reach of the full powers of rule,
may at will exercise almost despotic sway within their own shires, and may
sometimes threaten to convulse even the realm itself.

From 1910 to 1975 committee and subcommittee chairmanship was determined
purely by seniority; men sometimes had to wait 30 years to get one, but their
chairmanship was independent of party leadership. The rules were changed in
1975 to permit party caucuses to elect chairmen, shifting power upward to the
party leaders. In 1995, Republicans under Newt Gingrich set a limit of three
two-year terms for committee chairmen. The Democrats who took over in 2007
have not decided whether to continue the Gingrich rules. The chairman's powers
are extensive; they control the committee/subcommittee agenda, and may prevent
the committee from dealing with a bill. The senior member of the minority
party, is known as the Ranking Member. In some committees like Appropriations,
partisan disputes are few.

## Legislative functions

Most bills may be introduced in either House or Congress. However, the
Constitution provides that "All bills for raising Revenue shall originate in
the House of Representatives." As a result, the Senate does not have the power
to initiate bills imposing taxes. Furthermore, the House of Representatives
holds that the Senate does not have the power to originate appropriation
bills, or bills authorizing the expenditure of federal funds. Historically,
the Senate has disputed the interpretation advocated by the House. However,
whenever the Senate originates an appropriations bill, the House simply
refuses to consider it, thereby settling the dispute in practice. The
constitutional provision barring the Senate from introducing revenue bills is
based on the practice of the British Parliament, in which only the House of
Commons may originate such measures.

Although it cannot originate revenue bills, the Senate retains the power to
amend or reject them. As Woodrow Wilson wrote:

    [T]he Senate's right to amend [revenue bills] has been allowed the widest possible scope. The upper house may add to them what it pleases; may go altogether outside of their original provisions and tack to them entirely new features of legislation, altering not only the amounts but even the objects of expenditure, and making out of the materials sent them by the popular chamber measures of an almost totally new character.
The approval of both the Senate and the House of Representatives is required
for any bill, including a revenue bill, to become law. Both Houses must pass
the exact same version of the bill; if there are differences, they may be
resolved by a conference committee, which includes members of both bodies. For
the stages through which bills pass in the Senate, see Act of Congress.

The President may veto any bill passed by the House and Senate; if he does,
the bill cannot become law unless both chambers reconsider the bill and a two-
thirds majority in each chamber support re-passage of the bill over the
objections of the President. (see Veto override).

## Checks and balances

The Constitution provides that the Senate's "advice and consent" is necessary
for the President to make certain appointments and to ratify treaties, while
the House must confirm the nomination of a new Vice President under the 25th
Amendment. Thus, in terms of potential to frustrate Presidential appointments,
the powers of the Senate are more extensive than those of the House.

The Constitution empowers the House of Representatives to impeach federal
officials for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" and
empowers the Senate to try such impeachments. The House may approve "articles
of impeachment" by a simple majority vote; however, a two-thirds vote is
required for conviction in the Senate. A convicted official is automatically
removed from office; in addition, the Senate may stipulate that the defendant
be banned from holding office in the future. No further punishment is
permitted during the impeachment proceedings; however, the party may face
criminal penalties in a normal court of law.

In the history of the United States, the House of Representatives has
impeached sixteen officials, of whom seven were convicted. (Another, Richard
Nixon, resigned after the House Judiciary Committee passed articles of
impeachment but before a formal impeachment vote by the full House.) Only two
Presidents of the United States have ever been impeached: Andrew Johnson in
1868 and Bill Clinton in 1998. Both trials ended in acquittal; in Johnson's
case, the Senate fell one vote short of the two-thirds majority required for
conviction.

Under the Twelfth Amendment, the House has the power to elect the President if
no presidential candidate receives a majority of votes in the Electoral
College. The Twelfth Amendment requires the House to choose from the three
candidates with the highest numbers of electoral votes. The Constitution
provides that "the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from
each state having one vote." Electoral College deadlocks are rare; in the
history of the United States, the House has only had to break a deadlock
twice. In 1800, it elected Thomas Jefferson over Aaron Burr; in 1824, it
elected John Q. Adams over Andrew Jackson and William H. Crawford. The power
to elect the Vice President in the case of an Electoral College deadlock
belongs to the Senate.

## Latest election results and party summary

<IMG>

<IMG>

Current percentage of House members for each party by state.

Main articles: United States House of Representatives elections, 2008, Current
members of the United States Congress, and 111th Congress

Affiliation Members Delegates  
/ Resident  
Commissioner  
(non-voting) States with  
majority of  
Members  
Democratic Party 254 6* 33  
Republican Party 178 0 16  
Vacant 3** 0  
Total 435 6  
* Gregorio Sablan (I-Northern Mariana Islands) caucuses with the Democrats and is counted as part of the Democratic Caucus.  
**Rahm Emanuel resigned to become Barack Obama's chief of staff.  
**Kirsten Gillibrand resigned to fill Hillary Clinton's vacant Senate seat.  
**Hilda Solis resigned to become Barack Obama's Secretary of Labor.

## See also

  * 111th United States Congress
  * Suspension of the rules
  * United States postal abbreviations
  * United States Senate

## References

### Surveys

  * MacNeil, Neil (1963). Forge of Democracy: The House of Representatives. New York, New York: D. McKay.
  * Peters, Ronald M., Jr (1997). The American Speakership: The Office in Historical Perspective (2nd edition ed.). Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-5758-9.
  * Polsby, Nelson W. (2004). How Congress Evolves: Social Bases of Institutional Change. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516195-5.
  * Poole, Keith T.; Howard Rosenthal (1997). Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call Voting. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514-242-X.
  * Remini, Robert V. (2006). The House: The History of the House of Representatives. New York, NY: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-088434-7.
  * Sinclair, Barbara (1983). Majority Leadership in the U.S. House. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 080182933X.
  * Julian E. Zelizer, ed (2004). The American Congress: The Building of Democracy. New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-17906-2.

### Before 1945

  * David W. Brady and Mathew D. McCubbins. Party, Process, and Political Change in Congress: New Perspectives on the History of Congress (2002)
  * Brady, David W. Congressional Voting in a Partisan Era: A Study of the McKinley Houses and a Comparison to the Modern House of Representatives. U. Pr. of Kansas, 1973. 273 pp.
  * Cooper, Joseph. The Origins of the Standing Committees and the Development of the Modern House. Rice U. Press, 1970. 167 pp.
  * Linda Grant de Pauw, Charlene Bangs Bickford, and Kenneth R. Bowling, eds. Documentary History of the First Federal Congress of the United States of America, March 4, 1789-March 3, 1791 (1992- 2006) 14 volumes of primary documents
  * Ronald L. Hatzenbuehler, "Party Unity and the Decision for War in the House of Representatives in 1812," William and Mary Quarterly 29 (1972): 367-90;
  * Henig, Gerald S. Henry Winter Davis: Antebellum and Civil War Congressman from Maryland. 1973\. 332 pp. Radical leader in Civil War era
  * Klingman, Peter D. Josiah Walls: Florida's Black Congressman of Reconstruction. U. Press of Florida, 1976. 157 pp.
  * Lowitt, Richard. George W. Norris: The Making of a Progressive, 1861-1912 Vol. 1. Syracuse U. Press, 1963. leader of Republican insurgents in 1910
  * Margulies, Herbert F. Reconciliation and Revival: James R. Mann and the House Republicans in the Wilson Era. Greenwood, 1996. 242 pp.
  * Patterson, James. Congressional Conservatism and the New Deal: The Growth of the Conservative Coalition in Congress, 1933-39 (1967)
  * Robert V. Remini. Henry Clay: Statesman for the Union (1992) . Speaker for most of 1811-1825
  * Strahan, Randall; Moscardelli, Vincent G.; Haspel, Moshe; and Wike, Richard S. "The Clay Speakership Revisited" Polity 2000 32(4): 561-593. ISSN 0032-3497 uses roll call analysis
  * Stewart, Charles H., III. Budget Reform Politics: The Design of the Appropriations Process in the House of Representatives, 1865-1921. Cambridge U. Press, 1989. 254 pp.
  * Story, Joseph. (1891). Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States. (2 vols). Boston: Brown & Little.
  * Trefousse, Hans L. Thaddeus Stevens: Nineteenth-Century Egalitarian (1997) majority leader in 1860s
  * Waller, Robert A. Rainey of Illinois: A Political Biography, 1903-34. U. of Illinois Press, 1977. 260 pp. Democratic Speaker 1932-34
  * Wilson, Woodrow. (1885). Congressional Government. New York: Houghton Mifflin.

### Since 1945

  * Abramowitz, Alan I. and Kyle L. Saunders. 1998. Ideological Realignment in the US Electorate. Journal of Politics 60(3):634-652.
  * Adler, E. Scott. Why Congressional Reforms Fail: Reelection and the House Committee System. Univ. of Chicago Press, 2002.
  * Albert, Carl and Goble, Danney. Little Giant: The Life and Times of Speaker Carl Albert. U. of Oklahoma Press, 1990. 388 pp. Speaker in 1970s
  * Barone, Michael, and Grant Ujifusa, The Almanac of American Politics 2006: The Senators, the Representatives and the Governors: Their Records and Election Results, Their States and Districts (2005). Published every two years since 1975; enormous detail on every state and district and member.
  * Barry, John M. The Ambition and the Power: The Fall of Jim Wright. A True Story of Washington. Viking, 1989. 768 pp. Speaker in 1980s
  * Berard, Stanley P. Southern Democrats in the U.S. House of Representatives. U. of Oklahoma Press, 2001. 250 pp.
  * Berman, Daniel M. (1964). In Congress Assembled: The Legislative Process in the National Government. London: The Macmillan Company.
  * "Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774-2005." Washington: Government Printing Office, 2005. Prepared by the Office of the Clerk, Office of History and Preservation, United States House of Representatives. Contains biographical entries for every Member of Congress. Also online at Biographical Directory.
  * Congressional Quarterly Congress and the Nation: 2001-2004: A Review of Government and Politics: 107th and 108th Congresses (2005); massive, highly detailed summary of Congressional activity, as well as major executive and judicial decisions; based on Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report and the annual CQ almanac. 
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1997-2001 (2002)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1993-1996 (1998)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1989-1992 (1993)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1985-1988 (1989)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1981-1984 (1985)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1977-1980 (1981)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1973-1976 (1977)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1969-1972 (1973)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1965-1968 (1969)
    * Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1945-1964 (1965), the first of the series
  * Congressional Quarterly's Guide to Congress, 5th ed. (2000). Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Press.
  * Cox, Gary W. and McCubbins, Mathew D. Legislative Leviathan: Party Government in the House. U. of California Press, 1993. 324 pp.
  * C-SPAN. (2003). "Capitol Questions."
  * Currie, James T. The United States House of Representatives. Krieger, 1988. 239 pp short survey
  * DeGregorio, Christine A. Networks of Champions: Leadership, Access, and Advocacy in the U.S. House of Representatives. U. of Michigan Press, 1997. 185 pp.
  * Dierenfield, Bruce J. Keeper of the Rules: Congressman Howard W. Smith of Virginia U. Press of Virginia, 1987. 306 pp. leader of Conservative coalition 1940-66
  * Farrell, John A. Tip O'Neill and the Democratic Century Little, Brown, 2001. 776 pp. Democratic Speaker in 1980s
  * Gertzog, Irwin J. Congressional Women: Their Recruitment, Treatment, and Behavior Praeger, 1984. 291 pp.
  * Hardeman, D. B. and Bacon, Donald C. Rayburn: A Biography. Texas Monthly Press, 1987. 554 pp.
  * Hechler, Ken. Toward the Endless Frontier: History of the Committee on Science and Technology, 1959-79. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1980. 1073 pp.
  * Hibbing, John R. Congressional Careers: Contours of Life in the U.S. House of Representatives. U. of North Carolina Press, 1991. 213 pp.
  * Jacobs, John. A Rage for Justice: The Passion and Politics of Phillip Burton. U. of California Press., 1995. 578 pp. leader of liberal Democrats in 1970s
  * Jacobson, Gary C. The Electoral Origins of Divided Government: Competition in U.S. House Elections, 1946-1988. Westview, 1990. 152 pp.
  * Kiewiet, D. Roderick and McCubbins, Mathew D. The Logic of Delegation: Congressional Parties and the Appropriations Process. U. of Chicago Press, 1991. 286 pp.
  * Merriner, James L. Mr. Chairman: Power in Dan Rostenkowski's America. Southern Illinois U. Pr., 1999. 333 pp.
  * Price, David E. The Congressional Experience: A View from the Hill. Westview, 1992. 194 pp. Political scientist who served in House.
  * Rohde, David W. Parties and Leaders in the Postreform House. U. of Chicago Press, 1991. 232 pp.
  * Rohde, David W. and Kenneth A. Shepsle, "Leaders and Followers in the House of Representatives: Reflections on Woodrow Wilson's Congressional Government," Congress & the Presidency 14 (1987): 111-33
  * Schooley, C. Herschel. Missouri's Cannon in the House. Marceline, Mo.: Walsworth, 1977. 282 pp. Chaired Appropriations in 1960s
  * Schickler, Eric. Disjointed Pluralism: Institutional Innovation and the Development of the U.S. Congress (2001)
  * Shelley II, Mack C. The Permanent Majority: The Conservative Coalition in the United States Congress (1983)
  * Sinclair, Barbara. Legislators, Leaders, and Lawmaking: The U.S. House of Representatives in the Postreform Era. Johns Hopkins U. Press, 1995. 329 pp.
  * Sinclair, Barbara. Congressional Realignment, 1925-1978. U. of Texas Press, 1982. 201 pp.
  * Steinberg, Alfred. Sam Rayburn: A Biography. Hawthorn, 1975. 391 pp. popular biography
  * Strahan, Randall. New Ways and Means: Reform and Change in a Congressional Committee. U. of North Carolina Press, 1990. 218 pp.
  * VanBeek, Stephen D. Post-Passage Politics: Bicameral Resolution in Congress. U. of Pittsburgh Press, 1995. 227 pp.
  * Zelizer, Julian E. On Capitol Hill : The Struggle to Reform Congress and its Consequences, 1948-2000 (2006)

## Notes

  1. ^ a b See Public Law 62-5 of 1911, though Congress has the authority to change that number
  2. ^ Article I, Section 2.
  3. ^ See H.Res. 78, passed January 24, 2007. On April 19, 2007, the House of Representatives passed the DC House Voting Rights Act of 2007, a bill "to provide for the treatment of the District of Columbia as a Congressional district for purposes of representation in the House of Representatives, and for other purposes" by a vote of 241 - 177. That bill proposes to increase the House membership by two, making 437 members, by converting the District of Columbia delegate into a member, and (until the 2010 census) grant one membership to Utah, which is the state next in line to receive an additional district based on its population after the 2000 Census. The bill was under consideration in the U.S. Senate during the 2007 session.
  4. ^ 2 U.S.C. Â§ 2c "no district to elect more than one Representative"
  5. ^ As ruled in the 1969 Supreme Court case, Powell v. McCormack
  6. ^ 2 U.S.C. Â§ 2c
  7. ^ Brudnick, Ida A. (2008-02-21). [http://www.senate.gov/reference/resources/pdf/97-1011.pdf "Salaries of Members of Congress: A List of Payable Rates and Effective Dates, 1789-2008"]. http://www.senate.gov/reference/resources/pdf/97-1011.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-07-10.
  8. ^ Schaffer v. Clinton
  9. ^ USGovInfo.com (accessed 2007-12-14).
  10. ^ rules.house.gov
  11. ^ ethics.house.gov

## External links

Listen to this article (info/dl)  

Play sound

Spoken Wikipedia

This audio file was created from a revision dated 2006-08-04, and does not
reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles

This is a spoken version of the article. Click here to listen.

  * United States House of Representatives
    * Chief Administrator Office of the House
    * Clerk of the House of Representatives
    * Kids in the House- Educational Site for Children
    * Office of the Majority Leader
    * Office of the Speaker of the House
    * Official list of current members
    * Rules of the House
  * A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 1787-1825
    * Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774 to Present
  * Complete Downloadable List of U.S. Representative Contact Information
  * Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding the House
  * Legislative information and archives for US House and Senate

v â¢ d â¢ e

United States Congress  
(House of Representatives, Senate â 111th Congress)  
Members

Congress: Current, Freshmen, Longest serving, Expelled | House: Current by
seniority, Former members, Oldest living | Senate: Current by age, Current by
seniority; Former, Former still living, Age/seniority, Expelled/censured,
Classes  
Leaders

House: Speaker (list), Party leaders, Party whips, Dem. caucus, Rep.
conference, Dean | Senate: President pro tempore (list), Party leaders,
Assistant party leaders, Dem. Caucus (Chair, Secretary, Policy comm. chair),
Rep. Conference (Chair, Vice-Chair, Policy comm. chair), Dean  
Groups

African Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, Caucuses, Committees, Hispanic
Americans, Senate Women, House Women  
Agencies,  
Employees &  
Offices

Architect of the Capitol, Capitol Guide Service (board), Capitol Police
(board), Chiefs of staff, GAO, Government Printing Office, Law Revision
Counsel, Librarian of Congress, Poet laureate | House: Chaplain, Chief
Administrative Officer, Clerk, Doorkeeper, Emergency Planning, Preparedness,
and Operations, Historian, Page (board), Parliamentarian, Postmaster, Reading
clerk, Recording Studio, Sergeant at Arms | Senate: Chaplain, Curator,
Historian, Librarian, Page, Parliamentarian, Secretary, Sergeant at Arms  
Politics &  
Procedure

Act of Congress (list), Caucuses, Committees, Hearings, Joint session,
Oversight, Party divisions, Rider, Sponsorship, Saxbe fix | House: Committees,
History, Procedures, Mace of the House | Senate: Committees, Filibuster,
History, Jefferson's Manual, Traditions, VPs' tie-breaking votes  
Buildings

Botanic Garden, Capitol, Capitol Complex, Office buildings (House: Cannon,
Ford, Longworth, Rayburn, O'Neill (demolished), Senate: Dirksen, Hart,
Russell)  
Research

Biographical directory, Congressional Quarterly, Congressional Record,
Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress (Law Library, Copyright
Office), The Hill, Roll Call, THOMAS  
Misc

List of lists, Congressional districts (by area), Power of enforcement,
Scandals  
Websites: House of Representatives | Senate  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Current United States congressional committees  
House  
(list)

Agriculture â¢ Appropriations â¢ Armed Services â¢ Budget â¢ Education and
Labor â¢ Energy and Commerce â¢ Financial Services â¢ Foreign Affairs â¢
Homeland Security â¢ House Administration â¢ Judiciary â¢ Natural Resources
â¢ Oversight and Government Reform â¢ Rules â¢ Science and Technology â¢
Small Business â¢ Standards of Official Conduct â¢ Transportation and
Infrastructure â¢ Veterans' Affairs â¢ Ways and Means â¢ Intelligence
(Permanent Select) â¢ Energy Independence and Global Warming (Select) â¢
(Whole)  
Senate  
(list)

Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry â¢ Appropriations â¢ Armed Services â¢
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs â¢ Budget â¢ Commerce, Science and
Transportation â¢ Energy and Natural Resources â¢ Environment and Public
Works â¢ Finance â¢ Foreign Relations â¢ Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions â¢ Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs â¢ Judiciary â¢
Rules and Administration â¢ Small Business and Entrepreneurship â¢ Veterans'
Affairs â¢ Indian Affairs â¢ Ethics (Select) â¢ Intelligence (Select) â¢
Aging (Special) â¢ Narcotics Control (Caucus)  
Joint (list)

(Conference) â¢ Economic â¢ Inauguration â¢ Library â¢ Printing â¢
Taxation Defunct committees  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Flag of the United States United States House of Representatives elections  
1789 Â· 1790 Â· 1792 Â· 1794 Â· 1796 Â· 1798 Â· 1800 Â· 1802 Â· 1804 Â· 1806
Â· 1808 Â· 1810 Â· 1812 Â· 1814 Â· 1816 Â· 1818 Â· 1820 Â· 1822 Â· 1824 Â·
1826 Â· 1828 Â· 1830 Â· 1832 Â· 1834 Â· 1836 Â· 1838 Â· 1840 Â· 1842 Â· 1844
Â· 1846 Â· 1848 Â· 1850 Â· 1852 Â· 1854 Â· 1856 Â· 1858 Â· 1860 Â· 1862 Â·
1864 Â· 1866 Â· 1868 Â· 1870 Â· 1872 Â· 1874 Â· 1876 Â· 1878 Â· 1880 Â· 1882
Â· 1884 Â· 1886 Â· 1888 Â· 1890 Â· 1892 Â· 1894 Â· 1896 Â· 1898 Â· 1900 Â·
1902 Â· 1904 Â· 1906 Â· 1908 Â· 1910 Â· 1912 Â· 1914 Â· 1916 Â· 1918 Â· 1920
Â· 1922 Â· 1924 Â· 1926 Â· 1928 Â· 1930 Â· 1932 Â· 1934 Â· 1936 Â· 1938 Â·
1940 Â· 1942 Â· 1944 Â· 1946 Â· 1948 Â· 1950 Â· 1952 Â· 1954 Â· 1956 Â· 1958
Â· 1960 Â· 1962 Â· 1964 Â· 1966 Â· 1968 Â· 1970 Â· 1972 Â· 1974 Â· 1976 Â·
1978 Â· 1980 Â· 1982 Â· 1984 Â· 1986 Â· 1988 Â· 1990 Â· 1992 Â· 1994 Â· 1996
Â· 1998 Â· 2000 Â· 2002 Â· 2004 Â· 2006 (c Â· n Â· p) Â· 2008 (c Â· n Â· p) Â·
2010

* * *
Special elections: all Â· 2007 Â· 2009

Senate elections Â· Presidential elections Â· Gubernatorial elections  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Lists of United States congressional delegations  
States

Alabama (H S) Â· Alaska (H S) Â· Arizona (H S) Â· Arkansas (H S) Â· California
(H S) Â· Colorado (H S) Â· Connecticut (H S) Â· Delaware (H S) Â· Florida (H
S) Â· Georgia (H S) Â· Hawaii (H S) Â· Idaho (H S) Â· Illinois (H S) Â·
Indiana (H S) Â· Iowa (H S) Â· Kansas (H S) Â· Kentucky (H S) Â· Louisiana (H
S) Â· Maine (H S) Â· Maryland (H S) Â· Massachusetts (H S) Â· Michigan (H S)
Â· Minnesota (H S) Â· Mississippi (H S) Â· Missouri (H S) Â· Montana (H S) Â·
Nebraska (H S) Â· Nevada (H S) Â· New Hampshire (H S) Â· New Jersey (H S) Â·
New Mexico (H S) Â· New York (H S) Â· North Carolina (H S) Â· North Dakota (H
S) Â· Ohio (H S) Â· Oklahoma (H S) Â· Oregon (H S) Â· Pennsylvania (H S) Â·
Rhode Island (H S) Â· South Carolina (H S) Â· South Dakota (H S) Â· Tennessee
(H S) Â· Texas (H S) Â· Utah (H S) Â· Vermont (H S) Â· Virginia (H S) Â·
Washington (H S) Â· West Virginia (H S) Â· Wisconsin (H S) Â· Wyoming (H S)  
Other

American Samoa Â· District of Columbia Â· Guam Â· Northern Mariana Islands Â·
Puerto Rico Â· Virgin Islands  
Obsolete

Dakota Territory Â· Northwest Territory Â· Orleans Territory Â· Philippines  
Lists of former House members, lists of former Senators  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Legislatures of the United States  
United States Congress

United States House of Representatives Â· United States Senate  
State legislatures

Alabama (H, S) Â· Alaska (H, S) Â· Arizona (H, S) Â· Arkansas (H, S) Â·
California (A, S) Â· Colorado (H, S) Â· Connecticut (H, S) Â· Delaware (H, S)
Â· Florida (H, S) Â· Georgia (H, S) Â· Hawaii (H, S) Â· Idaho (H, S) Â·
Illinois (H, S) Â· Indiana (H, S) Â· Iowa (H, S) Â· Kansas (H, S) Â· Kentucky
(H, S) Â· Louisiana (H, S) Â· Maine (H, S) Â· Maryland (H, S) Â· Massachusetts
(H, S) Â· Michigan (H, S) Â· Minnesota (H, S) Â· Mississippi (H, S) Â·
Missouri (H, S) Â· Montana (H, S) Â· Nebraska Â· Nevada (A, S) Â· New
Hampshire (H, S) Â· New Jersey (GA, S) Â· New Mexico (H, S) Â· New York (A, S)
Â· North Carolina (H, S) Â· North Dakota (H, S) Â· Ohio (H, S) Â· Oklahoma (H,
S) Â· Oregon (H, S) Â· Pennsylvania (H, S) Â· Rhode Island (H, S) Â· South
Carolina (H, S) Â· South Dakota (H, S) Â· Tennessee (H, S) Â· Texas (H, S) Â·
Utah (H, S) Â· Vermont (H, S) Â· Virginia (H, S) Â· Washington (H, S) Â· West
Virginia (H, S) Â· Wisconsin (A, S) Â· Wyoming (H, S)  
Territorial legislatures

American Samoa (H, S) Â· District of Columbia Â· Guam Â· Northern Mariana
Islands (H, S) Â· Puerto Rico (H, S) Â· U.S. Virgin Islands  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States topics  
History

Timeline

Pre-Columbian Â· Colonial era (Thirteen Colonies) Â· Declaration of
Independence Â· American Revolution Â· Territorial changes Â· American Civil
War Â· Reconstruction era Â· African-American Civil Rights Movement
(1896â1954) Â· World War I Â· Great Depression Â· World War II (Home front)
Â· Cold War Â· Korean War Â· African-American Civil Rights Movement
(1955â1968) Â· Feminist Movement Â· Vietnam War Â· Post-Cold War
(1991-present) Â· War on Terrorism (War in Afghanistan Â· Iraq War)  
By topic

Demographic Â· Economic Â· Military Â· Postal Â· Technological and industrial
Â· Inventions and discoveries  
Federal  
government

Law  
U.S. Constitution  
Bill of Rights  
Civil liberties  
Federalism  
Separation of powers

Law Enforcement  
Department of Justice (DOJ)  
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)

Legislature \- Congress  
House of Representatives  
Senate  
Vice President

Executive \- President  
Executive Office of the President  
Cabinet/Executive departments  
Independent agencies  
Policies

Judiciary \- Supreme Court  
Federal courts  
Courts of appeal  
District courts

Intelligence  
U.S. Intelligence Community  
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)  
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)  
National Security Agency (NSA)

Military  
Army  
Marine Corps  
Navy  
Air Force  
Coast Guard  
Politics

State governments Â· Local governments Â· Elections (Electoral College) Â·
Political divisions Â· Political ideologies Â· Political parties (Democratic
Party Â· Republican Party Â· Third parties) Â· Political scandals Â· Political
status of Puerto Rico Â· Red states and blue states Â· Uncle Sam  
Geography

Cities, towns and villages Â· Counties Â· Extreme points Â· Islands Â·
Mountains (Appalachian Â· Rocky) Â· National Park System Â· Regions (New
England Â· Mid-Atlantic Â· Southern Â· Midwestern Â· Great Plains Â·
Northwestern Â· Southwestern) Â· Rivers (Mississippi Â· Missouri Â· Colorado)
Â· States Â· Territory Â· Water supply and sanitation  
Economy

Banking Â· Communications Â· Companies Â· Federal Reserve System Â· Insurance
Â· Standard of living (Personal income Â· Household income Â· Homeownership Â·
Income inequality) Â· Tourism Â· Transportation (Airports Â· Highways Â·
Interstate Highway System Â· Passenger vehicles Â· Railroads Â· Trucking
industry) Â· U.S. dollar Â· Wall Street Â· Total debt  
Society

Adolescent sexuality Â· Crime Â· Demographics Â· Education Â· Health care Â·
Health insurance Â· Incarceration Â· Languages (American English Â· Spanish)
Â· Media Â· People Â· Public holidays Â· Religion Â· Social class (Affluence
Â· American Dream Â· American middle class Â· Educational attainment Â·
Poverty Â· Professional and working class conflict) Â· Sports  
Culture

American literature (Beat Generation Â· Folklore Â· Harlem Renaissance Â·
Poetry Â· Transcendentalism) Â· Architecture Â· Cuisine Â· Dance Â· Fashion Â·
Flag Â· Music (American classical music Â· American folk music Â· American
popular music Â· Country music Â· Blues Â· Jazz Â· Rock and roll) Â· Radio Â·
Television / Cinema (Hollywood) Â· Visual arts (Abstract expressionism)  
Issues

Abortion Â· Affirmative action Â· American exceptionalism Â· Anti-Americanism
Â· Capital punishment Â· Drug policy / Prohibition Â· Energy policy Â·
Environmental movement Â· Gun politics Â· Health care reform Â· Human rights
Â· Immigration (United StatesâMexico barrier Â· Third Border Initiative) Â·
Obesity Â· Racism Â· Same-sex marriage  
Portal  
Retrieved from
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_House_of_Representatives"

Categories: Spoken articles | United States House of Representatives |
National lower houses

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2009 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
August 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 16:16.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



