
# Federalism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(January 2008)  
<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2008)  
For theological federalism, see Covenant Theology.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A map showing current federal states (in green).  
This article is part of the  
Politics series  
Politics  
  * List of political topics
  * Politics by country
  * Politics by subdivision
  * Political economy
  * Political history
  * Political history of the world
  * Political philosophy
  * Political science
  * Political systems
    * Parliamentary  

    * Presidential  

    * Semi-presidential

  * International relations (theory)
  * Political scientists
  * Comparative politics
  * Public administration
    * Bureaucracy (street-level)
    * Adhocracy

  * Public Policy
  * Separation of powers
    * Legislature  

    * Executive  

    * Judiciary

  * Sovereignty
  * Theories of political behavior

  
Subseries  
  * Elections
Electoral systems  
Voting

  * Federalism
  * Forms of government
  * Ideology
  * Political campaigning
  * Political parties

  
Politics portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Federalism is a political philosophy in which a group of members are bound
together (Latin: foedus, covenant) with a governing representative head. The
term federalism is also used to describe a system of the government in which
sovereignty is constitutionally divided between a central governing authority
and constituent political units (like states or provinces). Federalism is a
system in which the power to govern is shared between national and state
governments, creating what is often called a federation. Proponents are often
called federalists.

In Europe, "federalist" is sometimes used to describe those who favor stronger
federal government, at a national or supranational level, as is the case of
the European Union. The term is also used to describe those who favor weaker
provincial governments. In the federal nations of Europe (including Germany,
Austria and Switzerland) or South America (including Argentina or Brazil), the
term "strong federalism" labels situations where sub-national states may have
more power than the national (federal) government; it does not imply a strong
central government. Some nations with federal systems, such as Switzerland and
Canada, are officially confederations, because membership in the federation is
voluntary.

In Canada, federalism implies opposition to sovereigntist movements (usually
those of Quebec). The same is historically true in the United States.
Advocates of a weaker federal government and stronger state governments are
those that generally favor confederation, often related to early "anti-
federalists" and later the Confederacy.

Australia, Brazil and India, among others, are also federal states.

Federalism may encompass as few as two or three internal divisions, as is the
case in Belgium.

Ecclesiastic and theological federalism also exist within some Christian
denominations.

In general, two extremes of federalism can be distinguished. In practice,
however, there is always a mixture of both.

## Contents

  * 1 Cooperative federalism (or intrastate federalism)
  * 2 Dual federalism
  * 3 Examples of federalism
    * 3.1 Federalism in Europe
      * 3.1.1 Lisbon Treaty (to be ratified)
    * 3.2 Australia
    * 3.3 Brazil
    * 3.4 Canada
    * 3.5 India
      * 3.5.1 Asymmetric federalism
      * 3.5.2 Coalition politics
    * 3.6 United States
    * 3.7 Federalism with two components
      * 3.7.1 Belgium
      * 3.7.2 Other examples
  * 4 Christian Church
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
### [edit] Cooperative federalism (or intrastate federalism)

Cooperative federalism is a concept of federalism in which federal, state, and
local governments interact cooperatively and collectively to solve common
problems, rather than making policies separately but more or less equally or
clashing over a policy in a system dominated by the federal government.

Germany and the European Union are unique cases, since state governments are
directly represented in the upper houses (Bundesrat and council) at the
federal level; in this way states are directly involved at a very high degree
in federal decision making.

### [edit] Dual federalism

There is a clear separation of powers between the federal and state powers.
This is the overwhelming form of federalism.

## [edit] Examples of federalism

### [edit] Federalism in Europe

Several federal systems do exist in Europe, such as Switzerland, Austria,
Germany and Belgium. Germany is the only example in the world where the upper
federal house (the Bundesrat) in Germany, is neither elected nor appointed,
but is composed of the governments of their constituents.

In Germany, during the first part of the twentieth century, Adolf Hitler
viewed federalism as an obstacle. As he wrote in Mein Kampf, National
Socialism must claim the right to impose its principles on the whole German
nation, without regard to what were hitherto the confines of federal states.

In Britain, federalism has long been proposed as a solution to the "Irish
Problem", and more lately, the "West Lothian question"[1]

Following the end of World War II, several movements began advocating a
European federation, such as the Union of European Federalists or the European
Movement, founded in 1948. Those organizations were influential in the
European unification process, but never in a decisive way.

â Europe has charted its own brand of constitutional federalism.(Joseph H.
H. Weiler) â  
â Those uncomfortable using the âFâ word in the EU context should feel
free to refer to it as a quasi-federal or federal-like system. Nevertheless,
for the purposes of the analysis here, the EU has the necessary attributes of
a federal system. It is striking that while many scholars of the EU continue
to resist analyzing it as a federation, most contemporary students of
federalism view the EU as a federal system (See for instance, Bednar, Filippov
et al., McKay, Kelemen, Defigueido and Weingast).(R. Daniel Kelemen) â  
The European Union has many of the characteristics of federalism. The European
federalists campaigned in favour of a directly elected European Parliament
(est. 1979), and were among the first to put a European Constitution on the
agenda. Opponents of European federalists are both those in favor of a lesser
role for the EU and those who wish for the EU to be ruled by national
governments rather than by an indirectly elected parliament, and an unelected
commission, President and Foreign Minister. Although federalism was mentioned
both in the drafts of the Maastricht treaty and the Treaty establishing a
Constitution for Europe, it was never accepted by the representatives of the
member countries. The strongest advocates of European federalism have been
Germany, Belgium, and Italy, while those historically most strongly opposed
have been France and the United Kingdom. However, in recent times the French
and UK governments have become increasingly pro-European Union and Poland and
Austria have taken on the roles of primary opponents to a stronger EU. Despite
claims to the contrary it is important to note that the EU is not a federal
system. It remains today as an interstate system that is one of a kind and
while having some federalist characteristics is not a federal system.

#### [edit] Lisbon Treaty (to be ratified)

In the upcoming Lisbon Treaty the distribution of competences in various
policy areas between Member States and the European union is explicitly stated
in the following three categories:

Exclusive competence

The Union has exclusive competence to make directives and conclude
international agreements when provided for in a Union legislative act.

  * the customs union
  * the establishing of the competition rules necessary for the functioning of the internal market
  * monetary policy for the Member States whose currency is the euro
  * the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy
  * common commercial (trade) policy

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

Shared competence

Member States cannot exercise competence in areas where the Union has done so.

  * the internal market
  * social policy, for the aspects defined in this Treaty
  * economic, social and territorial cohesion
  * agriculture and fisheries, excluding the conservation of marine biological resources
  * environment
  * consumer protection
  * transport
  * trans-European networks
  * energy
  * the area of freedom, security and justice
  * common safety concerns in public health matters, for the aspects defined in this Treaty

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

Supporting competence

The Union can carry out actions to support, coordinate or supplement Member
States' actions.

  * the protection and improvement of human health
  * industry
  * culture
  * tourism
  * education, youth, sport and vocational training
  * civil protection (disaster prevention)
  * administrative cooperation

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG>  
### [edit] Australia

Main article: Federalism in Australia

On 1 January 1901 the Australian nation emerged as a federation. The model of
Australian federalism adheres closely to the original model of the United
States of America, though through a Westminster system.

### [edit] Brazil

The fall of Brazilian monarchy in 1889 by a military coup d'Ã©tat led to the
rise of the presidential system, headed by Deodoro da Fonseca. Aided by well-
known jurist Ruy Barbosa, Fonseca established federalism in Brazil by decree,
but this system of government would be confirmed by every Brazilian
constitution since 1891, although some of them would distort some of the
federalist principles. The 1937 Constitution, for example, granted the federal
government the authority to appoint State Governors (called interventors) at
will, thus centralizing power in the hands of President GetÃºlio Vargas.
Brazil also uses the Fonseca system to regulate trade.

The Brazilian Constitution of 1988 introduced a new component to the ideas of
federalism, including local governments as federal entities. Brazilian cities
are now invested with some of the traditional powers usually granted to states
in federalism, and although they are not allowed to have a Constitution, they
are structured by an organic law.

### [edit] Canada

Main article: Canadian federalism

In Canada, the system of federalism is described by the division of powers
between the federal parliament and the country's provincial governments. Under
the Constitution Act (previously known as the British North America Act) of
1867, specific powers of legislation are allotted. Section 91 of the
constitution gives rise to federal authority for legislation, whereas section
92 gives rise to provincial powers. For matters not directly dealt with in the
constitution, the federal government retains residual powers; however,
conflict between which level of government has legislative jurisdiction over
various matters has been a longstanding and evolving issue. Areas of contest
include legislation with respect to regulation of the economy, taxation, and
natural resources.

### [edit] India

<IMG>

<IMG>

Indian state governments led by various political parties as of March 2009

The Government of India (referred to as the Union Government or Central
Government) was established by the Constitution of India, and is the governing
authority of a federal union of 28 states and 7 union territories.

The governance of India is based on a tiered system, wherein the Constitution
of India appropriates the subjects on which each tier of government has
executive powers. The Constitution uses the Seventh Schedule to delimit the
subjects under three categories, namely the Union list, the State list and the
Concurrent list.

#### [edit] Asymmetric federalism

A distinguishing aspect of Indian federalism is that unlike American
federalism, it is asymmetric[2]. Article 370 makes special provisions for the
state of Jammu and Kashmir as per its Instrument of Accession. Article 371
makes special provisions for the states of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Goa, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim as per their accession or
state-hood deals.

#### [edit] Coalition politics

Although the Constitution did not envisage it, India is now a multi-lingual
federation[3]. India has a multi-party system with political allegiances
frequently based on linguistic, regional and caste identities[4],
necessitating coalition politics, especially at the Union level.  

### [edit] United States

Main article: Federalism in the United States

<IMG>

<IMG>

The United States is divided into a number of separate states, each with
varying amounts of government and power.

Federalism in the United States is the evolving relationship between state
governments and the federal government of the United States.

Because the states were preexisting political entities, the U.S. Constitution
did not need to define or explain federalism in any one section. However, it
contains numerous mentions of the rights and responsibilities of state
governments and state officials vis-Ã -vis the federal government. The federal
government has certain expressed powers (also called enumerated powers),
including the right to levy taxes, declare war, and regulate interstate and
foreign commerce. In addition, the Necessary and Proper Clause gives the
federal government the implied power to pass any law "necessary and proper"
for the execution of its express powers. Powers that the Constitution does not
delegate to the federal government or forbid to the statesâthe reserved
powersâare reserved to the people or the states.[5] The power delegated to
the federal government was significantly expanded by amendments to the
Constitution following the Civil War, and by some later amendments--as well as
the overall claim of the Civil War, that the states were legally subject to
the final dictates of the federal government.

The Federalist party of the United States was dissolved in 1824. Prior to
this, they were heavily opposed by the anti-federalist party, which included
powerful figures such as Thomas Jefferson. The anti-federalists mainly
believed that:

a) The Legislative had too much power (mainly because of the Necessary and
Proper Clause) and that they were unchecked.

b) The Executive branch had too much power, and that there was no check on
him. A dictator would arise.

c) A bill of rights should be coupled with the constitution to prevent a
dictator (then believed to eventually be the president) from exploiting
citizens. The federalists, on the other hand, argued that it was impossible to
list all the rights, and those that were not listed could be easily overlooked
because they were not in the official bill of rights. Rather, rights in
specific cases were to be decided by the judicial system of courts.

After the Civil War, the federal government increased greatly in size and
influence, in terms of its influence on everyday life and its size relative to
the state governments. There are several reasons for this, including the need
to regulate businesses and industries that span state borders, attempts to
secure civil rights, and the provision of social services.

Many people believe that the federal government has grown beyond the bounds
permitted by the express powers. From 1938 until 1995, the U.S. Supreme Court
did not invalidate any federal statute as exceeding Congress' power under the
Commerce Clause for over fifty years until United States v. Lopez overturned
the power of the Federal government under the Commerce Clause (see also,
challenging the Gun-Free School Zones Act). However, most actions by the
federal government can find some legal support among the express powers, such
as the Commerce Clause. The Commerce Clause is used by Congress to justify
certain federal laws, but its applicability has been narrowed by the Supreme
Court in recent years. For example, the Supreme Court rejected the Gun-Free
School Zones Act in the aforementioned Lopez decision, and they also rejected
the civil remedy portion of the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 in the
United States v. Morrison decision. Recently, the Commerce Clause was
interpreted to include marijuana laws in the Gonzales v. Raich decision.

Dual federalism holds that the federal government and the state governments
are co-equals, each sovereign. In this theory, parts of the Constitution are
interpreted narrowly, such as the Tenth Amendment, the Supremacy Clause, the
Necessary and Proper Clause, and the Commerce Clause. Under this narrow
interpretation, the federal government has jurisdiction only if the
Constitution clearly grants such. In this case, there is a large group of
powers belonging to the states or the people, and the federal government is
limited to only those powers explicitly listed in the Constitution.[6]

However, dual federalism also holds the federal government as the final judge
of its own powers. The establishment of Native American governments ( who are
separate and distinct from state and federal government) exercising limited
powers of sovereignty, has given rise to the concept of "bi-federalism."

### [edit] Federalism with two components

#### [edit] Belgium

<IMG>

This section contains information which may be of unclear or questionable
importance or relevance to the article's subject matter.  
Please help improve this article by clarifying or removing superfluous
information.  
    Main articles: Belgian federal government, Belgian federal parliament and Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium
Federalism in the Kingdom of Belgium is an evolving system. Belgian federalism
reflects both the linguistic communities (French and Dutch, and to a lesser
extent German) and the economic regions (Brussels, Flanders and Wallonia).
These correspond to the language areas in Belgium. Although officially there
are four language areas, for all practical purposes only two languages are
relevant on the federal level, Dutch and French:

  * Brussels is officially a bilingual area, but it has a French-speaking majority.[7]
  * Flanders is the region associated with the Belgium's Dutch-speaking majority, i.e. the Flemish Community.
  * Due to its relatively small size (approximately one percent) the German-speaking Community of Belgium does not have much influence on national politics.
  * Wallonia is a French-speaking area, except for the East Cantons. French is the second most spoken first language in Belgium, following Dutch. Within the French-speaking Community of Belgium, there is a geographical and political distinction between Wallonia and Brussels for historical and sociological reasons.[8]

On one hand, this means that the Belgian political landscape, generally
speaking, consists of only two components: the Dutch-speaking population
represented by Dutch-language political parties, and the majority populations
of Wallonia and Brussels, represented by their French-speaking parties. The
Brussels region emerges as a third component.[9] This specific dual form of
federalism, with the special position of Brussels, consequentially has a
number of political issues -even minor ones- that are being fought out over
the Dutch/French-language political division. With such issues, a final
decision is only possible in the form of a compromise. This tendency gives
this dual federalism model a number of traits that generally are ascribed to
confederalism, and makes the future of Belgian federalism contentious.[10][11]

On the other hand, Belgian federalism is federated with three components. An
affirmative resolution concerning Brussels' place in the federal system passed
in the parliaments of Wallonia and Brussels.[12] [13]These resolutions passed
against the desires of Dutch-speaking parties, who are generally in favour of
a federal system with two components (i.e. the Dutch and French Communities of
Belgium). However, the Flemish representatives in the Parliament of the
Brussels Capital-Region voted in favour of the Brussels resolution, with the
exception of one party. The chairman of the Walloon Parliament stated on July
17, 2008 that, "Brussels would take an attitude".[14] Brussels' parliament
passed the resolution on July 18, 2008:

    The Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region approves with great majority a resolution claiming the presence of Brussels itself at the negotiations of the reformation of the Belgian State.[13] July 18, 2008
This aspect of Belgian federalism helps to explain the difficulties of
partition; Brussels, with its importance, is linked both to Wallonia and
Flanders and vice-versa. This situation, however, does not erase the traits of
a confederation in the Belgian system.

#### [edit] Other examples

Historical examples of two-sided federalism include:

  * Nepal, after the abolishment of Nepalese monarchy was declared a federal democratic republic of Nepal. The structure of federal states have not been clearly defined, however, which is to be declared according to the constitution developed by the current Constituent Assembly.

  * Czechoslovakia, until the Czech Republic and Slovakia separated in 1993.

  * The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, from 1992 to 2003 when it became a confederation titled the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. This confederation expired 2006 as Montenegro declared its independence.

  * The 1960 Constitution of Cyprus was based on the same ideas, but the union of Greeks and Turks failed. Also, Tanzania, which is the union of Tanganika and Zanzibar.

Similar power-sharing arrangements between two communities can be found in
Fiji, Saint Kitts and Nevis, in Northern Ireland (the Belfast Agreement) and
in Trentino-Alto Adige/SÃ¼dtirol.[original research?]

<IMG>

<IMG>

<IMG> Official flag of Iraqi Kurdistan Ratio: 2:3

  * Iraq adapted a federal system in 15 October 2005, and formally recognized the Kurdistan region of Iraq as the county's first and currently only federal region. See Constitution of Iraq for more information regarding Iraq's method of creating federal entities.

## [edit] Christian Church

Federalism also finds expression in ecclesiology (the doctrine of the church).
For example, presbyterian church governance resembles parliamentary
republicanism (a form of political federalism) to a large extent. In
Presbyterian denominations, the local church is ruled by elected elders, some
of which are ministerial. Each church then sends representatives or
commissioners to presbyteries and further to a general assembly. Each greater
level of assembly has ruling authority over its constituent members. In this
governmental structure, each component has some level of sovereignty over
itself. As in political federalism, in presbyterian ecclesiology there is
shared sovereignty.

Other ecclesiologies also have significant representational and federalistic
components, including the more anarchic congregational ecclesiology, and even
in more hierarchical episcopal ecclesiology.

Some Christians argue that the earliest source of political federalism (or
federalism in human institutions; in contrast to theological federalism) is
the ecclesiastical federalism found in the Bible. They point to the structure
of the early Christian Church as described (and to many, prescribed) in the
New Testament. This is particularly demonstrated in the Council of Jerusalem,
described in Acts chapter 15, where the Apostles and elders gathered together
to govern the Church; the Apostles being representatives of the universal
Church, and elders being such for the local church. To this day, elements of
federalism can be found in almost every Christian denomination, some more than
others. Although the Catholic has almost completely rejected this model in
favour of the absolute and indeed infallible power of the pope and a
completely centralized top down approach.

## [edit] See also

    This entry is related to, but not included in the Political ideologies series or one of its sub-series. Other related articles can be found at the Politics Portal.
  * Asymmetrical federalism
  * Federalism in the United States
  * Anti-Federalism
  * European Union
  * Confederation
  * Federalist
  * Federalist Society
  * Federation
  * Subsidiarity principle
  * Layer cake federalism
  * States' rights
  * Cooperative Federalism
  * Democratic World Federalists is a civil society organization advocating for a democratic federal world government.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ [http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/talking_politics/82358.stm "UK Politics: Talking Politics The West Lothian Question"]. BBC News. 1998-06-01. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/talking_politics/82358.stm. Retrieved on 2008-02-07.
  2. ^ Indian Constitution at Work The Philosophy of the Constitution, NCERT, Pg. 232.
  3. ^ Indian Constitution at Work The Philosophy of the Constitution, NCERT, Pg. 233.
  4. ^ Johnson, A "Federalism: The Indian Experience ", HSRC Press,1996, Pg 3, ISBN 0796916993
  5. ^ "THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA With Explanatory Notes". U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International Information Programs. http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/constitution/supreme.htm. Retrieved on 2008-02-07.
  6. ^ "Constitutional Topic: Federalism". The U.S. Constitution Online. http://www.usconstitution.net/consttop_fedr.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-07.
  7. ^ (Dutch)âTaalgebruik in Brussel en de plaats van het Nederlands. Enkele recente bevindingenâ, Rudi Janssens, Brussels Studies, Nummer 13, 7 January 2008 (see page 4).
  8. ^ Historically, the Walloons were for a federalism with three components and the Flemings for two. (See: Witte, Els & Craeybeckx, Jan. Politieke geschiedenis van BelgiÃ«. Antwerpen, SWU, pp. 455, 459-460.) This difference is one of the elements which makes the Belgian issue so complicated. The Flemings wanted to defend their language while the Walloons wanted to defend their economy: It is true that the Walloon movement, which has never stopped affirming that Wallonia is part of the French cultural area, has never made this cultural struggle a priority, being more concerned to struggle against its status as a political minority and the economic decline which was only a corollary to it. (Wallonia today - The search for an identity without nationalist mania - (1995)
  9. ^ Charles PicquÃ©, Minister-President of the Brussels-Capital Region said in a September, 2008 declaration in Namur at the National Walloon Feast : It is impossible to have a debate about the future institutions of Belgian State without Brussels. (French Il n'est d'ailleurs, pas question d'imaginer un dÃ©bat institutionnel dont Bruxelles serait exclu. [1]) The Brussels-Capital Region has claimed and obtained a special place in the current negotiations about the reformation of the Belgian state. (French Pendant 18 ans, Bruxelles est demeurÃ©e sans statut (...) L'absence de statut pour Bruxelles s'expliquait par la diffÃ©rence de vision que partis flamands et partis francophones en avaient: [les partis flamands Ã©taient] allergiques Ã la notion de RÃ©gion (...) les francophones (...) considÃ©raient que Bruxelles devait devenir une RÃ©gion Ã part entiÃ¨re (...) Les partis flamands ont acceptÃ© [en 1988] la crÃ©ation d'une troisiÃ¨me RÃ©gion et l'exercice par celle-ci des mÃªmes compÃ©tences que celles des deux autres... C.E. Lagasse, Les nouvelles institutions politiques de la Belgique et de l'Europe, Erasme, Namur, 2003, pp. 177- 178 ISBN 2-87127-783-4)
  10. ^ "Brussels". EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica. http://concise.britannica.com/dday/print?articleId=106096&fullArticle=true&tocId=9680.
  11. ^ "Bruxelles dans l'oeil du cyclone" (in French). France 2. 2007-11-14. http://info.france2.fr/dossiers/europe/34025346-fr.php?page=2.
  12. ^ La Libre Belgique 17 juillet 2008
  13. ^ a b La Libre Belgique, 19 juillet 2008
  14. ^ Le Vif

## [edit] External links

Sister project Look up federalism in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * A Comparative Bibliography: Regulatory Competition on Corporate Law
  * National Brainstorming project Canadian site.
  * Interuniversity journal Federalism-e
  * The American Enterprise Institute Federalism Project The Federalism Project
  * Cases & Materials on American Federalism
  * Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy Federalism article
  * Publius: the journal of federalism
  * Forum of Federations - The Global Network on Federalism
  * Teaching about Federalism in the United States \- From the Education Resources Information Center Clearinghouse for Social Studies/Social Science Education Bloomington, Indiana.
  * An Ottawa, Canada-based international organization for federal countries that share best practices among countries with that system of government
  * Tenth Amendment Center Federalism and States Rights in the U.S.
  * BackStory Radio episode on the origins and current status of Federalism

v â¢ d â¢ e

Supranationalism and World government topics  
Theory

Supranationalism Â· Federalism Â· Confederation Â· Intergovernmentalism Â·
Anti-nationalism Â· Globalization Â· Democratic mundialization Â· Pax Â·
Cosmopolitanism Â· New World Order (conspiracy theory) Â· Supranational union  
International bodies

United Nations (UN) Â· Interpol Â· International Monetary Fund (IMF) Â· World
Bank Group (WBG) Â· World Trade Organization (WTO) Â· Commonwealth of Nations  
Regional bodies

European Union (EU) Â· Latin Union Â· Council of Europe Â· Arab League Â·
African Union (AU) Â· Union of South American Nations (USAN) Â· Shanghai
Cooperation Organisation (SCO) Â· Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Â· Association of Caribbean States (ACS) Â· Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) Â· Organization of American States (OAS) Â· South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Â· Pacific Islands Forum
(PIF) Â· NATO  
International  
parliaments

United Nations General Assembly Â· European Parliament Â· Arab Parliament Â·
Pan-African Parliament Â· Latin American Parliament Â· South American
Parliament Â· Mercosur Parliament Â· Central American Parliament Â· Inter-
Parliamentary Union  
International courts

International Criminal Court Â· International Court of Justice Â·
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia Â· International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda Â· African Court of Justice Â· Central American
Court of Justice Â· Caribbean Court of Justice Â· Inter-American Court of
Human Rights Â· European Court of Justice Â· European Court of Human Rights  
Law and treaties

International law (public Â· private Â· supranational) Â· United Nations
Charter Â· Universal Declaration of Human Rights Â· Geneva Conventions Â· Rome
Statute Â· Kyoto Protocol Â· European Union treaties Â· European Union law Â·
Treaty of Chaguaramas  
History

Holy Roman Empire Â· League of Nations Â· Permanent Court of International
Justice Â· Nuremberg Trials Â· Permanent Court of Arbitration  
Proposals and  
concepts

World government Â· United Nations Parliamentary Assembly Â· United States of
Africa Â· Central Asian Union Â· Pacific Union Â· North American Union Â·
Federal Europe  
Movements

Federal Union Â· World Federalist Movement Â· Global citizens movement Â·
World Union  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federalism"

Categories: Federalism | Political philosophy | Political systems

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since January
2008 | All articles that may contain original research | Articles needing
additional references from October 2008 | Articles that may contain original
research since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÜÜªÜ¡ÜÜ
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 17:50.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



