
# GloFish

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A group of GloFish fluorescent fish

<IMG>

<IMG>

An ordinary zebrafish

The GloFish is a trademarked brand of genetically modified (GM) fluorescent
zebrafish with bright red, green, and orange fluorescent color. Although not
originally developed for the ornamental fish trade, it is the first
genetically modified animal to become publicly available as a pet.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Early development
    * 1.2 Introduction to the U.S. market
    * 1.3 Developments Since The GloFish Introduction
  * 2 References
  * 3 External links

  
## [edit] History

### [edit] Early development

The original zebrafish (Danio rerio) from which the GloFish was developed is a
native of rivers in India and Bangladesh. It measures three centimeters long
and has gold and dark blue stripes, and over 200 million have been sold in the
last 50 years in the United States ornamental fish market. Despite the number
of zebrafish sold, they have never established any reproducing populations in
the United States, primarily because they are tropical fish, unable to survive
in the temperate North American climate.

In 1999, Dr. Zhiyuan Gong and his colleagues at the National University of
Singapore were working with a gene called green fluorescent protein (GFP),
originally extracted from a jellyfish, that naturally produced bright green
bioluminescence. They inserted the gene into a zebrafish embryo, allowing it
to integrate into the zebrafish's genome, which caused the fish to brightly
fluoresce under both natural white light and ultraviolet light. Their goal was
to develop a fish that could detect pollution by selectively fluorescing in
the presence of environmental toxins. The development of the always
fluorescing fish was the first step in this process. Shortly thereafter, his
team developed a line of red fluorescent zebra fish by adding a gene from a
sea coral, and yellow fluorescent zebra fish, by adding a variant of the
jellyfish gene. Later, a team of Taiwanese researchers at the National
University of Taiwan, headed by Professor Huai-Jen Tsai (è¡æ·ç¦), succeeded
in creating a medaka (rice fish) with a fluorescent green color.

The scientists from NUS and businessmen Alan Blake & Richard Crockett from
Yorktown Technologies, L.P., a company in Austin, Texas, met and a deal was
signed whereby Yorktown obtained the worldwide rights to market the GloFish.
At around the same time, a separate deal was made between Taikong, the largest
aquarium fish producer in Taiwan, and the Taiwanese researchers to market the
green medaka in Taiwan under the name TK-1. In spring of 2003, Taiwan became
the first to authorize sales of a genetically modified organism as a pet. One
hundred thousand fish were reported sold in less than a month at US$18.60 a
piece. It should be clarified that the fluorescent medaka are not GloFish, as
they are not marketed by Yorktown Technologies, but instead by Taikong Corp
under a different brand name.

### [edit] Introduction to the U.S. market

GloFish was introduced to the United States market in late 2003 by Yorktown
Technologies of Austin, Texas, after more than two years of extensive
environmental research and consultation with various Federal and State
agencies, as well as leading experts in the field of risk assessment. The
definitive environmental risk assessment was made by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), which has jurisdiction over all genetically modified
animals, including fluorescent zebra fish, since they consider the inserted
gene to be a drug. Their official statement, made on 9 December 2003, was as
follows:

> "Because tropical aquarium fish are not used for food purposes, they pose no
threat to the food supply. There is no evidence that these genetically
engineered zebra danio fish pose any more threat to the environment than their
unmodified counterparts which have long been widely sold in the United States.
In the absence of a clear risk to the public health, the FDA finds no reason
to regulate these particular fish."[1]

Similar findings were reached by the State of California Department of Fish
and Game and the State of Florida Transgenic Aquatic Task Force.

Marketing of the fish was met by protests from a non-governmental organization
called the Center for Food Safety. They were concerned that approval of the
GloFish based only on a Food and Drug Administration risk assessment would
create a precedent of inadequate scrutiny of biotech animals in general.

To prevent this, the group, along with one of their sister organizations,
filed a lawsuit in US Federal District Court to block the sale of the GloFish.
The lawsuit sought a court order stating that the sale of transgenic fish is
subject to federal regulation beyond the FDA's charter, and as such should not
be sold without more extensive approvals. In the opinion of Joseph Mendelson,
the Center for Food Safety's legal director:

> It's clear this sets a precedent for genetically engineered animals. It
opens the dams to a whole host of nonfood genetically engineered organisms.
That's unacceptable to us and runs counter to things the National Academy of
Sciences and other scientific review boards have said, particularly when it
comes to mobile GM organisms like fish and insects.[2]

The Center for Food Safety's suit was found to be without merit and dismissed
on March 30, 2005.

### [edit] Developments Since The GloFish Introduction

GloFish have continued to be successfully marketed throughout the United
States. Since their introduction in late 2003, there have been no reports of
any ecological concerns associated with their sale.

In addition to the red fluorescent zebrafish, trademarked as "Starfire Red",
Yorktown Technologies released a green fluorescent zebrafish and an orange
fluorescent zebrafish in mid-2006. The new lines of fish are trademarked as
"Electric Green" and "Sunburst Orange", and incorporate genes from sea
coral.[3] Despite the speculation of aquarium enthusiasts that the eggs are
pressure treated to make them infertile, it has been found some GloFish are
indeed fertile and will reproduce in a captive environment.[4]

Sale or possession of GloFish remains illegal in California due to a
regulation that restricts all genetically modified fish. The regulation was
implemented before the marketing of GloFish, largely due to concern about a
fast-growing biotech salmon. Although the Fish and Game Commission declined to
grant an exception (solely on ethical grounds) in December 2003, it later
reversed course and decided to move forward with the process of exempting
GloFish from the regulation. However, due to the Stateâs interpretation of
the California Environmental Quality Act, Yorktown Technologies was informed
by State attorneys that it would first need to complete an extremely expensive
study, which could cost hundreds of thousands of dollars and take years to
complete. According to the companyâs web site, they have thus far declined
to undertake this study.[5]

Canada also prohibits import or sale of the fish, due to what they report is a
lack of sufficient information to make a decision with regard to safety.

The import, sale and possession of these fish is not permitted within the
European Union. On November 9, 2006, however, the Netherlandsâ Ministry of
Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment (VROM) found 1,400 fluorescent
fish, which were sold in various aquarium shops.[6]

In January, 2009, the U.S. Food & Drug Administration formalized their
regulations for genetically engineered animals. These regulations describe the
way in which FDA regulates all GE animals, including GloFish.[7]

## [edit] References

  1. ^ fda.gov
  2. ^ biomedcentral.com
  3. ^ glofish.com
  4. ^ "Finformation". Greater Pittsburgh Aquarium Society. Pg. 5. http://www.gpasi.org/Apr04.pdf.
  5. ^ glofish.com
  6. ^ vrom.nl
  7. ^ FDA Regulations for GE Animals

  * "Troubled waters: fluorescent fish spark GM row" by A. Gumbel, May 4th, The Independent, London, England
  * "Frankenfish and the future", by F. Mazyoer, January 2004, Le Monde diplomatique (free in French, Esperanto, Portuguese)
  * "Leuchtfische aus dem Genlabor", by M. Robischon, August 2006 NatÃ¼rlich 8: 6 - 13

## [edit] External links

  * GloFish.com
  * GloFish videos
  * FDA GloFish Statement
  * FDA Regulations for GE Animals
  * Description of technology required to create glofish and other fluorescent transgenic organisms
  * Care information on GloFish
  * Dr. Gong's issued US patent
  * Dr. Gong's pending US patent application
  * Photographs of GloFish in different lighting
  * Aquarium care information for Glofish

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GloFish"

Categories: Danios | Genetically modified organisms

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 March 2009, at 19:54.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



