
# Freedom House

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the community organization in Boston, see Freedom House (Roxbury,
Massachusetts).

Freedom House <IMG>  
Formation 1941  
Type Research institute, think tank  
Headquarters Washington, D.C., United States  
Key people William H. Taft IV, chairman of the Board of Trustees  
Jennifer Windsor, executive director  
Staff Approximately 120[1]  
Website www.freedomhouse.org  
Freedom House is a United States-based international non-governmental
organization that conducts research and advocacy on democracy, political
freedom and human rights.[2] It publishes an annual assessment of the
perceived degree of democratic freedoms in each country, which is used in
political science research.[3]

The organization was founded by Wendell Willkie and Eleanor Roosevelt in 1941,
and describes itself as "a clear voice for democracy and freedom around the
world." The group states "American leadership in international affairs is
essential to the cause of human rights and freedom" and that this can
primarily be achieved through the group's "analysis, advocacy, and action".[4]
Freedom House receives about 80% of its budget from the U.S. government,[5]
but also receives funding from various other sources, for example the Bradley
Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, the Dutch government, and a list
of others.[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Mission Statement
  * 2 History
  * 3 Organization
  * 4 Reports
    * 4.1 Praise
  * 5 Other activities
    * 5.1 Debate at UN's 2001 NGO Committee Meeting
  * 6 Controversy
  * 7 Praise
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 See also
  * 10 External links
    * 10.1 Official links
      * 10.1.1 Freedom House reports
    * 10.2 Related links

  
## [edit] Mission Statement

As stated by Freedom House:

> "Freedom House is an independent organization that supports the expansion of
freedom in the world. Freedom is possible only in democratic political systems
in which the governments are accountable to their own people; the rule of law
prevails; and freedoms of expression, association, belief and respect for the
rights of minorities and women are guaranteed."

> "Freedom ultimately depends on the actions of committed and courageous men
and women. We support nonviolent civic initiatives in societies where freedom
is denied or under threat and we stand in opposition to ideas and forces that
challenge the right of all people to be free. Freedom House functions as a
catalyst for freedom, democracy, and the rule of law through its analysis,
advocacy, and action."[4]

Freedom House also states its "diverse Board of Trustees is united in the view
that American leadership in international affairs is essential to the cause of
human rights and freedom."[4]

## [edit] History

The organization was founded by Wendell Willkie, Eleanor Roosevelt, George
Field, Dorothy Thompson, Herbert Bayard Swope, and others in 1941. Originally
launched in response to the threat posed by Nazism, it now describes itself as
a clear voice for democracy and freedom around the world. Freedom House claims
that it:

> "has vigorously opposed dictatorships in Central America and Chile,
apartheid in South Africa, the suppression of the Prague Spring, the Soviet
war in Afghanistan, genocide in Bosnia and Rwanda, and the brutal violation of
human rights in Cuba, Burma, the People's Republic of China, and Iraq. It has
championed the rights of democratic activists, religious believers, trade
unionists, journalists, and proponents of free markets."

The group states that during the 1940s, Freedom House supported the Marshall
Plan and the establishment of NATO. Freedom House also states that it was
highly critical of McCarthyism.[6] During the 1950s and 1960s, it supported
the U.S. civil rights movement and its leadership included several prominent
civil rights activists. It supported Andrei Sakharov, other Soviet dissidents,
and the Solidarity movement in Poland. Freedom House assisted the post-
Communist societies in the establishment of independent media, non-
governmental think tanks, and the core institutions of electoral politics.[6]

More recently, Freedom House has supported citizens involved in revolutions in
Serbia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan. It states "In Jordan, Freedom House worked to
stem violence against women; in Algeria, it sought justice for victims of
torture; in Uzbekistan, a brutal dictatorship, it sought to defend human
rights advocates; in Venezuela, it worked with those seeking to protect and
promote human rights in a difficult political environment."[6]

## [edit] Organization

Freedom House is a nonprofit organization. It is predominantly funded by the
U.S. government,[5] and is headquartered in Washington, D.C. It has field
offices in about a dozen countries, including Ukraine, Hungary, Serbia,
Jordan, Mexico, and a number of countries in Central Asia.

It is controlled by a Board of Trustees, which it describes as composed of
'business and labor leaders, former senior government officials, scholars,
writers, and journalists'. While some board members were born outside the
United States, and many have been affiliated with international groups, all
are current residents of the United States. It does not identify itself with
either of the American Republican or the Democratic parties. The board is
currently chaired by William H. Taft IV. Taft assumed chairmanship of the
board in January 2009, replacing previous chair Peter Ackerman. Other current
notable board members include Kenneth Adelman, Farooq Kathwari, Azar Nafisi,
Mark Palmer, P. J. O'Rourke, and Lawrence Lessig,[7] while past notable board
members have included Zbigniew Brzezinski, Jeane Kirkpatrick, Samuel
Huntington, Mara Liasson, Otto Reich, Donald Rumsfeld, Whitney North Seymour,
Paul Wolfowitz, Steve Forbes, and Bayard Rustin.

Freedom House receives the majority (80%) of its funding from the U.S.
government through the National Endowment for Democracy, USAID, and the State
Department. It also receives some funding from foundations such as the Bradley
Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, the Dutch government, and a list
of others.[5]

Freedom House describes its relationship with the U.S. government as follows:
"Freedom House is an independent, non-governmental organization that was
initially created in 1941 to urge the U.S. government to adopt policies
supporting democracy and human rights at home and abroad. Its reports and
analyses are independent of any governmental influence and are enriched by an
intellectual atmosphere of scholarly inquiry. In recent years, Freedom House
has received grants from the U.S. Agency for International Development and the
State Department for various projects, usually as a result of public
competition. Freedom House has also applied for and received funds from other
democratic governments and international bodies that promote democracy,
including the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Norway and the European Union.
Freedom House chooses to respond to specific funding opportunities, but never
accepts funds from government institutions, including U.S. government
agencies, in the form of contracts, and never functions as an extension of any
government."[8]

## [edit] Reports

    See also: Freedom in the World (report)
<IMG>

<IMG>

This map reflects the findings of Freedom House's 2008 survey Freedom in the
World, concerning the state of world freedom in 2007.  Free Partly Free Not
Free

<IMG>

<IMG>

Countries highlighted in blue are designated "electoral democracies" in
Freedom House's 2009 survey Freedom in the World

<IMG>

<IMG>

This graph shows the number of nations in the different categories given above
for the period for which there are surveys, 1972-2005

Since 1972, (1978 in book form) Freedom House publishes an annual report,
Freedom in the World, on the degree of democratic freedoms in nations and
significant disputed territories around the world, by which it seeks to
assess[3] the current state of civil and political rights on a scale from 1
(most free) to 7 (least free). These reports are often[9] used by political
scientists when doing research. The ranking is highly correlated with several
other ratings of democracy also frequently used by researchers.[3]

In its 2003 report, for example, Canada (judged as fully free and democratic)
got a perfect score of a "1" in civil liberties and a "1" in political rights,
earning it the designation of "free." Nigeria got a "5" and a "4," earning it
the designation of "partly free," while North Korea scored the lowest rank of
"7-7," and was thus dubbed "not free." Nations are scored from 0 to 4 on
several questions and the sum determines the rankings. Example questions: "Is
the head of state and/or head of government or other chief authority elected
through free and fair elections?", "Is there an independent judiciary?", "Are
there free trade unions and peasant organizations or equivalents, and is there
effective collective bargaining? Are there free professional and other private
organizations?"[10] Freedom House states that the rights and liberties of the
survey are derived in large measure from the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.[10]

The research and ratings process involved two dozen analysts and more than a
dozen senior-level academic advisors. The eight members of the core research
team headquartered in New York, along with 16 outside consultant analysts,
prepared the country and territory reports. The analysts used a broad range of
sources of information--including foreign and domestic news reports, academic
analyses, nongovernmental organizations, think tanks, individual professional
contacts, and visits to the region--in preparing the reports.[11]

The country and territory ratings were proposed by the analyst responsible for
each related report. The ratings were reviewed individually and on a
comparative basis in a series of six regional meetings â Asia-Pacific,
Central and Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union, Latin America and the
Caribbean, Middle East and North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Western
Europe â involving the analysts, academic advisors with expertise in each
region, and Freedom House staff. The ratings were compared to the previous
year's findings, and any major proposed numerical shifts or category changes
were subjected to more intensive scrutiny. These reviews were followed by
cross-regional assessments in which efforts were made to ensure comparability
and consistency in the findings. Many of the key country reports were also
reviewed by the academic advisers.[11] Regardless, such a process contains
elements of subjectivity.

The survey's methodology is reviewed periodically by an advisory committee of
political scientists with expertise in methodological issues.[11]

Freedom House also produces annual reports on press freedom (Press Freedom
Survey), governance in the nations of the former Soviet Union (Nations in
Transit), and countries on the borderline of democracy (Countries at the
Crossroads). In addition, one-time reports have included a survey of women's
freedoms in the Middle East.

Freedom House generally uses standard geographic regions for its reports,
though it groups the countries of the Middle East and North Africa together,
separately from Sub-Saharan Africa; and it still uses the arguably outdated
concept of Western Europe, to include countries such as Turkey and Cyprus,
while categorizing Central and Eastern Europe separately â a division
stemming from the Cold War era which ignores the eastwards expansion of such
organizations such the EU and NATO. However, these groupings have nothing to
do with the individual country ratings; they're merely used to make nations
easier to find when perusing their reports, and also for comparative
statistics between the modern day and the ratings of decades past.

It has been cited in thousands of scholarly articles and books.[1]

On January 16, 2008, Freedom House dropped the "freedom status" of the
Philippines to partially free from a list of totally free countries. It based
the downgrade on a spate of political killings "specifically targeting left-
wing political activists in the country."[12]

### [edit] Praise

On its website, Freedom House provides praise of its reports. Professor of
International Political Economy Francis Fukuyama is quoted on the Freedom
House web site as saying, "An essential source, Freedom in the World works
from the assumption that freedom is a universal value, not reserved for the
rich."[13] Foreign affairs writer Fareed Zakaria is also quoted on the
organization's web site as saying: "While there are many sources of economic
data, good political data is hard to find. Freedom House's survey is an
exception. For anyone concerned with the state of freedom, or simply with the
state of the world, Freedom in the World is an indispensable guide."[13]

## [edit] Other activities

In addition to these reports, Freedom House participates in advocacy
initiatives, currently focused on North Korea, Africa, and religious freedom.
It has offices in a number of countries, where it promotes and assists local
human rights workers and non-government organizations.

On January 12, 2006, as part of a crackdown on unauthorized nongovernmental
organizations, the Uzbek government ordered Freedom House to suspend
operations in Uzbekistan. Resource and Information Centers managed by Freedom
House in Tashkent, Namangan, and Samarkand offered access to materials and
books on human rights, as well as technical equipment, such as computers,
copiers and Internet access. The government warned that criminal proceedings
could be brought against Uzbek staff members and visitors following recent
amendments to the criminal code and Code on Administrative Liability of
Uzbekistan. Other human rights groups have been similarly threatened and
obliged to suspend operations.

Freedom House is a member of the International Freedom of Expression Exchange,
a global network of more than 70 non-governmental organizations that monitors
free expression violations around the world and defends journalists, writers
and others who are persecuted for exercising their right to freedom of
expression.

Regarding regime change, Freedom House states "Freedom House works directly
with men and women around the world to expand the political rights and civil
liberties they experience in their countries. More specifically, Freedom House
focuses on initiatives that contribute to long-term stability and growth in
countries, such as strengthening civil society, promoting open government,
defending human rights, and facilitating the free flow of information and
ideas. While these activities - and the liberties they represent - may be
threatening to some repressive governments, Freedom House does not initiate or
sponsor regime change or popular revolutions. We help men and women of good
will to improve their own societies."[8]

The Financial Times has reported that Freedom House is one of several
organizations selected by the State Department to receive funding for
'clandestine activities' inside Iran.[14] In a research study, with Mr.
Ackerman acting as chief adviser, Freedom House sets out its conclusions: "Far
more often than is generally understood, the change agent is broad-based, non-
violent civic resistance - which employs tactics such as boycotts, mass
protests, blockades, strikes and civil disobedience to de-legitimate
authoritarian rulers and erode their sources of support, including the loyalty
of their armed defenders."[14]

On June 8, 2006, the vice-chairman of Freedom House's board of trustees[15]
asked the U.S. Senate to increase the share of NGO funding aimed at helping
support non-violent foreign democratic activists organize for potential
overthrows of their non-democratic governments. Palmer argued in favor of
shifting funding away from NGOs working in already democratic nations to fund
this effort.[16]

### [edit] Debate at UN's 2001 NGO Committee Meeting

In May 2001, the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations of the United
Nations heard arguments for and against Freedom House. Representatives of Cuba
alleged that the organization is a U.S. foreign policy instrument linked to
the CIA and "submitted proof of the politically motivated, interventionist
activities the NGO (Freedom House) carried out against their Government". They
also claimed a lack of criticism of U.S. human rights violations in the annual
reports. Cuba also claimed that these violations are well documented by other
reports, such as those of Human Rights Watch. Other countries such as China
and Sudan also gave criticism. The Russian representative inquired "why this
organization, an NGO which defended human rights, was against the creation of
the International Criminal Court."[17]

The United States representative claimed that alleged links between Freedom
House and the CIA were "simply not true." The representative said he agreed
that the NGO receives funds from the United States Government, but said this
is disclosed in its reports. The representative said the funds were from the
United States Agency for International Development (USAID), which was not a
branch of the CIA. The representative said his country had a law prohibiting
the government from engaging in the activities of organizations seeking to
change public policy, such as Freedom House. The representative said his
country was not immune from criticism from Freedom House, which he said was
well documented. The US representative further argued that Freedom House was a
human rights organization which sought to represent those who did not have a
voice. The representative said he would continue to support NGOs who
criticized his Government and those of others.[17]

On June 25, 2005, economist and writer F. William Engdahl asserted on the
GlobalResearch.ca website that Freedom House was "created in the late 1940âs
to back the creation of NATO" and criticized the group for being headed by
former CIA director James Woolsey at the time of his article's
publication.[18]

## [edit] Controversy

Noam Chomsky, Edward S. Herman, and some nations[17] have criticized the
organization for receiving funding from and allegedly furthering the interests
of the U.S. government,[19] while some within the U.S. government have offered
praise to the group.[20] Noam Chomsky and Edward Herman, in their book
Manufacturing Consent, wrote that in 1979 Freedom House monitored the election
of Ian Smith in Rhodesia and found them "fair", but found the 1980 elections
won by Mugabe under British supervision "dubious".[21] Chomsky and Herman
further write that the group's history has been characterised as excessively
criticising states opposed to US interests and unduly sympathetic to those
regimes supportive of US interests.[21] The authors suggest this can be most
notably seen by the way it perceived the US ally El Salvador in the early
1980s, a regime that used the army for mass slaughter of the populace to
intimidate them in the run up to an "election", but Freedom House found these
elections to be "admirable".[21]

The methodology Freedom House uses for its reports has been criticised by
social scientist K. A. Bollen for its perceived bias towards countries with
pro-US positions.[22] Bollen argues that by relying on 'experts' or 'judges',
the methodology falls into what is described as 'systematic measurement
error': "Regardless of the direction of distortions, it is highly likely that
every set of indicators formed by a single author or organization contains
systematic measurement error. The origin of this measure lies in the common
methodology of forming measures. Selectivity of information and various traits
of the judges fuse into a distinct form of bias that is likely to characterize
all indicators from a common publication."[23]

As noted in the section on organization above, Freedom House receives most of
its funding from the U.S. government, and prominent U.S. government officials
reside on its board. Self-described "freelance journalist" Diana Barahona has
made allegations.[24] The organization states that its board of trustees
contains Democrats, Republicans and Independents who are a mix of business and
labor leaders, former senior government officials, scholars and
journalists.[8]

MIT Professor Noam Chomsky, claimed in 1988 that Freedom House "had interlocks
with AIM, the World League for Freedom and Democracy, Resistance
International, and U.S. government bodies such as Radio Free Europe and the
CIA, and has long served as a virtual propaganda arm of the (U.S) government
and international right wing."[19] He justifies this claim by presenting a
series of national elections that he claims were staged and that the Freedom
House observers praised. He also criticizes Freedom House's claimed
expenditure of "substantial resources in criticizing the media for
insufficient sympathy with U.S. foreign-policy ventures and excessively harsh
criticism of U.S. client states." Chomsky further argues that "Its most
notable publication of this genre was Peter Braestrup's Big Story, which
contended that the media's negative portrayal of the Tet offensive helped lose
the war. The work is a travesty of scholarship, but more interesting is its
premise: that the mass media not only should support any national venture
abroad, but should do so with enthusiasm, such enterprises being by definition
noble."[19]

Craig Murray, the British ambassador to Uzbekistan from 2002 to 2004, wrote
that the executive director of Freedom House told him in 2003 that the group
decided to back off from its efforts to spotlight human rights abuses in
Uzbekistan, because some Republican board members (in Murrayâs words)
âexpressed concern that Freedom House was failing to keep in sight the need
to promote freedom in the widest sense, by giving full support to U.S. and
coalition forces.â Human rights abuses in Uzbekistan at the time included
treatment of prisoners who were killed by "immersion in boiling liquid," and
by strapping on a gas mask and blocking the filters, Murray reported.[25]
Jennifer Windsor, the executive director of Freedom House now and in 2003,
said Murray's "characterization of our conversation is an inexplicable
misrepresentation not only of what was said at that meeting, but of Freedom
Houseâs record in Uzbekistan." "Freedom House has been a consistent and
harsh critic of the human rights situation in Uzbekistan, as clearly
demonstrated in press releases and in our annual assessments of that country,"
she wrote.[26]

On December 7, 2004, U.S. House Representative Ron Paul criticized Freedom
House for allegedly administering a U.S.-funded program in Ukraine where "much
of that money was targeted to assist one particular candidate." Paul said that

> "one part that we do know thus far is that the U.S. government, through the
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), granted millions of dollars
to the Poland-America-Ukraine Cooperation Initiative (PAUCI), which is
administered by the U.S.-based Freedom House. PAUCI then sent U.S. Government
funds to numerous Ukrainian non-governmental organizations (NGOs). This would
be bad enough and would in itself constitute meddling in the internal affairs
of a sovereign nation. But, what is worse is that many of these grantee
organizations in Ukraine are blatantly in favor of presidential candidate
Viktor Yushchenko."[27]

Freedom House reports have criticized both the United States and its major
allies to a certain extent, for example in its 2006 report on the U.S. and
Israel. It criticized the U.S. for its policies on interrogation and detention
during the War on Terrorism and urged they should be brought into compliance
with international law.[28][29] The occupied Palestinian territories,
administered by Israel and Palestinian Authority, have not receive good
scores.[30]

Freedom House has also been critical of some traditional U.S. allies, such as
Saudi Arabia and Chile under Augusto Pinochet, classifying them as "Not Free."
It was also strongly critical of apartheid South Africa and military
dictatorships in Latin America.[31]

Russia, identified by Freedom House as "Not Free" in 2007, has called Freedom
House biased and has also accused the group of serving U.S. interests. Sergei
Markov, a Duma deputy from the pro-Kremlin United Russia party, called Freedom
House a "Russophobic" organization. "You can listen to everything they say,
except when it comes to Russia," Markov argued. "There are many Russophobes
there," he asserted.[32] In response, Christopher Walker, director of studies
at Freedom House, argued that Freedom House made its evaluations based on
objective criteria explained on the organization's web site, and he denied
that it had a pro-U.S. agenda. "If you look closely at the 193 countries that
we evaluate, you'll find that we criticize what are often considered strategic
allies of the United States," he said.[32]

## [edit] Praise

Former US President Bill Clinton, giving a speech at a Freedom House
breakfast, said:

> I'm honored to be here with all of you and to be here at Freedom House. For
more than 50 years, Freedom House has been a voice for tolerance for human
dignity. People all over the world are better off because of your work. And
I'm very grateful that Freedom House has rallied this diverse and dynamic
group. It's not every day that the Carnegie Endowment, the Progressive Policy
Institute, the Heritage Foundation, and the American Foreign Policy Council
share the same masthead.[33]

Writing in the conservative National Review Online, John R. Miller, a research
professor at the George Washington Universityâs Elliott School, states that

> Freedom House has unwaveringly raised the standard of freedom in evaluating
fascist countries, Communist regimes, and plain old, dictatorial thugocracies.
Its annual rankings are read and used in the United Nations and other
international organizations, as well as by the U.S. State Department. Policy
and aid decisions are influenced by Freedom Houseâs report. Those fighting
for freedom in countries lacking it are encouraged or discouraged by what
Freedom Houseâs report covers. And sometimes â most importantly â their
governments are moved to greater effort."[20]

Miller nevertheless criticized the organization in 2007 as not paying enough
attention to slavery in its reports. He wrote democracies such as Germany and
India, but mostly repressive regimes, needed to be held to account for their
lack of enforcement of laws against human trafficking and the bondage of some
foreign workers.[20]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Freedom House: Frequently Asked Questions
  2. ^ Voice of America:Cuba After Fidel - What Next?
  3. ^ a b c The Limited Robustness of Empirical Findings on Democracy using Highly Correlated Datasets
  4. ^ a b c Freedom House: About Us
  5. ^ a b c d 2006 Freedom House Annual Report
  6. ^ a b c Freedom House: A History
  7. ^ Freedom House Board of Trustees
  8. ^ a b c Frequently Asked Questions
  9. ^ Illumnia Login The political science journal database Illumina lists between 10 and 20 peer reviewed journal articles referencing the "freedom in the world" report each year
  10. ^ a b Methodology
  11. ^ a b c Freedom House Methodology
  12. ^ Abs-Cbn Interactive, Int'l democracy watchdog: RP only 'partly free'
  13. ^ a b FH: Freedom in the World
  14. ^ a b "Bush enters debate on freedom in Iran". http://news.ft.com/cms/s/48d26298-c052-11da-939f-0000779e2340,_i_rssPage=de095590-c8f4-11d7-81c6-0820abe49a01.html. Retrieved on 2006-04-06.
  15. ^ FH Board of Trustees: Mark Palmer
  16. ^ Promotion of Democracy by Nongovernmental Organizations: An Action Agenda \- Testimony by Ambassador Mark Palmer before the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee on June 8, 2006.
  17. ^ a b c UN: NGO Committee hears arguments for, against Freedom House
  18. ^ Color Revolutions, Geopolitics and the Baku Pipeline
  19. ^ a b c Manufacturing Consent. Noam Chomsky and Edward Herman, "Manufacturing Consent" Pantheon Books (1988).
  20. ^ a b c Miller, John R., "Does 'Freedom' Mean Freedom From Slavery? A glaring omission., article in National Review Online, February 5, 2007, accessed same day
  21. ^ a b c Chomsky and Herman: Manufacturng Consent, Vintage 1994, p28
  22. ^ * Bollen, K.A. (1992) Political Rights and Political Liberties in Nations: An Evaluation of Human Rights Measures, 1950 to 1984. In: Jabine, T.B. and Pierre Claude, R. "Human Rights and Statistics". University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 0812231082. Page 189
  23. ^ * Bollen, K.A. (1992) Political Rights and Political Liberties in Nations: An Evaluation of Human Rights Measures, 1950 to 1984. In: Jabine, T.B. and Pierre Claude, R. "Human Rights and Statistics". University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 0812231082
  24. ^ FH Files.Diana Barahona, "The Freedom House Files" Monthly Review, March, 2007
  25. ^ Glorious Nation of Uzbekistan, By TARA McKELVEY, New York Times Book Review, December 9, 2007. Book review of DIRTY DIPLOMACY: The Rough-and-Tumble Adventures of a Scotch-Drinking, Skirt-Chasing, Dictator-Busting and Thoroughly Unrepentant Ambassador Stuck on the Frontline of the War Against Terror, by Craig Murray.
  26. ^ NYTimes Sunday Book Review: Jennifer Windsor letter
  27. ^ Ron Paul: U.S. Hypocrisy in Ukraine
  28. ^ FH: 2006 Freedom in the World Report
  29. ^ Freedom House Urges President Bush to Bring U.S. Policies on Interrogation and Detention into Compliance with U.S. and International Law
  30. ^ FH: 2007 Map of Freedom in the World: Palestinian Authority-Administered Territories [Israel]
  31. ^ Comparative scores for all countries from 1973 to 2006
  32. ^ a b Freedom Is Downgraded From 'Bad'
  33. ^ Remarks at a Freedom House breakfast - President Bill Clinton speech

## [edit] See also

  * Cultural relativism
  * Democracy
  * Democracy Index
  * Human Development Index
  * Human rights
  * List of Indices of Freedom
  * Negative rights
  * United States government

## [edit] External links

### [edit] Official links

  * Freedom House

#### [edit] Freedom House reports

  * Freedom House Publications
  * 2006 essay and survey data
  * Annual Reports:2009, 2008, 2007, 2006, 2005, 2004, 2003, 2002, 2001

### [edit] Related links

  * Nonprofit Income Tax Declarations: 990 forms posted to Haitianalysis.com (incomplete abstract in Word format)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedom_House"

Categories: 1941 establishments | Think tanks based in the United States |
Political and economic think tanks | Bradley Foundation | Human rights
organizations | Freedom of expression organizations

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 17:30.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



