
# Sherman Antitrust Act

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>  
Competition law  
Basic concepts  
  * History of competition law
  * Monopoly
    * Coercive monopoly
    * Natural monopoly
  * Barriers to entry
  * Market power
  * SSNIP test
  * Relevant market
  * Merger control

  
Anti-competitive practices  
  * Monopolization
  * Collusion
    * Formation of cartels
    * Price fixing
    * Bid rigging
  * Product bundling and tying
  * Refusal to deal
    * Group boycott
  * Exclusive dealing
  * Dividing territories
  * Conscious parallelism
  * Predatory pricing
  * Misuse of patents and copyrights

  
Laws and doctrines  
United States

  * Sherman Antitrust Act
  * Clayton Antitrust Act
  * Robinson-Patman Act
  * FTC Act
  * Hart-Scott-Rodino Act
  * Merger guidelines
  * Essential facilities doctrine
  * Noerr-Pennington doctrine
  * Rule of reason

Europe

  * UK competition law
  * Irish competition law

Australia

  * Trade Practices Act 1974

  
Enforcement authorities and organizations  
  * International Competition Network
  * List of competition regulators

  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
The Sherman Antitrust Act (Sherman Act,[1] July 2, 1890, ch. 647, 26 Stat.
209, 15 U.S.C. Â§ 1â7) was the first United States Federal statute to limit
cartels and monopolies. It falls under antitrust law.

The Act provides: "Every contract, combination in the form of trust or
otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several
States, or with foreign nations, is declared to be illegal".[2] The Act also
provides: "Every person who shall monopolize, or attempt to monopolize, or
combine or conspire with any other person or persons, to monopolize any part
of the trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations,
shall be deemed guilty of a felony [. . . ]"[3] The Act put responsibility
upon government attorneys and district courts to pursue and investigate
trusts, companies and organizations suspected of violating the Act. The
Clayton Act (1914) extended the right to sue under the antitrust laws to "any
person who shall be injured in his business or property by reason of anything
forbidden in the antitrust laws."[4] Under the Clayton Act, private parties
may sue in U.S. district court and should they prevail, they may be awarded
treble damages and the cost of suit, including reasonable attorney's fees. [5]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Purpose
  * 3 Legal Effects
    * 3.1 Cartels and Agreements "in restraint of trade"
      * 3.1.1 "Per se" Illegality versus the Rule of Reason
      * 3.1.2 Bias against large business interests
      * 3.1.3 Modern Trends
        * 3.1.3.1 The "Quick Look" Rule of Reason
        * 3.1.3.2 Inference of Conspiracy
        * 3.1.3.3 Manipulating Market Definitions
    * 3.2 Monopoly
    * 3.3 Application of the act outside of pure commerce
  * 4 Criticism
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 External links
    * 7.1 Official websites
    * 7.2 Additional information

  
## [edit] History

The Sherman Act was passed in 1890 and was named after its author, Senator
John Sherman, an Ohio Republican, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.
After passing in the Senate on April 8, 1890 by a vote of 51-1, the
legislation passed unanimously (242-0) in the House of Representatives on June
20, 1890, and was then signed into law by President Benjamin Harrison on July
2, 1890.[6]

## [edit] Purpose

In 1879, C. T. Dodd, an attorney for the Standard Oil Company of Ohio, devised
a new type of trust agreement to overcome Ohio state prohibitions against
corporations owning stock in other corporations. A trust is a centuries old
form of a contract whereby one party entrusts their property to a second
party. The property is then used to benefit the first party. In a corporate
trust, the various corporations assign their stock to a board of trustees. The
trust then issues trust certificates to the stockholders. They receive the
financial benefits, while the board of trustees maintain operational control.
By consolidating control of most companies in an industry under one
controlling board, the industry is essentially monopolized.[7]

Around the world, what U.S. lawmakers and attorneys call "Antitrust" is more
commonly known as "competition law." The purpose of the act was to oppose the
combination of entities that could potentially harm competition, such as
monopolies or cartels. Its reference to trusts today is an anachronism. At the
time of its passage, the trust was synonymous with monopolistic practice,
because the trust was a popular way for monopolists to hold their businesses,
and a way for cartel participants to create enforceable agreements.[8].

The Sherman Act was not specifically intended to prevent the dominance of an
industry by a specific company, despite misconceptions to the contrary.
According to Senator George Hoar, an author of the bill, any company that "got
the whole business because nobody could do it as well as he could" would not
be in violation of the act. The law attempts to prevent the artificial raising
of prices by restriction of trade or supply.[9] In other words, innocent
monopoly, or monopoly achieved solely by merit, is perfectly legal, but acts
by a monopolist to artificially preserve his status, or nefarious dealings to
create a monopoly, are not.

## [edit] Legal Effects

<IMG>

This section includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article
by introducing more precise citations where appropriate. (July 2008)  
The Act is brief and not highly specific. This meant that responsibility for
the development of Antitrust law was entrusted to the U.S. courts,
particularly the Supreme Court, which have the power to interpret federal
statutes.

One of the earliest invocations of the Act was in 1894, against the American
Railway Union led by Eugene V. Debs, with the intent to settle the Pullman
Strike.[10] Several years would pass before the Act was used against its
intended target, corporate monopolies. President Theodore Roosevelt used the
Act extensively in his antitrust campaign, including to divide the Northern
Securities Company. President William Howard Taft used the Act to split the
American Tobacco Company.

### [edit] Cartels and Agreements "in restraint of trade"

#### [edit] "Per se" Illegality versus the Rule of Reason

Section 1 of the Act prohibits "agreements, conspiracies or trusts in
restraint of trade," making them a crime. Not every alleged agreement is
treated alike. The Court has interpreted this section to prohibit arrangements
that unreasonably manipulate trade, differentiating between two kinds of
conduct: agreements which are very likely to raise costs to consumers, and
those which might, but were not highly likely to be harmful.

The court gave this distinction legal meaning by characterizing conduct that
is overwhelmingly likely to be harmful as illegal per se. Per se illegal
conduct has always been limited, consisting chiefly of horizontal price-fixing
or territorial division agreements. Other kinds of agreements that might be
harmful to consumers but aren't necessarily, can only be won if the plaintiff
satisfies the Rule of Reason. This requires the plaintiff to prove that the
agreement caused economic harm, in addition to proving that the defendant
acted as charged..

#### [edit] Bias against large business interests

Most of the Section 1 cases coming before The Supreme Court between the turn
of the century and the 1980s were dealt with under the per se rule. Later
cases, including all of the Sherman Act cases before the court in the 21st
century have been dealt with mainly under the rule of reason, if not dismissed
outright. It must be noted first that it has remained well-settled that plain
vanilla price fixing is per se illegal, as much now as ever. The modern cases
have been appealed because they involve new kinds of conduct that were not
settled in early appeals from Sherman Act suits. These cases tend to involve
conduct in a grey area, where it is not literal price fixing or territorial
division, but something allegedly tantamount.

What has changed since the Burger court transitioned to the Rehnquist court
and with the Roberts court, is that courts are unwilling to expand per se
illegality to encompass new forms of conduct, even if they are allegedly
tantamount to price fixing. Earlier cases were conflicting, but generally
willing to treat as per se illegal, conduct that bore any resemblance to price
fixing.

#### [edit] Modern Trends

##### [edit] The "Quick Look" Rule of Reason

A modern trend in Section 1 cases has been the "quick-look" rule of reason.
Where conduct is not clearly per se illegal, but is arguably tantamount to
price fixing, territorial division, or otherwise lacks the appearance of
legitimacy, the court may apply a modified rule of reason. Taking a "quick
look," economic harm is presumed from the questionable nature of the conduct,
and the burden is shifted to the defendant to prove harmlessness or
justification. The quick-look became a popular way of disposing of cases where
the conduct was in a grey area between per se illegality, and demonstrable
harmfulness under the rule of reason.

##### [edit] Inference of Conspiracy

Two modern trends have increased the difficulty for antitrust plaintiffs.
First, courts have come to hold plaintiffs to increasing burdens of pleading.
Under older Section 1 precedent, it was not settled how much evidence was
required of the conspiracy. It could be inferred. Since the 1970s, courts have
held plaintiffs to higher standards, giving antitrust defendants an
opportunity to resolve cases in their favor, before much, if any discovery is
done. This protects defendants from bearing the costs of an antitrust "fishing
expeditions." However, it deprives plaintiffs of perhaps their only tool to
acquire evidence.

##### [edit] Manipulating Market Definitions

Second, courts have employed more sophisticated and principled definitions of
markets. Market definition is necessary in rule of reason cases, for the
plaintiff to prove a conspiracy is harmful. It is also necessary for the
plaintiff to establish the market relationship between conspirators to prove
their conduct is within the per se rule.

In early cases, it was easier for plaintiffs to show market relationship, or
dominance, by tailoring market definition, even if it ignored fundamental
principles of economics. In U.S. v. Grinnell, 384 U.S. 563 (1966), the trial
judge, Charles Wyzanski composed the market only of alarm companies with
services in every state, tailoring out any local competitors; the defendant
stood alone in this market, but had the court added up the entire national
market, it would have had a much smaller share of the national market for
alarm services that the court purportedly used. The appellate courts affirmed
this finding, however, today, an appellate court would likely find this
definition to be flawed. Modern courts use a more sophisticated market
definition that does not permit as manipulative a definition.[citation needed]

### [edit] Monopoly

Section 2 of the act forbade monopoly. In section 2 cases, the court has,
again on its own initiative, drawn a distinction between coercive and innocent
monopoly. The act is not meant to punish businesses that come to dominate
their market passively or on their own merit, only those that intentionally
dominate the market through misconduct, which generally consists of
conspiratorial conduct of the kind forbidden by section 1 of the Sherman Act,
or Section 3 of the Clayton Act.

### [edit] Application of the act outside of pure commerce

The Act was aimed at regulating businesses. However, its application was not
limited to the commerce side of business. Its prohibition of the cartel was
also interpreted to make illegal many labor union activities. This is because
unions were characterized as cartels as well (cartels of
laborers).[clarification needed] This persisted until 1914, when the Clayton
Act created exceptions for certain union activities.

## [edit] Criticism

See also: United States antitrust law and Competition law

The Sherman act has been a magnet for controversy. One branch of the criticism
focuses on whether the Act improves competition and benefits consumers, or
merely aids inefficient businesses at the expense of more innovative ones.
Alan Greenspan, in his essay entitled Antitrust[11] condemns the Sherman Act
as stifling innovation and harming society. "No one will ever know what new
products, processes, machines, and cost-saving mergers failed to come into
existence, killed by the Sherman Act before they were born. No one can ever
compute the price that all of us have paid for that Act which, by inducing
less effective use of capital, has kept our standard of living lower than
would otherwise have been possible."[12]

Another aspect of the debate over antitrust policy is normative. That is,
assuming that some kind of competition law is inevitable, critics will argue
as to what its central policy should be, and whether it is accomplishing its
goal. A common tactic is to choose a one goal, and then cite evidence that it
supports the opposite. For example, during a debate over the act in 1890,
Representative William Mason said "trusts have made products cheaper, have
reduced prices; but if the price of oil, for instance, were reduced to one
cent a barrel, it would not right the wrong done to people of this country by
the trusts which have destroyed legitimate competition and driven honest men
from legitimate business enterprise."[13] Consequently, if the primary goal of
the act is to protect consumers, and consumers are protected by lower prices,
the act may be harmful if it reduces economy of scale, a price-lowering
mechanism, by breaking up big businesses.

The converse argument is that if lowering prices alone is not the goal, and
instead protecting competitions and markets as well as consumers is the goal,
the law again arguably has the opposite effect - it could be protectionist.
Economist Thomas DiLorenzo notes that Senator Sherman sponsored the 1890
William McKinley tariff just three months after the Sherman Act, and agrees
with The New York Times which wrote on October 1, 1890: "That so-called Anti-
Trust law was passed to deceive the people and to clear the way for the
enactment of this Pro-Trust law relating to the tariff." The Times goes on to
assert that Sherman merely supported this "humbug" of a law "in order that
party organs might say...'Behold! We have attacked the trusts. The Republican
Party is the enemy of all such rings.' "[14]

Dilorenzo writes: "Protectionists did not want prices paid by consumers to
fall. But they also understood that to gain political support for high tariffs
they would have to assure the public that industries would not combine to
increase prices to politically prohibitive levels. Support for both an
antitrust law and tariff hikes would maintain high prices while avoiding the
more obvious bilking of consumers."[15]

The criticism of antitrust law is often associated with conservative politics.
For example, conservative legal scholar, judge, and failed Supreme Court
nominee Robert Bork is well known for his outspoken criticism of the antitrust
regime. Another conservative legal scholar and judge, Richard Posner of the
Seventh Circuit does not condem the entire regime, but expresses concern with
the potential that it could be applied to create inefficiency, rather than to
avoid inefficiency.[16]. Posner further believes, along with a number of
others, including Bork, that genuinely inefficient cartels and coercive
monopolies, the target of the act, would be self-corrected by market forces,
making the strict penalties of antitrust legislation unnecessary.[17]

## [edit] See also

  * Alcoa
  * American Bar Association
  * American Tobacco Company
  * AT&T
  * Microsoft
  * Northern Securities Company
  * Ticketmaster
  * Standard Oil
  * Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States
  * Tying (commerce)
  * Antitrust
  * Cartel
  * Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914
  * DRAM price fixing
  * Monopoly
  * Price fixing
  * Resale price maintenance
  * National Linseed Oil Trust
  * laissez faire

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ as it was formally designated by the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act in 1976.
  2. ^ See 15 U.S.C. Â§ 1.
  3. ^ See 15 U.S.C. Â§ 2.
  4. ^ See 15 U.S.C. Â§ 15.
  5. ^ See 15 U.S.C. Â§ 15.
  6. ^ [1]
  7. ^ May, J. (2007). The Story of Standard Oil Co. v. United States. In Fox, E. M. & Crane, D. A. (Eds.), Antitrust Stories. New York: Foundation.
  8. ^ Letwin, W. L. (1956). Congress and the Sherman Antitrust Law: 1887-1890, 23 U.Chi.L.Rev 221.
  9. ^ http://www.butnowyouknow.com/sherman.anti-trust.act.html
  10. ^ J. Anthony Lukas, Big trouble : a murder in a small western town sets off a struggle for the soul of America (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997), pp. 310f
  11. ^ http://www.polyconomics.com/searchbase/06-12-98.html
  12. ^ IdIt should be noted that criticisms such as this one, attributed to Greenspan, are not directed at the Sherman act in particular, but rather at the underlying policy of all antitrust law, which includes several pieces of legislation other than just the Sherman Act, e.g. the Clayton Antitrust Act.
  13. ^ Congressional Record, 51st Congress, 1st session, House, June 20, 1890, p. 4100.
  14. ^ ""Mr. Sherman's Hopes and Fears"". New York Times. 1890-10-01. http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-free/pdf?_r=1&res=9B06E4D7103BE533A25752C0A9669D94619ED7CF&oref=slogin. Retrieved on 2008-04-21.
  15. ^ DiLorenzo, Thomas, Cato Handbook for Congress, Antitrust.
  16. ^ Richard Posner, _Economic Analysis of Law_ p.295 et seq. (explaining the optimal antitrust regime from an econimc point of view)
  17. ^ Id.

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Sherman Anti-Trust Act

### [edit] Official websites

  * U.S. Department of Justice: Antitrust Division
  * U.S. Department of Justice: Antitrust Division - text of SHERMAN ANTITRUST ACT, 15 U.S.C. Â§Â§ 1-7

### [edit] Additional information

  * Antitrust Division's "Corporate Leniency Policy"
  * Antitrust by Alan Greenspan
  * Dr. Edward W. Younkins (February 19, 2000). "Antitrust Laws Should Be Abolished".
  * DiLorenzo, Thomas Cato Handbook for Congress, Antitrust.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sherman_Antitrust_Act"

Categories: United States federal antitrust legislation | History of the
petroleum industry | 1890 in law | History of the United States (1865â1918)
| Monopoly (economics) | 1890 in the United States

Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2008 | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
April 2009 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing
clarification from February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 23:18 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



