
# John Birch Society

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs references that appear in reliable third-party
publications. Primary sources or sources affiliated with the subject are
generally not sufficient for a Wikipedia article. Please add more appropriate
citations from reliable sources. (July 2008)  
The John Birch Society is a political education and action organization
founded by Robert W. Welch Jr. in Indianapolis, Indiana in 1958. The society
supports traditionally conservative causes such as anti-communism, support for
individual rights, and the ownership of private property.[1] It promotes U.S.
independence and sovereignty and opposes globalism and international regional
groups, such as the European Union, or a proposed North American Union.[2]

The Society is on the right of the American political spectrum. [3][4] Its
website states: "In the United States, however, a conservative is one who
seeks to support and retain the traditional institutions of the U.S.
government, including the rule of law under the Constitution, and the
political doctrines of individual rights and freedom as espoused by the
Founding Fathers." [5]

The society was named after John Birch, a United States military intelligence
officer and Baptist missionary in World War II, who was killed in 1945 by
supporters of the Communist Party of China.[6] Birch's parents joined the
society as life members. [7]

Based in Appleton, Wisconsin, the society has local chapters in all 50 states.
Its stated aim is to achieve "Less Government, More Responsibility, and â
With God's Help â a Better World."[1] The society operates the wholly-owned
corporation American Opinion Publishing, which changed its name from John
Birch Publishing in 1994 and publishes the journal The New American.[8]

## Contents

  * 1 Values
  * 2 Origins
  * 3 1960s
  * 4 Robert Welch and The Politician
  * 5 1970s
  * 6 After Welch
  * 7 In popular culture
  * 8 Leaders and notable members
    * 8.1 Presidents
    * 8.2 CEOs
    * 8.3 Politicians
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
    * 10.1 Footnotes
    * 10.2 Further reading
      * 10.2.1 Supporting the John Birch Society
      * 10.2.2 Criticizing the John Birch Society
      * 10.2.3 Regarding heroin trade in Southeast Asia
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Values

The John Birch Society says it is anti-totalitarian, particularly anti-
socialist and anti-communist, and leans to libertarian. It seeks to limit the
powers of government and defends what it sees as the original intention of the
U.S. Constitution, based on Judeo-Christian principles. It opposes
collectivism, including wealth redistribution, economic interventionism,
socialism, communism, and fascism. In a 1983 edition of Crossfire, Congressman
Larry McDonald (D-Georgia), then its newly appointed chairman, characterized
the Society as belonging to the Old Right, rather than the new right.[9]

The John Birch Society opposed aspects of the Civil Rights Movement in the
1960s because of its concerns that the movement had communists in important
positions. The Society opposed the 1964 Civil Rights Act, saying it was in
violation of the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and
overstepped the rights of individual states to enact laws regarding civil
rights.

The Society is against a unified "one world government", and has an
immigration reduction view on immigration reform. It opposes the United
Nations, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the Central America
Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), and
other free trade agreements.

The Society argues that there is a devaluing of the US Constitution in favor
of international government, and that this is not an accident. It cites David
Rockefeller's 2002 autobiography Memoirs in which Rockefeller writes, "Some
even believe we are part of a secret cabal working against the best interests
of the United States, characterizing my family and me as 'internationalists'
and of conspiring with others around the world to build a more integrated
global political and economic structure â one world, if you will. If that's
the charge, I stand guilty, and I am proud of it."[10]

## [edit] Origins

The John Birch Society was established in Indianapolis, Indiana on December 9,
1958 by a group of twelve men led by Robert Welch, Jr., a retired candy
manufacturer from Belmont, Massachusetts. One founding member was Fred Koch,
founder of Koch Industries, one of the largest private corporations in
America. Another was Revilo Pendleton Oliver, a University of Illinois
professor who later co-founded the "white nationalist" National Alliance. A
transcript of Welch's two-day presentation at the founding meeting was
published as The Blue Book of the John Birch Society, and became a cornerstone
of its beliefs, with each new member receiving a copy.[9]

According to Welch, "both the U.S. and Soviet governments are controlled by
the same furtive conspiratorial cabal of internationalists, greedy bankers,
and corrupt politicians. If left unexposed, the traitors inside the U.S.
government would betray the country's sovereignty to the United Nations for a
collectivist New World Order, managed by a 'one-world socialist
government.'"[11][12]

Welch saw "collectivism" as the main threat to Western Civilization, and
liberals as "secret communist traitors" who provide cover for the gradual
process of collectivism, with the ultimate goal of replacing the nations of
western civilization with one-world socialist government. "There are many
stages of welfarism, socialism, and collectivism in general," he wrote, "but
Communism is the ultimate state of them all, and they all lead inevitably in
that direction."[12]

The society's activities include distribution of literature, pamphlets,
magazines, videos and other educational material while sponsoring a Speaker's
Bureau, which invites "speakers who are keenly aware of the motivations that
drive political policy"[13].

One of the first public activities of the JBS was a "Get US Out!" (of
membership in the UN) campaign, which claimed in 1959 that the "Real nature of
[the] UN is to build a One World Government."[14] In 1960, Welch advised JBS
members to: "Join your local P.T.A. at the beginning of the school year, get
your conservative friends to do likewise, and go to work to take it over."[15]

One Man's Opinion, a magazine launched by Welch in 1956, was renamed American
Opinion, and became the John Birch Society's official publication. The
society's current publication is called The New American. [16]

## [edit] 1960s

By March 1961, the Society had 60,000 to 100,000 members and, according to
Welch, "a staff of 28 people in the Home Office; about 30 Coordinators (or
Major Coordinators) in the field, who are fully paid as to salary and
expenses; and about 100 Coordinators (or Section Leaders as they are called in
some areas), who work on a volunteer basis as to all or part of their salary,
or expenses, or both." According to Political Research Associates, a
"progressive think tank devoted to supporting movements that are building a
more just and inclusive democratic society" [17], the JBS "pioneered
grassroots lobbying, combining educational meetings, petition drives and
letter-writing campaigns. One early campaign against the second summit between
the United States and the Soviet Union generated over 600,000 postcards and
letters, according to the Society. A June 1964 Birch campaign to oppose Xerox
corporate sponsorship of TV programs favorable to the UN produced 51,279
letters from 12,785 individuals."[12]

Much of the Society's early views, according to Political Research Associates,
"reflects an ultra-conservative business nationalist critique of business
internationalists networked through groups such as the Council on Foreign
Relations (CFR)."

Anti-Semitic, racist, anti-Mormon, anti-Masonic, and religious groups
criticized the group's acceptance of Jews, non-whites, Masons, and Mormons
(Ezra Taft Benson, a leader in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, encouraged people to join it). These groups accused Welch of harboring
feminist, ecumenical, and evolutionary ideas.[18][19][20]

Ayn Rand said in a Playboy interview that "What is wrong with them is that
they don't seem to have any specific, clearly defined political philosophy.
... I consider the Birch Society futile, because they are not for Capitalism
but merely against Communism."[21][22]

John Birch Society influence on U.S. politics hit its high point in the years
around the failed 1964 presidential campaign of Republican candidate Barry
Goldwater, who lost to incumbent President Lyndon B. Johnson. Welch had
supported Goldwater over Richard Nixon for the Republican nomination, but the
membership split, with two-thirds supporting Goldwater and one-third
supporting Nixon. A number of Birch members and their allies were Goldwater
supporters in 1964[23] and some were delegates at the 1964 Republican National
Convention. The Goldwater campaign brought together the nucleus of what later
became known as the New Right.

In April 1966, a New York Times article on New Jersey and the John Birch
Society stated, in part, a concern for "the increasing tempo of radical right
attacks on local government, libraries, school boards, parent-teacher
associations, mental health programs, the Republican Party and, most recently,
the ecumenical movement."[24] It then characterized the Society as, "by far
the most successful and 'respectable' radical right organization in the
country. It operates alone or in support of other extremist organizations
whose major preoccupation, like that of the Birchers, is the internal
Communist conspiracy in the United States."

## [edit] Robert Welch and The Politician

Mainstream Republicans such as William F. Buckley, Jr., and Russell Kirk grew
increasingly unhappy with the Birch Society after Welch circulated a letter
calling President Dwight D. Eisenhower a possible "conscious, dedicated agent
of the Communist Conspiracy."[25] The controversial paragraph was removed
before final publication of The Politician.[26] Welch also wrote that
President Franklin D. Roosevelt knew about the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor
in advance, but said nothing because he wanted to get the U.S. involved in
World War II.[27]

The sensationalism of Welch's charge that Eisenhower was possibly a Communist
dupe led many conservatives and Republicans, most prominently Goldwater and
intellectuals of Buckley's circle, to renounce outright or quietly shy away
from the group.[28] Welch later said it was not originally meant to be
published because it was just a confidential letter among friends.[citation
needed]

Buckley, an early friend and admirer of Welch, regarded his accusations
against Eisenhower as "paranoid and idiotic libels" and attempted
unsuccessfully to purge Welch from the JBS.[29] Welch responded by attempting
to take over Young Americans for Freedom, a conservative youth organization
founded with assistance from Buckley.[citation needed]

## [edit] 1970s

The Society wound up at the center of an important free-speech law case in the
1970s, after American Opinion accused a Chicago lawyer representing the family
of a young man killed by a police officer of being part of a Communist
conspiracy to merge all police agencies in the country into one large force.
The resulting libel suit, Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., reached the United
States Supreme Court, which held that a state may allow a private figure such
as Gertz to recover actual damages from a media defendant without proving
malice, but that a public figure does have to prove actual malice, according
to the standard laid out in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, in order to
recover presumed damages or punitive damages. [30]. The court ordered a
retrial in which Gertz prevailed.

Key Birch Society causes of the 1970s included opposition to the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and to the establishment of
diplomatic ties with the People's Republic of China. The organization claimed
in 1973 that the regime of Mao Zedong had murdered 64 million Chinese as of
that year and that it was the primary supplier of illicit heroin into the
United States. This led to bumper stickers showing a pair of scissors cutting
a hypodermic needle in half accompanied by the slogan "Cut The Red China
Connection." According to the Voice of America, the society also was opposed
to transferring control of the Panama Canal from American to Panamanian
sovereignty.[31]

The John Birch Society was organized into local chapters. Ernest Brosang, a
New Jersey regional coordinator, contended that it was virtually impossible
for opponents of the society to penetrate its policy-making levels, thereby
protecting it from anti-Americanist takeover attempts. Its activities included
distribution of literature critical of civil rights legislation, warning of
the influence of the United Nations, and distributing petitions to impeach
U.S. Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren. To spread their message, members held
showings of documentary films and operated initiatives such as "Let Freedom
Ring", a nation-wide network of recorded telephone messages. Some members also
helped organize the "Minutemen", a paramilitary group training to lead
guerrilla warfare in case of a Communist takeover.

## [edit] After Welch

By the time of Welch's death in 1985, the Birch Society's membership, and
influence, had dramatically declined, but the UN's role in the Gulf War and
President George H. W. Bush's call for a 'New World Order' appeared to many
JBS members to validate their claims about a "One World Government"
conspiracy. Growing right-wing populism in the United States helped The John
Birch Society position itself for a comeback, and by 1995, its membership had
grown to more than 55,000 (est.).[citation needed]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A sign advocating America's withdrawal produced by the John Birch Society

The JBS continues to press for an end to U.S. membership in the United
Nations. As evidence of the effectiveness of JBS efforts, the Society points
to the Utah State Legislature's resolution calling for U.S. withdrawal, as
well as the actions of several other states where the Society's membership has
been active. The Birch Society repeatedly opposed overseas war-making,
although it is strongly supportive of the American military. It has issued
calls to "Bring Our Troops Home" in every conflict since its founding,
including Vietnam. The Society also has a national speakers' committee called
American Opinion Speakers Bureau (AOSB) and an anti-tax committee called TRIM
(Tax Reform IMmediately)[32].

## [edit] In popular culture

  * In 1964, Dizzy Gillespie made a semi-satirical run for President, and formed chapters of the "John Birks Society" (his real name was John Birks Gillespie) in 25 states. [33]
  * Bob Dylan wrote "Talkin' John Birch Paranoid Blues".[34]
  * The Chad Mitchell Trio performed the satirical song "The John Birch Society"[35],
  * Steve Jackson Games included a mythical "Fred Birch Society" as one of hundreds of groups in the collectible card game Illuminati: New World Order. [36]
  * Walt Kelly used his comic strip Pogo to produce a satire that appeared in book form as "The Jack Acid Society Black Book."[37]

## [edit] Leaders and notable members

### [edit] Presidents

  * Robert W. Welch Jr. (1958â1983)
  * Larry McDonald (1983) - a U.S. Representative was killed in the 1983 KAL-007 shootdown incident.
  * Charles R. Armour
  * John F. McManus (1991â2004, 2005âpresent)
  * G. Vance Smith (2004â2005)

### [edit] CEOs

  * G. Allen Bubolz (1988â1991)
  * Haroldson Hunt (1889-1974)
  * Fred Koch (1900-1967)
  * G. Vance Smith (1991â2005)
  * Arthur R. Thompson (2005-present)

### [edit] Politicians

  * Edgar Willard Hiestand (1888-1970)
  * Lawrence P. McDonald (1935-1983)
  * John Rousselot (1927-2003)
  * John George Schmitz (1930-2001)

## [edit] See also

  * Anti-Communism
  * United States isolationism
  * Paleoconservatism
  * Withdrawal from the United Nations
  * William P. Hoar
  * Wise Use Movement
  * Separation of church and state
  * William Norman Grigg

## [edit] References

### [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ a b "Core Principles". The John Birch Society. http://www.jbs.org/index.php/about/core-principles. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  2. ^ "National Sovereignty". The John Birch Society. http://www.jbs.org/index.php/issues/independence-a-sovereignty. Retrieved on 2008-07-18. "The Society has always opposed the surrender of American sovereignty to any international organization, such as the United Nations, or the emerging North American Union."
  3. ^ Berlet, Chip; Matthew Lyons (2000). Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort. New York: The Guilford Press. pp. 175â185. ISBN 1-57230-562-2.
  4. ^ Mintz, Frank P. (1985). The Liberty Lobby and the American right: race, conspiracy, and culture. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-24393-X.
  5. ^ Behreandt, Dennis (2008-05-29). "Racism and the John Birch Society". The John Birch Society. http://www.jbs.org/index.php/jbs-news-feed/7-jbs-news-feed/1717-racism-and-the-john-birch-society. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  6. ^ "John Birch: A Patriotic Exemplar". The John Birch Society. http://www.jbs.org/index.php/about/john-birch. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  7. ^ Time magazine, 7 April 1961
  8. ^ The New American
  9. ^ a b "Larry McDonald on the New World Order". Liveleak. 2008-02-15. http://www.liveleak.com/view?i=326_1203084840. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  10. ^ Farmer, Brian (2007-09-17). "The North American Union: Conspiracy Theory or Conspiracy Fact?". The John Birch Society. http://thenewamerican.com/node/5524. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  11. ^ Welch, Robert E. (1961). Blue Book of the John Birch Society. American Opinion Books. ISBN 0-88279-215-6.
  12. ^ a b c "John Birch Society". Political Research Associates. http://www.publiceye.org/tooclose/jbs.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  13. ^ John Birch Society Speakers Bureau
  14. ^ Matthew Lyons; Berlet, Chip (2000). Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort. New York: The Guilford Press. pp. 179\. ISBN 1-57230-562-2.
  15. ^ French, William Marshall (1967). American Secondary Education. Odyssey Press. pp. 477. http://books.google.com/books?id=180bAAAAMAAJ. Retrieved on 2008-07-20.
  16. ^ The New American homepage
  17. ^ Public Eye on The John Birch Society
  18. ^ Bryant, John. "The John Birch Society -- Exposed!". http://www.thebirdman.org/Index/NetLoss/NetLoss-Oliver.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  19. ^ "A Spectre Haunting Mormonism". http://www.mormoninquiry.typepad.com/mormon_inquiry/2006/06/a_spectre_was_h.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  20. ^ Bove, Nicholas J., Jr.. "The Belmont Brotherhood". http://www.watch.pair.com/belmont.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  21. ^ "Who was Ayn Rand? - a biography, Playboy interview, 1964". http://www.ellensplace.net/ar_pboy.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  22. ^ The Atlas Society : "The 'Lost' Parts of Ayn Rand's Playboy Interview"
  23. ^ William F. Buckley, "Goldwater, the John Birch Society, and Me"
  24. ^ Ronald Sullivan, Foes of Rising Birch Society Organize in Jersey, New York Times, April 20, 1966, page 1
  25. ^ Buckley, Jr, William F. (2008-03). "Goldwater, the John Birch Society, and Me". Commentary. http://www.commentarymagazine.com/viewarticle.cfm/goldwater%E2%80%94the-john-birch-society%E2%80%94and-me-11248. Retrieved on 2008-10-07.
  26. ^ Welch, Robert (1975). The Politician. Boston: Western Islands. cxxxviiiâcxxxix. ISBN 99908-64-98-5. "At this point in the original manuscript, there was one paragraph in which I expressed my own personal belief as to the most likely explanation of the events and actions with this document had tried to bring into focus. In a confidential letter, neither published nor offered for sale and restricted to friends who were expected to respect the confidence but offer me in exchange their own points of view, this seemed entirely permissible and proper. It does not seem so for an edition of the letter that is now to be published and given, probably, fairly wide distribution. So that paragraph, and two explanatory paragraphs, connected with it, have been omitted here. And the reader is left entirely free to draw his own conclusions."
  27. ^ Robert Winborne Welch biography on Spartacus Schoolnet
  28. ^ Buckley, Jr, William F. (2008-03). "Goldwater, the John Birch Society, and Me". Commentary. http://www.commentarymagazine.com/viewarticle.cfm/goldwater%E2%80%94the-john-birch-society%E2%80%94and-me-11248. Retrieved on 2008-10-07.
  29. ^ Buckley, Jr, William F. (2008-03). "Goldwater, the John Birch Society, and Me". Commentary. http://www.commentarymagazine.com/viewarticle.cfm/goldwater%E2%80%94the-john-birch-society%E2%80%94and-me-11248. Retrieved on 2008-10-07.
  30. ^ Haiman, Franklyn Saul; Tedford, Thomas L.; Herbeck, Dale (2005). "Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc". Freedom Of Speech In The United States. Strata Publishing. ISBN 1-891136-10-0.
  31. ^ Guthrie, Andrew (1999-11-24). "Is Panama Canal Falling Under Chinese Control?". Voice of America. http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/news/china/1999/991124-prc1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-25.
  32. ^ The Ross Institute
  33. ^ "Before Colbert, there was Dizzy" : WFIU Public Radio, 2007
  34. ^ BobDylan.com
  35. ^ MSN reviews "At the Bitter End" by The Chad Mitchell Trio
  36. ^ List of INWO groups
  37. ^ Walt Kelly biography from BPIB.com

### [edit] Further reading

  * Lipset, Seymour Martin (1990). The Politics of Unreason: Right-Wing Extremism America. Anti Defamation League of Bnai. ISBN 0-686-95046-1.

#### [edit] Supporting the John Birch Society

  * Welch, Robert (1961). The blue book of the John Birch Society. Boston: Western Islands. ISBN 0-88279-105-2. OCLC 16903114.
  * Welch, Robert (1964). The Politician. Belmont, Massachusetts: Belmont Publishing. OCLC 376165.
  * Welch, Robert; John Birch Society (1964). The White Book of the John Birch Society for 1964. Belmont, Massachusetts: John Birch Society. OCLC 21571870.
  * Welch, Robert (1966). The New Americanism and Other Speeches. Boston: Western Islands. ISBN 0-88279-211-3.
  * Allen, Gary (1971 isbn=0-945001-29-0). None Dare Call It Conspiracy. G S G & Associates, Incorporated.
  * Griffin, G. Edward (1975). The Life and Words of Robert Welch, Founder of the John Birch Society. Thousand Oaks, California: American Media. ISBN 0-912986-07-7. OCLC 1530499.
  * McManus, John F. (1983). The Insiders. Belmont, Massachusetts: John Birch Society. OCLC 16912302.
  * McManus, John F. (1992-04-20). "Taking on the Giant: How Dare Pat Buchanan Defy the Establishment!". The New American: p. 5.

#### [edit] Criticizing the John Birch Society

  * "Birch Society Investigated," Idaho Statesman, October 9, 1964.
  * Berlet, Chip. (1989). "Trashing the Birchers: Secrets of the Paranoid Right." Boston Phoenix, July 20, pp. 10, 23.
  * Broyles, J. Allen. (1964). The John Birch Society: Anatomy of a Protest. Boston: Beacon Press.
  * De Koster, Lester. (1967). The Citizen and the John Birch Society. A Reformed Journal monograph. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans.
  * Epstein, Benjamin R., and Arnold Forster. (1966). The Radical Right: Report on the John Birch Society and Its Allies. New York: Vintage Books.
  * Grove, Gene. (1961). Inside the John Birch Society. Greenwich, CT: Fawcett.
  * Grupp, Fred W., Jr. (1969). "The Political Perspectives of Birch Society Members." In Robert A. Schoenberger (Ed.), The American Right
  * Hardisty, Jean V. (1999). Mobilizing Resentment: Conservative Resurgence from the John Birch Society to the Promise Keepers. Boston: Beacon.
  * Janson, Donald & Eismann, Bernard. (1963). "The John Birch Society" pages 25â54 from The Far Right, New York: McGraw-Hill.
  * Johnson, George. (1983). Architects of Fear: Conspiracy Theories and Paranoia in American Politics. Los Angeles: Tarcher/Houghton Mifflin.
  * Kraft, Charles Jeffrey. (1992). A Preliminary Socio-Economic and State Demographic Profile of the John Birch Society. Cambridge, MA: Political Research Associates.
  * Moore, William V. (1981). The John Birch Society: A Southern Profile. Paper, annual meeting, Southern Political Science Association, Memphis, TN.
  * Ronald Sullivan, "Foes of Rising Birch Society Organize in Jersey," New York Times, April 20, 1966, pp. 1, 34.

#### [edit] Regarding heroin trade in Southeast Asia

  * McCoy, Alfred W. (2003). "The politics of heroin : CIA complicity in the global drug trade : Afghanistan, Southeast Asia, Central America, Colombia", Chicago : Lawrence Hill Books.

## [edit] External links

  * John Birch Society website
  * The New American, JBS biweekly publication
  * "John Birch Society," Political Research Associates
  * Report of the California Senate Factfinding Subcommittee on Un-American Activities on the John Birch Society
  * "What is the John Birch Society?", short excerpt of a film, released circa 1965, of Robert W. Welch Jr., explaining why he founded the John Birch Society and its aims.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Birch_Society"

Categories: John Birch Society | Conservative organizations in the United
States | History of anti-communism in the United States | Anti-communism |
Koch family | Organizations established in 1958 | Appleton, Wisconsin |
Conspiracy theorists | Far-right politics

Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from July 2008 | All
articles lacking sources | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles
with unsourced statements since September 2007 | Articles with unsourced
statements since July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 03:42 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



