
# Freddie Mac

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the Bank group. For the singer and boxer, see Freddie
Mack.

Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) <IMG>  
Type Public (NYSE: FRE)  
Founded 1970  
Headquarters McLean, Virginia  
Key people John Koskinen  
(Interim CEO)  
Industry Credit services  
Products Financial services  
Revenue US$ 43.104 Billion (2007)  
Operating income US$ -5.977 Billion (2007)  
Net income US$ -3.094 Billion (2007)  
Total assets US$ 794.368 Billion (2007)  
Total equity US$ 26.724 Billion (2007)  
Employees 5,281 (2008)  
Website FreddieMac.com  
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC) (NYSE: FRE), known as
Freddie Mac, is a government sponsored enterprise (GSE) of the United States
federal government

The FHLMC was created in 1970 to expand the secondary market for mortgages in
the US. Along with other GSEs, Freddie Mac buys mortgages on the secondary
market, pools them, and sells them as mortgage-backed securities to investors
on the open market. This secondary mortgage market increases the supply of
money available for mortgages lending and increases the money available for
new home purchases. The name, "Freddie Mac", was a creative acronym of the
company's full name that had been adopted officially for ease of
identification (see "GSEs" below for other examples).

On September 8, 2008, Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) director James B.
Lockhart III announced he had put Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac under the
conservatorship of the FHFA (see Federal takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac). The action has been described as "one of the most sweeping government
interventions in private financial markets in decades".[1][2][3]

Moody's gave Freddie Mac's preferred stock an investment grade rating of A1
until August 22, 2008 when Warren Buffett said publicly that both Freddie Mac
and Fannie Mae had tried to attract him and others. Moody's changed the credit
rating on that day to Baa3, the lowest investment grade credit rating.
Freddie's senior debt credit rating remains Aaa/AAA from each of the major
ratings agencies Moody's, S&P, and Fitch.[4] As of the start of the
conservatorship, the United States Department of the Treasury had contracted
to acquire US$1 billion in Freddie Mac senior preferred stock, paying at a
rate of 10 percent a year, and the total investment may subsequently rise to
as much as US$ 100 billion.[5]

Home loan interest rates may go down as a result, and owners of Freddie Mac
debt and the Asian central banks who had increased their holdings in these
bonds may be protected. Shares of Freddie Mac stock, however, plummeted to
about one U.S. dollar on September 8, 2008 . The yield on U.S Treasury
securities rose in anticipation of increased U.S. federal debt.[6]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Business
    * 2.1 Conforming loans
    * 2.2 Guarantees and subsidies
      * 2.2.1 No actual guarantees
      * 2.2.2 Assumed guarantees
      * 2.2.3 Federal subsidies
    * 2.3 Subprime adjustable rate loans
  * 3 Company
    * 3.1 Awards
    * 3.2 Credit rating
    * 3.3 Investigations
    * 3.4 Government subsidies and bailout
    * 3.5 Conservatorship
  * 4 References
  * 5 See also
  * 6 External links
    * 6.1 GSEs
  * 7 Further reading

  
## [edit] History

From 1938 to 1968, the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) was
the sole institution that bought mortgages from depository institutions,
principally savings and loan associations, which encouraged more mortgage
lending and effectively insured the value of mortgages by the US government.
In 1968, Fannie Mae split into a private corporation and a publicly financed
institution. The private corporation was still called Fannie Mae, and its
charter continued to support the purchase of mortgages from savings and loan
associations and other depository institutions, but without an explicit
insurance policy that guaranteed the value of the mortgages. The publicly
financed institution was named the Government National Mortgage Association
(Ginnie Mae) and it explicitly guaranteed the repayments of securities backed
by mortgages made to government employees or veterans (the mortgages
themselves were also guaranteed by other government organizations). To provide
competition for the newly private Fannie Mae and to further increase the
availability of funds to finance mortgages and home ownership, Congress then
established the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) as a
private corporation through the Emergency Home Finance Act of 1970. The
charter of Freddie Mac was essentially the same as Fannie Mae's newly private
charter: to expand the secondary market for mortgages and mortgage backed
securities by buying mortgages made by savings and loan associations and other
depository institutions.

The Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act ("FIRREA") of
1991 revised and standardized the regulation of both Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac. Prior to this act, Freddie Mac was owned by the Federal Home Loan Bank
System and governed by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which was reorganized
into the Office of Thrift Supervision by the Act. The Act severed Freddie
Mac's ties to the Federal Home Loan Bank System, created an 18-member board of
directors, and subjected it to HUD oversight.

In 1995, Freddie Mac began receiving affordable housing credit for buying
subprime securities, and by 2004, HUD suggested the company was lagging behind
and should "do more." [7]

Freddie Mac was put under a conservatorship of the U.S. Federal government on
Sunday, September 7, 2008: Federal takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

## [edit] Business

<IMG>

This section may be slanted towards recent events. Please try to keep recent
events in historical perspective. (August 2008)

<IMG>  
Freddie Mac's primary method of making money is by charging a guarantee fee on
loans that it has purchased and securitized into mortgage-backed security
bonds. Investors, or purchasers of Freddie Mac MBS, are willing to let Freddie
Mac keep this fee in exchange for assuming the credit risk, that is, Freddie
Mac's guarantee that the principal and interest on the underlying loan will be
paid back regardless of whether the borrower actually repays.

Both Alan Greenspan and Ben Bernanke have spoken publicly in favor of greater
regulation of the GSEs, because of the size of their holdings and the
widespread perception that they are government backed. Freddie Mac is
currently regulated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) and its Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO). The
United States House of Representatives passed HR 1427 (Federal Housing Finance
Reform Act of 2007) to consolidate oversight for Freddie, Fannie, and the
Federal Home Loan Banks into a single regulator.[8]

### [edit] Conforming loans

The GSEs are allowed to buy only conforming loans, which limits secondary
market competition for non-conforming loans. The law of supply and demand
accordingly renders the non-conforming loan harder to sell (fewer competing
buyers); thus it would cost the consumer more (typically 1/4 to 1/2 of a
percentage point, and sometimes more, depending on credit market conditions).
OFHEO annually sets the limit of the size of a conforming loan in response to
the October to October change in mean home price. However most lenders don't
follow OFHEO loan limits, so it is a meaningless number. OFHEO are completely
ignored for more expensive areas. The conforming loan limit for 2009 used by
lenders is $417,000 (much lower then OFHEO limits). Above that conforming loan
limit, a mortgage is considered a non-conforming jumbo loan. The conforming
loan limit is 50 percent higher in such high-cost areas as Alaska, Hawaii,
Guam and the US Virgin Islands, and is also higher for 2-4 unit properties on
a graduating scale.

### [edit] Guarantees and subsidies

In mid July 2008 there was widespread speculation that the US government would
move to provide Freddie Mac with additional guarantees of capital, because of
widespread instability in the financial markets and public perceptions of
looming insolvency. On Sunday July 13 The Secretary of the Treasury announced
that the US government would seek legal permission to invest in Freddie Mac,
which it later obtained as part of a Congressional housing bill. In addition,
the Federal Reserve offered Freddie access to its emergency borrowing
facility, the Discount Window[citation needed](see also press release of the
Fed[9]), a resource traditionally reserved for banks. While, many are calling
this move tantamount to a bailout, the Treasury has not yet invested in
Freddie Mac and has in fact announced that it has no plans to do so; rather,
the Congressional permission constituted a last-resort.[citation needed]

#### [edit] No actual guarantees

The FHLMC states, "securities, including any interest..., are not guaranteed
by, and are not debts or obligations of, the United States or any agency or
instrumentality of the United States other than Freddie Mac."[10] The FHLMC
and FHLMC securities are not funded or protected by the US Government. FHLMC
securities carry no government guarantee of being repaid. This is explicitly
stated in the law that authorizes GSEs, on the securities themselves, and in
public communications issued by the FHLMC.

#### [edit] Assumed guarantees

There is a wide belief that FHLMC securities are backed by some sort of
implied federal guarantee, and a majority of investors believe that the
government would prevent a disastrous default. Vernon L. Smith, 2002 Nobel
Laureate in economics, has called FHLMC and FNMA "implicitly taxpayer-backed
agencies." [11] The Economist has referred to "[t]he implicit government
guarantee"[12] of FHLMC and FNMA.

The then-director of the Congressional Budget Office, Dan L. Crippen, testifed
before Congress in 2001, that the "debt and mortgage-backed securities of GSEs
are more valuable to investors than similar private securities because of the
perception of a government guarantee. . . ."[13]

#### [edit] Federal subsidies

The FHLMC receives no direct federal government aid. However, the corporation
and the securities it issues are thought to benefit from government subsidies.
The Congressional Budget Office writes, "There have been no federal
appropriations for cash payments or guarantee subsidies. But in the place of
federal funds the government provides considerable unpriced benefits to the
enterprises... Government-sponsored enterprises are costly to the government
and taxpayers... the benefit is currently worth $6.5 billion annually." [14]

### [edit] Subprime adjustable rate loans

Freddie Mac announced on February 27, 2007 that it will buy a subprime
adjustable rate mortgage only if the borrower qualifies for the maximum rate
of the loan, rather than merely a low introductory (so-called teaser) rate.

## [edit] Company

### [edit] Awards

Freddie Mac was named one of the 100 Best Companies for Working Mothers in
2004 by Working Mothers magazine.

Freddie Mac was ranked number 50 in Fortune 500's 2007 rankings.

Freddie Mac was ranked 20 in Forbes' Global 2,000 public companies rankings
for 2008.

### [edit] Credit rating

See [3]

  * Senior Long-Term Debt: AAA Aaa AAA
  * Short-Term Debt A-1+ Prime-1 F-1+
  * Subordinated Debt BBB+/Watch Positive Aa2 AA-
  * Preferred Stock C Ca C/RR6
  * Risk-To-The-Government NR (Not Rated) Not Applicable Not Applicable
  * Bank Financial Strength Not Applicable E+ Not Applicable

### [edit] Investigations

In 2003, Freddie Mac revealed that it had understated earnings by almost $5
billion, one of the largest corporate restatements in U.S. history. As a
result, in November, it was fined $125 million--an amount called "peanuts" by
Forbes. [4]

On April 18, 2006 Freddie Mac was fined $3.8 million, by far the largest
amount ever assessed by the Federal Election Commission, as a result of
illegal campaign contributions. Freddie Mac was accused of illegally using
corporate resources between 2000 and 2003 for 85 fundraisers that collected
about $1.7 million for federal candidates. Much of the illegal fund raising
benefited members of the House Financial Services Committee, a panel whose
decisions can affect Freddie Mac. Notably, Freddie Mac held more than 40
fundraisers for House Financial Services Chairman Michael Oxley, R-Ohio. [5]

<IMG>

The neutrality of this article is disputed. Please see the discussion on the
talk page. Please do not remove this message until the dispute is resolved.
(October 2008)  
### [edit] Government subsidies and bailout

Officially, Freddie Mac is not given any backing, insurance, or statutory
support by the US Government. Unofficially, it has long been assumed that the
corporation, along with its sister GSE, the Federal National Mortgage
Association (Fannie Mae), were "too big to fail". Both companies often
benefited from an implied guarantee of fitness equivalent to truly federally-
backed financial groups. Now Asian investors await that guarantee.[15]

As of 2008, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac owned or guaranteed about half of the
U.S.'s $12 trillion mortgage market.[16] This made both corporations highly
susceptible to the subprime mortgage crisis of that year. Ultimately, in July
of that year, the speculation was made reality, when the US government took
action to prevent the collapse of both corporations. The Treasury Department
and the Federal Reserve took several steps to bolster confidence in the
corporations, including extending credit limits, granting both corporations
access to Federal Reserve low-interest loans (at similar rates as commercial
banks), and potentially allowing the Treasury Department to own stock.[17]
This event also renewed calls for stronger regulation of GSEs by the
government.

Bush recommended a significant regulatory overhaul of the housing finance
industry in 2003, but many Democrats opposed it fearing that tighter
regulation could greatly reduce financing for low-income housing, both low and
high risk. [18]

Bush opposed two other House Bills: [19] [20] Senate Bill S-190 Federal
Housing Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 was introduced in the Senate
on Jan 26, 2005, sponsored by Hagel and co-sponsored by Dole and Sununu. S-190
was discussed in the Senate Banking Committee on July 28, 2005 with the
result: "Ordered to be reported with an amendment in the nature of a
substitute favorably". The bill died in a Republican controlled committee and
never came to the floor of the Senate or back to the Senate Banking Committee
for reconsideration.

On May 23, 2006, the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac regulator, the Office of
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, issued the results of a 27 month long
investigation. [21]

On May 25,2006, Senator McCain joined as a co-sponsor to the Federal Housing
Enterprise Regulatory Reform Act of 2005 (first put forward by Sen. Charles
Hagel [R-NE])[22] where he pointed out that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac's
regulator reported that profits were "illusions deliberately and
systematically created by the company's senior management". [23] However, this
regulation too met with opposition from both Democrats and Republicans. [24]
Note that McCain did not co-sponsor the more recent Federal Housing Enterprise
Regulatory Reform Act of 2007.[25]

The Democrats who served as top Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac executives include
Franklin Raines, former Clinton Budget Director and current Housing Policy
advisor to Barack Obama, CEO from 1999 to 2004; James Johnson, former aide to
Democratic Vice-President Walter Mondale and ex-head of Obama's Vice-
Presidential Selection Committee, CEO from 1991 to 1998; and Jamie Gorelick,
former Clinton Deputy Attorney General, Vice-Chair from 1998 to 2003. In their
positions, Johnson earned an estimated $21 million; Raines earned an estimated
$90 million; while Gorelick earned an estimated $26 million.[26] All three top
executives were also involved in mortgage-related financial scandals.[27] [28]

John McCain received $21,550 from these GSEs in the 19-year, 1989-2008,
timeframe.[29] In addition, various Republican committees, of which the McCain
campaign was one, received a total of $169,000 in campaign contributions
directly from lobbyists, directors and officers of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae
([dubious â discuss].[30] Freddie Mac also contributed $250,000 to the 2008
Republican National Convention in St. Paul, Minnesota according to FEC filings
[31]. The organizers of the Democratic National Convention have not yet
submitted their filings on how much they received from Freddie Mac and Fannie
Mae (the latter of which tends more to support Democratic candidates).Yahoo!
News No news stories that we are aware of have reported to total contributions
of Fanny and Freddie to Democratic Committees. The top five recipients of
campaign contributions from Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae during the 1989 - 2008
time period are Christopher Dodd, (D-CT) $133,900, John Kerry, (D-MA)
$111,000, Barack Obama, (D-IL) $105,849, Hillary Clinton, (D-NY) $75,550, and
Paul Kanjorski,(D-PA) $65,500.[32].

### [edit] Conservatorship

Main article: Federal takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac

Sister project Wikinews has related news: Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae placed
into US government conservatorship  
On September 7, 2008, Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) Director James B.
Lockhart III announced pursuant to the financial analysis, assessments and
statutory authority of the FHFA, he had placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
under the conservatorship of the FHFA. FHFA has stated that there are no plans
to liquidate the company.[1][2] The announcement followed reports two days
earlier that the Federal government was planning to take over Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac and had met with their CEOs on short notice.[33][34][35] Under the
reported plan, the federal government, via the FHFA, would place the two firms
into conservatorship, and for each entity, dismiss the chief executive
officer, and dismiss the present board of directors and elect a new board of
directors, and cause to be issued new common stock to the federal government.
The value of the common stock to pre-conservatorship holders would be greatly
diminished, in the effort to maintain the value of company debt and of
mortgage-backed securities.[3] [33][34][35] The authority of the U.S. Treasury
to advance funds for the purpose of stabilizing Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac is
limited only by the amount of debt that the entire federal government is
permitted by law to commit to. The July 30, 2008, law enabling expanded
regulatory authority over Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac increased the national
debt ceiling by US$800 billion, to a total of US$ 10.7 Trillion in
anticipation of the potential need for the Treasury to have the flexibility to
support the federal home loan banks.[36][37][38] On September 7, 2008, the
U.S. Government took control of both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Daniel Mudd,
CEO of Fannie Mae and Richard Syron, CEO of Freddie Mac have been replaced.
Herbert M. Allison former vice chairman of Merrill Lynch will take over Fannie
Mae, and David M Moffett, former vice chairman of US Bancorp, will take over
Freddie Mac. It is estimated that the liabilities of both companies could cost
U.S. taxpayers tens of billions of dollars.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Lockhart, James B., III (2008-09-07). "Statement of FHFA Director James B. Lockhart". Federal Housing Finance Agency. http://www.ofheo.gov/newsroom.aspx?ID=456&q1=0&q2=0. Retrieved on 2008-09-07.
  2. ^ a b "Fact Sheet: Questions and Answers on Conservatorship" (PDF). Federal Housing Finance Agency. 2008-09-07. http://www.ofheo.gov/media/PDF/FHFACONSERVQA.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-09-07.
  3. ^ a b Goldfarb, Zachary A.; David Cho and Binyamin Appelbaum (2008-09-07). "Treasury to Rescue Fannie and Freddie: Regulators Seek to Keep Firms' Troubles From Setting Off Wave of Bank Failures". Washington Post: pp. A01. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/09/06/AR2008090602540.html?hpid=topnews. Retrieved on 2008-09-07.
  4. ^ "Freddie Mac courts investors, Buffett passes". Associated Press via International Herald Tribune. August 22, 2008. http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2008/08/22/business/NA-US-Mortgage-Giants-Crisis.php. Retrieved on 2008-09-07.
  5. ^ Christie, Rebecca (September 7, 2008). "Paulson Engineers U.S. Takeover of Fannie, Freddie (Update4)". Bloomberg. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=ajcw4yxxPGJ8. Retrieved on 2008-09-07.
  6. ^ Grynbaum, Michael and Jolly, David (September 8, 2008). "U.S. Takeover of Mortgage Giants Lifts Stock Markets". The New York Times (The New York Times Company). http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/09/business/worldbusiness/09markets.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-08.
  7. ^ Leonnig, Carol D. (June 10, 2008). "How HUD Mortgage Policy Fed The Crisis". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/06/09/AR2008060902626.html.
  8. ^ Associated Press (2007-03-06). "Bernanke seeks stronger mortgage regulation". MSNBC. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/17485336/.
  9. ^ [1] Press release of the Fed.
  10. ^ Freddie Mac Debt Securities: Freddie Notes FAQ
  11. ^ Vernon L. Smith, "The Clinton Housing Bubble", Wall Street Journal, December 18, 2007, pA20
  12. ^ The Economist, "Fannie and Freddie ride again", July 5, 2007
  13. ^ "CBO TESTIMONY Statement of Dan L. Crippen Director, Federal Subsidies for the Housing GSEs before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises Committee on Financial Services U.S. House of Representatives, May 23, 2001"
  14. ^ Congressional Budget Office, Assessing the Public Costs and Benefits of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, May 1996
  15. ^ Goodman, Wes and Shenn, Jody (February 20, 2009). "Fannie Mae Rescue Hindered as Asians Seek Guarantee (Update2)". Bloomberg. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601109&sid=azObP8_4deuI. Retrieved on 2009-02-20.
  16. ^ Duhigg, Charles, "Loan-Agency Woes Swell From a Trickle to a Torrent", The New York Times, Friday, July 11, 2008
  17. ^ Luhby, Tami, [2], CNN Money, Monday, July 14, 2008
  18. ^ Stephen Labaton, The New York Times, Sep 11, 2003
  19. ^ Statement of Administration Policy: H.R. 1461
  20. ^ Statement of Administration Policy: H.R. 1427
  21. ^ "Report of the Special Examination of Fannie Mae May 2006" (PDF). Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. 2006-05. http://www.ofheo.gov/media/pdf/FNMSPECIALEXAM.PDF.
  22. ^ govtrack.us
  23. ^ govtrack.us, May 25, 2006
  24. ^ Associated Press, Oct 20, 2008
  25. ^ govtrack.us, S. 1100--110th Congress (2007)
  26. ^ NationalPost, Jul 11, 2008
  27. ^ The Washington Post, Apr 6, 2005
  28. ^ The New York Times, Apr 19, 2008
  29. ^ OpenSecrets.org, Sep 11, 2008
  30. ^ The New York Times, Sep 9, 2008
  31. ^ Yahoo! News
  32. ^ OpenSecrets.org
  33. ^ a b Hilzenrath, David S.; Zachary A. Goldfarb (2008-09-05). "Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac to be Put Under Federal Control, Sources Say". Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/09/05/AR2008090503351.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  34. ^ a b Labaton, Stephen; Andres Ross Sorkin (2008-09-05). "U.S. Rescue Seen at Hand for 2 Mortgage Giants". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/06/business/06fannie.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-05.
  35. ^ a b Hilzenrath,, David S.; Neil Irwin, and Zachary A. Goldfarb (2008-09-06). "U.S. Nears Rescue Plan For Fannie And Freddie Deal Said to Involve Change of Leadership, Infusions of Capital". Washington Post: pp. A1. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/09/05/AR2008090503351.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-06.
  36. ^ Herszenhorn, David (2008-07-27). "Congress Sends Housing Relief Bill to President". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/27/washington/27housing.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-06.
  37. ^ Herszenhorn, David M. (2008-07-31). "Bush Signs Sweeping Housing Bill". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/31/business/31housing.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-06.
  38. ^ See HR 3221, signed into law as Public Law 110-289: A bill to provide needed housing reform and for other purposes.  
Access to Legislative History: Library of Congress THOMAS: A bill to provide
needed housing reform and for other purposes.  
White House pre-signing statement: Statement of Administration Policy: H.R.
3221 â Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (July 23, 2008 ). Executive
office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, Washington DC.

## [edit] See also

  * Derivative (finance)
  * Government sponsored enterprise
  * Mortgage GSE controversy
  * Securitization
  * USA Funds
  * Agency Securities
  * Mortgage
  * Mortgage loan

## [edit] External links

  * Why the Mortgage Crisis Happened
  * Official Website
  * Freddie Mac Profile, BusinessWeek
  * Freddie Mac Profile, FrontPage Magazine
  * Freddie Mac Profile, New York Times

### [edit] GSEs

  * Fannie Mae
  * Farmer Mac
  * Ginnie Mae
  * Sallie Mae

## [edit] Further reading

  * Barth, James R.; Brumbaugh, R. Dan, Jr. (1992). "Turmoil Among Depository Institutions: Implications for the U.S. Real Estate Market" (PDF). Housing Policy and Debate (Fannie Mae, Office of Housing Policy Research, Washington, DC) 3 (4). http://www.fanniemaefoundation.org/programs/hpd/pdf/hpd_0304_barth.pdf.
  * Labaton, Stephen; Weisman, Steven R. (2008-07-11). "U.S. Weighs Takeover of Two Mortgage Giants". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/11/business/11fannie.html.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Financial crisis of 2007â2009  
Late 2000s recession Â· 2008 G-20 Washington summit Â· APEC Peru 2008  
Specific issues

United States housing market correction Â· World food price crisis Â· Energy
crisis (Central Asia) Â· Subprime mortgage crisis (timeline, List of
writedowns) Â· Global financial crisis Â· Automotive industry crisis Â· List
of entities involved (Bankrupt or acquired banks, Bankrupt retailers) Â·
Effects upon museums Â· Banking revelations in Ireland Â· Resurgence of
Keynesianism  
By country (or region)

Belgium Â· Iceland Â· Ireland Â· Latvia Â· Russia Â· Spain Â· (Europe Â·
Africa Â· Americas Â· Asia Â· Australasia)  
Legislation and policy responses  
Banking and finance  
stability and reform

Banking (Special Provisions) Act 2008 Â· Commercial Paper Funding Facility Â·
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 Â· Troubled Assets Relief Program
Â· Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Â· Temporary Liquidity Guarantee
Program Â· 2008 United Kingdom bank rescue package Â· 2008 East Asian meetings
Â· Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Bill 2009 Â· 2009 G-20 London summit  
Stimulus and recovery

Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 Â· Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 Â·
2008 Chinese economic stimulus plan Â· 2008 European Union stimulus plan Â·
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 Â· Green New Deal  
Companies and banking institutions  
Company failures

New Century Financial Corporation Â· American Freedom Mortgage Â· American
Home Mortgage Â· Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities LLC Â· Charter
Communications Â· Lehman Brothers (bankruptcy) Â· Linens 'n Things Â· Mervyns
Â· NetBank Â· Terra Securities (scandal) Â· Sentinel Management Group Â·
Washington Mutual Â· Icesave Â· Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander Â· Yamato Life
Â· Circuit City Â· Allco Finance Group Â· Waterford Wedgwood Â· Saab
Automobile Â· BearingPoint Â· Tweeter Â· Babcock & Brown Â· Silicon Graphics  
Government bailouts  
and takeovers

Northern Rock (nationalisation) Â· IndyMac Federal Bank Â· Fannie Mae
(takeover) Â· Freddie Mac (takeover) Â· AIG Â· Bradford & Bingley Â· Fortis Â·
Glitnir Â· Hypo Real Estate Â· Dexia Â· CL Financial Â· Landsbanki Â·
Kaupthing Â· Straumur Â· ING Group Â· Citigroup Â· General Motors Â· Chrysler
Â· Bank of America Â· Anglo Irish Bank (nationalisation) Â· Bank of Antigua Â·
ACC Capital Holdings (reorganization) Â· U.S. Central Credit Union Â· Bank of
Ireland Â· Allied Irish Bank  
Company acquisitions

Ameriquest Mortgage Â· Countrywide Financial Â· Bear Stearns Â· Alliance &
Leicester Â· Merrill Lynch Â· Washington Mutual Â· Derbyshire Building Society
Â· Cheshire Building Society Â· HBOS Â· Wachovia Â· Sovereign Bank Â· Barnsley
Building Society Â· Scarborough Building Society Â· National City Corp. Â·
Dunfermline Building Society  
Other topics  
Alleged frauds  
and fraudsters

Stanford Financial Group (Allen Stanford) Â· Fairfield Greenwich Group Â· UBS
AG Â· Sean FitzPatrick (Anglo Irish Bank) Â· Kazutsugi Nami (Enten
controversy) Â· Nicholas Cosmo Â· Arthur Nadel Â· Marc Dreier Â· Joseph S.
Forte Â· Paul Greenwood Â· Stephen Walsh  
Proven or admitted  
frauds and fraudsters

Bernard Madoff (Ponzi scheme) Â· Satyam Computer Services (accounting scandal)
(Ramalinga Raju)  
Related entities

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Â· Federal Reserve System Â· Federal
Housing Administration Â· Federal Housing Finance Agency Â· Federal Housing
Finance Board Â· Government National Mortgage Association Â· Office of Federal
Housing Enterprise Oversight Â· Office of Financial Stability Â· UK Financial
Investments Limited Â· Federal Home Loan Banks  
Securities involved  
and financial markets

Auction rate securities Â· Collateralized debt obligations Â· Collateralized
mortgage obligations Â· Credit default swaps Â· Mortgage-backed securities Â·
Secondary mortgage market  
Related topics

Bailout Â· Bank run Â· Credit crunch Â· Economic bubble Â· Error account Â·
Financial contagion Â· Financial crisis Â· Interbank lending market Â·
Liquidity crisis  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freddie_Mac"

Categories: Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange | Mortgage
industry of the United States | Affordable housing | Organizations established
in 1970 | United States government sponsored enterprise | Entities involved in
United States housing bubble

Hidden categories: Articles slanted towards recent events from August 2008 |
All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | NPOV
disputes from October 2008 | All NPOV disputes | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles with disputed statements from October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 20:25.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



