
# Monroe Doctrine

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

U.S. President James Monroe.

The Monroe Doctrine is a United States policy introduced on December 2, 1823,
which said that further efforts by European governments to colonize land or
interfere with states in the Americas would be viewed by the United States of
America as acts of aggression requiring US intervention.[1] The Monroe
Doctrine asserted that the Western Hemisphere was not to be further colonized
by European countries, but also that the United States would not interfere
with existing European colonies nor in the internal concerns of European
countries. The Doctrine was issued at the time when many Latin American
countries were on the verge of becoming independent from Spain and the United
States hoped to avoid having any European power take Spain's
colonies.[citation needed]

President of the United States James Monroe first stated the doctrine during
his seventh annual State of the Union Address to Congress.

It became a defining moment in the foreign policy of the United States and one
of its longest-standing tenets, invoked by U.S. presidents, Calvin Coolidge,
Herbert Hoover, John F. Kennedy, and others.

The Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine (added during the presidency of
Theodore Roosevelt) was invoked to intervene militarily in Latin America to
stop the spread of European influence[2].

It would have been nearly impossible for Monroe to envision that its intent
and impact would persist with minor variations for almost two centuries. Its
primary objective was to free the newly independent colonies of Latin America
from European intervention and control. The doctrine advocated that the New
World and the Old World were to remain distinctly separate spheres of
influence, for they were comprised of entirely separate and independent
nations.[3]

It was born from concerns of both the United States and Great Britain that
Spain and other European powers would attempt to restore its influence over
Spain's former colonies.[citation needed]

President Monroe claimed the United States of America, although only a
fledgling nation at the time, would not interfere in European wars or internal
dealings, and in turn, expected Europe to stay out of the affairs of the New
World. The Western Hemisphere was never to be colonized again and any attempt
by a European power to oppress or control any nation in the Western Hemisphere
would be perceived as a direct threat to the U.S.[4]. This quid pro quo was
presumptuous on its face, yet has stood the test of time.

The formalized document known as the Monroe Doctrine essentially served to
inform the powers of the Old World that the Americas were no longer open to
European colonization, and that any effort to extend European political
influence into the New World would be considered by the United States "as
dangerous to our peace and safety." Basically, the doctrine warned the
European powers âto leave America for the Americans.â It also created a
sphere of influence that would grow stronger with the addition of the
Roosevelt Corollary.

Because the U.S. lacked both a credible navy and army at the time, the
doctrine was largely disregarded internationally.[3] However, the Doctrine met
with tacit British approval, and the Royal Navy mostly enforced it tacitly, as
part of the wider Pax Britannica, which enforced the neutrality of the
seas.[citation needed][weasel words]

## Contents

  * 1 Political climate of Latin America at the time of the Doctrine
  * 2 Use of the Monroe Doctrine
  * 3 Roosevelt Corollary
  * 4 Clark Memorandum
  * 5 Criticism
  * 6 Cold War
  * 7 Further reading
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Political climate of Latin America at the time of the Doctrine

The reaction in Latin America to the Monroe Doctrine was undeniably upbeat.
John Crow, author of The Epic of Latin America, states, âBolivar himself,
still in the midst of his last campaign against the Spaniards, Santander in
Colombia, Rivadavia in Argentina, Victoria in Mexicoâleaders of the
emancipation movement everywhere - received Monroeâs words with sincerest
gratitudeâ [5]. Crow argues that the leaders of Latin America were realists.
They knew that the President of the United States wielded very little power at
the time, particularly without the backing of the British forces. Furthermore,
they figured that the Monroe Doctrine was powerless if it stood alone against
the Triple Alliance[5]. While they appreciated and praised their support in
the north, they knew that their future of independence was in the hands of the
powerful Great Britain. In 1826, Bolivar called upon his Congress of Panama to
host the first âPan-Americanâ meeting. In the eyes of Bolivar and his men,
the Monroe Doctrine was to become nothing more than a tool of national policy.
According to Crow, âIt was not meant to be, and was never intended to be a
charter for concerted hemispheric actionâ[5].

During the first half of the nineteenth century, it was Great Britainâs
preoccupation with exerting its power on the rest of the world that led it to
decide to support the Monroe Doctrine. At the time, South America as a whole
constituted a much larger market for British goods than the United States.
Without question, it was ultimately the support of Great Britain, not the
Monroe Doctrine, which protected the sovereignty of Latin Americaâs newly
independent nations[5].

## [edit] Use of the Monroe Doctrine

The first use of the yet unnamed doctrine was in 1836 when the United States
Government objected to Britain's alliance with the newly created Republic of
Texas on the principle of the Monroe Doctrine. On December 2, 1845, U.S.
President James Polk announced to Congress that the principle of the Monroe
Doctrine should be strictly enforced and that the United States should
aggressively expand into the West, often termed as Manifest Destiny.

In 1852, some politicians used the principle of the Monroe Doctrine to argue
for forcefully removing the Spanish from Cuba. In 1898, following the Spanish-
American War, the United States obtained Puerto Rico and the Philippines from
Spain and began an occupation of Cuba that lasted until 1902.

The doctrine's authors, chiefly future-President and then secretary-of-state
John Quincy Adams, saw it as a proclamation by the United States of moral
opposition to colonialism, but it has subsequently been re-interpreted and
applied in a variety of instances. President Theodore Roosevelt asserted the
right of the United States to intervene to stabilize the economic affairs of
small nations in the Caribbean and Central America if they were unable to pay
their international debts. This interpretation, intended to forestall
intervention by European powers that had lent money to those countries, has
been termed the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine.[citation needed]

In 1863, French forces under Napoleon III invaded Mexico and set up a French
puppet regime headed by Emperor Maximilian; Americans proclaimed this as a
violation of "The Doctrine,â but were unable to intervene due to the
American Civil War. This marked the first time the Monroe Doctrine was widely
referred to as a "Doctrineâ. After the civil war came to an end, the U.S.
brought troops down to the Rio Grande in hopes of pressuring Napoleon to
withdraw his troops. In 1867, Napoleon did, in fact, withdraw (Britannica
269)[which?].

In the 1870s, President Ulysses S. Grant extended the Monroe Doctrine,
claiming that the United States would not tolerate a colony in the Americas
being transferred from one European country to another.

President Grover Cleveland cited the Doctrine in 1895, threatening strong
action against the United Kingdom if the British failed to arbitrate their
dispute with Venezuela.[citation needed] His Secretary of State, Richard Olney
extended the Monroe Doctrine to give the United States the authority to
mediate border disputes throughout South America. This is known as the Olney
interpretation. There was scarce precedent to support this unilateral
expansion of the concept.[citation needed]

The Drago Doctrine was announced on December 29, 1902 by the Foreign Minister
of Argentina, Luis MarÃ­a Drago. Extending the Monroe Doctrine, it set forth
the policy that no European power could use force against an American nation
to collect debt.

In the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, President John F. Kennedy cited the
Monroe Doctrine as a basis for Americaâs âeyeball-to-eyeballâ
confrontation with the Soviet Union that had embarked on a provocative
campaign to install ballistic missiles on Cuban soil.[citation needed]

## [edit] Roosevelt Corollary

As the United States emerged as a world superpower, the Monroe Doctrine came
to define a recognized sphere of control that few dared to challenge.[3] In
1904, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt, added the Roosevelt Corollary to the
Monroe Doctrine, which asserted the right of the United States to intervene in
Latin America in cases of âflagrant and chronic wrongdoing by a Latin
American Nationâ[2]. This was the most significant amendment to the original
doctrine and was widely opposed by critics, who argued that the Monroe
Doctrine was originally meant to stop European influence in the Western
Hemisphere[3]. This amendment was designed to preclude violation of the
doctrine by European powers that would ultimately argue that the independent
nations were âmismanaged or unrulyâ.[3]

Critics[who?], however, argued that the Corollary simply asserted U.S.
domination in that area, essentially making them a "hemispheric
policeman."[citation needed] To this day, it is hard to argue that the Western
Hemisphere is not entirely a United States sphere of influence.[3]

## [edit] Clark Memorandum

In 1928, the Clark Memorandum was released, concluding that the United States
need not invoke the Monroe Doctrine as a defense of its interventions in Latin
America. The Memorandum argued that the United States had a self-evident right
of self-defense, and that this was all that was needed to justify certain
actions. The policy was announced to the public in 1930.

In 1954, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles evoked the Monroe Doctrine at
the Tenth Inter-American Conference, denouncing the intervention of Soviet
Communism in Guatemala. This was used to justify Operation PBSUCCESS. U.S.
President John F. Kennedy said at an August 29, 1962 news conference:

> The Monroe Doctrine means what it has meant since President Monroe and John
Quincy Adams enunciated it, and that is that we would oppose a foreign power
extending its power to the Western Hemisphere, and that is why we oppose what
is happening in Cuba today. That is why we have cut off our trade. That is why
we worked in the OAS and in other ways to isolate the Communist menace in
Cuba. That is why we will continue to give a good deal of our effort and
attention to it.[6]

## [edit] Criticism

Many authors, including professor Noam Chomsky[7], argue that in practice the
Monroe Doctrine has functioned as a declaration of hegemony and a right of
unilateral intervention over the Western Hemisphere â limited only by
prudence, as in the case of British military. Critics including Chomsky also
point to the work of emissaries such as William Walker, who oversaw and
supported U.S. backed atrocities, as inspired by the Monroe Doctrine.[8]

Many Latin American popular movements have come to resent the "Monroe
Doctrine", which has been summarized there in the phrase: "America for the
Americans", which translates into Spanish ironically as "AmÃ©rica para los
americanos". The irony lies in the fact that the Spanish term americano is, in
all Latin America countries, used to name the inhabitants of North, Central
and South America. However, in English, the term American is related almost
exclusively to the nationals of the United States, although this wasn't always
the case. Thus, while "America for the Americans" sounds very much like a call
to share a common destiny, it becomes apparent that it could really imply:
America (the continent) for the United States. At the turn of the century,
popular resentment in Latin America gave rise to a series of left of center
leaders who questioned Washington's sincerity. In order to explicitly explain
what is meant, the phrase is usually changed to "America for North American
Americans".[citation needed]

Other critics have interpreted the Monroe Doctrine as isolationist in
intent.[who?]

## [edit] Cold War

During the Cold War, the Monroe Doctrine was applied to Latin America by the
framers of U.S. foreign policy. When the Cuban Revolution established a
socialist regime with ties to the Soviet Union, after trying to establish
fruitful relations with the U.S., it was argued that the spirit of the Monroe
Doctrine should be again invoked, this time to prevent the further spreading
of Soviet-backed Communism in Latin America.[citation needed] During the Cold
War, the United States thus often provided intelligence and military aid to
Latin and South American governments that claimed or appeared to be threatened
by Communist subversion. This, in turn, led to some domestic controversy
within the United States, especially among some members of the left who argued
that the Communist threat and Soviet influence in Latin America was greatly
exaggerated.[who?]

The debate over this new spirit of the Monroe Doctrine came to a head in the
1980s, as part of the Iran-Contra affair. Among other things, it was revealed
that the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency had been covertly training "Contra"
guerrilla soldiers in Honduras in an attempt to destabilize and overthrow the
Sandinista revolutionary government of Nicaragua and its President, Daniel
Ortega. CIA director Robert Gates vigorously defended the Contra operation,
arguing that avoiding U.S. intervention in Nicaragua would be "totally to
abandon the Monroe doctrine".[citation needed] In a case brought before the
International Court of Justice by Nicaragua, however, the court ruled that the
United States had exercised "unlawful use of force." The U.S. ignored the
verdict. The Carter and Reagan administrations embroiled themselves in the
Salvadoran Civil War, again citing the Monroe Doctrine as justification. The
conflict was marked by large scale human rights abuses and the 1980
assassination of Archbishop Ãscar Romero by right-wing death squads.[citation
needed] The Monroe Doctrine was also cited during the U.S. intervention in
Guatemala and the invasion of Grenada. Critics of the Reagan administration's
support for Britain in the Falklands War charge that the U.S. ignored the
Monroe Doctrine in that instance.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Samuel Flagg Bemis. John Quincy Adams and the Foundations of American Foreign Policy. 1949.
  * Donald Dozer. The Monroe Doctrine: Its Modern Significance. New York: Knopf, 1965.
  * Leonard Axel Lawson. The Relation of British Policy to the Declaration of the Monroe Doctrine, Columbia University, 1922.
  * Ernest R. May. The Making of the Monroe Doctrine. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1975.
  * Mellander, Gustavo A.(1971) The United States in Panamanian Politics: The Intriguing Formative Years. Daville,Ill.:Interstate Publishers. OCLC 138568.
  * Mellander, Gustavo A.; Nelly Maldonado Mellander (1999). Charles Edward Magoon: The Panama Years. RÃ­o Piedras, Puerto Rico: Editorial Plaza Mayor. ISBN 1563281554. OCLC 42970390.
  * Frederick Merk. The Monroe Doctrine and American Expansionism, 1843-1849. New York: Knopf, 1966.
  * Gretchen Murphy. Hemispheric Imaginings: The Monroe Doctrine and Narratives of U.S. Empire. Duke University Press, 2005. Examines the cultural context of the doctrine.
  * Dexter Perkins. The Monroe Doctrine, 1823-1826. 3 vols. 1927.
  * (it) Nico Perrone. Il manifesto dell'imperialismo americano nelle borse di Londra e Parigi. In Belfagor (Italian review), 1977, iii. Examines the reactions of the European stock exchange markets.
  * Joel S. Poetker. The Monroe Doctrine. Columbus, Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Books, Inc, 1967.
  * Gaddis Smith. The Last Years of the Monroe Doctrine, 1945-1993. New York: Hill and Wang, 1994. Argues that the Monroe Doctrine became irrelevant after the end of the Cold War.
  * Grahame, Leopold. "The Latin American View of the Monroe Dotrine." Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 54 (1914): 57-62. A view of what Latin America thinks of the Monroe Doctrine, according to an American. Interesting, viewed somewhat skewed.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Rodrigue Tremblay. "The New American Empire (pp 133-134)". http://books.google.com/books?id=LzaDM-f9e08C&pg=PA296&dq=noam+chomsky+hegemony+or+survival+monroe+doctrine#PPA133,M1. Retrieved on 2008-12-20.
  2. ^ a b Theodore Roosevelt (1904-12-06). "State of the Union Address". TeachingAmericanHistory.org. http://www.teachingamericanhistory.org/library/index.asp?document=1311. Retrieved on 2008-12-20.
  3. ^ a b c d e f Encyclopaedia Britannica, inc. "Volume 8". New EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, Fifteenth Ed.. pp. 269\. ISBN 1593392923.
  4. ^ Richardson, James D. (2004-02-01). "A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents, Volume 2, part 1: James Monroe". Project Gutemberg. http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/10919. Retrieved on 2008-12-20.
  5. ^ a b c d John A. Crow. "Areil and Caliban". The Epic of Latin America, Fourth Ed.. pp. 676\. ISBN 0520077237.
  6. ^ News Conference 42 from the John F. Kennedy Presidential Museum & Library
  7. ^ Noam Chomsky. "Hegemony Or Survival". 63-64. http://books.google.com/books?id=tzAC75P9sscC&pg=PA64&dq=noam+chomsky+hegemony+or+survival+doctrine+declaration+of+hegemony#PPA63,M1. Retrieved on 2008-12-20.
  8. ^ Noam Chomsky. "Assessing Humanitarian Intent". The New Military Humanism: Lessons from Kosovo, 1999. pp. 41\. ISBN 0745316336.

  * America.gov on Monroe Doctrine â most of the material (as of this writing on 2-Dec-2002) was copied from this public domain source.

  * The Encyclopedia Britannica 15th Edition:1974 and The Columbia Encyclopedia Sixth Edition:2008
  * âMonroe Doctrine.â The New Encyclopedia Britannica (volume 8) 15th Edition: 1993.

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Monroe Doctrine

  * Monroe Doctrine and related resources at the Library of Congress
  * Selected text from Monroe's December 2, 1823 speech

v â¢ d â¢ e

Flag of the United States Foreign relations of the United States  
Bilateral relations  
Africa

Algeria Â· Angola Â· Benin Â· Botswana Â· Burkina Faso Â· Burundi Â· Cameroon
Â· Cape Verde Â· Central African Republic Â· Chad Â· Comoros Â· Democratic
Republic of the Congo Â· Republic of the Congo Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast)
Â· Djibouti Â· Egypt Â· Equatorial Guinea Â· Eritrea Â· Ethiopia Â· Gabon Â·
The Gambia Â· Ghana Â· Guinea Â· Guinea-Bissau Â· Kenya Â· Lesotho Â· Liberia
Â· Libya Â· Madagascar Â· Malawi Â· Mali Â· Mauritania Â· Mauritius Â· Morocco
Â· Mozambique Â· Namibia Â· Niger Â· Nigeria Â· Rwanda Â· SÃ£o TomÃ© and
PrÃ­ncipe Â· Senegal Â· Seychelles Â· Sierra Leone Â· Somalia Â· South Africa
Â· Sudan Â· Swaziland Â· Tanzania Â· Togo Â· Tunisia Â· Uganda Â· Zambia Â·
Zimbabwe  
Asia

Middle East

Bahrain Â· Egypt Â· Iran Â· Iraq Â· Israel Â· Jordan Â· Kuwait Â· Lebanon Â·
Oman Â· Qatar Â· Saudi Arabia Â· Syria Â· United Arab Emirates Â· Yemen  
Elsewhere

Afghanistan Â· Bangladesh Â· Bhutan Â· Brunei Â· Burma Â· Cambodia Â· People's
Republic of China (Hong Kong Â· Macau) Â· East Timor Â· India Â· Indonesia Â·
Japan Â· Kazakhstan Â· Kyrgyzstan Â· Laos Â· Malaysia Â· Maldives Â· Mongolia
Â· Nepal Â· North Korea Â· Pakistan Â· Philippines Â· Republic of China Â·
Russia Â· Singapore Â· Sri Lanka Â· South Korea Â· Tajikistan Â· Thailand Â·
Turkmenistan Â· Uzbekistan Â· Vietnam  
Europe

Albania Â· Andorra Â· Armenia Â· Austria Â· Azerbaijan Â· Belarus Â· Belgium
Â· Bosnia and Herzegovina Â· Bulgaria Â· Croatia Â· Cyprus Â· Czech Republic
Â· Denmark Â· Estonia Â· Finland Â· France Â· Georgia Â· Germany Â· Greece Â·
Hungary Â· Iceland Â· Ireland Â· Italy Â· Kosovo Â· Latvia Â· Liechtenstein Â·
Lithuania Â· Luxembourg Â· Macedonia Â· Malta Â· Moldova Â· Monaco Â·
Montenegro Â· Netherlands Â· Norway Â· Poland Â· Portugal Â· Romania Â· Russia
Â· San Marino Â· Serbia Â· Slovakia Â· Slovenia Â· Spain Â· Sweden Â·
Switzerland Â· Turkey Â· Ukraine Â· United Kingdom Â· Vatican City  
North America

Caribbean

Antigua and Barbuda Â· Aruba Â· Bahamas Â· Barbados Â· Bermuda Â· Cayman
Islands Â· Cuba Â· Dominica Â· Dominican Republic Â· Grenada Â· Haiti Â·
Jamaica Â· Netherlands Antilles Â· St. Kitts and Nevis Â· St. Lucia Â· St.
Vincent and the Grenadines Â· Trinidad and Tobago  
Elsewhere

Belize Â· Canada Â· Costa Rica Â· El Salvador Â· Guatemala Â· Honduras Â·
Mexico Â· Nicaragua Â· Panama  
Oceania

ANZUS

Australia Â· New Zealand  
Elsewhere

Fiji Â· Kiribati Â· Marshall Islands Â· Micronesia Â· Nauru Â· Palau Â· Papua
New Guinea Â· Samoa Â· Solomon Islands Â· Tonga Â· Tuvalu Â· Vanuatu  
South America

Argentina Â· Bolivia Â· Brazil Â· Chile Â· Colombia Â· Ecuador Â· Guyana Â·
Paraguay Â· Peru Â· Suriname Â· Uruguay Â· Venezuela  
Former states

Confederate States of America Â· Czechoslovakia Â· Kingdom of Hawaii Â·
Russian Empire Â· Soviet Union Â· Ottoman Empire Â· Republic of Ragusa Â· Holy
Roman Empire Â· Republic of Texas Â· Yugoslavia  
National emblem of the United States of America  
Multilateral relations  
European Union Â· United Nations Â· Third Border Initiative  
Doctrines, policies, concepts  
Presidential  
doctrines

Proclamation of Neutrality Â· Monroe Â· Roosevelt Corollary Â· Truman Â·
Eisenhower Â· Kennedy Â· Johnson Â· Nixon Â· Carter Â· Reagan Â· Clinton Â·
Bush  
Other doctrines

Lodge Corollary Â· Stimson Â· Kirkpatrick Â· Weinberger Â· Powell Â· Rumsfeld
Â· Wolfowitz  
Policies and  
concepts

Containment Â· Domino theory Â· Rollback Â· Blowback  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monroe_Doctrine"

Categories: CaribbeanâUnited States relations | History of the foreign
relations of the United States | Foreign policy doctrines | Spanish-American
War | Banana Wars | United States-South American relations | United States
historical documents | History of United States isolationism | History of
United States expansionism | Presidency of James Monroe

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-
marked weasel-worded phrases since March 2009 | Articles with specifically-
marked weasel-worded phrases since December 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 07:18.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



