
# Whistleblower

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the 2008 RTÃ drama, see Whistleblower (TV series).

<IMG>

This article or section has multiple issues. Please help improve the article
or discuss these issues on the talk page.

  * Its neutrality or factuality may be compromised by weasel words. Tagged since February 2008.  

  * It may not present a worldwide view of the subject. Tagged since February 2008.  

  
A whistleblower is a person who alleges misconduct. More complex definitions
may be used, but the issue is that the whistleblower usually faces reprisal.
The misconduct may be classified in many ways; for example, a violation of a
law, rule, regulation and/or a direct threat to public interest, such as
fraud, health/safety violations, and corruption.

One famous whistleblower is Jeffrey Wigand, who exposed the Big Tobacco
scandal, revealing that executives of the companies knew that cigarettes were
addictive and approved the addition of carcinogenic ingredients to the
cigarettes. Wigand's story was the basis for the 1999 movie The Insider.
Another example is Dr. Frederic Whitehurst, who exposed irregularities at the
Federal Bureau of Investigation's Crime Lab. In Europe, Paul van Buitenen
exposed irregularities in the European Commission.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
    * 1.1 Origins of term "whistleblower"
    * 1.2 Definition of a whistleblower
    * 1.3 Common reactions to whistleblowing
  * 2 Legal protection for whistleblowers
    * 2.1 Whistleblower Protection Act of 2007
    * 2.2 California False Claims Act
    * 2.3 Conscientious Employee Protection Act (CEPA)
  * 3 Whistleblower Week in Washington (WWW)
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 Resources
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

### [edit] Origins of term "whistleblower"

The term whistleblower derives from the practice of English bobbies, who would
blow their whistles when they noticed the commission of a crime. The whistle
would alert both law enforcement officers and the general public of danger.[1]

### [edit] Definition of a whistleblower

Most whistleblowers are internal whistleblowers, who report misconduct to a
fellow employee or superior within their company. (One of the most interesting
questions with respect to internal whistleblowers is why and under what
circumstances people will either act on the spot to stop illegal and otherwise
unacceptable behavior or report it. There is some reason to believe that
people are more likely to take action with respect to unacceptable behavior,
within an organization, if there are complaint systems that offer not just
options dictated by the organization, but a choice of options for individuals.
See Mary Rowe, "Options and Choice for Conflict Resolution in the Workplace"
in Negotiation: Strategies for Mutual Gain, by Lavinia Hall, ed., Sage
Publications, Inc., 1993, pp. 105â119.)

External whistleblowers, however, report misconduct to outside persons or
entities. In these cases, depending on the information's severity and nature,
whistleblowers may report the misconduct to lawyers, the media, law
enforcement or watchdog agencies, or other local, state, or federal agencies.

Under most U.S. federal whistleblower statutes, in order to be considered a
whistleblower, the federal employee must have reason to believe his or her
employer has violated some law, rule or regulation; testify or commence a
legal proceeding on the legally protected matter; or refuse to violate the
law. If disclosure is specifically prohibited by law or executive order,
disclosure may be considered treason.[citation needed] However, no
whistleblowers have been tried for treason in the United States, and it is not
officially treasonous to report illegal conduct by government officials
there.[opinion needs balancing]

Some try to limit the impact of whistleblowing by arguing that "role-
prescribed" whistleblowers (e.g. quality control personnel or internal
auditors) are not whistleblowers in the traditional sense because they are
employed in order to blow whistles.[citation needed] In cases where
whistleblowing on a specified topic is protected by statute, U.S. courts have
generally held that such whistleblowers are protected from retaliation.[1]
However, a closely divided U.S. Supreme Court decision, Garcetti v. Ceballos
(2006). held that the First Amendment free speech guarantees for government
employees do not protect disclosures made within the scope of the employees'
duties.

Many U.S. federal courts do not distinguish between internal and external
whistleblowing. For example, in the field of federal environmental
whistleblowing, federal courts have protected only internal whistleblowing as
a matter of public policy, holding that whistleblower statutes encourage the
free flow of information, and that internal whistleblowing helps resolve
problems as soon as possible.[opinion needs balancing]

### [edit] Common reactions to whistleblowing

Ideas about whistleblowing vary widely. Whistleblowers are commonly seen as
selfless martyrs for public interest and organizational accountability; others
view them as a 'tattle tale' or "snitches" (slang), solely pursuing personal
glory and fame.

It is probable that many people do not even consider blowing the whistle, not
only because of fear of retaliation, but also because of fear of losing their
relationships at work and outside work.(See Rowe, Mary & Bendersky, Corinne,
"Workplace Justice, Zero Tolerance and Zero Barriers: Getting People to Come
Forward in Conflict Management Systems," in Negotiations and Change, From the
Workplace to Society, Thomas Kochan and Richard Locke (editors), Cornell
University Press, 2002.)

Because the majority of cases are very low-profile and receive little or no
media attention and because whistleblowers who do report significant
misconduct are usually put in some form of danger or persecution, the idea of
seeking fame and glory may be less commonly believed.[citation needed]

Persecution of whistleblowers has become a serious issue in many parts of the
world. Although whistleblowers are often protected under law from employer
retaliation, there have been many cases where punishment for whistleblowing
has occurred, such as termination, suspension, demotion, wage garnishment,
and/or harsh mistreatment by other employees. For example, in the United
States, most whistleblower protection laws provide for limited "make whole"
remedies or damages for employment losses if whistleblower retaliation is
proven. However, many whistleblowers report there exists a widespread "shoot
the messenger" mentality by corporations or government agencies accused of
misconduct and in some cases whistleblowers have been subjected to criminal
prosecution in reprisal for reporting wrongdoing.

As a reaction to this many private organizations have formed whistleblower
legal defense funds or support groups to assist whistleblowers; one such
example in the UK is Public Concern at Work. Depending on the circumstances,
it is not uncommon for whistleblowers to be ostracized by their co-workers,
discriminated against by future potential employers, or even fired from their
organization. This campaign directed at whistleblowers with the goal of
eliminating them from the organization is referred to as mobbing. It is an
extreme form of workplace bullying wherein the group is set against the
targeted individual.

## [edit] Legal protection for whistleblowers

Legal protection for whistleblowing varies from country to country[2]. In the
United Kingdom, the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 provides a framework
of legal protection for individuals who disclose information so as to expose
malpractice and matters of similar concern. In the vernacular, it protects
whistleblowers from victimisation and dismissal.

In the United States, legal protections vary according to the subject matter
of the whistleblowing, and sometimes the state in which the case arises. In
passing the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the Senate Judiciary Committee found that
whistleblower protections were dependent on the "patchwork and vagaries" of
varying state statutes. (Congressional Record p. S7412; S. Rep. No. 107-146,
107th Cong., 2d Session 19 (2002).) Still, a wide variety of federal and state
laws protect employees who call attention to violations, help with enforcement
proceedings, or refuse to obey unlawful directions.

The first U.S. law adopted specifically to protect whistleblowers was the
Lloyd-La Follette Act of 1912. It guaranteed the right of federal employees to
furnish information to the United States Congress. The first U.S.
environmental law to include an employee protection was the Water Pollution
Control Act of 1972, also called the Clean Water Act. Similar protections were
included in subsequent federal environmental laws including the Safe Drinking
Water Act (1974), Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (also called the
Solid Waste Disposal Act) (1976), Toxic Substances Control Act (1976), Energy
Reorganization Act of 1974 (through 1978 amendment to protect nuclear
whistleblowers), Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act (CERCLA, or the Superfund Law) (1980), and the Clean Air Act
(1990). Similar employee protections enforced through OSHA are included in the
Surface Transportation Assistance Act (1982) to protect truck drivers, the
Pipeline Safety Improvement Act (PSIA) of 2002, the Wendell H. Ford Aviation
Investment and Reform Act for the 21st Century ("AIR 21"), and the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act, enacted on July 30, 2002 (for corporate fraud whistleblowers).

The patchwork of laws means that victims of retaliation need to be alert to
the laws at issue to determine the deadlines and means for making proper
complaints. Some deadlines are as short as 10 days (for Arizona State
Employees to file a "Prohibited Personnel Practice" Complaint before the
Arizona State Personnel Board; and Ohio public employees to file appeals with
the State Personnel Board of Review). It is 30 days for environmental
whistleblowers to make a written complaint to the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration [OSHA]. Federal employees complaining of discrimination,
retaliation or other violations of the civil rights laws have 45 days to make
a written complaint to their agency's equal employment opportunity (EEO)
officer. Airline workers and corporate fraud whistleblowers have 90 days to
make their complaint to OSHA. Nuclear whistleblowers and truck drivers have
180 days to make complaints to OSHA. Victims of retaliation against union
organizing and other concerted activities to improve working conditions have
180 days to make complaints to the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB).
Private sector employees have either 180 or 300 days to make complaints to the
federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) (depending on whether
their state has a "deferral" agency) for discrimination claims on the basis of
race, gender, age, national origin or religion (but here an example of
retaliation can be seen, as these anti-discrimination agencies change their
areas of discrimination to suit their needs. An area of discrimination in
California was if a complaining party had a civil servant relative. The state
Department of Fair Employment and Housing quickly called an end to this
practice. The state's RALPH Act has also proven to be non-functional.)[opinion
needs balancing] Those who face retaliation for seeking minimum wages or
overtime have either two or three years to file a civil lawsuit, depending on
whether the court finds the violation was "willful."

Those who report a false claim against the federal government, and suffer
adverse employment actions as a result, may have up to six years (depending on
state law) to file a civil suit for remedies under the U.S. False Claims Act
(FCA). 31 U.S.C. Â§ 3730(h). Under a qui tam provision, the "original source"
for the report may be entitled to a percentage of what the government recovers
from the offenders. However, the "original source" must also be the first to
file a federal civil complaint for recovery of the federal funds fraudulently
obtained, and must avoid publicizing the claim of fraud until the U.S. Justice
Department decides whether to prosecute the claim itself. Such qui tam
lawsuits must be filed under seal, using special procedures to keep the claim
from becoming public until the federal government makes its decision on direct
prosecution.

Federal employees could benefit from the Whistleblower Protection Act (5
U.S.C. Â§ 1221(e)), and the No FEAR Act (which made individual agencies
directly responsible for the economic sanctions of unlawful retaliation).
Federal protections are enhanced in those few cases were the Office of Special
Counsel will uphold the whistleblower's case.

The Military Whistleblower Protection Act (10 U.S.C. Â§ 1034), protects the
right of members of the armed services to communicate with any member of
Congress (even if copies of the communication are sent to others).

The HOPE Scholarship in Georgia is the only incentive to report corporate,
government, or religious crimes. This scholarship provides four years of free
tuition to a tech school or University in Georgia for children of
whistleblowers or those researching corporate crime.

### [edit] Whistleblower Protection Act of 2007

The U.S. Supreme Court dealt a major blow to government whistleblowers when,
in the case of Garcetti v. Ceballos, 04-5, it ruled that government employees
did not have protection from retaliation by their employers under the First
Amendment of the Constitution.[3]

The free speech protections of the First Amendment have long been used to
shield whistleblowers from retaliation by whistleblower attorneys. In response
to the Supreme Court decision, the House of Representatives passed H.R. 985,
the Whistleblower Protection Act of 2007. President George W. Bush, citing
national security concerns, promised to veto the bill should it be enacted
into law by Congress. The Senate's version of the Whistleblower Protection Act
(S. 274), which has significant bipartisan support, was approved by the Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs on June 13, 2007.
However, it has yet to reach a vote by Senate as a hold has been placed on the
bill by Senator Tom Coburn (R-OK).[4] According to the National Whistleblower
Center, Coburn's hold on S. 274 has been done to further President Bush's
agenda.[5]

### [edit] California False Claims Act

The California False Claims Act protects whistleblowers from retaliation from
their employer under a section entitled: "Section 12653. Employer interference
with employee disclosures." [6] Under this section, employers may not make
rules that prevent an employee from disclosing information to the government
in furtherance of a false claims action, an employer may not discharge,
demote, suspend, threaten, harass, deny promotion to, or in any other manner
discriminate against, an employee in the terms and conditions of employment
because he or she has disclosed information to the government.

### [edit] Conscientious Employee Protection Act (CEPA)

CEPA, New Jersey's whistleblower law, prohibits an employer from taking any
retaliatory action against an employee because the employee does any of the
following:

  * Discloses, or threatens to disclose, to a supervisor or to a public body an activity, policy, or practice of the employer or another employer, with whom there is a business relationship, that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, or a rule or regulation issued under the law, or, in the case of an employee who is a licensed or certified health care professional, reasonably believes constitutes improper quality of patient care;

  * Provides information to, or testifies before, any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of law, or a rule or regulation issued under the law by the employer or another employer, with whom there is a business relationship, or, in the case of an employee who is a licensed or certified health care professional, provides information to, or testifies before, any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into quality of patient care; or

  * Objects to, or refuses to participate in, any activity, policy or practice which the employee reasonably believes: is in violation of a law, or a rule or regulation issued under the law, or, if the employee is a licensed or certified health care professional, constitutes improper quality of patient care; is fraudulent or criminal; or is incompatible with a clear mandate of public policy concerning the public health, safety or welfare or protection of the environment. N.J.S.A. 34:19-3

## [edit] Whistleblower Week in Washington (WWW)

The week of May 13-19 2007, whistleblowers from all over the country gathered
in Washington, D.C., to convince the United States Congress to pass stronger
whistleblower protections for both government and private sector workers. Dr.
Marsha Coleman-Adebayo, founder of the No FEAR Coalition and No FEAR
Institute, served as Chair of the first-ever Whistleblower Week in Washington.
The event was coordinated around the fifth anniversary of the May 15, 2002
enactment of the Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and
Retaliation Act of 2002, which is now known as the No FEAR Act. One purpose of
the Act is to "require that Federal agencies be accountable for violations of
antidiscrimination and whistleblower protection laws." Public Law 107-174. The
law came to fruition after Dr. Coleman-Adebayo provided congressional
testimony about American companies exposing African miners and their families
to vanadium, a deadly substance.

During WWW dozens of nonprofit organizations, whistleblower groups and
individual whistleblowers participated in a broad range of activities that
included discussion panels, testimony, award ceremonies, a film night and book
signing, and workshops in advocacy, stress management, whistleblower law, and
mentoring. Doctors from the "Semmelweis Society International" played a
leading role in organizing the event, along with the Civil rights
whistleblower advocates, the No FEAR Institute. Prominent organizations
included the Government Accountability Project (GAP), the National
Whistleblower Center, the VA Whistleblower Coalition, the National Security
Whistleblowers Coalition, the ACLU, Public Citizen, the Liberty Coalition, and
the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons (AAPS). Betsy Combier
represented the E-Accountability Foundation. Linda Lewis, chair of
Whistleblowers USA, played a special role and noted that "too many very brave
whistleblowers were present to adequately honor their accomplishments and
their contributions to the conference." Senator Charles Grassley saluted the
group, and called on the White House to hold a rose garden ceremony to honor
whistleblowers. The group plans to make this an annual event.[7]

## [edit] See also

Sister project Look up whistleblower in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * European Community competition law: Leniency policy
  * Global Integrity tracks the status of whistle blowers worldwide.
  * Source criticism
  * Wikileaks
  * List of whistleblowers

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Winters v. Houston Chronicle Pub. Co., 795 S.W.2d 723, 727 (Tex. 1990) (Doggett, J., concurring).
  2. ^ Global Integrity Report
  3. ^ High Court Trims Whistleblower Rights
  4. ^ Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2007 - Congresspedia
  5. ^ Take Action Now
  6. ^ California False Claims Act
  7. ^ http://www.w3conference.org/

Major Daniel A. Lauretano, The Military Whistleblower Protection Act and the
Military Mental Health Protection Act, ARMY LAW., (Oct) 1998.

## [edit] Resources

  * IRS Whistleblower - Informant Award
  * Project On Government Oversight, Homeland and National Security Whistleblower Protections: The Unfinished Agenda, April, 2006.
  * Project On Government Oversight, Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility and Government Accountability Project, Art of Anonmymous Activism: Serving the Public While Surviving Public Service "Chapter One", 2002. To order full book, go here.
  * Project On Government Oversight, Documents Concerning the Office of Special Counsel.
  * Frais,A Whistleblowing heroes - boon or burden? Bulletin of Medical Ethics, 2001Aug:(170):13-19.
  * Alford, C. Fred (2001). Whistleblowers: Broken Lives and Organizational Power. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-3841-1.
  * Garrett, Allison, "Auditor Whistle Blowing: The Financial Fraud Detection and Disclosure Act," 17 Seton Hall Legis. J. 91 (1993).

  * Hunt, Geoffrey (20061). The Principle of Complementarity: Freedom of Information, Public Accountability and Whistleblowing in Chapman, R & Hunt, M (eds) Freedom of Information: Perspectives on Open Government in a Theoretical and Practical Context. Ashgate, Aldershot, UK.

  * Hunt, Geoffrey (2000). Whistleblowing, Accountability & Ethical Accounting, in. Clinical Risk 6(3): 115-16.

  * Hunt, Geoffrey (1998). 'Whistleblowing', commissioned entry for Encyclopedia of Applied Ethics, (8,000 words). Academic Press, California, USA,.

  * Hunt, Geoffrey (ed) (1998). Whistleblowing in the Social Services: Public Accountability & Professional Practice. Arnold.

  * Hunt, G (ed) (1995). Whistleblowing in the Health Service: Accountability, Law & Professional Practice. Arnold.

  * Johnson, Roberta Ann (2002). Whistleblowing: When It WorksâAnd Why. ISBN 978-1588261144.

  * Kohn, Stephen M (2000). Concepts and Procedures in Whistleblower Law. Quorum Books. ISBN 1-56720-354-X.

  * Kohn, Stephen M; Kohn, Michael D; Colapinto, David K. (2004). Whistleblower Law A Guide to Legal Protections for Corporate Employees. Praeger Publishers. ISBN 0-275-98127-4.

  * Miethe, Terance D (1991). Whistleblowing at work : tough choices in exposing fraud, waste, and abuse on the job. Westview Press. ISBN 0-81â33-3549-3.
  * "Sarbanes-Oxley Criminal Whistleblower Provisions & the Workplace: More Than Just Securities Fraud," by Jay P. Lechner & Paul M. Sisco, 80 Florida B. J. 85 (June 2006)
  * Rowe, Mary & Bendersky, Corinne, "Workplace Justice, Zero Tolerance and Zero Barriers: Getting People to Come Forward in Conflict Management Systems," in Negotiations and Change, From the Workplace to Society, Thomas Kochan and Richard Locke (editors), Cornell University Press, 2002

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Category:Whistleblower  
  * Global Integrity Report tracks whistleblower protection worldwide.
  * Whistleblowing about the Scottish Widows demutualisation
  * Whistleblower.co.uk UK site for whistleblowers to tell their story
  * Taxpayers Against Fraud
  * Father and Son Whistleblowers' Website - Tips for Whistleblowers - A free public Service
  * Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility (PEER)
  * Government Accountability Project
  * Worldwide Whistleblowers \- International whistleblowing news and information site
  * Project On Government Oversight (POGO)
  * The Ron Ridenhour Awards
  * National Whistleblower Center
  * The Truth-Telling Project \- Project formed by whistleblowers Daniel Ellsberg and Katharine Gun
  * FAIR: Federal Accountability Initiative for Reform For Whistleblowers in Canada
  * Public Concern at Work \- the leading UK authority on Public Disclosure
  * Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 from Her Majesty's Stationery Office
  * Workplace Fairness FAQ for environmental whistleblowers
  * Congressional Research Service (CRS) Report "National Security Whistleblowers"
  * Whistleblowers in the EU
  * Year of the Rhinoceros (a novel about whistleblowers)
  * International Freedom of Expression Exchange
  * National Security Whistleblowers Coalition Source for many and varied articles
  * Freedom to Care UK's first grassroots (1991)whistleblowers support organisation.
  * Whistleblower-Netzwerk Whistleblower support organisation in Germany.
  * U.S. Department of Labor Whistleblower Program & information
  * List and information on US Whistleblowers at SourceWatch
  * Read v. Canada (Attorney General) Canadian legal framework regarding whistleblowing defence
  * Whistleblower Week in Washington
  * "Office of Special Counsel's War on Whistleblowers", Mother Jones, May/June 2007.
  * Political Party of Whistleblowers in the Netherlands
  * Grant Thornton IBR whistleblowing survey

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whistleblower"

Categories: Whistleblowers | Dissent | Political terms | Business ethics |
Employment law | Grounds for termination of employment | Anti-corporate
activism | United States federal labor legislation | Discrimination

Hidden categories: Articles with weasel words from February 2008 | Articles
with limited geographic scope | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since September 2007 | All pages needing
cleanup | Articles with minor POV problems from September 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 16:42 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



