
# DOT pictograms

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The DOT pictograms are a set of fifty pictograms used to convey information
useful to travelers without using words. Such images are useful in airports,
train stations, hotels, and other public places for foreign tourists, as well
as being easier to identify than strings of text. Among these pictograms are
the now-familiar graphics representing toilets and telephones. As a result of
this near-universal acceptance, some describe them as the "Helvetica" of
pictograms, and the character portrayed within them as Helvetica Man (Lupton).

As works of the United States government, the images are in the public domain
and thus can be used by anyone for any purpose, without licensing issues.

<IMG>

<IMG>

DOT pictograms representing, from left, "Escalator (up)," "Nursery" and
"Ground transportation".

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 References
  * 3 See also
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] History

In 1974, the United States Department of Transportation (DOT) recognized the
shortcomings of pictograms drawn on an ad hoc basis across the United States
Interstate Highway System and commissioned the American Institute of Graphic
Arts to produce a comprehensive set of pictograms. In collaboration with Roger
Cook and Don Shanosky of Cook and Shanosky Associates, the designers conducted
an exhaustive survey of pictograms already in use around the world, which drew
from sources as diverse as Tokyo International Airport and the 1972 Olympic
Games in Munich. The designers rated these pictograms based on criteria such
as their legibility, their international recognizability and their resistance
to vandalism. After determining which features were the most successful and
appropriate, the designers drew a set of pictograms to represent 34 meanings
requested by the DOT.

In 1979, 16 symbols were added, bringing the total to 50.

## [edit] References

  * Ellen Lupton and J. Abbott Miller. Design Writing Research: Writing About Graphic Design. New York: Kiosk, 1996.
  * The Professional Association for Design for the U.S. Department of Transportation. Symbol signs, 2nd ed. New York: American Institute of Graphic Arts, 1993.

## [edit] See also

  * ISO 7001

## [edit] External links

  * DOT pictograms (symbol signs)
  * Airport, an animated film made from AIGA pictograms

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DOT_pictograms"

Categories: Graphic design | Infographics | Symbols | United States Department
of Transportation

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 November 2008, at 20:34.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



