
# Indigenous peoples of the Americas

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For indigenous peoples in the United States, see Native Americans in the
United States and Native Alaskan.

For indigenous peoples in Canada, see First Nations, Metis and Inuit.

"Red Indian" redirects here. For the ethnic group known as such to Europeans
for using red ochre, see Beothuk.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Painting of various ethnic groups from the Americas, early 20th century.

The indigenous peoples of the Americas are the pre-Columbian inhabitants of
the Americas, their descendants, and many ethnic groups who identify with
those peoples. They are often also referred to as Native Americans, First
Nations, Amerigine, and by Christopher Columbus' geographical mistake Indians,
modernly disambiguated as the American Indian race, American Indians,
Amerindians, Amerinds, or Red Indians.

According to the still-debated New World migration model, a migration of
humans from Eurasia to the Americas took place via Beringia, a land bridge
which formerly connected the two continents across what is now the Bering
Strait. The most recent point at which this migration could have taken place
is c. 12,000 years ago, with the earliest period remaining a matter of some
unresolved contention.[1] These early Paleoamericans soon spread throughout
the Americas, diversifying into many hundreds of culturally distinct nations
and tribes.[2] According to the oral histories of many of the indigenous
peoples of the Americas, they have been living there since their genesis,
described by a wide range of traditional creation accounts.

Application of the term "Indian" originated with Christopher Columbus, who
thought that he had arrived in the East Indies, while seeking Asia. This has
served to imagine a kind of racial or cultural unity for the aboriginal
peoples of the Americas. Once created, the unified "Indian" was codified in
law, religion, and politics. The unitary idea of "Indians" was not originally
shared by indigenous peoples, but many over last two centuries have embraced
the identity.

While some indigenous people of the Americas were historically hunter-
gatherers, many practiced aquaculture and agriculture. The impact of their
agricultural endowment to the world is a testament to their time and work in
reshaping, taming, and cultivating the flora indigenous to the Americas.[3]
Some societies depended heavily on agriculture while others practiced a mix of
farming, hunting, and gathering. In some regions the indigenous peoples
created monumental architecture, large-scale organized cities, chiefdoms,
states, and massive empires.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Peruvian woman and child of Amerindian ancestry

Many parts of the Americas are still populated by indigenous Americans; some
countries have sizeable populations, such as Bolivia, Peru, Paraguay, Mexico,
Guatemala, Colombia, and Ecuador. At least a thousand different indigenous
languages are spoken in the Americas and some like Quechua, GuaranÃ­, Mayan
languages, and Nahuatl count their speakers in millions. Most indigenous
peoples have largely adopted the lifestyle of the western world,[citation
needed] but many also maintain aspects of indigenous cultural practices to
varying degrees, including religion, social organization and subsistence
practices. Some indigenous peoples still live in relative isolation from
Europeanized society, and a few are still counted as uncontacted peoples.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Original migrations to the Americas
    * 1.2 Recent genetic research
    * 1.3 European colonization
  * 2 Agriculture
  * 3 Culture
    * 3.1 Writing systems
    * 3.2 Music and art
  * 4 Demography of contemporary populations
  * 5 History and status by country
    * 5.1 Argentina
    * 5.2 Belize
    * 5.3 Bolivia
    * 5.4 Brazil
    * 5.5 Canada
    * 5.6 Chile
    * 5.7 Colombia
    * 5.8 Costa Rica
    * 5.9 Ecuador
    * 5.10 Guatemala
    * 5.11 El Salvador
    * 5.12 Mexico
    * 5.13 Nicaragua
    * 5.14 Peru
    * 5.15 United States
    * 5.16 Venezuela
    * 5.17 Other parts of the Americas
  * 6 Native American name controversy
  * 7 Rise of Indigenous Movements
    * 7.1 Legal prerogative
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] History

See also: Archaeology of the Americas and Models of migration to the New World

### [edit] Original migrations to the Americas

See also: Models of migration to the New World, Classification of indigenous
peoples of the Americas, Solutrean hypothesis, Kennewick Man, and Pre-Siberian
American Aborigines

<IMG>

<IMG>

Language families of North American indigenous peoples

Scholars who follow the Bering Strait theory agree that most indigenous
peoples of the Americas descended from people who probably migrated from
Siberia across the Bering Strait, anywhere between 9,000 and 50,000 years ago.
The time frame and exact routes are still matters of debate, and the model
faces continuous challenges. A 2006 study (to be published in Journal of
California and Great Basin Anthropology[when?]) reports new DNA-based research
that links DNA retrieved from a 10,000-year-old fossilized tooth from an
Alaskan island with specific coastal tribes in Tierra del Fuego, Ecuador,
Mexico, and California.[4] Unique DNA markers found in the fossilized tooth
were found only in these specific coastal tribes, and were not comparable to
markers found in any other indigenous peoples in the Americas. This finding
lends substantial credence to a migration theory that at least one set of
early peoples moved south along the west coast of the Americas in boats.
However, these results may be ambiguous, as there are other issues with DNA
research and biological and cultural affiliation as outlined in Peter N.
Jones' book Respect for the Ancestors: Cultural Affiliation and Cultural
Continuity in the American West.

One result of these waves of migration is that large groups of peoples with
similar languages and perhaps physical characteristics as well, moved into
various geographic areas of North, and then Central and South America. While
these peoples have traditionally remained primarily loyal to their individual
tribes, ethnologists have variously sought to group the myriad of tribes into
larger entities which reflect common geographic origins, linguistic
similarities, and lifestyles.[5]

Remnants of a human settlement in Monte Verde, Chile dated to 12,500 years
B.P. (another layer at Monteverde has been tentatively dated to
33,000â35,000 years B.P.) suggests that southern Chile was settled by
peoples who entered the Americas before the peoples associated with the Bering
Strait migrations. It is suggested that a coastal route via canoes could have
allowed rapid migration into the Americas.[citation needed]

The traditional view of a relatively recent migration has also been challenged
by older findings of human remains in South America; some dating to perhaps
even 30,000 years old or more. Some recent finds (notably the Luzia Woman in
Lagoa Santa, Brazil) are claimed to be morphologically distinct from most
Asians and are more similar to Africans, Melanesians and Australian
Aborigines. These American Aborigines would have been later displaced or
absorbed by the Siberian immigrants. The distinctive Fuegian natives of Tierra
del Fuego, the southernmost tip of the American continent, are speculated to
be partial remnants of those Aboriginal populations. These early immigrants
would have either crossed the ocean by boat or traveled north along the Asian
coast and entered America through the Northwest, well before the Siberian
waves. This theory is presently viewed by many scholars as conjecture, as many
areas along the proposed routes now lie underwater, making research difficult.
Some scholars believe the earliest forensic evidence for early populations
appears to more closely resemble Southeast Asians and Pacific Islanders, and
not those of Northeast Asia. [6]

Scholars' estimates of the total population of the Americas before European
contact vary enormously, from a low of 10 million to a high of 112 million.[7]
Some authors see ideological underpinnings in this population debate. For
example, Robert Royal writes that "estimates of pre-Columbian population
figures have become heavily politicized with scholars who are particularly
critical of Europe and/or Western civilization often favoring wildly higher
figures."[8] Some scholars believe that most of the indigenous population
resided in Mesoamerica and South America, with approximately 10 percent
residing in North America, prior to European colonization.[9]

The Solutrean hypothesis suggests an early European migration into the
Americas[10][11][12][13] and that stone tool technology of the Solutrean
culture in prehistoric Europe may have later influenced the development of the
Clovis tool-making culture in the Americas. Some of its key proponents include
Dr. Dennis Stanford of the Smithsonian Institution and Dr. Bruce Bradley of
the University of Exeter. In this hypothesis, peoples associated with the
Solutrean culture migrated from Ice Age Europe to North America, bringing
their methods of making stone tools with them and providing the basis for
later Clovis technology found throughout North America. The hypothesis rests
upon particular similarities in Solutrean and Clovis toolmaking styles, and
the fact that no predecessors of Clovis technology have been found in Eastern
Asia, Siberia or Beringia, areas from which or through which early Americans
are thought to have migrated.[citation needed]

American Indian creation legends tell of a variety of originations of their
respective peoples. Some were "always there" or were created by gods or
animals, some migrated from a specified compass point, and others came from
"across the ocean".[14]

Vine Deloria, Jr., author and Nakota activist, cites some of the oral
histories that claim an in situ origin in his book Red Earth, White Lies,
rejecting the Bering Strait land bridge route. Deloria takes a Young Earth
position, arguing that Native Americans actually originated in the
Americas.[15]

### [edit] Recent genetic research

An article in the American Journal of Human Genetics states "Our results
strongly support the hypothesis that haplogroup X, together with the other
four main mtDNA haplogroups, was part of the gene pool of a single Native
American founding population; therefore they do not support models that
propose haplogroup-independent migrations, such as the migration from Europe
posed by the Solutrean hypothesis."[16] The National Geographic Genographic
Project identified haplogroup Q-M242 as the YDNA male ancestor of the
"Siberian Clan," some of whom remained in Asia, but that today "almost all
Native Americans are descendants from this man."[17]

### [edit] European colonization

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cultural areas of North America at time of European contact.

Further information: European colonization of the Americas, Population history
of American indigenous peoples, and Columbian Exchange

The European colonization of the Americas forever changed the lives,
bloodlines and cultures of the peoples of the continent. The population
history of American indigenous peoples postulates that disease exposure,
displacement, and warfare diminished populations, with the first the most
significant cause.[18][19] The first indigenous group encountered by Columbus
were the 250,000 Tainos of Hispaniola who were the dominant culture in the
Greater Antilles and the Bahamas. In thirty years, about 70% of the Tainos
died.[20] Enslaved, forced to labour in the mines, mistreated, the Tainos
began to adopt suicidal behaviors, with women aborting or killing their
infants, men jumping from the cliffs or ingesting manioc, a violent
poison[20]. They had no immunity to European diseases, so outbreaks of measles
and smallpox ravaged their population.[21]

The Laws of Burgos, 1512-1513 were the first codified set of laws governing
the behavior of Spanish settlers in America, particularly with regards to
native Indians. They forbade the maltreatment of natives, and endorsed their
conversion to Catholicism.[22]

Reasons for the decline of the Native American populations are variously
theorized to be from diseases, conflicts with Europeans, and conflicts among
warring tribes. Scholars now believe that, among the various contributing
factors, epidemic disease was the overwhelming cause of the population decline
of the American natives.[23][24] After first contacts with Europeans and
Africans, some believe that the death of 90 to 95% of the native population of
the New World was caused by Old World diseases.[25] Half the native population
of Hispaniola in 1518 was killed by smallpox.[26] Within a few years smallpox
killed between 60% and 90% of the Inca population, with other waves of
European disease weakening them further.[27] Smallpox was only the first
epidemic. Typhus (probably) in 1546, influenza and smallpox together in 1558,
smallpox again in 1589, diphtheria in 1614, measles in 1618âall ravaged the
remains of Inca culture. Smallpox had killed millions of native inhabitants of
Mexico.[28][29] Unintentionally introduced at Veracruz with the arrival of
Panfilo de Narvaez on April 23, 1520, smallpox ravaged Mexico in the
1520s,[30] killing 150,000 in TenochtitlÃ¡n alone, including the emperor, and
was credited with the victory of Cortes over the Aztec empire at Tenochtitlan
(present-day Mexico City) in 1521.[31]

Over the centuries, the Europeans had developed high degrees of immunity to
these diseases, while the Native Americans had no such immunity.[32] Europeans
had been ravaged in their own turn by such diseases as bubonic plague and
Asian flu that moved west from Asia to Europe. In addition, when they went to
some territories, such as Africa and Asia, they were more vulnerable to
malaria.

In 1633 in Plymouth, Massachusetts, the Native Americans were exposed to
smallpox because of contact with Europeans. As it had done elsewhere, the
virus wiped out entire population groups of Native Americans.[33] It reached
Lake Ontario in 1636, and the lands of the Iroquois by 1679.[34][35] During
the 1770s, smallpox killed at least 30% of the West Coast Native
Americans.[36] Smallpox epidemics in 1780â1782 and 1837â1838 brought
devastation and drastic population depletion among the Plain Indians.[37][38]
In 1832, the federal government of the United States established a smallpox
vaccination program for Native Americans (The Indian Vaccination Act of
1832).[39][40]

In Brazil the indigenous population has declined from a pre-Columbian high of
an estimated 3 million to some 300,000 in 1997.[41][42]

Later explorations of the Caribbean led to the discovery of the Aruak peoples
of the Lesser Antilles. The culture was extinct by 1650. Only 500 had survived
by the year 1550, though the bloodlines continued through the modern populace.
In Amazonia, indigenous societies weathered centuries of colonization.[43]

The Spaniards and other Europeans brought horses to the Americas. Some of
these animals escaped and began to breed and increase their numbers in the
wild.[44] The re-introduction of the horse had a profound impact on Native
American culture in the Great Plains of North America and of Patagonia in
South America. By domesticating horses, some tribes had great success: they
expanded their territories, exchanged many goods with neighboring tribes, and
more easily captured game, especially bison.

## [edit] Agriculture

At about 4,000 years BP, the Archaic Native American cultures began practicing
farming. Technology had advanced to the point that pottery was becoming
common, and the small-scale felling of trees became feasible. Concurrently,
the Archaic Indians began using fire in a widespread manner. Intentional
burning of vegetation was used to mimic the effects of natural fires that
tended to clear forest understories. It made travel easier and facilitated the
growth of herbs and berry-producing plants, which were important for both food
and medicines.[45]

Over the course of thousands of years, American indigenous peoples
domesticated, bred and cultivated a large array of plant species. These
species now constitute 50â60% of all crops in cultivation worldwide[46]. In
certain cases, the indigenous peoples developed entirely new species and
strains through artificial selection, as was the case in the domestication and
breeding of maize from wild teosinte grasses in the valleys of southern
Mexico. Numerous such agricultural products retain native names in the English
and Spanish lexicons.

In the Mississippi River valley, Europeans noted Native Americans' managed
groves of nut and fruit trees as orchards, not far from villages and towns, in
addition to their gardens and agricultural fields. Wildlife competition could
be reduced by understory burning. Further away, prescribed burning would have
been used in forest and prairie areas.[47]

Many crops first domesticated by indigenous Americans are now produced and/or
used globally. Chief among these is maize or "corn", arguably the most
important crop in the world.[48] Other significant crops include cassava,
chia, squash (pumpkins, zucchini, marrow, acorn squash, butternut squash), the
pinto bean, Phaseolus beans including most common beans, tepary beans and lima
beans, tomato, potatoes, avocados, peanuts, cocoa beans (used to make
chocolate), vanilla, strawberries, pineapples, Peppers (species and varieties
of Capsicum, including bell peppers, jalapeÃ±os, paprika and chili peppers)
sunflower seeds, rubber, brazilwood, chicle, tobacco, coca, manioc and some
species of cotton.

## [edit] Culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Cascajal Block. These undeciphered glyphs have been termed "Olmec
hieroglyphs".

Cultural practices in the Americas seem to have been mostly shared within
geographical zones where otherwise unrelated peoples might adopt similar
technologies and social organizations. An example of such a cultural area
could be Mesoamerica, where millennia of coexistence and shared development
between the peoples of the region produced a fairly homogeneous culture with
complex agricultural and social patterns. Another well-known example could be
the North American plains area, where until the 19th century, several
different peoples shared traits of nomadic hunter-gatherers primarily based on
buffalo hunting. Within the Americas, dozens of larger and hundreds of smaller
culture areas can be identified.

### [edit] Writing systems

An independent origin and development of writing is counted among the many
achievements and innovations of pre-Columbian American cultures. The region of
Mesoamerica produced a number of indigenous writing systems from the 1st
millennium BCE onwards. What may be the earliest-known example in the Americas
of an extensive text thought to be writing is by the Cascajal Block. The Olmec
hieroglyphs tablet has been indirectly dated from ceramic shards found in the
same context to approximately 900 BCE, around the time that Olmec occupation
of San Lorenzo began to wane.[49]

The Maya writing system (often called hieroglyphs from a superficial
resemblance to the Ancient Egyptian writing) was a combination of phonetic
symbols and logograms. It is most often classified as a logographic or (more
properly) a logosyllabic writing system, in which syllabic signs play a
significant role. It is the only writing system of the Pre-Columbian New World
which is known to completely represent the spoken language of its community.
In total, the script has more than a thousand different glyphs, although a few
are variations of the same sign or meaning, and many appear only rarely or are
confined to particular localities. At any one time, no more than around 500
glyphs were in use, some 200 of which (including variations) had a phonetic or
syllabic interpretation.

Aztec codices (singular codex) are books written by pre-Columbian and
colonial-era Aztecs. These codices provide some of the best primary sources
for Aztec culture. The pre-Columbian codices differ from European codices in
that they are largely pictorial; they were not meant to symbolize spoken or
written narratives.[50] The colonial era codices not only contain Aztec
pictograms, but also Classical Nahuatl (in the Latin alphabet), Spanish, and
occasionally Latin.

The Ojibwe birchbark scroll pictographs can also be considered a form of
writing.

### [edit] Music and art

Native American music in North America is almost entirely monophonic, but
there are notable exceptions. Traditional Native American music often includes
drumming but little other instrumentation, although flutes are played by
individuals. The tuning of these flutes is not precise and depends on the
length of the wood used and the hand span of the intended player, but the
finger holes are most often around a whole step apart and, at least in
Northern California, a flute was not used if it turned out to have an interval
close to a half step.

Music from indigenous peoples of Central Mexico and Central America often was
pentatonic. Before the arrival of the Spaniards it was inseparable from
religious festivities and included a large variety of percussion and wind
instruments such as drums, flutes, sea snail shells (used as a kind of
trumpet) and "rain" tubes. No remnants of pre-Columbian stringed instruments
were found until archaeologists discovered a jar in Guatemala, attributed to
the Maya of the Late Classic Era (600â900 AD), which depicts a stringed
musical instrument which has since been reproduced. This instrument is
astonishing in at least two respects. First, it is the only stringed
instrument known in the Americas prior to the introduction of European musical
instruments. Second, when played, it produces a sound virtually identical to a
jaguar's growl. A sample of this sound is available at the Princeton Art
Museum website.

Art of the indigenous peoples of the Americas composes a major category in the
world art collection. Contributions include pottery, paintings, jewellery,
weavings, sculptures, basketry, carvings and hair pipes [2].

Due to the many artists posing as Native Americans, the United States passed
the Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990, requiring artists prove that they are
enrolled in a state or federally recognized tribe.

## [edit] Demography of contemporary populations

The following table provides estimates of the per-country populations of
indigenous people, and also those with part-indigenous ancestry, expressed as
a percentage of the overall country population of each country that is
comprised by indigenous peoples, and of people with partly indigenous descent.
The total percentage obtained by adding both of these categories is also given
(One should note however that these categories, especially the second one, are
inconsistently defined and measured differently from country to country).

Indigenous populations of the Americas  
as estimated percentage of total country's population Country Indigenous Ref.
Mestizo Ref. Combined total Ref.  
Antigua and Barbuda % % %  
Argentina 1.0% [51] 2% 3% [52]  
Barbados % % %  
Bahamas % [53] % %  
Belize 16.7% [54] 33.8% [54] 50.5%  
Bolivia 55% [55] 30% [55] 85%  
Brazil 0.4% [56] % %  
Canada % % 3.8% [57]  
Chile 4.6% [58] % %  
Colombia 1% [59] 61% [59] 62%  
Costa Rica 1% [60] % %  
Cuba % % %  
Dominica 2.9% [61] % %  
Dominican Republic % % %  
Ecuador 25% [62] 65% [62] 90%  
El Salvador 1% [63] 90% [63] 91%  
French Guiana % % %  
Grenada 0% [64] 0% [64] 0% [64]  
Guatemala 40.8% [65] % %  
Guyana 9.1% [66] % %  
Haiti 0% [67] 0% [67] 0% [67]  
Honduras 7% [68] 90% [68] %  
Jamaica % % %  
Mexico 13% [69] 60% [70] %  
Nicaragua 5% [71] 69% [71] 74%  
Panama 6% [72] 84% [72] 90%  
Paraguay % 95% [73] %  
Peru 45% [74] 37% [74] %  
Puerto Rico 0.4% [75] % %  
Saint Kitts and Nevis % % %  
Saint Lucia % % %  
Saint Vincent and  
the Grenadines 2% [76] % %  
Suriname 2% [77] % %  
Trinidad and Tobago % % %  
USA 0.9% [78] 0.6% [78] 1.5%  
Uruguay 0% [79] 8% [79] 8%  
Venezuela 0% [80] 66% [80] 66%  
## [edit] History and status by country

### [edit] Argentina

See also: Demographics of Argentina

See also: Argentine Amerindians

See also: List of indigenous languages in Argentina

Argentina's indigenous population is about 403,000 (0.9 percent of total
population).[81] Indigenous nations include the Toba, WichÃ­, MocovÃ­,
PilagÃ¡, ChulupÃ­, Diaguita-CalchaquÃ­, Kolla, GuaranÃ­ (TupÃ­ GuaranÃ­ and
AvÃ¡ GuaranÃ­ in the provinces of Jujuy and Salta, and MbyÃ¡ GuaranÃ­ in the
province of Misiones), Chorote (Iyo'wujwa Chorote and Iyojwa'ja Chorote),
ChanÃ©, TapietÃ©, Mapuche (probably the largest indigenous nation in
Argentina) and Tehuelche. The Selknam (Ona) people is now virtually extinct in
its pure form. The languages of the Diaguita, Tehuelche, and Selknam nations
are now extinct or virtually extinct: the CacÃ¡n language (spoken by
Diaguitas) in the 18th century, the Selknam language in the 20th century;
whereas one Tehuelche language (Southern Tehuelche) is still spoken by a small
handful of elderly people.

### [edit] Belize

Mestizos (European with indigenous peoples) number about 34 percent of the
population; unmixed Maya make up another 10.6 percent (Ketchi, Mopan, and
Yucatec). The Garifuna, who came to Belize in the 1800s, originating from St.
Vincent and the Grenadines, with a mixed African, Carib, and Arawak ancestry
make up another 6 percent of the population.[54]

### [edit] Bolivia

In Bolivia about 2.5 million people speak Quechua, 2.1 million speak Aymara,
while GuaranÃ­ is only spoken by a few hundred thousand people. Also there are
36 recognized cultures and languages in the country. The languages are
recognized; nevertheless, there are no official documents written in those
languages. However, the constitutional reform in 1997 for the first time
recognized Bolivia as a multilingual, pluri-ethnic society and introduced
education reform. In 2005, for the first time in the country's history, an
indigenous descendant Aymara, Evo Morales, was elected as president.

### [edit] Brazil

<IMG>

<IMG>

Brazilian Indigenous chiefs of the Kayapo tribe: Raony, Kaye, Kadjor, Panara.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Korubo man from the Brazilian Amazon.

See also: Indigenous peoples in Brazil

See also: List of Indigenous peoples in Brazil

The Amerindians make up 0.4% of Brazil's population, or about 700,000
people.[42] Indigenous peoples are found in the entire territory of Brazil,
although the majority of them live in Indian reservations in the North and
Centre-Western part of the country. On 18 January 2007, FUNAI reported that it
had confirmed the presence of 67 different uncontacted tribes in Brazil, up
from 40 in 2005. With this addition Brazil has now overtaken the island of New
Guinea as the country having the largest number of uncontacted tribes.[82]

### [edit] Canada

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bill Reid's sculpture The Raven and The First Men, showing part of a Haida
creation myth. The Raven represents the Trickster figure common to many
mythologies. The work is in the University of British Columbia Museum of
Anthropology, Vancouver.

Main article: Aboriginal peoples in Canada

The most commonly preferred term for the indigenous peoples of what is now
Canada is Aboriginal peoples. Of these Aboriginal peoples who are not Inuit or
MÃ©tis, "First Nations" is the most commonly preferred term of self-
identification. Aboriginal peoples make up approximately 3.8 percent of the
Canadian population.[83] Inuit live in subarctic and arctic Canada, as well as
Alaska, Greenland, and Siberia, and maintain their own distinct Inuit culture.
First Nations are the American Indian tribes of Canada, while MÃ©tis are a
distinct group of people descended from First Nations peoples and French
traders.

### [edit] Chile

Main article: Indigenous peoples in Chile

More than 70 percent of Chileans belong to indigenous peoples, such as the
Mapuche in the country's central valley and lake district. The Mapuche
successfully fought off defeat in the first 300â350 years of Spanish rule
during the War of Arauco. Relation with the new Chilean Republic were good
until the Chilean state decided to occupy their lands. During the Occupation
of AraucanÃ­a the Mapuche surrendered to the country's army in the 1880s. The
former land was opened to settlement for mestizo and white Chileans. Conflict
over Mapuche land rights continued until present days.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sculpture of a Chibchan-Sutagao Native American standing at the entrance of
FusagasugÃ¡, Colombia

### [edit] Colombia

Main article: Indigenous peoples in Colombia

A small minority today within Colombia's overwhelmingly Mestizo and Afro-
Colombian population, Colombia's indigenous peoples nonetheless encompass at
least 85 distinct cultures and more than 1,378,884 people[84][85]. A variety
of collective rights for indigenous peoples are recognized in the 1991
Constitution.

One of these is the Muisca culture, a subset of the larger Chibcha ethnic
group, famous for their use of gold, which led to the legend of El Dorado. At
the time of the Spanish conquest, the Chibchas were the largest native
civilization between the Incas and the Aztecs.

### [edit] Costa Rica

Costa Rica was the site of many indigenous cultures, but only eight remain
today: Bribri, Brunka, Cabecar, Chorotega, Guaymi, Huetar, Maleku and Terraba,
also called Teribe or Naso.

### [edit] Ecuador

Main article: Indigenous peoples in Ecuador

Ecuador was the site of many indigenous cultures, and civilizations of
different proportions. An early sedentary culture, known as the Valdivia
culture, developed in the coastal region, while the Caras and the Quitus
unified to form an elaborate civilization that ended at the birth of the
Capital Quito. The CaÃ±aris near Cuenca were the most advanced, and most
feared by the Inca, due to their fierce resistance to the Incan expansion.
Their architecture remains were later destroyed by Spaniards and the Incas.

<IMG>

<IMG>

OtavaleÃ±a girl from Ecuador

Approximately 96.4% of Ecuador's are Highland Quichuas living in the valleys
of the Sierra region. Primarily consisting of the descendents of Incans, they
are Kichwa speakers and include the Caranqui, the OtavaleÃ±os, the Cayambi,
the Quitu-Caras, the Panzaleo, the Chimbuelo, the Salasacan, the Tugua, the
PuruhÃ¡, the CaÃ±ari, and the Saraguro. Linguistic evidence suggests that the
Salascan and the Saraguro may have been the descendants of Bolivian ethnic
groups transplanted to Ecuador as mitimaes.

Coastal groups, including the AwÃ¡, Chachi, and the TsÃ¡chila, make up 24%
percent of the indigenous population, while the remaining 3.35 percent live in
the Oriente and consist of the Oriente Kichwa (the Canelo and the Quijos), the
Shuar, the Huaorani, the Siona-Secoya, the CofÃ¡n, and the Achuar.

In 1986, indigenous people formed the first "truly" national political
organization. The Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador
(CONAIE) has been the primary political institution of the Indigenous since
then and is now the second largest political party in the nation. It has been
influential in national politics, contributing to the ouster of presidents
AbdalÃ¡ Bucaram in 1997 and Jamil Mahuad in 2000.

### [edit] Guatemala

Many of the indigenous peoples of Guatemala are of Maya heritage. Other groups
are Xinca people and GarÃ­funa.

Pure Maya account for some 40 percent of the population; although around 40
percent of the population speaks an indigenous language, those tongues (of
which there are more than 20) enjoy no official status.

### [edit] El Salvador

Much of El Salvador was home to the Pipil, Lenca, and a number of Maya. The
Pipil lived in western El Salvador and spoke Nahuatl like their Aztec and Maya
counterparts, and had many settlements there. The Pipil had no treasure but
held land that had rich and fertile soil, good for farming. This both
disappointed and garnered attention from the Spaniards who were shocked not to
find gold or jewels in El Salvador like they did in other lands like Guatemala
or Mexico, but later learned of the fertile land El Salvador had to offer and
attempted to conquer it. At first the Pipil had repelled Spanish Attacks but
after many other attacks they had stopped fighting and many were used for
labor by Spaniards. Today many Pipil and Indigenous populations live in small
towns of El Salvador like Izalco and Nahuizalco.

### [edit] Mexico

Main article: Indigenous peoples of Mexico

<IMG>

<IMG>

Benito JuÃ¡rez, an indigenous Zapotec and President of Mexico from 1858 to
1872. He was the first president with indigenous roots in the Americas.

The territory of modern-day Mexico was home to numerous indigenous
civilizations prior to the arrival of the Spanish conquistadores: The Olmecs,
who flourished from between 1200 BCE to about 400 BCE in the coastal regions
of the Gulf of Mexico; the Zapotecs and the Mixtecs, who held sway in the
mountains of Oaxaca and the Isthmus of Tehuantepec; the Maya in the YucatÃ¡n
(and into neighbouring areas of contemporary Central America); the Purepecha
or Tarascan in present day MichoacÃ¡n and surrounding areas, and the Aztecs,
who, from their central capital at Tenochtitlan, dominated much of the centre
and south of the country (and the non-Aztec inhabitants of those areas) when
HernÃ¡n CortÃ©s first landed at Veracruz.

In contrast to what was the general rule in the rest of North America, the
history of the colony of New Spain was one of racial intermingling
(mestizaje). Mestizos quickly came to account for a majority of the colony's
population; however, significant pockets of pure-blood indÃ­genas (as the
native peoples are now known) have survived to the present day. With mestizos
numbering some 39% percent of the modern population, estimates for the numbers
of unmixed indigenous peoples vary from 52% percent (As reported by the
National Commission for the Development of the Indigenous Peoples)[86].

In the states of Chiapas and Oaxaca and in the interior of the YucatÃ¡n
peninsula the majority of the population is indigenous. Large indigenous
minorities, including Aztecs, PurÃ©pechas, and Mixtecs are also present in the
central regions of Mexico. In Northern Mexico indigenous people are a small
minority.

The General Law of Linguistic Rights of the Indigenous Peoples grants all
indigenous languages spoken in Mexico, regardless of the number of speakers,
the same validity as Spanish in all territories in which they are spoken, and
indigenous peoples are entitled to request some public services and documents
in their native languages.[87] Along with Spanish, the law has granted them
âmore than 60 languagesâ the status of "national languages". The law
includes all Amerindian languages regardless of origin; that is, it includes
the Amerindian languages of ethnic groups non-native to the territory. As such
the National Commission for the Development of the Indigenous Peoples
recognizes the language of the Kickapoo, who immigrated from the United
States,[88] and recognizes the languages of the Guatemalan Amerindian
refugees.[89] The Mexican government has promoted and established bilingual
primary and secondary education in some indigenous rural communities.
Nonetheless, of the 13% of pure indigenous peoples in Mexico, only about 67%
of them (or 7.1% of the country's population) speak an Amerindian language and
about a sixth do not speak Spanish (1.2% of the country's population).[90]

The indigenous peoples in Mexico have the right of free determination under
the second article of the constitution. According to this article the
indigenous peoples are granted:[91]

  * the right to decide the internal forms of social, economic, political and cultural organization;

the right to apply their own normative systems of regulation as long as human
rights and gender equality are respected;

  * the right to preserve and enrich their languages and cultures;
  * the right to elect representatives before the municipal council in which their territories are located;

amongst other rights.

In recent years the economic gap between indigenous groups (most notably the
Aztec population) and other ethnic groups has come to attention on the
national level with many non-indigenous claiming that the current laws and
constitution give the Aztec population and other ethnic groups such as the
Zapotec an unfair advnatage over other races. They argue that the current
indigenous laws of the constitution give Pure Indigenous citizens rights
impossible for other citizens to ever obtain, the most prominent law in
Article 914, the Xotz co Pilg (Xschotss koh Fielg) doctrine which states, "All
lands currently the property of any non native person as defined by Article
107 of this constitution shall be returned to their respective people's
possesion unless the land was purchased by said non native directly from a
member of the respective native peoples before the twenty-sixth of November of
the year 1846. Any industry, building, or residence on said land will be
transfered to the native owner unless the non native person pays a parcel of
money no more than twenty percent the value of the property each month should
the non native owner fail to pay the monthly parcel he may be evicted from the
property and retain only forty-nine percent of the value of said properties
monthly income should it be a place of business such as a farm, industrial
facility, or residence for pay. In the case of said property being the place
of residence for the non native the native owner may charge a monthly rent
upon him of no more than fifty percent of said resident's proven monthly
income."

Other arguments have been made, such as political under-representation of non
indigenous groups; sixty-eight percent of politicians in Mexico are of Aztecan
decent while Aztec Peoples make up only thirty-six percent of the national
population.

Some have also bought up the fact that while the national average wage per-
capita stands at $37,000 USD the average wage of a person of Aztecan decent
stands at almost three times that at $86,000 USD and top of that Aztecan
Mexicans currently hold over ninety percent of all stocks held in Mexico. Many
analysts have used this as evidence that Mexican corporations generaly prefer
Aztecan citizens over others due in part to the fact that most Mexican
corporations and industries are Aztecan run which is a clear sign of racial-
protectionism in the Mexican corporate system.

### [edit] Nicaragua

Main article: Miskito

The Miskito are a native people in Central America. Their territory extended
from Cape Cameron, Honduras, to Rio Grande, Nicaragua along the Miskito Coast.
There is a native Miskito language, but large groups speak Miskito creole
English, Spanish, Rama and other languages. The creole English came about
through frequent contact with the British who colonized the area. Many are
Christians.

Over the centuries the Miskito have intermarried with escaped slaves who have
sought refuge in Miskito communities. Traditional Miskito society was highly
structured, with a defined political structure. There was a king but he did
not have total power. Instead, the power was split between him, a governor, a
general, and by the 1750s, an admiral. Historical information on kings is
often obscured by the fact that many of the kings were semi-mythical.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Peruvian indigenous people, learning to read.

### [edit] Peru

Main article: Indigenous Peoples in Peru

Most Peruvians are either indigenous or mestizos (of mixed Indigenous and
European ancestry). Peru has the largest indigenous population of South
America, and its traditions and customs have shaped the way Peruvians live and
see themselves today. Cultural citizenshipâor what Renato Rosaldo has
called, "the right to be different and to belong, in a democratic,
participatory sense" (1996:243)âis not yet very well developed in Peru. This
is perhaps no more apparent than in the country's Amazonian regions where
indigenous societies continue to struggle against state-sponsored economic
abuses, cultural discrimination, and pervasive violence.

Throughout the Peruvian Amazon, indigenous peoples have long faced centuries
of missionization, unregulated streams of colonists, land-grabbing, decades of
formal schooling in an alien tongue, pressures to conform to a foreign
national culture, and more recently, explosive expressions of violent social
conflict fueled by a booming underground coca economy. The disruptions
accompanying the establishment of extractive economies, coupled with the
Peruvian state-sanctioned civilizing project, have led to a devastating
impoverishment of Amazonia's richly variegated social and ecological
communities.[92]

The most visited tourist destinations of Peru were built by indigenous peoples
(the Quechua, Aymara, Moche, etc.), while Amazonian peoples, such as the
Urarina, Bora, MatsÃ©s, Ticuna, Yagua, Shipibo and the Aguaruna, developed
elaborate shamanic systems of belief prior to the European Conquest of the New
World. Macchu Picchu is considered one of the marvels of humanity, and it was
constructed by the Inca civilization. Even though Peru officially declares its
multi-ethnic character and recognizes at least sixâdozen
languagesâincluding Quechua, Aymara and hegemonic Spanishâdiscrimination
and language endangerment continue to challenge the indigenous peoples in
Peru.[93]

### [edit] United States

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Choctaw Belle, Painted by P. Romer

Main article: Native Americans in the United States

Indigenous peoples in what is now the contiguous United States are commonly
called "American Indians", or just "Indians" domestically, but are also often
referred to as "Native Americans". In Alaska, indigenous peoples, which
include Native Americans, Yupik and Inupiat Eskimos, and Aleuts, are referred
to collectively as Alaska Natives.

Native Americans and Alaska Natives make up 2 percent of the population, with
more than 6 million people identifying themselves as such, although only 1.8
million are recognized as registered tribal members. Tribes have established
their own rules for membership, some of which are increasingly exclusive. More
people have unrecognized Native American ancestry together with other ethnic
groups. A minority of U.S. Native Americans live in zones called Indian
reservations. Some southwestern U.S. tribes, such as the Yaqui and Apache,
have registered tribal communities in Northern Mexico. Similarly, some
northern bands of Blackfoot reside in southern Alberta, Canada, in addition to
within US borders.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An Inuit woman

### [edit] Venezuela

Most Venezuelans have some indigenous heritage, but the indigenous population
make up only around 2% of the total population. They speak around 29 different
languages and many more dialects, but some of the ethnic groups are very small
and their languages are in danger of becoming extinct in the next decades. The
most important indigenous groups are the Wayuu, the Pemones and the Waraos.

The 1999 constitution gives them special rights, although the vast majority of
them still live in very critical conditions of poverty. The largest groups
receive some basic primary education in their languages.

### [edit] Other parts of the Americas

Indigenous peoples make up the majority of the population in Bolivia and Peru,
and are a significant element in most other former Spanish colonies.
Exceptions to this include Costa Rica, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Argentina, Dominican
Republic, Chile, and Uruguay. At least three of the native American languages
(Quechua in Peru and Bolivia; Aymara also in Peru, Bolivia and Chile, and
Guarani in Paraguay) are recognized along with Spanish as national languages
(or Aymara in Chile, by regional basis).

## [edit] Native American name controversy

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2008)  
Main article: Native American name controversy

The Native American name controversy is an ongoing dispute over the acceptable
ways to refer to the indigenous peoples of the Americas and to broad subsets
thereof, such as those living in a specific country or sharing certain
cultural attributes. Once-common terms like "Indian" remain in use, despite
the introduction of terms such as "Native American" and "Amerindian" during
the latter half of the 20th century.

## [edit] Rise of Indigenous Movements

In recent years, there has been a rise of indigenous movements in the Americas
(mainly South America). These are rights-driven groups that organize
themselves in order to achieve some sort of self-determination and the
preservation of their culture for their peoples. Organizations like the
Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon River Basin and the
Indian Council of South America are examples of movements that are breaking
the barrier of borders in order to obtain rights for Amazonian indigenous
populations everywhere. Similar movements for indigenous rights can also be
seen in Canada and the United States, with movements like the International
Indian Treaty Council and the accession of native Indian group into the UNPO.

There has also been a recognition of indigenous movements on an international
scale, with the United Nations adopting the Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, despite dissent from the stronger countries of the
Americas.

Moves towards the rights of the indigenous in Leftist countries of Latin
America, led to a surge in activity in historically the most right-winged
state in South America. In Colombia various indigenous groups protested the
denial of their rights. People organized a march in Cali in October 2008 to
demand the government live up to promises to protect indigenous lands, defend
the indigenous against violence, and reconsider the free trade pact with the
United States.[94]

### [edit] Legal prerogative

With the rise to power of Leftist regimes in Venezuela, Ecuador, Paraguay, and
especially Bolivia where Evo Morales was the first indigenous descendant
elected president of Bolivia, the indigenous movement gained a strong foothold
by the ability to create legal sanction sometimes with violence (as the Tupac
Amaru in Peru had done).

Representatives from indigenous and rural organizations from major South
American countries, including Bolivia, Ecuador, Colombia, Chile and Brazil,
started a forum in support of Morales' legal process of change. The meeting
condemned plans by the European "foreign" power elite to destabilize the
country. The forum also expressed solidarity with the Morales and his economic
and social changes in the interest of historically marginalized majorities.
Furthermore, in a cathartic blow to the US-backed elite, it questioned US
interference through diplomats and NGO's. The forum was suspicious of plots
against Bolivia and other countries, including Cuba, Venezuela, Ecuador,
Paraguay and Nicaragua.[95]

The forum rejected the supposed violent method used by regional civic leaders
from the called "Crescent departments" in Bolivia to impose their autonomous
statutes, applauded the decision to expel the US ambassador to Bolivia, and
reafirmed the sovereignty and independence of the presidency. Amongst others,
representatives of the Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador,
the National Indigenous Organization of Colombia, the Chilean Council of All
Lands, and the Brazilian Landless Movement participated in the forum.[96]

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Indigenous peoples of
North America  
  * Alaska Natives
  * Haplogroup Q1a3a (Y-DNA)
  * History of the west coast of North America
  * Hyphenated American
  * Indigenous languages of the Americas
  * Indigenous Movements in the Americas
  * List of Inuit
  * Mongoloid race
  * Native Hawaiians
  * Pacific Islander
  * Population history of American indigenous peoples
  * Uncontacted peoples
  * Native American art
  * Zambo

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ See Jacobs 2001 for an extensive review of the evidence for migration timings, and Jacobs 2002 for a survey of migration models.
  2. ^ Jacobs (2002).
  3. ^ Mann (2005).
  4. ^ "DNA Ties Together Scattered Peoples," Los Angeles Times (accessed September 11, 2006); reprint; Kemp et al, [[ Genetic analysis of early holocene skeletal remains from Alaska and its implications for the settlement of the Americas]], American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 132(4), 605-621 (2007). doi 10.1002/ajpa.20543
  5. ^ See also Classification of indigenous peoples of the Americas.
  6. ^ Jablonski, Nina (2001). The First Americans: The Pleistocene Colonization of the New World. Journal of Field Archeology (Vol 28, 2001, p. 459. Retrieved on August 10, 2007.
  7. ^ See Thornton's (2006) review of 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus (Mann 2005).
  8. ^ Jennings, p. 83; Royal's quote
  9. ^ Taylor (2001, p.40).
  10. ^ Carey, Bjorn (19 February 2006).First Americans may have been European.Life Science. Retrieved on August 10, 2007.
  11. ^ Conner, Steve, Science Editor, (03 December 2002).Does skull prove that the first Americans came from Europe?. Published in the UK Independent. Retrieved on August 14, 2007.
  12. ^ Hecht, Jeff (4 September 2003).Skulls narrow clues to First AmericansNew Scientist. Retrieved on August 12, 2007.
  13. ^ Gonzalez, Sylvia, C. Jimenez-Lopez, R. Hedges, D. Huddart, J.C. Ohman, A. Turner, J.A. Pompa y Padilla (2003). Earliest humans in the Americas: new evidence from Mexico, Journal of Human Evolution 44, 379â387.
  14. ^ Richard Erdoes, Alfonso Ortiz, (Eds.) "American Indian Myths and Legends." Pantheon, 1985.
  15. ^ Vine Deloria, Jr. "Red Earth, White Lies: Native Americans and the Myth of Scientific Fact." Fulcrum Inc. 1999.
  16. ^ http://www.ajhg.org/AJHG/fulltext/S0002-9297(08)00139-0# "Mitochondrial Population Genomics Supports a Single Pre-Clovis Origin with a Coastal Route for the Peopling of the Americas" Fagundes, Nelson J.R.; Kanitz, Ricardo; Eckert, Roberta; Valls, Ana C.S.; Bogo, Mauricio R.; Salzano, Francisco M.; Smith, David Glenn; Silva, Wilson A.; Zago, Marco A.; Ribeiro-dos-Santos, Andrea K.; Santos, Sidney E.B.; Petzl-Erler, Maria Luiza; Bonatto, Sandro L. American journal of human genetics(volume 82 issue 3 pp.583 - 592)
  17. ^ See Atlas of the Human Journey YDNA Haplogroup Q (M242): https://www3.nationalgeographic.com/genographic/atlas.html
  18. ^ As characterized by Mann (2005)
  19. ^ Native Americans of North America, http://encarta.msn.com/text_761570777___2/Native_Americans_of_North_America.html, Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2006, Trudy Griffin-Pierce, accessed September 14, 2006
  20. ^ a b "Espagnols-Indiens: le choc des civilisations" in L'Histoire, nÂ°322, July-August 2007, pp.14â21
  21. ^ Smallpox Through History
  22. ^ Laws of Burgos, 1512-1513
  23. ^ Cook, p. 1.
  24. ^ BBC Smallpox: Eradicating the Scourge
  25. ^ The Story Of... Smallpox â and other Deadly Eurasian Germs
  26. ^ American Indian Epidemics
  27. ^ Smallpox: The Disease That Destroyed Two Empires
  28. ^ Epidemics
  29. ^ American plague, New Scientist
  30. ^ Oaxaca
  31. ^ Smallpox's history in the world
  32. ^ Stacy Goodling, "Effects of European Diseases on the Inhabitants of the New World"
  33. ^ Dutch Children's Disease Kills Thousands of Mohawks
  34. ^ Smallpox
  35. ^ Iroquois
  36. ^ Smallpox epidemic ravages Native Americans on the northwest coast of North America in the 1770s.
  37. ^ The first smallpox epidemic on the Canadian Plains: In the fur-traders' words
  38. ^ Mountain Man Plain Indian Fur Trade
  39. ^ Lewis Cass and the Politics of Disease: The Indian Vaccination Act of 1832
  40. ^ Wicazo Sa Review: Vol. 18, No. 2, The Politics of Sovereignty (Autumn, 2003), pp. 9â35
  41. ^ '500 Years of Brazil's Discovery'
  42. ^ a b Brazil urged to protect Indians
  43. ^ See Varese (2004), as reviewed in Dean (2006).
  44. ^ Ancient Horse (Equus cf. E. complicatus), The Academy of Natural Sciences, Thomas Jefferson Fossil Collection, Philadelphia, PA, (See: species Equus scotti) Others died out at the end of the last ice age with other megafauna.
  45. ^ Owen, Wayne (2002). "Chapter 2 (TERRAâ2): The History of Native Plant Communities in the South". Southern Forest Resource Assessment Final Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southern Research Station. http://www.srs.fs.usda.gov/sustain/report/terra2/terra2.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-29.
  46. ^ "Native Americans: The First Farmers." AgExporter October 1 1999 [1]
  47. ^ David L. Lentz, ed (2000). Imperfect balance: landscape transformations in the Precolumbian Americas. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 241â242. ISBN 0-231-11157-6.
  48. ^ Michael Pollan, The Omnivore's Dilemma
  49. ^ Skidmore (2006, pp.1â4). The numbers appearing next to each glyph are identifiers used by archaeologists investigating the find.
  50. ^ Elizabeth Hill Boone, "Pictorial Documents and Visual Thinking in Postconquest Mexico". p. 158.
  51. ^ Primeros Resultados de la Encuesta Complementaria de Pueblos IndÃ­genas (ECPI)
  52. ^ Argentina entry at The World Factbook
  53. ^ the Bahamas entry at The World Factbook
  54. ^ a b c "Belize 2000 Housing and Population Census". Belize Central Statistical Office. 2000. http://celade.cepal.org/cgibin/RpWebEngine.exe/PortalAction?&MODE=MAIN&BASE=CPVBLZ2000&MAIN=WebServerMain.inl. Retrieved on 2008-09-30.
  55. ^ a b Bolivia entry at The World Factbook
  56. ^ PopulaÃ§Ã£o residente, por cor ou raÃ§a, segundo a situaÃ§Ã£o do domicÃ­lio - Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e EstatÃ­stica
  57. ^ Aboriginal Peoples in Canada in 2006: Inuit, MÃ©tis and First Nations, 2006 Census
  58. ^ Chile entry at The World Factbook
  59. ^ a b Colombia entry at The World Factbook
  60. ^ Costa Rica entry at The World Factbook
  61. ^ Dominica entry at The World Factbook
  62. ^ a b Ecuador entry at The World Factbook
  63. ^ a b El Salvador entry at The World Factbook
  64. ^ a b c Grenada entry at The World Factbook
  65. ^ Guatemala entry at The World Factbook
  66. ^ Guyana entry at The World Factbook
  67. ^ a b c Haiti entry at The World Factbook
  68. ^ a b Honduras entry at The World Factbook
  69. ^ "POBLACIÃN DE 5 AÃOS Y MÃS POR ENTIDAD FEDERATIVA, SEXO Y GRUPOS LENGUA INDÃGENA QUINQUENALES DE EDAD, Y SU DISTRIBUCIÃN SEGÃN CONDICIÃN DE HABLA INDÃGENA Y HABLA ESPAÃOLA" (PDF). INEGI, MÃ©xico. http://www.inegi.gob.mx/prod_serv/contenidos/espanol/bvinegi/productos/censos/poblacion/2000/definitivos/Nal/tabulados/00li01.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-12-13.
  70. ^ Mexico entry at The World Factbook
  71. ^ a b Nicaragua entry at The World Factbook
  72. ^ a b Panama entry at The World Factbook
  73. ^ Paraguay entry at The World Factbook
  74. ^ a b Peru entry at The World Factbook
  75. ^ Puerto Rico entry at The World Factbook
  76. ^ Suriname entry at The World Factbook
  77. ^ Suriname entry at The World Factbook
  78. ^ a b Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin, 2000 US Census (Page 3-4)
  79. ^ a b Uruguay entry at The World Factbook
  80. ^ a b Venezuela -- Britannica Online Encyclopedia
  81. ^ INDEC: Encuesta Complementaria de Pueblos IndÃ­genas (ECPI) 2004 - 2005
  82. ^ Brazil sees traces of more isolated Amazon tribes
  83. ^ Aboriginal People. Statistics Canada. Release No. 5: 15 Jan 2008 (retrieved 12 March 2009)
  84. ^ DANE 2005 national census
  85. ^ "HEALTH EQUITY AND ETHNIC MINORITIES IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS", Pier Paolo Balladelli, JosÃ© Milton GuzmÃ¡n, Marcelo Korc, Paula Moreno, Gabriel Rivera, The Commission on Social Health Determinants, Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization, BogotÃ¡, Colombia, 2007
  86. ^ Diversidad EtnolingÃ¼Ã­stica. ComisiÃ³n Nacional para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos IndÃ­genas
  87. ^ (Spanish) "Ley General de Derechos LingÃ¼Ã­sticos de los Pueblos IndÃ­genas (General Law of the Rights of the Indigenous Peoples)" (PDF). CDI MÃ©xico. http://cdi.gob.mx/derechos/vigencia/2006_ley_general_derechos_linguisticos_pueblos_indigenas.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-10-02.
  88. ^ "KikapÃºes - Kikaapoa". CDI MÃ©xico. http://www.cdi.gob.mx/index.php?id_seccion=291. Retrieved on 2007-10-02.
  89. ^ "Aguacatecos, cakchiqueles, ixiles, kekchÃ­es, tecos y quichÃ©s". CDI MÃ©xico. http://cdi.gob.mx/index.php?id_seccion=1378. Retrieved on 2007-10-02.
  90. ^ "POBLACIÃN DE 5 AÃOS Y MÃS POR ENTIDAD FEDERATIVA, SEXO Y GRUPOS LENGUA INDÃGENA QUINQUENALES DE EDAD, Y SU DISTRIBUCIÃN SEGÃN CONDICIÃN DE HABLA INDÃGENA Y HABLA ESPAÃOLA" (PDF). INEGI, MÃ©xico. http://www.inegi.gob.mx/prod_serv/contenidos/espanol/bvinegi/productos/censos/poblacion/2000/definitivos/Nal/tabulados/00li01.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-12-13.
  91. ^ ConstituciÃ³n PolÃ­tica de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos. Second article.
  92. ^ See for example Dean and Levi (2003)
  93. ^ A view expressed by Dean (2003)
  94. ^ http://africa.reuters.com/world/news/usnTRE49M10G.html Reuters
  95. ^ http://www.plenglish.com/article.asp?ID=%7B59DF5FFB-B4C1-4E06-B315-BA3A23C1F081%7D)&language=EN
  96. ^ http://www.plenglish.com/article.asp?ID=%7B59DF5FFB-B4C1-4E06-B315-BA3A23C1F081%7D)&language=EN

## [edit] References

  * Cappel, Constance, "The Smallpox Genocide of the Odawa Tribe at L'Arbre Croche, 1763: The History of a Native American People," Edwin Mellen Press, 2007, ISBN-10:0-7734-5220-6
  * Churchill, Ward (1997). A Little Matter of Genocide. City Lights Books. ISBN 0-872-86323-9.
  * Dean, Bartholomew (2003). "State Power and Indigenous Peoples in Peruvian Amazonia: A Lost Decade, 1990â2000". in David Maybury-Lewis (Ed.). The Politics of Ethnicity Indigenous Peoples in Latin American States. David Rockefeller Center Series on Latin American Studies. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. pp. 199â238. ISBN 0-674-00964-9.
  * Dean, Bartholomew (January 2006). "Salt of the Mountain: Campa AshÃ¡ninka History and Resistance in the Peruvian Jungle (review)". The Americas 62 (3): pp.464â466. doi:10.1353/tam.2006.0013. ISSN 0003-1615.
  * Dean, Bartholomew; and Jerome M. Levi, (Eds.) (2003). At the Risk of Being Heard; Identity, Indigenous Rights, and Postcolonial States. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 0-472-09736-9.
  * Jacobs, James Q. (2001). "The Paleoamericans: Issues and Evidence Relating to the Peopling of the New World". Anthropology and Archaeology Pages. jqjacobs.net. http://www.jqjacobs.net/anthro/paleoamericans.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-20.
  * Jacobs, James Q. (2002). "Paleoamerican Origins: A Review of Hypotheses and Evidence Relating to the Origins of the First Americans". Anthropology and Archaeology Pages. jqjacobs.net. http://www.jqjacobs.net/anthro/paleoamerican_origins.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-20.
  * Jones, Peter N. (2005). Respect for the Ancestors: American Indian Cultural Affiliation in the American West. Boulder CO: Bauu Press. ISBN 0-972-13492-1.
  * Kane, Katie (1999). "Nits Make Lice: Drogheda, Sand Creek, and the Poetics of Colonial Extermination". Cultural Critique 42: pp.81â103. doi:10.2307/1354592. ISSN 0882-4371.
  * Krech, Shepard III (1999). The Ecological Indian: Myth and History. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-04755-5.
  * Mann, Charles C. (2005). 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus. New York: Knopf Publishing Group. ISBN 1-400-04006-X.
  * Skidmore, Joel (2006). "The Cascajal Block: The Earliest Precolumbian Writing" (PDF). Mesoweb Reports & News. Mesoweb. http://www.mesoweb.com/reports/cascajal.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-20.
  * Taylor, Alan (2001). American colonies. New York: Viking. ISBN 0-670-87282-2.
  * Thornton, Bruce S. (July 2006). "New World, Old Myths: A review of Charles C. Mann's 1491: New Revelations of the Americas Before Columbus". Claremont Review of Books. http://www.victorhanson.com/articles/thornton070206.html. Retrieved on 2006-09-14.
  * Varese, Stefano (2004). Salt of the Mountain: Campa AshÃ¡ninka History and Resistance in the Peruvian Jungle. Susan Giersbach RascÃ³n (trans.). Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-806-13512-3.

## [edit] External links

  * The Peopling of the American Continents
  * Indigenous Peoples Issues and Resources: North America
  * Indigenous Peoples Issues and Resources: South America
  * America's Stone Age Explorers

Links to related articles  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Indigenous peoples of the Americas  
History

Archaeology of the Americas Â· Models of migration to the New World Â· Pre-
Columbian trans-oceanic contact Â· Classification of indigenous peoples of the
Americas Â· Paleo-Indians  
European  
colonization

European colonization of the Americas Â· Population history of American
indigenous peoples Â· Columbian Exchange  
By country

North America

Canada Â· United States Â· Mexico Â· Central America Â· West Indies  
South America

Argentina Â· Brazil Â· Chile Â· Colombia Â· Ecuador Â· Peru Â· Venezuela  
Related topics

Native American name controversy Â· Indigenous languages of the Americas  
Category Â· Portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Indigenous peoples of the world by continent  
Location of Africa  
Africa

Location of the Americas  
Americas

Location of Asia  
Asia

Location of Europe  
Europe

Location of Oceania  
Oceania  
Miscegenation in Spanish colonies

v â¢ d â¢ e  
African âââ Spaniard âââ Spaniard âââ Amerindian âââ
African  
â â â â  
Mulato Criollo Mestizo Zambo  
Retrieved from
"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indigenous_peoples_of_the_Americas"

Categories: Ethnic groups in the Americas | Ethnic groups in Latin America |
Ethnic groups in North America | Indigenous peoples of the Americas | Race
(historical definitions) | Latin American caste system

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since October 2008 | Vague or ambiguous time | Articles
with unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles needing additional
references from October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deitsch
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Malagasy
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Seeltersk
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkmenÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 03:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



