
# Burundi

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

Republic of Burundi

Republika y'u Burundi  
RÃ©publique du Burundi  
Flag of Burundi Coat of arms of Burundi  
Flag Coat of arms  
Motto: "Ubumwe, Ibikorwa, Iterambere" (Kirundi)  
"UnitÃ©, Travail, ProgrÃ¨s" (French)  
"Unity, Work, Progress" 1  
Anthem: Burundi bwacu  
  
Location of Burundi  
Capital  
(and largest city) Bujumbura  
3Â°30â²S 30Â°00â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿3.5Â°S 30Â°Eï»¿ / -3.5; 30  
Official languages Kirundi, French  
Demonym Burundian  
Government Republic  
- President Pierre Nkurunziza  
Independence from Belgium  
- Date July 1, 1962  
Area  
- Total 27,830 km2 (145th)  
10,745 sq mi  
- Water (%) 7.8%  
Population  
- 1978 census 3,589,434  
- Density 271/km2 (43rd)  
533.8/sq mi  
GDP (PPP) 2007 estimate  
- Total $2.897 billion[1] (142nd)  
- Per capita $371[1] (163rd)  
GDP (nominal) 2007 estimate  
- Total $974 million[1] (162nd)  
- Per capita $124[1] (182nd)  
Gini (1998) 42.4 (medium)  
HDI (2007) â² 0.413 (low) (167th)  
Currency Burundi franc (FBu) (`BIF`)  
Time zone CAT (UTC+2)  
- Summer (DST) not observed (UTC+2)  
Drives on the right  
Internet TLD .bi  
Calling code 257  
1 Before 1966, "Ganza Sabwa".  
2 Estimate is based on regression; other PPP figures are extrapolated from the
latest International Comparison Program for benchmark estimates.  
Burundi (pronounced [buËÉ¾undi]), officially the Republic of Burundi, is a
small country in the Great Lakes region of Eastern Africa bordered by Rwanda
to the north, Tanzania to the south and east, and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to the west. Although the country is landlocked, much of the
southwestern border is adjacent to Lake Tanganyika.

The Twa, Tutsi, and Hutu peoples have occupied Burundi since the country's
formation five centuries ago. Burundi was ruled as a kingdom by the Tutsi for
over two hundred years. However, at the beginning of the twentieth century,
Germany and Belgium occupied the region, and Burundi and Rwanda became a
European colony known as Ruanda-Urundi. Political unrest occurred throughout
the region because of social differences between the Tutsi and Hutu, provoking
civil war in Burundi throughout the middle twentieth century. Presently,
Burundi is governed as a presidential representative democratic republic.
Sixty-two percent of Burundians are Roman Catholic, eight to ten percent are
Muslims and the rest follow indigenous beliefs and other Christian
denominations.

Burundi is one of the ten poorest countries in the world.[2] Burundi has a low
gross domestic product, largely due to civil wars, corruption, poor access to
education, and the effects of HIV/AIDS. Burundi is densely populated, with
substantial emigration. Cobalt and copper are among Burundi's natural
resources. Some of Burundi's main exports include coffee and sugar.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Early settlement
    * 1.2 European conquest
    * 1.3 Independence and civil war
    * 1.4 First Attempt at Democracy
    * 1.5 Peace Agreements
    * 1.6 UN Involvement
    * 1.7 2006 to Present
  * 2 Politics
  * 3 Provinces, communes, and collines
  * 4 Geography
  * 5 Economy
  * 6 Demographics
    * 6.1 Religion
  * 7 Culture
  * 8 Footnotes
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## History

Main article: History of Burundi

### Early settlement

Archaeological evidence shows that a pygmoid hunter gathering tribe, the Twa,
first settled the region in 70,000 B.C.[3] However, approximately 5,000 years
ago, the Hutu, a Bantu-speaking people from the mountainous regions of central
Africa, immigrated and provided Burundi's first language.[4] The Hutu served
as the main farming group in the country.[5] Following the Hutu, the Tutsi
tribe settled the region in the late fifteenth century.[6] Based on genetics
and bioanthropology the Tutsi seem to have many affinities with population
from the Central and Western Sahara corridor. From the Tutsi's early
occupation in the region, some additional agricultural techniques were
introduced, and a feudal system was established within local chiefdoms.[7] The
Tutsi's relationship with the Hutu remained stable during this period.[6]

With the settlement of the Tutsi and Hutu tribes, Burundi's kingdom expanded
in land size until the seventeenth century[8] creating a powerful state.[9] At
the beginning of the seventeenth century, the Tutsi dynasty reigned over
Burundi's kingdom.[5] The kingdom continued through rulers until the late
nineteenth century.[8] King Mwezi IV reigned from 1852 to 1908. During this
time he allied with the Germans in order to gain control over his
opponents.[10] Mwezi's opponents, two chiefs named Maconco and Birori, were
rebelling to take away Burundi's throne.[11] As a result, the kingdom of
Burundi became a German colony in 1899.[12]

### European conquest

After its defeat in World War I, Germany handed control of Burundi to
Belgium.[7] On October 20, 1924, Burundi officially became a part of the
Belgian colonial empire and was known as Ruanda-Urundi, and consisted of
Rwanda and Burundi. However, the Belgians allowed Ruanda-Urundi to continue
its kingship dynasty.[12][13]

Following World War II, Ruanda-Urundi was a United Nations Trust Territory
under Belgian administrative authority.[12] During the 1940s, a series of
policies caused divisions throughout the country. On October 4, 1943, powers
were split in the legislative division of Burundi's government between
chiefdoms and lower chiefdoms. Chiefdoms were in charge of land, and lower
sub-chiefdoms were established. Native authorities also had powers.[13] In
1948, Belgium allowed the region to form political parties.[7] These factions
would be one of the main influences for Burundi's independence from Belgium.

### Independence and civil war

On January 20, 1959, Burundi's ruler Mwami Mwambutsa IV requested from the
Belgian Minister of Colonies a separation of Burundi and Rwanda and a
dissolution of Ruanda-Urundi.[14] Six months later, political parties formed
to bring attention to Burundi's independence from Europe and to separate
Rwanda from Burundi.[14] The first of these political parties was the African
National Union of Ruanda-Urundi (UNARU).

During Burundi's push for independence, instability and ethnic persecution
occurred between the Hutu and Tutsi tribes. In November 1959, a dispute over
land possession sparked a revolt in Rwanda between Hutu teachers and Tutsi
soldiers.[14] From 1959 to 1962, Hutu refugees escaped to Rwanda to avoid
persecution.[15] In turn, the Hutu in Rwanda murdered thousands of Tutsi,
causing the Tutsi to flee to Burundi for freedom. While in Burundi, Tutsi
fought against the Hutu. Many Tutsi soldiers killed Hutu peasants in
retaliation for Hutu violence in Rwanda.[16] The Hutu managed to take power in
Rwanda by winning Belgian-run elections in 1960.[17][15]

The Union for National Progress (UPRONA), a multi-ethnic unity party led by
Tutsi Prince Louis Rwagasore and Christian Democratic Party (PDC) members,
became popular throughout Burundi-Urundi. Following an UPRONA victory in
legislative elections, Prince Rwagasore was assassinated in 1961 by a Greek
national named Georges Kageorgis;[7] the event caused infighting between the
two groups. [18]

The country claimed independence in July 1, 1962,[7] and legally changed its
name from Ruanda-Urundi to Burundi.[19] Mwami Mwambutsa IV was named king.[15]
On September 18, 1962, just over a month after declaring independence from
Belgium, Burundi joined the United Nations.[20]

Upon Burundiâs independence, a constitutional monarchy was established and
the Hutus and Tutsis held equal representation in Parliament. However, during
Burundi's move to become an independent nation, Hutu forces took control of
the country, forcing the Tutsi out of the country; many fled to Rwanda to
escape ethnic persecution and death. During 1962 and 1963, approximately
12,000 Tutsi were killed, while between 140,000 to 250,000 people escaped to
Rwanda.[21]

In 1965, King Mwambutsa refused to appoint a Hutu prime minister, even though
Hutus won a majority in parliamentary elections. An attempted coup by the Hutu
dominated police was ruthlessly suppressed by the Tutsi dominated Army led by
Michel Micombero[22] When the next Hutu Prime Minister was assassinated in
1965, Hutus engaged in a series of revolts that the government repressed, and,
fearing the killings of Tutsis by the neighboring Rwandan Hutu regime, the
police and military came under the control of the Tutsis.

Mwambutsa was deposed in 1966 by his son, Prince Ntare V, who claimed the
throne. That same year, Tutsi Prime Minister Captain Michel Micombero deposed
Ntare, abolished the monarchy, and created a republic, which was in effect a
military regime.[23]

A Hutu attack on a military-affiliated town in 1972 resulted in a systematic
retaliation by the military against the Hutus. Roughly 200,000 Hutus were
killed and about 150,000 became asylum-seekers. Another Tutsi, Colonel Jean-
Baptiste Bagaza, led a bloodless coup in 1976 and promoted various reforms. A
new constitution was created in 1981, making Burundi a one-party state.[22]
Bagaza was elected head of state. However, Bagaza suppressed political
opponents and religious freedoms.

Major Pierre Buyoya, a Tutsi, overthrew Bagaza in 1987 and suspended the
constitution, dissolved the political parties, and reinstated military rule
under the Military Committee for National Salvation (CSMN).[22] In 1988,
tensions between Hutus, Tutsis, and the military resulted in roughly 20,000
deaths. In response, Buyoya approved a new constitution in 1992 that attempted
to create a non-ethnic government with a presidency and a parliament. The
constitution provided for a multi-party system.[22] Buyoya also created a
commission to investigate the 1988 killings. [22]

An estimated 250,000 people died between 1962 and 1993.[24]

### First Attempt at Democracy

In June 1993, Melchior Ndadaye, leader of the Hutu-dominated Front for
Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU), won the first democratic election and became
the first Hutu head of the state, leading a pro-Hutu government. However, in
October 1993, Tutsi soldiers assassinated Ndadaye, which started further years
of violence between Hutus and Tutsis. It is estimated that some 300,000 were
killed in 1993.[25]

In early 1994, the parliament elected Cyprien Ntaryamira, also a Hutu, to the
office of president. He and the president of Rwanda were killed together when
their airplane was shot down. More refugees started fleeing to Rwanda. Another
Hutu, parliament speaker Sylvestre Ntibantunganya was appointed as president
in October 1994. Within months, a wave of ethnic violence began, starting with
the massacre of Hutu refugees in the capital, Bujumbura, and the withdrawal of
the mainly Tutsi Union for National Progress from the government and
parliament.

In 1996, Pierre Buyoya, a Tutsi, took power through a coup dâÃ©tat. He
suspended the constitution and was sworn in as president in 1998. In response
to the rebel attacks, the population was forced by the government to relocate
to refugee camps.[26] Under his rule, long peace talks started, mediated by
South Africa. Both parties signed agreements in Arusha, Tanzania and Pretoria,
South Africa, to share power in Burundi. The agreements took four years to
plan, and on August 28, 2000, a transitional government for Burundi was
planned as a part of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. The
transitional government was placed on a trial basis for five years. After
several aborted cease-fires, a 2001 peace plan and power sharing agreement has
been relatively successful. After several more years of genocide against the
Hutu, a cease-fire was signed in 2003 between the Tutsi-controlled Burundian
government and the largest Hutu rebel group, CNDD-FDD (National Council for
the Defense of Democracy-Forces for the Defense of Democracy).[27] In 2003,
FRODEBU Hutu leader Domitien Ndayizeye was elected president.[28] > In early
2005, ethnic quotas were formed for determining positions in Burundi's
government. Throughout the year, elections for parliamentary and president
occurred.[29] To this day, conflicts between the Hutu and the Tutsi continue.
As of 2008, the Burundian government is talking with the Hutu-led Palipehutu-
National Liberation Forces (NLF)[30] to bring peace to the country.[31] In
2008, Pierre Nkurunziza, once a leader of a Hutu rebel group, was elected to
president.

### Peace Agreements

Following the request of the United Nation Secretary General Boutros Boutros-
Ghali to intervene in the humanitarian crisis, African leaders began a series
of peace talk between the warring factions. Talks were initiated under the
aegis of former Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere in 1995; following his
death, South African President Nelson Mandela took the helm. As the talks
progressed, South African President Thabo Mbeki and United States President
Bill Clinton would also lend their respective weight.

The peace talks took the form of Track I mediations. This method of
negotiation can be defined as a form of diplomacy involving governmental or
intergovernmental representatives, who may use their positive reputations,
mediation or the âcarrot and stickâ method as a means of obtaining or
forcing an outcome, frequently along the lines of âbargainingâ or âwin-
loseâ.[32]

The main objective framing the talks was a structural transformation of the
Burundian government and military as a way to bridge the ethnic gap between
the Tutsis and Hutus. This would be accomplished in two ways. First, a
transitional power sharing government would be established, with the president
holding office for three year terms. The second objective involved a
restructuring of the military, where the two groups would be represented
equally.

As the protracted nature of the peace talks demonstrated, there were several
obstacles facing the mediators and negotiating parties. First, the Burundian
officials perceived the goals as âunrealisticâ and viewed the treaty as
ambiguous, contradictory and confusing. Second, and perhaps most importantly,
the Burundians believed the treaty would be irrelevant without an accompanying
cease fire. This would require separate and direct talks with the rebel
groups. The main Hutu party was skeptical of the offer of a power-sharing
government; they alleged that they were deceived by the Tutsis in past
agreements.[33]

In 2000, the Burundian President signed the treaty, as well as 13 of the 19
warring Hutu and Tutsi factions. However, disagreements persisted over which
group would preside over the nascent government and when the ceasefire would
commence. The spoilers of the peace talks were the hardliner Tutsi and Hutu
groups who refused to sign the accord; as a result, violence intensified.
Three years later at a summit of African leaders in Tanzania, the Burundian
president and the main opposition Hutu group signed an accord to end the
conflict; the signatory members were granted ministerial posts within the
government. However, smaller militant Hutu groups â such as the Forces for
National Liberation - remained active.

### UN Involvement

Between 1993 and 2003, many rounds of peace talks, overseen by regional
leaders in Tanzania, South Africa, and Uganda, gradually established power-
sharing agreements to satisfy the majority of the contending groups. African
Union (AU) peacekeepers were deployed to help oversee the installation of a
transitional government. In June 2004, the UN stepped in and took over
peacekeeping responsibilities as a signal of growing international support for
the already markedly advanced peace process in Burundi.[34]

The missionâs mandate, under Chapter VII of the UN Charter, has been to
monitor cease-fire; carry out disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration
of former combatants; support humanitarian assistance and refugee and IDP
return; assist with elections; protect international staff and Burundian
civilians; monitor Burundiâs troublesome borders including halting illicit
arms flows; and assist in carrying out institutional reforms including those
of the Constitution, judiciary, armed forces, and police. The mission has been
allotted 5,650 military personnel, 120 civilian police, and about 1,000
international and local civilian personnel. The mission has been functioning
well and has greatly benefited from the existence of a fairly functional
transitional government, which is in the process of transitioning into a more
legitimate, elected entity.[35]

The main difficulty the operation faced at first was the continued resistance
to the peace process by the last Tutsi nationalist rebel group. This
organization continued its violent conflict on the outskirts of the capital
despite the UNâs presence. By June 2005, the group had stopped fighting and
was brought back into the political process. All political parties have
accepted a formula for inter-ethnic power-sharing, which means no political
party can gain access to government offices unless it is ethnically
integrated.[36]

The focus of the UNâs mission had been to enshrine the power-sharing
arrangements in a popularly voted constitution, so that elections may be held
and a new government installed. Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
were done in tandem with elections preparations. In February 2005, the
Constitution was approved with over 90% of the popular vote. In May, June, and
August 2005, three separate elections were also held at the local level for
the Parliament and the presidency.

While there are still some difficulties with refugee returns and securing
adequate food supplies for the war-weary population, the mission has overall
managed to win the trust and confidence of a majority of the formerly warring
leaders as well as the population at large.[37] It has also been involved with
several âquick impactâ projects including rehabilitating and building
schools, orphanages, health clinics, and rebuilding infrastructure such as
water lines.

### 2006 to Present

Reconstruction efforts in Burundi started to practically take effect after
2006. The UN shut down its peacekeeping mission and re-focused on helping with
reconstruction.[38] Toward achieving economic reconstruction, Rwanda,
D.R.Congo and Burundi relaunched the regional economic bloc: The Great Lakes
Countries Economic Community.[38] In addition, Burundi, along with Rwanda,
joined the East African Community in 2007.

However, the terms of the September 2006 Ceasefire between the government and
the last remaining armed opposition group, the FLN (Forces for National
Liberation, also called NLF or FROLINA), were not totally implemented, and
senior FLN members subsequently left the truce monitoring team, claiming that
their security was threatened.[39] In September, rival FLN factions clashed in
the capital, killing 20 fighters and causing residents to begin fleeing. Rebel
raids were reported in other parts of the country.[38] The rebel factions
disagreed with the government over disarmament and the release of political
prisoners.[40] In late 2007 and early 2008, FLN combatants attacked
government-protected camps where former combatants now live, in search of
peace. The homes of rural residents were also pillaged.[40]

The 2007 report[40] of Amnesty International mentions many areas where
improvement is required. Civilians are victims of repeated acts of violence
done by the FLN. The latter also recruits child soldiers. The rate of violence
against women is high. Perpetrators regularly escape prosecution and
punishment by the state. There is an urgent need for reform of the judicial
system. Genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity remain unpunished.
The establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a Special
Tribunal for investigation and prosecution has not yet been implemented. The
freedom of expression is limited, journalists are frequently arrested for
carrying our legitimate professional activities. A total of 38,087 Burundian
refugees have been repatriated between January and November 2007.

In late March 2008, the FLN sought for the parliament to adopt a law
guaranteeing them âprovisional immunityâ from arrest. This would cover
ordinary crimes, but not grave violations of international humanitarian law
like war crimes or crimes against humanity .[40] Even though the government
has granted this in the past to people, the FLN is unable to obtain the
provisional immunity.

On April 17, 2008, the FLN bombarded Bujumbura. The Burundian army fought back
and the FLN suffered heavy losses. A new ceasefire was signed on May 26, 2008.
In August 2008, President Nkurunziza met with the FLN leader Agathon Rwasa,
with the mediation of Charles Nqakula, South Africaâs Minister for Safety
and Security. This was the first direct meeting since June 2007. Both agree to
meet twice a week to establish a commission to resolve any disputes that might
arise during the peace negotiations.[41]

Refugee camps are now closing down, and 450,000 refugees have returned. The
economy of the country is shattered - Burundi has the lowest per capita gross
income in sub-Saharan Africa. With the return of refugees, amongst others,
property conflicts have started.

## Politics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Pierre Nkurunziza, president of Burundi

Main article: Politics of Burundi

Burundi's political system is a transitional presidential representative
democratic republic based upon a multi-party state. The President of Burundi
is the head of state and head of government. There are currently 21 registered
parties in Burundi.[7] On March 13, 1992, Tutsi coup leader Pierre Buyoya
established a constitution,[42] which provided for a multi-party political
process[43] and reflected multi-party competition. Six years later, on June 6,
1998, the constitution was changed, broadening National Assembly's seats and
making provisions for two vice presidents. Because of the Arusha Accord,
Burundi enacted a transitional government in 2000.[44]

Burundi's legislative branch is a bicameral assembly, consisting of the
Transitional National Assembly and the Transitional Senate. As of 2004, the
Transitional National Assembly consists of 170 members, with the Front for
Democracy in Burundi holding 38% of seats, and 10% of the assembly is
controlled by UPRONA. Fifty-two seats are controlled by other parties.
Burundi's constitution mandates representation in the Transitional National
Assembly to be consistent with 60% Hutu, 40% Tutsi, and 30% female members, as
well as three Batwa members.[7] Members of the National Assembly are elected
by popular vote and serve for five year terms.[45]

The Transitional Senate has fifty-one members, and three seats are reserved
for former presidents. Due to stipulations in Burundi's constitution, 30% of
Senate members must be female. Members of the Senate are elected by electoral
colleges, which consist of members from each of Burundi's provinces and
communes.[7] For each of Burundi's seventeen provinces, one Hutu and one Tutsi
senator are chosen. One term for the Transitional Senate is five years.[46]

Together, Burundi's legislative branch elect the President to a five-year
term.[47] Burundi's president appoints officials to his Council of Ministers,
which is also part of the executive branch.[44] The president can also pick
fourteen members of the Transitional Senate to serve on the Council of
Ministers.[7] Members of the Council of Ministers must be approved by two-
thirds of Burundi's legislature. The president also chooses two vice-
presidents.[47] As of 2008, the President of Burundi is Pierre Nkurunziza. The
First Vice President is Dr. Yves Sahinguvu, and the Second Vice President is
Gabriel Ntisezerana.[48]

The Court Supreme (Supreme Court) is Burundi's highest court. There are three
Courts of Appeals directly below the Supreme Court. Tribunals of First
Instance are used as judicial courts in each of Burundi's provinces as well as
123 local tribunals.[44]

## Provinces, communes, and collines

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of provinces

Main articles: Provinces of Burundi, Communes of Burundi, and Collines of
Burundi

Burundi is divided into 17 provinces,[12] 117 communes,[7] and 2,638 collines
(hills).[49] Provincial governments are structured upon these boundaries. In
2000, the province encompassing Bujumbura was separated into two provinces,
Bujumbura Rural and Bunjumbura Mairie.[2]

The provinces are:

  * Bubanza
  * Bujumbura Mairie
  * Bujumbura Rural
  * Bururi
  * Cankuzo
  * Cibitoke
  * Gitega
  * Karuzi
  * Kayanza

  * Kirundo
  * Makamba
  * Muramvya
  * Muyinga
  * Mwaro
  * Ngozi
  * Rutana
  * Ruyigi

  
## Geography

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of Burundi

Main article: Geography of Burundi

One of the smallest countries in Africa, Burundi is landlocked and has an
equatorial climate. Burundi is a part of the Albertine Rift, the western
extension of the Great Rift Valley. The country lies on a rolling plateau in
the center of Africa. The average elevation of the central plateau is 5,600
feet (1,700 m), with lower elevations at the borders. The highest peak, Mount
Heha at 8,810 feet (2,690 m),[50] lies to the southeast of the capital,
Bujumbura. The Nile is a major river in Burundi.[51] Lake Victoria is also an
important water source, which serves as a fork to the Kagera River.[52][53]
Another major lake is Lake Tanganyika, located in much of Burundi's
southwestern corner.[54]

Burundi's lands are mostly agricultural or pasture. Settlement by rural
populations has led to deforestation, soil erosion and habitat loss.[55]
Deforestation of the entire country is almost completely due to
overpopulation, with a mere 230 square miles (600 km2) remaining and an
ongoing loss of about 9% per annum.[56] There are two national parks, Kibira
National Park to the northwest (a small region of rain forest, adjacent to
Nyungwe Forest National Park in Rwanda), Rurubu National Park to the northeast
(along the Rurubu River, also known as Ruvubu or Ruvuvu). Both were
established in 1982 to conserve wildlife populations.[57]

## Economy

Main article: Economy of Burundi

Burundi is one of the poorest countries on the planet, owing in part to its
landlocked geography,[12] poor legal system, lack of access to education, and
the proliferation of HIV/AIDS. Approximately 80% of Burundi's population lives
in poverty.[58] Famines and food shortages have occurred throughout Burundi,
most notably in the 20th century,[13] and according to the World Food
Programme, 56.8% of children under age five suffer from chronic
malnutrition.[59] One scientific study of 178 nations rated Burundi's
population as having the lowest satisfaction with life in the world.[60] As a
result of poverty, Burundi is dependent on foreign aid.[12]

Burundi's largest industry is agriculture, which accounted for 58% of the GDP
in 1997. Subsistence agriculture accounts for 90% of agriculture.[61] The
nation's largest source of revenue is coffee, which makes up 93% of Burundi's
exports.[62] Other agriculture products include cotton, tea, maize, sorghum,
sweet potatoes, bananas, manioc (tapioca); beef, milk, and hides. Some of
Burundi's natural resources include uranium, nickel, cobalt, copper, and
platinum.[63] Besides agriculture, other industries include: assembly of
imported components; public works construction; food processing, and light
consumer goods such as blankets, shoes, and soap. Burundi's currency is the
Burundian franc (BIF); As of July 2008, 1,184 Burundian franc were equivalent
to one United States dollar.[12]

Burundi is part of the East African Community and a potential member of the
planned East African Federation.

## Demographics

<IMG>

<IMG>

A group of Burundian women rearing goats

Main article: Demographics of Burundi

As of 2008, Burundi was projected to have an estimated population of 8,691,005
people. This estimate explicitly takes into account the effects of AIDS, which
has a significant effect on the demographics of the country.[12] Over 500,000
have been displaced due to the disease.[2] Many Burundians have migrated to
other countries as a result of the civil war. In 2006, the United States
accepted approximately 10,000 Burundian refugees.[64]

Most Burundians live in rural areas, and about six percent of the population
live in urban areas.[65] The population density of around 315 people per
square kilometer (753 per sq mi) is the second highest in Sub-Saharan
Africa.[7] Roughly 85% of the population are of Hutu ethnic origin, 15% of the
remaining population are Tutsi, and fewer than one percent are Twas.[66]

### Religion

Religion in Burundi[67]  
religion percent  
Roman Catholic

â

62%  
Protestant

â

5%  
Indigenous

â

23%  
Islam

â

10%  
Sources estimate the Christian population to be 67 percent, with Roman
Catholics representing the largest group at 62 percent. Protestant and
Anglican practitioners comprise the remaining 5 percent. An estimated 23
percent of the population adheres to traditional indigenous religious beliefs;
some of the traditional indigenous groups promoted cures for HIV/AIDS and
other ailments. The Muslim population is estimated to be as high as 10
percent, the majority of whom live in urban areas. Sunnis make up the majority
of the Muslim population, and the remainder is Shi'a.[68]

The Anglican Church of Burundi. Retrieved on July 5, 2008. Reports indicate
the Christian population may be as high as 90% with most of the remainder
being Muslim.[69]

## Culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gitega drums

Main article: Culture of Burundi

Burundi's culture is based on local tradition and the influence of neighboring
countries, though cultural prominence has been hindered by civil unrest. Since
farming is the main industry in Burundi, a typical Burundian meal consists of
sweet potatoes, corn, and peas. Due to the expense, meat is only eaten few
times per month. When several Burundians of close acquaintance meet for a
gathering they drink impeke, a beer, from a large container. Each person
receives a straw to symbolize unity.[70]

Crafts are an important art form in Burundi and are attractive gifts to many
tourists. Basket weaving is a popular craft for Burundian artisans.[71] Other
crafts such as masks, shields, statues, pottery are made in Burundi.[72]

Drumming is an important part of Burundian cultural heritage. The world-famous
Royal Drummers of Burundi, who have performed for over forty years, are noted
for traditional drumming using the amashako, ibishikiso, and ikiranya
drums.[73] Dance often accompanies drumming performance, which is frequently
seen in celebrations and family gatherings. The abatimbo, which is performed
at official ceremonies and rituals, and the fast-paced abanyagasimbo are some
famous Burundian dances. Some musical instruments of note are the flute,
zither, ikembe, indonongo, umuduri, inanga, and the inyagara.[74]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Football in Burundi

Kirundi, French, and Swahili are spoken throughout Burundi.[12] Burundi's
literacy rate is low, due to low school attendance. Ten percent of Burundian
boys are allowed a secondary education.[75] Burundi's oral tradition is strong
and relays history and life lessons through storytelling, poetry, and song.
Imigani, indirimbo, amazina, and ivyivugo are types of literary genres
existing in Burundi.[76]

Basketball and track and field are noted sports in Burundi.[77] Football is a
popular pastime throughout the country, as are mancala games. In Burundi most
Christian holidays are celebrated, with Christmas being the largest.[78]
Burundian Independence Day is celebrated annually on July 1.[79] In 2005, the
Burundian government declared Eid al-Fitr, an Islamic holiday, to be a public
holiday.[69]

## Footnotes

  1. ^ a b c d "Burundi". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=618&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=63&pr.y=14. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  2. ^ a b c Eggers, E., Historical Dictionary of Burundi, p. xlix.
  3. ^ Gates, H., Africana, p. 338.
  4. ^ Gates, H., Africana, p. 338â9.
  5. ^ a b Eggers, E., Historical Dictionary of Burundi, p. l.
  6. ^ a b Gates, H., Africana, p. 339.
  7. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Burundi. U.S. Department of State. February 2008. Retrieved June 8, 2008.
  8. ^ a b "Burundi - Political System and history". Institute for Security Studies. February 2005. http://www.iss.co.za/af/profiles/burundi/politics.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-08.
  9. ^ Eastern Africa, 1600â1800 a.d.
  10. ^ Gates, H., Africana, p. 1373.
  11. ^ ChrÃ©tien, Jean-Pierre. Burundi: l'histoire retrouvÃ©e: 25 ans de mÃ©tier d'historien en Afrique. Paris, France: Karthala, 1993. p. 395â396. ISBN 2865374491
  12. ^ a b c d e f g h i CIA - The World Factbook - Burundi CIA. Retrieved June 8, 2008.
  13. ^ a b c Weinstein, W., Political Conflict and Ethnic Strategies, p. 5.
  14. ^ a b c Weinstein, W., Political Conflict and Ethnic Strategies, p. 7.
  15. ^ a b c Timeline: Burundi. BBC. April 22, 2008. Retrieved on June 8, 2008.
  16. ^ MacDonald, F., Peoples of Africa, p. 60.
  17. ^ Timeline: Rwanda. Amnesty International. Retrieved July 12, 2008.
  18. ^ Ethnicity and Burundiâs Refugees. African studies quarterly: The online journal for African Studies. Retrieved July 12, 2008.
  19. ^ Cook, C., What Happened Where, p. 281.
  20. ^ United Nations Member States. July 3, 2006. Retrieved June 22, 2008.
  21. ^ Uvin, Peter. Ethnicity and Power in Burundi and Rwanda: Different Paths to Mass Violence. Comparative Politics, Vol. 31, No. 3 (Apr., 1999). Published by: Ph.D. Program in Political Science of the City University of New York. p. 256.
  22. ^ a b c d e http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/country_profiles/1068991.stm
  23. ^ http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2821.htm
  24. ^ Hagget, Peter. Encyclopedia of World Geography. Tarrytown, New York: Marshall Cavendish, 2002. ISBN 0761473068.
  25. ^ BBC, Country profile Burundi. Available from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/country_profiles/1068873.stm (accessed on 29-10-08)(1)
  26. ^ Global Security http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/war/burundi.htm
  27. ^ Global Ceasefire Agreement between Burundi and the CNDD-FDD. November 20, 2003. Relief Web. United Nations Security Council. Retrieved July 24, 2008.
  28. ^ Global Security http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/news/2008/05/mil-080519-voa12.htm
  29. ^ Burundi: Basic Education Indicators. UNESCO. May 4, 2007. Retrieved June 22, 2008.
  30. ^ Haskin, Jeanne M. The Tragic State of the Congo: From Decolonization to Dictatorship. New York, NY: Algora Publishing, 2005. ISBN 0875864163 p. 151.
  31. ^ Liang, Yin. "EU welcomes positive developments in Burundi". China View. Xinhua News Agency. June 4, 2008. Retrieved on June 29, 2008.
  32. ^ Ramsbotham, O., Woodhouse, T., Miall, H. Contemporary Conflict Resolution. Second Edition. Polity: Cambridge, 2007.
  33. ^ BBC News
  34. ^ Howard, Lise Morje (2008). UN Peacekeeping in Civil Wars. New York: Cambridge University Press.
  35. ^ Howard, Lise Morje (2008). UN Peacekeeping in Civil Wars. New York: Cambridge University Press.
  36. ^ Howard, Lise Morje (2008). UN Peacekeeping in Civil Wars. New York: Cambridge University Press.
  37. ^ Howard, Lise Morje (2008). UN Peacekeeping in Civil Wars. New York: Cambridge University Press.
  38. ^ a b c BBC, Time line Burundi. Available from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/country_profiles/1068991.stm (accessed on 29-10-08)
  39. ^ http://report2008.amnesty.org/eng/Regions/Africa/Burundi
  40. ^ a b c d http://www.hrw.org/english/docs/2008/05/29/burund18974.htm
  41. ^ Peace Building Commission Update, A project of the Institute for Global Policy, 2008 http://www.pbcupdate.org/?p=114#more-114
  42. ^ Burundi. International Center for Transitional Justice. Retrieved on July 27, 2008.
  43. ^ Burundi - Politics. From "The Financial Times World Desk Reference". Dorling Kindersley. 2004. Prentice Hall. Retrieved on June 30, 2008.
  44. ^ a b c "Republic of Burundi: Public Administration Country Profile" (PDF). United Nations' Division for Public Administration and Development Management (DPADM): 5â7. July 2004. http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/un/unpan023253.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-09-20.
  45. ^ Puddington, A., Freedom of the World, p. 145.
  46. ^ Puddington, A., Freedom of the World, p. 145â146.
  47. ^ a b Puddington, A., Freedom of the World, p. 146.
  48. ^ Burundi - World Leaders. CIA. Retrieved on June 28, 2008.
  49. ^ Kavamahanga, D. Empowerment of people living with HIV/AIDS in Gitega Province, Burundi. International Conference on AIDS 2004. July 15, 2004. NLM Gateway. Retrieved on June 22, 2008.
  50. ^ O'Mara, Michael. Facts about the World's Nations. Bronx, New York: H.W. Wilson, 1999. p. 150. ISBN 0824209559
  51. ^ By Ash, Russell. The Top 10 of Everything. New York, New York: Sterling Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2006. ISBN 060061557X
  52. ^ Klohn, Wulf and Mihailo Andjelic. Lake Victoria: A Case in International Cooperation. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Retrieved on July 20, 2008.
  53. ^ Budge, E. A. Wallace, The Egyptian Sudan: Its History and Monuments. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: J.P. Lippincott Company, 1907. p. 352.
  54. ^ Jessup, John E., An Encyclopedic Dictionary of Conflict and Conflict Resolution, 1945â1996, p. 97.
  55. ^ Bermingham, Eldredge, Christopher W. Dick, and Craig Moritz. Tropical Rainforests: Past, Present, and Future. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press, 2005. p. 146. ISBN 0226044688
  56. ^ Worldwide Deforestation Rates Food and Agriculture Organization of the U.N.: The State of the World's Forests 2003. Published on Mongabay.com. Retrieved on June 29, 2008.
  57. ^ East, Rob. African Antelope Database 1998. Gland, Switzerland: International Union for Conservation of Nature, 1999. p. 74. ISBN 2831704774.
  58. ^ Burundi Population. Institute for Security Studies. Retrieved on June 30, 2008.
  59. ^ Where We Work - Burundi. World Food Programme. Retrieved on June 30, 2008.
  60. ^ White, A. (2007). A Global Projection of Subjective Well-being: A Challenge to Positive Psychology? Psychtalk 56, 17â20. Retrieved June 8, 2008.
  61. ^ Eggers, E., Historical Dictionary of Burundi, p. xlvii.
  62. ^ Dinham, B., Agribusiness in Africa, p. 56.
  63. ^ Eggers, E., Historical Dictionary of Burundi, p. xlviii.
  64. ^ Kaufman, Stephen. U.S. Accepting Approximately 10,000 Refugees from Burundi. October 17, 2006. U.S. Department of State. Retrieved on June 30, 2008.
  65. ^ MacDonald, F., Peoples of Africa, p. 62.
  66. ^ Eggers, E., Historical Dictionary of Burundi, ix.
  67. ^ CIA the World Fact Book
  68. ^ U.S. Department of State
  69. ^ a b Burundi celebrates Muslim holiday. BBC. November 3, 2005. Retrieved on June 30, 2008.
  70. ^ Eating the Burundian Way. Cultural Profiles Project. Citizenship and Immigration Canada. Retrieved June 30, 2008.
  71. ^ Levin, Adam. The Art of African Shopping. Cape Town, South Africa: Struik, 2005. p. 36. ISBN 9781770070707
  72. ^ Burundi Arts and Literature. Cultural Profiles Project. Citizenship and Immigration Canada. Retrieved June 30, 2008.
  73. ^ Center for the Arts Presents the Royal Drummers of Burundi. The Mason Gazette. September 14, 2006. George Mason University. Retrieved on July 20, 2008.
  74. ^ Arts and Literature. Cultural Profiles Project. Citizenship and Immigration Canada. Retrieved July 20, 2008.
  75. ^ Learning in Burundi. Cultural Profiles Project. Citizenship and Immigration Canada. Retrieved June 30, 2008.
  76. ^ Vansina, Jan. Oral Tradition as History. Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 1985. p. 114. ISBN 0299102149
  77. ^ Sports and Recreation. Cultural Profiles Project. Citizenship and Immigration Canada. Retrieved July 20, 2008.
  78. ^ Burundi Holidays. Cultural Profiles Project. Citizenship and Immigration Canada. Retrieved June 30, 2008.
  79. ^ Trawicky, Bernard and Ruth Wilhelme Gregory. Anniversaries and Holidays. Chicago, Illinois: American Library Association. p. 110. ISBN 0838906958

## References

  * Allen, J.A.; et. al. (2003). Africa South of the Sahara 2004: South of the Sahara. New York, New York: Taylor and Francis Group. ISBN 1857431839.
  * Cook, Chris; Diccon Bewes (1999). What Happened Where: A Guide to Places and Events in Twentieth-Century. London, England: Routledge. ISBN 1857285336.
  * Dinham, Barbara; Colin Hines (1984). Agribusiness in Africa. Trenton, New Jersey: Africa World Press. ISBN 0865430039.
  * Eggers, Ellen K. (2006). Historical Dictionary of Burundi. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press, Incorporated. ISBN 0810853027. 3rd. edition.
  * Gates, Henry Lewis; Anthony Appiah (1999). Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience. New York, New York: Basic Civitas Books. ISBN 0465000711.
  * Jessup, John E. (1998). An Encyclopedic Dictionary of Conflict and Conflict Resolution, 1945â1996. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0313281122.
  * MacDonald, Fiona; et. al (2001). Peoples of Africa. Tarrytown, New York: Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 0761471588.
  * Puddington, Arch (2007). Freedom in the World: The Annual Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties. Syracuse University: Lanham, Maryland. ISBN 0742558975.
  * Weinstein, Warren; Robert Schrere (1976). Political Conflict and Ethnic Strategies: A Case Study of Burundi. Syracuse University: Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. ISBN 0915984202.
  * Weinstein, Warren (2006). Historical Dictionary of Burundi. Metuchen, New Jersey: Scarecrow Press, Incorporated. ISBN 0810809621. 1st. edition.

## External links

Find more about Burundi on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions from
Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Official Burundi government website (in French)
  * Chief of State and Cabinet Members
  * Burundi entry at The World Factbook
  * Burundi from UCB Libraries GovPubs
  * Burundi at the Open Directory Project
  * Wikimedia Atlas of Burundi
  * Burundi travel guide from Wikitravel
  * Crisis briefing on Burundi's transition to peace from Reuters AlertNet

v â¢ d â¢ e

Burundi  
History

Burundi Civil War Â· Colonial heads Â· Genocide Â· German East Africa Â·
Monarchy Â· Second Congo War  
Politics

Elections Â· Flag Â· Foreign relations Â· Law enforcement Â· Military Â·
Ministers Â· National Assembly Â· Political parties Â· Provincial governors Â·
Rulers and heads of state Â· Senate  
Geography

Cities Â· Provinces Â· Wildlife  
Economy and infrastructure

Airports Â· Burundian franc Â· Mining Â· Transport  
Culture and society

Communications Â· Demographics Â· Education Â· Football Â· Kirundi Â· Holidays
Â· Music  
List of Burundi-related topics  
Geographic locale  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries and territories of Africa  
Map indicating Western Africa West Africa

Benin Â· Burkina Faso Â· Cape Verde Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire Â· The Gambia Â· Ghana
Â· Guinea Â· Guinea-Bissau Â· Liberia Â· Mali Â· Mauritania Â· Niger Â·
Nigeria Â· Senegal Â· Sierra Leone Â· Togo  
Map indicating Northern Africa North Africa

Algeria Â· Egypt1 Â· Libya Â· Mauritania Â· Morocco Â· Sudan Â· Tunisia Â·
Western Sahara 2  
Map indicating Central Africa Central Africa

Angola Â· Burundi Â· Cameroon Â· Central African Republic Â· Chad Â·
Democratic Republic of the Congo Â· Republic of the Congo Â· Equatorial Guinea
Â· Gabon Â· Rwanda Â· SÃ£o TomÃ© and PrÃ­ncipe  
Map indicating Eastern Africa East Africa

Burundi Â· Comoros Â· Djibouti Â· Eritrea Â· Ethiopia Â· Kenya Â· Madagascar
Â· Malawi Â· Mauritius Â· Mozambique Â· Rwanda Â· Seychelles Â· Somalia Â·
Tanzania Â· Uganda Â· Zambia Â· Zimbabwe  
Map indicating Southern Africa Southern Africa

Botswana Â· Lesotho Â· Namibia Â· South Africa Â· Swaziland  
Dependencies

British Indian Ocean Territory / St. Helena3 (UK) Â· Canary Islands / Ceuta /
Melilla (Spain) Â· Madeira (Portugal) Â· Mayotte / RÃ©union (France) Â·
Socotra (Yemen)  
Unrecognized

Puntland Â· Somaliland Â· Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic  
1 Partly in Asia. 2 Status undetermined. 3 Includes the dependencies of
Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.  
International membership and history  
v â¢ d â¢ e

African Union (AU)  
Algeria Â· Angola Â· Benin Â· Botswana Â· Burkina Faso Â· Burundi Â· Cameroon
Â· Cape Verde Â· Central African Republic Â· Chad Â· Comoros Â· Democratic
Republic of the Congo Â· Republic of the Congo Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire Â· Djibouti
Â· Egypt Â· Eritrea Â· Ethiopia Â· Equatorial Guinea Â· Gabon Â· The Gambia Â·
Ghana Â· Guinea Â· Guinea-Bissau Â· Kenya Â· Lesotho Â· Liberia Â· Libya Â·
Madagascar Â· Malawi Â· Mali Â· Mauritania Â· Mauritius Â· Mozambique Â·
Namibia Â· Niger Â· Nigeria Â· Rwanda Â· Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Â·
SÃ£o TomÃ© and PrÃ­ncipe Â· Senegal Â· Seychelles Â· Sierra Leone Â· Somalia
Â· South Africa Â· Sudan Â· Swaziland Â· Tanzania Â· Togo Â· Tunisia Â· Uganda
Â· Zambia Â· Zimbabwe

<IMG>  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Member states and observers of the Francophonie  
Members

Albania Â· Andorra Â· Armenia Â· Belgium (French Community) Â· Benin Â·
Bulgaria Â· Burkina Faso Â· Burundi Â· Cambodia Â· Cameroon Â· Canada (New
Brunswick â¢ Quebec) Â· Cape Verde Â· Central African Republic Â· Chad Â·
Comoros Â· Cyprus1 Â· Democratic Republic of the Congo Â· Republic of the
Congo Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire Â· Djibouti Â· Dominica Â· Egypt Â· Equatorial Guinea
Â· FYR Macedonia Â· France (French Guiana â¢ Guadeloupe â¢ Martinique â¢
St. Pierre and Miquelon) Â· Gabon Â· Ghana1 Â· Greece Â· Guinea Â· Guinea-
Bissau Â· Haiti Â· Laos Â· Luxembourg Â· Lebanon Â· Madagascar Â· Mali Â·
Mauritania Â· Mauritius Â· Moldova Â· Monaco Â· Morocco Â· Niger Â· Romania Â·
Rwanda Â· St. Lucia Â· SÃ£o TomÃ© and PrÃ­ncipe Â· Senegal Â· Seychelles Â·
Switzerland Â· Togo Â· Tunisia Â· Vanuatu Â· Vietnam  
Observers

Austria Â· Croatia Â· Czech Republic Â· Georgia Â· Hungary Â· Latvia Â·
Lithuania Â· Mozambique Â· Poland Â· Serbia Â· Slovakia Â· Slovenia Â·
Thailand Â· Ukraine  
1 Associate member.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Niger-Congo-speaking nations  
Kordofanian  
<IMG> Sudan  
Mande  
<IMG> Gambia  
<IMG> Guinea

<IMG> Guinea-Bissau  
<IMG> Mali

<IMG> Mauritania  
<IMG> Senegal

<IMG> Sierra Leone  
<IMG> Liberia

<IMG> CÃ´te d'Ivoire  
<IMG> Nigeria

<IMG> Burkina Faso  
<IMG> Benin

<IMG> Togo  
  
Atlantic-Congo  
Atlantic  
<IMG> Benin  
<IMG> Burkina Faso  
<IMG> Cameroon  
<IMG> CAR

Ijoid  
<IMG> Nigeria

  
<IMG> Chad  
<IMG> CÃ´te d'Ivoire  
<IMG> Gambia  
<IMG> Guinea

Dogon  
<IMG> Mali

  
<IMG> Guinea-Bissau  
<IMG> Liberia  
<IMG> Mali

  
<IMG> Mauritania  
<IMG> Niger  
<IMG> Senegal

  
<IMG> Sierra Leone  
<IMG> Sudan  
<IMG> Togo  
Volta-Congo  
Senufo  
<IMG> Benin  
<IMG> CÃ´te d'Ivoire  
<IMG> Mali

Gur  
<IMG> Benin  
<IMG> Burkina Faso  
<IMG> CÃ´te d'Ivoire  
<IMG> Ghana  
<IMG> Mali  
<IMG> Nigeria  
<IMG> Togo

Adamawa-Ubangi  
<IMG> Cameroon  
<IMG> CAR  
<IMG> Chad  
<IMG> Nigeria

Kru  
<IMG> Burkina Faso  
<IMG> CÃ´te d'Ivoire  
<IMG> Liberia

Kwa  
<IMG> Benin  
<IMG> CÃ´te d'Ivoire  
<IMG> Ghana  
<IMG> Nigeria  
<IMG> Togo  
Benue-Congo  
Bantu  
<IMG> Angola  
<IMG> Botswana  
<IMG> Burundi  
<IMG> Cameroon  
<IMG> DRC

Yoruba and Igbo  
<IMG> Nigeria

  
<IMG> Rep. of the Congo  
<IMG> Equatorial Guinea  
<IMG> Gabon  
<IMG> Kenya  
<IMG> Lesotho

  
<IMG> Nigeria  
<IMG> Malawi  
<IMG> Mozambique  
<IMG> Namibia

  
<IMG> Rwanda  
<IMG> South Africa  
<IMG> Swaziland

  
<IMG> Tanzania  
<IMG> Uganda  
<IMG> Zambia  
<IMG> Zimbabwe  
* * *
CAR = Central African Republic â¢ DRC = Democratic Republic of the Congo  
v â¢ d â¢ e

List of former German colonies and protectorates  
Colonies

Africa

Wituland Â· German East Africa (Tanganyika Â· Rwanda Â· Burundi) Â· Togoland
Â· German South-West Africa (Namibia) Â· German West Africa (Kamerun Â·
Neukamerun)  
Pacific

German New Guinea (German Solomon Islands Â· German Marshall Islands Â·
Caroline Islands Â· Mariana Islands Â· Nauru Â· Palau) Â· German Samoa  
Flag of the German Empire  
Imperial German coat of arms  
Concessions

China

German Kiautschou Â· Tientsin Â· Tsingtao  
Unrecognised

Antarctica

New Swabia  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burundi"

Categories: Burundi | African Union member states | Landlocked countries |
French-speaking countries | Least Developed Countries | Member states of La
Francophonie

Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism |
Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * á áá­á
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Arpetan
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Bamanankan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Cebuano
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¬ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¦ÞÞ°
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÙÙÙÙØ³Ù
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ilokano
  * à¦à¦®à¦¾à¦° à¦ à¦¾à¦°/à¦¬à¦¿à¦·à§à¦£à§à¦ªà§à¦°à¦¿à¦¯à¦¼à¦¾ à¦®à¦£à¦¿à¦ªà§à¦°à§
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Interlingue
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * Kapampangan
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * à¤à¤¶à¥à¤®à¥à¤°à¥ - (ÙØ´Ù ÙØ±Ù)
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * Kernewek
  * Kinyarwanda
  * Kirundi
  * Kiswahili
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Limburgs
  * LingÃ¡la
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Ù ÙØ²ÙØ±ÙÙÙ
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * NÄhuatl
  * Dorerin Naoero
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Norfuk / Pitkern
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * Uyghurcheâ / Ø¦ÛÙØºÛØ±ÚÛ
  * O'zbek
  * Ù¾ÚØªÙ
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * QÄ±rÄ±mtatarca
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * SÃ¡megiella
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Sardu
  * Seeltersk
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Soomaaliga
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * VÃ¨neto
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * Winaray
  * Wolof
  * å´è¯­
  * Xitsonga
  * YorÃ¹bÃ¡
  * Zazaki
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 14:25.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



