
# Rice

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Rice (disambiguation).

<IMG>

It has been suggested that Oryza sativa be merged into this article or
section. (Discuss)  
Rice, white, long-grain, regular,  
raw, unenriched  
Nutritional value per 100 g (3.5 oz)  
Energy 370 kcal  1530 kJ  
Carbohydrates 79 g  
\- Sugars  0.12 g  
\- Dietary fiber 1.3 g  
Fat 0.66 g  
Protein 7.13 g  
Water 11.62 g  
Thiamine (Vit. B1) 0.070 mg  5%  
Riboflavin (Vit. B2) 0.049 mg  3%  
Niacin (Vit. B3) 1.6 mg  11%  
Pantothenic acid (B5)  1.014 mg 20%  
Vitamin B6 0.164 mg 13%  
Folate (Vit. B9)  8 Î¼g 2%  
Calcium 28 mg 3%  
Iron 0.80 mg 6%  
Magnesium 25 mg 7%  
Manganese 1.088 mg 54%  
Phosphorus 115 mg 16%  
Potassium 115 mg  2%  
Zinc 1.09 mg 11%  
Percentages are relative to US  
recommendations for adults.  
Source: USDA Nutrient database  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Oryza sativa

Rice is the seed of the monocot plant Oryza sativa, of the grass family
(Poaceae). As a cereal grain, it is the most important staple food for a large
part of the world's human population, especially in tropical Latin America,
East, South and Southeast Asia. It is the grain with the second highest
worldwide production, after maize ("corn").[1]. Since a large portion of maize
crops are grown for purposes other than human consumption, rice is probably
the most important grain with regards to human nutrition and caloric intake,
providing more than one fifth of the calories consumed worldwide by our
species.[2] A traditional food plant in Africa, rice has the potential to
improve nutrition, boost food security, foster rural development and support
sustainable landcare.[3] In early 2008, some governments and retailers began
rationing supplies of the grain due to fears of a global rice shortage.[4][5]

The name wild rice is usually used for species of the grass genus Zizania,
both wild and domesticated, although the term may also be used for primitive
or uncultivated varieties of Oryza.

Rice is normally grown as an annual plant, although in tropical areas it can
survive as a perennial and can produce a ratoon crop for up to 20 years.[6]
The rice plant can grow to 1â1.8 m tall, occasionally more depending on the
variety and soil fertility. The grass has long, slender leaves 50â100 cm
long and 2â2.5 cm broad. The small wind-pollinated flowers are produced in a
branched arching to pendulous inflorescence 30â50 cm long. The edible seed
is a grain (caryopsis) 5â12 mm long and 2â3 mm thick.

Rice cultivation is well-suited to countries and regions with low labor costs
and high rainfall, as it is very labor-intensive to cultivate and requires
plenty of water for cultivation. On the other hand, mechanized cultivation is
extremely oil-intensive, more than other food products with the exception of
beef and dairy products.[citation needed] Rice can be grown practically
anywhere, even on a steep hill or mountain. Although its parent species are
native to South Asia and certain parts of Africa, centuries of trade and
exportation have made it commonplace in many cultures worldwide.

The traditional method for cultivating rice is flooding the fields whilst, or
after, setting the young seedlings. This simple method requires sound planning
and servicing of the water damming and channeling, but reduces the growth of
less robust weed and pest plants that have no submerged growth state, and
deters vermin. While with rice growing and cultivation the flooding is not
mandatory, all other methods of irrigation require higher effort in weed and
pest control during growth periods and a different approach for fertilizing
the soil.

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology
  * 2 Preparation as food
  * 3 Cooking
  * 4 Rice growing ecology
  * 5 History of domestication & cultivation
    * 5.1 Asia
    * 5.2 Africa
    * 5.3 Middle East
    * 5.4 Europe
    * 5.5 Caribbean and Latin America
    * 5.6 United States
    * 5.7 Australia
  * 6 World production and trade
    * 6.1 Production and export
    * 6.2 Price
    * 6.3 Worldwide consumption
    * 6.4 Environmental impacts
  * 7 Pests and diseases
  * 8 Cultivars
  * 9 Biotechnology
    * 9.1 High-yielding varieties
    * 9.2 Potentials for the future
    * 9.3 Golden rice
    * 9.4 Expression of human proteins
  * 10 Sayings
  * 11 See also
  * 12 References
    * 12.1 General References
  * 13 External links
    * 13.1 General
    * 13.2 Rice research & development
    * 13.3 Rice in agriculture
    * 13.4 Rice as food
    * 13.5 Rice as fuel as in car fuel
    * 13.6 Rice economics
    * 13.7 Rice genome

  
## [edit] Etymology

According to the Microsoft Encarta Dictionary (2004) and the Chambers
Dictionary of Etymology (1988), the word 'rice' has an Indo-Iranian origin. It
came to English from Greek Ã³ryza, via Latin oriza, Italian riso and finally
Old French ris (the same as present day French riz).

It has been speculated that the Indo-Iranian vrihi itself is borrowed from a
Dravidian vari (Vari, à°µà°°à°¿ in telugu(*warinci)[7] or the Tamil arisi (à®
à®°à®¿à®à®¿), from which the Arabic ar-ruzz, from which the Portuguese and
Spanish word arroz originated.

<IMG>

The planting of rice is often a labor-intensive process.

<IMG>

Japanese short-grain rice plants

<IMG>

Japanese short-grain rice ear

<IMG>

Short-grain rice grains, natural state  
## [edit] Preparation as food

<IMG>

<IMG>

Broker of rice in the 1820's Japan. "36 Views of Mount Fuji" Hokusai

<IMG>

<IMG>

Old fashioned way of rice polishing in Japan."36 Views of Mount Fuji" Hokusai

The seeds of the rice plant are first milled using a rice huller to remove the
chaff (the outer husks of the grain). At this point in the process, the
product is called brown rice. The milling may be continued, removing the
'bran', i.e., the rest of the husk and the germ, thereby creating white rice.
White rice, which keeps longer, lacks some important nutrients; in a limited
diet which does not supplement the rice, brown rice helps to prevent the
deficiency disease beriberi.

White rice may be also buffed with glucose or talc powder (often called
polished rice, though this term may also refer to white rice in general),
parboiled, or processed into flour. White rice may also be enriched by adding
nutrients, especially those lost during the milling process. While the
cheapest method of enriching involves adding a powdered blend of nutrients
that will easily wash off (in the United States, rice which has been so
treated requires a label warning against rinsing), more sophisticated methods
apply nutrients directly to the grain, coating the grain with a water
insoluble substance which is resistant to washing.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Terraced rice paddy on a hill slope in Indonesia.

Despite the hypothetical health risks of talc (such as stomach cancer),[8]
talc-coated rice remains the norm in some countries due to its attractive
shiny appearance, but it has been banned in some and is no longer widely used
in others such as the United States. Even where talc is not used, glucose,
starch, or other coatings may be used to improve the appearance of the grains;
for this reason, many rice lovers still recommend washing all rice in order to
create a better-tasting rice with a better consistency, despite the
recommendation of suppliers. Much of the rice produced today is water
polished.[citation needed]

Rice bran, called nuka in Japan, is a valuable commodity in Asia and is used
for many daily needs. It is a moist, oily inner layer which is heated to
produce an oil. It is also used as a pickling bed in making rice bran pickles
and Takuan.

Raw rice may be ground into flour for many uses, including making many kinds
of beverages such as amazake, horchata, rice milk, and sake. Rice flour does
not contain gluten and is suitable for people on a gluten-free diet. Rice may
also be made into various types of noodles. Raw wild or brown rice may also be
consumed by raw-foodist or fruitarians if soaked and sprouted (usually 1 week
to 30 days); see also Gaba rice below.

Processed rice seeds must be boiled or steamed before eating. Cooked rice may
be further fried in oil or butter, or beaten in a tub to make mochi.

Rice is a good source of protein and a staple food in many parts of the world,
but it is not a complete protein: it does not contain all of the essential
amino acids in sufficient amounts for good health, and should be combined with
other sources of protein, such as nuts, seeds, beans, fish or meat.[9]

Rice, like other cereal grains, can be puffed (or popped). This process takes
advantage of the grains' water content and typically involves heating grains
in a special chamber. Further puffing is sometimes accomplished by processing
pre-puffed pellets in a low-pressure chamber. The ideal gas law means that
either lowering the local pressure or raising the water temperature results in
an increase in volume prior to water evaporation, resulting in a puffy
texture. Bulk raw rice density is about 0.9 g/cmÂ³. It decreases to less than
one-tenth that when puffed.

## [edit] Cooking

See Wikibooks' Rice Recipes for information on food preparation using rice.

There are many varieties of rice; for many purposes the main distinction is
between long- and medium-grain rice. The grains of long-grain rice (high
amylose) tend to remain intact after cooking; medium-grain rice (high
amylopectin) becomes more sticky. Medium-grain rice is used for sweet dishes,
and for risotto and many Spanish dishes.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Uncooked, polished, white long-grain rice grains

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chinese rice dish utilising Basmati rice

Rice is cooked by boiling or steaming, and absorbs water during cooking. It
can be cooked in just as much water as it absorbs (the absorption method), or
in a large quantity of water which is drained before serving (the rapid-boil
method).[10] Electric rice cookers, popular in Asia and Latin America,
simplify the process of cooking rice. Rice is often heated in oil before
boiling, or oil is added to the water; this is thought to make the cooked rice
less sticky.

In Arab cuisine rice is an ingredient of many soups and dishes with fish,
poultry, and other types of meat. It is also used to stuff vegetables or is
wrapped in grape leaves. When combined with milk, sugar and honey, it is used
to make desserts. In some regions, such as Tabaristan, bread is made using
rice flour. Medieval Islamic texts spoke of medical uses for the plant.[11]

Rice may also be made into rice porridge (also called congee or rice gruel) by
adding more water than usual, so that the cooked rice is saturated with water
to the point that it becomes very soft, expanded, and fluffy. Rice porridge is
commonly eaten as a breakfast food, and is also a traditional food for the
sick.

Rice may be soaked prior to cooking, which saves fuel, decreases cooking time,
minimizes exposure to high temperature and thus decreases the stickiness of
the rice. For some varieties, soaking improves the texture of the cooked rice
by increasing expansion of the grains.

In some countries parboiled rice is popular. Parboiled rice is subjected to a
steaming or parboiling process while still a brown rice. This causes nutrients
from the outer husk to move into the grain itself. The parboil process causes
a gelatinisation of the starch in the grains. The grains become less brittle,
and the color of the milled grain changes from white to yellow. The rice is
then dried, and can then be milled as usual or used as brown rice. Milled
parboiled rice is nutritionally superior to standard milled rice. Parboiled
rice has an additional benefit in that it does not stick to the pan during
cooking, as happens when cooking regular white rice.

Minute Rice, or "easy-cook rice", differs from parboiled rice in that it is
milled, fully cooked and then dried. It does not share the nutritional
benefits of parboiling.

A nutritionally superior method of preparing brown rice known as GABA Rice or
GBR (Germinated Brown Rice)[12] may be used. This involves soaking washed
brown rice for 20 hours in warm water (38Â°C or 100Â°F) prior to cooking it.
This process stimulates germination, which activates various enzymes in the
rice. By this method, a result of research carried out for the United Nations
Year of Rice, it is possible to obtain a more complete amino acid profile,
including GABA.

Cooked rice can contain Bacillus cereus spores, which produce an emetic toxin
when left at 4Â°Câ60Â°C [4]. When storing cooked rice for use the next day,
rapid cooling is advised to reduce the risk of toxin production.

Rice flour and starch often are used in batters and breadings to increase
crispiness.

## [edit] Rice growing ecology

Rice can be grown in different ecologies, depending upon water
availability.[13]

  1. Lowland, rainfed, which is drought prone, favors medium depth; waterlogged, submergence, and flood prone
  2. Lowland, irrigated, grown in both the wet season and the dry season
  3. Deep water or floating rice
  4. Coastal Wetland
  5. Upland rice, also known as 'Ghaiya rice', well known for its drought tolerance[14]

## [edit] History of domestication & cultivation

### [edit] Asia

<IMG>

<IMG>

Banaue Rice Terraces, N. Luzon, Philippines

Main article: Oryza sativa#History of domestication & cultivation

Rice has been eaten in Asia since hominins arrived in Asia. In Asia alone over
200,000,000 tons are eaten every year.

### [edit] Africa

African rice has been cultivated for 3500 years. Between 1500 and 800 BC, O.
glaberrima propagated from its original centre, the Niger River delta, and
extended to Senegal. However, it never developed far from its original region.
Its cultivation even declined in favour of the Asian species, possibly brought
to the African continent by Arabs coming from the east coast between the 7th
and 11th centuries CE.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rice crop in Madagascar

In parts of Africa under Islam, rice was chiefly grown in southern Morocco.
During the tenth century rice was also brought to east Africa by Muslim
traders. Although, the diffusion of rice in much sub-Saharan Africa remains
uncertain, Muslims brought it to the region stretching from Lake Chad to the
White Nile.[15]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The actual and hypothesized cultivation of rice (areas shown in green) in the
Old World (both Muslim and non-Muslim regions) during Islamic times
(700-1500). Cultivation of rice during pre-Islamic times have been shown in
orange.[15]

### [edit] Middle East

According to Zohary and Hopf (2000, p. 91), O. sativa was introduced to the
Middle East in Hellenistic times, and was familiar to both Greek and Roman
writers. They report that a large sample of rice grains was recovered from a
grave at Susa in Iran (dated to the first century AD) at one end of the
ancient world, while at the same time rice was grown in the Po valley in
Italy. However, Pliny the Elder writes that rice (oryza) is grown only in
"Egypt, Syria, Cilicia, Asia Minor and Greece" (N.H. 18.19).[citation needed]

After the rise of Islam, rice was grown anywhere there was enough water to
irrigate it. Thus, desert oases, river valleys, and swamp lands were all
important sources of rice during the Muslim Agricultural Revolution.[15]

In Iraq rice was grown in some areas of southern Iraq. With the rise of Islam
it moved north to Nisibin, the southern shores of the Caspian Sea and then
beyond the Muslim world into the valley of Volga. In Israel, rice came to be
grown in the Jordan valley. Rice is also grown in Yemen.[15]

### [edit] Europe

The Muslims (later known as Moors) brought Asiatic rice to the Iberian
Peninsula in the tenth century. Records indicate it was grown in Valencia and
Majorca. In Majorca, rice cultivation seems to have stopped after the
Christian conquest, although historians are not certain.[15]

Muslims also brought rice to Sicily, where it was an important crop.[15]

After the middle of the 15th century, rice spread throughout Italy and then
France, later propagating to all the continents during the age of European
exploration.

### [edit] Caribbean and Latin America

Rice is not native to the Americas but was introduced to the Caribbean and
South America by European colonizers at an early date with Spanish colonizers
introducing Asian rice to Mexico in the 1520s at Veracruz and the Portuguese
and their African slaves introducing it at about the same time to Colonial
Brazil.[16] Recent scholarship suggests that African slaves played an active
role in the establishment of rice in the New World and that African rice was
an important crop from an early period.[17] In either case, varieties of rice
and bean dishes were a staple dish along the peoples of West Africa and they
remained a staple among their descendants subjected to slavery in the Spanish
New World colonies and elsewhere in the Americas.[18]

### [edit] United States

<IMG>

<IMG>

South Carolina rice plantation (Mansfield Plantation, Georgetown.)

In 1694, rice arrived in South Carolina, probably originating from
Madagascar.[19]

In the United States, colonial South Carolina and Georgia grew and amassed
great wealth from the slave labor obtained from the Senegambia area of West
Africa and from coastal Sierra Leone. At the port of Charleston, through which
40% of all American slave imports passed, slaves from this region of Africa
brought the highest prices, in recognition of their prior knowledge of rice
culture, which was put to use on the many rice plantations around Georgetown,
Charleston, and Savannah. From the slaves, plantation owners learned how to
dyke the marshes and periodically flood the fields. At first the rice was
milled by hand with wooden paddles, then winnowed in sweetgrass baskets (the
making of which was another skill brought by the slaves). The invention of the
rice mill increased profitability of the crop, and the addition of water power
for the mills in 1787 by millwright Jonathan Lucas was another step forward.
Rice culture in the southeastern U.S. became less profitable with the loss of
slave labor after the American Civil War, and it finally died out just after
the turn of the 20th century. Today, people can visit the only remaining rice
plantation in South Carolina that still has the original winnowing barn and
rice mill from the mid-1800s at the historic Mansfield Plantation in
Georgetown, SC. The predominant strain of rice in the Carolinas was from
Africa and was known as "Carolina Gold." The cultivar has been preserved and
there are current attempts to reintroduce it as a commercially grown crop.[20]

<IMG>

<IMG>

American long-grain rice plants

In the southern United States, rice has been grown in southern Arkansas,
Louisiana, and east Texas since the mid 1800s. Many Cajun farmers grew rice in
wet marshes and low lying prairies. In recent years rice production has risen
in North America, especially in the Mississippi River Delta areas in the
states of Arkansas and Mississippi.

Rice cultivation began in California during the California Gold Rush, when an
estimated 40,000 Chinese laborers immigrated to the state and grew small
amounts of the grain for their own consumption. However, commercial production
began only in 1912 in the town of Richvale in Butte County.[21] By 2006,
California produced the second largest rice crop in the United States,[22]
after Arkansas, with production concentrated in six counties north of
Sacramento.[23] Unlike the Mississippi Delta region, California's production
is dominated by short- and medium-grain japonica varieties, including
cultivars developed for the local climate such as Calrose, which makes up as
much as eighty five percent of the state's crop.[24]

References to wild rice in the Americas are to the unrelated Zizania palustris

More than 100 varieties of rice are commercially produced primarily in six
states (Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and California) in
the U.S.[25] According to estimates for the 2006 crop year, rice production in
the U.S. is valued at $1.88 billion, approximately half of which is expected
to be exported. The U.S. provides about 12% of world rice trade.[25] The
majority of domestic utilization of U.S. rice is direct food use (58%), while
16 percent is used in processed foods and beer respectively. The remaining 10
percent is found in pet food.[25]

### [edit] Australia

Although attempts to grow rice in the well-watered north of Australia have
been made for many years, they have consistently failed because of inherent
iron and manganese toxicities in the soils and destruction by pests.

In the 1920s it was seen as a possible irrigation crop on soils within the
Murray-Darling Basin that were too heavy for the cultivation of fruit and too
infertile for wheat.[26]

Because irrigation water, despite the extremely low runoff of temperate
Australia, was (and remains) very cheap, the growing of rice was taken up by
agricultural groups over the following decades. Californian varieties of rice
were found suitable for the climate in the Riverina, and the first mill opened
at Leeton in 1951.

Even before this Australia's rice production greatly exceeded local needs,[26]
and rice exports to Japan have become a major source of foreign currency.
Above-average rainfall from the 1950s to the middle 1990s[27] encouraged the
expansion of the Riverina rice industry, but its prodigious water use in a
practically waterless region began to attract the attention of environmental
scientists. These became severely concerned with declining flow in the Snowy
River and the lower Murray River.

Although rice growing in Australia is exceedingly efficient and highly
profitable due to the cheapness of land, several recent years of severe
drought have led many to call for its elimination because of its effects on
extremely fragile aquatic ecosystems. Politicians, however, have not made any
plan to reduce rice growing in southern Australia.

## [edit] World production and trade

### [edit] Production and export

<IMG>

<IMG>

Paddy rice output in 2005.

World production of rice[28] has risen steadily from about 200 million tonnes
of paddy rice in 1960 to 600 million tonnes in 2004. Milled rice is about 68%
of paddy rice by weight. In the year 2004, the top four producers were China
(26% of world production), India (20%), Indonesia (9%) and Bangladesh.

World trade figures are very different, as only about 5â6% of rice produced
is traded internationally. The largest three exporting countries are Thailand
(26% of world exports), Vietnam (15%), and the United States (11%), while the
largest three importers are Indonesia (14%), Bangladesh (4%), and Brazil (3%).
Although China and India are the top two largest producers of rice in the
world, both of countries consume the majority of the rice produced
domestically leaving little to be traded internationally.

### [edit] Price

In March to May 2008, the price of rice rose greatly due to a rice shortage.
In late April 2008, rice prices hit 24 cents a pound, twice the price that it
was seven months earlier.[29]

On the 30th of April, 2008, Thailand announced the project of the creation of
the Organisation of Rice Exporting Countries (OREC) with the potential to
develop into a price-fixing cartel for rice.[30][31]

### [edit] Worldwide consumption

Consumption of rice by countryâ2003/2004  
(million metric ton)[32]  
<IMG> China 135  
<IMG> India 85  
<IMG> Egypt 39  
<IMG> Indonesia 37  
<IMG> Malaysia 37  
<IMG> Bangladesh 26  
<IMG> Vietnam 18  
<IMG> Thailand 10  
<IMG> Myanmar 10  
<IMG> Philippines 9.7  
<IMG> Japan 8.7  
<IMG> Brazil 8.1  
<IMG> South Korea 5.0  
<IMG> United States 3.9  
Source:  
United States Department of Agriculture  
Between 1961 and 2002, per capita consumption of rice increased by 40%. By
2007 annual world wide per capita rice consumption stood at 127 kg[33].

Rice consumption is highest in Asia, where average per capita consumption is
higher than 80 kg/person per year. In the subtropics such as South America,
Africa, and the Middle East, per capita consumption averages between 30 and 60
kg/person per year. People in the developed West, including Europe and the
United States, consume less than 10 kg/person per year.[34][35]

Rice is the most important crop in Asia. In Cambodia, for example, 90% of the
total agricultural area is used for rice production. See The Burning of the
Rice by Don Puckridge for the story of rice production in Cambodia [5].

U.S. rice consumption has risen sharply over the past 25 years, fueled in part
by commercial applications such as beer production.[36] Almost one in five
adult Americans now report eating at least half a serving of white or brown
rice per day.[37]

### [edit] Environmental impacts

In many countries where rice is the main cereal crop, rice cultivation is
responsible for most of the methane emissions.[38] Farmers in some of the arid
regions try to cultivate rice using groundwater bored through pumps, thus
increasing the chances of famine in the long run.[citation needed] Rice also
requires much more water to produce than other grains.[39]

As sea levels rise, rice will become more inclined to remain flooded for
longer periods of time. Longer stays in water cuts the soil off from
atmospheric oxygen and causes fermentation of organic matter in the soil.
During the wet season, rice cannot hold the carbon in anaerobic conditions.
The microbes in the soil convert the carbon into methane which is then
released through the respiration of the rice plant or through diffusion of
water. Current contributions of methane from agriculture is ~15% of
anthropogenic greenhouse gases, as estimated by the IPCC. Further rise in sea
level of 10-85 centimeters would then stimulate the release of more methane
into the air by rice plants. Methane is twenty times more effective as a
greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide is.[40]

## [edit] Pests and diseases

Main article: List of rice diseases

Rice pests are any organisms or microbes with the potential to reduce the
yield or value of the rice crop (or of rice seeds)[41] (Jahn et al. 2007).
Rice pests include weeds, pathogens, insects, rodents, and birds. A variety of
factors can contribute to pest outbreaks, including the overuse of pesticides
and high rates of nitrogen fertilizer application (e.g. Jahn et al. 2005) [6].
Weather conditions also contribute to pest outbreaks. For example, rice gall
midge and army worm outbreaks tend to follow high rainfall early in the wet
season, while thrips outbreaks are associated with drought (Douangboupha et
al. 2006).

One of the challenges facing crop protection specialists is to develop rice
pest management techniques which are sustainable. In other words, to manage
crop pests in such a manner that future crop production is not threatened
(Jahn et al. 2001). Rice pests are managed by cultural techniques, pest-
resistant rice varieties, and pesticides (which include insecticide).
Increasingly, there is evidence that farmers' pesticide applications are often
unnecessary (Jahn et al. 1996, 2004a,b) [7] [8] [9]. By reducing the
populations of natural enemies of rice pests (Jahn 1992), misuse of
insecticides can actually lead to pest outbreaks (Cohen et al. 1994).
Botanicals, so-called ânatural pesticidesâ, are used by some farmers in an
attempt to control rice pests, but in general the practice is not common.
Upland rice is grown without standing water in the field. Some upland rice
farmers in Cambodia spread chopped leaves of the bitter bush (Chromolaena
odorata (L.)) over the surface of fields after planting. The practice probably
helps the soil retain moisture and thereby facilitates seed germination.
Farmers also claim the leaves are a natural fertilizer and helps suppress weed
and insect infestations (Jahn et al. 1999).

Among rice cultivars there are differences in the responses to, and recovery
from, pest damage (Jahn et al. 2004c, Khiev et al. 2000). Therefore,
particular cultivars are recommended for areas prone to certain pest problems.
The genetically based ability of a rice variety to withstand pest attacks is
called resistance. Three main types of plant resistance to pests are
recognized (Painter 1951, Smith 2005): as nonpreference, antibiosis, and
tolerance. Nonpreference (or antixenosis) (Kogan and Ortman 1978) describes
host plants which insects prefer to avoid; antibiosis is where insect survival
is reduced after the ingestion of host tissue; and tolerance is the capacity
of a plant to produce high yield or retain high quality despite insect
infestation. Over time, the use of pest resistant rice varieties selects for
pests that are able to overcome these mechanisms of resistance. When a rice
variety is no longer able to resist pest infestations, resistance is said to
have broken down. Rice varieties that can be widely grown for many years in
the presence of pests, and retain their ability to withstand the pests are
said to have durable resistance. Mutants of popular rice varieties are
regularly screened by plant breeders to discover new sources of durable
resistance (e.g. Liu et al. 2005, Sangha et al. 2008).

Major rice pests include the brown planthopper[10] (Preap et al. 2006),
armyworms[11], the green leafhopper, the rice gall midge (Jahn and Khiev
2004), the rice bug (Jahn et al. 2004c), hispa (Murphy et al. 2006), the rice
leaffolder, stemborer, rats (Leung et al. 2002), and the weed Echinochloa
crusgali (Pheng et al. 2001). Rice weevils[12] are also known to be a threat
to rice crops in the US, PR China and Taiwan.

Major rice diseases include Rice Ragged Stunt, Sheath Blight and Tungro. Rice
blast, caused by the fungus Magnaporthe grisea, is the most significant
disease affecting rice cultivation.

## [edit] Cultivars

Main article: List of rice varieties

While most breeding of rice is carried out for crop quality and productivity,
there are varieties selected for other reasons. Cultivars exist that are
adapted to deep flooding, and these are generally called 'floating rice' [13].

The largest collection of rice cultivars is at the International Rice Research
Institute (IRRI), with over 100,000 rice accessions [14] held in the
International Rice Genebank [15]. Rice cultivars are often classified by their
grain shapes and texture. For example, Thai Jasmine rice is long-grain and
relatively less sticky, as long-grain rice contains less amylopectin than
short-grain cultivars. Chinese restaurants usually serve long-grain as plain
unseasoned steamed rice. Japanese mochi rice and Chinese sticky rice are
short-grain. Chinese people use sticky rice which is properly known as
"glutinous rice" (note: glutinous refer to the glue-like characteristic of
rice; does not refer to "gluten") to make zongzi. The Japanese table rice is a
sticky, short-grain rice. Japanese sake rice is another kind as well.

Indian rice cultivars include long-grained and aromatic Basmati (grown in the
North), long and medium-grained Patna rice and short-grained Sona Masoori
(also spelled Sona Masuri). In the state of Tamil Nadu, the most prized
cultivar is ponni which is primarily grown in the delta regions of Kaveri
River. Kaveri is also referred to as ponni in the South and the name reflects
the geographic region where it is grown. In the Western Indian state of
Maharashtra, a short grain variety called Ambemohar is very popular. this rice
has a characteristic fragrance of Mango blossom.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Unpolished long-grain rice grains with bran

<IMG>

<IMG>

Polished Indian sona masuri rice grains

Aromatic rices have definite aromas and flavours; the most noted cultivars are
Thai fragrant rice, Basmati, Patna rice, and a hybrid cultivar from America
sold under the trade name, Texmati. Both Basmati and Texmati have a mild
popcorn-like aroma and flavour. In Indonesia there are also red and black
cultivars.

High-yield cultivars of rice suitable for cultivation in Africa and other dry
ecosystems called the new rice for Africa (NERICA) cultivars have been
developed. It is hoped that their cultivation will improve food security in
West Africa.

Draft genomes for the two most common rice cultivars, indica and japonica,
were published in April 2002. Rice was chosen as a model organism for the
biology of grasses because of its relatively small genome (~430 megabase
pairs). Rice was the first crop with a complete genome sequence.[42]

On December 16, 2002, the UN General Assembly declared the year 2004 the
International Year of Rice. The declaration was sponsored by more than 40
countries.

## [edit] Biotechnology

### [edit] High-yielding varieties

Main article: High-yielding variety

The High Yielding Varieties are a group of crops created intentionally during
the Green Revolution to increase global food production. Rice, like corn and
wheat, was genetically manipulated to increase its yield. This project enabled
labor markets in Asia to shift away from agriculture, and into industrial
sectors. The first "modern rice", IR8 was produced in 1966 at the
International Rice Research Institute which is based in the Philippines at the
University of the Philippines' Los Banos site. IR8 was created through a cross
between an Indonesian variety named "Peta" and a Chinese variety named "Dee
Geo Woo Gen."[43]

With advances in molecular genetics, the mutant genes responsible for reduced
height(rht), gibberellin insensitive (gai1) and slender rice (slr1) in
Arabidopsis and rice were identified as cellular signaling components of
gibberellic acid (a phytohormone involved in regulating stem growth via its
effect on cell division) and subsequently cloned. Stem growth in the mutant
background is significantly reduced leading to the dwarf phenotype.
Photosynthetic investment in the stem is reduced dramatically as the shorter
plants are inherently more stable mechanically. Assimilates become redirected
to grain production, amplifying in particular the effect of chemical
fertilizers on commercial yield. In the presence of nitrogen fertilizers, and
intensive crop management, these varieties increase their yield two to three
times.

### [edit] Potentials for the future

As the UN Millennium Development project seeks to spread global economic
development to Africa, the "Green Revolution" is cited as the model for
economic development. With the intent of replicating the successful Asian boom
in agronomic productivity, groups like the Earth Institute are doing research
on African agricultural systems, hoping to increase productivity. An important
way this can happen is the production of "New Rices for Africa" (NERICA).
These rices, selected to tolerate the low input and harsh growing conditions
of African agriculture are produced by the African Rice Center, and billed as
technology from Africa, for Africa. The NERICA have appeared in The New York
Times (October 10, 2007) and International Herald Tribune (October 9, 2007),
trumpeted as miracle crops that will dramatically increase rice yield in
Africa and enable an economic resurgence.

### [edit] Golden rice

Main article: Golden rice

German and Swiss researchers have engineered rice to produce Beta-carotene,
with the intent that it might someday be used to treat vitamin A deficiency.
Additional efforts are being made to improve the quantity and quality of other
nutrients in golden rice.[44] The addition of the carotene turns the rice
gold.

### [edit] Expression of human proteins

Ventria Bioscience has genetically modified rice to express lactoferrin,
lysozyme, and human serum albumin which are proteins usually found in breast
milk. These proteins have antiviral, antibacterial, and antifungal
effects.[45]

Rice containing these added proteins can be used as a component in oral
rehydration solutions which are used to treat diarrheal diseases, thereby
shortening their duration and reducing recurrence. Such supplements may also
help reverse anemia.[46]

## [edit] Sayings

  * In the Korean and Japanese language, the Chinese character for the rice' (ç±³ ,kome?) is composed by two eights (å « ,hachi?) and ten (å ,jÅ«?) which is 88, eighty-eight (å «åå « ,hachi-jÅ«-hachi?).[citation needed]
  * A proverbial saying in Japan states: "The farmer spends eighty-eight efforts on rice from planting to crop." This teaches the sense of mottainai and gratitude for the farmer and for rice itself.[47]
  * Another Japanese proverb says: "Eat rice before battle, and you will be victorious."[citation needed]
  * "Each grain of rice one wastes is equivalent to a drop sweat of a farmer" is a saying in the Philippines.[citation needed]
  * American religious leader Brigham Young taught: "Don't give your children pork for breakfast. Give them rice and fruit instead."[citation needed]

## [edit] See also

  * Rice (cooked)
  * Basmati rice
  * Beaten rice
  * Bhutanese red rice
  * Black rice
  * Brown rice syrup
  * Fengyuan City
  * Forbidden rice
  * FreeRice
  * Inari
  * Indonesian rice table
  * Jasmine rice
  * List of rice dishes
  * List of rice varieties
  * New Rice for Africa
  * Nutritious Rice for the World
  * Protein per unit area
  * Puffed rice
  * Red rice
  * Rice Belt
  * Rice bran oil
  * Rice ethanol
  * Rice wine
  * Straw
  * System of rice intensification
  * White rice
  * Wild rice
  * Rice shortage

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "ProdSTAT". FAOSTAT. http://faostat.fao.org/site/567/DesktopDefault.aspx. Retrieved on 2006-12-26.
  2. ^ Smith, Bruce D. The Emergence of Agriculture. Scientific American Library, A Division of HPHLP, New York, 1998.
  3. ^ National Research Council (1996-02-14). "African Rice". Lost Crops of Africa: Volume I: Grains. Lost Crops of Africa. 1. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-0-309-04990-0. http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=2305&page=17. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  4. ^ Global rice shortage sparks panic - SBS World News Australia
  5. ^ BBC World Service - News - Global rice shortage
  6. ^ International Rice Research Institute The Rice Plant and How it Grows Retrieved January 29, 2008
  7. ^ Krishnamurti, Bhadriraju (2003) The Dravidian Languages Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-77111-0 at p. 5.
  8. ^ Risks of Talcum Powder
  9. ^ Jianguo G. Wu; Chunhai Shia and Xiaoming Zhanga (2003). "Estimating the amino acid composition in milled rice by near-infrared reflectance spectroscopy". Field Crops Research. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6T6M-44XK5WK-3&_user=918210&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_acct=C000047944&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=918210&md5=65f76ac6c52c83d057a73ee21f915f0e#sec7. Retrieved on 2008-01-08.
  10. ^ The latter method of using excess water is not desirable with enriched rice, as much of the enrichment additives are flushed away when the water is discarded.
  11. ^ Watson, p. 15
  12. ^ Shoichi Ito and Yukihiro Ishikawa Tottori University, Japan. "(Marketing of Value-Added Rice Products in Japan: Germinated Grown Rice and Rice Bread.)". http://www.hatsuga.com/DOMER/english/en/GBRRB.html. Retrieved on February 12 2004.
  13. ^ IRRI rice knowledge bank
  14. ^ drought tolerance in upland rice
  15. ^ a b c d e f Watson, p. 17-18
  16. ^ Slavery in America: Rice and Slavery
  17. ^ Black Rice: The African Origins of Rice Cultivation in the Americas by Judith A. Carney
  18. ^ National Research Council (1996-02-14). "African Rice". Lost Crops of Africa: Volume I: Grains. Lost Crops of Africa. 1. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-0-309-04990-0. http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=2305&page=17. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  19. ^ Slavery in America: Rice and Slavery
  20. ^ http://www.carolinagoldricefoundation.org/ Carolina Gold Rice Foundation
  21. ^ Ching Lee (2005). "Historic Richvale â the birthplace of California rice". California Farm Bureau Federation. http://www.cfbf.com/magazine/MagazineStory.cfm?ID=17&ck=70EFDF2EC9B086079795C442636B55FB. Retrieved on 2007-08-10.
  22. ^ "California's Rice Growing Region". California Rice Commission. http://www.calrice.org/e7b_cas_rice_growing_region.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-10.
  23. ^ Daniel A. Sumner; Henrich Brunke (2003). "The economic contributions of the California rice industry"". California Rice Commission. http://www.calrice.org/c3a_economic_impact.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-10.
  24. ^ "Medium Grain Varieties". California Rice Commission. http://www.calrice.org/b6a_medium.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-10.
  25. ^ a b c States Department of Agriculture August 2006, Release No. 0306.06, U.S. RICE STATISTICS
  26. ^ a b Wadham, Sir Samuel; Wilson, R. Kent and Wood, Joyce; Land Utilization in Australia, 3rd ed. Published 1957 by Melbourne University Press; p. 246
  27. ^ Australian Bureau of Meteorology; Climatic Atlas of Australia: Rainfall; published 2000 by Bureau of Meteorology, Melbourne, Victoria
  28. ^ all figures from UNCTAD 1998â2002 and the International Rice Research Institute statistics (accessed September 2005)
  29. ^ "Cyclone fuels rice price increase", BBC News, 7 May 2008
  30. ^ "Mekong nations to form rice price-fixing cartel", Radio Australia, April 30, 2008.
  31. ^ "PM floats idea of five-nation rice cartel", Bangkok Post, May 1, 2008.
  32. ^ Nationmaster.com, Agriculture Statistics > Grains > Rice consumption (most recent) by country, http://www.nationmaster.com/graph/agr_gra_ric_con-agriculture-grains-rice-consumption, retrieved on 2008-04-24
  33. ^ Combination of data from: http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/MannUsda/viewDocumentInfo.do?documentID=1229 table 24, and http://www.xist.org/earth/pop_region.aspx
  34. ^ United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), (Rice} Market, http://www.unctad.org/infocomm/anglais/rice/market.htm, retrieved on 2008-04-24
  35. ^ Saudi Arabia: Per Capita Rice Consumption Hits 47 Kilogram, http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G1-72731851.html, retrieved on 2008-04-24
  36. ^ United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Economic Research Service, Briefing Rooms: Rice, http://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/Rice/, retrieved on 2008-04-24
  37. ^ Iowa State University (July 2005). Rice Consumption in the United States: New Evidence from Food Consumption Surveys. http://publications.iowa.gov/2781/.
  38. ^ Methane Emission from Rice Fields - Wetland rice fields may make a major contribution to global warming by Heinz-Ulrich Neue.
  39. ^ report12.pdf
  40. ^ IPCC. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. United Nations Environment Programme, 2007:Ch5, 8, and 10.[1]
  41. ^ Jahn et al. 2000
  42. ^ Gillis, Justing (August 11, 2005). "Rice Genome Fully Mapped". washingtonpost.com. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/08/10/AR2005081001054.html?referrer=email.
  43. ^ Rice Varieties: IRRI Knowledge Bank. Accessed August 2006. [2]
  44. ^ Grand Challenges in Global Health, Press release, June 27, 2005
  45. ^ Nature's story
  46. ^ Bethell D. R., Huang J., et al. BioMetals, 17. 337 - 342 (2004).[3]
  47. ^ proverbial saying, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (Japan), (Japanese)

### [edit] General References

  * Cohen, J. E., K. Schoenly, K. L. Heong, H. Justo, G. Arida, A. T. Barrion, J. A. Litsinger. 1994. A Food Web Approach to Evaluating the Effect of Insecticide Spraying on Insect Pest Population Dynamics in a Philippine Irrigated Rice Ecosystem. Journal of Applied Ecology, Vol. 31, No. 4, pp. 747â763. doi:10.2307/2404165
  * Crawford, G.W. and C. Shen. 1998. The Origins of Rice Agriculture: Recent Progress in East Asia. Antiquity 72:858â866.
  * Crawford, G.W. and G.-A. Lee. 2003. Agricultural Origins in the Korean Peninsula. Antiquity 77(295):87â95.
  * Douangboupha, B., K. Khamphoukeo, S. Inthavong, J. Schiller, and G. Jahn. 2006. Pests and diseases of the rice production systems of Laos. Pp. 265â281. In J.M. Schiller, M.B. Chanphengxay, B. Linquist, and S. Appa Rao, editors. Rice in Laos. Los BaÃ±os (Philippines): International Rice Research Institute. 457 p. ISBN 978-971-22-0211-7.
  * Heong, KL, YH Chen, DE Johnson, GC Jahn, M Hossain, RS Hamilton. 2005. Debate Over a GM Rice Trial in China. Letters. Science, Vol 310, Issue 5746, 231â233 , 14 October 2005.
  * Huang, J., Ruifa Hu, Scott Rozelle, Carl Pray. 2005. Insect-Resistant GM Rice in Farmers' Fields: Assessing Productivity and Health Effects in China. Science (29 April 2005) Vol. 308. no. 5722, pp. 688â690. DOI: 10.1126/science.1108972
  * Jahn, G. C. 1992. Rice pest control and effects on predators in Thailand. Insecticide & Acaricide Tests 17:252â253.
  * Jahn, GC and B. Khiev. 2004. Gall midge in Cambodian lowland rice. pp. 71â76. In J. Benett, JS Bentur, IC Pasula, K. Krishnaiah, [eds]. New approaches to gall midge resistance in rice. Los BaÃ±os (Philippines): International Rice Research Institute and Indian Council of Agricultural Research. 195 p.
  * Jahn, G. C., S. Pheng, B. Khiev, and C. Pol. 1996. Farmersâ pest management and rice production practices in Cambodian lowland rice. Cambodia-IRRI-Australia Project (CIAP), Baseline Survey Report No. 6. CIAP Phnom Penh, Cambodia, 28 pages. [16]
  * Jahn, G. C., B. Khiev, S. Pheng, and C. Pol. 1997. Pest management in rice. In H. J. Nesbitt [ed.] "Rice Production in Cambodia." Manila (Philippines): International Rice Research Institute. 83â91.
  * Jahn, G. C., S. Pheng, B. Khiev, and C. Pol. 1997. Pest management practices of lowland rice farmers in Cambodia. In K. L. Heong and M. M. Escalada [editors] "Pest Management Practices of Rice Farmers in Asia." Manila (Philippines): International Rice Research Institute. 35â52. ISBN 971-22-0102-3
  * Jahn, G. C., C. Pol, B. Khiev, S. Pheng, and N. Chhorn. 1999. Farmerâs pest management and rice production practices in Cambodian upland and deepwater rice. Cambodia-IRRI-Australia Project, Baseline Survey Report No. 7.[17]
  * Jahn, G. C., S. Pheng, B. Khiev and C. Pol 2000. Ecological characterization of biotic constraints to rice in Cambodia. International Rice Research Notes (IRRN) 25 (3): 23â24.
  * Jahn, G. C., S. Pheng, C. Pol, B. Khiev 2000. Characterizing biotic constraints to production of Cambodian rainfed lowland rice: limitations to statistical techniques. pp. 247â268 In T. P. Tuong, S. P. Kam, L. Wade, S. Pandey, B. A. M. Bouman, B. Hardy [eds.] âCharacterizing and Understanding Rainfed Environments.â Proceedings of the International Workshop on Characterizing and Understanding Rainfed Environments, 5â9 December 1999, Bali, Indonesia. Los BaÃ±os (Philippines): International Rice Research Institute (IRRI). 488 p.
  * Jahn, GC, B. Khiev, C. Pol, N. Chhorn, S. Pheng, and V. Preap. 2001. Developing sustainable pest management for rice in Cambodia. pp. 243â258, In S. Suthipradit, C. Kuntha, S. Lorlowhakarn, and J. Rakngan [eds.] âSustainable Agriculture: Possibility and Directionâ Proceedings of the 2nd Asia-Pacific Conference on Sustainable Agriculture 18â20 October 1999, Phitsanulok, Thailand. Bangkok (Thailand): National Science and Technology Development Agency. 386 p.
  * Jahn, GC, NQ Kamal, S Rokeya, AK Azad, NI Dulu, JB Orsini, A Barrion, and L Almazan. 2004a. Completion Report on Livelihood Improvement Through Ecology (LITE), PETRRA IPM Subproject SP 27 02. Poverty Elimination Through Rice Research Assistance (PETRRA), IRRI, Dhaka. 20 pages text plus 20 pages appendices. [18]
  * Jahn, GC, NQ Kamal, S Rokeya, AK Azad, NI Dulu, JB Orsini, M Morshed, NMS Dhar, NA Kohinur 2004b. Evaluation Report on Livelihood Improvement Through Ecology (LITE), PETRRA IPM Subproject SP 27 02. Poverty Elimination Through Rice Research Assistance (PETRRA), IRRI, Dhaka. 42 pages plus 40 pages of annexes.[19]
  * Jahn, GC, I. Domingo, L. P. Almazan and J. Pacia. 2004c. Effect of rice bugs (Alydidae: Leptocorisa oratorius (Fabricius)) on rice yield, grain quality, and seed viability. Journal of Economic Entomology 97(6): 1923â1927.[20]
  * Jahn, GC, LP Almazan, and J Pacia. 2005. Effect of nitrogen fertilizer on the intrinsic rate of increase of the rusty plum aphid, Hysteroneura setariae (Thomas) (Homoptera: Aphididae) on rice (Oryza sativa L.). Environmental Entomology 34 (4): 938â943.[21]
  * Jahn, GC, JA Litsinger, Y Chen and A Barrion. 2007. Integrated Pest Management of Rice: Ecological Concepts. In Ecologically Based Integrated Pest Management (eds. O. Koul and G.W. Cuperus). CAB International Pp. 315â366.
  * Khiev, B., G. C. Jahn, C. Pol, and N. Chhorn 2000. Effects of simulated pest damage on rice yields. IRRN 25 (3): 27â28.
  * Kogan, M., and E. F. Ortman. 1978. Antixenosis a new term proposed to defined to describe Painterâs ânon-preferenceâ modality of resistance. Bull. Entomol. Soc. Am. 24: 175-176.
  * Leung LKP, Peter G. Cox, Gary C. Jahn and Robert Nugent. 2002. Evaluating rodent management with Cambodian rice farmers. Cambodian Journal of Agriculture Vol. 5, pp. 21â26.
  * Liu, L., Z. Van, Q. Y. Shu, and M. Maluszynski. 2004. Officially released mutant varieties in China. Mutat. Breed. Rev 14: 1:64.
  * Ma, Jian Feng; Kazunori Tamai, Naoki Yamaji, Namiki Mitani, Saeko Konishi, Maki Katsuhara, Masaji Ishiguro, Yoshiko Murata, Masahiro Yano (2006). "A silicon transporter in rice". Nature 440 (7084): 688â691. doi:10.1038/nature04590. ISSN 0028-0836.

  * Mitani, Namiki; Jian Feng Ma, Takashi Iwashita (2005). "Identification of the silicon form in xylem sap of rice (Oryza sativa L.)". Plant Cell Physiol. 46 (2): 279â283. doi:10.1093/pcp/pci018. PMID 15695469. http://pcp.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/46/2/279. Retrieved on 2008-05-05.

  * Mitani, Namiki; Jian Feng Ma (2005). "Uptake system of silicon in different plant species". J. Exp. Bot. 56 (414): 1255â1261. doi:10.1093/jxb/eri121. PMID 15753109. http://jxb.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/56/414/1255. Retrieved on 2008-05-05.

  * Murphy, S, J Stonehouse, J Holt, J Venn, NQ Kamal, MF Rabbi, MH Haque, G Jahn, B Barrion. 2006. Ecology and management of rice hispa (Dicladispa armigera) in Bangladesh. Pp. 162ââ164. In Perspectives on Pests II: Achievements of research under UK Department for International Development, Crop Protection Programme 2000â05. Natural Resources International Limited. 206 pages. [22]
  * Painter, R. H. 1951. Insect resistance in crop plants. The Macmillan Co., New York.
  * Pheng, S., B. Khiev, C. Pol and G. C. Jahn 2001. Response of two rice cultivars to the competition of Echinochloa crus-gali (L.) P. Beauv. International Rice Research Institute Notes (IRRN) 26 (2): 36â37.
  * Preap V., M. P. Zalucki and G. C. Jahn. 2006. Brown planthopper outbreaks and management. Cambodian Journal of Agriculture 7(1): 17â25.
  * Preap, V, GC Jahn, K Hin, N Siheng. 2005. Fish and rice management system to enable agricultural diversification. Paper presented at the 5th Asia-Pacific Congress of Entomology, 18â21 October 2005, Jeju, Korea.
  * Saltini Antonio, I semi della civiltÃ . Grano, riso e mais nella storia delle societÃ umane,, prefazione di Luigi BernabÃ² Brea Avenue Media, Bologna 1996
  * Sangha JS, Chen YH, Palchamy K, Jahn GC, Maheswaran M, et al. (2008) Categories and Inheritance of Resistance to Nilaparvata lugens (Hemiptera: Delphacidae) in Mutants of Indica Rice âIR64â. Journal of Economic Entomology: Vol. 101, No. 2 pp. 575â583.
  * Smith, C. M. 2005. Plant resistance to arthropods: molecular and conventional approaches. Springer, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
  * Rice Research in South Asia through Ages by Y L Nene, Asian Agri-History Vol. 9, No. 2, 2005 (85â106) [23]
  * Daniel Zohary and Maria Hopf, Domestication of plants in the Old World, third edition Oxford: University Press, 2000.
  * Watson, Andrew (1983). Agricultural innovation in the early Islamic world. Cambridge University Press.
  * Zhao, Z. 1998. The Middle Yangtze Region in China is the Place Where Rice was Domesticated: Phytolithic Evidence from the Diaotonghuan Cave, Northern Jiangxi. Antiquity 72:885â897.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on

Rice  
Sister project Look up rice in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Rice  
### [edit] General

  * Infocomm/UNCTAD
  * International Rice Research Institute
  * Rice Knowledge Bank
  * Historical Price of Rice Historical Price of Rice according to U.S. CPI
  * A Brief History of Rice
  * History of antebellum South Carolina rice production with photos of old machinery used
  * Rice Research in South Asia through Ages (PDF)

### [edit] Rice research & development

  * Intensify to Diversify: an IRRI rice intensification project in Cambodia
  * Celebrating the Land (Part 1): video about an IRRI project to increase rice production in Laos
  * Celebrating the Land (Part 2): video about an IRRI project to increase rice production in Laos
  * Operation Rice Bowl of the Catholic Relief Service
  * Rice-Fish Culture in China, an IDRC Project
  * JICA rice project in Bolivia

### [edit] Rice in agriculture

  * American Phytopathological Society: Diseases of Rice (Oryza sativa)
  * FAO: Animal Feed Resources Information System, Oryza sativa
  * Origin of Chinese rice cultivation

### [edit] Rice as food

  * How to Cook Rice Step-by-Step Photos
  * US Patent 6,676,983: Puffed food starch product
  * How to Save a Bad Batch of Rice and Other Tips
  * A Malaysian Food Heritage
  * Different types of rice

### [edit] Rice as fuel as in car fuel

  * Japanese Rice Ethanol Plant to Start 2009.
  * Using rice husks (chaff) to generate electricity in rural India

### [edit] Rice economics

  * Rice as a Commodity
  * UNCTAD market information
  * Grain Drain: The Hidden Cost of U.S. Rice Subsidies
  * Vietnamese Rice Website

### [edit] Rice genome

  * Rice Genome Browser
  * n:Chinese authorities question genetically altered rice allegation
  * Oryza sativa The rice genome, a "Rosetta stone" for other cereals
  * Rice Genome Research Program
  * Rice Genome Approaches Completion
  * The Genomes of Oryza sativa: A History of Duplications
  * Biologists Trace Back Genetic Origins Of Rice Domestication
  * Waterproof rice can outlast the floods â Researchers have tracked down a gene that allows the plant to survive complete submersion

v â¢ d â¢ e

World rice production  
China Â· India Â· Egypt Â· Indonesia Â· Malaysia Â· Bangladesh Â· Vietnam Â·
Thailand Â· Burma Â· Philippines Â· Japan Â· Brazil Â· South Korea Â· Bhutan
Â· Nepal Â· Guyana Â· Laos Â· Cambodia

<IMG>  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Cereals and pseudocereals  
Amaranth Â· Barley Â· Buckwheat Â· Fonio Â· Job's Tears Â· KaÃ±iwa Â· Maize
(Corn) Â· Millet Â· Oat Â· Quinoa Â· Rice Â· Rye Â· Sorghum Â· Spelt Â·
Triticale Â· Teff Â· Wild rice Â· Wheat  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Cuisine  
Regional

Africa Â· Asia Â· Caribbean Â· Europe Â· Latin America Â· Mediterranean Â·
Middle East Â· North America Â· Oceania Â· South Asia  
Styles

Haute Â· Immigrant Â· Fusion Â· Fast food  
Food

Bread Â· Pasta Â· Noodle Â· Cheese Â· Rice Â· Salad Â· Sandwich Â· Sauce Â·
Soup Â· Dessert Â· Dip Â· Pizza Â· Stew Â· Confectionery  
Technical

Techniques Â· Utensils Â· Weights and measures  
See also

Kitchen Â· Meal Â· Wikibooks:Cookbook â¢ List of cuisines  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rice"

Categories: Model organisms | Rice | Tropical agriculture

Hidden categories: Articles to be merged since January 2009 | All articles to
be merged | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since September 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
December 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since March 2008 | Articles
with unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles containing Japanese
language text | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Chamoru
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¬ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¦ÞÞ°
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * æè¨
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ilokano
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kinyarwanda
  * Kiswahili
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * LingÃ¡la
  * Lojban
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VÃµro
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 03:07.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



