
# Avengers (comics)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

The Avengers  
<IMG>  
Avengers vol. 3, #38 (Mar. 2001). Cover art by Alan Davis.  
Publication information  
Publisher Marvel Comics  
First appearance The Avengers #1 (Sept. 1963)  
Created by Stan Lee  
Jack Kirby  
In-story information  
Base(s) Various, formerly the Avengers Mansion, New York City, Hydro-Base  
Roster  
See:List of Avengers members  
The Avengers is a team of fictional superhero characters in comic books
published by Marvel Comics. Originally created using preexisting Marvel
characters, variously created by writer-editor Stan Lee, artist and co-plotter
Jack Kirby and others, the team first appeared in The Avengers #1 (Sept.
1963).

Labeled "Earth's Mightiest Heroes", the Avengers originally consisted of Ant-
Man, Wasp, Thor, Iron Man, and the Hulk. Almost from inception, however, the
roster has been fluid: The Hulk departs; [1] Captain America joins [2] and
soon afterwards leads a whole new team. [3] The rotating roster has become a
hallmark of the team, although one theme remains consistent: the Avengers
fight the foes no single superhero can withstand â hence their battle cry,
"Avengers Assemble!" The team has featured humans, mutants, robots, gods,
aliens, supernatural beings, and even former villains.

## Contents

  * 1 Publication history
  * 2 Fictional biography
    * 2.1 1960s
    * 2.2 1970s
    * 2.3 1980s
    * 2.4 1990s
      * 2.4.1 "Heroes Reborn"
      * 2.4.2 "Heroes Return"
    * 2.5 "Avengers Disassembled"
    * 2.6 Reformed: New & Mighty Avengers
    * 2.7 New Avengers
    * 2.8 Mighty Avengers
  * 3 Other versions
    * 3.1 1950s Avengers
    * 3.2 Avengers Next
    * 3.3 The Ultimates
    * 3.4 Marvel Adventures: The Avengers
    * 3.5 House of M: Avengers
    * 3.6 Age of Apocalypse
  * 4 Other media
    * 4.1 Novels
    * 4.2 Animated series
      * 4.2.1 The Avengers: United They Stand
      * 4.2.2 Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes
    * 4.3 Video and computer games
    * 4.4 Film
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Footnotes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Publication history

See also: Bibliography of Avengers titles

The titular team debuted in The Avengers #1 (Sept. 1963), using existing
characters created primarily by writer-editor Stan Lee and penciler and co-
plotter Jack Kirby. This initial series, published bi-monthly through issue #6
(July 1964) and monthly thereafter ran through issue #402 (Sept. 1996), with
spinoffs including several annuals, miniseries and a giant-size quarterly
sister series that ran briefly in the mid-1970s.[4]

Other spinoff series include West Coast Avengers, initially published as a
four-issue miniseries in 1984, followed by a 102-issue series (Oct. 1985 -
Jan. 1994), retitled Avengers West Coast with #48;[5][6] and the 40-issue Solo
Avengers (Dec. 1987 - Jan. 1991), retitled Avengers Spotlight with #21.[7][8]

Between 1996 and 2004 Marvel relaunched the primary Avengers title three
times. In 1996, the "Heroes Reborn" line, in which Marvel contracted outside
companies to produce four titles, included a new volume of The Avengers.
Taking place in an alternate universe with a revamped history unrelated to
mainstream Marvel continuity, The Avengers vol. 2 was written by Rob Liefeld
and penciled by Jim Valentino of Image Comics, and ran 13 issues (Nov. 1996 -
Nov. 1997). The final issue, which featured a crossover with the other "Heroes
Reborn" titles, returned the characters to the main Marvel Universe.[9]

Relaunched with a new first issue, The Avengers vol. 3 ran 84 issues (Feb.
1998 - Aug. 2004). To coincide with what would have been the 500th issue of
the original series, Marvel changed the numbering, and The Avengers #500-503
(Sept.-Dec. 2004)[10], followed by the one-shot Avengers Finale (Jan.
2005),[11] became the Avengers Disassembled storyline and final issues. In
January 2005 a new version of the team appeared in the ongoing title New
Avengers.[12]

Following New Avengers came Young Avengers, beginning with #1 (Feb. 2005),
featuring teenage heroes patterned after former members of the Avengers; and
Mighty Avengers, also beginning with #1 (May 2007).[13]

## [edit] Fictional biography

### [edit] 1960s

"And there came a day, a day unlike any other, when Earth's mightiest heroes
and heroines found themselves united against a common threat. On that day, the
Avengers were born â to fight the foes no single super hero could withstand!
Through the years, their roster has prospered, changing many times, but their
glory has never been denied! Heed the call, then â for now, the Avengers
Assemble!"  
â Prologue from The Avengers  
The first adventure features the Asgardian trickster god Loki, who seeks
revenge against his adopted brother Thor. Using an illusion, Loki tricks the
Hulk into destroying a railroad track, after that he then diverts a radio call
by Rick Jones for help to Thor, whom Loki hopes will battle the Hulk. Unknown
to Loki, the radio call is also answered by Ant-Man, the Wasp, and Iron Man.
After an initial misunderstanding, the heroes unite and defeat Loki. Ant-Man
states the five work well together and suggests they form a combined team â
with the Wasp naming the group the Avengers. The original members are known as
the "founding members," and courtesy of an Avengers Charter are responsible
for the good name of the team. As a result, their wishes regarding the
direction of the team are given additional weight and deference.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Avengers #1 (Sept. 1963). Cover art by Jack Kirby & Dick Ayers.

The roster changes almost immediately; by the beginning of the second issue,
Ant-Man has become Giant-Man and, at the end of the issue, the Hulk leaves
once he realizes how much the others fear his unstable personality. Feeling
responsible, the Avengers try to locate and contain the Hulk (a recurring
theme in the early years of the team), which subsequently leads them into
combat with Namor the Sub-Mariner. This would result in the first major
milestone in the Avengers' history - the revival and return of Captain
America.[2] Captain America joins the team, eventually becoming field leader.
Captain America is also given "founding member" status in the Hulk's
place.[14] The Avengers go on to fight foes such as Captain America's wartime
enemy Baron Zemo, who forms the Masters of Evil; the Lava Men; Kang the
Conqueror; Wonder Man; Immortus; and Count Nefaria.

The next milestone came when every member but Captain America resigned and
were replaced by three former villains - Hawkeye, the Scarlet Witch, and
Quicksilver.[3] Although lacking the raw power of the original team, "Cap's
Kooky Quartet" (as they were sometimes jokingly called), proved their worth by
fighting and defeating the Swordsman; the original Power Man; Doctor Doom; and
Kang. They are soon rejoined by Henry Pym (who changes his name to Goliath),
the Wasp, Hercules, the Black Knight, and the Black Widow, although the last
two do not obtain official membership status until years later.

When writer Roy Thomas commenced, there was a greater focus on
characterization. The Black Panther joins the team, followed by the Vision.
Thomas also established that the Avengers are headquartered in a New York City
building called Avengers Mansion, provided courtesy of Tony Stark (Iron Man's
alter ego), who also funds the Avengers through the Maria Stark Foundation, a
non-profit organization. The mansion is serviced by Edwin Jarvis, the
Avengers' faithful butler, and also furnished with state-of-the-art
technology, and defense systems, including the Avengers' primary mode of
transport: the five-engine Quinjets.

### [edit] 1970s

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Avengers face Korvac on the cover of The Avengers #176 (Oct. 1978). Art by
Dave Wenzel.

The adventures increased in scope as the team cross into an alternate
dimension to battle the Squadron Supreme and fight in the Kree-Skrull War, an
epic battle between the alien Kree and Skrull races and guest-starring the
Kree hero Captain Marvel. The Avengers also briefly disband when Skrulls
impersonate Captain America, Thor and Iron Man use their authority as founders
of the team to disband it. The true founding Avengers, minus the Wasp, later
reform the team in response to complaints from Jarvis.

The Vision and the Scarlet Witch fall in love, although the relationship is
tinged with sadness as the Vision believes himself to be inhuman and unworthy
of her. Writer Steve Englehart then introduces Mantis, who joins the team
along with the reformed Swordsman. Englehart linked her origins to the very
beginnings of the Kree-Skrull conflict in a time-spanning adventure involving
Kang the Conqueror and the mysterious Immortus, who are revealed to be past
and future versions of each other. Mantis is revealed to be the Celestial
Madonna, who is destined to give birth to a being that will save the universe.
This saga also reveals that the Vision's body had only been appropriated, and
not created, by Ultron, and that it had originally belonged to the 1940s Human
Torch. With his origins now clear to him, the Vision proposes to the Scarlet
Witch. The Celestial Madonna saga ends with their wedding, presided over by
Immortus. Englehart's tenure also coincided with the debut of George PÃ©rez as
artist. [15]

After Englehart's departure (and a seven-issue stint by Gerry Conway) Jim
Shooter began as writer, generating several classic adventures, including
"Bride of Ultron", the "Nefaria Trilogy," and "The Korvac Saga," featuring
nearly every Avenger in the canon. New members added during this time include
the Beast, a resurrected Wonder Man, Captain America's former partner the
Falcon, and Ms. Marvel.

Shooter also introduced the character of Henry Peter Gyrich, the Avengers'
liaison to the United States National Security Council. Gyrich is prejudiced
against superhumans, and acts in a heavy-handed, obstructive manner, insisting
that the Avengers follow government rules and regulations or else lose their
priority status with the government. Among Gyrich's demands is that the active
roster be trimmed down to only seven members, and that the Falcon, an African
American, be admitted to the team to comply with affirmative action laws. This
last act is resented by Hawkeye, who because of the seven-member limit loses
his membership slot to the Falcon. The Falcon, in turn, is unhappy to be the
beneficiary of what he perceives to be tokenism, and decides to resign from
the team, after which Hawkeye rejoins.

### [edit] 1980s

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Avengers #200 (Oct. 1980). Cover art by George PÃ©rez and Terry Austin.

The first major development was the breakdown of Henry Pym, with his frequent
changes of costume and name being symptomatic of an identity problem and an
inferiority complex. After abusing his wife, failing to win back the
confidence of the Avengers with a ruse and being duped by the villain Egghead,
Pym is jailed. Writer Roger Stern later resolves this by having Pym outwit
Egghead and defeat the latest incarnation of the Masters of Evil single-
handedly, thereby proving his innocence. Pym reconciles with the Wasp, but
they decide to remain apart. Pym also retires from superheroics, but returns
some years later.

Stern developed several major storylines, such as "Ultimate Vision" in which
the Vision takes over the world's computer systems in a misguided attempt to
create world peace; the formation of the West Coast Avengers; and "Avengers
Under Siege" which involves the second Baron Zemo and the Masters of Evil
taking over the mansion and severely injuring Jarvis and Hercules, "War on
Olympus" in which Hercules' father Zeus blames the Avengers for his son's
injuries and brings them to Olympus for trial and "Heavy Metal" in which the
Super Adaptoid organizes several other robotic villains for an assault on the
team. New members during the 1980s included an African American Captain Marvel
named Monica Rambeau (who became the team's new leader); She-Hulk; Tigra,
Namor, Starfox and Hawkeye's wife, Mockingbird, while Henry Pym emerges from
retirement to join the West Coast Avengers. Stern also created the villain
Nebula, who is the granddaughter of Thanos and niece of Starfox. In her first
appearance she faces Captain Marvel (the namesake of her grandfather's
original arch-foe) and manipulates a civil war among the alien Skrulls and
destroys the planet of Xandar. In a second adventure Nebula would infiltrate
the team with mind control technology stolen from Kang and cause it to
temporarily disband until the combined events of the company-wide Marvel
crossovers "Evolutionary War" and "Inferno" would cause Captain America to
reform the team with a short-lived roster that included Mr. Fantastic and the
Invisible Woman of the Fantastic Four and Gilgamesh (aka the Forgotten One) of
the Eternals.

The team also relocated for a period to a floating island off the coast of New
York called Hydrobase.

John Byrne eventually took over writing both titles and revamped the line-up
of the main team to include more traditional members such as Thor, Iron Man
and Vision alongside Captain America and new member Quasar. Byrne's stint
would also see Spider-Man officially join the Avengers for the first time in
yet another cosmic battle with Nebula. His contributions included a revamping
of the Vision, and the discovery that the children of the Scarlet Witch, and
the Vision, are actually illusions. The loss of the Scarlet Witch's children
and the Vision (who is dissasembled by government agents in retaliation for
the "Ultimate Vision" storyline) drives her insane, although she eventually
recovers and rejoins the team. This story also revealed that the Scarlet
Witch's powers include wide-range reality manipulation and she is what the
time-traveling Immortus refers to as a "nexus being" setting the stage for
2004's eventual "Chaos" and "Avengers Dissassembled" Storylines.

The Avengers titles are then embroiled in a major crossover event Acts of
Vengeance wherein Loki assembles most of Marvel's other arch-villains such as
Doctor Doom, Magneto, the Red Skull and the Kingpin in a plot to destroy the
team once and for all. Their first act is to orchestrate a prison break of the
Vault setting loose dozens of other villains such as Venom, the Absoribing
Man, Juggernaut, Chemistro and the Controller who end up battling the Avengers
individually in their solo titles. With the team thus scattered and occupied
in individual conflicts, Doctor Doom sinks Hydrobase. Ultimately however the
arch-villains are unable to co-exist due to egos with Doom and Kingpin
departing and Magneto engaging the Red Skull in battle since as a Holocaust
survivor Magneto could not abide being teamed up with the Nazi Red Skull. This
leaves Loki with only the Mandarin and the Wizard, and the trio are defeated
by the Avengers in the final battle. Afterwards the team builds a new facility
on the Mansion site.

### [edit] 1990s

This decade coincided with a speculators' boom, followed by an industry-wide
slump and Marvel filing for bankruptcy in 1997. Bob Harras and Steve Epting
took over the title, and introduced a stable lineup with ongoing storylines
and character development focused on the Black Knight, Sersi, Crystal,
Quicksilver, Hercules and the Vision. Their primary enemies in this run
include the mysterious Proctor and the Shiar warrior Deathcry. During this
period, the team finds themselves facing increasingly murderous enemies, and
are forced to question their rule against killing.

This culminated in "Operation: Galactic Storm", a 19-part storyline that ran
through all Avengers-related titles and showcases a conflict between the Kree
and the Shi'ar Empire. The team splits when Iron Man and several dissidents
execute the Supreme Intelligence against the wishes of Captain America.

After a vote disbanding the West Coast Avengers, Iron Man forms a proactive
and aggressive team called Force Works. During the team's first mission Wonder
Man is apparently killed again (his atoms are actually only temporarily
scattered). Force Works later disbands after it is revealed that Iron Man has
become a murderer via the manipulations of the villain Kang.[16]

#### [edit] "Heroes Reborn"

<IMG>

<IMG>

Avengers vol. 2, #11 (Sept. 1997), showing the Heroes Reborn Avengers. Cover
art by Michael Ryan and Sal Regla.

Together with the Fantastic Four and others, many of the Avengers apparently
die stopping the gestalt psychic entity Onslaught, although it is later
revealed that Franklin Richards preserves these heroes in a pocket universe.
Believing the main team gone, the Black Widow disbands the Avengers, with only
butler Jarvis remaining to tend to the Mansion.

Marvel contracted out The Avengers and three related titles - Captain America,
Fantastic Four, and Iron Man \- to former Marvel artists Jim Lee and Rob
Liefeld, two of the founding creators of Image Comics. The previous continuity
of the Marvel Universe was set aside as the heroes were "reborn" in the pocket
universe. While the Avengers was relaunched as a new series, the "Heroes
Reborn" line ended after a year as planned and the license reverted to
Marvel.[17]

#### [edit] "Heroes Return"

Writer Kurt Busiek and penciler George PÃ©rez launched a new volume of the
series with Avengers #1 (Feb. 1998). Busiek also concurrently wrote the
limited series Avengers Forever, a time-travel story that explored the history
of the Avengers and resolved many outstanding questions and loose ends. New
members during this run included Ms. Marvel; the revived Wonder Man; Justice;
Firestar; Silverclaw; and Triathlon. Busiek's run included many of the
Avengers traditional villains although in stories of a more epic scope. For
example his first story included Morgan Le Fey reordering reality so that
every Avenger member ever was transformed into medieval counterparts of
themselves in an alternate reality where she was queen. Ultron would return
for a multi-part epic that saw him lay waste the fictional nation of Slovenkia
and then from that nation unleash an army of hundreds of robotic duplicates
against the team. In yet another multi-part arc Kang would actually
successfully conquor the planet after destroying several major cities from
space causing the governments of the world to surrender to him and leaving the
Avengers in role of underground freedom fighters before Captain America
defeated him in the title's 50th issue.

### [edit] "Avengers Disassembled"

Successor writer Geoff Johns dealt with the aftermath of Busiek's Kang arc, as
the Avengers are granted international authority by the United Nations.
Members joining during this period included Jack of Hearts and the second Ant-
Man. Chuck Austen followed as writer, and added a new Captain Britain to the
team. Writer Brian Michael Bendis then rebooted the title with the "Avengers
Disassembled" storyline. [18] Titled "Chaos", the story featured the deaths of
some members and a loss of credibility for the team. The culprit is revealed
to be the Scarlet Witch, who has gone insane after agonizing over the memory
of her lost children and who subsequently loses control of her reality-
altering powers.[19] With the team in disarray and Avengers Mansion ruined,
the surviving members agree to disband.

### [edit] Reformed: New & Mighty Avengers

### [edit] New Avengers

Main article: New Avengers

<IMG>

<IMG>

Variant cover art for New Avengers #1, by Joe Quesada and Richard Isanove.
(Feb 2005)

With the original Avengers organization disbanded, a mass-escape attempt at
the supervillain prison the Raft led Captain America and Iron Man to form a
new Avengers team. The previously solo heroes Luke Cage, Ronin, the Sentry,
Spider-Man, and Spider-Woman, plus X-Men member Wolverine were recruited for
the team.

During the Marvel Civil War over the U.S. government's new mandate that all
superhumans be federally registered, an underground splinter group led by
Captain America forms and retains the title of New Avengers.

### [edit] Mighty Avengers

Main article: Mighty Avengers

In response to this Iron Man reforms the official team under the aegis of the
government's Fifty State Initiative program, taking up residency in New York
City with the roster of Ares, the Black Widow, Iron Man, the Sentry, the Wasp,
Wonder Man, and leader Ms. Marvel (Carol Danvers).[20]

## [edit] Other versions

### [edit] 1950s Avengers

A short-lived team of superheroes in the 1950s called themselves the
"Avengers". Consisting of Marvel Boy, Venus, the 3-D Man, Gorilla-Man, the
Human Robot, Jimmy Woo, Namora and Jann of the Jungle,[21] the team exists in
an alternate timeline that is erased by the time-manipulating Immortus.[22] A
version of the group without the 3-D Man and Jann exists in mainstream
continuity, and eventually reforms in the present day.[23]

### [edit] Avengers Next

Main article: A-Next

In the alternate future timeline known as MC2, the Avengers have disbanded and
Avengers Mansion is now a museum. An emergency forces Edwin Jarvis to sound an
alert, and a new generation of heroes form a new team of Avengers. Most of the
new Avengers are children of established Marvel superheroes.

### [edit] The Ultimates

Main article: Ultimates

In the Ultimate Marvel Universe, the Avengers are named "The Ultimates", and
were formed by Ultimate Nick Fury to protect America against superhuman
threats.[24]

### [edit] Marvel Adventures: The Avengers

In 2006, Marvel Adventures (Marvel Comics' "All Ages" line) began a new
Avengers series, featuring a line-up of Captain America, Iron Man, Spider-Man
(supplanting Ant-Man), Wolverine, Storm, the Hulk and Giant-Girl (Janet van
Dyne, the Wasp in regular continuity).

### [edit] House of M: Avengers

In the alternate reality created by the Scarlet Witch, Luke Cage forms a team
of superpowered humans to fight for human rights.[25]

### [edit] Age of Apocalypse

A humanized version of the Avengers band together during the Age of
Apocalypse.[26]

## [edit] Other media

### [edit] Novels

  * The Avengers Battle the Earth-Wrecker by Otto Binder was published as a mass market paperback novel by Bantam Books (F3569) in June 1967. The cover illustration depicts Captain America, Goliath, Hawkeye, Quicksilver and the Scarlet Witch (though these last two do not actually appear). Iron Man and the Wasp are active members, with the mutant siblings and Thor mentioned as past Avengers. The titular "Earth-Wrecker" is one Karzz the Conqueror, an alien who travels back in time in order to destroy the earth (with a comet), so that humanity will be unable to thwart his future conquest of the galaxy.
  * The team was also featured in the Pocket Books line of Marvel-based paperback novels of the late 1970s. Jim Shooter's short story "This Evil Undying" (1979) appeared as one-fourth of an anthology entitled The Marvel Superheroes, and featured Ultron as the villain. The story was later adapted for the regular comic series (vol. 1 # 201-202). A full-length novel by David Michelinie, The Man Who Stole Tomorrow (also 1979) sent an Avengers team forward in time to fight Kang in the fortieth century. The novel is noteworthy for its humorous retro-history (e.g., the team passes a "Second Church of the Latter-Day Elvis"), as well as for introducing Inuit shaman Aningan Kenojuak, one of the "Eskimo" characters last seen worshipping the frozen body of Captain America (vol. 1 # 4).
  * The Berkeley Boulevard imprint has published several Avengers tie-ins, all of them team-ups with other superhero teams--with the X-Men (against the Leader) in Greg Cox's Gamma Quest trilogy (1999-2000), and with the Thunderbolts (against Baron Zemo) for Pierce Askegren's The Avengers & the Thunderbolts(1999).
  * Pocket Books has published two tie-ins with the Ultimates. Michael Jan Friedman's Tomorrow Men (2006) was set between the first and second Ultimates arcs, and involved time travelers from the future. Alex Irvine's Against All Enemies (2007) pitted the team against the Chitauri.

### [edit] Animated series

#### [edit] The Avengers: United They Stand

The Avengers (also known as The Avengers: United They Stand), was an animated
series consisting of thirteen episodes. It originally aired from October 30,
1999 to February 26, 2000, and was produced by Avi Arad and distributed by
20th Century Fox Television. This series featured a team composed of Ant-Man
(leader); the Wasp; Wonder Man; Tigra; Hawkeye and the Scarlet Witch. The
Falcon and the Vision were added to the roster in the opening episodes.
Captain America and Iron Man only make one appearance each, while Thor does
not appear in the series outside of the opening titles.

  * The Avengers appeared briefly in the 1966 The Marvel Superheroes Show.
  * The team also made appearances in the 1980 Spider-Man animated series ("Arsenic and Aunt May"); the 1994 Fantastic Four cartoon ("To Battle the Living Planet" and "Doomsday"), and in the X-Men animated series.

#### [edit] Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes

Marvel announced in October 2008 that its Marvel Animation division and the
outside studio Film Roman would produce an Avengers animated TV series, The
Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes, for planned broadcast in 2011. Confirmed
members are Captain America, Thor, Iron Man, Ant-Man (Henry Pym), Wasp and the
Hulk.[27]

### [edit] Video and computer games

In 1991, the Avengers were featured in the arcade and console game Captain
America and the Avengers.

In 1995 a videogame called "Avengers in Galactic Storm" based on the events of
the Operation: Galactic Storm was published by Data East Corporation in the
arcades in Japan and USA. It is now emulated by MAME.

The Avengers feature in the Marvel: Ultimate Alliance videogame.

### [edit] Film

Paramount Pictures and Marvel Studios are scheduled to release on May 4, 2012
a film titled The Avengers.[28][29] Iron Man director Jon Favreau is the
executive producer, while Robert Downey, Jr. and Don Cheadle will play Iron
Man and War Machine, respectively. The film's roster includes Iron Man,
Captain America, the Incredible Hulk and Thor.[29] The film's writer, Zak Penn
(co-writer of The Incredible Hulk film), cited Mark Millar and Bryan Hitch's
Ultimates version of the team as inspiration for the story.[30] In February
2009 Samuel L. Jackson signed a nine picture deal with Marvel Studios and
Paramount Pictures to play Nick Fury in Iron Man II, Thor, The First Avenger:
Captain America and The Avengers.[31] In March 2009 Scarlett Johansson signed
on to play Black Widow in both Iron Man II and The Avengers.[32]

## [edit] See also

  * Bibliography of Avengers titles
  * List of Avengers members
  * Great Lakes Avengers

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ The Avengers #2 (Nov. 1963)
  2. ^ a b The Avengers #4 (March 1964)
  3. ^ a b The Avengers #16 (May 1965)
  4. ^ "Avengers, The (1963 Series)". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=1571. Retrieved on 2007-06-16.
  5. ^ "West Coast Avengers (1985 Series)". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=3061. Retrieved on 2007-06-16.
  6. ^ "Avengers West Coast (1989 Series)". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=3830. Retrieved on 2007-06-16.
  7. ^ "Solo Avengers (1987 Series)". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=3435. Retrieved on 2007-06-16.
  8. ^ "Avengers Spotlight (1989 Series)". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=3829. Retrieved on 2007-06-16.
  9. ^ "Avengers (1996 series)". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=7252. Retrieved on 2007-06-16.
  10. ^ "Avengers (2004 Series)". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=11637. Retrieved on 2007-06-16.
  11. ^ "Avengers Finale". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=224494. Retrieved on 2008-04-24.
  12. ^ "The New Avengers (2005 Series)". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=12464. Retrieved on 2007-06-16.
  13. ^ "Mighty Avengers". Grand Comicbook Database. http://www.comics.org/series.lasso?SeriesID=22524. Retrieved on 2008-04-24.
  14. ^ The Avengers vol. 3, #1 (Feb. 1998) Marvel Comics
  15. ^ The Avengers #141 (Aug. 1975)
  16. ^ Force Works concluded with issue #22 (Apr 1996).
  17. ^ "Heroes Reborn"
  18. ^ The "Avengers Disassembled" story ran through several titles, with the final chapters featured in The Avengers #500 - #503 (Sept. - Dec. 2004).
  19. ^ The story of the Scarlet Witch continued in the biweekly limited series House of M #1-8 (Aug. - Dec. 2005)
  20. ^ Mighty Avengers #1 (May 2007) - present
  21. ^ What Ifâ¦? #9 (Jun 1978) Marvel Comics
  22. ^ Avengers Forever #1-12 (Dec. 1998 - Feb. 2000) Marvel Comics
  23. ^ Agents of Atlas #1-6 (Marvel Comic, Oct. 2006âMarch 2007).
  24. ^ The Ultimates"" #1-13 (March 2002 - April 2004) Marvel Comics
  25. ^ House of M: Avengers #1-5 (Jan.-April 2008; two issues published Feb. 2008)
  26. ^ X-Universe #1-2 (May-June 1995)
  27. ^ Marvel Comics press release: "Announcing Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes, October 8, 2008
  28. ^ "Sony and Marvel Studios Set New Release Dates!". Superhero Hype!. 2009-03-11. http://www.superherohype.com/news/spider-mannews.php?id=8161. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.
  29. ^ a b Marvel Entertainment (2008-10-29). "Downey Jr., Favreau & Cheadle Suit Up for The Avengers!". Superhero Hype!. http://www.superherohype.com/news/ironmannews.php?id=7763. Retrieved on 2008-10-30.
  30. ^ Scott Collura (2007-05-03). "Penn on Avengers". IGN. http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/785/785607p1.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-30.
  31. ^ http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/news/e3i57845f198f95ed938a79d4a806b64e68
  32. ^ Nikki Finke (2009-03-11). "Another Iron Man 2 Deal". Nikki Finke's Deadline Hollywood Daily. http://www.deadlinehollywooddaily.com/another-iron-man-2-exclusive-scarlett-johannson-will-replace-emily-blunt-in-iron-man-2/. Retrieved on 2009-03-12.

## [edit] References

  * Marvel Comics: Avengers official site
  * Big Comic Book DataBase: Avengers

## [edit] External links

  * MDP:Avengers \- Marvel Database Project (wiki)

v â¢ d â¢ e

Avengers  
Creators

Stan Lee Â· Jack Kirby  
Current Books

v â¢ d â¢ e

New Avengers  
Creators

Brian Michael Bendis Â· David Finch  
Members

Luke Cage Â· Ronin Â· Spider-Man Â· Wolverine Â· Captain America (Bucky
Barnes) Â· Ms. Marvel Â· Spider-Woman Â· Mockingbird Â· Jessica Jones  
Former members

Captain America Â· Doctor Strange Â· Iron Man Â· The Sentry Â· Echo Â· Iron
Fist Â· Veranke (disguised as Spider-Woman)  
Enemies

Iron Patriot Â· Dark Avengers Â· Hood  
Storylines

Story arcs Â· House of M Â· New Avengers: Illuminati Â· World War Hulk Â·
Secret Invasion Â· Dark Reign Â· New Avengers/Transformers  
Related series

Avengers Â· "Avengers Disassembled" Â· Mighty Avengers Â· Dark Avengers  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Mighty Avengers  
Creators

Brian Michael Bendis Â· Frank Cho

<IMG>  
Members

Stature Â· U.S.Agent Â· Vision Â· Wasp (Henry Pym)  
Adversaries

Chthon Â· New Avengers Â· Modred the Mystic Â· Mole Man Â· Skrulls Â·
Symbiotes Â· Ultron  
Storylines

Story arcs Â· Dark Reign  
Related series

Avengers Â· Avengers: The Initiative Â· New Avengers Â· Dark Avengers  
v â¢ d â¢ e

The Initiative  
Teams

Primary: Dark Avengers Â· Trainees Â· Thunderbolts  
Ancillary: Action Pack Â· The Called Â· The Cavalry Â· The Command Â·
Defenders Â· Desert Stars Â· Force Works Â· Freedom Force Â· The Garrison Â·
Great Lakes Initiative Â· Heavy Hitters Â· Liberteens Â· The Mavericks Â· The
Order Â· Point Men Â· Rangers Â· Spaceknights  
Locations

Stark Tower Â· Camp Hammond  
Anti-Registration teams

Mighty Avengers Â· New Avengers Â· Counter Force Â· New Warriors Â· Young
Avengers Â· Runaways Â· X-Factor Investigations  
Comic book titles

Primary: The Avengers Â· New Avengers Â· Mighty Avengers Â· Dark Avengers Â·
West Coast Avengers  

Ancillary: Agents of Atlas Â· Force Works Â· Great Lakes Avengers Â· Avengers:
The Initiative Â· Young Avengers Â· Solo Avengers  

Alternate continuities: The Ultimates (Members) Â· A-Next (Members) Â· Marvel
Adventures: The Avengers Â· Squadron Supreme (Members)  
Opponents

Baron Zemo Â· Collector Â· Count Nefaria Â· Egghead Â· Grandmaster Â· Graviton
Â· Grim Reaper Â· Hood Â· Immortus Â· Kang Â· Korvac Â· Legion of the Unliving
Â· Lethal Legion Â· Master Pandemonium Â· Masters of Evil Â· Sons of the
Serpent Â· Space Phantom Â· Super-Adaptoid Â· Squadron Sinister Â· Taskmaster
Â· Ultron  
Locations

Avengers Mansion Â· Avengers Island Â· Stark Tower  
In other media

Avengers in Galactic Storm Â· The Avengers: United They Stand Â· Captain
America and the Avengers Â· Ultimate Avengers Â· Ultimate Avengers 2  
Miscellania

Bibliography of Avengers titles Â· List of Avengers members Â· New Avengers
story arcs  
v â¢ d â¢ e

The Initiative  
Teams

Primary: Dark Avengers Â· Trainees Â· Thunderbolts  
Ancillary: Action Pack Â· The Called Â· The Cavalry Â· The Command Â·
Defenders Â· Desert Stars Â· Force Works Â· Freedom Force Â· The Garrison Â·
Great Lakes Initiative Â· Heavy Hitters Â· Liberteens Â· The Mavericks Â· The
Order Â· Point Men Â· Rangers Â· Spaceknights  
Locations

Stark Tower Â· Camp Hammond  
Anti-Registration teams

Mighty Avengers Â· New Avengers Â· Counter Force Â· New Warriors Â· Young
Avengers Â· Runaways Â· X-Factor Investigations  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avengers_(comics)"

Categories: Marvel Comics superhero teams | Avengers | Marvel Comics titles

Hidden categories: Groups pop

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 01:07.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



