
# World War I

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Great War" redirects here. For other uses, see Great War (disambiguation).

Semi-protected

World War I  
<IMG>  
Clockwise from top: Trenches on the Western Front; a British Mark IV tank
crossing a trench; Royal Navy battleship HMS Irresistible sinking after
striking a mine at the Battle of the Dardanelles; a Vickers machine gun crew
with gas masks, and German Albatros D.III biplanes  
Date 28 June 1914 â 11 November 1918 (Armistice Treaty)

Peace treaty signed 28 June 1919  
Location Europe, Africa and the Middle East (briefly in China and the Pacific
Islands)  
Result Allied victory; end of the German, Russian, Ottoman, and Austro-
Hungarian Empires; foundation of new countries in Europe and the Middle East;
transfer of German colonies to other powers; establishment of the League of
Nations.  
Belligerents  
Allied (Entente) Powers Central Powers  
Commanders  
Leaders and commanders Leaders and commanders  
Casualties and losses  
Military dead:  
5,525,000  
Military wounded:  
12,831,500  
Military missing:  
4,121,000[1]  
...further details. Military dead:  
4,386,000  
Military wounded:  
8,388,000  
Military missing:  
3,629,000[1]  
...further details.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Theatres of World War I  
European  
Balkans â Gallipoli â Western Front â Eastern Front â Italian Front  
Middle Eastern  
Caucasus â Mesopotamia â Sinai and Palestine â Persia  
African  
South-West Africa â West Africa â East Africa â North  Africa  
Asian and Pacific  
Other  
Atlantic Ocean â Mediterranean â Naval â Aerial  
World War I (WWI, WW1), also known as the First World War, Great War and War
to End All Wars, was a global military conflict which involved the majority of
the world's great powers,[2] organized into two opposing military alliances:
the Entente Powers and the Central Powers.[3] Over 70 million military
personnel were mobilized in one of the largest wars in history.[4] In a state
of total war, the major combatants placed their scientific and industrial
capabilities at the service of the war effort. Over 15 million people were
killed, making it one of the deadliest conflicts in human history.[5]

The proximate catalyst for the war was the 28 June 1914 assassination of
Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, by a
Bosnian-Serb nationalist, Gavrilo Princip. Austria-Hungary's resulting demands
against the Kingdom of Serbia led to the activation of a series of alliances
which within weeks saw all of the major European powers at war. Because of the
global empires of many European nations, the war soon spread worldwide.

By the war's end, four major imperial powers - Germany, Russia, Austria-
Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire \- had been militarily and politically
defeated, with the latter two ceasing to exist as autonomous countries.[6] The
revolutionized Soviet Union emerged from the Russian Empire, while the map of
central Europe was completely redrawn into numerous smaller states.[7] The
League of Nations was formed in the hope of preventing another such conflict.
The European nationalism spawned by the war, the repercussions of Germany's
defeat, and the Treaty of Versailles would eventually lead to the beginning of
World War II in 1939.[8]

## Contents

  * 1 Background
  * 2 Chronology
    * 2.1 Opening hostilities
      * 2.1.1 Confusion among the Central Powers
      * 2.1.2 African campaigns
      * 2.1.3 Serbian campaign
      * 2.1.4 German forces in Belgium and France
      * 2.1.5 Asia and the Pacific
    * 2.2 Early stages
      * 2.2.1 Trench warfare begins
    * 2.3 Naval war
    * 2.4 Southern theatres
      * 2.4.1 War in the Balkans
      * 2.4.2 Ottoman Empire
      * 2.4.3 Italian participation
      * 2.4.4 Fighting in India
        * 2.4.4.1 Indian independence movement
    * 2.5 Eastern Front
      * 2.5.1 Initial actions
      * 2.5.2 Ukrainian oppression
      * 2.5.3 Russian Revolution
    * 2.6 1917â1918
      * 2.6.1 Entry of the United States
        * 2.6.1.1 Isolationism
        * 2.6.1.2 Making the case
        * 2.6.1.3 U.S. declaration of war on Germany
        * 2.6.1.4 First active U.S. participation
      * 2.6.2 German Spring Offensive of 1918
      * 2.6.3 New states under war zone
      * 2.6.4 Allied victory: summer and autumn 1918
      * 2.6.5 Allied superiority and the stab-in-the-back legend, November 1918
    * 2.7 End of war
  * 3 Technology
  * 4 Legacy
    * 4.1 Soldiers' experiences
      * 4.1.1 Prisoners of war
    * 4.2 Military attachÃ©s and war correspondents
    * 4.3 Opposition to the war
  * 5 War crimes
    * 5.1 Genocide
    * 5.2 Rape of Belgium
  * 6 Aftermath
    * 6.1 Later conflicts
    * 6.2 Peace treaties
    * 6.3 New national identities
    * 6.4 Social trauma
    * 6.5 Macro- and micro-economic effects
  * 7 Cognate names for the war
  * 8 See also
    * 8.1 Media
    * 8.2 Animated maps
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## Background

In the 19th century, the major European powers had gone to great lengths to
maintain a "balance of power" throughout Europe, resulting in a complex
network of political and military alliances throughout the continent.[9] The
first of these major alliances formed in 1879, when the German Empire and
Austria-Hungary signed treaties creating the Dual Alliance, seen as a method
of combating Russian influence in the Balkans as the Ottoman Empire continued
to weaken.[9] In 1882, this alliance was expanded to include Italy in what
became the Triple Alliance.[10] European conflict was averted largely due to a
carefully planned network of treaties between the German Empire and the
remainder of Europeâorchestrated by Chancellor Otto von Bismarck. Bismarck's
system of alliances was gradually deconstructed following the coronation of
Kaiser Wilhelm II, with treaties[which?] between Germany and Russia ending in
1890. Two years later the Franco-Russian Alliance was signed to counteract the
force of the Triple Alliance. In 1907, the British Empire joined France and
Russia, signalling the beginning of the Triple Entente.[9]

As German industrial power grew, Kaiser Wilhelm II devoted significant
economic resources to the establishment of the Kaiserliche Marine, in order to
be capable of rivaling the Royal Navy.[11] As a result, both nations strove to
outbuild each other in terms of capital ships. With the launch of HMS
Dreadnought in 1906, the British Empire gained a significant advantage over
their German rivals.[11] The arms race between Britain and Germany eventually
extended to the rest of Europe, with all the major powers devoting their
industrial base to the production of the equipment and weapons necessary for a
pan-European conflict.[12] Between 1908 and 1913, the military spending of the
European powers increased by 50%.[13]

In 1909, Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia-Herzegovina from the Ottoman Empire,
greatly angering the Russian Romanov Dynasty and the Kingdom of Serbia, as
Bosnia-Herzegovina contained a significant Slavic Serbian population.[14]
Russian political maneuvering in the region destabilized peace accords that
were already fracturing in what was known as "the Powder keg of Europe".[14]
In 1913, the First Balkan War was fought between the Balkan League and the
fracturing Ottoman Empire. The resulting Treaty of London further shrank the
Ottoman Empire, creating an independent Albanian State while enlarging the
territorial holdings of Bulgaria, Serbia and Greece. When Bulgaria attacked
both Serbia and Romania on 13 June 1913 it lost all of Macedonia to Serbia and
Southern Dobruja to Romania in the 33âday Second Balkan War, further
destabilizing the region.[15]

On 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian-Serb student and member of Young
Bosnia, assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria in Sarajevo.[16]
Suspecting Serbian involvement in the assassination,[16] Austria-Hungary
delivered the July Ultimatum to Serbia, a series of ten demands aimed at
diplomatically undermining Serbia.[17] When Serbia acceded to eight of the ten
demands levied against it in the ultimatum, Austria-Hungary declared war on
Serbia on 28 July 1914. The Russian Empire, unwilling to allow Austria-Hungary
to eliminate its influence in the Balkans, ordered a partial mobilization one
day later.[10] When the German Empire began to mobilize on 30 July 1914,
Franceâsporting significant animosity over the German conquest of Alsace-
Lorraine during the Franco-Prussian Warâordered French mobilization on 1
August. Germany declared war on Russia the same day.[18]

## Chronology

### Opening hostilities

#### Confusion among the Central Powers

The strategy of the Central Powers suffered from miscommunication. Germany had
promised to support Austria-Hungaryâs invasion of Serbia, but
interpretations of what this meant differed. Austro-Hungarian leaders believed
Germany would cover its northern flank against Russia. Germany, however,
envisioned Austria-Hungary directing the majority of its troops against
Russia, while Germany dealt with France. This confusion forced the Austro-
Hungarian Army to divide its forces between the Russian and Serbian fronts.

#### African campaigns

Main article: African theatre of World War I

Some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French and German
colonial forces in Africa. On 7 August, French and British troops invaded the
German protectorate of Togoland. On 10 August German forces in South-West
Africa attacked South Africa; sporadic and fierce fighting continued for the
remainder of the war.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Haut-Rhin, France, 1917

#### Serbian campaign

Main article: Serbian Campaign (World War I)

The Serbian army fought the Battle of Cer against the invading Austrians,
beginning on 12 August, occupying defensive positions on the south side of the
Drina and Sava rivers. Over the next two weeks Austrian attacks were thrown
back with heavy losses, which marked the first major Allied victory of the war
and dashed Austrian hopes of a swift victory. As a result, Austria had to keep
sizable forces on the Serbian front, weakening its efforts against Russia.

#### German forces in Belgium and France

Main article: Western Front (World War I)

The German attack on the Western Front began with an invasion through neutral
Belgium. Initially, the Germans had great success in the Battle of the
Frontiers (14 Augustâ24 August). Russia, however, attacked in East Prussia
and diverted German forces intended for the Western Front. Germany defeated
Russia in a series of battles collectively known as the First Battle of
Tannenberg (17 August â 2 September), but this diversion exacerbated
problems of insufficient speed of advance from rail-heads not foreseen by the
German General Staff. The Schlieffen Plan called for the right flank of the
German advance to converge on Paris, but the French, with some assistance from
the British forces finally halted the German advance east of Paris at the
First Battle of the Marne (5 Septemberâ12 September). The Central Powers
were thereby denied a quick victory and forced to fight a war on two fronts.
The German army had fought its way into a good defensive position inside
France and had permanently incapacitated 230,000 more French and British
troops than it had lost itself. Despite this, communications problems and
questionable command decisions cost Germany the chance of obtaining an early
victory.

#### Asia and the Pacific

Main article: Asian and Pacific theatre of World War I

New Zealand occupied German Samoa (later Western Samoa) on 30 August. On 11
September the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force landed on the
island of Neu Pommern (later New Britain), which formed part of German New
Guinea. Japan seized Germany's Micronesian colonies and after the Battle of
Tsingtao, the German coaling port of Qingdao, in the Chinese Shandong
peninsula. Within a few months, the Allied forces had seized all the German
territories in the Pacific.

<IMG>

<IMG>

In the trenches: Infantry with gas masks, Ypres, 1917

### Early stages

#### Trench warfare begins

<IMG>

This section is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(February 2008)  
Main article: Western Front (World War I)

Military tactics before World War I had failed to keep pace with advances in
technology. These changes resulted in the building of impressive defence
systems, which out-of-date tactics could not break through for most of the
war. Barbed wire was a significant hindrance to massed infantry advances.
Artillery, vastly more lethal than in the 1870s, coupled with machine guns,
made crossing open ground very difficult. The Germans introduced poison gas;
it soon became used by both sides, though it never proved decisive in winning
a battle. Its effects were brutal, causing slow and painful death, and poison
gas became one of the most-feared and best-remembered horrors of the war.
Commanders on both sides failed to develop tactics for breaching entrenched
positions without heavy casualties. In time, however, technology began to
produce new offensive weapons, such as the tank. Britain and France were its
primary users; the Germans employed captured Allied tanks and small numbers of
their own design.

After the First Battle of the Marne, both Entente and German forces began a
series of outflanking maneuvers, in the so-called 'Race to the Sea'. Britain
and France soon found themselves facing entrenched German forces from Lorraine
to Belgium's Flemish coast. Britain and France sought to take the offensive,
while Germany defended the occupied territories; consequently, German trenches
were generally much better constructed than those of their enemy. Anglo-French
trenches were only intended to be 'temporary' before their forces broke
through German defenses. Both sides attempted to break the stalemate using
scientific and technological advances. In April 1915 the Germans used chlorine
gas for the first time (in violation of the Hague Convention), opening a six
kilometre (four mile) hole in the Allied lines when British and French
colonial troops retreated. Canadian soldiers closed the breach at the Second
Battle of Ypres. At the Third Battle of Ypres, Canadian and ANZAC troops took
the village of Passchendaele.

The British Army endured the bloodiest day in its history, suffering 57,470
casualties and 19,240 dead on 1 July 1916, the first day of the Battle of the
Somme. Most of the casualties occurred in the first hour of the attack. The
entire Somme offensive cost the British Army almost half a million men.[19]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A French assault on German positions. Champagne, France, 1917.

Neither side proved able to deliver a decisive blow for the next two years,
though protracted German action at Verdun throughout 1916, combined with the
Entente's failure at the Somme,[citation needed] brought the exhausted French
army to the brink of collapse. Futile attempts at frontal assault, a rigid
adherence to an ineffectual method,[citation needed] came at a high price for
both the British and the French poilu (infantry) and led to widespread
mutinies, especially during the Nivelle Offensive.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Canadian troops advancing behind a British Mark II tank at the Battle of Vimy
Ridge.

Throughout 1915â17, the British Empire and France suffered more casualties
than Germany, due both to the strategic and tactical stances chosen by the
sides. At the strategic level, while the Germans only mounted a single main
offensive at Verdun, the Allies made several attempts to break through German
lines. At the tactical level, the German defensive doctrine was well suited
for trench warfare, with a relatively lightly defended "sacrificial" forward
position,[citation needed] and a more powerful main position from which an
immediate and powerful counter-offensive could be launched. This combination
usually was effective in pushing out attackers at a relatively low cost to the
Germans.[citation needed] In absolute terms, of course, the cost in lives of
men for both attack and defense was astounding.

Ludendorff wrote on the fighting in 1917, "The 25th of August concluded the
second phase of the Flanders battle. It had cost us heavilyâ¦. The costly
August battles in Flanders and at Verdun imposed a heavy strain on the Western
troops. In spite of all the concrete protection they seemed more or less
powerless under the enormous weight of the enemyâs artillery. At some points
they no longer displayed the firmness which I, in common with the local
commanders, had hoped for. The enemy managed to adapt himself to our method of
employing counter attacksâ¦ I myself was being put to a terrible strain. The
state of affairs in the West appeared to prevent the execution of our plans
elsewhere. Our wastage had been so high as to cause grave misgivings, and had
exceeded all expectation."

On the battle of the Menin Road Ridge Ludendorff wrote: "Another terrific
assault was made on our lines on the 20 Septemberâ¦. The enemyâs onslaught
on the 20th was successful, which proved the superiority of the attack over
the defence. Its strength did not consist in the tanks; we found them
inconvenient, but put them out of action all the same. The power of the attack
lay in the artillery, and in the fact that ours did not do enough damage to
the hostile infantry as they were assembling, and above all, at the actual
time of the assault."[20]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Officers and senior enlisted men of the Bermuda Militia Artillery's Bermuda
Contingent, Royal Garrison Artillery, in Europe.

Around 800,000 soldiers from the British Empire were on the Western Front at
any one time.[citation needed] 1,000 battalions, occupying sectors of the line
from the North Sea to the Orne River, operated on a month-long four-stage
rotation system, unless an offensive was underway. The front contained over
9,600 kilometres (5,965 mi) of trenches. Each battalion held its sector for
about a week before moving back to support lines and then further back to the
reserve lines before a week out-of-line, often in the Poperinge or Amiens
areas.

In the 1917 Battle of Arras the only significant British military success was
the capture of Vimy Ridge by the Canadian Corps under Sir Arthur Currie and
Julian Byng. The assaulting troops were able for the first time to overrun,
rapidly reinforce and hold the ridge defending the coal-rich Douai plain.[21]

### Naval war

Main article: Naval Warfare of World War I

<IMG>

<IMG>

The British Grand Fleet.

At the start of the war, the German Empire had cruisers scattered across the
globe, some of which were subsequently used to attack Allied merchant
shipping. The British Royal Navy systematically hunted them down, though not
without some embarrassment from its inability to protect Allied shipping. For
example, the German detached light cruiser SMS Emden, part of the East-Asia
squadron stationed at Tsingtao, seized or destroyed 15 merchantmen, as well as
sinking a Russian cruiser and a French destroyer. However, the bulk of the
German East-Asia squadronâconsisting of the armoured cruisers Scharnhorst
and Gneisenau, light cruisers NÃ¼rnberg and Leipzig and two transport
shipsâdid not have orders to raid shipping and was instead underway to
Germany when it encountered elements of the British fleet. The German
flotilla, along with Dresden, sank two armoured cruisers at the Battle of
Coronel, but was almost completely destroyed at the Battle of the Falkland
Islands in December 1914, with only Dresden escaping.[22]

Soon after the outbreak of hostilities, Britain initiated a naval blockade of
Germany. The strategy proved effective, cutting off vital military and
civilian supplies, although this blockade violated generally accepted
international law codified by several international agreements of the past two
centuries.[23] Britain mined international waters to prevent any ships from
entering entire sections of ocean, causing danger to even neutral ships.[24]
Since there was limited response to this tactic, Germany expected a similar
response to its unrestricted submarine warfare.[25]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A battleship squadron of the Hochseeflotte at sea

The 1916 Battle of Jutland (German: Skagerrakschlacht, or "Battle of the
Skagerrak") developed into the largest naval battle of the war, the only full-
scale clash of battleships during the war. It took place on 31 Mayâ1 June
1916, in the North Sea off Jutland. The Kaiserliche Marine's High Seas Fleet,
commanded by Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer, squared off against the Royal
Navy's Grand Fleet, led by Admiral Sir John Jellicoe. The engagement was a
standoff, as the Germans, outmaneuvered by the larger British fleet, managed
to escape and inflicted more damage to the British fleet than they received.
Strategically, however, the British asserted their control of the sea, and the
bulk of the German surface fleet remained confined to port for the duration of
the war.

German U-boats attempted to cut the supply lines between North America and
Britain.[26] The nature of submarine warfare meant that attacks often came
without warning, giving the crews of the merchant ships little hope of
survival.[27] The United States launched a protest, and Germany modified its
rules of engagement. After the notorious sinking of the passenger ship RMS
Lusitania in 1915, Germany promised not to target passenger liners, while
Britain armed its merchant ships, placing them beyond the protection of the
"cruiser rules" which demanded warning and placing crews in "a place of
safety" (a standard which lifeboats did not meet).[28] Finally, in early 1917
Germany adopted a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare, realizing the
Americans would eventually enter the war.[29] Germany sought to strangle
Allied sea lanes before the U.S. could transport a large army overseas.

The U-boat threat lessened in 1917, when merchant ships entered convoys
escorted by destroyers. This tactic made it difficult for U-boats to find
targets, which significantly lessened losses; after the introduction of
hydrophone and depth charges, accompanying destroyers might actually attack a
submerged submarine with some hope of success. The convoy system slowed the
flow of supplies, since ships had to wait as convoys were assembled. The
solution to the delays was a massive program to build new freighters. Troop
ships were too fast for the submarines and did not travel the North Atlantic
in convoys.[30][31]

World War I also saw the first use of aircraft carriers in combat, with HMS
Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a successful raid against the Zeppelin
hangars at Tondern in July 1918, as well as blimps for antisubmarine
patrol.[32]

### Southern theatres

#### War in the Balkans

Main articles: Balkans Campaign (World War I), Serbian Campaign (World War I),
and Macedonian front (World War I)

Faced with Russia, Austria-Hungary could spare only one third of its army to
attack Serbia. After suffering heavy losses, the Austrians briefly occupied
the Serbian capital, Belgrade. A Serbian counterattack in the battle of
Kolubara, however, succeeded in driving them from the country by the end of
1914. For the first ten months of 1915, Austria-Hungary used most of its
military reserves to fight Italy. German and Austro-Hungarian diplomats,
however, scored a coup by convincing Bulgaria to join in attacking Serbia. The
Austro-Hungarian provinces of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia provided troops for
Austria-Hungary, invading Serbia as well as fighting Russia and Italy.
Montenegro allied itself with Serbia.

Serbia was conquered in a little more than a month. The attack began in
October, when the Central Powers launched an offensive from the north; four
days later the Bulgarians joined the attack from the east. The Serbian army,
fighting on two fronts and facing certain defeat, retreated into Albania,
halting only once in order to make a stand against the Bulgarians. The Serbs
suffered defeat near modern day Gnjilane in the Battle of Kosovo[citation
needed]. Montenegro covered the Serbian retreat toward the Adriatic coast in
the Battle of Mojkovac in 6-7 January 1916, but ultimately the Austrians
conquered Montenegro, too. Serbian forces were evacuated by ship to Greece.

In late 1915 a Franco-British force landed at Salonica in Greece, to offer
assistance and to pressure the government to declare war against the Central
Powers. Unfortunately for the Allies, the pro-German King Constantine I
dismissed the pro-Allied government of Eleftherios Venizelos, before the
Allied expeditionary force could arrive.

After conquest, Serbia was divided between Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria.
Bulgarians commenced bulgarization of the Serbian population in their
occupation zone, banishing Serbian Cyrillic and the Serbian Orthodox Church.
After forced conscription of the Serbian population into the Bulgarian army in
1917, the Toplica Uprising began. Serbian rebels liberated for a short time
the area between the Kopaonik mountains and the South Morava river. The
uprising was crushed by joint efforts of Bulgarian and Austrian forces at the
end of March 1917.

The Macedonian Front proved static for the most part. Serbian forces retook
part of Macedonia by recapturing Bitola on 19 November 1916. Only at the end
of the conflict were the Entente powers able to break through, after most of
the German and Austro-Hungarian troops had withdrawn. The Bulgarians suffered
their only defeat of the war at the Battle of Dobro Pole but days later, they
decisively defeated British and Greek forces at the Battle of Doiran, avoiding
occupation. Bulgaria signed an armistice on 29 September 1918.

#### Ottoman Empire

Main article: Middle Eastern theatre of World War I

<IMG>

<IMG>

British artillery placements during the Battle of Jerusalem, 1917.

The Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers in the war, the secret Ottoman-
German Alliance having been signed in August 1914. It threatened Russia's
Caucasian territories and Britain's communications with India via the Suez
Canal. The British and French opened overseas fronts with the Gallipoli (1915)
and Mesopotamian campaigns. In Gallipoli, the Turks successfully repelled the
British, French and Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs). In
Mesopotamia, by contrast, after the disastrous Siege of Kut (1915â16),
British Imperial forces reorganised and captured Baghdad in March 1917.
Further to the west, in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign, initial British
setbacks were overcome when Jerusalem was captured in December 1917. The
Egyptian Expeditionary Force, under Field Marshal Edmund Allenby, broke the
Ottoman forces at the Battle of Megiddo in September 1918.

Russian armies generally had the best of it in the Caucasus. Enver Pasha,
supreme commander of the Turkish armed forces, was ambitious and dreamed of
conquering central Asia. He was, however, a poor commander.[33] He launched an
offensive against the Russians in the Caucasus in December 1914 with 100,000
troops; insisting on a frontal attack against mountainous Russian positions in
winter, he lost 86% of his force at the Battle of Sarikamis.[34]

The Russian commander from 1915 to 1916, General Yudenich, drove the Turks out
of most of the southern Caucasus with a string of victories.[34] In 1917,
Russian Grand Duke Nicholas assumed command of the Caucasus front. Nicholas
planned a railway from Russian Georgia to the conquered territories, so that
fresh supplies could be brought up for a new offensive in 1917. However, in
March 1917, (February in the pre-revolutionary Russian calendar), the Czar was
overthrown in the February Revolution and the Russian Caucasus Army began to
fall apart. In this situation, the army corps of Armenian volunteer units
realigned themselves under the command of General Tovmas Nazarbekian, with Dro
as a civilian commissioner of the Administration for Western Armenia. The
front line had three main divisions: Movses Silikyan, Andranik, and Mikhail
Areshian. Another regular unit was under Colonel Korganian. There were
Armenian partisan guerrilla detachments (more than 40,000[35]) accompanying
these main units.

The Arab Revolt (described in Lawrence of Arabia) was a major cause of the
Ottoman Empire's defeat. The revolts started with the Battle of Mecca by
Sherif Hussain of Mecca with the help of Britain in June 1916, and ended with
the Ottoman surrender of Damascus. Fakhri Pasha the Ottoman commander of
Medina showed stubborn resistance for over two and half years during the Siege
of Medina.

Along the border of Italian Libya and British Egypt, the Senussi tribe,
incited and armed by the Turks, waged a small-scale guerrilla war against
Allied troops. According to Martin Gilbert's The First World War, the British
were forced to dispatch 12,000 troops to deal with the Senussi. Their
rebellion was finally crushed in mid-1916.

#### Italian participation

Main article: Italian Campaign (World War I)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Austro-Hungarian mountain corps in Tyrol

Italy had been allied with the German and Austro-Hungarian Empires since 1882
as part of the Triple Alliance. However, the nation had its own designs on
Austrian territory in Trentino, Istria and Dalmatia. Rome had a secret 1902
pact with France, effectively nullifying its alliance.[citation needed] At the
start of hostilities, Italy refused to commit troops, arguing that the Triple
Alliance was defensive in nature, and that Austria-Hungary was an aggressor.
The Austro-Hungarian government began negotiations to secure Italian
neutrality, offering the French colony of Tunisia in return. The Allies made a
counter-offer in which Italy would receive the Alpine province of Alto Adige
and territory on the Dalmatian coast after the defeat of Austria-Hungary. This
was fomalised by the Treaty of London. Further encouraged by the Allied
invasion of Turkey in April 1915, Italy joined the Entente and declared war on
Austria-Hungary on May 23. Fifteen months later Italy declared war on Germany.

Militarily, the Italians had numerical superiority. This advantage, however,
was lost, not only because of the difficult terrain in which fighting took
place, but also because of the strategies and tactics employed. Field Marshal
Luigi Cadorna, a staunch proponent of the frontal assault, had dreams of
breaking into the Slovenian plateau, taking Ljubljana and threatening Vienna.
It was a Napoleonic plan, which had no realistic chance of success in an age
of barbed wire, machine guns, and indirect artillery fire, combined with hilly
and mountainous terrain.

On the Trentino front, the Austro-Hungarians took advantage of the mountainous
terrain, which favoured the defender. After an initial strategic retreat, the
front remained largely unchanged, while Austrian KaiserschÃ¼tzen and
StandschÃ¼tzen (German wikipedia) engaged Italian Alpini in bitter hand-to-
hand combat throughout the summer. The Austro-Hungarians counter-attacked in
the Altopiano of Asiago, towards Verona and Padua, in the spring of 1916
(Strafexpedition), but made little progress.

Beginning in 1915, the Italians under Cadorna mounted eleven offensives on the
Isonzo front along the Isonzo River, north-east of Trieste. All eleven
offensives were repelled by the Austro-Hungarians, who held the higher ground.
In the summer of 1916, the Italians captured the town of Gorizia. After this
minor victory, the front remained static for over a year, despite several
Italian offensives. In the autumn of 1917, thanks to the improving situation
on the Eastern front, the Austrians received large numbers of reinforcements,
including German Stormtroopers and the elite Alpenkorps. The Central Powers
launched a crushing offensive on 26 October 1917, spearheaded by the Germans.
They achieved a victory at Caporetto. The Italian army was routed and
retreated more than 100 km (60 miles) to reorganise, stabilizing the front at
the Piave River. Since in the Battle of Caporetto Italian Army had heavy
losses, the Italian Government called to arms the so called '99 Boys (Ragazzi
del '99), that is, all males who were 18 years old. In 1918, the Austro-
Hungarians failed to break through, in a series of battles on the Asiago
Plateau, finally being decisively defeated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto in
October of that year. Austria-Hungary surrendered in early November
1918.[36][37][38]

Further information: Battles of the Isonzo

#### Fighting in India

The war began with an unprecedented outpouring of loyalty and goodwill towards
the United Kingdom from within the mainstream political leadership, contrary
to initial British fears of an Indian revolt. India under British rule
contributed massively to the British war effort by providing men and
resources. This was done by the Indian Congress in hope of achieving self-
government as India was very much under the control of the British. The United
Kingdom disappointed the Indians by not providing self-governance, leading to
the Gandhiian Era in Indian history. About 1.3 million Indian soldiers and
labourers served in Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, while both the Indian
government and the princes sent large supplies of food, money, and ammunition.
In all 140,000 men served on the Western Front and nearly 700,000 in the
Middle East. 47,746 Indian soldiers were killed and 65,126 wounded during
World War I.[39]

##### Indian independence movement

Bengal and Punjab remained hotbeds of anti-colonial activities. Terrorism in
Bengal, increasingly closely linked with the unrests in Punjab, was
significant enough to nearly paralyse the regional administration. Also from
the beginning of the war, expatriate Indian population, notably in Germany,
United States and Canada, headed by the Indian Independence Committee and the
Ghadar Party respectively, attempted to trigger insurrections in India on the
lines of the 1857 uprising with Irish Republican, German and Turkish help in a
massive conspiracy that has since come to be called the Hindu German
conspiracy. The conspiracy also made attempts to rally the Amir of Afghanistan
against British India, starting a political process in that country that
culminated three years later in the assassination of Amir Habibullah and
precipitation of the Third Anglo-Afghan war. A number of failed attempts at
mutiny were made in India, of which the February mutiny plan and the Singapore
mutiny remain most notable. This movement was suppressed by means of a massive
international counter-intelligence operation and draconian political acts
(including the Defence of India act 1915) that lasted nearly ten
years.[40][41][42]

The Ghadarites also attempted to organise incursions from the western border
of India, recruiting Indian prisoners of war from Turkey, Germany,
Mesopotamia. Ghadarite rebels, led by Sufi Amba Prasad, fought along with
Turkish forces in Iran and in Turkey. Plans were made in Constantinopole to
organise a campaign from Persia, through Baluchistan, to Punjab. These forces
were involved skirmishes that captured the frontier city of Karman, taking
into custody the British consul. Percy Sykes's campaign in Persia was directed
mostly against these composite forces. It was at this time that the Aga Khan
and his brother were recruited into the British War effort. However, the Aga
Khan's brother was captured and shot dead by the rebels, who also successfully
harassed British Forces in Sistan in Afghanistan, confining British forces to
Karamshir in Baluchistan, later moving towards Karachi. They were able to take
control of the coastal towns of Gawador and Dawar. The Baluchi chief of
Bampur, having declared his independence from the British rule, also joined
the Ghadarite forces. It was not before the war in Europe turned for the worse
for Turkey and Baghdad was captured by the British forces that the Ghadarite
forces, their supply lines starved, were finally dislodged. They retreated to
regroup at Shiraz, where they were finally defeated after a bitter fight. Amba
Prasad Sufi was killed in this battle. The Ghadarites carried on guerrilla
warfare along with the Iranian partisans till 1919.[43][44][45][46]

Although the conflict in India was not explicitly a part of the First World
War, it was part of the wider strategic context. The British attempt to
subjugate the rebelling tribal leaders drew away much needed troops from other
theaters, in particular, of course, the Western Front, where the real decisive
victory would be made.

The reason why some Indian and Afghani tribes rose up simply came down to
years of discontent which erupted, probably not coincidentally, during the
First World War. It is likely that the tribal leaders were aware that Britain
would not be able to field the required men, in terms of either number or
quality, but underestimated the strategic importance of India to the British.
Despite being far from the epicenter of the conflict, India provided a bounty
of men for the fronts. Its produce was also needed for the British war effort
and many trade routes running to other profitable areas of the Empire ran
through India. Therefore, although the British were not able to send the men
that they wanted, they were able to send enough to mount a gradual but
effective counter-guerrilla war against the tribesmen. The fighting continued
into 1919 and in some areas lasted even longer.

See also: Third Anglo-Afghan War and Hindu-German Conspiracy

### Eastern Front

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2008)  
#### Initial actions

Main article: Eastern Front (World War I)

While the Western Front had reached stalemate, the war continued in East
Europe. Initial Russian plans called for simultaneous invasions of Austrian
Galicia and German East Prussia. Although Russia's initial advance into
Galicia was largely successful, they were driven back from East Prussia by
Hindenburg and Ludendorff at Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes in August and
September 1914. Russia's less developed industrial base and ineffective
military leadership was instrumental in the events that unfolded. By the
spring of 1915, the Russians had retreated into Galicia, and in May the
Central Powers achieved a remarkable breakthrough on Poland's southern
frontiers. On 5 August they captured Warsaw and forced the Russians to
withdraw from Poland.

#### Ukrainian oppression

Further information: Ukraine in World War I

#### Russian Revolution

Main article: Russian Revolution of 1917

Dissatisfaction with the Russian government's conduct of the war grew, despite
the success of the June 1916 Brusilov offensive in eastern Galicia. The
success was undermined by the reluctance of other generals to commit their
forces to support the victory. Allied and Russian forces were revived only
temporarily with Romania's entry into the war on 27 August. German forces came
to the aid of embattled Austrian units in Transylvania and Bucharest fell to
the Central Powers on 6 December. Meanwhile, unrest grew in Russia, as the
Tsar remained at the front. Empress Alexandra's increasingly incompetent rule
drew protests and resulted in the murder of her favourite, Rasputin, at the
end of 1916.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vladimir Illyich Lenin

In March 1917, demonstrations in Petrograd culminated in the abdication of
Tsar Nicholas II and the appointment of a weak Provisional Government which
shared power with the Petrograd Soviet socialists. This arrangement led to
confusion and chaos both at the front and at home. The army became
increasingly ineffective.

The war and the government became more and more unpopular. Discontent led to a
rise in popularity of the Bolshevik party, led by Vladimir Lenin. He promised
to pull Russia out of the war and was able to gain power. The triumph of the
Bolsheviks in November was followed in December by an armistice and
negotiations with Germany. At first the Bolsheviks refused the German terms,
but when Germany resumed the war and marched across Ukraine with impunity, the
new government acceded to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918. It took
Russia out of the war and ceded vast territories, including Finland, the
Baltic provinces, parts of Poland and Ukraine to the Central Powers. The
manpower required for German occupation of former Russian territory may have
contributed to the failure of the Spring Offensive, however, and secured
relatively little food or other war materiel.

With the Bolsheviks' accession to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the Entente no
longer existed. The Allied powers led a small-scale invasion of Russia to stop
Germany from exploiting Russian resources and, to a lesser extent, to support
the Whites in the Russian Civil War. Allied troops landed in Archangel and in
Vladivostok.

Further information: North Russia Campaign

### 1917â1918

<IMG>

<IMG>

In the trenches: Royal Irish Rifles in a communications trench on the first
day on the Somme, 1 July 1916.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Taking photographs during the war required the use of a helmet.

Events of 1917 proved decisive in ending the war, although their effects were
not fully felt until 1918. The British naval blockade began to have a serious
impact on Germany. In response, in February 1917, the German General Staff
convinced Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg to declare unrestricted
submarine warfare, with the goal of starving Britain out of the war. Tonnage
sunk rose above 500,000 tons per month from February to July. It peaked at
860,000 tons in April. After July, the reintroduced convoy system became
extremely effective in neutralizing the U-boat threat. Britain was safe from
starvation and German industrial output fell.

On 3 May 1917 during the Nivelle Offensive the weary French 2nd Colonial
Division, veterans of the Battle of Verdun, refused their orders, arriving
drunk and without their weapons. Their officers lacked the means to punish an
entire division, and harsh measures were not immediately implemented. There
upon the mutinies afflicted 54 French divisions and saw 20,000 men desert. The
other Allied forces attacked but received massive casualties.[47] However,
appeals to patriotism and duty, as well as mass arrests and trials, encouraged
the soldiers to return to defend their trenches, although the French soldiers
refused to participate in further offensive action.[48] Robert Nivelle was
removed from command by 15 May, replaced by General Philippe PÃ©tain, who
suspended large-scale attacks. The French would go on the defensive for the
next year, leaving the burden of attack to Britain, her Empire and other
allies, and subsequently the United States.

The victory of Austria-Hungary and Germany at the Battle of Caporetto led the
Allies at the Rapallo Conference to form the Supreme War Council to coordinate
planning. Previously, British and French armies had operated under separate
commands.

In December, the Central Powers signed an armistice with Russia. This released
troops for use in the west. Ironically, German troop transfers could have been
greater if their territorial acquisitions had not been so dramatic. With
German reinforcements and new American troops pouring in, the final outcome
was to be decided on the Western front. The Central Powers knew that they
could not win a protracted war, but they held high hopes for a quick
offensive. Furthermore, the leaders of the Central Powers and the Allies
became increasingly fearful of social unrest and revolution in Europe. Thus,
both sides urgently sought a decisive victory.[49]

#### Entry of the United States

<IMG>

<IMG>

In December 1916, the Germans attempted to negotiate peace with the Allies,
declaring themselves the victors. The Allies rejected the offer. This German
poster from January 1917 quotes a speech by Kaiser Wilhelm II lambasting them
for their decision.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An American doughboy, circa 1918.

<IMG>

<IMG>

President Wilson before Congress, announcing the break in official relations
with Germany on 3 February 1917

##### Isolationism

The United States originally pursued a policy of isolationism, avoiding
conflict while trying to broker a peace. This resulted in increased tensions
with Berlin and London. When a German U-boat sank the British liner Lusitania
in 1915, with 128 Americans aboard, U.S. President Woodrow Wilson vowed,
"America is too proud to fight" and demanded an end to attacks on passenger
ships. Germany complied. Wilson unsuccessfully tried to mediate a settlement.
He repeatedly warned the U.S. would not tolerate unrestricted submarine
warfare, in violation of international law and U.S. ideas of human rights.
Wilson was under pressure from former president Theodore Roosevelt, who
denounced German acts as "piracy".[50] Wilson's desire to have a seat at
negotiations at war's end to advance the League of Nations also played a
role.[51] Wilson's Secretary of State, William Jennings Bryan, resigned in
protest of the President's decidedly warmongering diplomacy. Other factors
contributing to the U.S. entry into the war include the suspected German
sabotage of both Black Tom in Jersey City, New Jersey, and the Kingsland
Explosion in what is now Lyndhurst, New Jersey.

##### Making the case

In January 1917, after the Navy pressured the Kaiser, Germany resumed
unrestricted submarine warfare. Britain's secret Royal Navy cryptanalytic
group, Room 40, had broken the German diplomatic code. They intercepted a
proposal from Berlin (the Zimmermann Telegram) to Mexico to join the war as
Germany's ally against the United States, should the U.S. join. The proposal
suggested, if the U.S. were to enter the war, Mexico should declare war
against the United States and enlist Japan as an ally. This would prevent the
United States from joining the Allies and deploying troops to Europe, and
would give Germany more time for their unrestricted submarine warfare program
to strangle Britain's vital war supplies. In return, the Germans would promise
Mexico support in reclaiming Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.[52]

##### U.S. declaration of war on Germany

After the British revealed the telegram to the United States, President
Wilson, who had won reelection on his keeping the country out of the war,
released the captured telegram as a way of building support for U.S. entry
into the war. He had previously claimed neutrality, while calling for the
arming of U.S. merchant ships delivering munitions to combatant Britain and
quietly supporting the British blockading of German ports and mining of
international waters, preventing the shipment of food from America and
elsewhere to combatant Germany. After submarines sank seven U.S. merchant
ships and the publication of the Zimmerman telegram, Wilson called for war on
Germany, which the U.S. Congress declared on 6 April 1917.[53]

Crucial to U.S. participation was the massive domestic propaganda campaign
executed by the Committee on Public Information overseen by George Creel. The
campaign included tens of thousands of government-selected community leaders
giving brief carefully scripted pro-war speeches at thousands of public
gatherings. Along with other branches of government and private vigilante
groups like the American Protective League, it also included the general
repression and harassment of people either opposed to American entry into the
war or of German heritage. Other forms of propaganda included newsreels,
photos, large-print posters (designed by several well-known illustrators of
the day, including Louis D. Fancher and Henry Reuterdahl), magazine and
newspaper articles, etc.

##### First active U.S. participation

<IMG>

<IMG>

African-American soldiers marching in France.[54]

The United States was never formally a member of the Allies but became a self-
styled "Associated Power". The United States had a small army, but it drafted
four million men and by summer 1918 was sending 10,000 fresh soldiers to
France every day. In 1917, the U.S. Congress gave U.S. citizenship to Puerto
Ricans when they were drafted to participate in World War I, as part of the
Jones Act. Germany had miscalculated, believing it would be many more months
before they would arrive and that the arrival could be stopped by U-boats.[55]

<IMG>

<IMG>

M1905 Howitzer used by Allied Forces

The United States Navy sent a battleship group to Scapa Flow to join with the
British Grand Fleet, destroyers to Queenstown, Ireland and submarines to help
guard convoys. Several regiments of U.S. Marines were also dispatched to
France. The British and French wanted U.S. units used to reinforce their
troops already on the battle lines and not waste scarce shipping on bringing
over supplies. The U.S. rejected the first proposition and accepted the
second. General John J. Pershing, American Expeditionary Force (AEF)
commander, refused to break up U.S. units to be used as reinforcements for
British Empire and French units. As an exception, he did allow African-
American combat regiments such as the Harlem Hellfighters to be used in French
divisions.[56]AEF doctrine called for the use of frontal assaults, which had
long since been discarded by British Empire and French commanders because of
the large loss of life.[57]

#### German Spring Offensive of 1918

Main article: Spring Offensive

<IMG>

<IMG>

For most of World War I, Allied forces were stalled at trenches on the Western
Front

German General Erich Ludendorff drew up plans (codenamed Operation Michael)
for the 1918 offensive on the Western Front. The Spring Offensive sought to
divide the British and French forces with a series of feints and advances. The
German leadership hoped to strike a decisive blow before significant U.S.
forces arrived. The operation commenced on 21 March 1918 with an attack on
British forces near Amiens. German forces achieved an unprecedented advance of
60 kilometers (40 miles).[58]

British and French trenches were penetrated using novel infiltration tactics,
also named Hutier tactics, after General Oskar von Hutier. Previously, attacks
had been characterised by long artillery bombardments and massed
assaults.[citation needed] However, in the Spring Offensive, the German Army
used artillery only briefly and infiltrated small groups of infantry at weak
points. They attacked command and logistics areas and bypassed points of
serious resistance. More heavily armed infantry then destroyed these isolated
positions. German success relied greatly on the element of surprise.[citation
needed]

The front moved to within 120 kilometers (75 mi) of Paris. Three heavy Krupp
railway guns fired 183 shells on the capital, causing many Parisians to flee.
The initial offensive was so successful that Kaiser Wilhelm II declared 24
March a national holiday. Many Germans thought victory was near. After heavy
fighting, however, the offensive was halted. Lacking tanks or motorised
artillery, the Germans were unable to consolidate their gains. The sudden stop
was also a result of the four AIF (Australian Imperial Forces) divisions that
were "rushed" down, thus doing what no other army had done and stopping the
German advance in its tracks. During that time the first Australian division
was hurriedly sent north again to stop the second German breakthrough.

<IMG>

<IMG>

British 55th (West Lancashire) Division troops blinded by tear gas during the
Battle of Estaires, 10 April 1918

American divisions, which Pershing had sought to field as an independent
force, were assigned to the depleted French and British Empire commands on 28
March. A Supreme War Council of Allied forces was created at the Doullens
Conference on 5 November 1917.[59] General Foch was appointed as supreme
commander of the allied forces. Haig, Petain and Pershing retained tactical
control of their respective armies; Foch assumed a coordinating role, rather
than a directing role and the British, French and U.S. commands operated
largely independently.[59]

Following Operation Michael, Germany launched Operation Georgette against the
northern English channel ports. The Allies halted the drive with limited
territorial gains for Germany. The German Army to the south then conducted
Operations BlÃ¼cher and Yorck, broadly towards Paris. Operation Marne was
launched on 15 July, attempting to encircle Reims and beginning the Second
Battle of the Marne. The resulting Allied counterattack marked their first
successful offensive of the war.

By 20 July the Germans were back at their Kaiserschlacht starting
lines,[citation needed] having achieved nothing. Following this last phase of
the war in the West, the German Army never again regained the initiative.
German casualties between March and April 1918 were 270,000, including many
highly trained stormtroopers.

Meanwhile, Germany was falling apart at home. Anti-war marches become frequent
and morale in the army fell. Industrial output was 53% of 1913 levels.

#### New states under war zone

In 1918, the internationally recognized Democratic Republic of Armenia and
Democratic Republic of Georgia bordering the Ottoman Empire were established,
as well as the unrecognized Centrocaspian Dictatorship and South West
Caucasian Republic.

In 1918, the Dashnaks of the Armenian national liberation movement declared
the Democratic Republic of Armenia (DRA) through the Armenian Congress of
Eastern Armenians (unified form of Armenian National Councils) after the
dissolution of the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic. Tovmas
Nazarbekian became the first Commander-in-chief of the DRA. Enver Pasha
ordered the creation of a new army to be named the Army of Islam. He ordered
the Army of Islam into the DRA, with the goal of taking Baku on the Caspian
Sea. This new offensive was strongly opposed by the Germans. In early May
1918, the Ottoman army attacked the newly declared DRA. Although the Armenians
managed to inflict one defeat on the Ottomans at the Battle of Sardarapat, the
Ottoman army won a later battle and scattered the Armenian army. The Republic
of Armenia was forced to sign the Treaty of Batum in June 1918.

#### Allied victory: summer and autumn 1918

Main articles: Hundred Days Offensive and Weimar Republic

<IMG>

<IMG>

U.S. engineers returning from the front during the Battle of Saint-Mihiel in
September 1918

The Allied counteroffensive, known as the Hundred Days Offensive, began on 8
August 1918. The Battle of Amiens developed with III Corps Fourth British Army
on the left, the First French Army on the right, and the Australian and
Canadian Corps spearheading the offensive in the centre through
HarbonniÃ¨res.[60][61] It involved 414 tanks of the Mark IV and Mark V type,
and 120,000 men. They advanced 12 kilometers (7 miles) into German-held
territory in just seven hours. Erich Ludendorff referred to this day as the
"Black Day of the German army".[60][62]

The Australian-Canadian spearhead at Amiens, a battle that was the beginning
of Germanyâs downfall,[20] helped pull the British armies to the north and
the French armies to the south forward. While German resistance on the British
Fourth Army front at Amiens stiffened, after an advance as far as 14 miles (23
km) and brought the battle there to an end, the French Third Army lengthened
the Amiens front on 10 August, when it was thrown in on the right of the
French First Army, and advanced 4 miles (6 km) liberating Lassigny in fighting
which lasted until the 16th. South of the French Third Army General Mangin
(The Butcher) drove his French Tenth Army forward at Soissons on 20 August to
capture eight thousand prisoners, two hundred guns and the Aisne heights
overlooking and menacing the German position north of the Vesle.[63] Another
"Black day" as described by Ludendorff.

Meanwhile General Byng of the Third British Army, reporting that the enemy on
his front was thinning in a limited withdrawal, was ordered to attack with 200
tanks toward Bapaume, opening what is known as the Battle of Albert with the
specific orders of "To break the enemy's front, in order to outflank the
enemies present battle front" (opposite the British Fourth Army at
Amiens).[20] Allied leaders had now realized that to continue an attack after
resistance had hardened was a waste of lives and it was better to turn a line
than to try and roll over it. Attacks were being undertaken in quick order to
take advantage of the successful advances on the flanks and then broken off
when that attack lost its initial impetus.[63]

The British Third Army's 15-mile (24 km) front north of Albert progressed
after stalling for a day against the main resistance line to which the enemy
had withdrawn.[64] Rawlinsonâs Fourth British Army was able to battle its
left flank forward between Albert and the Somme straightening the line between
the advanced positions of the Third Army and the Amiens front which resulted
in recapturing Albert at the same time.[63] On 26 August the British First
Army on the left of the Third Army was drawn into the battle extending it
northward to beyond Arras. The Canadian Corps already being back in the
vanguard of the First Army fought their way from Arras eastward 5 miles (8 km)
astride the heavily defended Arras-Cambrai before reaching the outer defenses
of the Hindenburg line, breaching them on the 28th and 29th. Bapaume fell on
the 29th to the New Zealand Division of the Third Army and the Australians,
still leading the advance of the Fourth Army, were again able to push forward
at Amiens to take Peronne and Mont St. Quentin on August 31. Further south the
French First and Third Armies had slowly fought forward while the Tenth Army,
who had by now crossed the Ailette and was east of the Chemin des Dames, was
now near to the Alberich position of the Hindenburg line.[65] During the last
week of August the pressure along a 70-mile (113 km) front against the enemy
was heavy and unrelenting. From German accounts, "Each day was spent in bloody
fighting against an ever and again on-storming enemy, and nights passed
without sleep in retirements to new lines."[63] Even to the north in Flanders
the British Second and Fifth Armies during August and September were able to
make progress taking prisoners and positions that were previously denied
them.[65]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Close-up view of an American major in the basket of an observation balloon
flying over territory near front lines.

On 2 September the Canadian Corps outflanking of the Hindenburg line, with the
breaching of the Wotan Position, made it possible for the Third Army to
advance and sent repercussions all along the Western Front. That same day OHL
had no choice but to issue orders to six armies for withdrawal back into the
Hindenburg line in the south, behind the Canal Du Nord on the Canadian-First
Army's front and back to a line east of the Lys in the north, giving up
without a fight the salient seized in the previous April.[66] According to
Ludendorff âWe had to admit the necessityâ¦to withdraw the entire front
from the Scarpe to the Vesle.â[67]

In nearly four weeks of fighting since 8 August over 100,000 German prisoners
were taken, 75,000 by the BEF and the rest by the French. Since "The Black Day
of the German Army" the German High Command realized the war was lost and made
attempts for a satisfactory end. The day after the battle Ludenforff told
Colonel Mertz "We cannot win the war any more, but we must not lose it
either." On 11 August he offered his resignation to the Kaiser, who refused it
and replied, "I see that we must strike a balance. We have nearly reached the
limit of our powers of resistance. The war must be ended." On 13 August at
Spa, Hindenburg, Ludendorff, Chancellor and Foreign minister Hintz agreed that
the war could not be ended militarily and on the following day the German
Crown Council decided victory in the field was now most improbable. Austria
and Hungary warned that they could only continue the war until December and
Ludendorff recommended immediate peace negotiations, to which the Kaiser
responded by instructing Hintz to seek the Queen of Holland's mediation.
Prince Rupprecht warned Prince Max of Baden "Our military situation has
deteriorated so rapidly that I no longer believe we can hold out over the
winter; it is even possible that a catastrophe will come earlier." On 10
September Hindenburg urged peace moves to Emperor Charles of Austria and
Germany appealed to Holland for mediation. On the 14th Austria sent a note to
all belligerents and neutrals suggesting a meeting for peace talks on neutral
soil and on 15 September Germany made a peace offer to Belgium. Both peace
offers were rejected and on 24 September OHL informed the leaders in Berlin
that armistice talks were inevitable.[65]

September saw the Germans continuing to fight strong rear guard actions and
launching numerous counter attacks on lost positions, with only a few
succeeding and then only temporarily. Contested towns, villages, heights and
trenches in the screening positions and outposts of the Hindenburg Line
continued to fall to the Allies as well as thousands of prisoners, with the
BEF alone taking 30,441 in the last week of September. Further small advances
eastward would follow the Third Army victory at Ivincourt on 12 September, the
Fourth Armies at Epheny on the 18th and the French gain of Essigny Le Grand a
day later. On the 24th a final assault by both the British and French on a
four mile (6 km) front would come within two miles (3 km) of St. Quentin.[65]
With the outposts and preliminary defensive lines of the Siegfried and
Alberich Positions eliminated the Germans were now completely back in the
Hindenburg line. With the Wotan position of that line already breached and the
Siegfried position in danger of being turned from the north the time had now
come for an assault on the whole length of the line.

The Allied attack on the Hindenburg Line began on 26 September. 260,000 U.S.
soldiers went "over the top". All initial objectives were captured; the U.S.
79th Infantry Division, which met stiff resistance at Montfaucon, took an
extra day to capture its objective. The U.S. Army stalled due to supply
problems because its inexperienced headquarters had to cope with large units
and a difficult landscape.[68] At the same time, French units broke through in
Champagne and closed on the Belgian frontier.[citation needed] The most
significant advance came from Commonwealth units, as they entered
Belgium.[citation needed] The last Belgian town to be liberated before the
armistice was Ghent, which the Germans held as a pivot until Allied artillery
was brought up.[69][70] The German army had to shorten its front and use the
Dutch frontier as an anchor to fight rear-guard actions.

By October, it was evident that Germany could no longer mount a successful
defence.[citation needed] They were increasingly outnumbered, with few new
recruits. Rations were cut. Ludendorff decided, on 1 October,[citation needed]
that Germany had two ways out â total annihilation or an armistice. He
recommended the latter at a summit of senior German officials. Allied pressure
did not let up.

Meanwhile, news of Germany's impending military defeat spread throughout the
German armed forces. The threat of mutiny was rife. Admiral Reinhard Scheer
and Ludendorff decided to launch a last attempt to restore the "valour" of the
German Navy. Knowing the government of Max von Baden would veto any such
action, Ludendorff decided not to inform him. Nonetheless, word of the
impending assault reached sailors at Kiel. Many rebelled and were arrested,
refusing to be part of a naval offensive which they believed to be suicidal.
Ludendorff took the blameâthe Kaiser dismissed him on 26 October. The
collapse of the Balkans meant that Germany was about to lose its main supplies
of oil and food. The reserves had been used up, but U.S. troops kept arriving
at the rate of 10,000 per day.[71]

Having suffered over 6 million casualties, Germany moved toward peace. Prince
Max von Baden took charge of a new government as Chancellor of Germany to
negotiate with the Allies. Negotiations with President Wilson began
immediately, in the vain hope that better terms would be offered than with the
British and French. Instead Wilson demanded the abdication of the Kaiser.
There was no resistance when the social democrat Philipp Scheidemann on 9
November declared Germany to be a republic. Imperial Germany was dead; a new
Germany had been born: the Weimar Republic.[72]

#### Allied superiority and the stab-in-the-back legend, November 1918

In November 1918 the Allies had ample supplies of men and materiel;
continuation of the war would have meant the invasion of Germany. This had
unforeseeable consequences; some Allied decision-makers felt the war should be
"finished," not just stopped, and many voices on both sides voiced the opinion
that the war was not really over.[citation needed] But most Allied decision-
makers were eager to see the end of hostilities.

Berlin was almost 900 miles (1,400 km) from the Western Front; no Allied
soldier had ever set foot on German soil in anger, and the Kaiser's armies
retreated from the battlefield in good order. Thus many veterans who had
fought for the Central Powers, including Adolf Hitler, were convinced their
armies had not really been defeated, resulting in the stab-in-the-back legend.

<IMG>

<IMG>

In the forest of CompiÃ¨gne after reaching an agreement for the armistice that
ended World War I, Foch is seen second from the right. The carriage seen in
the background, where the armistice was signed, later was chosen as the
symbolic setting of PÃ©tain's June 1940 armistice. It was moved to Berlin as a
prize, but due to Allied bombing it was eventually moved to Crawinkel,
Thuringia, where it was deliberately destroyed by SS troops in 1945[73].

### End of war

The collapse of the Central Powers came swiftly. Bulgaria was the first to
sign an armistice on 29 September 1918 at Saloniki.[74] On 30 October the
Ottoman Empire capitulated at Mudros.[74]

On 24 October the Italians began a push which rapidly recovered territory lost
after the Battle of Caporetto. This culminated in the Battle of Vittorio
Veneto, which marked the end of the Austro-Hungarian Army as an effective
fighting force. The offensive also triggered the disintegration of Austro-
Hungarian Empire. During the last week of October declarations of independence
were made in Budapest, Prague and Zagreb. On 29 October, the imperial
authorities asked Italy for an armistice. But the Italians continued
advancing, reaching Trento, Udine and Trieste. On 3 November Austria-Hungary
sent a flag of truce to ask for an Armistice. The terms, arranged by telegraph
with the Allied Authorities in Paris, were communicated to the Austrian
Commander and accepted. The Armistice with Austria was signed in the Villa
Giusti, near Padua, on 3 November. Austria and Hungary signed separate
armistices following the overthrow of the Habsburg monarchy.

Following the outbreak of the German Revolution, a republic was proclaimed on
9 November. The Kaiser fled to the Netherlands. On 11 November an armistice
with Germany was signed in a railroad carriage at CompiÃ¨gne. At 11 a.m. on 11
November 1918 â the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month
â a ceasefire came into effect. Opposing armies on the Western Front began
to withdraw from their positions. Canadian George Lawrence Price is
traditionally regarded as the last soldier killed in the Great War: he was
shot by a German sniper and died at 10:58.[75]

A formal state of war between the two sides persisted for another seven
months, until signing of the Treaty of Versailles with Germany on 28 June
1919. Later treaties with Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire
were signed. However, the latter treaty with the Ottoman Empire was followed
by strife (the Turkish Independence War) and a final peace treaty was signed
between the Allied Powers and the country that would shortly become the
Republic of Turkey, at Lausanne on 24 July 1923.

Some war memorials date the end of the war as being when the Versailles treaty
was signed in 1919; by contrast, most commemorations of the war's end
concentrate on the armistice of 11 November 1918. Legally the last formal
peace treaties were not signed until the Treaty of Lausanne. Under its terms,
the Allied forces abandoned Constantinople on 23 August 1923.

## Technology

See also: Technology during World War I

<IMG>

<IMG>

British Army Vickers machine gun.

The First World War began as a clash of 20th century technology and 19th
century tactics, with inevitably large casualties. By the end of 1917,
however, the major armies, now numbering millions of men, had modernised and
were making use of telephone, wireless communication, armoured cars, tanks,
and aircraft. Infantry formations were reorganised, so that 100-man companies
were no longer the main unit of maneuver. Instead, squads of 10 or so men,
under the command of a junior NCO, were favoured. Artillery also underwent a
revolution.

In 1914, cannons were positioned in the front line and fired directly at their
targets. By 1917, indirect fire with guns (as well as mortars and even machine
guns) was commonplace, using new techniques for spotting and ranging, notably
aircraft and (often overlooked) field telephone. Counter-battery missions
became commonplace, also, and sound detection was used to locate enemy
batteries.

<IMG>

<IMG>

RAF Sopwith Camel.

Germany was far ahead of the Allies in utilizing heavy indirect fire. She
employed 150 and 210 mm howitzers in 1914 when the typical French and British
guns were only 75 and 105 mm. The British had a 6 inch (152 mm) howitzer, but
it was so heavy it had to be assembled for firing. Germans also fielded
Austrian 305 mm and 420 mm guns, and already by the beginning of the war had
inventories of various calibers of Minenwerfer ideally suited for trench
warfare.[76]

Much of the combat involved trench warfare, where hundreds often died for each
yard gained. Many of the deadliest battles in history occurred during the
First World War. Such battles include Ypres, the Marne, Cambrai, the Somme,
Verdun, and Gallipoli. The Haber process of nitrogen fixation was employed to
provide the German forces with a constant supply of gunpowder, in the face of
British naval blockade. Artillery was responsible for the largest number of
casualties and consumed vast quantities of explosives. The large number of
head-wounds caused by exploding shells and fragmentation forced the combatant
nations to develop the modern steel helmet, led by the French, who introduced
the Adrian helmet in 1915. It was quickly followed by the Brodie helmet, worn
by British Imperial and U.S. troops, and in 1916 by the distinctive German
Stahlhelm, a design, with improvements, still in use today.

<IMG>

<IMG>

French Nieuport 17 C.1 fighter, 1917

There was chemical warfare and small-scale strategic bombing, both of which
were outlawed by the 1907 Hague Conventions, and both proving of limited
effectiveness,[77] though they captured the public imagination.[78]

The widespread use of chemical warfare was a distinguishing feature of the
conflict. Gases used included chlorine, mustard gas and phosgene. Only a small
proportion of total war casualties were caused by gas. Effective
countermeasures to gas attacks were quickly created, such as gas masks.

The most powerful land-based weapons were railway guns weighing hundreds of
tons apiece. These were nicknamed Big Berthas, even though the namesake was
not a railway gun. Germany developed the Paris Gun, able to bombard Paris from
over 100 km (60 mi), though shells were relatively light at 94 kilograms (210
lb). While the Allies had railway guns, German models severely out-ranged and
out-classed them.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Russian Ilya Muromets the world's first strategic bomber, 1913

Fixed-wing aircraft were first used militarily by the Italians in Libya 23
October 1911 during the Italo-Turkish War for reconnaissance, soon followed by
the dropping of grenades and aerial photography the next year. By 1914 the
military utility was obvious. They were initially used for reconnaissance and
ground attack. To shoot down enemy planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter
aircraft were developed. Strategic bombers were created, principally by the
Germans and British, though the former used Zeppelins as well.

Towards the end of the conflict, aircraft carriers were used for the first
time, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a raid against the Zeppelin
hangars at Tondern in 1918.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Armoured cars

German U-boats (submarines) were deployed after the war began. Alternating
between restricted and unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic, they
were employed by the Kaiserliche Marine in a strategy to deprive the British
Isles of vital supplies. The deaths of British merchant sailors and the
seeming invulnerability of U-boats led to the development of depth charges
(1916), hydrophones (passive sonar, 1917), blimps, hunter-killer submarines
(HMS R-1, 1917), forward-throwing anti-submarine weapons, and dipping
hydrophones (the latter two both abandoned in 1918).[79] To extend their
operations, the Germans proposed supply submarines (1916). Most of these would
be forgotten in the interwar period until World War II revived the need.

Trenches, machineguns, air reconnaissance, barbed wire, and modern artillery
with fragmentation shells helped bring the battle lines of World War I to a
stalemate. The British sought a solution with the creation of the tank and
mechanised warfare. The first tanks were used during the Battle of the Somme
on 15 September 1916. Mechanical reliability became an issue, but the
experiment proved its worth. Within a year, the British were fielding tanks by
the hundreds and showed their potential during the Battle of Cambrai in
November 1917, by breaking the Hindenburg Line, while combined arms teams
captured 8000 enemy soldiers and 100 guns. Light automatic weapons also were
introduced, such as the Lewis Gun and Browning automatic rifle.

Manned observation balloons, floating high above the trenches, were used as
stationary reconnaissance platforms, reporting enemy movements and directing
artillery. Balloons commonly had a crew of two, equipped with parachutes.[80]
In the event of an enemy air attack, the crew could parachute to safety. At
the time, parachutes were too heavy to be used by pilots of aircraft (with
their marginal power output) and smaller versions would not be developed until
the end of the war; they were also opposed by British leadership, who feared
they might promote cowardice.[81] Recognised for their value as observation
platforms, balloons were important targets of enemy aircraft. To defend
against air attack, they were heavily protected by antiaircraft guns and
patrolled by friendly aircraft; to attack them, unusual weapons such as air-
to-air rockets were even tried. Blimps and balloons contributed to air-to-air
combat among aircraft, because of their reconnaissance value, and to the
trench stalemate, because it was impossible to move large numbers of troops
undetected. The Germans conducted air raids on England during 1915 and 1916
with airships, hoping to damage British morale and cause aircraft to be
diverted from the front lines. The resulting panic took several squadrons of
fighters from France.[81]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Johnson's Nieuport 11 armed with Le Prieur rockets for attacking observation
balloons

Another new weapon, flamethrowers, were first used by the German army and
later adopted by other forces. Although not of high tactical value, they were
a powerful, demoralizing weapon and caused terror on the battlefield. It was a
dangerous weapon to wield, as its heavy weight made operators vulnerable
targets.

Trench railways evolved to supply the enormous quantities of food, water, and
ammunition required to support large numbers of soldiers in areas where
conventional transportation systems had been destroyed. A trench railway
system was included in construction of the Maginot Line, but internal
combustion engines and improved traction systems for wheeled vehicles rendered
trench railways obsolete within a decade.

## Legacy

Main article: World War I in art and literature

Main article: Media of World War I

Main article: War memorials

The first tentative efforts to comprehend the meaning and consequences of
modern warfare began during the initial phases of the war, and this process
continued throughout and after the end of hostilities.

### Soldiers' experiences

Main article: Surviving veterans of World War I

Main article: World War I casualties

Main article: Commonwealth War Graves Commission

Main article: American Battle Monuments Commission

<IMG>

<IMG>

The First Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps Contingent, raised in 1914, sent as an
extra, 90-man company to the 1 Lincolns in June, 1915, the first colonial
volunteer unit to reach the Front. Its strength rapidly reduced. After losing
50% of its remaining men at Gueudecourt on 25 September 1916, the survivors
merged with a Second Contingent of thirty-seven, and trained as Lewis gunners.
By the War's end, the two contingents had lost over 75% of their combined
strength. Forty died on active service. 16 were commissioned., one received
the O.B.E, and six the Military Medal

The soldiers of the war were initially volunteers, except for Italy, but
increasingly were conscripted into service. Books such as All Quiet on the
Western Front detail the mundane time, but also the intense horror, of
soldiers that fought the war. Britain's Imperial War Museum has collected more
than 2,500 recordings of soldiers' personal accounts and selected transcripts,
edited by military author Max Arthur, have been published. The museum believes
that historians have not taken full account of this material and accordingly
has made the full archive of recordings available to authors and
researchers.[82]

#### Prisoners of war

<IMG>

<IMG>

This photograph shows an emaciated Indian army soldier who survived the Siege
of Kut.

About 8 million men surrendered and were held in POW camps during the war. All
nations pledged to follow the Hague Convention on fair treatment of prisoners
of war. In general, a POW's rate of survival was much higher than their peers
at the front.[83] Individual surrenders were uncommon. Large units usually
surrendered en masse. At the Battle of Tannenberg 92,000 Russians surrendered.
When the besieged garrison of Kaunas surrendered in 1915, 20,000 Russians
became prisoners. Over half of Russian losses were prisoners (as a proportion
of those captured, wounded or killed); for Austria 32%, for Italy 26%, for
France 12%, for Germany 9%; for Britain 7%. Prisoners from the Allied armies
totalled about 1.4 million (not including Russia, which lost between 2.5 and
3.5 million men as prisoners.) From the Central Powers about 3.3 million men
became prisoners.[84]

Germany held 2.5 million prisoners; Russia held 2.9 million and Britain and
France held about 720,000. Most were captured just prior to the Armistice. The
U.S. held 48,000. The most dangerous moment was the act of surrender, when
helpless soldiers were sometimes gunned down.[85][86] Once prisoners reached a
camp, in general, conditions were satisfactory (and much better than in World
War II), thanks in part to the efforts of the International Red Cross and
inspections by neutral nations. Conditions were terrible in Russia, starvation
was common for prisoners and civilians alike; about 15â20% of the prisoners
in Russia died. In Germany food was in short supply, but only 5%
died.[87][88][89]

The Ottoman Empire often treated POWs poorly.[90] Some 11,800 British Empire
soldiers, most of them Indians, became prisoners after the Siege of Kut, in
Mesopotamia, in April 1916; 4,250 died in captivity.[91] Although many were in
very bad condition when captured, Ottoman officers forced them to march 1,100
kilometres (684 mi) to Anatolia. A survivor said: "we were driven along like
beasts, to drop out was to die."[92] The survivors were then forced to build a
railway through the Taurus Mountains.

In Russia, where the prisoners from the Czech Legion of the Austro-Hungarian
army were released in 1917 they re-armed themselves and briefly became a
military and diplomatic force during the Russian Civil War.

### Military attachÃ©s and war correspondents

Main article: Military attachÃ©s and war correspondents in the First World War

Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the
course of the war. Many were able to report on events from a perspective
somewhat like what is now termed "embedded" positions within the opposing land
and naval forces. These military attachÃ©s and other observers prepared
voluminous first-hand accounts of the war and analytical papers.

For example, former U.S. Army Captain Granville Fortescue followed the
developments of the Gallipoli campaign from an embedded perspective within the
ranks of the Turkish defenders; and his report was passed through Turkish
censors before being printed in London and New York.[93] However, this
observer's role was abandoned when the U.S. entered the war, as Fortescue
immediately re-enlisted, sustaining wounds at Montfaucon d'Argonne in the
Meuse-Argonne Offensive, September 1918.[94]

In-depth observer narratives of the war and more narrowly focused professional
journal articles were written soon after the war; and these post-war reports
conclusively illustrated the battlefield destructiveness of this conflict.
This was the not first time the tactics of entrenched positions for infantry
defended with machine guns and artillery became vitally important. The Russo-
Japanese War had been closely observed by Military attachÃ©s, war
correspondents and other observers; but, from a 21st Century perspective, it
is now apparent that a range of tactical lessons were disregarded or not used
in the preparations for war in Europe and during the course of the Great
War.[95]

An early recorded use of the term "World War" is attributed to a well-known
journalist for The Times, Colonel Charles Repington, who wrote in his diary on
10 September 1918: "We discussed the right name of the war. I said the we
called it now The War, but that this could not last. The Napoleonic War was
The Great War. To call it The German War was too much flattery for the Boche.
I suggested The World War as a shade better title, and finally we mutually
agreed to call it The First World War in order to prevent the millennium folk
from forgetting that the history of the world was the history of war."[96]

### Opposition to the war

Main articles: Opposition to World War I and French Army Mutinies (1917)

The trade union and socialist movements had long voiced their opposition to a
war, which they argued, meant only that workers would kill other workers in
the interest of capitalism. Once war was declared, however, many socialists
and trade unions backed their governments. Among the exceptions were the
Bolsheviks, the Socialist Party of America, and the Italian Socialist Party,
and individuals such as Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg and their followers in
Germany. There were also small anti-war groups in Britain and France. Other
opposition came from conscientious objectors \- some socialist, some religious
- who refused to fight. In Britain 16,000 people asked for conscientious
objector status.[97] Many suffered years of prison, including solitary
confinement and bread and water diets. Even after the war, in Britain many job
advertisements were marked "No conscientious objectors need apply". Many
countries jailed those who spoke out against the conflict. These included
Eugene Debs in the United States and Bertrand Russell in Britain. In the U.S.
the 1917 Espionage Act effectively made free speech illegal and many served
long prison sentences for statements of fact deemed unpatriotic. The Sedition
Act of 1918 made any statements deemed "disloyal" a federal crime.
Publications at all critical of the government were removed from circulation
by postal censors.[51]

## War crimes

### Genocide

Main article: Ottoman casualties of World War I

See also: Armenian Genocide, Assyrian Genocide, and Pontic Greek Genocide

The ethnic cleansing of the Ottoman Empire's Christian population, with the
most prominent among them being the massacres of Armenians (similar policies
were enacted against the Assyrians and Greeks), during the final years of the
Ottoman Empire is considered by some genocide.[98] The Ottomans saw the entire
Armenian population as an enemy[99] that had chosen to side with Russia during
the beginning of the war.[100] The exact number of deaths is unknown although
a range of 250,000 to 1.5 million is given for the deaths of Armenians.[101]
The government of Turkey has consistently rejected charges of genocide and of
others, arguing that those who died were simply caught up in the fighting or
that killings of Armenians and other Christians were justified by their
individual or collective treason.[102]

### Rape of Belgium

Main article: Rape of Belgium

In Belgium, German troops, in fear of French and Belgian guerrilla fighters,
or francs-tireurs, massacred townspeople in Andenne (211 dead), Tamines (384
dead), and Dinant (612 dead). On 25 August 1914, the Germans set fire to the
town of Leuven, burned the library containing about 230,000 books, killed 209
civilians and forced 42,000 to evacuate. These actions brought worldwide
condemnation.[103]

## Aftermath

Main article: Aftermath of World War I

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Beaumont Hamel Newfoundland Memorial in the Somme

No other war had changed the map of Europe so dramatically â four empires
disappeared: the German, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman and the Russian. Four
defunct dynasties, the Hohenzollerns, the Habsburg, Romanovs and the Ottomans
together with all their ancillary aristocracies, all fell after the war.
Belgium was badly damaged, as was France with 1.4 million soldiers dead, not
counting other casualties. Germany and Russia were similarly affected.

Of the 60 million European soldiers who were mobilized from 1914 â 1918, 8
million were killed, 7 million were permanently disabled, and 15 million were
seriously injured. Germany lost 15.1% of its active male population, Austria-
Hungary lost 17.1%, and France lost 10.5%.[104] About 750,000 German civilians
died from starvation caused by the British blockade during the war.[105] The
war had profound economic consequences. In addition, a major influenza
epidemic that started in Western Europe in the latter months of the war,
killed millions in Europe and then spread around the world. Overall, the
Spanish flu killed at least 50 million people.[106][107] During the war,
typhus epidemics killed 150,000 in Serbia. There were about 30 million
infections and 3 million deaths from epidemic typhus in Russia from 1918 to
1922.[108] By 1922 there were at least 7 million homeless children in Russia
as a result of nearly a decade of devastation from World War I and the Russian
Civil War.[109]

### Later conflicts

The end of World War I set the stage for other world conflicts, some of which
are continuing into the 21st century. The Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin,
pushed for socialist revolution. Out of German discontent with the still
controversial Treaty of Versailles, Adolf Hitler was able to gain popularity
and power.[110][111] World War II was in part a continuation of the power
struggle that was never fully resolved by the First World War; in fact, it was
common for Germans in the 1930s and 1940s to justify acts of international
aggression because of perceived injustices imposed by the victors of the First
World War.[112]

The establishment of the modern state of Israel and the roots of the
continuing Israeli-Palestinian Conflict are partially found in the unstable
power dynamics of the Middle East which were born at the end of World War
I.[113] Previous to the end of fighting in the war, the Ottoman Empire had
maintained a modest level of peace and stability throughout the Middle
East.[114] With the end of the war and the fall of Ottoman government, power
vacuums developed and conflicting claims to land and nationhood began to
emerge.[115] Sometimes after only cursory consultation with the local
population, the political boundaries drawn by the victors of the First World
War were quickly imposed, and in many cases are still problematic in the 21st
century struggles for national identity.[116][117] While the dissolution of
the Ottoman Empire at the end of World War I was a pivotal milestone in the
creation of the modern political situation of the Middle East, including
especially the Arab-Israeli conflict,[118][119][120] the end of Ottoman rule
also spawned lesser known disputes over water and other natural
resources.[121]

Further information: SykesâPicot Agreement

### Peace treaties

After the war, the Allies imposed a series of peace treaties on the Central
Powers. The 1919 Treaty of Versailles, which Germany was kept under blockade
until she signed, ended the war. It declared Germany responsible for the war
and required Germany to pay enormous war reparations and award territory to
the victors. Unable to pay them with exports (a result of territorial losses
and postwar recession),[122] she did so by borrowing from the United States,
until the reparations were suspended in 1931. The "Guilt Thesis" became a
controversial explanation of events in Britain and the United States. The
Treaty of Versailles caused enormous bitterness in Germany, which nationalist
movements, especially the Nazis, exploited with a conspiracy theory they
called the Dolchstosslegende. The treaty contributed to economic collapse of
the Weimar Republic by sparking runaway inflation in the 1920s.

The German Empire lost its colonial possessions and was saddled with accepting
blame for the war, as well as paying punitive reparations for it. The Austro-
Hungarian and Ottoman empires were completely dissolved.

Austria-Hungary was also partitioned, largely along ethnic lines, into several
successor states including Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia,
as well as adding Transylvania to the Greater Romania who was allied with the
victors. The details were contained in the Treaty of Saint-Germain and the
Treaty of Trianon.

The Russian Empire, which had withdrawn from the war in 1917 after the October
Revolution, lost much of its western frontier as the newly independent nations
of Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland were carved from it;
Bessarabia was also re-attached to the Greater Romania as it had been a
Romanian territory for more than a thousand years.[123]

The Ottoman Empire disintegrated, and much of its non-Anatolian territory was
awarded as protectorates of various Allied powers, while the remaining Turkish
core was reorganised as the Republic of Turkey. The Ottoman Empire was to be
partitioned by the Treaty of SÃ¨vres in 1920. The treaty, however, was never
ratified by the Sultan and was rejected by the Turkish republican movement.
This led to the Turkish Independence War and, ultimately, to the 1923 Treaty
of Lausanne.

### New national identities

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2008)  
Poland reemerged as an independent country, after more than a century.
Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia were entirely new nations agglomerating
previously independent peoples. Russia became the Soviet Union and lost
Finland, Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia, which became independent countries.
The Ottoman Empire was soon replaced by Turkey and several other countries in
the Middle East.

In the British Empire, the war unleashed new forms of nationalism. In
Australia and New Zealand the Battle of Gallipoli became known as those
nations' "Baptism of Fire". It was the first major war in which the newly
established countries fought and it was one of the first times that Australian
troops fought as Australians, not just subjects of the British Crown. Anzac
Day, commemorating the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps, celebrates this
defining moment.[124][125]

After the Battle of Vimy Ridge, where the Canadian divisions fought together
for the first time as a single corps, Canadians began to refer to theirs as a
nation "forged from fire".[126] Having succeeded on the same battleground
where the "mother countries" had previously faltered, they were for the first
time respected internationally for their own accomplishments. Having entered
the war as a Dominion of the British Empire, by its end Canada emerged as a
fully independent nation.[127][128] While the other Dominions were represented
by Britain, Canada was an independent negotiator and signatory of the
Versailles Treaty.

### Social trauma

<IMG>

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)  
The experiences of the war led to a collective trauma for all participating
countries. The optimism of the 1900s was gone and those who fought in the war
became known as the Lost Generation. For the next few years, much of Europe
mourned. Memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns. The
soldiers returning home from World War I suffered greatly from the horrors
they had witnessed. Many returning veterans suffered from post-traumatic
stress disorder, called shell shock at the time.

The social trauma caused by years of fighting manifested itself in different
ways. Some people were revolted by nationalism and its results, and so they
began to work toward a more internationalist world, supporting organisations
such as the League of Nations. Pacifism became increasingly popular. Others
had the opposite reaction, feeling that only strength and military might could
be relied upon in a chaotic and inhumane world. Anti-modernist views were an
outgrowth of the many changes taking place in society. The rise of Nazism and
fascism included a revival of the nationalist spirit and a rejection of many
post-war changes. Similarly, the popularity of the Dolchstosslegende ("stab-
in-the-back legend") was a testament to the psychological state of defeated
Germany and was a rejection of responsibility for the conflict. The conspiracy
theory of betrayal became common and the German public came to see themselves
as victims. The Dolchstosslegende's popular acceptance in Germany played a
significant role in the rise of Nazism. A sense of disillusionment and
cynicism became pronounced, with nihilism growing in popularity. This
disillusionment for humanity found a cultural climax with the Dadaist artistic
movement. Many believed the war heralded the end of the world as they had
known it, including the collapse of capitalism and imperialism. Communist and
socialist movements around the world drew strength from this theory and
enjoyed a level of popularity they had never known before. These feelings were
most pronounced in areas directly or harshly affected by the war.[129][130]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lt. Col. John McCrae of Canada, who wrote the poem "In Flanders Fields", died
in 1918 of pneumonia

On 3 May 1915, during the Second Battle of Ypres, Lieutenant Alexis Helmer was
killed. At his graveside, his friend John McCrae, M.D., of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada wrote the memorable poem In Flanders Fields as a salute to those who
perished in the Great War. Published in Punch on 8 December 1915, it is still
recited today, especially on Remembrance Day and Memorial Day.[131][132]

### Macro- and micro-economic effects

One of the most dramatic effects of the war was the expansion of governmental
powers and responsibilities in Britain, France, the United States, and the
Dominions of the British Empire. In order to harness all the power of their
societies, new government ministries and powers were created. New taxes were
levied and laws enacted, all designed to bolster the war effort; many of which
have lasted to this day. Similarly, the war strained the abilities of the
formerly large and bureaucratised governments such as in Austria-Hungary and
Germany; however, any analysis of the long-term effects were clouded by the
defeat of these governments.

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased for three Allies (Britain, Italy, and
U.S.), but decreased in France and Russia, in neutral Netherlands, and in the
main three Central Powers. The shrinkage in GDP in Austria, Russia, France,
and the Ottoman Empire reached 30 to 40%. In Austria, for example, most of the
pigs were slaughtered and, at war's end, there was no meat.

All nations had increases in the government's share of GDP, surpassing fifty
percent in both Germany and France and nearly reaching fifty percent in
Britain. To pay for purchases in the United States, Britain cashed in its
massive investments in American railroads and then began borrowing heavily on
Wall Street. President Wilson was on the verge of cutting off the loans in
late 1916, but allowed a massive increase in U.S. government lending to the
Allies. After 1919, the U.S. demanded repayment of these loans, which, in
part, were funded by German reparations, which, in turn, were supported by
American loans to Germany. This circular system collapsed in 1931 and the
loans were never repaid.

Macro- and micro-economic consequences devolved from the war. Families were
altered by the departure of many men. With the death or absence of the primary
wage earner, women were forced into the workforce in unprecedented numbers. At
the same time, industry needed to replace the lost laborers sent to war. This
aided the struggle for voting rights for women.

As the war slowly turned into a war of attrition, conscription was implemented
in some countries. This issue was particularly explosive in Canada and
Australia. In the former it opened a political gap between French-Canadians
â who claimed their true loyalty was to Canada and not the British Empire
â and the Anglophone majority who saw the war as a duty to both Britain and
Canada. Prime Minister Robert Borden pushed through a Military Service Act,
provoking the Conscription Crisis of 1917. In Australia, a sustained pro-
conscription campaign by Prime Minister Billy Hughes, caused a split in the
Australian Labor Party and Hughes formed the Nationalist Party of Australia in
1917 to pursue the matter. Nevertheless, the labour movement, the Catholic
Church, and Irish nationalist expatriates successfully opposed Hughes' push,
which was rejected in two plebiscites.

In Britain, rationing was finally imposed in early 1918, limited to meat,
sugar, and fats (butter and oleo), but not bread. The new system worked
smoothly. From 1914 to 1918 trade union membership doubled, from a little over
four million to a little over eight million. Work stoppages and strikes became
frequent in 1917â18 as the unions expressed grievances regarding prices,
alcohol control, pay disputes, fatigue from overtime and working on Sundays
and inadequate housing. Conscription put into uniform nearly every physically
fit man, six of ten million eligible. Of these, about 750,000 lost their lives
and 1,700,000 were wounded. Most deaths were to young unmarried men; however,
160,000 wives lost husbands and 300,000 children lost fathers.[133]

Britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining essential war materials
whose supply had become difficult from traditional sources. Geologists, such
as Albert Ernest Kitson, were called upon to find new resources of precious
minerals in the African colonies. Kitson discovered important new deposits of
manganese, used in munitions production, in the Gold Coast.[134]

## Cognate names for the war

Before World War II, the war was also known as The Great War, The World War,
The War to End All Wars, The Kaiser's War, The War of the Nations and The War
in Europe. In France and Belgium it was sometimes referred to as La Guerre du
Droit (the War for Justice) or La Guerre Pour la Civilisation / de Oorlog tot
de Beschaving (the War to Preserve Civilization), especially on medals and
commemorative monuments.

The term used by official histories of the war in Britain and Canada is The
First World War, while American histories generally use the term World War I.

There is evidence that German biologist and philosopher Ernst Haeckel used the
key phrase shortly after the start of the fighting in Europe: "There is no
doubt that the course and character of the feared "European War"...will become
the first world war in the full sense of the word."[135]

Although the widespread use of the term First World War has been dated to
1931, the first known appearance of the phrase in print was in the
Indianapolis Star's issue for 20 September 1914.[135]

In many European countries, it appears the current usage is tending back to
calling it The Great War / la Grande Guerre / de Grote Oorlog / der GroÃe
Krieg, because of the growing historical awareness that, of the two 20th
century world wars, the 1914â1918 conflict caused more social, economic and
political upheaval.[citation needed] It was also one of the prime factors in
the outbreak of the Second World War.

## See also

<IMG> World War I portal  
Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

World War I

  * European Civil War
  * Timeline of World War I

  * World War One - Medal Abbreviations
  * List of people associated with World War I
  * List of wars by death toll
  * Blockade of Germany
  * Russian Civil War
  * List of wars
  * Room 40

### Media

Bombers of WW1.ogg

Play video

Video clip of allied bombing runs over German lines

Tanks of WWI.ogg

Play video

Primitive WWI tanks help the Allies with an advance in Langres, France (1918)  
### Animated maps

  * An animated map "Europe plunges into war"
  * An animated map of Europe at the end of the First World War

## Notes

  1. ^ a b Evans 2004, p. 188
  2. ^ Willmott 2003, p. 10
  3. ^ Willmott 2003, p. 15
  4. ^ Keegan 1988, p. 8
  5. ^ Willmott 2003, p. 307
  6. ^ Willmott 2003, p. 6
  7. ^ Keegan 1988, p. 7
  8. ^ Keegan 1988, p. 11
  9. ^ a b c Willmott 2003, p. 15
  10. ^ a b Keegan 1998, p. 52
  11. ^ a b Willmott 2003, p. 21
  12. ^ Prior 1999, p. 18
  13. ^ Fromkin
  14. ^ a b Keegan 1998, pp. 48â49
  15. ^ Willmott 2003, pp. 22â23
  16. ^ a b Willmott 2003, p. 26
  17. ^ Willmott 2003, p. 27
  18. ^ Willmott 2003, p. 29
  19. ^ Duffy
  20. ^ a b c Terraine 1963, pp. 508
  21. ^ ([dead link] â Scholar search)Vimy Ridge, Canadian National Memorial, New South Wales Department of Veteran's Affairs and Board of Studies, 2007, http://www.ww1westernfront.gov.au/vimy_ridge/index.html
  22. ^ Taylor2007, pp. 39â47
  23. ^ Keene 2006, pp. 5
  24. ^ Halpern 1995, p. 293
  25. ^ Zieger 2001, pp. 50
  26. ^ "Coast Guard in the North Atlantic War". http://www.uscg.mil/History/h_AtlWar.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-30.
  27. ^ Gilbert 2004, pp. 306
  28. ^ von der Porten 1969
  29. ^ Jones, p. 80
  30. ^ "Nova Scotia House of Assembly Committee on Veterans' Affairs". Hansard. http://www.gov.ns.ca/legislature/hansard//comm/va/va_2006nov09.htm. Retrieved on 2007-10-30.
  31. ^ "Greek American Operational Group OSS, Part 3 continued". http://www.pahh.com/oss/pt3/p23.html. Retrieved on 2007-10-30.
  32. ^ Price
  33. ^ Fromkin 2001, p. 119
  34. ^ a b Hinterhoff 1984, pp. 499â503
  35. ^ Boghos Nubar the president of the "Armenian National Assembly" declared to Paris Peace Conference, 1919 through a letter to French Foreign Office - 3 December 1918
  36. ^ The Battles of the Isonzo, 1915-17, FirstWorldWar.com, http://www.firstworldwar.com/battles/isonzo.htm
  37. ^ Battlefield Maps: Italian Front, FirstWorldWar.com, http://www.firstworldwar.com/maps/italianfront.htm
  38. ^ Hickey 2003, pp. 60-65
  39. ^ Participants from the Indian subcontinent in the First World War, Memorial Gates Trust, http://www.mgtrust.org/ind1.htm, retrieved on 2008-12-12
  40. ^ Fraser 1977
  41. ^ Hughes 2002, p. 474
  42. ^ Dignan 1971, p. 57
  43. ^ Sykes 1921, p. 101
  44. ^ Singh
  45. ^ Herbert 2003
  46. ^ Asghar 2005
  47. ^ Lyons, 243.
  48. ^ Marshall, 292.
  49. ^ Heyman 1997, pp. 146â147
  50. ^ Brands 1997, p. 756
  51. ^ a b Karp 1979
  52. ^ Tuchman 1966
  53. ^ see: Woodrow Wilson declares war on Germany.
  54. ^ "African Americans during World War I". http://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/369th-infantry/.
  55. ^ Wilgus, p. 52
  56. ^ Archives, National, African Americans during World War I, http://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/369th-infantry/
  57. ^ Millett & Murray 1988, p. 143
  58. ^ Westwell 2004
  59. ^ a b Moon 1996, pp. 495-6
  60. ^ a b "The Battle of Amiens: 8 August 1918". Australian War Memorial. http://www.awm.gov.au/1918/battles/amiens.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-12.
  61. ^ Map
  62. ^ Rickard, J (5 March 2001). "Erich von Ludendorff, 1865-1937, German General". Military History Encyclopedia on the Web. HistoryOfWar.org. http://www.historyofwar.org/articles/people_ludendorff.html. Retrieved on 2008-02-06.
  63. ^ a b c d Pitt 2003
  64. ^ Maurice 1918
  65. ^ a b c d Chronicle Of The First World War
  66. ^ Nicholson 1962
  67. ^ Ludendorff 1919
  68. ^ The Meuse-Argonne Offensive: Overview, http://www.worldwar1.com/dbc/bigshow.htm, retrieved on 2007-10-30
  69. ^ "Ghent Burghers Hail Liberators", New York Times, 15 November 1918, http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-free/pdf?res=940DE1DC1239E13ABC4D52DFB7678383609EDE
  70. ^ "Fall of Ghent Near, German Flank in Peril", New York Times, 26 October 1918 published 30 October 1918, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9F05E4D61539E13ABC4850DFB6678383609EDE&scp=4&sq=Ghent+1918&st=p
  71. ^ Stevenson 2004, p. 383
  72. ^ Stevenson 2004
  73. ^ "ClairiÃ¨re de l Armistice" (in French). CompiÃ¨gne. http://www.compiegne.fr/decouvrir/clairierearmistice.asp. Retrieved on 2008-12-03.
  74. ^ a b "1918 Timeline". http://www.indiana.edu/~league/1918.htm.
  75. ^ "The Last Hours". http://www.nwbattalion.com/last.html.
  76. ^ Mosier 2001, pp. 42â48
  77. ^ Heller 1984
  78. ^ Postwar, there were numerous pulp novels on future "gas wars", including Ghastly Dew The Gas War of 19--.
  79. ^ Price 1980
  80. ^ Winter, Denis. First of the Few.
  81. ^ a b Johnson 2001
  82. ^ "Forgotten Voices of the Great War". Imperial War Museum. http://www.forgottenvoices.co.uk/. Retrieved on 2008-03-30.
  83. ^ Phillimore & Bellot 1919, pp. 47â64
  84. ^ Ferguson 1999, pp. 368-9
  85. ^ Blair 2005
  86. ^ Cook 2006, pp. 637â665
  87. ^ Speed 1990
  88. ^ Ferguson 1999
  89. ^ Morton 1992
  90. ^ Bass 2002, p. 107
  91. ^ "The Mesopotamia campaign". British National Archives. http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/pathways/firstworldwar/battles/mesopotamia.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-10.
  92. ^ Prisoners of Turkey: Men of Kut Driven along like beasts, Australian War Memorial, http://www.awm.gov.au/stolenyears/ww1/turkey/story2.asp, retrieved on 2008-12-10
  93. ^ Fortescue 28 October 1915, p. 1
  94. ^ "Granville Roland Fortescue". Arlington National Cemetery. http://www.arlingtoncemetery.net/fortesc.htm.
  95. ^ Sisemore 2003
  96. ^ Shapiro & Epstein 2006, p. 633
  97. ^ Lehmann 1999, p. 62
  98. ^ Letter from the International Association of Genocide Scholars to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip ErdoÄan, 13 June 2005
  99. ^ Lewy 2005, p. 57
  100. ^ Ferguson 2006, p. 177
  101. ^ Balakian 2003, pp. 195-196
  102. ^ Fromkin 1989, pp. 212-215
  103. ^ Keegan 1998, pp. 82â3
  104. ^ Kitchen 2000, p. 22
  105. ^ "Die miserable Versorgung mit Lebensmitteln erreichte 1916/17 im "KohlrÃ¼benwinterâ einen dramatischen HÃ¶hepunkt. WÃ¤hrend des Ersten Weltkriegs starben in Deutschland rund 750.000 Menschen an UnterernÃ¤hrung und an deren Folgen. [1]
  106. ^ Knobler 2005
  107. ^ "Influenza Report". http://www.influenzareport.com/ir/overview.htm.
  108. ^ Typhus Fever, globalsecurity.org
  109. ^ And Now My Soul Is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet Russia, 1918-1930, By Thomas J. Hegarty, Canadian Slavonic Papers
  110. ^ "The Ending of World War One, and the Legacy of Peace". BBC. http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwone/war_end_01.shtml.
  111. ^ "The Rise of Hitler". http://www.schoolshistory.org.uk/hitlergainspower.htm.
  112. ^ "World War II". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9110199/World-War-II.
  113. ^ Economist 2005
  114. ^ Hooker 1996
  115. ^ Muller 2008
  116. ^ Kaplan 1993
  117. ^ Salibi 1993
  118. ^ Evans 2005
  119. ^ Israeli Foreign Ministry
  120. ^ Gelvin 2005
  121. ^ Isaac & Hosh 1992
  122. ^ Keynes 1920
  123. ^ Clark 1927
  124. ^ "'ANZAC Day' in London; King, Queen, and General Birdwood at Services in Abbey". New York Times. 26 April 1916. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9400E1DD113FE233A25755C2A9629C946796D6CF&scp=12&sq=New+Zealand+anzac&st=p.
  125. ^ "The ANZAC Day tradition". Australian War Memorial. http://www.awm.gov.au/commemoration/anzac/anzac_tradition.asp. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
  126. ^ "Vimy Ridge". Canadian War Museum. http://www.warmuseum.ca/cwm/exhibitions/guerre/vimy-ridge-e.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-10-22.
  127. ^ "The War's Impact on Canada". Canadian War Museum. http://www.warmuseum.ca/cwm/exhibitions/guerre/war-impact-e.aspx. Retrieved on 2008-10-22.
  128. ^ "Canada's last WW1 vet gets his citizenship back". CBC News. 2008-05-09. http://www.cbc.ca/canada/ottawa/story/2008/05/09/babcock-citizen.html.
  129. ^ Baker, Kevin Stabbed in the Back! The past and future of a right-wing myth Harper's Magazine, June 2006
  130. ^ Chickering 2004
  131. ^ "John McCrae (from Historica)". http://www.histori.ca/minutes/minute.do?id=10200.
  132. ^ Evans David. "John McCrae (from the Canadian Encyclopedia)". http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.com/index.cfm?PgNm=TCE&ArticleId=A0004849.
  133. ^ Havighurst, pp. 134-5
  134. ^ Green 1938, pp. CXXVI
  135. ^ a b Shapiro, p. 329

## References

See also: List of World War I books

  * American Armies and Battlefields in Europe: A History, Guide, and Reference Book, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1938, OCLC 59803706, http://www.secstate.wa.gov/history/ww1/maps.aspx
  * Army Art of World War I, U.S. Army Center of Military History: Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of American History, 1993, OCLC 28608539, http://www.secstate.wa.gov/history/publications_detail.aspx?p=28
  * Asghar, Syed Birjees (2005-06-12), A Famous Uprising, Dawn Group, http://www.dawn.com/weekly/dmag/archive/050612/dmag14.htm, retrieved on 2007-11-02
  * Ashworth, Tony (2000), Trench warfare, 1914-18 : the live and let live system, London: Pan, ISBN 0330480685, OCLC 247360122
  * Bade, Klaus J; Brown, Allison (tr.) (2003), Migration in European History, The making of Europe, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0631189394, OCLC 52695573 (translated from the German)
  * Balakian, Peter (2004), The Burning Tigris: The Armenian Genocide and America's Response, New York: HarperCollins, ISBN 0060558709, OCLC 56822108
  * Bass, Gary Jonathan (2002), Stay the Hand of Vengeance: The Politics of War Crimes Tribunals, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, pp. 424pp, ISBN 0691092788, OCLC 248021790
  * Blair, Dale (2005), No Quarter: Unlawful Killing and Surrender in the Australian War Experience, 1915-1918, Charnwood, Australia: Ginninderra Press, ISBN 1740272919, OCLC 62514621
  * Blumberg, Arnold, ed. (1995), Great Leaders, Great Tyrants?, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, ISBN 0313287511, OCLC 30400598
  * Brands, Henry William (1997), T. R.: The Last Romantic, New York: Basic Books, ISBN 0465069584, OCLC 36954615
  * Cecil, Lamar (1996), Wilhelm II: Emperor and Exile, 1900-1941, II, Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press, pp. 176, ISBN 0807822833, OCLC 186744003
  * Chickering, Rodger (2004), Imperial Germany and the Great War, 1914-1918, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521839084, OCLC 55523473
  * Clark, Charles Upson (1927), Bessarabia, Russia and Roumania on the Black Sea, New York: Dodd, Mead, OCLC 150789848, http://depts.washington.edu/cartah/text_archive/clark/meta_pag.shtml
  * Coffman, Edward M (1998), The War to End All Wars: The American Military Experience in World War I, Lexington, Kentucky: University Press of Kentucky, ISBN 0813109558, OCLC 38842092
  * Cook, Tim (2006), "The politics of surrender: Canadian soldiers and the killing of prisoners in the First World War", The Journal of Military History 70 (3): 637â665, doi:10.1353/jmh.2006.0158
  * Cornish, Nik; Karachtchouk, Andrei (ill.) (2001), The Russian Army 1914-18, Men-at-Arms, Oxford: Osprey Publishing, pp. 48, ISBN 1841763039, OCLC 248331622
  * Coulthard-Clark, Christopher D (2001), The Encyclopaedia of Australia's Battles, Crows Nest, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin, pp. 320pp, ISBN 1865086347, OCLC 48793439
  * Cruttwell, Charles Robert Mowbray Fraser (2007), A History of the Great War, 1914â1918, Chicago: Academy Chicago Publishers, ISBN 0897333152 general military history
  * Dignan, Don K (February 1971), "The Hindu Conspiracy in Anglo-American Relations during World War I.", The Pacific Historical Review (University of California Press) 40 (1): 57â76, ISSN 0030-8684, http://www.jstor.org/stable/3637829
  * Duffy, Michael, Somme, First World War.com, http://www.firstworldwar.com/battles/somme.htm, retrieved on 25 February 2007
  * Dupuy, Trevor Nevitt (1979), Numbers, Predictions and War, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, ISBN 0672521318, OCLC 4037624
  * Eksteins, Modris (1989), Rites of Spring: The Great War and the Birth of the Modern Age, London: Bantam, ISBN 0593018621, OCLC 19455240 an analysis of cultural changes before, during, and after the war
  * Ellis, John; Cox, Michael (2001), The World War I Databook: The Essential Facts and Figures for All the Combatants, London: Aurum, ISBN 1854107666, OCLC 46506978
  * Esposito, Vincent J (1997), 1900â1918, The West Point Atlas of American Wars, II, New York: Henry Holt, ISBN 0805053050, OCLC 39644150, http://www.dean.usma.edu/history/web03/atlases/great%20war/great%20war%20index.htm despite the title covers entire war
  * Evans, David (2004), The First World War, Teach yourself, London: Hodder Arnold, ISBN 0340884894, OCLC 224332259
  * Evans, Leslie (27 May 2005), Future of Iraq, Israel-Palestine Conflict, and Central Asia Weighed at International Conference, UCLA International Institute, http://www.international.ucla.edu/article.asp?parentid=24920, retrieved on 2008-12-30
  * Falls, Cyril Bentham (1959), The Great War, New York: Putnam, ISBN 0399501002, OCLC 8664179 general military history
  * Ferguson, Niall (1999), The Pity of War, New York: Basic Books, pp. 563pp, ISBN 046505711X, OCLC 41124439
  * Ferguson, Niall (2006), The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the West, New York: Penguin Press, ISBN 1594201005
  * Fischer, Fritz (1967), Germany's Aims in the First World War, New York: Norton, OCLC 1558559 (original German title "Griff nach der Weltmacht: Die Kriegzielpolitik des kaiserlichen Deutschland 1914/18")
  * Fischer, Fritz; Jackson, Marian (1975), War of Illusions: German Policies From 1911 to 1914, New York: Norton, OCLC 221830012 (original German title "Krieg der Illusionen die deutsche Politik von 1911 - 1914")
  * Fortescue, Granville Roland (28 October 1915), London in Gloom over Gallipoli; Captain Fortescue in Book and Ashmead-Bartlett in Lecture Declare Campaign Lost. Say Allies Can't Advance; Attack on Allied Diplomacy in Correspondent's Doleful Talk Passed by Censor, New York Times, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9907E3DE1E38E633A2575BC2A9669D946496D6CF
  * Fraser, Thomas G (April 1977), "Germany and Indian Revolution, 1914-18", Journal of Contemporary History (Sage Publications) 12 (2): 255â272, doi:10.1177/002200947701200203, ISSN 00220094
  * Fromkin, David (2001), A Peace to End All Peace: The Fall of the Ottoman Empire and the Creation of the Modern Middle East, New York: Owl Books, pp. 119, ISBN 0805068848, OCLC 53814831
  * Fromkin, David (2004), Europe's Last Summer: Who Started the Great War in 1914?, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, ISBN 0375411569, OCLC 53937943
  * Fussell, Paul (1975), The Great War and Modern Memory, New York: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0195019180, OCLC 1631561 on literature
  * Gelvin, James L (2005), The Israel-Palestine Conflict: One Hundred Years of War, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521852897, OCLC 59879560
  * Gilbert, Martin (2004), The First World War: A Complete History, Clearwater, Florida: Owl Books, pp. 306, ISBN 0805076174, OCLC 34792651
  * Gray, Edwyn A (1994), The U-Boat War, 1914â1918, London: L Cooper, ISBN 0850524059, OCLC 59816503
  * Green, John Frederick Norman (1938), "Obituary: Albert Ernest Kitson", Geological Society Quarterly Journal (Geological Society) 94
  * Haber, LF (1986), The Poisonous Cloud: Chemical Warfare in the First World War, Oxford: Clarendon, ISBN 0198581424, OCLC 12051072
  * Halpern, Paul G (1995), A Naval History of World War I, New York: Routledge, ISBN 1857284984, OCLC 60281302
  * Harrach, Franz, Archduke Franz Ferdinand's Assassination, 28 June 1914: Memoir of Count Franz von Harrach, First World War.com
  * Hardach, Gerd (1977), The First World War 1914â1918, London: Allen Lane, ISBN 0713910240, OCLC 3174153 economics
  * Heller, Charles E (1984), Chemical warfare in World War I : the American experience, 1917-1918, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: Combat Studies Institute, OCLC 123244486, http://www-cgsc.army.mil/carl/resources/csi/Heller/HELLER.asp
  * Henig, Ruth Beatrice (2002), The Origins of the First World War, Lancaster Pamphlets (3rd ed.), London: Routledge, ISBN 0415262054, OCLC 59470456
  * Herbert, Edwin (2003), Small Wars and Skirmishes 1902-1918: Early Twentieth-century Colonial Campaigns in Africa, Asia and the Americas, Nottingham: Foundry Books Publications, ISBN 1901543056
  * Herrmann, David G (1996), The Arming of Europe and the Making of the First World War, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, ISBN 0691033749, OCLC 32509928
  * Herwig, Holger H (1996), The First World War: Germany and Austria-Hungary 1914â1918, London: Arnold, ISBN 0340573481, OCLC 60154404
  * Heyman, Neil M (1997), World War I, Guides to historic events of the twentieth century, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, ISBN 0313298807, OCLC 36292837
  * Hickey, Michael (2003), The Mediterranean Front 1914-1923, The First World War, 4, New York: Routledge, pp. 60â65, ISBN 0415968445, OCLC 52375688
  * Higham, Robin DS; Showalter, Dennis E, eds. (2003), Researching World War I: A Handbook, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, ISBN 031328850X, OCLC 51922814 , historiography, stressing military themes
  * Hinterhoff, Eugene (1984), Young, Peter, ed., The Campaign in Armenia, ii, New York: Marshall Cavendish, ISBN 0863071813
  * Hooker, Richard (1996), The Ottomans, http://www.wsu.edu/~dee/OTTOMAN/OTTOMAN1.HTM, retrieved on 2008-12-30
  * Hoover, Herbert; Wilson, Woodrow (1958), Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson, New York: McGraw-Hill, OCLC 254607345
  * Howard, Michael Eliot (2002), The First World War, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 175, ISBN 0192853627, OCLC 59376613 , general military history
  * Hubatsch, Walther; Backus, Oswald P (1963), Germany and the Central Powers in the World War, 1914â1918, Lawrence, Kansas: University of Kansas, OCLC 250441891
  * Hughes, Thomas L (October 2002), "The German Mission to Afghanistan, 1915-1916", German Studies Review (German Studies Association) 25 (3): 447â476, doi:10.2307/1432596, ISSN 01497952
  * Hull, Cordell; Berding, Andrew Henry Thomas (1948), The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, 1, New York: Macmillan, pp. 81, OCLC 228774232
  * Isaac, Jad; Hosh, Leonardo (7-9 May 1992), Roots of the Water Conflict in the Middle East, University of Waterloo, http://web.archive.org/web/20060928053605/http://www.oranim.ac.il/courses/meast/water/Roots+of+the+Water+Conflict+in+the+Middle+East.htm
  * Isenberg, Michael Thomas (1981), War on Film: The American Cinema and World War I, 1914-1941, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0838620043, OCLC 5726236
  * Johnson, James Edgar (2001), Full Circle: The Story of Air Fighting, London: Cassell, ISBN 0304358606, OCLC 45991828
  * Joll, James (1984), The Origins of the First World War, London: Longman, ISBN 0582490162, OCLC 9852205
  * Jones, Howard (2001), Crucible of Power: A History of U. S. Foreign Relations Since 1897, Wilmington, Delaware: Scholarly Resources Books, ISBN 0842029184, OCLC 46640675
  * Kaplan, Robert D. (February 1993), "Syria: Identity Crisis", The Atlantic, http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/199302/kaplan, retrieved on 2008-12-30
  * Karp, Walter (1979), The Politics of War (1st ed.), ISBN 006012265X, OCLC 4593327 , Wilson's maneuvering U.S. into war
  * Keegan, John (1998), The First World War, Hutchinson, ISBN 0091801788 , general military history
  * Keene, Jennifer D (2006), World War I, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, pp. 5, ISBN 0313331812, OCLC 70883191
  * Kennedy, David M (1982), Over Here: The First World War and American Society, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0195032098, OCLC 9906841 , covers politics & economics & society
  * Kennett, Lee B (1992), The First Air War, 1914â1918, New York: Free Press, ISBN 0029173019, OCLC 22113898
  * Keynes, John Maynard (1920), The Economic Consequences of the Peace, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Howe, OCLC 213487540
  * Kitchen, Martin (2000), Europe Between the Wars, New York: Longman, ISBN 0582418690, OCLC 247285240, http://www.jimmyatkinson.com/papers/versaillestreaty.html#endnotes
  * Knobler, Stacey L, ed. (2005), The Threat of Pandemic Influenza: Are We Ready? Workshop Summary, Washington DC: National Academies Press, ISBN 0309095042, OCLC 57422232, http://www.nap.edu/books/0309095042/html/7.html
  * Lee, Dwight Erwin, ed. (1953), The Outbreak of the First World War: Who Was Responsible?, Boston: Heath, pp. 74pp, OCLC 8824589 , readings from multiple points of view
  * Lehmann, Hartmut; van der Veer, Peter, eds. (1999), Nation and religion: perspectives on Europe and Asia, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, ISBN 0691012326, OCLC 39727826
  * Lewy, Guenter (2005), The Armenian Massacres in Ottoman Turkey: A Disputed Genocide, Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, ISBN 0874808499, OCLC 61262401
  * Lyons, Michael J (1999), World War I: A Short History (2nd ed.), Prentice Hall, ISBN 0130205516
  * Ludendorff, Erich (1919), My War Memories, 1914-1918, OCLC 60104290 also published by Harper as "Ludendorff's Own Story, August 1914-November 1918: The Great War from the Siege of Liege to the Signing of the Armistice as Viewed from the Grand Headquarters of the German Army" OCLC 561160
  * Marsden, William Edward (2001), The School Textbook: Geography, History, and Social Studies, London: Routledge, pp. 177, ISBN 0713040432, OCLC 46836724
  * Maurice, Frederick Barton (18 August 1918), "Foe's reserves now only 16 divisions; Allies' Counteroffensive has reduced them from 60, Gen. Maurice says Ludendorff in dilemma; he must choose between giving up offensive projects and shortening his line", New York Times, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9B02EFD6103BEE3ABC4052DFBE668383609EDE&scp=8&sq=Ludendorff+Amiens+1918&st=p
  * Millett, Allan Reed; Murray, Williamson (1988), Military Effectiveness, Boston: Allen Unwin, ISBN 0044450532, OCLC 220072268
  * Moon, John Ellis van Courtland (July 1996), "United States Chemical Warfare Policy in World War II: A Captive of Coalition Policy?", The Journal of Military History 60 (3): 495â511, doi:10.2307/2944522, http://www.jstor.org/stable/2944522
  * Morton, Desmond; Granatstein, Jack L (1989), Marching to Armageddon: Canadians and the Great War 1914â1919, ISBN 0886192099, OCLC 21449019
  * Morton, Desmond (1992), Silent Battle: Canadian Prisoners of War in Germany, 1914-1919, Toronto: Lester Pub, ISBN 1895555175, OCLC 29565680
  * Mosier, John (2001), "Germany and the Development of Combined Arms Tactics", Myth of the Great War: How the Germans Won the Battles and How the Americans Saved the Allies, New York: Harper Collins, ISBN 0060196769
  * Muller, Jerry Z (March/April 2008), "Us and Them - The Enduring Power of Ethnic Nationalism", Foreign Affairs, http://www.foreignaffairs.org/20080301faessay87203/jerry-z-muller/us-and-them.html, retrieved on 2008-12-30
  * Neiberg, Michael S (2005), Fighting the Great War: A Global History, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, ISBN 0674016963, OCLC 56592292
  * Nicholson, Gerald WL (1962), Canadian Expeditionary Force, 1914-1919: Official History of the Canadian Army in the First World War (1st ed.), Ottawa: Queens Printer and Controller of Stationary, OCLC 2317262, http://www.censol.ca/research/greatwar/nicholson/index.htm
  * Phillimore, George Grenville; Bellot, Hugh HL (1919), "Treatment of Prisoners of War", Transactions of the Grotius Society 5: 47â64, OCLC 43267276
  * Pitt, Barrie (2003), 1918: The Last Act, Barnsley: Pen and Sword, ISBN 0850529743, OCLC 56468232
  * Pope, Stephen; Wheal, Elizabeth-Anne, eds. (1995), The Macmillan Dictionary of the First World War, ISBN 033361822X, OCLC 60238536
  * Price, Alfred (1980), Aircraft versus Submarine: the Evolution of the Anti-submarine Aircraft, 1912 to 1980, London: Jane's Publishing, ISBN 0710600089, OCLC 10324173 Deals with technical developments, including the first dipping hydrophones
  * Prior, Robin (1999), The First World War, London: Cassell, ISBN 030435256X
  * Robbins, Keith (1993), The First World War, New York: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0192891499, OCLC 26402515 , short overview
  * Ross, Stewart Halsey (1996), Propaganda for War: How the United States was Conditioned to Fight the Great War of 1914-1918, Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, ISBN 0786401117, OCLC 185807544
  * Gilpin, Robert (1989), Rotberg, Robert I; Rabb, Theodore K, eds., The Origin and Prevention of Major Wars, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 225, ISBN 0521379555, OCLC 123169187
  * Salibi, Kamal Suleiman (1993), "How it all began - A concise history of Lebanon", A House of Many Mansions - the history of Lebanon reconsidered, I.B. Tauris, ISBN 1850430918, OCLC 224705916, http://almashriq.hiof.no/lebanon/900/902/Kamal-Salibi/
  * Shapiro, Fred R; Epstein, Joseph (2006), The Yale Book of Quotations, Yale University Press, ISBN 0300107986
  * Silkin, Jon, ed. (1996), The Penguin Book of First World War Poetry (2nd ed.), New York: Penguin, ISBN 0141180099, OCLC 37105631
  * Singh, Jaspal, History of the Ghadar Movement, panjab.org.uk, http://www.panjab.org.uk/english/histGPty.html, retrieved on 2007-10-31
  * Sisemore, James D (2003), The Russo-Japanese War, Lessons Not Learned, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, http://cgsc.cdmhost.com/cdm4/item_viewer.php?CISOROOT=/p4013coll2&CISOPTR=113
  * Snyder, Jack L (1984), Ideology of the Offensive, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, ISBN 0801416574
  * Southgate, Troy, The Fischer Controversy, http://www.rosenoire.org/articles/hist9.php
  * Speed, Richard B., III (1990), Prisoners, Diplomats and the Great War: A Study in the Diplomacy of Captivity, New York: Greenwood Press, ISBN 0313267294, OCLC 20694547
  * Stevenson, David (1996), Armaments and the Coming of War: Europe, 1904-1914, New York: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0198202083, OCLC 33079190
  * Stevenson, David (2004), Cataclysm: The First World War As Political Tragedy, New York: Basic Books, pp. 560pp, ISBN 0465081843, OCLC 54001282 , major reinterpretation
  * Stevenson, David (2005), The First World War and International Politics, Oxford: Clarendon, OCLC 248297941
  * Stokesbury, James (1981), A Short History of World War I, New York: Morrow, ISBN 0688001289
  * Strachan, Hew (2004), The First World War: Volume I: To Arms, New York: Viking, ISBN 0670032956, OCLC 53075929 : the major scholarly synthesis. Thorough coverage of 1914
  * Taylor, AJP (1963), The First World War: An Illustrated History, Hamish Hamilton, OCLC 2054370
  * Taylor, John M (Summer 2007), "Audacious Cruise of the Emden", The Quarterly Journal of Military History 19 (4): 38-47, doi:10.1353/jmh.2007.0331, ISSN 0899-3718
  * Terraine, John (1963), Ordeal of Victory, Philadelphia: Lippincott, pp. 508pp, OCLC 1345833
  * Tuchman, Barbara Wertheim (1962), The Guns of August, New York: Macmillan, OCLC 192333 , tells of the opening diplomatic and military manoeuvres
  * Tuchman, Barbara Wertheim (1966), The Zimmerman Telegram (2nd ed.), New York: Macmillan, ISBN 0026203200, OCLC 233392415
  * Tucker, Spencer (1999), European Powers in the First World War: An Encyclopedia, ISBN 081533351X, OCLC 40417794
  * Tucker, Spencer C (2005), Encyclopedia of World War I. A Political, Social and Military History, Santa Barbara: ABC-Clio, ISBN 1851094202
  * van der Vat, Dan (1988), The Atlantic Campaign, London: Grafton, ISBN 0586206957 Connects submarine and antisubmarine operations between wars, and suggests a continuous war
  * Venzon, Anne Cipriano; Miles, Paul L, eds. (1995), The United States in the First World War: An Encyclopedia, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 0824070550
  * von der Porten, Edward P (1969), German Navy in World War II, New York: T. Y. Crowell, OCLC 164543865
  * Westwell, Ian (2004), World War I Day by Day, St. Paul, Minnesota: MBI Pub., pp. 192pp, ISBN 0760319375, OCLC 57533366
  * Wiggin, Addision (29 November 2006), [www.dailyreckoning.com.au/bretton-woods-agreement/2006/11/29/ Bretton Woods agreement], Port Phillip Publishing, www.dailyreckoning.com.au/bretton-woods-agreement/2006/11/29/
  * Wilgus, William John (1931), Transporting the A. E. F. in Western Europe, 1917â1919, New York: Columbia University Press, OCLC 1161730
  * Willmott, H.P. (2003), World War I, New York: Dorling Kindersley, ISBN 0789496275, OCLC 52541937
  * Winter, Denis (1982), The First of the Few: Fighter Pilots of the First World War, Allen Lane, pp. 223pp, ISBN 0713912782
  * Winter, Jay M (2005), The Experience of World War I (2nd ed.), Oxford University Press, ISBN 0195207769 , topical essays; well illustrated
  * Zieger, Robert H (2001), America's Great War: World War I and the American experience, Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield, pp. 50, ISBN 0847696456
  * "Country Briefings: Israel", The Economist, 28 July 2005, http://www.economist.com/countries/Israel/profile.cfm?folder=History%20in%20brief, retrieved on 2008-12-30
  * Israeli Foreign Ministry, Ottoman Rule, Jewish Virtual Library, http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/History/Ottoman.html, retrieved on 2008-12-30

## External links

Listen to this article (3 parts) Â· (info)

Part 1 â¢ Part 2 â¢ Part 3

Spoken Wikipedia

This audio file was created from a revision dated 2006-06-24, and does not
reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles

This is a spoken version of the article. Click here to listen.

  * A multimedia history of World War I
  * World War I rare Photograph album
  * The Heritage of the Great War, Netherlands
  * The War to End All Wars on BBC
  * World War 1 Atlas A day-by-day map of the First World War
  * WWI Service Questionnaires at Gettysburg College
  * Collection of World War I Color Photographs
  * The Commonwealth War Graves Commission
  * Royal Engineers Museum Royal Engineers and the First World War
  * World War I : Soldiers Remembered Presented by the Washington State Library and Washington State Archives
  * The World War I Document Archive Wiki
  * US World War I links
  * Maps of Great War

v â¢ d â¢ e

World War I  
European theatre: (Balkans â Western Front â Eastern Front â Italian
Front)  
Middle Eastern theatre: (Caucasus â Mesopotamia â Sinai and Palestine â
Gallipoli â Persia)  
African theatre: (South-West Africa â West Africa â East Africa â North
Africa )  
Asian and Pacific theatre: (Siege of Tsingtao)  
Atlantic Ocean Â· Mediterranean  
Major participants  
(People)

Entente Powers

Russian Empire Â· French Empire: France, Vietnam Â· British Empire: United
Kingdom, Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand, Newfoundland, South Africa Â·
Italy Â· Romania Â· United States Â· Serbia Â· Portugal Â· China Â· Japan Â·
Belgium Â· Montenegro Â· Greece Â· Armenia Â· Brazil  
Central Powers

Germany Â· AustriaâHungary Â· Ottoman Empire Â· Bulgaria  
Timeline

Pre-conflicts

Mexican Revolution (1910â1920) Â· Italo-Turkish War (1911â1912) Â· First
Balkan War (1912â1913) Â· Second Balkan War (1913)  
Prelude

Origins Â· Sarajevo assassination Â· July Ultimatum  
1914

Battle of the Frontiers Â· First Battle of the Marne Â· Battle of Tannenberg
Â· Battle of Galicia Â· Battle of the Masurian Lakes Â· Battle of Kolubara Â·
Battle of SarÄ±kamÄ±Å  
1915

Second Battle of Ypres Â· Battle of Gallipoli Â· Battles of the Isonzo Â·
Great Retreat Â· Conquest of Serbia Â· Siege of Kut  
1916

Erzerum Offensive Â· Battle of Verdun Â· Lake Naroch Offensive Â· Battle of
Asiago Â· Battle of Jutland Â· Battle of the Somme Â· Brusilov Offensive Â·
Conquest of Romania  
1917

Capture of Baghdad Â· Second Battle of Arras Â· Kerensky Offensive Â· Third
Battle of Ypres Â· Battle of Caporetto Â· Battle of Cambrai  
1918

Armistice of Erzincan Â· Treaty of Brest-Litovsk Â· Spring Offensive Â·
Hundred Days Offensive Â· Meuse-Argonne Offensive Â· Battle of Vittorio Veneto
Â· Armistice with Germany Â· Armistice with Ottoman Empire  
Other conflicts

Maritz Rebellion (1914â1915) Â· Indo-German Conspiracy (1914â1919) Â·
Easter Rising (1916) Â· Russian Revolution (1917) Â· Finnish Civil War (1918)  
Post-conflicts

Russian Civil War (1917â1921) Â· ArmenianâAzerbaijani War (1918â1920) Â·
GeorgianâArmenian War (1918) Â· German Revolution (1918â1919) Â·
Hungarian-Romanian War (1918â1919) Â· Wielkopolska Uprising (1918â1919) Â·
Estonian War of Independence (1918â1920) Â· Latvian War of Independence
(1918â1920) Â· Lithuanian Wars of Independence (1918â1920) Â· Ukrainian
War of Independence (1917â1921) Â· PolishâSoviet War (1919â1921) Â·
PolishâLithuanian War (1920) Â· Irish War of Independence (1919â1921) Â·
Turkish War of Independence including the Greco-Turkish War (1919â1923) Â·
Invasion of Georgia (1921) Â· Irish Civil War (1922â1923)  
Aspects

Warfare

Military engagements Â· Naval warfare Â· Air warfare Â· Cryptography Â· Poison
gas Â· Railways Â· Technology Â· Trench warfare Â· Total war Â· Surviving
veterans  
Civilian impact /  
atrocities

Casualties Â· Spanish flu Â· Rape of Belgium Â· Ottoman People: (Armenian
Genocide Â· Assyrian Genocide Â· Pontic Greek Genocide Â· Kurdish Genocide) Â·
Female roles Â· Literature  
Agreements /  
Treaties

Partitioning of the Ottoman Empire Â· Sykes-Picot â¢ St.-Jean-de-Maurienne
â¢ French-Armenian â¢ Damascus â¢ Paris Peace Conference Â· Treaty of
Brest-Litovsk Â· Treaty of Lausanne Â· Treaty of London Â· Treaty of Neuilly
Â· Treaty of St. Germain Â· Treaty of SÃ¨vres Â· Treaty of Trianon Â· Treaty
of Versailles  
Consequences

Aftermath Â· "Fourteen Points" Â· League of Nations  
Category Â· Portal  
<IMG> World War I from Wiktionary <IMG> WWI Textbooks from Wikibooks <IMG> WWI
Quotations from Wikiquote <IMG> WWI Source texts from Wikisource <IMG> WWI
Images & media from Commons <IMG> WWI News stories from Wikinews  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I"

Categories: Spoken articles | World War I | Wars involving the states and
peoples of Europe | Wars involving the states and peoples of Asia | Wars
involving the states and peoples of Africa | Wars involving the states and
peoples of Oceania | Contemporary German history | Contemporary Italian
history | French Third Republic | Wars involving Australia | History of
Austria-Hungary | History of Montenegro | History of the United States
(1865â1918) | History of Serbia | Wars involving Armenia | Wars involving
Austria | Wars involving Belgium | Wars involving British India | Wars
involving Bulgaria | Wars involving Canada | Wars involving China | Wars
involving Croatia | Wars involving France | Wars involving Greece | Wars
involving Germany | Wars involving Hungary | Wars involving Ireland | Wars
involving Italy | Wars involving Japan | Wars involving Montenegro | Wars
involving New Zealand | Wars involving Portugal | Wars involving Romania |
Wars involving Russia | Wars involving South Africa | Wars involving the
Ottoman Empire | Wars involving the United Kingdom | Wars involving the United
States | Russo-Ottoman Wars | Global conflicts

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since December 2008 | Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected
pages | All pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-
worded phrases since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since
February 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since July 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 |
Articles needing additional references from December 2008 | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles needing additional references
from May 2008 | Articles needing additional references from January 2008 |
Articles with unsourced statements since November 2008 | Articles containing
video clips

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * Anglo-Saxon
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Asturianu
  * AvaÃ±e'áº½
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bikol Central
  * Boarisch
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Corsu
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EmiliÃ n e rumagnÃ²l
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * EstremeÃ±u
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Furlan
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Limburgs
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * Nedersaksisch
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Nouormand
  * Occitan
  * Oromoo
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * QÄ±rÄ±mtatarca
  * Ripoarisch
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sardu
  * Seeltersk
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Soomaaliga
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Basa Sunda
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * VÃ¨neto
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Walon
  * West-Vlams
  * Winaray
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 20:04.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



