
# Honduras

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Republic of Honduras

RepÃºblica de Honduras  
Flag of Honduras Coat of arms of Honduras  
Flag Coat of arms  
Motto: "Libre, Soberana e Independiente " (Spanish)  
"Free, Sovereign and Independent"  
Anthem: Himno Nacional de Honduras  
  
Location of Honduras  
Capital  
(and largest city) Tegucigalpa  
14Â°6â²N 87Â°13â²Wï»¿ / ï»¿14.1Â°N 87.217Â°Wï»¿ / 14.1; -87.217  
Official languages Spanish  
Ethnic groups 90% Mestizo  
7% Amerindian  
2% Black  
1% White  
Government Presidential Republic  
- President JosÃ© Manuel Zelaya Rosales  
- Vice President Elvin Ernesto Santos  
Independence  
- from Spain September 15, 1821  
Area  
- Total 112,492 km2 (102nd)  
43,278 sq mi  
Population  
- September 2007 estimate 7,483,763Â² (96th)  
- 2000 census 6,975,204  
- Density 64/km2 (128th)  
166/sq mi  
GDP (PPP) 2007 estimate  
- Total $30.676 billion[1]  
- Per capita $4,085[1]  
GDP (nominal) 2007 estimate  
- Total $12.279 billion[1]  
- Per capita $1,635[1]  
Gini (2003) 53.8 (high)  
HDI (2007) â² 0.700 (medium) (115th)  
Currency Lempira (`HNL`)  
Time zone CST (UTC-6)  
Drives on the right  
Internet TLD .hn  
Calling code 504  
1 "libre, soberana, solo" is the official motto, by congress order put on the
coat of arms. The unofficial motto "NO PASARÃN" or "They shall not pass"
became popular during the 1969 war with El Salvador. This is an allusion to
the El Salvador's stated goal to reach the Honduran Caribbean coast during
their offensive.  
2 note: estimates for this country explicitly take into account the effects of
excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower life expectancy, higher
infant mortality and death rates, lower population and growth rates, and
changes in the distribution of population by age and sex than would otherwise
be expected (July 2007 est.)  
Honduras (Spanish: RepÃºblica de Honduras, Spanish pronunciation:
[reËpuÎ²lika Ã°e onËduÉ¾as]) is a democratic republic in Central America. It
was formerly known as Spanish Honduras to differentiate it from British
Honduras (now Belize).[2] The country is bordered to the west by Guatemala, to
the southwest by El Salvador, to the southeast by Nicaragua, to the south by
the Pacific Ocean at the Gulf of Fonseca, and to the north by the Gulf of
Honduras, a large inlet of the Caribbean Sea. Its size is just over 110,000
kmÂ² with an estimated population of almost 7,500,000. Its capital is
Tegucigalpa.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Etymology
  * 2 Politics
  * 3 Departments and municipalities
  * 4 Geography
    * 4.1 Ecology
  * 5 Economy
  * 6 Demographics
  * 7 Culture
    * 7.1 Celebrations
  * 8 Infrastructure
    * 8.1 Energy
    * 8.2 Water supply and sanitation
    * 8.3 Transport
  * 9 National symbols
  * 10 Folklore
  * 11 Sports
  * 12 See also
  * 13 Bibliography
  * 14 References
  * 15 External links

  
## [edit] History

Main article: History of Honduras

Archaeologists have demonstrated that Honduras had a rich, multi-ethnic
prehistory. An important part of that prehistory was the Mayan presence around
the city of CopÃ¡n in western Honduras, near the Guatemalan border. A major
Mayan city flourished during the classic period (150-900) in that area. It has
many carved inscriptions and stelae. The ancient kingdom, named rtyu, existed
from the fifth century to the early ninth century, with antecedents going back
to at least the second century. The Mayan civilization began a marked decline
in the ninth century, but there is evidence of people still living in and
around the city until at least 1200.[citation needed] By the time the Spanish
came to Honduras, the once great city-state of CopÃ¡n was overrun by the
jungle, and the Lencas, not the Mayans, were the main Amerindian people living
in western Honduras.

On his fourth and the final voyage to the New World in 1502, Christopher
Columbus reached the Bay Islands on the coast of Honduras.[3] Columbus landed
near the modern town of Trujillo, in the vicinity of the Guaimoreto Lagoon.
After the Spanish discovery, Honduras became part of Spain's vast empire in
the New World within the Kingdom of Guatemala. Trujillo and Gracias were the
first city-capitals. The Spanish ruled what would become Honduras for
approximately three centuries. During this period a clock which had been built
by the Moors in the twelfth Century was transferred to the Cathedral of
Comayagua in 1636: it is now the oldest functioning clock in the
Americas.[citation needed]

Spain granted independence to Honduras, with the rest of the Central American
provinces on September 15, 1821. In 1822 the United Central American Provinces
decided to join the newly declared Mexican Empire of Iturbide. The Iturbide
Empire was overthrown in 1823 and Central America separated from it, forming
the Federal Republic of Central America, which disintegrated in 1838. As a
result the states of the republic became independent nations.

Silver mining was a key factor in the Spanish conquest and settlement of
Honduras, but has been only a minor part of the national economy in recent
years. The American-owned Barger Mining Company was a major gold and silver
producer, but shut down its large mine at San Juancito in 1954.

Following the attack on Pearl Harbor, Honduras joined the Allied Nations on
December 8, 1941. Less than a month later, on the first day of 1942, Honduras,
along with twenty-five other governments, signed the Declaration by United
Nations.

In 1969, Honduras and El Salvador fought what would become known as the
Football War.[4] There had been border tensions between the two countries
after Oswaldo LÃ³pez Arellano, a former president of Honduras, blamed the
deteriorating economy on the large number of immigrants from El Salvador. From
that point on, the relationship between the two countries grew acrimonious and
reached a low when El Salvador met Honduras for a three-round football
elimination match as a preliminary to the World Cup. Tensions escalated, and
on July 14, 1969, the Salvadoran army launched an attack against Honduras. The
Organization of American States negotiated a cease-fire which took effect on
July 20, and brought about a withdrawal of Salvadoran troops in early
August.[4]

Contributing factors in the conflict were a boundary dispute and the presence
of thousands of Salvadorans living in Honduras illegally. After the week-long
football war in July 1969, many Salvadoran families and workers were expelled.
El Salvador had agreed on a truce to settle the boundary issue, but Honduras
later paid war damage costs for expelled refugees.[4]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Fort of San Fernando Omoa, built by the Spaniards to defend against pirates

Hurricane Fifi caused severe damage while skimming the northern coast of
Honduras on September 18 and 19, 1974.

During the 1980s, the United States established a very large military presence
in Honduras with the purpose of supporting the anti-Sandinista Contras
fighting the Nicaraguan government, and to support the El Salvador military
fighting against the FMLN guerrillas. The U.S. built the airbase known as
Palmerola, near Comayagua, with a 10,000-foot (3,000 m) runway so that C-5
Galaxy cargo planes could land there, rather than at the public airport in San
Pedro Sula. The U.S. also built a training base near Trujillo which primarily
trained Contras and the Salvadoran military, and in conjunction with this,
developed Puerto Castilla into a modern port. The United States built many
airstrips near the Nicaraguan border to help move supplies to the Contra
forces fighting the Sandinistas in Nicaragua. Though spared the bloody civil
wars wracking its neighbors, the Honduran army quietly waged a campaign
against leftists which included extra judicial killings and forced
disappearances of political opponents by government-backed death squads, most
notably Battalion 316.[5]

In 1998, Hurricane Mitch caused such massive and widespread loss that former
Honduran President Carlos Roberto Flores claimed that fifty years of progress
in the country were reversed. Mitch obliterated about 70% of the crops and an
estimated 70-80% of the transportation infrastructure, including nearly all
bridges and secondary roads. Across the country, 33,000 houses were destroyed,
an additional 50,000 damaged, some 5,000 people killed, 12,000 injured, and
total loss estimated at $3 billion USD.[6]

### [edit] Etymology

The Spanish used at least three different terms to refer to the area that
became the Central American country of Honduras.

  * Guaymuras - a name Columbus provided for a town near modern Trujillo. BartolomÃ© de las Casas subsequently generalized it to apply to the whole colony.
  * Higueras - a reference to the gourds that come from the Jicaro tree, many of which were found floating in the waters off the northwest coast of Honduras.
  * Honduras - literally "depths" in Spanish. Columbus is traditionally quoted as having written Gracias a Dios que hemos salido de esas Honduras (English: "Thank God we have come out of those depths") while along the northeastern coast. [7]

## [edit] Politics

Main article: Politics of Honduras

Honduras has five registered political parties: National Party (Partido
Nacional de Honduras: PNH), Liberal Party (Partido Liberal de Honduras: PLH),
Social Democrats (Partido InnovaciÃ³n y Unidad-Social DemÃ³crata: PINU-SD),
Social Christians (Partido DemÃ³crata-Cristiano de Honduras: DCH), and
Democratic Unification (Partido UnificaciÃ³n DemocrÃ¡tica: UD). PNH and PLH
have ruled the country for decades. In the last years, Honduras has had five
Liberal presidents: Roberto Suazo CÃ³rdova, JosÃ© Azcona del Hoyo, Carlos
Roberto Reina, Carlos Roberto Flores and Manuel Zelaya, and two Nationalists:
Rafael Leonardo Callejas Romero and Ricardo Maduro. The elections have been
full of controversies, including questions about whether Azcona was born in
Spain, and whether Maduro should have been able to stand given he was born in
Panama.

In 1963, a military coup was mounted against the democratically-elected
president RamÃ³n Villeda Morales. This even started a string of Military
Governments which held power almost uninterrupted until 1981. In this year
Suazo CÃ³rdova (LPH) was elected president and Honduras changed from a
military authoritarian regime.

In 1986, there were five Liberal candidates and four Nationalists running for
president. Because no one candidate obtained a clear majority, the so-called
"Formula B" was invoked and Azcona del Hoyo became president. In 1990,
Callejas won the election under the slogan "LlegÃ³ el momento del Cambio"
(English: "The time for change has arrived"), which was heavily criticized for
resembling El Salvador's "ARENAs" political campaign. Once in office, Callejas
Romero gained a reputation for illicit enrichment, and has been the subject of
several scandals and accusations. It was during Flores Facusse's mandate that
Hurricane Mitch hit the country and decades of economic growth were eradicated
in less than a week.

The effect of the patronage appointments is tremendously felt in the
incapacity of government departments to carry out their mandate.[citation
needed] In an interview with Rodolfo Pastor Fasquelle, Minister of Sports &
Culture and one of three 'super ministers' responsible for coordinating the
ministries related to public services (security & economic being the other 2),
published in Honduras This Week on July 31, 2006, it was related that 94% of
the department budget was spent on bureaucracy and only 6% went to support
activities and organizations covered by the mandate. Wages within that
ministry were identified as the largest budget consumer.

President Maduro's administration "de-nationalized" the telecommunications
sector in a move to promote the rapid diffusion of these services to the
Honduran population. As of November 2005, there were around 10 private-sector
telecommunications companies in the Honduran market, including two mobile
phone companies. As of mid 2007 the issue of tele-communications continues to
be very damaging to the current government.[8] The country's main newspapers
are La Prensa, El Heraldo, La Tribuna and Diario Tiempo. The official
newspaper is La Gaceta.

A Presidential and General Election was held on November 27, 2005. Manuel
Zelaya of the Liberal Party of Honduras (Partido Liberal de Honduras: PLH)
won, with Porfirio Pepe Lobo of the National Party of Honduras (Partido
Nacional de Honduras: PNH) coming in second. The PNH challenged the election
results, and Lobo Sosa did not concede until December 7. Towards the end of
December, the government finally released the total ballot count, giving
Zelaya the official victory. Zelaya was inaugurated as Honduras' new president
on January 27, 2006. His government has generally been considered fragile and
he does not hold a majority in the National Congress.[citation needed]

## [edit] Departments and municipalities

<IMG>

<IMG>

Departmental division of Honduras

See also: Departments of Honduras and Municipalities of Honduras

Honduras is divided into 18 departments. The capital city is Tegucigalpa
Central District of the department of Francisco MorazÃ¡n.

  * 1-AtlÃ¡ntida
  * 2-Choluteca
  * 3-ColÃ³n
  * 4-Comayagua
  * 5-CopÃ¡n
  * 6-CortÃ©s
  * 7-El ParaÃ­so
  * 8-Francisco MorazÃ¡n
  * 9-Gracias a Dios
  * 10-IntibucÃ¡
  * 11-Islas de la BahÃ­a
  * 12-La Paz
  * 13-Lempira
  * 14-Ocotepeque
  * 15-Olancho
  * 16-Santa BÃ¡rbara
  * 17-Valle
  * 18-Yoro

## [edit] Geography

Main article: Geography of Honduras

See also: Rivers of Honduras

For administrative geography, see Departments of Honduras.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Honduras is surrounded by the Caribbean Sea (top), Nicaragua, a gulf on the
Pacific Ocean, El Salvador (lower left) & Guatemala (left)

<IMG>

<IMG>

River landscape in Tela.

Honduras borders the Caribbean Sea on the north coast and the Pacific Ocean on
the south through the Gulf of Fonseca. The climate varies from tropical in the
lowlands to temperate in the mountains. The central and southern regions are
relatively hotter and less humid than the northern coast.

The Honduran territory consists mainly of mountains (~81%), but there are
narrow plains along the coasts, a large undeveloped lowland jungle La
Mosquitia region in the northeast, and the heavily populated lowland Sula
valley in the northwest.

In La Mosquitia, lies the UNESCO world-heritage site RÃ­o PlÃ¡tano Biosphere
Reserve, with the Coco River which divides the country from Nicaragua.

Natural resources include timber, gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, iron ore,
antimony, coal, fish, shrimp, and hydropower.

The Islas de la BahÃ­a and the Swan Islands (all off the north coast) are part
of Honduras. Misteriosa Bank and Rosario Bank, 130 to 150 km (80-93 miles)
north of the Swan Islands, fall within the EEZ of Honduras.

### [edit] Ecology

The region is considered a biodiversity hotspot due to the numerous plant and
animal species that can be found there. Like other countries in the region,
Honduras contains vast biological resources. This 43,278 square mile (112,092
kmÂ²) country hosts more than 6,000 species of vascular plants, of which 630
(described so far) are Orchids; around 250 reptiles and amphibians, more than
700 bird species, and 110 mammal species, half of them being bats.[9]

In the northeastern region of La Mosquitia lies the RÃ­o PlÃ¡tano Biosphere
Reserve, a lowland rainforest which is home to a great diversity of life. The
reserve was added to the UNESCO World Heritage Sites List in 1982.

Honduras has rain forests, cloud forests (which can rise up to nearly three
thousand meters above sea level), mangroves, savannas and mountain ranges with
pine and oak trees, and the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System. In the Bay
Islands there are bottlenose dolphins, manta rays, parrot fish, schools of
blue tang and whale shark.

## [edit] Economy

See also: Economy of Honduras

<IMG>

<IMG>

The famous hotel Gran Sula in the center of San Pedro Sula

<IMG>

<IMG>

Fruit Market on the Road

The economy has continued to grow slowly but the distribution of wealth
remains very polarized with average wages remaining low. Economic growth in
the last few years has averaged 7% a year which has been one of the most
successful growths in Latin America, but 50%, approximately 3.7 million, of
the population still remain below the poverty line.[10] It is estimated that
there are more than 1.2 million people who are unemployed, the rate of
unemployment standing at 27.9%.

Honduras was declared one of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries by the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund which made it eligible for debt
relief in 2005.

Both the electricity services (ENEE) and land-line telephone services
(HONDUTEL) have been operated by government agencies, with ENEE receiving
heavy subsidies because of chronic financial problems. HONDUTEL, however, is
no longer a monopoly, the telecommunication sector having been opened to
private-sector companies after December 25, 2005; this was one of the
requirements before approving the beginning of CAFTA. There are price controls
on petrol, and other temporary price controls for basic commodities are often
passed for short periods by the Congress.

After years of declining against the U.S. dollar the Lempira has stabilized at
around 19 Lempiras per dollar. In June 2008 the exchange rate between United
States Dollars and Honduran Lempiras was approximately 1 to 18.85.

In 2005 Honduras signed the CAFTA (Free Trade Agreement with United States).
In December 2005, Honduras' main seaport Puerto Cortes was included in the
U.S. Container Security Initiative.[11]

On December 7, 2006, the U.S. Departments of Homeland Security (DHS) and
Energy (DOE) announced the first phase of the Secure Freight Initiative, an
unprecedented effort to build upon existing port security measures by
enhancing the U.S. federal governmentâs ability to scan containers for
nuclear and radiological materials overseas and to better assess the risk of
inbound containers. The initial phase of Secure Freight involves the
deployment of a combination of existing technology and proven nuclear
detection devices to six foreign ports: Port Qasim in Pakistan; Puerto Cortes
in Honduras; Southampton in the United Kingdom; Port Salalah in Oman; Port of
Singapore; and the Gamman Terminal at Port Busan in Korea. Since early 2007,
containers from these ports are scanned for radiation and information risk
factors before they are allowed to depart for the United States.[12]

## [edit] Demographics

Main article: Demographics of Honduras

See also: Hondurans

According to the CIA World Factbook, Honduras has a population of 7.48
million; 90% of the population is Mestizo, 7% Amerindian, 2% black and 1%
white.[13]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Village in CopÃ¡n.

90% of the Honduran population is Mestizo (a mixture of Amerindian and
European ancestry). About 7% of the Honduran population are members of one of
the seven recognized indigenous groups. The Confederation of Autochthonous
Peoples of Honduras (CONPAH) and the government of Honduras count seven
different indigenous groups:

  * the Ch'orti', a Mayan group living in the northwest on the border with Guatemala;
  * the Garifuna speaking an Arawakan language. They live along the entire Caribbean coastline of Honduras, and in the Bay Islands;
  * the Pech or Paya Indians living in a small area in the Olancho department;
  * the Tolupan (also called Jicaque, "Xicaque", or Tol), living in the Department of Yoro and in the reserve of the MontaÃ±a de la Flor and parts of the department of Yoro;
  * the Lenca Indians living in the Valle and Choluteca departments;
  * the Miskito Indians living on the northeast coast along the border with Nicaragua.

The confederation and each separate group of indigenous people have worked,
since the 1980s, for bettering the life of the aboriginal peoples. Change,
however, has been elusive as these peoples still face violence and
discrimination[citation needed].

About 2% of Honduras's population is black, or Afro-Honduran, and mainly
reside on the country's Caribbean or Atlantic coast. The black population
comes from a number of sources. Most are the descendants of the West Indian
islands brought to Honduras as slaves and indentured servants. Another large
group (about 150,000 today) are the Garifuna, descendants of an Afro-Carib
population which revolted against British authorities on the island of St.
Vincent and were forcibly moved to Belize and Honduras during the eighteenth
century. GarÃ­funas are part of Honduran identity through theatrical
presentations such as Louvavagu[citation needed].

Honduras hosts a significant Palestinian community (the vast majority of whom
are Christian Arabs). The Palestinians arrived in the country in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries, establishing themselves especially in the city of
San Pedro Sula. The Palestinian community, well integrated in Honduras, is
prominent in business, commerce, banking, industry, and politics. There is
also an East Asian community that is primarily Chinese descent, and to a
lesser extent Japanese. Korean, Ryukyuan, Vietnamese also make up a small
percentage due to their arrival to Honduras as contract laborers in the 1980s
and 1990s. There are also an estimated 1000 Sumos (or Mayangnas) that live in
Honduras, the majority of whom reside on the Caribbean coast[citation needed].

Although plurality of Hondurans are nominally Roman Catholic (47% according to
2007 CID-Gallup nationwide survey), membership in the Roman Catholic Church is
declining while membership in Protestant churches is increasing. There are
thriving Anglican, Presbyterian, Methodist, Seventh-Day Adventist, Lutheran
and Pentecostal churches, and together Evangelical Protestant churches
constitute 36% of population. There are Protestant seminaries. Practitioners
of the Buddhist, Jewish, Islamic, BahÃ¡'Ã­, Rastafari and indigenous
denominations and religions exist.[14]

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (Mormons) claims over 120,000
members in Honduras as of the beginning of 2007 (lds.org newsroom
site)[citation needed].

Since 1975, emigration from Honduras has accelerated as job-seekers and
political refugees sought a better life elsewhere. Although many Hondurans
have relatives in Nicaragua, Spain, Mexico, El Salvador and Canada, the
majority of Hondurans living abroad are in the United States[citation needed].

## [edit] Culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Cathedral of Comayagua.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Colonial architecture in CopÃ¡n.

Main article: Culture of Honduras

The most renowned Honduran painter is Jose Antonio VelÃ¡squez. Other important
painters include Carlos Garay, and Roque Zelaya. Two of Honduras' most notable
writers are Froylan Turcios and RamÃ³n Amaya Amador. Others include Marco
Antonio Rosa, Roberto Sosa, Lucila Gamero de Medina, Eduardo BÃ¤hr, Amanda
Castro, Javier Abril Espinoza, TeÃ³filo Trejo, and Roberto Quesada. Some of
Honduras' notable musicians include Rafael Coello Ramos, Lidia Handal,
Victoriano Lopez, Guillermo Anderson, Victor Donaire, Francisco Carranza and
Camilo Rivera Guevara.

Hondurans are often referred to as Catracho or Catracha (fem) in Spanish. The
word was coined by Nicaraguans and derives from the last name of the Spanish
Honduran General Florencio Xatruch, who, in 1857, led Honduran armed forces
against an attempted invasion by North American adventurer William Walker. The
nickname is considered complimentary, not derogatory. The main language is
Spanish spoken by a 93.6 per cent as first language. And as first and second
is spoken by 95 per cent. The other languages that are minorities and are
spoken by less than 4 percent, are Amerindian languages, and in the islands
next to the coast English (spoken by less than a 0.3 per cent).

Honduras This Week is a weekly English language newspaper that has been
published for seventeen years in Tegucigalpa. On the islands of Roatan, Utila
and Guanaja, the Bay Islands Voice has been a source of monthly news since
2003.

Honduran cuisine makes extensive use of coconut, in both sweet and savory
foods, and even in soups.

The JosÃ© Francisco Saybe theater in San Pedro Sula is home to the CÃ­rculo
Teatral Sampedrano (Theatrical Circle of San Pedro Sula)

### [edit] Celebrations

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sawdust Carpets of Comayagua During the Easter Celebrations

Some of Honduras's national holidays include Honduras Independence Day on
September 15 and Children's Day or Dia del NiÃ±o, which is celebrated in
homes, schools and churches on September 10; on this day, children receive
presents and have parties similar to Christmas or birthday celebrations. Some
neighborhoods have piÃ±atas on the street. Other holidays are Easter, Maundy
Thursday, Good Friday, Day of the Soldier (October 3rd to celebrate the birth
of Francisco MorazÃ¡n), Christmas, El Dia de Lempira on July 20,[15] and New
Year's Eve. Honduras Independence Day festivities start early in the morning
with marching bands. Each band wears different colors and features
cheerleaders. Fiesta Catracha takes place this same day: typical Honduran
foods such as beans, tamales, baleadas, yucca with chicharron, and tortillas
are offered. On Christmas Eve, the people reunite with their families and
close friends to have dinner, then give out presents at midnight. In some
cities fireworks are seen and heard at midnight. On New Year's Eve there is
food and "cohetes", fireworks and festivities. Birthdays are also great
events, and include the famous âpiÃ±ataâ which is filled with candies and
surprises for the children invited. La Feria Isidra is celebrated in La Ceiba
in the end of May A city located in the coast. It is usually called "The
Friendship Carnaval". People from all over the world come for one week of
festivities. Every night there is a little carnaval (carnavalito) in a
neighborhood. Finally, on Saturday there is a big parade with floats and
displays with people from Brazil, New Orleans, Japan, Jamaica, Barbados and
many other countries. This celebration is also accompanied by the Milk Fair,
where many Hondurans come to show off their farm products and animals.

## [edit] Infrastructure

<IMG>

This article is written like a personal reflection or essay and may require
cleanup. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style.
(December 2007)  
### [edit] Energy

The electricity sector in Honduras is characterized by the dominance of
individuals. By individuals it is meant that the electrical companies are
owned privately and not of a vertically integrated utility (except for about
half of the generation capacity) called ENEE ( Empresa Nacional de EnergÃ­a
ElÃ©ctrica ); a failed attempt in 1994 to unbundle the sector into separate
enterprises in charge of electricity generation and distribution; the
increasing share of thermal generation over the past two decades; the poor
financial health of the state utility ENEE; the imbalance between relatively
high industrial and relatively low residential electricity tariffs; the high
technical and commercial losses in transmission and distribution; and the low
electric coverage in rural areas.

Key challenges in the sector are:

  * How to finance investments in generation and transmission in the absence of either a financially healthy utility or of concessionary funds by external donors for these types of investments;
  * How to re-balance tariffs, cut arrears and reduce commercial losses - including electricity theft - without fostering social unrest; and
  * How to reconcile environmental concerns with the government's objective to build two new large dams and associated hydropower plants.
  * How to improve access in rural areas.

### [edit] Water supply and sanitation

Water supply and sanitation in Honduras varies greatly from urban centers to
rural villages. Larger population centers generally have modernized water
treatment and distribution systems, however water quality is often poor due to
lack of proper maintenance and treatment. Rural areas generally have basic
drinking water systems with limited capacity for water treatment. Many urban
areas have sewer systems in place for the collection of wastewater, however
proper treatment of wastewater is scarce. In rural areas, sanitary facilities
are generally limited to latrines and basic septic pits.

Water and sanitation services were historically provided by Servicio Autonomo
de Alcantarillas y Aqueductos (SANAA). In 2003, a new "water law" was passed
which called for the decentralization of water services. With the 2003 law,
local communities have the right and responsibility to own, operate, and
control their own drinking water and wastewater systems. Since passage of the
new law, many communities have joined together to address water and sanitation
issues on a regional basis.

Many national and international non-government organizations have a history of
working on water and sanitation projects in Honduras. International groups
include, but are not limited to, the Red Cross, Water 1st, Rotary Club,
Catholic Relief Services, Water for People, CARE, CESO-SACO and SHH.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Old Honduran Police Cars

In addition, many government organizations working on projects include: the
European Union, USAID, the Army Corps of Engineers,Cooperacion Andalucia, the
government of Japan, and many others.

### [edit] Transport

Transportation in Honduras consists of the following infrastructure: 699 km of
railways;[16] 13,603 km of roadways;[16] 7 ports and harbors;[citation needed]
and 112 airports altogether (12 Paved, 100 unpaved).[16] Responsibility for
policy in the transport sector rests with the Ministry of Public Works,
Transport and Housing (SOPRTRAVI after its Spanish acronym).

  

## [edit] National symbols

<IMG>

<IMG>

National flower, the orchid (orquÃ­dea) Rhyncholaelia digbyana

<IMG>

<IMG>

National bird, Ara Macao

The flag of Honduras is composed of 3 equal horizontal stripes, with the upper
and lower ones being blue and representing the Pacific Ocean and Caribbean
Sea. The central stripe is white. It contains five blue stars representing the
five states of the Central American Union. The middle star represents
Honduras, located in the center of the Central American Union. The legislation
designating this design for the flag of Honduras passed into law on January
18, 1949.

The Coat of Arms was established in 1825. It is one an equilateral triangle,
at the base a volcano finds its base between two castles, over which we find a
rainbow and the sun shining. The triangle placed on an area that supposes
bathed by both seas. Around all of this an oval containing in golden
lettering: "Republic of Honduras, Free, Sovereign and Independent".

The National Anthem of Honduras is a result of a contest carried out in 1904
during the presidency of Manuel Bonilla. In the end, it was the poet Augusto
C. Coello that ended up writing the anthem, with the participation of the
German composer Carlos Hartling writing the music. The anthem was officially
adopted on November 15, 1915, during the presidency of Alberto MembreÃ±o. The
anthem is composed of a choir and seven stroonduran. The national flower is
the famous orchid, Rhyncholaelia digbyana (formerly known as Brassavola
digbyana), which replaced the rose in 1969. The change of the National Flower
was carried out during the administration of general Oswaldo LÃ³pez Arellano,
thinking that Brassavola digbiana "is an indigenous plant of Honduras; having
this flower exceptional characteristics of beauty, vigor and distinction", as
the decree dictates it.

The National Tree of Honduras is the Honduras Pine (Pinus caribaea var.
hondurensis), which was approved on February 4, 1927 during the presidency of
Miguel Paz Barahona. Also the use of the tree was regulated, "to avoid the
unnecessary destructions caused by choppings or fires of forest."

The National Mammal is the White-tailed Deer (Odocoileus virginianus), which
was adopted on June 28, 1993 by the government of Honduras as a measure to
avoid excessive depredation. It is one of two species of deer that live in
Honduras. It eats grass, leaves, etc. The three main natural enemies of the
White-tail are the cougar, the jaguar and man.

The National Bird of Honduras is the Scarlet Macaw (Ara Macao), under a decree
established in 1993. This bird was much valued by the pre-Columbian
civilizations of Honduras. The Guacamaya, as it is called by Hondurans and
others, belongs to the family Psittacidae and its foods include nectar, roots,
fruits etc. The bird lives from Bolivia up to Mexico where the bird makes use
of various zones as its natural habitat. In Honduras the scarlet macaw can be
found particularly on the Mosquito Coast.

## [edit] Folklore

Legends and fairy tales are paramount within the Honduras culture, Lluvia de
Peces (Fish Rain) in example of this. The legend of El Cadejo and La Ciguanaba
(La Sucia) are also popular.

During the 1960s-70s and through mid 80s Honduras Radio Noticias (HRN), a
local Honduran radio, was the only one which transmitted these folklore
stories. The program was called "Cuentos y Leyendas de Honduras". This show
was responsible for the diffusion of the folk stories in the country.

## [edit] Sports

Football is the most popular sport in Honduras. Information on all other
Honduran-sports related atricles are below:

  * Football in Honduras
  * FederaciÃ³n Nacional AutÃ³noma de FÃºtbol de Honduras
  * Honduras national baseball team
  * Honduras national football team
  * Honduras national under-20 football team
  * Honduras U-17 national football team
  * Honduran football clubs
  * Honduran football competitions
  * Honduran footballers
  * Football venues in Honduras

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Latin America portal  
Main article: List of Honduras-related topics

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Adventures in Nature: Honduras; James D. Gollin
  * Don't Be Afraid, Gringo: A Honduran Woman Speaks From The Heart: The Story of Elvia Alvarado; Medea Benjamin
  * Honduras: The Making of a Banana Republic; Alison Acker
  * Honduras: State for Sale; Richard Lapper, James Painter
  * Inside Honduras; Kent Norsworthy and Tom Berry
  * La Mosquitia: A Guide to the Savannas, Rain Forest and Turtle Hunters; Derek Parent
  * Moon Handbooks: Honduras; Christopher Humphrey
  * Reinterpreting the Banana Republic: Region and State in Honduras, 1870-1972; Dario A. Euraque
  * Seven Names for the Bellbird: Conservation Geography in Honduras; Mark Bonta
  * Ulysses Travel Guide: Honduras; Eric Ilamovitch
  * The United States in Honduras, 1980-1981: An Ambassador's Memoir; Jack R. Binns
  * The War of the Dispossessed: Honduras and El Salvador, 1969; Thomas P. Anderson

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d "Honduras". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=268&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=39&pr.y=9. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  2. ^ Environmental - Archeological Investigations in the Bay Islands, Spanish Honduras
  3. ^ Honduras History
  4. ^ a b c "Wars of the World: Soccer War 1969". OnWar.com. http://www.onwar.com/aced/data/sierra/soccer1969.htm. Retrieved on 2007-08-21.
  5. ^ "A survivor tells her story" baltimoresun.com, June 15, 1995, retrieved January 8, 2007.
  6. ^ USGS Hurricane Mitch Program -Honduras
  7. ^ Columbus's quote
  8. ^ [http://www.laprensa.hn/ediciones/2007/08/11/que_nadie_se_atreva_a_intentar_romper_el_orden_constitucional Que nadie se atreva a intentar romper el orden constitucional]
  9. ^ Honduras Silvestre - Honduran Biodiversity Database
  10. ^ web.worldbank.org
  11. ^ Ports in CSI - CBP.gov
  12. ^ DHS: DHS and DOE Launch Secure Freight Initiative
  13. ^ CIA - The World Factbook - Honduras
  14. ^ International Religious Freedom Report 2008: Honduras
  15. ^ Honduras This Week Online June 1999
  16. ^ a b c CIA - The World Factbook - Honduras

http://www.answers.com/topic/honduras

https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/print/ho.html

## [edit] External links

<IMG> Honduras portal  
Find more about Honduras on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions
from Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * Government of Honduras (Spanish)
  * Official Site of the Tourism Institute of Honduras (English)
  * Chief of State and Cabinet Members
  * Honduras entry at The World Factbook
  * Honduras at University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries GovPubs
  * Honduras at the Open Directory Project
  * Wikimedia Atlas of Honduras
  * Honduras travel guide from Wikitravel
  * Honduras (an external wiki)
  * Honduran Biodiversity Database (Spanish)
  * [http://www.hondurastips.honduras.com/ Honduras Tips Travel Info (English)}
  * Travel and Tourism Info on Honduras (English)
  * Humanitarian Aid in Honduras
  * Honduran English Language weekly newspaper

  

Geographic locale  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries of Central America  
Belize Â· Costa Rica Â· El Salvador Â· Guatemala Â· Honduras Â· Nicaragua Â·
Panama1  
1Also in or commonly considered to be part of South America.  
  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries and dependencies of North America  
Several nations listed here straddle both North and South America or can also
be considered Caribbean.  
Sovereign states

Antigua and Barbuda Â· Bahamas Â· Barbados Â· Belize Â· Canada Â· Costa Rica
Â· Cuba Â· Dominica Â· Dominican Republic Â· El Salvador Â· Grenada Â·
Guatemala Â· Haiti Â· Honduras Â· Jamaica Â· Mexico Â· Nicaragua Â· Panama Â·
St. Kitts and Nevis Â· St. Lucia Â· St. Vincent and the Grenadines Â· Trinidad
and Tobago Â· United States  
Dependencies

Denmark

Greenland  
France

Guadeloupe Â· Martinique Â· Saint BarthÃ©lemy Â· Saint Martin Â· Saint Pierre
and Miquelon Â· Clipperton  
Netherlands

Aruba Â· Netherlands Antilles  
United Kingdom

Anguilla Â· Bermuda Â· British Virgin Islands Â· Cayman Islands Â· Montserrat
Â· Turks and Caicos Islands  
United States

Navassa Island Â· Petrel Islands Â· Puerto Rico Â· Serranilla Bank Â· U.S.
Virgin Islands  
International membership  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Latin Union  
Member Nations

Andorra Â· Angola Â· Bolivia Â· Brazil Â· Cape Verde Â· Chile Â· Colombia Â·
Costa Rica Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire Â· Cuba Â· Dominican Republic Â· Ecuador Â· El
Salvador Â· France Â· Guatemala Â· Guinea-Bissau Â· Haiti Â· Honduras Â· Italy
Â· Mexico Â· Moldova Â· Monaco Â· Mozambique Â· Nicaragua Â· Panama Â·
Paraguay Â· Peru Â· Philippines Â· Portugal Â· Romania Â· San Marino Â· SÃ£o
TomÃ© and PrÃ­ncipe Â· Senegal Â· Spain Â· East Timor Â· Uruguay Â· Venezuela  
Permanent Observers

Argentina Â· Holy See Â· Sovereign Military Order of Malta  
Official languages

Catalan Â· French Â· Italian Â· Portuguese Â· Romanian Â· Spanish  
[[zea:Honduras]

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honduras"

Categories: Former Spanish colonies | Honduras | Spanish-speaking countries |
Countries

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | Articles
containing Spanish language text | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since January 2008 | Articles with
unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since July 2008 | Wikipedia articles needing style editing from December 2007
| All articles needing style editing | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Arpetan
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * à½à½¼à½à¼à½¡à½²à½
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Cebuano
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¬ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¦ÞÞ°
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ilokano
  * à¦à¦®à¦¾à¦° à¦ à¦¾à¦°/à¦¬à¦¿à¦·à§à¦£à§à¦ªà§à¦°à¦¿à¦¯à¦¼à¦¾ à¦®à¦£à¦¿à¦ªà§à¦°à§
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * Kapampangan
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * Kernewek
  * Kiswahili
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * LingÃ¡la
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * NÄhuatl
  * Dorerin Naoero
  * Nederlands
  * à¤¨à¥à¤ªà¤¾à¤²à¥
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * Uyghurcheâ / Ø¦ÛÙØºÛØ±ÚÛ
  * O'zbek
  * Ù¾ÚØªÙ
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * QÄ±rÄ±mtatarca
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SÃ¡megiella
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡Ð»Ð¾Ð²Ñ£ÌÐ½ÑÑÐºÑ / â°â°â°â°â°¡â°â° â°â°â°
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * Wolof
  * Zazaki
  * ZeÃªuws
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 00:37.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



