
# Jonestown

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Jonestown (disambiguation).

Jonestown \(Guyana\)  

Jonestown

Jonestown

Georgetown

Georgetown

Kaituma

Kaituma

Peoples Temple Agricultural Project ("Jonestown", Guyana)

Jonestown was the informal name for the "Peoples Temple Agricultural Project",
an intentional community in northwestern Guyana formed by the Peoples Temple,
a cult from California, United States, led by Jim Jones. It became
internationally notorious in November 1978, when 918 people died in the
settlement as well as in a nearby airstrip and in Georgetown, Guyana's
capital. The name of the settlement became synonymous with the incidents at
those locations.

On November 18, 1978, 909 Temple members died in Jonestown, all but two from
apparent cyanide poisoning in an event termed "revolutionary suicide" by Jones
and some members on an audio tape of the event and in prior discussions. To
the extent the actions in Jonestown were viewed as a mass suicide, it is the
largest such event in modern history and resulted in the largest single loss
of American civilian life in a non-natural disaster until the events of
September 11, 2001.

The poisonings in Jonestown followed the murder of five others by Temple
members at a nearby Port Kaituma airstrip. The victims included Congressman
Leo Ryan, the first and only Congressman murdered in the line of duty in the
history of the United States.

## Contents

  * 1 Origins
  * 2 Jonestown established
    * 2.1 Selection and establishment of Guyanese land
    * 2.2 Jonestown before mass migration
    * 2.3 Investigation and mass migration
    * 2.4 Jonestown life after mass migration
  * 3 Events in Jonestown prior to Ryan visit
    * 3.1 White Nights
    * 3.2 Stoen custody dispute
    * 3.3 Exploring another potential exodus
    * 3.4 Concerned Relatives
    * 3.5 Digging in
    * 3.6 Declining health
  * 4 Ryan delegation's initial investigation in Georgetown
  * 5 Ryan delegation visits Jonestown
  * 6 The Port Kaituma airstrip shootings
  * 7 Deaths in Jonestown
    * 7.1 Survivors/eyewitnesses
    * 7.2 Medical examinations
    * 7.3 Notes from non-surviving residents
  * 8 Deaths in Georgetown
  * 9 Aftermath
  * 10 Former site
  * 11 See also
  * 12 Notes
  * 13 Further reading
  * 14 External links

  
## [edit] Origins

Los Angeles \(California\)  

Los Angeles

Los Angeles

San Francisco

San Francisco

Ukiah

Ukiah

Bakersfield

Bakersfield

Fresno

Fresno

Sacramento

Sacramento

Santa Rosa

Santa Rosa

Some of the Peoples Temple's California Locations

Main articles: Peoples Temple, Jim Jones, and Peoples Temple in San Francisco

The Peoples Temple was formed in Indianapolis, Indiana, during the
mid-1950s.[1] It purported to practice what it called "apostolic
socialism."[2] In doing so, the Temple preached to established members that
"those who remained drugged with the opiate of religion had to be brought to
enlightenmentâsocialism."[3][4]

After Jones received considerable criticism in Indiana for his integrationist
views, the Temple moved to Redwood Valley, California in 1965.[5][6]

In the early 1970s the Peoples Temple opened other branches in California,
including in Los Angeles and San Francisco. In the mid-1970s, the Temple moved
its headquarters to San Francisco.[7]

After the Temple's move to San Francisco, it became more politically active.
After Peoples Temple participation proved instrumental in the mayoral election
victory of George Moscone in 1975, Moscone appointed Jones as the Chairman of
the San Francisco Housing Authority Commission.[8] Unlike other figures
considered as cult leaders, Jones enjoyed public support and contact with some
of the highest level politicians in the United States. For example, Jones met
with Vice Presidential Candidate Walter Mondale and Rosalynn Carter several
times.[9][10] Governor Jerry Brown, Lieutenant Governor Mervyn Dymally and
Assemblyman Willie Brown, among others, attended a large testimonial dinner in
honor of Jim Jones during September 1976.[11]

## [edit] Jonestown established

### [edit] Selection and establishment of Guyanese land

In the fall of 1973, after critical newspaper articles by Lester Kinsolving
and the defection of eight Temple members (the "Gang of Eight"), Jones and
Temple member Timothy Stoen prepared an "immediate action" contingency plan
for responding to a police or media crackdown.[12] The plan listed various
options, including fleeing to Canada or to a "Caribbean missionary post", such
as Barbados or Trinidad.[12] For its "Caribbean missionary post", the Temple
quickly chose Guyana.[12] The Temple then researched Guyana's economy and
extradition treaties with the United States.[12] In October 1973, the
directors of the Peoples Temple passed a resolution to establish an
agricultural mission there.[12]

The Temple chose Guyana, in part, because of its socialist politics that were
also moving further to the left during the selection process.[12][13] Former
Temple member Tim Carter stated that the reason for choosing Guyana was the
Temple's view of creeping fascism, the perception of the dominance of
multinational corporations on the government, and perceived racism in the U.S.
government.[14] Carter said the Temple concluded that Guyana, a predominantly
black, English-speaking socialist country, would afford black members of the
Temple a peaceful place to live.[14] Later, Guyanese Prime Minister Forbes
Burnham stated that what may have attracted Jones was that "he wanted to use
cooperatives as the basis for the establishment of socialism, and maybe his
idea of setting up a commune meshed with that."[13] Jones also thought it was
important that Guyana's leadership consisted of several black leaders and that
the country was small and poor enough for Jones to easily obtain influence and
official protection.[12]

In 1974, after Jones and Temple members traveled to an area of Northwest
Guyana with Guyanese officials, the Temple and Guyanese officials negotiated a
lease of over 3,800 acres (15.4 kmÂ²) of jungle land from the Guyanese
government.[15] The site was isolated and possessed soil of poor fertility,
even by Guyanese standards.[16] The nearest body of water was seven miles (11
km) away by muddy roads.[16]

### [edit] Jonestown before mass migration

A small group of Peoples Temple members began the construction of Jonestown.
The Temple encouraged some of its members to move to Jonestown,[15] which was
formally named the "Peoples Temple Agricultural Project".[17] Jones saw
Jonestown as both a "socialist paradise" and a "sanctuary" from media
scrutiny.[18] In 1976, Guyana finally approved the lease it had negotiated
(retroactive to April 1974) with the Temple for the over 3,000 acres (12 km2)
of land in Northwest Guyana on which Jonestown was located.[19]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Houses in Jonestown

In 1974, Guyanese government officials granted the Temple permission to import
certain items "duty free."[16] Later payoffs to Guyanese customs officials
helped safeguard shipments of firearms and drugs through Guyanese customs.[20]
The relatively large number of immigrants to Guyana overwhelmed the Guyanese
government's small but stringent immigration infrastructure in a country where
most people wanted to leave.[21] Jones reached an agreement to guarantee that
Guyana would permit Temple members' mass migration. To do so, he stated that
Temple members were "skilled and progressive", showed off an envelope he
claimed had $500,000 and stated that he would invest most of the church's
assets in Guyana.[21] Guyanese immigration procedures were also compromised to
inhibit the departure of Temple defectors and curtail the visas of Temple
opponents.[22]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Guyanese Prime Minister Forbes Burnham

Jones purported to establish Jonestown as a benevolent communist community,
stating: "I believe weâre the purest communists there are."[23] Marceline
Jones described Jonestown as "dedicated to live for socialism, total economic
and racial and social equality. We are here living communally."[23] Jones
wanted to construct a model community and claimed that Prime Minister Burnham
"couldnât rave enough about us, uh, the wonderful things we do, the project,
the model of socialism."[24] In that regard, like the restrictive emigration
policies of the Soviet Union, Cuba, North Korea and other communist republics,
Jones did not permit members to leave Jonestown.[25]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Temple's house in Georgetown

The Temple established offices in Georgetown and conducted numerous meetings
with Burnham and other Guyanese officials.[26] In 1976, Temple member Michael
Prokes requested that Guyana's Prime Minister Forbes Burnham receive Jones as
a foreign dignitary along with other "high ranking U.S. officials."[27] Jones
traveled to Guyana with Lieutenant Governor Mervyn Dymally to meet with
Burhnam and Foreign Affairs Minister Fred Willis.[27] In that meeting, Dymally
agreed to pass on the message to the U.S. State Department that socialist
Guyana wanted to keep an open door to cooperation with the United States.[27]
Dymally followed up that meeting with a letter to Burnham stating that Jones
was "one of the finest human beings" and that Dymally was "tremendously
impressed" by his visit to Jonestown.[27]

Temple members took pains to stress their loyalty to Burnham's Peoples
National Congress Party.[28] One Temple member, Paula Adams, was involved in a
romantic relationship with Guyana's Ambassador to the United States, Laurence
"Bonny" Mann. Jones bragged about other Temple members he referred to as
"public relations women" giving all for the cause in Georgetown.[29][30] Viola
Burnham, the Guyanese Prime Minister's wife, was also a strong advocate of the
Temple.[13]

Later, Burnham stated that Guyana allowed the Temple to operate in the manner
it did on the references of Vice President Mondale, Rosalyn Carter and Mayor
Moscone.[31] Burnham also said that, when Deputy Minister Ptolemy Reid
traveled to Washington in September 1977 to sign the Panama Treaties, Mondale
asked him "How's Jim?", which indicated to Reid that Mondale had a personal
interest in Jones' well being.[31]

### [edit] Investigation and mass migration

<IMG>

<IMG>

Migration to Jonestown (Migration figures after June 1978 are not known,
Jonestown Report)

Further information: Peoples Temple in San Francisco

In the summer of 1977, Jones and several hundred Temple members moved to
Jonestown to escape building pressure from San Francisco media
investigations.[32] Jones left the same night that an editor at New West
magazine read Jones an article to be published by Marshall Kilduff detailing
allegations by former Temple members.[32][33] Jonestown's population increased
from 50 members in early 1977 to just under 1000 at its peak in 1978.

### [edit] Jonestown life after mass migration

Many members of the Peoples Temple believed that Guyana would be, as Jones
promised, a paradise, or a utopia.[34] After the mass migration, Jonestown
became overcrowded.[35]

After Jones arrived, Jonestown life significantly changed.[35] Entertaining
movies from Georgetown that the pioneers had watched were eliminated in favor
of propaganda shorts on Soviet life provided by the Soviet embassy and
documentaries on problems such as elderly life in the U.S. and returning
Vietnam veterans' adjustment to civilian life.[35] Bureaucratic requirements
after Jones' arrival sapped labor resources for other needs.[35] Buildings
fell into disrepair and weeds encroached on fields.[35] School study and night
time lectures for adults turned to Jones discussions about revolution and
enemies, with lessons focusing on Soviet alliances, Jones' crises and the
purported "mercenaries" of Timothy Stoen.[35]

For the first several months, Temple members worked six days a week, from
approximately 6:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., with an hour for lunch.[36] In mid-1978,
after Jim Jones' health deteriorated and Marcy Jones began managing more of
Jonestown's operations, the work week was reduced to eight hours a day for
five days a week.[14]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Troolie Cottages

After the day's work ended, Temple members would attend several hours of
activities in a pavilion structure, including classes in socialism.[37] Jones
described this study as like that of the North Korean system of eight hours of
daily work followed by eight hours of study.[38][39] This also comported with
the Temple's practice of gradually subjecting its followers to sophisticated
mind control and behavior-modification techniques borrowed from post-
revolutionary China and North Korea.[40] Jones would often read news and
commentary, including some from Radio Moscow and Radio Havana.[41]

"Discussion" around the topics raised often took the form of Jones
interrogating individual followers about the implications and subtexts of a
given item, or delivering lengthy and often confused monologues on how his
people should 'read' the events. In addition to Soviet documentaries,
conspiracy theory movies such as Executive Action, written by Temple attorneys
Mark Lane and Donald Freed, and The Parallax View (incorrectly attributed by
Jones to Lane and Freed) were screened and minutely dissected by Jones as
primers on the 'true nature' of the Temple's capitalist enemies.[41]

Jones' recorded readings of the news were part of the constant broadcasts over
Jonestown's tower speakers, such that all members could hear them throughout
the day and night.[42] Jones' news readings usually portrayed the United
States as a "capitalist" and "imperialist" villain, while casting "socialist"
leaders, such as former North Korean dictator Kim Il-sung ("great leader of
the revolution, is in the vanguard of the Korean working class"[43]), Robert
Mugabe ("long known for his communist inspiration to the people of Zimbabweâ¦
one of the revolutionary heroes"[44]) and Joseph Stalin (disturbed by people
criticizing Stalin[45]), in a positive light.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jonestown radio tower

Jonestown's primary means of communication with the outside world was a
shortwave radio.[46] All voice communications with San Francisco and
Georgetown were transmitted using this radio, from mundane supply orders to
confidential Temple business.[46] The FCC cited the Temple for technical
violations and for using amateur frequencies for commercial purposes.[46]
Because shortwave radio was Jonestown's only effective means of non-postal
communication, the Temple felt that the FCC's threats to revoke its operators'
licenses threatened Jonestown's existence.[47]

Jonestown, being on poor soil, was not self-sufficient and had to import large
quantities of commodities such as wheat.[48] Temple members lived in small
communal houses, some with walls woven from Troolie palm, and ate meals which
reportedly consisted of nothing more on some days than rice, beans, greens and
sometimes meat sauce and eggs (more on others).[49][48] Despite theoretically
having access to millions of dollars in Temple funds, Jones also lived in a
tiny communal house (pictured below), though fewer people lived there than in
other communal houses.[49] His house reportedly held a small refrigerator,
containing, at times, eggs, meat, fruit, salads and soft drinks.[49] Medical
problems, such as severe diarrhea and high fevers, struck half the community
in February 1978.

Although Jonestown contained no dedicated prison and no form of capital
punishment, various forms of punishment were used against members considered
to be serious disciplinary problems. Methods included imprisonment in a 6 x 4
x 3-foot (1.8 x 1.2 x 0.9m) plywood box and forcing children to spend a night
at the bottom of a well, sometimes upside-down.[1] For some members who
attempted to escape, drugs such as Thorazine, sodium pentathol, chloral
hydrate, Demerol and Valium were administered in an "extended care unit."[50]
Armed guards patrolled the area day and night to enforce Jonestown's rules.
Some local Guyanese, including a police official, related stories about harsh
beatings and a "torture hole", the well into which the children were placed
when they were perceived to have misbehaved.[51][52]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jim Jones' cabin

Children, generally surrendered to communal care, addressed Jones as "Dad" and
some at times were only allowed to see their real parents briefly at night.
Jones was called "Father" or "Dad" by the adults as well.[53] The community
had a nursery at which 33 infants were born.[54]

Up to $65,000 in monthly welfare payments from government organizations in the
United States to Jonestown residents were signed over to the Temple.[55] In
1978, officials from the United States Embassy in Guyana interviewed Social
Security recipients on multiple occasions to make sure they were not being
held against their will.[56] None of the 75 people interviewed by the Embassy
stated that they were being held against their will, were forced to sign over
welfare checks or wanted to leave Jonestown.[57][56]

The Temple's wealth was estimated in late 1978 to be approximately $26
million.[58]

## [edit] Events in Jonestown prior to Ryan visit

### [edit] White Nights

Jones made frequent addresses to Temple members regarding Jonestown's safety,
including statements that the CIA and other intelligence agencies were
conspiring with "capitalist pigs" to destroy Jonestown and harm its
members.[44][59][60] After work, when purported emergencies arose, the Temple
sometimes conducted what Jones referred to as "White Nights".[61] During such
events, Jones would sometimes give the Jonestown members four choices: (1)
attempt to flee to the Soviet Union; (2) commit "revolutionary suicide"; (3)
stay in Jonestown and fight the purported attackers or (4) flee into the
jungle.[62]

On at least two occasions during White Nights, after a "revolutionary suicide"
vote was reached, a simulated mass suicide was rehearsed. Peoples Temple
defector Deborah Layton described the event in an affidavit:

> "Everyone, including the children, was told to line up. As we passed through
the line, we were given a small glass of red liquid to drink. We were told
that the liquid contained poison and that we would die within 45 minutes. We
all did as we were told. When the time came when we should have dropped dead,
Rev. Jones explained that the poison was not real and that we had just been
through a loyalty test. He warned us that the time was not far off when it
would become necessary for us to die by our own hands."[63]

The Temple had received monthly half-pound shipments of cyanide since 1976
after Jones obtained a jeweler's license to buy the chemical to purportedly
clean gold.[64]

### [edit] Stoen custody dispute

Main article: Timothy Stoen

<IMG>

<IMG>

John (right) (photo: Jonestown Institute)

In September 1977, former Temple members Timothy and Grace Stoen battled in a
Georgetown court to produce an order for the Temple to show cause why a final
order should not be issued returning their purported son, John, to his mother
Grace.[65] A few days later, a second order was issued for the arrest of John
by authorities.[66]

The fear of being held in contempt of the orders caused Jones to set up a
false sniper attack upon himself and begin his first series of White Nights,
called the "Six Day Siege", where Jones spoke to Temple members about attacks
from outsiders and had them surround Jonestown with guns and machetes.[67] The
fiery rallies took an almost surreal tone as Angela Davis and Huey Newton
communicated via radio-telephone to the Jonestown crowd, urging them to hold
strong against the "conspiracy."[68] Jones made radio broadcasts stating "we
will die unless we are granted freedom from harassment and asylum."[69] Guyana
Deputy Minister Ptolemy Reid finally assured Jones' wife Marceline that
Guyanese Defense Forces would not invade Jonestown.[70]

### [edit] Exploring another potential exodus

After the Six Day Siege, Jones no longer believed the Guyanese could be
trusted.[71] Jones directed Temple members to write to over a dozen foreign
governments inquiring about immigration policies relevant to another exodus by
the Temple.[71] He also wrote the U.S. State department inquiring about North
Korea and Stalinist Albania.[71]

In Georgetown, the Peoples Temple conducted frequent meetings with the
embassies of the Soviet Union, North Korea, Yugoslavia and Cuba.[72] Their
negotiations with the Soviet Union included extensive discussions of possible
resettlement there and the Temple produced memoranda discussing potential
places within the Soviet Union in which they might settle.[72] Sharon Amos,
Michael Prokes and other Temple members took active roles in the "Guyana-Korea
Friendship Society", which sponsored two seminars on revolutionary concepts of
North Korean leader Kim Il Sung.[73]

On October 2, 1978, Feodor Timofeyev from the Soviet Union embassy in Guyana
visited Jonestown for two days and gave a speech.[74] Jones stated before the
speech that "For many years, we have let our sympathies be quite publicly
known, that the United States government was not our mother, but that the
Soviet Union was our spiritual motherland," which was followed by extended
cheers and applause from the Jonestown crowd.[74] Timofeyev opened the speech
stating that the USSR would like to send "our deepest and the most sincere
greetings to the people of this first socialist and communist community of the
United States of America, in Guyana and in the world," followed by cheers and
applause from the crowd.[74] Timofeyev also stated "Iâd like to wish you,
dear comrades, all the successes to your great, to your very big work youâre
doing here."[74]

By October 1978, Temple members met almost weekly with Timofeyev discussing a
potential exodus to the Soviet Union.[72]

### [edit] Concerned Relatives

Main article: Timothy Stoen

Meanwhile, in late 1977 and early 1978, Tim and Grace Stoen participated in
meetings with other relatives of Jonestown residents at the home of Jeannie
Mills, and they collectively called themselves the "Concerned Relatives."[75]
Tim Stoen engaged in letter writing campaigns to the Secretary of State and
the government of Guyana, and traveled to Washington to attempt to begin an
investigation.[76] In January 1978, Stoen wrote a "white paper" to Congress
detailing the problems and requesting that Representatives write Forbes
Burnham, and 91 Congressmen wrote such letters, including Congressman Leo
Ryan[77][78]

Feeling pressure from the United States, on February 17, Jones submitted to an
interview with San Francisco Examiner journalist Tim Reiterman.[79] Reiterman
wrote a story the next day in the San Francisco Examiner about Stoen's
attempts to gain custody of his son that prompted the immediate threat of a
lawsuit by the Temple.[80] The repercussions were devastating for the Temple's
reputation, and made most former supporters even more suspicious of the
Temple's claims that it was being subjected to a "rightist vendetta."[80]

One day later, on Sunday February 19, 1978, Harvey Milk wrote a letter of
support for the Peoples Temple to President Jimmy Carter.[81] Milk wrote that
Jones was known "as a man of the highest character".[81] Regarding defecting
Temple members pressing for an investigation of the Peoples Temple, Milk wrote
"they are attempting to damage Rev. Jones' reputation" with "apparent bold-
faced lies".[81]

On April 11, 1978, the Concerned Relatives distributed a packet of documents,
including letters and affidavits, that they titled an "Accusation of Human
Rights Violations by Rev. James Warren Jones" to the Peoples Temple, members
of the press and members of Congress.[82] In June 1978, Peoples Temple
defector Deborah Layton provided the group with a further affidavit detailing
alleged crimes by the Peoples Temple and substandard living conditions in
Jonestown.[63]

Tim Stoen represented three members of the Concerned Relatives in lawsuits
filed in May and June 1978 against Jim Jones and other Temple members seeking
in excess of $56 million in damages.[83] The Temple, represented by Charles R.
Garry, filed a suit against Tim Stoen on July 10, 1978 seeking $150 million in
damages.[84]

### [edit] Digging in

During the summer of 1978, Jones hired JFK assassination conspiracy theorists
Mark Lane and Donald Freed to help make the case of a "grand conspiracy" by
intelligence agencies against the Peoples Temple.[85] Jones told Lane he
wanted to "pull an Eldridge Cleaver", referring to a fugitive Black Panther
who was able to return to the United States after repairing his
reputation.[85] In September 1978, Lane spoke to the residents of Jonestown,
providing support for Jones' theories and drawing parallels between Martin
Luther King, Jr. and Jim Jones.[85] Lane then held press conferences stating
that "none of the charges" against the Temple "are accurate or true" and that
there was a "massive conspiracy" against the Temple by "intelligence
organizations," naming the CIA, FBI, FCC and even the U.S. Post Office.[85]
Though Lane represented himself as disinterested, Jones was actually paying
him $6,000 per month to generate such theories.[86]

### [edit] Declining health

Jones' health significantly declined in Jonestown, and a doctor who examined
Jones in 1978 told him that he might have a lung infection.[87] Jones was said
to be abusing injectable Valium, Quaaludes, stimulants, and barbiturates.[88]
His once sharp voice later sounded slurred, words ran together and Jones would
not finish sentences even when reading.[88]

Journalist Tim Reiterman was surprised by the severe deterioration of Jones'
health when Reiterman first saw Jones in Jonestown on November 17, 1978.[54]
After covering Jones for 18 months for the San Francisco Examiner, Reiterman
thought it was "shocking to see his glazed eyes and festering paranoia face to
face, to realize that nearly a thousand lives, ours included, were in his
hands."[54]

## [edit] Ryan delegation's initial investigation in Georgetown

<IMG>

<IMG>

Congressman Leo Ryan

On November 1, 1978, Congressman Leo Ryan, who represented a district in
Northern California, announced that he would visit Jonestown.[89] Ryan was
friends with the father of Bob Houston, whose mutilated body was found near
train tracks on October 5, 1976, three days after a taped telephone
conversation with Houston's ex-wife in which leaving the Temple was
discussed.[90] Over the following months Ryan's interest was further aroused
by the complaints of the Concerned Relatives represented by Timothy Stoen and
the allegations following the defection of Deborah Layton.[90]

On November 14, 1978, Ryan flew to Georgetown, Guyana (150 miles from
Jonestown), along with a team of 18 people consisting of government officials,
media representatives and some members of the Concerned Relatives.[91] The
group included Ryan, his legal advisor Jackie Speier (now a Congresswoman),
Neville Annibourne (representing Guyana's Ministry of Information) Richard
Dwyer (Deputy Chief of Mission of the US Embassy to Guyana), Tim Reiterman
(San Francisco Examiner reporter), Don Harris (NBC reporter), Greg Robinson
(San Francisco Examiner photographer), Steve Sung (NBC sound man), Bob Flick
(NBC producer), Charles Krause (Washington Post reporter), Ron Javers (San
Francisco Chronicle reporter), Bob Brown (NBC camera man), and Concerned
Relatives representatives, including Tim and Grace Stoen, Steve and Anthony
Katsaris, Beverly Oliver, Jim Cobb, Sherwin Harris, and Carolyn Houston
Boyd.[92]

The Peoples Temple's lawyers, Mark Lane and Charles Garry, initially refused
to allow Ryan's party access to Jonestown.[93]

## [edit] Ryan delegation visits Jonestown

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jonestown Aerial (photo:Jonestown Institute)

By late morning on Friday, November 17, Lane and Garry informed Jones that
Ryan would likely leave for Jonestown at 2:30 pm, regardless of Jones'
schedule or willingness.[94] Ryan's party did so at roughly that time,
accompanied by Lane and Garry, and came to Port Kaituma airstrip, 6 miles (10
km) from Jonestown, some hours later.[95] Because of aircraft seating
limitations, only four of the Concerned Relatives were allowed to accompany
the Ryan delegation on its flight into Jonestown.[96] Only Ryan and three
others were initially accepted into Jonestown, but the rest of Ryan's group
was allowed in after sunset.[97] It was later reported (and verified by
audiotapes recovered by investigators) that Jones had run rehearsals in how to
receive Ryan's delegation in order to convince them that everyone was happy
and in good spirits.[98]

That night, the Ryan delegation attended a reception in the pavilion.[99]
While the party received a friendly reception, Jones said he felt like a dying
man and ranted about government conspiracies and martyrdom as he decried
attacks by the press and his enemies.[54] Two Peoples Temple members, Vernon
Gosney and Monica Bagby, made the first move for defection that night. In the
pavilion, Gosney passed a note to Don Harris (mistaking him for Ryan), reading
"Dear Congressman, Vernon Gosney and Monica Bagby. Please help us get out of
Jonestown."[100]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Road to Jonestown (photo:Jonestown Institute)

That night Ryan, Speier, Dwyer, and Annibourne stayed in Jonestown.[101] Other
members of the Ryan delegation, including the press corps and members of
Concerned Relatives, were told that they had to find other accommodations, and
so they went to Port Kaituma and stayed at a small cafÃ©.[101]

In the early morning of November 18, eleven Temple members sensed danger
enough to walk out of the colony toward train tracks in order to take a train
to Matthew's Ridge, which is located in the opposite direction from the
airstrip at Port Kaituma along those tracks.[102][103] Those defectors
included members of the Evans family and the Wilson family (the family of
Jonestown's head of security, Joe Wilson).[102][104][105][106] When reporters
and Concerned Relatives arrived in Jonestown later that day, Jim Jones' wife
Marceline gave them a tour of the settlement.[107]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Entrance to Jonestown (photo:Jonestown Institute)

That afternoon, two families stepped forward and asked to be escorted out of
Jonestown by the Ryan delegation.[108] They were the Parks and the Bogue
families, along with Christopher O'Neal and Harold Cordell, who were partners
of women in the two families.[108][109][102] When Jones' adopted son Johnny
attempted to talk Jerry Parks out of leaving, Parks told him "No way, it's
nothing but a communist prison camp."[110]

Jones gave the two families, along with Gosney and Bagby, permission to
leave.[111] Under the Pavilion, Don Harris of NBC handed Jones the note
written by Vernon Gosney while other reporters huddled around Jones.[112]
Jones told those reporters that, like others who left the community, the
defectors would "lie" and destroy Jonestown.[112]

After a sudden violent rainstorm started, some emotional scenes developed
between family members.[113] Al Simon, an American Indian member of the
Peoples Temple, attempted to take two of his children to Ryan in order to
process the requisite paperwork for transfer back to the United States.[113]
Al's wife, Bonnie, summoned on the loudspeakers by Temple staff, loudly
denounced her husband.[113] Al pleaded in vain with Bonnie to return to the
U.S., but Bonnie rejected his suggestion.[113]

## [edit] The Port Kaituma airstrip shootings

Port Kaituma airstrip shootings  
<IMG>  
The tractor and trailer driven by the Twin Otter shooters, as recorded by Bob
Brown of NBC News. One shooter is visible in front of the vehicle, having just
fired a shot.  
Location Port Kaituma, Guyana  
Date November 18, 1978  
5:20 p.m. â 5:25 p.m. (UTC-4)  
Attack type Mass murder  
Weapon(s) Firearms  
Deaths 5[114]  
Injured 11[114]  
Perpetrator(s) Larry Layton (Cessna attack)  
Suspected perpetrator(s) Joe Wilson (Twin Otter attack)  
Thomas Kice Sr. (Twin Otter attack)  
Ronnie Dennis (Twin Otter attack)  
Approximately 5-6 additional Peoples Temple members (Twin Otter attack)  
While most of the Ryan delegation began to depart on a large dump truck to the
Port Kaituma airstrip, Congressman Ryan and Dwyer stayed behind in Jonestown
to process any additional defectors.[115]

Shortly before the dump truck departed for the airstrip, Temple loyalist Larry
Layton, the brother of Deborah Layton, demanded to join the group.[115]
Several Jonestown defectors voiced their suspicions about Layton's
motives.[115]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Don Sly

Shortly after the dump truck initially departed, Temple member Don Sly
(nicknamed "Ujara") grabbed Ryan while wielding a knife.[116] While
Congressman Ryan was unhurt after others wrestled Sly to the ground, Dwyer
strongly suggested that Ryan leave Jonestown while Dwyer filed a criminal
complaint against Sly.[117] Ryan did so, promising to return later to address
the dispute.[118]

The truck departing to the airstrip had stopped after hearing of the attack on
Ryan.[119] Ryan then boarded the truck, traveled with the group to the
airstrip and arrived there later that afternoon.[119]

Because of the defectors, a second aircraft (a Cessna) was required to carry
all of those departing Jonestown. Accordingly, the entourage planned to use
two planes, the six-passenger Cessna and a 19 seat Twin Otter, to fly to
Georgetown.[120] The planes were not ready for departure when the group
arrived; the group had to wait at the airstrip until approximately 5:10
p.m.[118]

Larry Layton was a passenger on the Cessna, which was the first aircraft to
set up for takeoff.[121] After the Cessna had taxied to the far end of the
airstrip, Layton produced a gun and started shooting at the passengers.[122]
He wounded Monica Bagby and Vernon Gosney, and tried to kill Dale Parks, who
disarmed him.[122]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Joe Wilson

At this time, the larger Twin Otter was partially boarded with
passengers.[123] A tractor with a trailer attached driven by members of the
Temple's Red Brigade security squad approached the Otter.[123] When the
tractor neared within approximately 30 feet (9.1 m) of the Otter, roughly
concurrent with the shootings on the Cessna, the Red Brigade opened fire on
the aircraft while at least two Red Brigade members circled the plane on
foot.[118] There were perhaps nine shooters whose identities are not all
certainly known, but most sources agree that Joe Wilson, Jones' head of
security, Thomas Kice Sr., and Ronnie Dennis were among them.[124]

A few seconds of the shooting were captured on camera by NBC cameraman Bob
Brown.[125] Congressman Ryan, Bob Brown, photographer Greg Robinson, NBC
reporter Don Harris and Temple defector Patricia Parks were killed in the few
minutes of shooting.[125] Jackie Speier, Steve Sung, Richard Dwyer, Tim
Reiterman and Anthony Katsaris were among the nine injured in and around the
Twin Otter.[125] After the shootings, the Cessna's pilot along with the pilot
and copilot of the Otter fled in the Cessna to Georgetown, leaving behind the
gunfire-damaged Otter and the injured Ryan delegation members.[122]

The murder of Congressman Ryan was the first and only murder of a Congressman
in the line of duty in the history of the United States.[126]

## [edit] Deaths in Jonestown

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jones, Garry and Dwyer

Before leaving Jonestown for the airstrip, Congressman Ryan had told Temple
attorney Charles Garry that he would issue a report that would describe
Jonestown "in basically good terms."[127] Ryan stated that none of the sixty
relatives Ryan had targeted for interviews wanted to leave, the 14 defectors
constituted a very small portion of Jonestown's residents, that any sense of
imprisonment the defectors had was likely because of peer pressure and a lack
of physical transportation, and even if 200 of the 900+ wanted to leave "I'd
still say you have a beautiful place here."[127] Similarly, Washington Post
reporter Charles Krause stated that, on the way back to the airstrip, he was
unconvinced that Jonestown was as bad as defectors had claimed because there
were no signs of malnutrition or physical abuse, while many members appeared
to enjoy Jonestown and only a small number of the over 900 residents elected
to leave.[128]

Despite Garry's report, Jones told him "I have failed."[129] Garry reiterated
that Ryan would be making a positive report, but Jones maintained that "All is
lost."[129]

A 44-minute cassette tape (the "death tape"),[130] recorded at least part of a
meeting Jones called under the pavilion in the early evening. Before the
meeting, aides prepared a metal vat with Flavor Aid, poisoned with Valium,
chloral hydrate, cyanide,[131] and Phenergan.[132]

When the assembly gathered, referring to the Ryan delegation's air travel back
to Georgetown, Jones told the gathering "one of the people on that plane is
gonna shoot the pilot, I know that. I didn't plan it but I know it's going to
happen. They're gonna shoot that pilot and down comes the plane into the
jungle and we had better not have any of our children left when it's over,
because they'll parachute in here on us."[130] Parroting Jones' prior
statements that hostile forces would convert captured children to Fascism, one
temple member states: "The ones that they take captured, they're gonna just
let them grow up and be dummies."[130]

On the death tape, Jones urged Temple members to commit "revolutionary
suicide".[130] Such "revolutionary suicide" had been planned by the Temple
before and, according to Jonestown defectors, its theory was "you can go down
in history, saying you chose your own way to go, and it is your commitment to
refuse capitalism and in support of socialism." [133]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jim McElvane

<IMG>

<IMG>

Christine Miller

Temple member Christine Miller argued that the Temple should alternatively
attempt an airlift to Russia.[130] Jim McElvane, a former therapist who had
arrived in Jonestown only two days earlier, assisted Jones by arguing against
Miller's resistance to suicide, stating "Let's make it a beautiful day"
(followed by applause from Temple members) and later citing possible
reincarnation.[130] After several exchanges in which Jones argued that a
Soviet exodus would not be possible, along with reactions by other temple
members hostile to Miller, Miller backed down.[130] However, Miller may have
ceased dissenting when Jones confirmed at one point that "the Congressman is
dead" after members of his "Red Brigade" squad returned from the airstrip
after shooting Ryan.

After the airstrip shooters arrived back in Jonestown, Tim Carter, a Vietnam
war veteran, recalled the shooters having the "thousand-yard stare" of weary
soldiers.[134]

After Jones announced that "the congressman is dead" no dissent occurs on the
death tape.[130] Directly after this, referring to his Red Brigade security
squad that shot Ryan, Jones stated "But the Red Brigade's the only one that
made any sense anyway" and "Red Brigade showed them justice."[130] In response
to reactions of seeing the poison take effect on others, Jones commanded "Stop
this hysterics. This is not the way for people who are Socialists or
Communists to die. No way for us to die. We must die with some dignity." In
addition to Jim McElvane, several other temple members gave speeches praising
Jones and his decision for the community to commit suicide, even after Jones
stopped appreciating this praise and begged for the process to go faster.[130]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Aftermath of the suicides. The vat containing the poison is visible in the
foreground.

According to escaped Temple member Odell Rhodes, first to take the poison were
Ruletta Paul and her one-year-old infant.[135] A needle-less syringe was used
to squirt poison into the infant's mouth and then Paul squirted another
syringe into her own mouth.[135] Stanley Clayton also saw mothers with their
babies first approach the table containing the poison.[136] Clayton said that
Jones approached people to encourage them to drink the poison and that, after
adults saw the poison begin to take effect, "they showed a reluctance to
die."[136]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Aftermath - Jim Jones pavilion chair and sign

The poison caused death within around five minutes.[137] After consuming the
poison, according to Rhodes, people were then escorted away down a wooden
walkway leading outside the Pavilion.[135] It is not clear if some initially
thought the exercise was another "White Night" rehearsal. Rhodes reported
being in close contact with dying children.[135]

Jones made reference to the cries and screams: "I don't care how many screams
you hear, I don't care how many anguished cries, death is a million times
preferable to ten more days of this life. If you knew what was ahead of you
â if you knew what was ahead of you, you'd be glad to be stepping over
tonight."[130] However, survivor Odell Rhodes stated that while the poison was
squirted in some children's mouths, there was no panic or emotional outburst
and people looked like they were "in a trance".[138]

Jones was found dead in a deck chair with a gunshot wound to his head that
Guyanese coroner Cyrill Mootoo stated was consistent with a self-inflicted gun
wound.[139]

The events at Jonestown constituted the greatest single losses of American
civilian life in a non-natural disaster until the incidents of September 11,
2001.[140]

### [edit] Survivors/eyewitnesses

<IMG>

<IMG>

Letter to Timofeyev from the Jonestown Institute.

Three high ranking Temple member survivors claim they were given an assignment
and thereby escaped death. Brothers Tim and Mike Carter, 30 years old and 20
years old respectively, and Mike Prokes, 31, were given luggage containing
$550,000 US currency, $130,000 in Guyanese currency and an envelope, which
they were told to deliver to Guyanaâs Soviet Embassy, in Georgetown.[141]
The envelope contained two passports and three instructional letters, the
first of which was to Feodor Timofeyev of the Embassy of the Soviet Union in
Guyana, stating:

> Dear Comrade Timofeyev,  
>  The following is a letter of instructions regarding all of our assets that
we want to leave to the Communist Party of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics. Enclosed in this letter are letters which instruct the banks to
send the cashiers checks to you. I am doing this on behalf of Peoples Temple
because we, as communists, want our money to be of benefit for help to
oppressed peoples all over the world, or in any way that your decision-making
body sees fit.[142][141]

The letters included listed accounts with balances totaling in excess of $7.3
million to be transferred to the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union[142][143][144] The Carters and Prokes soon ditched most of the money and
were apprehended heading for the Temple boat (Cudjo) at Kaituma.[141] It is
unknown how they were supposed to reach Georgetown, 150 miles (240 km) away,
since the boat had been sent away by Temple leadership earlier that day.[141]

Just before the start of the final meeting in the pavilion, lawyers Charles
Garry and Mark Lane were told that the people were angry at them.[145] The
lawyers were escorted to a house used to accommodate visitors. According to
the lawyers, they talked their way past armed guards and made it to the
jungle, before eventually arriving in Port Kaituma.[145] While in the jungle
near the settlement, they heard gunshots.[145] This observation concurs with
the testimony of Clayton, who heard the same sounds as he was sneaking back
into Jonestown to retrieve his passport.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Odell Rhodes

Four more people who were intended to be poisoned managed to survive.[141]
Grover Davis, 79, who was hearing impaired, missed the announcement to
assemble on the loudspeaker, lay down in a ditch and pretended to be
dead.[146][18] Hyacinth Thrash, 76, slept through the suicide drills and awoke
to find her sister and friends dead.[18][146] Odell Rhodes, 36, a Jonestown
teacher and craftsman, volunteered to fetch a stethoscope and hid under a
building.[135] Stanley Clayton, 25, a kitchenworker and cousin of Huey Newton,
tricked security guards and ran into the jungle.[136]

The sheer scale of the event, as well as Jones' socialist leanings, led some
to suggest CIA involvement,[147][148][149] though the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence investigated the Jonestown mass suicide and
announced that there was no evidence of CIA involvement at Jonestown.[150]

### [edit] Medical examinations

The only medical doctor to initially examine the scene at Jonestown was
Guyanese Chief Medical Examiner Dr. Leslie Mootoo. Mootoo visually examined
over 200 bodies and later told a Guyanese coroner's jury that he saw needle
marks on at least 70.[151] However, no determination was made as to whether
those injections initiated the introduction of poison or whether they were so-
called "relief" injections to quicken death and reduce suffering from
convulsions from those who had previously taken poison orally. Mootoo and
American pathologist Dr. Lynn Crook determined that cyanide was present in
some of the bodies, while analysis of the contents of the vat revealed
tranquilizers and two poisons: potassium cyanide and potassium chloride.[151]

Plastic cups, Flavor Aid packets and syringes, some with needles and some
without, littered the area where the bodies were found.[152] Mootoo concluded
that the gunshot wound to Annie Moore could not have been self-inflicted,
though Moore had also ingested a lethal dose of cyanide.[152]

Guyanese authorities waived their requirement for autopsies in the case of
unnatural death.[151] Doctors in the United States performed autopsies on only
seven bodies, including those of Jim Jones, Dr. Lawrence Schact, Annie Moore
and Carolyn Layton.[151] Annie Moore and Carolyn Layton were selected among
those autopsied, in part, because of the urging of the Moore family, including
the two victims' sister, Rebecca Moore, who was not a Temple member
herself.[151]

### [edit] Notes from non-surviving residents

<IMG>

<IMG>

Will of Marceline Jones from the Jonestown Institute.

Found near Marceline Jones' body was a typewritten note, dated November 18,
1978, signed by Marceline Jones and witnessed by Annie Moore and Maria
Katsaris, stating:

> I, Marceline Jones, leave all bank accounts in my name to the Communist
Party of the USSR. The bank accounts are located in the Bank of Nova Scotia,
Nassau, Bahamas. Please be sure that these assets do get to the USSR. I
especially request that none of these are allowed to get into the hands of my
adopted daughter, Suzanne Jones Cartmell. For anyone who finds this letter,
please honor this request as it is most important to myself and my husband
James W. Jones.[153]

Annie Moore left a note, which in part stated: "I am at a point right now so
embittered against the world that I don't know why I am writing this. Someone
who finds it will believe I am crazy or believe in the barbed wire that does
NOT exist in Jonestown."[154] The last line ("We died because you would not
let us live in peace.") is written in different color ink. No other specific
reference is made to the events of the day. Moore also wrote, "JONESTOWNâthe
most peaceful, loving community that ever existed."[154] In addition she
stated,"JIM JONESâthe one who made this paradise possibleâmuch to the
contrary of the lies stated about Jim Jones being a power-hungry sadistic,
mean person who thought he was Godâof all things."[154] And "His hatred of
racism, sexism, elitism, and mainly classism, is what prompted him to make a
new world for the peopleâa paradise in the jungle. The children loved it. So
did everyone else."[154]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Carolyn Layton (left) and Annie Moore (middle)

Another note, found 25 years later, was buried among reams of unrelated
paperwork. The document, titled "Last Words", unsigned, was attributed most
likely to Richard Tropp.[155] The note contained references to the events of
the last day:

> We did not want it this way. All was going well as Ryan completed [his]
first day here. Then a man tried to attack him, unsuccessfully at some time,
several set out into jungle wanting to overtake Ryan, aide, and others who
left with him. They did, and several killed. When we heard this, we had no
choice. We would be taken. We have to go as one, we want to live as Peoples
Temple, or end it. We have chosen. It is finished.[155]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Maria Katsaris

A note likely written by Tish Leroy stated:

> Dad I see no way out - I agree with your decision - I fear only that without
you the world may not make it to communism - Tish For my part - I am more than
tired of this wretched, merciless planet & the hell it holds for the masses of
so many beautiful people - thank you for the only life I've known.[156]

Found near Maria Katsaris' body was a handwritten note signed by Katsaris,
dated November 18, 1978, witnessed by Jim McElvane and Marilee Bogue, stating,
"I Maria Katsaris leave all of the money in the Banco Union de Venezuela in
Caracas to the Communist Party Soviet Union."[157]

Found near Carolyn Layton's body was a handwritten note signed by Carolyn
Layton, witnessed by Maria Katsaris and Annie Moore, dated November 18, 1978,
stating, "This is my last will and testament. I hereby leave all assets in any
bank account to which I am a signatory to the Communist Party of the
U.S.S.R."[158]

## [edit] Deaths in Georgetown

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sharon, Martin and Christa Amos

<IMG>

<IMG>

Liane Harris

In the early evening of November 18, at the Temple's headquarters in
Georgetown, Temple member Sharon Amos received a radio communication from
Jonestown instructing the members at the headquarters to take revenge on the
Temple's enemies and then commit revolutionary suicide.[159]Later, after
police arrived at the Temple headquarters, Sharon Amos escorted her children,
Liane (21), Christa (11) and Martin (10), into a bathroom.[160] Wielding a
kitchen knife, Sharon first killed Christa and then Martin.[160] Then Liane
assisted Sharon to kill herself with the knife, followed by Liane killing
herself with the knife.[160]

## [edit] Aftermath

Further information: Peoples Temple in San Francisco, Jim Jones, and Peoples
Temple

At the airstrip, journalist Tim Reiterman photographed the aftermath of the
violence.[161] Dwyer assumed leadership at the scene and, at his
recommendation, Layton was arrested by Guyanese state police.[162] Dwyer was
grazed by one bullet in his buttock during the airstrip shootings.[162] It
took several hours before the ten wounded and others in their party gathered
themselves together.[162] Most of them spent the night in a cafÃ©.[162] The
more seriously wounded slept in a small tent on the airfield.[162] A Guyanese
government plane arrived the following morning to evacuate the wounded.[161]
Five teenaged members of the Parks and Bogue families, with one boyfriend,
followed the instructions of defector Gerald Parks to hide in the adjacent
jungle until help arrived and their safety was assured.[163] Thereafter those
members were lost for three days in the jungle and nearly died. Guyanese
soldiers eventually found them.

After escaping Jonestown, Odell Rhodes arrived in Port Kaituma on the night of
November 18, 1978.[135] That night Stanley Clayton stayed with a local
Guyanese family and travelled to Port Kaituma the next morning.[136] The
Carter brothers and Michael Prokes were put into protective custody in Port
Kaituma.[141] They were later released in Georgetown. Rhodes, Clayton and the
two lawyers (Garry and Lane) were also brought to Georgetown. Michael Prokes
committed suicide in March 1979, four months after the Jonestown
incident.[164]

Larry Layton, who had fired a gun at several people aboard the Cessna, was
originally found not guilty of attempted murder in a Guyanese court, employing
the defense that he was "brainwashed".[165] Layton could not be tried in the
United States for the attempted murders of Vern Gosney, Monica Bagby, the
Cessna pilot and Dale Parks on Guyanese soil and was, instead, tried under a
federal statute against assassinating members of Congress and internationally
protected people (Ryan and Dwyer).[165] He was convicted of conspiracy and of
aiding and abetting the murder of Congressman Leo Ryan and of the attempted
murder of Richard Dwyer.[165] Paroled in 2002, he is the only person ever to
have been held criminally responsible for the events at Jonestown.[166]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Newsweek cover

The event was one of the stories most heavily covered by the media and
photographs pertaining to it adorned newspaper and magazine covers for months
after its occurrence, including being labeled "cult of death" by Time and
Newsweek magazines. In February 1979, 98% of Americans polled said that they
had heard of the tragedy.[167] George Gallup stated that "few events, in fact,
in the entire history of the Gallup Poll have been known to such a high
percentage of the U.S. public."[167]

After the tragedy, both the House Committee on Foreign Affairs and the State
Department itself criticized the State Department's handling of the
Temple.[168] Political opposition to Guyanese Prime Minister Burnham seized
the opportunity to embarrass Burnham by establishing an inquest which
concluded that Burnham was responsible for the deaths at Jonestown. [168]

## [edit] Former site

Now deserted, the compound at Jonestown was first tended by the Guyanese
government following the deaths.[169] The government then allowed its re-
occupation by Hmong refugees from Laos for a few years in the early
1980s.[169] The buildings and grounds were looted by local Guyanese people,
but were not taken over because of their association with the mass killing.
The buildings were mostly destroyed by a fire in the mid-1980s, after which
the ruins were left to decay and be reclaimed by the jungle.

During a visit in 1998 to film a segment for the ABC news show 20/20, Jim
Jones, Jr. discovered the rusting remains of an oil drum near the former
entrance to the Pavilion.[170] Jones recognized the drum, originally adapted
for use during meal times, as the drum used for drink mixtures used during the
"white night" exercises, and which he believed was used to hold the poison and
Flavor Aid liquid used on November 18, 1978.[170]

There is now little left save an old oil tank turned on its side, and very
little indication at all of the former settlement, other than aging fruit
trees that were part of the Jonestown orchard, the oil tank, and an abandoned
truck that was presumably owned by Peoples Temple.[171] The former pilot then
led the host of the show to where the Pavilion once was and they found daisies
growing where the bodies had once lain. While they were out in the jungle
earlier in the show they had found a desk drawer while searching around.[172]

## [edit] See also

  * Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple, a 2006 documentary film
  * Jonestown: Paradise Lost, a 2007 History Channel Documentary
  * Witness to Jonestown, a 2008 documentary by MSNBC

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b CNN - Jonestown massacre + 20: Questions linger. CNN.com. Accessed on 9 April, 2007.
  2. ^ Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 1023." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  3. ^ Layton, Deborah. Seductive Poison. Anchor, 1999. ISBN 0-3854-8984-6. p. 53.
  4. ^ Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 1053." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  5. ^ Catherine Wessinger (2000) "How the Millennium Comes Violently: From Jonestown to Heaven's Gate" ISBN 978-1889119243
  6. ^ "The Religious Movements Homepage Project: Peoples Temple". Archived from the original on 2006-09-07. http://web.archive.org/web/20060907005952/http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/relmove/.
  7. ^ Layton, Deborah. Seductive Poison. Anchor, 1999. ISBN 0-3854-8984-6. p. 64-5.
  8. ^ Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple. PBS.org.
  9. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 302-304.
  10. ^ Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 799." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  11. ^ Layton, Deborah. Seductive Poison. Anchor, 1999. ISBN 0-3854-8984-6. p. 105.
  12. ^ a b c d e f g Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 237.
  13. ^ a b c Paranoia And Delusions, Time Magazine, December 11, 1978
  14. ^ a b c Carter, Tim. Interview on Oregon Public Broadcasting Radio (Clip#3), 9 April 2007.
  15. ^ a b Timeline: The Life and Death of Jim Jones. PBS.org. Accessed April 9, 2007.
  16. ^ a b c Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 275.
  17. ^ Walliss, John, "Apocalyptic Trajectories : Millenarianism and Violence in the Contemporary World", Oxford, New York, 2004, ISBN 0820472174
  18. ^ a b c Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 132\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  19. ^ Reiterman, Tim, Tom Reiterman, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Reverend Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. pages 275.
  20. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 418.
  21. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 337.
  22. ^ United States House of Representatives; United States House of Representatives (15 May 1979). "House of Representatives Report on Jonestown--Findings". House of Representatives Report on Jonestown--Findings, United States Congress.
  23. ^ a b Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 50." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  24. ^ Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 833." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  25. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 451.
  26. ^ Reiterman, Tim, Tom Reiterman, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Reverend Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. pages 274-5 & 281.
  27. ^ a b c d Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 285.
  28. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-88738-124-3. page 195
  29. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. pages 274-5 & 418.
  30. ^ After the tragedy at Jonestown, Adams married Mann. On October 24, 1983, Mann fatally shot both Adams and the couple's child, and then fatally shot himself. (Weingarten, Gene. "The Peekaboo Paradox." The Washington Post. January 22, 2006).
  31. ^ a b Moore, Rebecca. A Sympathetic History of Jonestown. Lewiston: E. Mellen Press. ISBN 0-8894-6860-5. p. 173-4.
  32. ^ a b Layton, Deborah. (1998) Seductive Poison. Anchor, 1999. ISBN 0-3854-8984-6. p. 113.
  33. ^ Kilduff, Marshall and Phil Tracy. "Inside Peoples Temple." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. August 1, 1977.
  34. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 133\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  35. ^ a b c d e f Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 390-2.
  36. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 322.
  37. ^ Layton, Deborah (1998). Seductive Poison. New York: Doubleday. p. 53\. ISBN 0-385-48983-8.
  38. ^ Jones, Jim. FBI tape Q 320.
  39. ^ Martin, Bradley K. Under the Loving Care of the Fatherly Leader. New York: St. Martin's Press, 2004. ISBN 0-312-32221-6. p. 159.
  40. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 163-4.
  41. ^ a b "FBI Summaries of Peoples Temple Tapes Q 155, Q 160, Q 190, Q 198, Q 200, Q 203 and Q 242." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  42. ^ "Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple" (Documentary also airing on PBS including numerous interviews).
  43. ^ Jim Jones, Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 216. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  44. ^ a b Jim Jones, Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 322. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  45. ^ Jim Jones, Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 161. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  46. ^ a b c Moore, Rebecca. A Sympathetic History of Jonestown. Lewiston: E. Mellen Press. ISBN 0-8894-6860-5. p. 292.
  47. ^ Moore, Rebecca. A Sympathetic History of Jonestown. Lewiston: E. Mellen Press. ISBN 0-8894-6860-5. p. 293.
  48. ^ a b Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 236\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  49. ^ a b c Layton, Deborah (1998). Seductive Poison. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-48983-8.
  50. ^ King, Peter. "How Jones used drugs." San Francisco Examiner. 28 December 1978. Archived.
  51. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 502.
  52. ^ Layton, Deborah. (1998) Seductive Poison. Anchor, 1999. ISBN 0-3854-8984-6. p. 176
  53. ^ An Analysis of Jonestown. Guyana.org. Accessed April 9, 2007.
  54. ^ a b c d Reiterman, Tim, For Those Who Were There, Jonestown's A Part Of Each Day, Los Angeles Times, November 18, 1998
  55. ^ Layton, Deborah. (1998) Seductive Poison. Anchor, 1999. ISBN 0-3854-8984-6. p. 103.
  56. ^ a b Pear, Richard. "State Explains Response to Cult Letters." Washington Star News. November 26 1978.
  57. ^ Wessinger, Catherine. How the Millennium Comes Violently: From Jonestown to Heaven's Gate. 2000. ISBN 978-1889119243.
  58. ^ Reiterman, Tim, "Peoples Temple's $26 million financial empire", San Francisco Examiner, January 9, 1979.
  59. ^ Jim Jones, Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 234. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  60. ^ Jim Jones, Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 051. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  61. ^ Layton, Deborah (1998). Seductive Poison. New York: Doubleday. p. 178\. ISBN 0-385-48983-8.
  62. ^ Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 642." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  63. ^ a b "Affidavit of Deborah Layton Blakey." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  64. ^ "Jones plotted cyanide deaths years before Jonestown" CNN.com, November 12, 2008
  65. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 361
  66. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 366
  67. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 360-72
  68. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 369
  69. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 367
  70. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 370
  71. ^ a b c Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 371
  72. ^ a b c Moore, Rebecca. A Sympathetic History of Jonestown. Lewiston: E. Mellen Press. ISBN 0-8894-6860-5. p. 165.
  73. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 416.
  74. ^ a b c d Jones, Jim. "Transcript of Recovered FBI tape Q 352." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  75. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 408
  76. ^ Sims, Hank, Tim Stoen's Story, North Coast Journal, September 25, 2003
  77. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 458
  78. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-88738-124-3. page 227
  79. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 380-3
  80. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 383
  81. ^ a b c Milk, Harvey Letter Addressed to President Jimmy Carter, Dated February 19, 1978
  82. ^ "Accusation of Human Rights Violations by Rev. James Warren Jones. April 11, 1978. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  83. ^ Moore, Rebecca. A Sympathetic History of Jonestown. Lewiston: E. Mellen Press. ISBN 0-8894-6860-5. p. 259.
  84. ^ Moore, Rebecca. A Sympathetic History of Jonestown. Lewiston: E. Mellen Press. ISBN 0-8894-6860-5. p. 268.
  85. ^ a b c d Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p.440.
  86. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 441
  87. ^ Goodlett, Carlton B. Notes on Peoples Temple, Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. Excerpted from The Need For A Second Look At Jonestown, Rebecca Moore and Fielding M. McGehee, III, editors. Lewiston NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1989.
  88. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 446.
  89. ^ Moore, Rebecca. American as Cherry Pie, Jonestown Institute, San Diego State University
  90. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. pp. 299-300 & 457-458
  91. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 481.
  92. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 476-480.
  93. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 484-5.
  94. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 485.
  95. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 487.
  96. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 487-8.
  97. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 488-90.
  98. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 270\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  99. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 491.
  100. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 271\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  101. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 498-9.
  102. ^ a b c ' Survivors of the Tragedy', CNN
  103. ^ 'Slavery of Faith': Survivor recounts escape from Jonestown, Leslie Wilson, CNN reprint of excerpt
  104. ^ Knapp, Don. Jonestown massacre memories linger amid rumors of CIA link, CNN, November 19, 1998.
  105. ^ Obituary announcement of Julius Evans (references his escape with family), Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  106. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 272\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  107. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 505.
  108. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 512.
  109. ^ Stephenson, Denice. Dear People: Remembering Jonestown. Heyday Books, 2005. ISBN 1597140023.
  110. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 273\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  111. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 516.
  112. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 515.
  113. ^ a b c d Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 516-7.
  114. ^ a b The Events of November 18, 1978, PBS: American Experience, Jonestown, 2-20-2007, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/jonestown/peopleevents/e_nov.html, retrieved on 2007-12-07
  115. ^ a b c Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 518.
  116. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 519-20.
  117. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 276\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  118. ^ a b c United States House of Representatives; Foreign Affairs Committee (May 15, 1979). "Congressional Foreign Affairs Committee report on Ryan's assassination". Report of a Staff Investigative Group to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, United States Congress.
  119. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 524.
  120. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 525.
  121. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 526.
  122. ^ a b c Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 533.
  123. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 527.
  124. ^ Hall, John R. Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. 1989. ISBN 978-0887388019. p. 278
  125. ^ a b c Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 529-31.
  126. ^ Brazil, Jeff. "Jonestown's Horror Fades but Mystery Remain." Los Angeles Times. December 16, 1999.
  127. ^ a b Hall, John R. Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. 1989. ISBN 978-0887388019. p. 275-76
  128. ^ Layton, Deborah. Seductive Poison. Anchor, 1999. ISBN 0-3854-8984-6. p. xix (Krause forward)
  129. ^ a b Hall, John R. Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. ISBN 978-0887388019. pp. 273-74
  130. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Jonestown Audiotape Primary Project." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University.
  131. ^ Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. p. 282\. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  132. ^ Autopsy Report for Carolyn Moore Layton
  133. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p 566.
  134. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 178.
  135. ^ a b c d e f Guyana Inquest - Interview of Odell Rhodes. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  136. ^ a b c d Guyana Inquest - Interview of Stanley Clayton. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  137. ^ "Another Day of Death." Time. December 11, 1978.
  138. ^ "Some of 780 Forced To Drink Witness Says Most Waited Turn Quietly." Los Angeles Herald Examiner. November 25, 1978.
  139. ^ Guyana Inquest - Interviews of Cecil Roberts & Cyril Mootoo
  140. ^ Rapaport, Richard, Jonestown and City Hall slayings eerily linked in time and memory, San Francisco Chronicle, November 16, 2003
  141. ^ a b c d e f Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. pp 561-580.
  142. ^ a b "Letter to Feodor Timofeyev." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  143. ^ "Letter from Annie McGowan." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  144. ^ "Another Letter from Annie McGowan." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  145. ^ a b c Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. pp 540-542.
  146. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. pp 578.
  147. ^ Moore, Rebecca, âReconstructing Reality: Conspiracy Theories About Jonestown, Journal of Popular Culture 36, no. 2 (Fall 2002): 200-20
  148. ^ See, e.g.,Anderson, Jack, CIA Involved In Jonestown Massacre, September 27, 1980
  149. ^ See, e.g., Alinin, S.F., B.G. Antonov and A.N. Itskov, The Jonestown carnage--a CIA crime, Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1987
  150. ^ Taylor, Michael; Lattin, Don (1998). "Most Peoples Temple Documents Still Sealed". San Francisco Examiner. http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/1998/11/13/MN107219.DTL&hw=Most+Peoples+Temple+Documents+Still+Sealed&sn=002&sc=468. Retrieved on 2008-08-24.
  151. ^ a b c d e "Last Rites." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University. 8 March 2007.
  152. ^ a b Guyana Inquest - Interviews of Cecil Roberts & Cyril Mootoo. Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  153. ^ "Letter from Marceline Jones." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  154. ^ a b c d "Last Words - Annie Moore." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  155. ^ a b "Last Words - Richard Tropp." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  156. ^ "Tish Leroy Suicide Note." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  157. ^ "Letter from Maria Katsaris." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  158. ^ "Letter from Carolyn Layton." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. Jonestown Project: San Diego State University.
  159. ^ Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. p. 522-3
  160. ^ a b c Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. pp. 544-5.
  161. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 568-70.
  162. ^ a b c d e Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 534-8.
  163. ^ Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 566-67.
  164. ^ "Statement of Michael Prokes." Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University: Jonestown Project. Accessed 22 September, 2007.
  165. ^ a b c Bishop, Katherine. "1978 CULT FIGURE GETS LIFE TERM IN CONGRESSMAN'S JUNGLE SLAYING." New York Times. March 4, 1987.
  166. ^ Coleman, Loren. The Copycat Effect: How the Media and Popular Culture Trigger the Mayhem in Tomorrow's Realities. 2004. ISBN 1416505547
  167. ^ a b Hall, John R. Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. 1989. ISBN 978-0887388019. p. 289.
  168. ^ a b Reiterman, Tim, and John Jacobs. Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton, 1982. ISBN 0-525-24136-1. page 576.
  169. ^ a b "What happened to Jonestown?" Alternative Considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple. San Diego State University: Jonestown Project. 2007-03-08
  170. ^ a b Smith, Gary. "Escaping Jonestown." Sports Illustrated. CNN.com. 24 December 2007.
  171. ^ Guyana TV (2003), "Lets Talk", Jonestown, 25 Years Later (clip #2), including interview with pilot Gerry Gouveia and visit to former Jonestown site.
  172. ^ Guyana TV (2003), "Lets Talk", Jonestown, 25 Years Later (clip #3), including interview with pilot Gerry Gouveia and visit to former Jonestown site.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Barden, Renardo Barden. Cults (Troubled Society series). Rourke Pub Group. ISBN 0-86593-070-8.
  * Chidester, David (1988). Salvation and Suicide. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-35056-5.
  * Dolan, Sean (2000). Everything You Need to Know About Cults. New York: Rosen Pub. Group. ISBN 0-8239-3230-3.
  * Galanter, M. (1999). Cults: Faith, Healing, and Coercion. New York: Oxford University Press.
  * Hall, John R. (1987). Gone from the Promised Land: Jonestown in American Cultural History. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-88738-124-3.
  * Kerns, Phil. (1978). People's Temple, People's Tomb. Logos Associates. ISBN 0-88270-363-3.
  * Kilduff, Marshall and Ron Javers. (1978). The Suicide Cult: The Inside Story of the Peoples Temple Sect and the Massacre in Guyana. New York: Bantam Books. ISBN 0-553-12920-1.
  * Klineman, George and Sherman Butler. (1980). The Cult That Died. G.P. Putnam's Sons. ISBN 0-399-12540-X.
  * Krause, Charles A. with Laurence M. Stern, Richard Harwood and the staff of The Washington Post (1978). Guyana Massacre: The Eyewitness Account. [New York]: Berkley Pub. Corp. ISBN 0-425-04234-0.
  * Layton, Deborah (1998). Seductive Poison. New York: Anchor Books. ISBN 0-3854-8984-6.
  * Maaga, Mary McCormick (1998). Hearing the Voices of Jonestown. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press. ISBN 0-815-60515-3.
  * Moore, Rebecca. (1985). A Sympathetic History of Jonestown: the Moore Family Involvement in Peoples Temple. Lewiston: E. Mellen Press. ISBN 0-88946-860-5.
  * Naipaul, Shiva. (1982). Journey to Nowhere: A New World Tragedy. Harmondsworth [Eng.]: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-006189-4. (published in the UK as Black and White)
  * Reiterman, Tim and John Jacobs (1982). Raven: The Untold Story of Rev. Jim Jones and His People. Dutton. ISBN 0-525-24136-1.
  * Sargeant, Jack. (2002). Death Cults: Murder, Mayhem and Mind Control (True Crime Series). Virgin Publishing. ISBN 0-7535-0644-0.
  * Sorell, W. E. (1978). Cults and Cult Suicide. International Journal of Group Tensions.
  * Stephenson, Denice (2005). Dear People: Remembering Jonestown. Heyday Books. ISBN 1-597-14002-3.

## [edit] External links

Wikisource

Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Congressman Tom Lantos' Remarks on the 25th Anniversary of the Tragedy at
Jonestown and the Death of Congressman Leo Ryan

  * Alternative considerations of Jonestown and Peoples Temple, an extensive resource on the topics, sponsored by the Department of Religious Studies at San Diego State University 
    * "FBI Audiotape Project", summaries and transcripts of many of the over 900 audio tapes discovered in Jonestown, mostly recorded in the year before the mass slaying, and including the "Death Tape" seemingly made just before and during the mass slaying
    * Transcript of the Death Tape
    * "Who Died?", a list of who died at Jonestown
  * "Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple", website for the film broadcast on PBS includes video interviews with survivors from 2006
  * "The Jonestown Death Tape (FBI No. Q 042) (November 18 1978)", an unofficial web-publishing (digital) of the "Death Tape" seemingly made just before and during the mass slaying
  * "Nightmare in Jonestown". Time Magazine. 1978-12-04. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,912249,00.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-05. , Time magazine cover story, Monday, December 4, 1978
  * Father Cares: The Last of Jonestown, a 1981 audio documentary produced by NPR (90 minutes)
  * 'Jonestown Legacy' website run by David Wise, once a Pastor of the Los Angeles Branch of the Peoples Temple, but latterly an opponent of Jim Jones.
  * "The Jonestown, Guyana Tragedy: Primary Source Materials from the U.S. Department of State". Archived from the original on 1999-04-28. http://web.archive.org/web/19990428190751/http%3A//www.icehouse.net/zodiac/. , the contents of US Government archives on the subject obtained through the Freedom of Information Act. (web-archived copy of the original website, no longer extant; unfortunately the scanned pages are missing)
  * "Jonestown massacre + 20: Questions linger", CNN.com, November 18, 1998
  * "Timeline: Road to tragedy in Jonestown" CNN.com, November 17, 2003
  * "1978: Mass suicide leaves 900 dead". BBC News. 1978-11-18. http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/november/18/newsid_2540000/2540209.stm. Retrieved on 2008-08-05. BBC, On This Day: 18 November
  * "The Assassination of Representative Leo J. Ryan and the Jonestown, Guyana Tragedy", excerpt from: Report of a Staff Investigative Group to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives, May 15, 1979
  * "From Silver Lake to Suicide: One Family's Secret History of the Jonestown Massacre," Isaacson, Barry. L.A. Weekly, October 23 2008

v â¢ d â¢ e

Peoples Temple  
Leadership

Jim Jones  
History

Father Divine Â· Wings of deliverance Â· Disciples of Christ Â· I-Hotel Â·
Jonestown Â· Peoples Temple in San Francisco Â· Mark Lane Â· Charles R. Garry
Â· Timothy Stoen Â· Larry Layton Â· Deborah Layton Â· Jeannie Mills Â· John R.
Burke Â· Jonestown conspiracy theory Â· Cult Awareness Network Â· George
Moscone Â· Willie Brown (politician) Â· Angela Davis Â· Huey Newton Â· Flavor
Aid  
Congressional entourage

Congressman Leo J. Ryan Â· Jackie Speier Â· Richard Dwyer Â· Tim Reiterman Â·
Don Harris Â· Greg Robinson Â· Steve Sung Â· Bob Flick Â· Charles A. Krause Â·
Ron Javers Â· Bob Brown Â· Marshall Kilduff  
Books

Raven (book) Â· Seductive Poison  
Films

Guyana: Crime of the Century Â· Guyana Tragedy: The Story of Jim Jones Â·
Cults: Dangerous Devotion Â· Jonestown: Paradise Lost Â· Jonestown: The Life
and Death of Peoples Temple  
WikiSource Â· Wikimedia Commons  
Coordinates: 7Â°42â²17.8596â³N 59Â°54â²22.104â³Wï»¿ / ï»¿7.704961Â°N
59.90614Â°Wï»¿ / 7.704961; -59.90614

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonestown"

Categories: 1978 | Peoples Temple | New religious movements | Intentional
communities | Communism in the United States | Assassinations

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Ãslenska
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 16:09.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



