
# Central Park

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Central Park (disambiguation).

Central Park  
The Pond looking North

The Pond looking North  
Type Urban park  
Location Manhattan, New York City  
Coordinates

40Â°46â²55â³N 73Â°57â²58â³Wï»¿ / ï»¿40.78194Â°N 73.96611Â°Wï»¿ / 40.78194;
-73.96611ï»¿ (Central Park)Coordinates: 40Â°46â²55â³N 73Â°57â²58â³Wï»¿ /
ï»¿40.78194Â°N 73.96611Â°Wï»¿ / 40.78194; -73.96611ï»¿ (Central Park)  
Size 843 acres (341 ha)  
1.32 sq mi (3.4 km2)  
Opened 1859  
Operated by Central Park Conservancy  
Annual visitors 25 million  
Status Open all year  
Central Park  
U.S. National Register of Historic Places  
U.S. National Historic Landmark  
Central Park is located in New York City  

Central Park  
Coordinates: 40Â°46â²55â³N 73Â°57â²58â³Wï»¿ / ï»¿40.78194Â°N
73.96611Â°Wï»¿ / 40.78194; -73.96611  
Built/Founded: 1857  
Architect: Frederick Law Olmsted, Calvert Vaux  
Added to NRHP: October 15, 1966  
Designated NHL: May 23, 1963  
NRHP Reference#: 66000538[1]  
Central Park is a large public, urban park in New York City, with about
twenty-five million visitors annually. Most of the areas immediately adjacent
to the park are known for impressive buildings and valuable real estate.
Central Park has been a National Historic Landmark since 1963.

The park is maintained by the Central Park Conservancy and the New York City
Department of Parks and Recreation. The park was designed by Frederick Law
Olmsted and architect Calvert Vaux. While much of the park looks natural, it
is in fact almost entirely landscaped. It contains several natural-looking
lakes and ponds, extensive walking tracks, two ice-skating rinks, the Central
Park Zoo, the Central Park Conservatory Garden, a wildlife sanctuary, a large
area of natural woods, a reservoir with an encircling running track, and the
outdoor Delacorte Theater which hosts the "Shakespeare in the Park" summer
festivals.

The park also serves as an oasis for migrating birds.

## Contents

  * 1 Central Park today
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Early history
    * 2.2 Initial development
    * 2.3 20th century
    * 2.4 1960â1980
    * 2.5 1980âpresent
  * 3 Activities in the park
    * 3.1 Carriage horses
    * 3.2 Pedicabs
    * 3.3 Sports
    * 3.4 Entertainment
    * 3.5 Climbing
    * 3.6 Children
  * 4 Central Park Reservoir
  * 5 Sculptures
  * 6 Crime
  * 7 Other issues
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links
    * 10.1 Official websites
    * 10.2 Additional information

  
## [edit] Central Park today

Central Park is a large public, urban park (843 acres, 3,4 kmÂ², 1.32 sq mi; a
rectangle 2.6 statute miles by 0.5 statute mile, or 4.1 km Ã 830 m) in the
borough of Manhattan in New York City, almost 4/5 of the size of Vancouver's
Stanley Park and just over 1/3 of the size of London's Richmond Park, but just
1/5 of Los Angeles's Griffith Park. With about twenty-five million visitors
annually, Central Park is the most visited city park in the United States,[2]
and its appearance in many movies and television shows has made it famous.

The park is maintained by the Central Park Conservancy, a private, not-for-
profit organization that manages the park under a contract with the New York
City Department of Parks and Recreation,[3] in which the president of the
Conservancy is ex officio Administrator of Central Park.

Central Park is bordered on the north by West 110th Street, on the south by
West 59th Street, on the west by Eighth Avenue. Along the park's borders
however, these are known as Central Park North, Central Park South, and
Central Park West respectively. Fifth Avenue retains its name along the
eastern border of the park. Most of the areas immediately adjacent to the park
are known for impressive buildings and valuable real estate.

The park was designed by landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted and
architect Calvert Vaux, who went on to collaborate on Brooklyn's Prospect
Park. Central Park has been a National Historic Landmark since 1963.[4][5][6]

While much of the park looks natural, it is in fact almost entirely
landscaped. It contains several natural-looking lakes and ponds,[7] extensive
walking tracks, bridle paths, two ice-skating rinks, the Central Park Zoo, the
Central Park Conservatory Garden, a wildlife sanctuary, a large area of
natural woods, a 106-acre (43 ha) billion gallon reservoir with an encircling
running track, and an outdoor amphitheater called the Delacorte Theater which
hosts the "Shakespeare in the Park" summer festivals. Indoor attractions
include Belvedere Castle with its nature center, the Swedish Cottage
Marionette Theatre, and the historic Carousel. In addition there are numerous
major and minor grassy areas, some of which are used for informal or team
sports, some are set aside as quiet areas, and there are a number of enclosed
playgrounds for children.

The park has its own wildlife and also serves as an oasis for migrating birds,
especially in the fall and the spring, making it a significant attraction for
bird watchers; 200 species of birds are regularly seen.[8] The 6 miles (10 km)
of drives within the park are used by joggers, bicyclists and inline skaters,
especially on weekends, and in the evenings after 7:00 p.m., when automobile
traffic is banned.

The real-estate value of Central Park is estimated to be $528,783,552,000
according to the property-appraisal firm Miller Samuel.[9]

## [edit] History

### [edit] Early history

The park was not part of the Commissioners' Plan of 1811; however, between
1821 and 1855, New York City nearly quadrupled in population. As the city
expanded, people were drawn to the few open spaces, mainly cemeteries, to get
away from the noise and chaotic life in the city.[10] Before long, however,
New York City's need for a great public park was voiced by the poet and editor
of the then-Evening Post (now the New York Post), William Cullen Bryant, and
by the first American landscape architect, Andrew Jackson Downing, who began
to publicize the city's need for a public park in 1844. A stylish place for
open-air driving, like the Bois de Boulogne in Paris or London's Hyde Park,
was felt to be needed by many influential New Yorkers, and in 1853 the New
York legislature designated a 700-acre (280 ha) area from 59th to 106th
Streets for the creation of the park, to a cost of more than US$5 million for
the land alone. The park is the largest on Manhattan Island.

### [edit] Initial development

The State appointed a Central Park Commission to oversee the development of
the park, and in 1857 the commission held a landscape design contest. Writer
Frederick Law Olmsted and English architect Calvert Vaux developed the so-
called "Greensward Plan," which was selected as the winning design. According
to Olmsted, the park was "of great importance as the first real Park made in
this centuryâa democratic development of the highest significanceâ¦," a
view probably inspired by his stay, and various trips in Europe in 1850.[11]
During that trip he visited several parks, and was in particular impressed by
Birkenhead Park on the Wirral Peninsula, near Liverpool, England.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Victor Prevost, The Terrace, Central Park, NY, Albumen Print, September 10th,
1862.

Several influences came together in the design. Landscaped cemeteries, such as
Mount Auburn (Cambridge, Massachusetts) and Green-Wood (Brooklyn, New York)
had set an example of idyllic, naturalistic landscapes. The most influential
innovations in the Central Park design were the "separate circulation systems"
for pedestrians, horseback riders, and pleasure vehicles. The "crosstown"
commercial traffic was entirely concealed in sunken roadways (today called
"transverses") screened with densely planted shrub belts, so as not to disturb
the impression of a rustic scene. The Greensward plan called for some 36
bridges, all designed by Vaux, ranging from rugged spans of Manhattan schist
or granite, to lacy neo-gothic cast iron, no two alike. The ensemble of the
formal line of the Mall's doubled allÃ©es of elms culminating at Bethesda
Terrace, whose centerpiece is The Bethesda Fountain, with a composed view
beyond of lake and woodland, was at the heart of the larger design.

<IMG>

<IMG>

One of the park's bridges, no two alike.[12]

Before the construction of the park could start, the area had to be cleared of
its inhabitants, most of whom were quite poor and either free African-
Americans or immigrants of either German or Irish origin. Most of them lived
in smaller villages, such as Seneca Village, Harsenville, the Piggery District
or the Convent of the Sisters of Charity. The roughly 1,600 working-class
residents occupying the area at the time were evicted under the rule of
eminent domain during 1857, and Seneca Village and parts of the other
communities were torn down and removed in order to make room for the park.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Central-Park, Winter: The Skating Pond, 1862

During the construction of the park, Olmsted fought constant battles with the
Park Commissioners, many of whom were appointees of the city's Democratic
machine. In 1860, he was forced out for the first of many times as Central
Park's Superintendent, and Andrew Haswell Green, the former president of New
York City's Board of Education took over as the chairman of the commission.
Despite the fact that he had relatively little experience, he still managed to
accelerate the construction, as well as to finalize the negotiations for the
purchase of an additional 65 acres (260,000 m2) at the north end of the park
between 106th and 110th Streets, which would be used as the "rugged" part of
the park, its swampy northeast corner dredged and reconstructed as the Harlem
Meer.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cleopatra's Needle, Central Park

Between 1860 and 1873, the construction of the park had come a long way, and
most of the major hurdles had been overcome. During this period, more than
500,000 cubic feet (14,000 mÂ³) of topsoil had been transported in from New
Jersey, as the original soil wasn't fertile or substantial enough to sustain
the various trees, shrubs, and plants the Greensward Plan called for. When the
park was officially completed in 1873, more than ten million cartloads of
material, including soil and rocks which were to be removed from the area had
been manually dug up, and transported out of the park. Also included were the
more than four million trees, shrubs and plants representing the approximately
1,500 species which were to lay the foundation for today's park.

Interestingly, sheep actually grazed on the Sheep Meadow from the 1860s until
1934, when they were moved upstate since it was feared they would be used for
food by impoverished depression-era New Yorkers.[13]

### [edit] 20th century

Following the completion of the park, it quickly slipped into decline. One of
the major reasons for this was the lack of interest of Tammany Hall, the
political machine which was the largest political force in New York at the
time.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The buildings that line Central Park South include Essex House.

Around the turn of the 20th century, the park faced several new challenges.
Cars had been invented and were becoming commonplace, bringing with them their
burden of pollution. Also, the general mental view of the people was beginning
to change. No longer were parks to be used only for walks and picnics in an
idyllic environment, but now also for sports, and similar recreation.
Following the dissolution of the Central Park Commission in 1870 and Andrew
Green's departure from the project and the death of Vaux in 1895, the
maintenance effort gradually declined, and there were few or no attempts to
replace dead trees, bushes and plants or worn-out lawn. For several decades,
authorities did little or nothing to prevent vandalism and the littering of
the park.

All of this changed in 1934, when Republican Fiorello La Guardia was elected
mayor of New York City and unified the five park-related departments then in
existence, and gave Robert Moses the job of cleaning up. Moses, then about to
become one of the mightiest men in New York City, took over what was
essentially a relic, a leftover from a bygone era.

According to historian Robert Caro in his 1974 book The Power Broker:

    Lawns, unseeded, were expanses of bare earth, decorated with scraggly patches of grass and weeds, that became dust holes in dry weather and mud holes in wetâ¦. The once beautiful Mall looked like a scene of a wild party the morning after. Benches lay on their backs, their legs jabbing at the sky...
In a single year, Moses managed to clean up not only Central Park, but also
other parks in New York City: lawns and flowers were replanted, dead trees and
bushes replaced, walls were sandblasted and bridges repaired. Major
redesigning and construction was also carried out: for instance, the existing
Croton Lower Reservoir was filled in so the Great Lawn could be created. The
Greensward Plan's intention of creating an idyllic landscape was combined with
Moses' vision of a park to be used for recreational purposesânineteen
playgrounds, twelve ballfields, and handball courts were constructed. Moses
also managed to secure funds from the New Deal program, as well as donations
from the public, thus ensuring that the park got a new lease of life,
prospering under the wings of a powerful and new defender.

### [edit] 1960â1980

The 1960s marked the beginning of an âEvents Eraâ in Central Park that
reflected the widespread cultural and political trends of the period. The
Public Theater's annual Shakespeare in the Park festival was settled in the
new Delacorte Theater (1961) and summer performances were instituted on the
Sheep Meadow and then on the Great Lawn by the New York Philharmonic Orchestra
and the Metropolitan Opera. Increasingly through the 1970s, the Park became a
venue for events of unprecedented scale, including political rallies and
demonstrations, festivals, and massive concerts.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Relaxing in the shade on an August day.

At the time, the City of New York was in the throes of economic and social
crisis. Residents were fleeing the City and moving to the suburbs. Morale was
low and crime was high. The Parks Department, suffering from budget cuts and a
lack of skilled management that rendered its workforce virtually ineffective,
responded by opening the Park to any and all activities that would bring
people into itâregardless of their impact and without adequate management
oversight or maintenance follow-up. Some of these events became important
milestones in the social history of the Park and the cultural history of the
City. Many were positive experiences fondly remembered by the individuals who
participated. But without essential management and enforcement of reasonable
limitations, and combined with a total lack of park maintenance and repair,
they also did an incredible amount of damage.

On Saturday, February 8, 1964, as part of the Beatles' first visit to America,
John Lennon, Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr visited Central Park while
entertaining photographers and members of the press. George Harrison stayed
back at the group's suite at the Plaza Hotel, due to a bout with influenza. On
Lennon's birthday, October 9, 1985, Yoko Ono helped inaugurate the Strawberry
Fields memorial, created as a tribute to him following his murder on December
8, 1980.[14]

  

<IMG>

<IMG>

Central Park viewed from atop the Rockefeller Tower

By the mid-1970s, New Yorkâs fiscal and social crisis had contributed to
severe management neglect. "Years of poor management and inadequate
maintenance had turned a masterpiece of landscape architecture into a virtual
dustbowl by day and a danger zone by night," said the Conservancy
president.[15] Time had hastened the deterioration of its infrastructure and
architecture, and ushered in an era of vandalism, territorial use (as when a
pick-up game of softball or soccer commandeered open space to the exclusion of
others) and illicit activity.

Several citizen groups had emerged intent upon reclaiming the park by
fundraising and organizing volunteer initiatives. One of these groups, the
Central Park Community Fund, commissioned a study of the parkâs management
that concluded by calling for the establishment of a single position within
the Parks Department responsible for overseeing the planning and management of
Central Park, and for a board of guardians to provide citizen oversight. The
Koch administration was receptive, and in 1979 Parks Commissioner Gordon Davis
established the office of Central Park Administrator, appointing to the
position the executive director of another citizen organization, the Central
Park Task Force. The Central Park Conservancy was founded the following year
to support the office and initiatives of the Administrator and to provide
consistent leadership through a self-perpetuating, citizen-based board that
would also include as ex-officio trustees the Parks Commissioner, Central Park
Administrator, and mayoral appointees.

<IMG>

<IMG>

From Central Park South

### [edit] 1980âpresent

The Park's transformation under the leadership of the Central Park Conservancy
began with modest but highly significant first steps toward reclaiming the
Park, addressing needs that could not be met within the existing structure and
resources of the Parks Department. These included an initial focus on hiring
interns and establishing a small restoration staff to reconstruct and repair
unique rustic structures, undertaking horticultural projects, and removing
graffiti, under the broken windows premise. Currently "Graffiti doesn't last
24 hours in the park," according to Conservancy president Douglas Blonsky.
[16]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Pond and Central Park South

By the early 1980s the Conservancy was engaged in design efforts and long-term
restoration planning, using a combination of its own staff and consultants.
Through this work, the Conservancy provided the impetus and leadership for
several early restoration projects funded by the City, while at the same time
preparing a comprehensive plan for rebuilding the Park. With the completion of
this plan in 1985, the Conservancy launched its first capital campaign.
Through the campaign, the Conservancy assumed increasing responsibility for
funding the comprehensive restoration of the Park, and full responsibility for
designing, bidding, and supervising all capital projects in the Park.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Wollman Memorial skating rink.

The restoration of Central Park has been accompanied by a crucial
transformation of its management. As the Conservancy rebuilt the Park
beginning in the mid-1980s, it instituted a revolutionary new zone-management
system, in which Central Park was divided into territories, in which a
designated supervisor was held responsible for maintaining restored areas; and
as citywide budget cuts in the early 1990s resulted in attrition of the Parks
Department staff responsible for routine maintenance, the Conservancy began to
hire staff to replace these workers. Management of the restored landscapes by
the Conservancyâs "zone gardeners" proved so successful that core
maintenance and operations staff were reorganized in 1996 and a zone-based
system of management implemented throughout the Park, now divided into 49
zones. Consequently, every zone of the Park now has a specific individual
accountable for its day-to-day maintenance. Zone gardeners supervise the
volunteers[17] assigned to them (who commit to a consistent work schedule),
and are supported by specialized crews in areas of maintenance requiring
specific expertise or equipment, or more effectively conducted on a parkwide
basis. Today the Conservancy employs four out of five maintenance and
operations staff in the Park, and effectively oversees the work of both the
private and public employees under the authority of the Central Park
Administrator (a publicly appointed position reporting to the Parks
Commissioner) who is also the President of the Conservancy. As of 2007, the
Conservancy had invested approximately $450 million in the restoration and
management of the Park; the organization presently contributes approximately
85% of Central Parkâs annual operating budget of over $25 million.[3]

The system was functioning so well that in 2006 the Conservancy created the
Historic Harlem Parks Initiative, providing horticultural and maintenance
support and mentoring in Morningside Park and St. Nicholas, Jackie Robinson
and Marcus Garvey Parks.[18]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The park in 2004.

## [edit] Activities in the park

### [edit] Carriage horses

<IMG>

<IMG>

One of the many carriage horses present throughout the park.

New York City has had carriage horses since 1935[19], but the tradition has
recently come under a firestorm of controversy, with activists and politicians
questioning its humanity.[20] They are a symbolic institution of the city.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11 the city ground to a halt, and in
a much-publicized event, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani went to the stables himself to
ask the drivers to go back to work to help return a sense of normalcy.[19]

Recently several factors have begun to turn public opinion on the trade.
First, the history of accidents with the horses in traffic has come under
scrutiny with recent deaths.[21] Second, an expose of the industry by award-
winning activist filmmaker Donny Moss provided evidence of alleged abuse.
Third, protests from People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals and
celebrities like Pink, Cheryl Hines, Kristen Johnston and Alec Baldwin have
raised the issue's profile.[22][23] Media accounts have corroborated some
charges, but they have also shown that the standards vary from stable to
stable.[24]

Both activists and horse owners who pride themselves on humane conditions
agree that part of the problem is toothless enforcement of the city code.[24]
Supporters of the trade say it needs to be reformed, not shut down, and that
carriage drivers deserve a raise, which the city has not authorized since
1989.[25] Paris, London, Beijing, and several U.S. cities have banned carriage
horses.[26]

### [edit] Pedicabs

Pedicabs have more recently offered visitors a most dynamic way in which to
view the park. Covering three to ten times the distance of a typical Central
Park horse carriage ride, pedicabs have become very popular with visitors and
New Yorkers alike in the last five years. Unfortunately, the city's Department
of Consumer Affairs has failed to follow city council legal mandates and
regulate these eco-positive sightseeing experiences. Be sure to check for
insurance and request a price up front from these riders to ensure a most
rewarding experience, as the DCA will not do so despite the NYC pedicab law
passed in April 2007.

### [edit] Sports

Central Park is perhaps cherished most by athletes. The Park Drive, just over
6 miles (9.7 km) long, is a haven for runners, joggers, bicyclists, and inline
skaters. Nearly every weekend, races take place in the park, many of which are
organized by the New York Road Runners. The New York City Marathon finishes in
Central Park outside Tavern on the Green. Many other professional races are
run in the park, including the recent USA Men's 8k Championships. A long
tradition of horseback riding in the park was kept alive by the one remaining
stable nearby, Claremont Riding Academy until it closed in 2007. At the
northern part of Central Park between 106th and 108th streets Lasker Rink and
Pool is a large ice skating rink which converts to an outdoor swimming pool in
Summer and serves the neighboring communities.

### [edit] Entertainment

Each summer, the Public Theater presents free open-air theatre productions,
often starring well-known stage and screen actors, in the Delacorte Theater,
summer performing venue of the New York Shakespeare Festival. Most, though not
all, of the plays presented are by William Shakespeare, and the performances
are generally regarded as being of high quality since its founding by Joseph
Papp in 1962.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Summerstage features free musical concerts throughout the summer.

The New York Philharmonic gives an open-air concert every summer on the Great
Lawn and the Metropolitan Opera presents two operas. Many concerts have been
given in the park including Elton John, 1980; the Simon and Garfunkel reunion,
1981; Diana Ross, 1983; Garth Brooks, 1997; Dave Matthews Band, 2003, Bon Jovi
2008.[27] Since 1992, local Singer-songwriter David Ippolito has performed
almost every summer weekend to large crowds of passers-by and regulars,
including visitors from around the world, and has become a New York icon.
Often he is simply referred to as "That guitar man from Central Park."

Also each summer, City Parks Foundation offers Central Park Summerstage, a
series of free performances including music, dance, spoken word, and film
presentations. SummerStage celebrated its 20th anniversary in 2005, having
welcomed emerging artists and world renowned artists over two decades,
including Celia Cruz, David Byrne, Curtis Mayfield, Ladysmith Black Mambazo,
George Clinton and the P-Funk All Stars, and Nobel Laureate and Pulitzer
winner Toni Morrison.

With the revival of the city and the Park in the new century, Central park has
given birth to arts groups dedicated to performing in the park, notably
Central Park Brass, which performs an annual concert series, and the New York
Classical Theatre, which produces an annual series of plays.

The numerous portrait artists who work in Central Park have been interviewed
1997

Central Park is also home to the famed New York City restaurant, Tavern on the
Green, which is located on the park's grounds at Central Park West and West
67th Street.

Central Park was home to the largest concert ever on record. Country Superstar
Garth Brooks performed a free concert in August 1997. About 1.7 million people
attended the event, according to the NYPD.

### [edit] Climbing

<IMG>

<IMG>

Boulderer climbing Rat Rock.

Central Park's glaciated rock outcroppings attract climbers, especially
boulderers; Manhattan's bedrock, a glaciated metamorphic schist, protrudes
from the ground frequently and quite considerably in some parts of Central
Park. The two most renowned spots for boulderers are Rat Rock and Cat Rock.
Some more of the very famous ones are Dog Rock, Duck Rock, Rock N' Roll Rock,
and Beaver Rock, near the south end of the park.[28]

### [edit] Children

In addition to its 37 unique playgrounds, Central Park offers dozens of
activities for children, including performances by master puppeteers at the
historic Swedish Cottage Marionette Theatre. There are other activities such
as children's yoga, modern art classes for infants, and wind chime making
classes. The famous Central Park Carousel has excited and thrilled children
since the original one was built in 1870.

## [edit] Central Park Reservoir

See: Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir

Panorama of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir at Central Park looking North

<IMG>

Panorama of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir at Central Park looking North

## [edit] Sculptures

Main article: List of sculptures in Central Park

<IMG>

<IMG>

Generations of children have rubbed Balto's nose to a shine.[citation needed]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bronze statue of Christopher Columbus at the base of the Mall, by Jeronimo
SuÃ±ol, 1894

<IMG>

<IMG>

Statue of SimÃ³n Bolivar at Central Park.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Untermeyer Fountain/Three Dancing Maidens by Walter Schott, second cast (first
cast 1903)

Though Olmsted disapproved of the clutter of sculptures in the park, a total
of twenty-nine sculptures have crept in over the years, most of which have
been donated by individuals or organizations (and not the city itself). Much
of the first statuary to appear in the park was of authors and poets,
clustered along a section of the Mall that became known as Literary Walk. The
better-known sculptors represented in Central Park include Augustus Saint-
Gaudens and John Quincy Adams Ward. The "Angel of the Waters" at Bethesda
Terrace by Emma Stebbins (1873), was the first large public sculpture
commission for an American woman. The 1925 statue of the sled dog Balto who
became famous during the 1925 serum run to Nome, Alaska is very popular among
tourists, reflected in its near polished appearance as the result of being
patted by countless visitors. The oldest sculpture is "Cleopatra's Needle,"
actually an Egyptian obelisk of Tutmose III much older than Cleopatra, which
was donated to New York by the Khedive of Egypt. The largest and most
impressive is equestrian King Jagiello bronze monument on the east end of
Turtle Pond. North of Conservatory Water, the sailboat pond, there is a
larger-than-life statue of Alice, sitting on a huge mushroom, playing with her
cat, while the Hatter and the March Hare look on. A large memorial to Duke
Ellington created by sculptor Robert Graham was dedicated in 1997 near Fifth
Avenue and 110th Street, in the Duke Ellington Circle.

For 16 days in 2005 (February 12â27), Central Park was the setting for
Christo and Jeanne-Claude's installation, The Gates. Though the project was
the subject of very mixed reactions (and it took many years for Christo and
Jeanne-Claude to get the necessary approvals), it was nevertheless a major, if
temporary, draw for the park.[29]

## [edit] Crime

Although often regarded as a kind of oasis of tranquility inside a "city that
never sleeps," Central Park was once a very dangerous place â especially
after dark â as measured by crime statistics. The park, like most of New
York City, is considerably safer today, though during prior periods it was the
site of numerous muggings and rapes. Well-publicized incidents of sexual and
confiscatory violence, such as the notorious 1989 "Central Park Jogger" case,
dissuaded many from visiting one of Manhattan's most scenic areas.

As crime has declined in the Park and in the rest of New York City, many
negative perceptions have waned, and the use of common sense is enough to
reasonably protect visitors from harm. The park has its own New York City
Police Department precinct (Central Park Precinct), which employs both regular
police and Auxiliary officers. In 2005, such safety measures held the number
of crimes in the park â which has more than 25 million visitors annually â
to fewer than one hundred per year (down from approximately 1,000 in the early
1980s).

## [edit] Other issues

<IMG>

<IMG>

An unobtrusively-sited bridge in Central Park, designed by Calvert Vaux,
separates pedestrians from the carriage drive. No two bridges in the Park are
identical.

Permission to hold issue-centered rallies in Central Park has been met with
increasingly stiff resistance from the city. In 2004, the organization United
for Peace and Justice wanted to hold a rally on the Great Lawn during the
Republican National Convention. The City denied UFPJ's application for a
permit, stating that such a mass gathering would be harmful to the grass, and
that such damage would make it harder to collect private donations to maintain
the Park. Courts upheld the refusal.

Since the 1960s, there has been a grassroots campaign to restore the park's
loop drives to their original car-free state. Over the years, the number of
car-free hours has increased, though a full closure is currently resisted by
the New York City Department of Transportation.

The Central Park Medical Unit is an all-volunteer ambulance service that
provides completely free emergency medical service to patrons of Central Park
and the surrounding streets. CPMU also operates a rapid-response bike patrol,
particularly during major events such as the New York City Marathon, the 1998
Goodwill Games, and concerts in the park.

Central Park has one of the largest remaining stands of American Elms in the
northeastern U.S., 1700 of them, protected by their isolation from Dutch Elm
Disease. Central Park was the site of the unfortunate unleashing of starlings
in North America (cf. Invasive species). Central Park is a popular birding
spot during spring and fall migration, when birds flying over Manhattan are
attracted to the prominent oasis. Over a quarter of all the bird species found
in the United States have been seen in Central Park. The Red-tailed hawk known
as Pale Male was the object of much attention by the media, the ornithologist-
author Marie Winn and other Central Park birdwatchers. There are 215 bird
species in New York City's Central Park.[30]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Statue of King Jagiello, from the Polish pavilion at the 1939 New York World's
Fair.

In 2002 a new genus and species of centipede was discovered in Central Park.
The centipede is about four-tenths of an inch (10 mm) long, making it one of
the smallest in the world. It is named Nannarrup hoffmani (after the man who
discovered it) and lives in the park's leaf litter, the crumbling organic
debris that accumulates under the trees.

Since the late 1990s, the Central Park Conservancy, the United States
Department of Agriculture, and several city and state agencies have been
fighting an infestation of the Asian long-horned beetle, which has been
reported in Brooklyn, Queens, and Manhattan, including some parts of Central
Park. The beetle, which likely was accidentally shipped from its native China
in an untreated shipping crate, has no natural predators in the United States
and the fight to contain its infestation has been very expensive. The beetle
infests trees by boring a hole in them to deposit its eggs, at which point the
only way to end the infestation is to destroy the tree.

On June 11, 2000, following the Puerto Rican Day Parade, gangs of drunken men
groped and sexually assaulted women in the park. Several arrests were made
shortly after the attacks, but it was not until 2006 that a civil suit against
the city for failing to provide police protection was finally settled. [3],
[4]

Central Park constitutes its own United States census tract, number 143.
According to Census 2000, the park's population is eighteen persons, twelve
male and six female, with a median age of 38.5 years, and a household size of
2.33, over 3 households.[31]

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. 2007-01-23. http://www.nr.nps.gov/.
  2. ^ "America's Most Visited City Parks" (PDF). The Trust for Public Land. June 2006. http://www.tpl.org/content_documents/ccpe_MostVisitedParks.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-07-11.
  3. ^ a b About the Central Park Conservancy, Central Park Conservancy. Accessed October 8, 2007.
  4. ^ "Central Park". National Historic Landmark summary listing. National Park Service. 2007-09-10. http://tps.cr.nps.gov/nhl/detail.cfm?ResourceId=388&ResourceType=District.
  5. ^ "National Register of Historic Places Inventory". National Park Service. 1975-08-14. http://pdfhost.focus.nps.gov/docs/NHLS/Text/66000538.pdf.
  6. ^ "National Register of Historic Places Inventory". National Park Service. 1975-08-14. http://pdfhost.focus.nps.gov/docs/NHLS/Photos/66000538.pdf.
  7. ^ all the present bodies of water in the park have been created by damming natural seeps and flows.
  8. ^ Rebekah Kreshkoff and Marie Winn, The Birds of Central Park: An Annotated Checklist (on-line text).,
  9. ^ Central Park: Because We Wouldn't Trade a Patch of Grass for $528,783,552,000
  10. ^ John Emerson Todd, Frederick Law Olmsted (Boston: Twayne Publishers: Twayneâs World Leader Series) 1982:73; see the history of Green-Wood Cemetery.
  11. ^ Central Park's history 1800-1858 [1]
  12. ^ Henry Hope Reed, Robert M. McGee and Esther Mipaas. The Bridges of Central Park. (Greensward Foundation) 1990.
  13. ^ pbs.org â New York: A Documentary Film
  14. ^ See Strawberry Fields official site
  15. ^ Blonsky, Douglas. "Saving the Park: a key to NYC's revival". The New York Post, 3 November 2007 Op-Ed page.
  16. ^ Blonsky 2007 op. cit.
  17. ^ In 2007 3000 volunteers outnumbered under 250 workers over 12-to-1 (Blonsky 2007, op.cit.).
  18. ^ Blonsky 2007, op.cit..
  19. ^ a b Tradition or Cruelty?, Jessica Bennett, Newsweek, September 25, 2007; accessed August 23, 2008
  20. ^ Bill Could Halt New York Carriage Horses, Keith B. Richburg, The Washington Post, December 17, 2007; accessed August 23, 2008
  21. ^ Another Horse Down in Central Park, Blog of the Association of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, September 17, 2007; accessed August 23, 2008.
  22. ^ PETA Fact Sheet on Horse Carriage; accessed August 23, 2008
  23. ^ Home on the Asphalt, Lloyd Grove, New York Magazine, March 16, 2008; accessed August 23, 2008
  24. ^ a b Carriage Horse Industry At A Crossroads, Kristin Cole, CBS News, November 5, 2007; Accessed August 23, 2008.
  25. ^ Horse Pucky, Editorial of The New York Sun, November 30, 2007; accessed August 23, 2008
  26. ^ Film Highlights Suffering of NYC Carriage Horses, Humane Society of the United States, April 24, 2008
  27. ^ For the Bon Jovi concert, 12 July 2008, 60,000 free tickets were distributed by the city; a large section of Central Park was closed to the nin-ticketed public.
  28. ^ Christopher S. Wren, "A Summit in Central Park; Boulder Gives Climbers a Taste of the Mountain", The New York Times, July 21, 1999. Accessed October 8, 2007.
  29. ^ February 25, 2005 CNN story about Christo and Jeanne-Claude's The Gates Central Park's 'Gates' to close
  30. ^ New York City Economic Development Corporation. [2]
  31. ^ "Profile of General Demographic Characteristics: 2000". U.S. Census Bureau. http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/QTTable?_bm=y&-geo_id=14000US36061014300&-qr_name=DEC_2000_SF1_U_DP1&-ds_name=D&-_lang=en&-redoLog=false. Retrieved on 2006-07-11.

## [edit] References

  * Kelly, Bruce, Gail T. Guillet, and Mary Ellen W. Hern. Art of the Olmsted Landscape. New York: City Landmarks Preservation Commission: Arts Publisher, 1981. ISBN 0-941302-00-8.
  * Kinkead, Eugene. Central Park, 1857-1995: The Birth, Decline, and Renewal of a National Treasure. New York: Norton, 1990. ISBN 0-393-02531-4.
  * Miller, Sara Cedar. Central Park, An American Masterpiece: A Comprehensive History of the Nation's First Urban Park. New York: Abrams, 2003. ISBN 0-8109-3946-0.
  * Rosenzweig, Roy, and Elizabeth Blackmar. The Park and the People: A History of Central Park. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992. ISBN 0-8014-9751-5.
  * Swerdlow, Joel L. Central Park - Oasis in the city. National Geographic Magazine May 1993

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Central Park  
### [edit] Official websites

  * NYC Department of Parks & Recreation
  * Central Park Conservancy
  * Central Park Police Precinct

### [edit] Additional information

  * CentralPark.com: The complete guide to Central Park
  * CentralParkHistory.com: The complete history of Central Park
  * Forgotten-NY: Secrets of Central Park
  * Forgotten-NY: The bridges of Central Park
  * Experience the Heart of Central Park
  * Car-Free Central Park Campaign
  * National Historic Landmarks Program: Central Park
  * NYCtrl.com: Central Park Reservoir Project
  * Elisabeth Barlow Rogers: The Central Park Story. Management and Restoration for a New Era of Public Use
  * Nike Central Park Track Club
  * Central Park
  * Greensward Foundation On-line text of Bridges of Central Park 1990), The Men Who Made Central Park (1982), Rock Trails in Central Park (1976), Tree Trails in Central Park (1970),

v â¢ d â¢ e

Features of Central Park  
Features

Belvedere Castle â¢ Bethesda Terrace â¢ Blockhouse â¢ Central Park Mall â¢
Cleopatra's Needle â¢ Conservatory Garden â¢ Conservatory Water â¢
Delacorte Theater â¢ Diana Ross Playground â¢ Great Lawn â¢ Harlem Meer â¢
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir â¢ King Jagiello Monument â¢ The Lake
â¢ Lasker Rink â¢ Marionette Theatre â¢ Medical Unit â¢ Metropolitan
Museum of Art â¢ The Ramble â¢ Sculptures â¢ Seneca Village â¢ Strawberry
Fields â¢ SummerStage â¢ Tavern on the Green â¢ Wollman Rink â¢ Zoo â¢
Zoo York Wall

<IMG>  
Events

Be-In â¢ The Concert â¢ The Gates â¢ New York Shakespeare Festival  
Streets

Borders: Fifth Avenue â¢ Central Park North â¢ Central Park South â¢
Central Park West  
Transverses: 79th Street â¢ 85th Street/86th Street â¢ 96th Street  
People

Balto â¢ Central Park Jogger â¢ Hal the Coyote â¢ Frederick Law Olmsted â¢
Pale Male â¢ Regina Peruggi â¢ Elizabeth Barlow Rogers â¢ Arthur Ross â¢
Calvert Vaux â¢  
v â¢ d â¢ e

New York City Historic Sites  
NRHP: Manhattan â Brooklyn â Queens â Staten Island â Bronx â¢ NHL:
New York State  
NYC: Manhattan â Brooklyn â Queens â Staten Island â Bronx  
v â¢ d â¢ e

U.S. National Register of Historic Places  
Keeper of the Register Â· History of the National Register of Historic Places
Â· Property types Â· Historic district Â· Contributing property

National Park Service logo  
List of entries  
National Park Service Â· National Historic Landmarks Â· National Battlefields
Â· National Historic Sites Â· National Historical Parks Â· National Memorials
Â· National Monuments  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Popular visitor attractions in New York City  
Times Square (35M) â¢ Central Park (20M) â¢ Metropolitan Museum of Art
(4.5M) â¢ Statue of Liberty (4.24M) â¢ American Museum of Natural History
(4M) â¢ Empire State Building (4M) â¢ Museum of Modern Art (2.67M)  
  

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_Park"

Categories: 1873 architecture | American architecture | Urban public parks |
Central Park | National Historic Landmarks in New York City | National
Register of Historic Places in Manhattan | Parks in Manhattan | Urban forests
in the United States

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 02:43.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



