
# Military science

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG> War portal  
<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2008)  
Military science is the process of translating national defence policy to
produce military capability by employing military scientists, including:
theorists, researchers, experimental scientists, applied scientists,
designers, engineers, test technicians, and military personnel responsible for
prototyping. In so doing, military science seeks to interpret policy into what
military skills are required, which, by employing military concepts and
military methods, can use military technologies, military weapon systems and
other military equipment to produce required military capability.

Military science involves creation of theories, concepts, methods and systems
applicable to the functions and activities of the armed forces, usually
undertaken to increase overall military capability by increasing efficiency,
effectiveness and simplicity of complex concepts, methods and systems used in
military operations in peace during a war. Military science is the means by
which military personnel obtain military technology, weapons, equipment and
training to satisfactorily provide military capability as required by the
national defence policy to achieve specific strategic goals. Military science
is also used to establish enemy capability as part of technical intelligence.

In military history, Military Science had been used during the period of
Industrial Revolution as a general term to refer to all matters of military
theory and technology application as a single academic discipline, including
that of the deployment and employment of troops in peacetime or in battle.

In military education, Military Science is often the name of the department in
the education institution that administers officer candidate education.
However, this education usually focuses on the officer leadership training and
basic information about employment of military theories, concepts, methods and
systems, and graduates are not military scientists on completion of studies,
but rather junior military officers.

## Contents

  * 1 History of military science
  * 2 Employment of military skills
    * 2.1 Military organization
    * 2.2 Force structuring
    * 2.3 Military education and training
  * 3 Military concepts and methods
    * 3.1 Military history
    * 3.2 Military strategy and doctrines
    * 3.3 Military geography
  * 4 Military systems
    * 4.1 Military intelligence
    * 4.2 Military logistics
    * 4.3 Military technology and equipment
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Citations and notes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] History of military science

Even until the Second World War, Military Science was written in English
starting with capital letters, and was thought of as an academic discipline
alongside Physics, Philosophy and the Medical Science. In part this was due to
the general mystique that accompanied education in a World where as late as
1880s 75% of the European population was illiterate. The ability by the
officers to make complex calculations required for the equally complex
"evolutions" of the troop movements in linear warfare that increasingly
dominated the Renaissance and later history, and the introduction of the
gunpowder weapons into the equation of warfare only added to the veritable
arcana of building fortifications as it seemed to the average individual.
Until the early 19th century, one observer, a British veteran of the
Napoleonic Wars, Major John Mitchell thought that it seemed nothing much had
changed from the application of force on a battlefield since the days of the
Greeks.[1] He suggested that this was primarily so because as Clausewitz
suggested, "unlike in any other science or art, in war the object reacts".[2]

Until this time, and even after the Franco-Prussian War, Military Science
continued to be divided between the formal thinking of officers brought up in
the "shadow" of Napoleonic Wars

> Military implements, the supply of an army, its organization, tactics, and
discipline, have constituted the elements of military science in all ages; but
improvement in weapons and accoutrements appears to lead and control all the
rest.[3]

and younger officers like Ardant du Picq who tended to view fighting
performance as rooted in the individual's and group psychology[4] and
suggested detailed analysis of this. This set in motion the eventual
fascination of the military organisations with application of quantitative and
qualitative research to their theories of combat; the attempt to translate
military thinking as philosophic concepts into concrete methods of combat. The
breakthrough of sorts made by Clausewitz in suggesting eight principles on
which such methods can be based, in Europe, for the first time presented an
opportunity to largely remove the element of chance and error from command
decision making process.[5] At this time emphasis was made on the Topography
(including Trigonometry), Military art (Military science)[6], Military
history, Organisation of the Army in the field, Artillery and Science of
Projectiles, Field fortifications and Permanent fortifications, Military
legislation, Military administration and Manoeuvres.[7]

The Military Science on which the model of German combat operations was built
for the First World War remained largely unaltered from the Napoleonic model,
but took into the consideration the vast improvements in the fire power and
the ability to conduct "great battles of annihilation" through rapid
concentration of force, strategic mobility, and the maintenance of the
strategic offensive[8] better known as the Cult of the offensive. The key to
this, and other modes of thinking about war remained analysis of military
history and attempts to derive tangible lessons that could be replicated again
with equal success on another battlefield as a sort of bloody laboratory of
Military Science. Few were bloodier than the fields of the Western Front
between 1914 and 1918. Fascinatingly the man who probably understood
Clausewitz better than most, Marshal Foch would initially participate in
events that nearly destroyed the French Army.[9]

It is not however true to say that military theorists and commanders were
suffering from some collective case of stupidity; quite the obvious is true.
Their analysis of military history convinced them that decisive and aggressive
strategic offensive was the only doctrine of victory, and feared that
overemphasis of fire power, and the resultant dependence on entrenchment would
make this all but impossible, and leading to the battlefield stagnant in
advantages of the defensive position, destroying troop morale and willingness
to fight.[10] Because only the offensive could bring victory, lack of it, and
not the fire power, was blamed for the defeat of the Imperial Russian Army in
the Russo-Japanese War. Foch thought that "In strategy as well as in tactics
one attacks".[11]

In many ways military science was born as a result of the experiences of the
Great War. "Military implements" had changed armies beyond recognition with
cavalry to virtually disappear in the next 20 years. The "supply of an army"
would become a science of logistic support in the wake of massive armies,
operations and troops that could fire ammunition faster than it could be
produced, for the first time using vehicles that used the combustion engine, a
watershed of change.[12] Military "organisation" would no longer be that of
the linear warfare, but assault teams, and battalions that were becoming
multi-skilled with introduction of machine gun and mortar, and for the first
time forcing military commanders to think not only in terms of rank and file,
but force structure. Tactics changed too, with infantry for the first time
segregated from the horse-mounted troops, and required to cooperate with
tanks, aircraft and new artillery tactics. Perception of military discipline
too had changed. Morale, despite strict disciplinarian attitudes, had cracked
in all armies during the war, but best performing troops were found to be
those where emphasis on discipline had been replaced with display of personal
initiative and group cohesiveness such as that found in the Australian Corps
during the Hundred Days Offensive. The Military Sciences' analysis of military
history that had failed European commanders was about to give way to a new
military science, less conspicuous in appearance, but more aligned to the
processes of science of testing and experimentation, the scientific method,
and forever "wed" to the idea of the superiority of technology on the
battlefield.

Currently military science still means many things to different organisations.
In the United Kingdom and much of the European Union the approach is to relate
it closely to the civilian application and understanding. The Defence
Scientific Advisory Council sees this in terms of the fields of science,
engineering, technology and analysis (SETA) that includes broad strategic
issues, priorities and policies related to developing military
capabilities.[13] In Europe, for example Belgium's Royal Military Academy,
Military Science remains an academic discipline, and is studied alongside
Social Sciences, including such subjects as Humanitarian law. The United
States Department of Defence defines military science in terms of specific
systems and operational requirements, and include among other areas civil
defence and force structure.

## [edit] Employment of military skills

In the first instance military science is concerned with who will participate
in military operations, and what sets of skills and knowledge they will
require to do so effecively.

### [edit] Military organization

Main article: Military organization

Develops optimal methods for the administration and organization of military
units, as well as the military as a whole. In addition, this area studies
other associated aspects as mobilization/demobilization, and military
government for areas recently conquered (or liberated) from enemy control.

### [edit] Force structuring

Force structuring is the method by which personnel and the weapons and
equipment they use are organised and trained for military operations,
including combat. Development of force structure in any country is based on
strategic, operational and tactical needs of the national defence policy, the
identified threats to the country, and the technological capabilities of the
threats and the armed forces. Force structure development is guided by
doctrinal considerations of strategic, operational and tactical deployment and
employment of formations and units to territories, areas and zones where they
are expected to perform their missions and tasks. Force structuring applies to
all Armed Services, but not to their supporting organisations such as those
used for defence science research activities.

In the United States force structure is guided by the table of organization
and equipment (TOE or TO&E) is a document published by the U.S. Department of
Defense which prescribes the organization, manning, and equipage of units from
divisional size and down, but also including the headquarters of Corps and
Armies.

Force structuring also provides information on the mission and capabilities of
specific units, as well as the unit's current status in terms of posture and
readiness. A general TOE is applicable to a type of unit (for instance,
infantry) rather than a specific unit (the 3rd Infantry Division). In this
way, all units of the same branch (such as Infantry) follow the same
structural guidelines which allows for a more efficient financing, training
and employment of like units operationally.

### [edit] Military education and training

Main article: Military education and training

Studies the methodology and practices involved in training soldiers, NCOs
(non-commissioned officers, i.e. sergeants), and officers. It also extends
this to training small and large units, both individually and in concert with
one another for both the regular and reserve organizations. Military training,
especially for officers, also concerns itself with general education and
political indoctrination of the armed forces.

## [edit] Military concepts and methods

Much of capability development depends on the concepts which guide use of the
armed forces and their weapons and equipment, and the methods employed in any
given theatre of war or combat environment.

### [edit] Military history

Main article: Military history

Military activity has been a constant process over thousands of years, and the
essential tactics, strategy, and goals of military operations have been
unchanging throughout history. As an example, one notable maneuver is the
double envelopment, considered to be the consummate military maneuver, first
executed by Hannibal at the Battle of Cannae in 216 BC, and later by Khalid
ibn al-Walid at the Battle of Walaja in 633 AD. By the study of history, the
military seeks to not repeat past mistakes, and improve upon its current
performance by instilling an ability in commanders to perceive historical
parallels during battle, so as to capitalize on the lessons learned. The main
areas military history includes are the history of wars, battles, and combats,
history of the military art, and history of each specific military service.

### [edit] Military strategy and doctrines

<IMG>

<IMG>

Current Major Military Alliances

    Main articles: Military strategy, Military doctrine
Military strategy is in many ways the centerpiece of military science. It
studies the specifics of planning for, and engaging in combat, and attempts to
reduce the many factors to a set of principles that govern all interactions of
the field of battle. In Europe these principles were first defined by
Clausewitz in his Principles of War. As such, it directs the planning and
execution of battles, operations, and wars as a whole. Two major systems
prevail on the planet today. Broadly speaking, these may be described as the
"Western" system, and the "Russian" system. Each system reflects and supports
strengths and weakness in the underlying society.

Modern Western military art is composed primarily of an amalgam of French,
German, British, and American systems. The Russian system borrows from these
systems as well, either through study, or personal observation in the form of
invasion (Napoleon's War of 1812, and The Great Patriotic War), and form a
unique product suited for the conditions practitioners of this system will
encounter. The system that is produced by the analysis provided by Military
Art is known as doctrine.

Western military doctrine relies heavily on technology, the use of a well-
trained and empowered NCO cadre, and superior information processing and
dissemination to provide a level of battlefield awareness that opponents
cannot match. Its advantages are extreme flexibility, extreme lethality, and a
focus on removing an opponent's C3I (command, communications, control, and
intelligence) to paralyze and incapacitate rather than destroying their combat
power directly (hopefully saving lives in the process). Its drawbacks are high
expense, a reliance on difficult to replace personnel, an enormous logistic
train, and a difficulty in operating without high technology assets if
depleted or destroyed.

Soviet military doctrine (and its descendants, in CIS countries) relies
heavily on masses of machinery and troops, a highly educated (albeit very
small) officer corps, and pre-planned missions. Its advantages are that it
does not require well educated troops, does not require a large logistic
train, is under tight central control, and does not rely on a sophisticated
C3I system after the initiation of a course of action. Its disadvantages are
inflexibility, a reliance on the shock effect of mass (with a resulting high
cost in lives and material), and overall inability to exploit unexpected
success or respond to unexpected loss.

Chinese military doctrine is currently in a state of flux as the People's
Liberation Army is evaluating military trends of relevance to China. Chinese
military doctrine is influenced by a number of sources including an indigenous
classical military tradition characterized by strategists such as Sun Tzu,
Western and Soviet influences, as well as indigenous modern strategists such
as Mao Zedong. One distinctive characteristic of Chinese military science is
that it places emphasis on the relationship between the military and society
as well as views military force as merely one part of an overarching grand
strategy.

Each system trains its officer corps in its philosophy regarding military art.
The differences in content and emphasis are illustrative. The United States
Army principles of war are defined in the U.S. Army Field Manual FM 100-5. The
Canadian Forces principles of war/military science are defined by the Royal
Military College of Canada or Canadian Forces College Web Site to focus on
principles of command, principles of war, operational art and campaign
planning, and scientific principles.

Russian Federation armed forces derive their principles of war predominantly
from those developed during the existence of the Soviet Union. These, although
based significantly on the Second World War experience in conventional war
fighting, have been substantially modified since the introduction of the
nuclear arms into strategic considerations. The Soviet war in Afghanistan and
the First and Second Chechen Wars further modified the principles that Soviet
theorists had divided into the operational art and tactics. The very
scientific approach to military science thinking in the Soviet union had been
perceived as overly rigid at the tactical level, and had affected the training
in the Russian Federation's much reduced forces to instil greater
professionalism and initiative in the forces.

The military principles of war of the People's Liberation Army were loosely
based on those of the Soviet Union until the 1980s when a significant shift
begun to be seen in a more regionally-aware, and geographically-specific
strategic, operational and tactical thinking in all services. The PLA is
currently influenced by three doctrinal schools which both conflict and
complement each other: the People's war, the Regional war, and the Revolution
in military affairs that led to substantial increase in the defence spending
and rate of technological modernisation of the forces.

The differences in the specifics of Military art notwithstanding, Military
science strives to provide an integrated picture of the chaos of battle, and
illuminate basic insights that apply to all combatants, not just those who
agree with your formulation of the principles.

### [edit] Military geography

Main article: Military geography

Military geography encompasses much more than simple protestations to take the
high ground. Military geography studies the obvious, the geography of theatres
of war, but also the additional characteristics of politics, economics, and
other natural features of locations of likely conflict (the political
"landscape", for example). As an example, the Soviet war in Afghanistan was
predicated on the ability of the Soviet Union to not only successfully invade
Afghanistan, but also to militarily and politically flank the Islamic Republic
of Iran simultaneously.

## [edit] Military systems

How effectively and efficiently militaries accomplish their operations,
missions and tasks is closely related not only to the methods they use, but
the equipment and weapons they use.

### [edit] Military intelligence

Military intelligence supports the combat commanders' decision making process
by providing intelligence analysis of available data from a wide range of
sources. To provide that informed analysis the commanders information
requirements are identified and input to a process of gathering, analysis,
protection, and dissemination of information about the operational
environment, hostile, friendly and neutral forces and the civilian population
in an area of combat operations, and broader area of interest. Intelligence
activities are conducted at all levels from tactical to strategic, in
peacetime, the period of transition to war, and during the war.

Most militaries maintain a military intelligence capability to provide
analytical and information collection personnel in both specialist units and
from other arms and services. Personnel selected for intelligence duties,
whether specialist intelligence officers and enlisted soldiers or non-
specialist assigned to intelligence may be selected for their analytical
abilities and intelligence before receiving formal training.

Military intelligence serves to identify the threat, and provide information
on understanding best methods and weapons to use in deterring or defeating it.

### [edit] Military logistics

Main article: Military logistics

The art and science of planning and carrying out the movement and maintenance
of military forces. In its most comprehensive sense, it is those aspects or
military operations that deal with the design, development, acquisition,
storage, distribution, maintenance, evacuation, and disposition of materiel;
the movement, evacuation, and hospitalization of personnel; the acquisition or
construction, maintenance, operation, and disposition of facilities; and the
acquisition or furnishing of services.

### [edit] Military technology and equipment

Main article: Military technology and equipment

Military technology is not just the study of various technologies and
applicable physical sciences used to increase military power. It may also
extend to the study of production methods of military equipment, and ways to
improve performance and reduce material and/or technological requirements for
its production. An example is the effort expended by Nazi Germany to produce
artificial rubbers and fuels to reduce or eliminate their dependence on
imported POL (petroleum, oil, and lubricants) and rubber supplies. Military
technology is unique only in its application, not in its use of basic
scientific and technological achievements. Because of the uniqueness of use,
military technological studies strive to incorporate evolutionary, as well as
the rare revolutionary technologies into their proper place of military
application.

## [edit] See also

  * List of basic military science and technology topics
  * War

## [edit] Citations and notes

  1. ^ p.12, Gat
  2. ^ cf p.12, Gat
  3. ^ p.194, Lodge
  4. ^ p.29, Gat
  5. ^ p.12, Dupuy
  6. ^ taught by a Professor of Military Art at the Staff School in France, p.248, Barnard
  7. ^ p.248, Barnard
  8. ^ p.113, Gat
  9. ^ p.15, Dupuy
  10. ^ p.138, Gat
  11. ^ p.138-139, Gat
  12. ^ p.50, Thompson
  13. ^ [1] Defence Scientific Advisory Council (DSAC)

## [edit] References

  * Gat, Azar, The Development of Military Thought: The Nineteenth Century, Oxford University Press, London, 1992
  * Lodge, Henry Cabot, (ed.), The North American Review, Making of America Project, University of Northern Iowa, 1878
  * Dupuy, T.N., Understanding War: History and Theory of Combat, Leo Cooper, London, 1992
  * Thompson, Julian, Lifeblood of war: Logistics in armed conflict, Brassey's classics, London, 1991
  * Barnard, Henry, Military Schools and Courses of Instruction in the Science and Art of War in France, Prussia, Austria, Russia, Sweden, Switzerland, Sardinia, England, and the United States, Part I - France and Prussia, J.B. Lippincott & Co., Philadelphia, 1862

## [edit] External links

  * Collection of military handbooks etc.
  * Military Technology
  * Military Equipment

US Military/Government Texts

  * The Logic of Warfighting Experiments by Kass (CCRP, 2006)
  * Complexity, Networking, and Effects Based Approaches to Operations by Smith (CCRP, 2006)
  * Understanding Command and Control by Alberts and Hayes (CCRP, 2006)
  * The Agile Organization by Atkinson and Moffat (CCRP, 2005)
  * Power to the Edge by Alberts and Hayes (CCRP, 2003)
  * Network Centric Warfare by Alberts et al. (CCRP, 1999)

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Military science  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military_science"

Categories: Military science

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from August 2008 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Furlan
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 12:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



