
# Armenia

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Armenia (disambiguation).

Semi-protected

Republic of Armenia

ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¡Õ½Õ¿Õ¡Õ¶Õ« ÕÕ¡Õ¶ÖÕ¡ÕºÕ¥Õ¿Õ¸ÖÕ©ÕµÕ¸ÖÕ¶  
Hayastani Hanrapetutá¿¾yun  
Flag of Armenia Coat of arms of Armenia  
Flag Coat of arms  
Anthem: ÕÕ¥Ö ÕÕ¡ÕµÖÕ¥Õ¶Õ«Ö (Armenian)  
Mer Hayrenik (transcription)  
"Our Fatherland"  
  
Location of Armenia  
Capital  
(and largest city) Yerevan  
40Â°11â²N 44Â°31â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿40.183Â°N 44.517Â°Eï»¿ / 40.183; 44.517  
Official languages Armenian[1]  
Ethnic groups 97.9% Armenian, 1.3% Yazidi, 0.5% Russian, 0.3% Other  
Demonym Armenian  
Government Presidential republic[2]  
- President Serzh Sargsyan  
- Prime Minister Tigran Sargsyan  
- Speaker Hovik Abrahamyan  
Formation and independence  
- Urartu 840s BC  
- Orontid Dynasty 560 BC  
- Kingdom of Armenia  
formed  
190 BC  
- Democratic Republic of Armenia established   
May 28, 1918  
- Independence  
from the Soviet Union

Declared  
Recognised  
Finalised

  
  
August 23, 1990  
September 21, 1991  
December 25, 1991  
Area  
- Total 29,800 km2 (142nd)  
11,506 sq mi  
- Water (%) 4.71  
Population  
- July 2008 estimate 3,231,900[3] (133th)  
- 2001 census 3,002,594[4]  
- Density 101/km2 (103rd)  
262/sq mi  
GDP (PPP) 2008 estimate  
- Total $19.298 billion[5]  
- Per capita $5,437[5]  
GDP (nominal) 2008 estimate  
- Total $12.070 billion[5]  
- Per capita $3,400[5]  
Gini (2003) 33.8 (medium)  
HDI (2007) â¼ 0.775 (medium) (83rd)  
Currency Dram (`AMD`)  
Time zone UTC (UTC+4)  
- Summer (DST) DST (UTC+5)  
Drives on the right  
Internet TLD .am  
Calling code 374  
Patron saint St. Bartholomew the Apostle, St. Gregory the Illuminator, St.
Jude the Apostle, Virgin Mary  
Armenia en-us-Armenia.ogg /ÉrËmiËniÉ/ (helpÂ·info) (Armenian:
ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¡Õ½Õ¿Õ¡Õ¶, transliterated: Hayastan, Armenian pronunciation:
[hÉjÉsËtÉn]), officially the Republic of Armenia (ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¡Õ½Õ¿Õ¡Õ¶Õ«
ÕÕ¡Õ¶ÖÕ¡ÕºÕ¥Õ¿Õ¸ÖÕ©ÕµÕ¸ÖÕ¶, Hayastani Hanrapetutá¿¾yun, [hÉjÉsËtÉni
hÉnÉ¹ÉpÉtuËtÊ°jun]), is a landlocked mountainous country in South Caucasus
between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. Located at the juncture of Eastern
Europe and Western Asia, it borders Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north,
Azerbaijan to the east, and Iran and the Nakhchivan exclave of Azerbaijan to
the south.

A former republic of the Soviet Union, Armenia is a unitary, multiparty,
democratic nation-state with an ancient and historic cultural heritage. The
Kingdom of Armenia was the first state to adopt Christianity as its
religion[6] in the early years of the 4th century (the traditional date is
301).[7] The modern Republic of Armenia recognizes the exclusive historical
mission of the Armenian Apostolic Church as a national church, although the
modern Republic of Armenia has separation of church and state.[8]

Armenia is a member of more than 40 international organisations, including the
United Nations, the Council of Europe, the Asian Development Bank, the
Commonwealth of Independent States, the World Trade Organization, the
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation, and La Francophonie. It is
a member of the CSTO military alliance, and also participates in NATO's
Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme. In 2004 its forces joined KFOR, a NATO-
led international force in Kosovo. It is also an observer member of the
Eurasian Economic Community and the Non-Aligned Movement.

The country is an emerging democracy and, because of its strategic location,
lies among both the Russian and Western spheres of influence.

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology of name
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Antiquity
    * 2.2 Middle Ages
    * 2.3 Foreign rule
    * 2.4 World War I and the Armenian Genocide
    * 2.5 Democratic Republic of Armenia
    * 2.6 Soviet Armenia
    * 2.7 Restoration of independence
  * 3 Government and politics
    * 3.1 Foreign relations
  * 4 Military
  * 5 Administrative divisions
  * 6 Geography
    * 6.1 Topography
    * 6.2 Environment
    * 6.3 Climate
  * 7 Economy
  * 8 Demographics
    * 8.1 Diaspora
  * 9 Religion
  * 10 Culture
  * 11 Art
    * 11.1 Music and the arts
    * 11.2 Hospitality and wedding ceremonies
    * 11.3 Sport
  * 12 See also
  * 13 References
  * 14 External links

  
## Etymology of name

Main articles: Armenia (name) and Hayk

The native Armenian name for the country is Haykâ. The name in the Middle
Ages was extended to Hayastan, by addition of the Iranian suffix -stan (land).
The name has traditionally been derived from Hayk (ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¯), the legendary
patriarch of the Armenians and a great-great-grandson of Noah, who according
to Moses of Chorene defeated the Babylonian king Bel in 2492 BC, and
established his nation in the Ararat region.[9] The further origin of the name
is uncertain.

The exonym Armenia is first attested in the Old Persian Behistun inscription
(515 BC) as Armina. Greek á¼ÏÎ¼Î­Î½Î¹Î¿Î¹ "Armenians" is attested from about
the same time, perhaps the earliest reference being a fragment attributed to
Hecataeus of Miletus (476 BC).[10] Herodotus (440 BC) has á¼ÏÎ¼Î­Î½Î¹Î¿Î¹
Î´á½² ÎºÎ±ÏÎ¬ ÏÎµÏ Î¦ÏÏÎ³ÎµÏ á¼ÏÎµÏÎ¬ÏÎ±ÏÎ¿, á¼ÏÎ½ÏÎµÏ Î¦ÏÏ
Î³á¿¶Î½ á¼ÏÎ¿Î¹ÎºÎ¿Î¹. "the Armenians were equipped like Phrygians, being
Phrygian colonists" (7.73). Some decades later, Xenophon, a Greek general
waging war against the Persians, describes many aspects of Armenian village
life and hospitality. He relates that the people spoke a language that to his
ear sounded like the language of the Persians.[11] According to the histories
of both Moses of Chorene and Michael Chamich, Armenia derives from the name of
Aram, a lineal descendent of Hayk, son of Harma and father of Ara the
Beautiful, who ruled around 900 BC[when?] and became widely acclaimed by the
peoples of the region for his exploits.[12][13]

## History

Main article: History of Armenia

### Antiquity

Main article: Prehistoric Armenia

Armenia lies in the highlands surrounding the Biblical mountains of Ararat,
upon which, according to Judeo-Christian history, Noah's Ark came to rest
after the flood. (Gen. 8:4). In the Bronze Age, several states flourished in
the area of Greater Armenia, including the Hittite Empire (at the height of
its power), Mitanni (South-Western historical Armenia), and Hayasa-Azzi
(1500-1200 BC). Then, the Nairi people (twelfth to ninth centuries BC) and the
Kingdom of Urartu (1000-600 BC) successively established their sovereignty
over the Armenian Highland. Each of the aforementioned nations and tribes
participated in the ethnogenesis of the Armenian people.[14][15][16][17]
Yerevan, the modern capital of Armenia, was founded in 782 BC by the Urartian
king Argishti I.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Kingdom of Armenia at its greatest extent under Tigranes the Great, who
reigned between 95 - 66 BC

Around 600 BC, the Kingdom of Armenia was established under the Orontid
Dynasty. The kingdom reached its height between 95 - 66 BC under Tigranes the
Great, becoming one of the most powerful kingdoms of its time within the
region. Throughout its history, the kingdom of Armenia enjoyed periods of
independence intermitted with periods of autonomy subject to contemporary
empires. Armenia's strategic location between two continents has subjected it
to invasions by many peoples, including the Assyrians, Greeks, Romans,
Byzantines, Arabs, Mongols, Persians, Ottoman Turks and Russians.

In 301, Armenia became the first country in the world to adopt Christianity as
its official state religion,[18][19] while a number of Christian communities
have been established in Armenia since AD 40. There had been various pagan
communities before Christianity, but they were converted by an influx of
Christian missionaries. Tiridates III (AD 238-314) was the first ruler to
officially Christianise his people, his conversion occurring ten years before
the Roman Empire granted Christianity an official toleration under Galerius,
and 36 years before Constantine the Great was baptised.

After the fall of the Armenian kingdom in AD 428, most of Armenia was
incorporated as a marzpanate within the Sassanid Empire. Following an Armenian
rebellion in AD 451, Christian Armenians maintained their religious freedom,
while Armenia gained autonomy.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Kingdom of Cilician Armenia, 1199-1375

### Middle Ages

Main article: Medieval Armenia

After the Marzpanate period (428-636), Armenia emerged as the Emirate of
Armenia, an autonomous principality within the Arabic Empire, reuniting
Armenian lands previously taken by the Byzantine Empire as well. The
principality was ruled by the Prince of Armenia, recognised by the Caliph and
the Byzantine Emperor. It was part of the administrative division/emirate
Arminiyya created by the Arabs, which also included parts of Georgia and
Caucasian Albania, and had its center in the Armenian city Dvin. The
Principality of Armenia lasted until 884, when it regained its independence
from the weakened Arabic Empire.

The re-emergent Armenian kingdom was ruled by the Bagratuni dynasty, and
lasted until 1045. In time, several areas of the Bagratid Armenia separated as
independent kingdoms and principalities such as the Kingdom of Vaspurakan
ruled by the House of Artsruni, while still recognizing the supremacy of the
Bagratid kings.

In 1045, the Byzantine Empire conquered Bagratid Armenia. Soon, the other
Armenian states fell under Byzantine control as well. The Byzantine rule was
short lived, as in 1071 Seljuk Turks defeated the Byzantines and conquered
Armenia at the Battle of Manzikert, establishing the Seljuk Empire. To escape
death or servitude at the hands of those who had assassinated his relative,
Gagik II, King of Ani, an Armenian named Roupen went with some of his
countrymen into the gorges of the Taurus Mountains and then into Tarsus of
Cilicia. The Byzantine governor of the palace gave them shelter where the
Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia was eventually established.

The Seljuk Empire soon started to collapse. In the early 1100s, Armenian
princes of the Zakarid noble family established a semi-independent Armenian
principality in Northern and Eastern Armenia, known as Zakarid Armenia, lasted
under patronages of Seljuks, Georgian Kingdom, Atabegs of Azerbaijan and
Khwarezmid Empire. The noble family of Orbelians shared control with the
Zakarids in various parts of the country, especially in Syunik and Vayots
Dzor.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of Imperial Russia's Armenian Oblast

### Foreign rule

Further information: Ottoman Armenia, Russian Armenia, Persian Armenia

During the 1230s, the Mongol Empire conquered the Zakaryan Principality, as
well as the rest of Armenia. Armenian soldiers formed an important part of the
military of the Ilkhanate.[citation needed] The Mongolian invasions were soon
followed by those of other Central Asian tribes (Kara Koyunlu, Timurid and Ak
Koyunlu), which continued from the 1200s until the 1400s. After incessant
invasions, each bringing destruction to the country, Armenia in time became
weakened. During the 1500s, the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Persia divided
Armenia among themselves. The Russian Empire later incorporated Eastern
Armenia (consisting of the Erivan and Karabakh khanates within Persia) in 1813
and 1828.

Under Ottoman rule, the Armenians were granted considerable autonomy within
their own enclaves and lived in relative harmony with other groups in the
empire (including the ruling Turks). However, as Christians under a strict
Muslim social system, Armenians faced pervasive discrimination. When they
began pushing for more rights within the Ottoman Empire, Sultan
âAbduâl-Hamid II, in response, organised state-sponsored massacres against
the Armenians between 1894 and 1896, resulting in an estimated death toll of
80,000 to 300,000 people. The Hamidian massacres, as they came to be known,
gave Hamid international infamy as the "Red Sultan" or "Bloody Sultan".

As the Ottoman Empire began to collapse, the Young Turk Revolution (1908)
overthrew the government of Sultan Hamid. Armenians living in the empire hoped
that the Committee of Union and Progress would change their second-class
status. Armenian reform package (1914) was presented as a solution by
appointing an inspector general over Armenian issues.[20]

### World War I and the Armenian Genocide

Main article: Armenian Genocide

<IMG>

<IMG>

The United States contributed a significant amount of aid to the Armenians
during the Armenian Genocide. Shown here is a poster for the American
Committee for Relief in the Near East vowing that they (the Armenians among
others) "shall not perish."

When World War I broke out leading to confrontation of the Ottoman Empire and
the Russian Empire in the Caucasus and Persian Campaigns, the new government
in Constantinople began to look on the Armenians with distrust and suspicion.
This was due to the fact that the Russian army contained a contingent of
Armenian volunteers. On April 24, 1915, Armenian intellectuals were arrested
by Ottoman authorities and, with the Tehcir Law (29 May 1915), eventually a
large proportion of Armenians living in Anatolia perished in what has become
known as the Armenian Genocide. There was local Armenian resistance in the
region, developed against the activities of the Ottoman Empire. The events of
1915 to 1917 are regarded by Armenians and the vast majority of Western
historians to have been state-sponsored mass killings, or genocide. However as
Turkey is an ally of the West and holds a strategic position near to the
Middle East, both the United States and the United Kingdom governments
continue to maintain that there is a lack of unequivocal evidence to
categorise the events as genocide. Turkish authorities maintain that the
deaths were the result of a civil war coupled with disease and famine, with
casualties incurred by both sides. Most estimates for the number of Armenians
killed range from 650,000 to 1.5 million. Armenia and the Armenian diaspora
have been campaigning for official recognition of the events as genocide for
over 30 years. These events are traditionally commemorated yearly on April 24,
the Armenian Martyr Day, or the Day of the Armenian Genocide.

Although the Russian army succeeded in gaining most of Ottoman Armenia during
World War I, their gains were lost with the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. At
the time, Russian-controlled Eastern Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan
attempted to bond together in the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative
Republic. This federation, however, only lasted from February to May 1918,
when all three parties decided to dissolve it. As a result, Eastern Armenia
became independent as the Democratic Republic of Armenia (DRA) on May 28.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Political divisions of Europe in 1919 showing the independent Armenian
republic.

### Democratic Republic of Armenia

Main article: Democratic Republic of Armenia

Unfortunately, the DRA's short-lived independence was fraught with war,
territorial disputes, a mass influx of refugees from Ottoman Armenia,
spreading disease, and starvation. Still, the Entente Powers, appalled by the
actions of the Ottoman government, sought to help the newly-found Armenian
state through relief funds and other forms of support.

At the end of the war, the victorious Entente powers sought to divide up the
Ottoman Empire. Signed between the Allied and Associated Powers and Ottoman
Empire at SÃ¨vres on August 10, 1920, the Treaty of SÃ¨vres promised to
maintain the existence of the DRA and to attach the former territories of
Ottoman Armenia to it. Because the new borders of Armenia were to be drawn by
United States President Woodrow Wilson, Ottoman Armenia is also referred to as
"Wilsonian Armenia." There was even consideration of possibly making Armenia a
mandate under the protection of the United States. The treaty, however, was
rejected by the Turkish National Movement, and never came into effect. The
movement, under Mustafa Kemal AtatÃ¼rk, used the treaty as the occasion to
declare itself the rightful government of Turkey, replacing the monarchy based
in Istanbul with a republic based in Ankara.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Armenian civilians fleeing Kars after its capture by KazÄ±m Karabekir's forces

In 1920, Turkish nationalist forces invaded the fledgling Armenian republic
from the east and the Turkish-Armenian War began. Turkish forces under the
command of KazÄ±m Karabekir captured Armenian territories that Russia annexed
in the aftermath of the 1877-1878 Russo-Turkish War and occupied the old city
of Alexandropol (present-day Gyumri). The violent conflict finally concluded
with the Treaty of Alexandropol (December 2, 1920). The treaty forced Armenia
to disarm most of its military forces, cede more than 50% of its pre-war
territory, and to give up all the "Wilsonian Armenia" granted to it at the
SÃ¨vres treaty. Simultaneously, the Soviet Eleventh Army under the command of
Grigoriy Ordzhonikidze, invaded Armenia at Karavansarai (present-day Ijevan)
on November 29. By December 4, Ordzhonikidze's forces entered Yerevan and the
short-lived Armenian republic collapsed.

### Soviet Armenia

Main article: Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic

<IMG>

<IMG>

The coat of arms of Soviet Armenia depicting Mount Ararat in the center.

Armenia was annexed by Bolshevist Russia and along with Georgia and
Azerbaijan, it was incorporated into the Soviet Union as part of the
Transcaucasian SFSR on March 4, 1922. With this annexation, the Treaty of
Alexandropol was superseded by the Turkish-Soviet Treaty of Kars. In the
agreement, Turkey allowed the Soviet Union to assume control over Adjara with
the port city of Batumi in return for sovereignty over the cities of Kars,
Ardahan, and IÄdÄ±r, all of which were part of Russian Armenia.

The TSFR existed from 1922 to 1936, when it was divided up into three separate
entities (Armenian SSR, Azerbaijan SSR, and Georgian SSR). Armenians enjoyed a
period of relative stability under Soviet rule. They received medicine, food,
and other provisions from Moscow, and communist rule proved to be a soothing
balm in contrast to the turbulent final years of the Ottoman Empire. The
situation was difficult for the church, which struggled under Soviet rule.
After the death of Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin took the reins of power and
began an era of renewed fear and terror for Armenians. As with various other
ethnic minorities who lived in the Soviet Union during Stalin's Great Purge,
tens of thousands of Armenians were either executed or deported.

Fears decreased when Stalin died in 1953 and Nikita Khruschev emerged as the
Soviet Union's new leader. Soon, life in Soviet Armenia began to see rapid
improvement. The church which suffered greatly under Stalin was revived when
Catholicos Vazgen I assumed the duties of his office in 1955. In 1967, a
memorial to the victims of the Armenian Genocide was built at the
Tsitsernakaberd hill above the Hrazdan gorge in Yerevan. This occurred after
mass demonstrations took place on the tragic event's fiftieth anniversary in
1965.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Armenian students gather at Theater Square in central Yerevan to protest
Soviet policies and rule in 1988

During the Gorbachev era of the 1980s with the reforms of Glasnost and
Perestroika, Armenians began to demand better environmental care for their
country, opposing the pollution that Soviet-built factories brought. Tensions
also developed between Soviet Azerbaijan and its autonomous district of
Nagorno-Karabakh, a majority-Armenian region separated by Stalin from Armenia
in 1923. The Armenians of Karabakh demanded unification with Soviet Armenia.
Peaceful protests in Yerevan supporting the Karabakh Armenians were met with
anti-Armenian pogroms in the Azerbaijani city of Sumgait. Compounding
Armenia's problems was a devastating earthquake in 1988 with a moment
magnitude of 7.2.[21]

Gorbachev's inability to solve Armenia's problems (especially Karabakh)
created disillusionment among the Armenians and only fed a growing hunger for
independence. In May 1990, the New Armenian Army (NAA) was established,
serving as a defence force separate from the Soviet Red Army. Clashes soon
broke out between the NAA and Soviet Internal Security Forces (MVD) troops
based in Yerevan when Armenians decided to commemorate the establishment of
the 1918 Democratic Republic of Armenia. The violence resulted in the deaths
of five Armenians killed in a shootout with the MVD at the railway station.
Witnesses there claimed that the MVD used excessive force and that they had
instigated the fighting. Further firefights between Armenian militiamen and
Soviet troops occurred in Sovetashen, near the capital and resulted in the
deaths of over 26 people, mostly Armenians. On March 17, 1991, Armenia, along
with the Baltic states, Georgia and Moldova, boycotted a union-wide referendum
in which 78% of all voters voted for the retention of the Soviet Union in a
reformed form.[22]

### Restoration of independence

In 1991, the Soviet Union broke apart and Armenia re-established its
independence. Declaring independence on August 23, it was the first non-Baltic
republic to secede. However, the initial post-Soviet years were marred by
economic difficulties as well as the break-out of a full-scale armed
confrontation between the Karabakh Armenians and Azerbaijan. The economic
problems had their roots early in the Karabakh conflict when the Azerbaijani
Popular Front managed to pressure the Azerbaijan SSR to instigate a railway
and air blockade against Armenia. This move effectively crippled Armenia's
economy as 85% of its cargo and goods arrived through rail traffic.[23] In
1993, Turkey joined the blockade against Armenia in support of Azerbaijan.[24]

The Karabakh war ended after a Russian-brokered cease-fire was put in place in
1994. The war was a success for the Karabakh Armenian forces who managed to
secure 14% of Azerbaijan's internationally recognised territory including
Nagorno-Karabakh itself.[25] Since then, Armenia and Azerbaijan have held
peace talks, mediated by the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE). The status over Karabakh has yet to be determined. The
economies of both countries have been hurt in the absence of a complete
resolution and Armenia's borders with Turkey and Azerbaijan remain closed.

As it enters the twenty-first century, Armenia faces many hardships. Still, it
has managed to make some improvements. It has made a full switch to a market
economy and as of 2008, is the 28th most economically free nation in the
world.[26] Its relations with Europe, the Middle East, and the Commonwealth of
Independent States have allowed Armenia to increase trade. Gas, oil, and other
supplies come through two vital routes: Iran and Georgia. Armenia maintains
cordial relations with both countries.

## Government and politics

Main article: Politics of Armenia

<IMG>

<IMG>

The National Assembly of Armenia

Politics of Armenia takes place in a framework of a presidential
representative democratic republic. According to the Constitution of Armenia,
the President is the head of government and of a multi-party system. Executive
power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the
government and parliament. The unicameral parliament (also called the Azgayin
Zhoghov or National Assembly) is controlled by a coalition of four political
parties: the conservative Republican party, the Prosperous Armenia party, the
Rule of Law party and the Armenian Revolutionary Federation. The main
opposition party is Raffi Hovannisian's Heritage party, which favors eventual
Armenian membership in the European Union and NATO.

The Armenian government's stated aim is to build a Western-style parliamentary
democracy as the basis of its form of government. It has universal suffrage
above the age of eighteen.

International observers of Council of Europe and U.S. Department of State have
questioned the fairness of Armenia's parliamentary and presidential elections
and constitutional referendum since 1995, citing polling deficiencies, lack of
cooperation by the Electoral Commission, and poor maintenance of electoral
lists and polling places. Freedom House categorized Armenia in its 2008 report
as a "Semi-consolidated Authoritarian Regime" (along with Moldova, Kosovo,
Kyrgyzstan, and Russia) and ranked Armenia 20th among 29 nations in
transition, with a Democracy Score of 5.21 out of 7 (7 represents the lowest
democratic progress).[27] Since 1999, Freedom House's Democracy Score for
Armenia has been steadily on the decline (from 4.79 to 5.21).[28] Furthermore,
Freedom House ranked Armenia as "partly free" in its 2007 report, though it
did not categorise Armenia as an "electoral democracy", indicating an absence
of relatively free and competitive elections.[29] However, significant
progress seems to have been made and the 2008 Armenian presidential election
was hailed as largely democratic by OSCE and Western monitors.[30]

### Foreign relations

Main articles: Foreign relations of Armenia and Armenia and the European Union

<IMG>

<IMG>

Embassy of Armenia in Washington, D.C.

Armenia presently maintains good relations with almost every country in the
world, with two major exceptions being its immediate neighbours, Turkey and
Azerbaijan. Tensions were running high between Armenians and Azerbaijanis
during the final years of the Soviet Union. The Nagorno-Karabakh War dominated
the region's politics throughout the 1990s.[31] The border between the two
rival countries remains closed up to this day, and a permanent solution for
the conflict has not been reached despite the mediation provided by
organisations such as the OSCE.

Turkey also has a long history of poor relations with Armenia over its refusal
to acknowledge the Armenian Genocide of 1915. The Karabakh conflict became an
excuse for Turkey to close its land border with Armenia in 1993. It has not
lifted its blockade despite pressure from the powerful Turkish business lobby
interested in Armenian markets.[31] Since 2001, however, the Armenian airline
company Armavia regularly flies between the Zvartnots International Airport of
Yerevan and AtatÃ¼rk International Airport of Istanbul.

Due to its position between two unfriendly neighbours, Armenia has close
security ties with Russia. At the request of the Armenian government, Russia
maintains a military base in the northwestern Armenian city of Gyumri[32] as a
deterrent against Turkey.[citation needed] Despite this, Armenia has also been
looking toward Euro-Atlantic structures in recent years. It maintains good
relations with the United States especially through its Armenian diaspora.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, there are 427,822 Armenians living in the
country.[33]

Armenia is also a member of the Council of Europe, maintaining friendly
relations with the European Union, especially with its member states such as
France and Greece. A 2005 survey reported that 64% of Armenia's population
would be in favor of joining the EU.[34] Several Armenian officials have also
expressed the desire for their country to eventually become an EU member
state,[35] some predicting that it will make an official bid for membership in
a few years.

Eduard Nalbandyan currently serves as the Armenian Minister of Foreign
Affairs.[36]

## Military

Main article: Armed Forces of Armenia

<IMG>

<IMG>

Russian Air Force MiG 29s flying over Armenia.

The Armenian Army, Air Force, Air Defence, and Border Guard comprise the four
branches of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia. The Armenian military
was formed after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and with the
establishment of the Ministry of Defence in 1992. The Commander-in-Chief of
the military is the President of Armenia, Serzh Sargsyan. The Ministry of
Defence is in charge of political leadership, currently headed by Colonel-
General Mikael Harutyunyan, while military command remains in the hands of the
General Staff, headed by the Chief of Staff, who is currently Lieutenant-
General Seyran Ohanian.

Active forces now number about 60,000 soldiers, with an additional reserve of
32,000, and a "reserve of the reserve" of 350,000 troops. Armenian border
guards are in charge of patrolling the country's borders with Georgia and
Azerbaijan, while Russian troops continue to monitor its borders with Iran and
Turkey. In the case of an attack, Armenia is able to mobilise every able-
bodied man between the age of 15 and 59, with military preparedness.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Armenian Army BTR-80s.

The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which establishes
comprehensive limits on key categories of military equipment, was ratified by
the Armenian parliament in July 1992. In March 1993, Armenia signed the
multilateral Chemical Weapons Convention, which calls for the eventual
elimination of chemical weapons. Armenia acceded to the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as a non-nuclear weapons state in July 1993.
Armenia is member of Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) along with
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. It
participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace (PiP) program and is in a NATO
organisation called Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC). Armenia has
engaged in a peacekeeping mission in Kosovo as part of non-NATO KFOR troops
under Greek command.[37] Armenia also had 46 members of its military
peacekeeping forces as a part of the Coalition Forces in Iraq War until
October 2008.[38]

## Administrative divisions

Main article: Administrative divisions of Armenia

<IMG>

Shirak

Lori

Tavush

Aragatsotn

Armavir

Yerevan

Ararat

Kotayk

Gegharkunik

Vayots  
Dzor

Syunik

Armenia is divided into ten provinces (marzer, singular marz), with the city
(kaghak) of Yerevan (ÔµÖÖÕ¡Õ¶) having special administrative status as the
country's capital. The chief executive in each of then ten provinces is the
marzpet (marz governor), appointed by the government of Armenia. In Yerevan,
the chief executive is the mayor, appointed by the president.

Within each province are communities (hamaynkner, singular hamaynk). Each
community is self-governing and consists of one or more settlements
(bnakavayrer, singular bnakavayr). Settlements are classified as either towns
(kaghakner, singular kaghak) or villages (gyugher, singular gyugh). As of
2007, Armenia includes 915 communities, of which 49 are considered urban and
866 are considered rural. The capital, Yerevan, also has the status of a
community.[39] Additionally, Yerevan is divided into twelve semi-autonomous
districts.

Province Capital Area Population  
Aragatsotn (Ô±ÖÕ¡Õ£Õ¡Õ®Õ¸Õ¿Õ¶) Ashtarak (Ô±Õ·Õ¿Õ¡ÖÕ¡Õ¯) 2,753 kmÂ² 126,278  
Ararat (Ô±ÖÕ¡ÖÕ¡Õ¿) Artashat (Ô±ÖÕ¿Õ¡Õ·Õ¡Õ¿) 2,096 kmÂ² 252,665  
Armavir (Ô±ÖÕ´Õ¡Õ¾Õ«Ö) Armavir (Ô±ÖÕ´Õ¡Õ¾Õ«Ö) 1,242 kmÂ² 255,861  
Gegharkunik (Ô³Õ¥Õ²Õ¡ÖÖÕ¸ÖÕ¶Õ«Ö) Gavar (Ô³Õ¡Õ¾Õ¡Õ¼) 5,348 kmÂ² 215,371  
Kotayk (Ô¿Õ¸Õ¿Õ¡ÕµÖ) Hrazdan (ÕÖÕ¡Õ¦Õ¤Õ¡Õ¶) 2,089 kmÂ² 241,337  
Lori (Ô¼Õ¸Õ¼Õ«) Vanadzor (ÕÕ¡Õ¶Õ¡Õ±Õ¸Ö) 3,789 kmÂ² 253,351  
Shirak (ÕÕ«ÖÕ¡Õ¯) Gyumri (Ô³ÕµÕ¸ÖÕ´ÖÕ«) 2,681 kmÂ² 257,242  
Syunik (ÕÕµÕ¸ÖÕ¶Õ«Ö) Kapan (Ô¿Õ¡ÕºÕ¡Õ¶) 4,506 kmÂ² 134,061  
Tavush (ÕÕ¡Õ¾Õ¸ÖÕ·) Ijevan (Ô»Õ»ÖÕ¡Õ¶) 2,704 kmÂ² 121,963  
Vayots Dzor (ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¸Ö ÕÕ¸Ö) Yeghegnadzor (ÔµÕ²Õ¥Õ£Õ¶Õ¡Õ±Õ¸Ö) 2,308 kmÂ²
53,230  
Yerevan (ÔµÖÖÕ¡Õ¶) â 227 kmÂ² 1,091,235  
See also: List of municipalities in Armenia

## Geography

Main article: Geography of Armenia

Armenia is landlocked in the southern Caucasus. Located between the Black and
Caspian Seas, the country is bordered on the north and east by Georgia and
Azerbaijan, and on the south and west by Iran and Turkey.

### Topography

<IMG>

<IMG>

Armenia's topography is mountainous and volcanic

The Republic of Armenia, covering an area of 30 000 square kilometres (11,600
sq. mi), is located in the north-east of the Armenian Highland (covering 400
000 kmÂ² or 154,000 sq. mi), otherwise known as historical Armenia and
considered as the original homeland of Armenians. The terrain is mostly
mountainous, with fast flowing rivers and few forests. The climate is highland
continental, which means that the country is subjected to hot summers and cold
winters. The land rises to 4090 metres (13,420 ft) above sea-level at Mount
Aragats, and no point is below 390 metres (1,280 ft) above sea level.[40]

Mount Ararat, which was historically part of Armenia, is the highest mountain
in the region. Now located in Turkey, but clearly visible in Armenia, it is
regarded by the Armenians as a symbol of their land. Because of this, the
mountain is present on the Armenian national emblem today.

### Environment

Armenia has established a Ministry of Nature Protection and introduced taxes
for air and water pollution and solid waste disposal, whose revenues are used
for environmental protection activities. Waste management in Armenia is
underdeveloped as no waste sorting or recycling takes place at Armenia's 60
landfills.

Despite the availability of abundant renewable energy sources in Armenia
(especially hydroelectric and wind power) the Armenian Government is working
toward building a new Nuclear Power Plant at Medzamor near Yerevan[41].

### Climate

The climate in Armenia is markedly continental. Summers are dry and sunny,
lasting from June to mid-September. The temperature fluctuates between 22Â°
and 36 Â°C/71-97 Â°F. However, the low humidity level mitigates the effect of
high temperatures. Evening breezes blowing down the mountains provide a
welcome refreshing and cooling effect. Springs are short, while falls are
long. Autumns are known for their vibrant and colorful foliage. Winters are
quite cold with plenty of snow, with temperatures ranging between -10Â° and -5
Â°C/14-23 Â°F. Winter sports enthusiasts enjoy skiing down the hills of
Tsakhkadzor, located thirty minutes outside Yerevan. Lake Sevan nestled up in
the Armenian highlands, is the second largest lake in the world relative to
its altitude, 1,900 metres above sea level.

## Economy

Main articles: Economy of Armenia and Agriculture in Armenia

The Armenian economy heavily relies on investment and support from Armenians
abroad.[1] Before independence, Armenia's economy was largely industry-based
â chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic rubber, and
textile â and highly dependent on outside resources. The republic had
developed a modern industrial sector, supplying machine tools, textiles, and
other manufactured goods to sister republics in exchange for raw materials and
energy.[18] Agriculture accounted for less than 20% of both net material
product and total employment before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in
1991. After independence, the importance of agriculture in the economy
increased markedly, its share at the end of the 1990s rising to more than 30%
of GDP and more than 40% of total employment.[42] This increase in
agriculture's share was attributable to food security needs of the population
in the face of uncertainty during the first phases of transition and the
collapse of the non-agricultural sectors of the economy in the early 1990s. As
the economic situation stabilized and growth resumed, the share of agriculture
in GDP dropped to slightly over 20% (2006 data), although the share of
agriculture in employment remained more than 40%.[43]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Water World entertainment park in Yerevan

Armenian mines produce copper, zinc, gold, and lead. The vast majority of
energy is produced with fuel imported from Russia, including gas and nuclear
fuel (for its one nuclear power plant); the main domestic energy source is
hydroelectric. Small amounts of coal, gas, and petroleum have not yet been
developed.

Like other newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, Armenia's
economy suffers from the legacy of a centrally planned economy and the
breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns. Soviet investment in and support
of Armenian industry has virtually disappeared, so that few major enterprises
are still able to function. In addition, the effects of the 1988 Spitak
Earthquake, which killed more than 25,000 people and made 500,000 homeless,
are still being felt. The conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has
not been resolved. The closure of Azerbaijani and Turkish borders has
devastated the economy, because Armenia depends on outside supplies of energy
and most raw materials. Land routes through Georgia and Iran are inadequate or
unreliable. GDP fell nearly 60% from 1989 until 1993, and then resumed its
robust growth.[42] The national currency, the dram, suffered hyperinflation
for the first years after its introduction in 1993.

Nevertheless, the government was able to make wide-ranging economic reforms
that paid off in dramatically lower inflation and steady growth. The 1994
cease-fire in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has also helped the economy.
Armenia has had strong economic growth since 1995, building on the turnaround
that began the previous year, and inflation has been negligible for the past
several years. New sectors, such as precious stone processing and jewellery
making, information and communication technology, and even tourism are
beginning to supplement more traditional sectors in the economy, such as
agriculture.

This steady economic progress has earned Armenia increasing support from
international institutions. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank,
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and other
international financial institutions (IFIs) and foreign countries are
extending considerable grants and loans. Loans to Armenia since 1993 exceed
$1.1 billion. These loans are targeted at reducing the budget deficit,
stabilizing the currency; developing private businesses; energy; the
agriculture, food processing, transportation, and health and education
sectors; and ongoing rehabilitation in the earthquake zone. The government
joined the World Trade Organization on February 5, 2003. But one of the main
sources of foreign direct investments remains the Armenian diaspora, which
finances major parts of the reconstruction of infrastructure and other public
projects. Being a growing democratic state, Armenia also hopes to get more
financial aid from the Western World.

A liberal foreign investment law was approved in June 1994, and a Law on
Privatisation was adopted in 1997, as well as a program on state property
privatisation. Continued progress will depend on the ability of the government
to strengthen its macroeconomic management, including increasing revenue
collection, improving the investment climate, and making strides against
corruption. However unemployment still remains a major problem due to the
influx of thousands of refugees from the Karabakh conflict, which currently
stands at around 15%.

Armenia ranked 83rd on the 2007 UNDP Human Development Index, the highest
among the Transcaucasian republics.[44] In the 2007 Transparency International
Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), Armenia ranked 99 of 179 countries.[45] In
the 2008 Index of Economic Freedom, Armenia ranked 28th, ahead of countries
like Austria, France, Portugal and Italy.[26]

## Demographics

Main articles: Demographics of Armenia and Peoples of the Caucasus

<IMG>

<IMG>

Armenian children at the UN Cup Chess Tournament in 2005.

Armenia has a population of 3,215,800 (April 2006 est.) and is the second most
densely populated of the former Soviet republics. There has been a problem of
population decline due to elevated levels of emigration after the break-up of
the USSR. The rates of emigration and population decline, however, have
decreased drastically in the recent years, and a moderate influx of Armenians
returning to Armenia have been the main reasons for the trend, which is
expected to continue. In fact Armenia is expected to resume its positive
population growth by 2010.

Ethnic Armenians make up 97.9% of the population. Yazidis make up 1.3%, and
Russians 0.5%. Other minorities include Assyrians, Ukrainians, Greeks, Kurds,
Georgians, and Belarusians. There are also smaller communities of Vlachs,
Mordvins, Ossetians, Udis, and Tats. Minorities of Poles and Caucasus Germans
also exist though they are heavily Russified.[46] During the Soviet era,
Azerbaijanis were historically the second largest population in the country
(forming about 2.5% in 1989).[47] However, due to the conflict over Nagorno-
Karabakh virtually all of them emigrated from Armenia to Azerbaijan.
Conversely, Armenia received a large influx of Armenian refugees from
Azerbaijan, thus giving Armenia a more homogeneous character.

### Diaspora

Main article: Armenian diaspora

Armenia has a relatively large diaspora (8 million by some estimates, greatly
exceeding the 3 million population of Armenia itself), with communities
existing across the globe. The largest Armenian communities outside of Armenia
can be found in Russia, France, Iran, the United States, Georgia, Syria,
Lebanon, Argentina, Australia, Canada, Greece, Cyprus, Israel, Poland and
Ukraine. 40,000 to 70,000 Armenians still live in Turkey (mostly in and around
Istanbul).[48] Also, about 1,000 Armenians reside in the Armenian Quarter in
the Old City of Jerusalem in Israel, a remnant of a once-larger community.[49]
Italy is home to the San Lazzaro degli Armeni, an island located in the
Venetian Lagoon, which is completely occupied by a monastery run by the
Mechitarists, an Armenian Catholic congregation.[50] In addition,
approximately 139,000 Armenians live in the de facto country of Nagorno-
Karabakh where they form a majority.[51]

## Religion

<IMG>

<IMG>

The influence of St. Gregory the Illuminator led to the adoption of
Christianity in Armenia in the year AD 301. He is the patron saint of the
Armenian Apostolic Church.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The 12th century Khor Virap monastery in the shadow of Mount Ararat, upon
which Noah's Ark had supposedly once come to rest.

Main article: Religion in Armenia

The predominant religion in Armenia is Christianity. The roots of the Armenian
Church go back to the first century. According to tradition, the Armenian
Church was founded by two of Jesus' twelve apostles \-- Thaddaeus and
Bartholomew \-- who preached Christianity in Armenia between AD 40-60. Because
of these two founding apostles, the official name of the Armenian Church is
Armenian Apostolic Church. Armenia was the first nation to adopt Christianity
as a state religion, an event traditionally dated to AD 301. Over 93% of
Armenian Christians belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church, a form of
Oriental (Non-Chalcedonian) Orthodoxy, which is a very ritualistic,
conservative church, roughly comparable to the Coptic and Syriac churches.[52]
Armenian Apostolic Church is in communion only with a group of churches within
Oriental Orthodoxy. Armenia also has a population of Catholics (both Roman and
Mekhitarist - Armenian Uniate (180,000)), evangelical Protestants and
followers of the Armenian traditional religion. The Yazidi Kurds, who live in
the western part of the country, practice Yazidism. The Armenian Catholic
Church is headquartered in Bzoummar, Lebanon. The non-Yazidi Kurds practice
Sunni Islam. The Jewish community in Armenia has diminished to 750 persons
since independence due to Armenia's economic difficulties, with most emigrants
leaving for Israel. There are currently two synagogues operating in Armenia -
in the capital, Yerevan, and in the city of Sevan located near Lake Sevan.
Intermarriage with Christian Armenians is frequent. Still, despite these
difficulties, a lot of enthusiasm exists to help the community meet its
needs.[53]

## Culture

Main article: Culture of Armenia

See also: Music of Armenia, Armenian cuisine, and Sport in Armenia

Armenians have their own distinctive alphabet and language. The alphabet was
invented in AD 405 by Saint Mesrob Mashtots and consists of thirty-eight
letters, two of which were added during the Cilician period. 96% of the people
in the country speak Armenian, while 75.8% of the population additionally
speaks Russian although English is becoming increasingly popular.

## Art

  * Ivan Aivazovsky â painter
  * Tigran Avakian, photographer
  * Minas Avetisyan â painter
  * Gevorg Bashinjagyan â painter [2]
  * Arto Chakmakchian â sculptor
  * John Dolmayan â Lebanese-born musician
  * Ronald Dzerigian â painter
  * Arthur Sarkissian â painter
  * Larry Gagosian â art collector
  * Denis Peterson â painter
  * Arshile Gorky â painter
  * Ara GÃ¼ler â photographer
  * Malak Karsh â landscape photographer
  * Yousuf Karsh â Canada; Egyptian-born portrait photographer.
  * Rafik Khachatryan â sculptor
  * Garegin Khachatryan â ceramic-sculptor, painter
  * Vartan Malakian â painter
  * Daron Malakian â American-born musician and son of Vartan Malakian
  * Mkrtich Mazmanian â sculptor
  * Alain Mikli â designer
  * Shavarsh Odadjian â musician and painter
  * Hovsep Pushman â painter
  * Toros Roslin â medieval painter
  * Sarkis â sculptor
  * Cheryl Sarkisian â American-born actress, singer, songwriter, and entertainer
  * Martiros Saryan â painter [3]
  * Serj Tankian â Lebanese-born musician
  * Arto TunÃ§boyacÄ±yan â Turkish-Armenian avant-garde folk musician

  

### Music and the arts

<IMG>

<IMG>

The work Song of the Italian Girl by 19th century Armenian poet Mikael
Nalbandian served as the inspiration for the Armenian national anthem Mer
Hayrenik.

The National Art Gallery in Yerevan has more than 16,000 works that date back
to the Middle Ages. The Modern Art Museum, the Childrenâs Picture Gallery,
and the Martiros Saryan Museum are only a few of the other noteworthy
collections. Moreover, many private galleries are in operation, with many more
opening each year. They feature rotating exhibitions and sales.

The Armenian Philharmonic Orchestra performs at the refurbished city Opera
House. In addition, several chamber ensembles are highly regarded for their
musicianship, including the National Chamber Orchestra of Armenia and the
Serenade Orchestra. Classical music can also be heard at one of several
smaller venues, including the Yerevan Komitas State Conservatory and the
Chamber Orchestra Hall. Jazz is popular, especially in the summer when live
performances are a regular occurrence at one of the cityâs many outdoor
cafÃ©s.

Yerevan's Vernisage (arts and crafts market), close to Republic Square,
bustles with hundreds of vendors selling a variety of crafts on weekends and
Wednesdays (though the selection is much reduced mid-week). The market offers
woodcarving, antiques, fine lace, and the hand-knotted wool carpets and kilims
that are a Caucasus specialty. Obsidian, which is found locally, is crafted
into assortment of jewellery and ornamental objects. Armenian gold smithery
enjoys a long tradition, populating one corner of the market with a selection
of gold items. Soviet relics and souvenirs of recent Russian
manufactureânesting dolls, watches, enamel boxes and so on, are also
available at the Vernisage. Across from the Opera House, a popular art market
fills another city park on the weekends. Armeniaâs long history as a
crossroads of the ancient world has resulted in a landscape with innumerable
fascinating archaeological sites to explore. Medieval, Iron Age, Bronze Age
and even Stone Age sites are all within a few hours drive from the city. All
but the most spectacular remain virtually undiscovered, allowing visitors to
view churches and fortresses in their original settings.

The American University of Armenia has graduate programs in Business and Law,
among others. The institution owes its existence to the combined efforts of
the Government of Armenia, the Armenian General Benevolent Union, U.S. Agency
for International Development, and the University of California. The extension
programs and the library at AUA form a new focal point for English-language
intellectual life in the city.

Many famous names in the music world are of Armenian descent including
classical composer Aram Khachaturian and French singer Charles Aznavour. The
members of the alternative metal band System of a Down all have Armenian
backgrounds as well, although only bassist Shavo Odadjian was born in the
country.

### Hospitality and wedding ceremonies

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008)  
Hospitality is well-known in Armenia and stems from ancient tradition. Social
gatherings focused around sumptuous presentations of course after course of
elaborately prepared and well-seasoned food. The hosts will often put morsels
on a guest's plate whenever it is empty or fill his or her glass when it gets
low. After a helping or two it is acceptable to refuse politely or, more
simply, just leave a little uneaten food. Alcohol such as cognac, vodka, and
red wine are usually served during meals and gatherings. It is rare and
unusual for one to go inside an Armenian household and not be offered coffee,
pastry, food, or even water.

The elaborate Armenian wedding process begins when the man and woman get
engaged. The man's immediate family (parents, grandparents, and often uncles
and aunts) go over to the woman's house to ask for permission from the woman's
father for the relationship to continue and hopefully prosper. Once permission
is granted by the father, the man gives the woman an engagement ring to make
it official. To celebrate the mutual family agreement, the woman's family
opens a bottle of Armenian cognac. After getting engaged, most families elect
to have a semi-large engagement party as well. The girl's family is the one
who plans, organizes and pays for the party. There is very little involvement
by the man's family. At the party, a priest is summoned to pray for the soon-
to-be husband and wife and give his blessings. Once the words of prayer have
concluded, the couple slide wedding bands on each other's left hands (the ring
is moved to the right hand once a formal marriage ceremony is conducted by the
Armenian church). The customary time to wait for the marriage is about one
year. Unlike other cultures, where bride's family pays for the wedding, in
Armenia the man and his family pay for the wedding. The planning and
organization process is usually done by the bride and groom to be.

### Sport

Armenia is active in the international sporting community, with full
membership in the International Olympic Committee, Union of European Football
Associations and International Ice Hockey Federation.

## See also

  * Republic of Mountainous Armenia
  * Russian Armenia

v â¢ d â¢ e

<IMG> Armenia topics  
History (timeline)

Early

Origins Â· Name Â· Kura-Araxes culture Â· Hayk Â· Hayasa-Azzi Â· Nairi Â·
Kingdom of Urartu Â· Orontid dynasty Â· Kingdom of Armenia Â· Byzantine
Armenia Â· Bagratuni Armenia Â· Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia  
Middle

Persian Armenia Â· Ottoman Armenia Â· Russian Armenia  
Modern

Democratic Republic of Armenia Â· Soviet Armenia Â· Independent Armenia  
By topic

Armenian Genocide (relief) Â· more  
Coat of arms of Armenia  
Government and  
politics

Constitution Â· President Â· Prime Minister Â· Azgayin Zhoghov Â· Political
parties Â· Elections Â· Foreign relations Â· Corruption in Armenia Â· Human
rights in Armenia Â· Relations with the European Union Â· more on government /
politics  
Economy

Armenian dram Â· Central Bank Â· List of companies Â· Armex Â· Agriculture Â·
Industry Â· Communications Â· Transportation Â· Energy in Armenia  
Administrative  
divisions

Historical regions Â· Provinces (Marzer) Â· Municipalities Â· more  
Armed Forces

Army Â· Air Force Â· Air Defense Â· Border Guard Â· more  
Geography

Armenian Highland Â· Ararat plain Â· Rivers and lakes Â· Mountains Â·
Shikahogh State Preserve Â· Extreme points Â· Mount Aragats Â· Lake Sevan Â·
more  
Demographics

Language (Eastern Â· Western) Â· People Â· Diaspora Â· Censuses Â· Health Â·
Crime Â· Education Â· Social issues Â· Ethnic minorities Â· more  
Religion

Armenian Apostolic Church Â· Armenian Catholic Church Â· Roman Catholicism Â·
Armenian Evangelical Church Â· Armenian Brotherhood Church Â· Judaism Â· Islam
Â· more  
Culture

Alphabet Â· Education Â· Cuisine Â· Literature Â· Theatre Â· Dance Â· Sport Â·
Music Â· Cinema Â· Famous Armenians Â· Flag Â· Coat of arms Â· National anthem
Â· more  
## References

  1. ^ The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, Article 12.
  2. ^ The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, Article 55.
  3. ^ "National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia". http://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=81&id=766. Retrieved on 2008-10-16.
  4. ^ "Census of 2001 of the Republic of Armenia". http://docs.armstat.am/census/engcontent.php.
  5. ^ a b c d "Armenia". International Monetary Fund. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/02/weodata/weorept.aspx?sy=2004&ey=2008&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=country&ds=.&br=1&c=911&s=NGDPD%2CNGDPDPC%2CPPPGDP%2CPPPPC%2CLP&grp=0&a=&pr.x=73&pr.y=18. Retrieved on 2008-10-09.
  6. ^ "The conversion of Armenia to Christianity was probably the most crucial step in its history. It turned Armenia sharply away from its Iranian past and stamped it for centuries with an intrinsic character as clear to the native population as to those outside its borders, who identified Armenia almost at once as the first state to adopt Christianity". (GarsoÃ¯an, Nina (1997). ed. R.G. Hovannisian. ed. Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Times. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. Volume 1, p.81. ).
  7. ^ Grousset, RenÃ© (1947). Histoire de l'ArmÃ©nie (1984 edition ed.). Payot. pp. p. 122. . Estimated dates vary from 284 to 314. GarsoÃ¯an (op.cit. p.82), following the research of Ananian, favours the latter.
  8. ^ The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, Article 8.1
  9. ^ Razmik Panossian, The Armenians: From Kings And Priests to Merchants And Commissars, Columbia University Press (2006), ISBN 978-0231139267, p. 106.
  10. ^ "Î§Î±Î»ÏÎ²Î¿Î¹ÏÎ¹ ÏÏá½¸Ï Î½ÏÏÎ¿Î½ á¼ÏÎ¼Î­Î½Î¹Î¿Î¹ á½Î¼Î¿Ï ÏÎ­Î¿Ï ÏÎ¹ (The Armenians border on the Chalybes to the south)". Chahin, Mark (2001). The Kingdom of Armenia. London: Routledge. pp. fr. 203. ISBN 0-7007-1452-9.
  11. ^ Xenophon. Anabasis. pp. IV.v.2-9.
  12. ^ Moses of Chorene,The History of Armenia, Book 1, Ch. 12 (Russian)
  13. ^ History of Armenia by Father Michael Chamich from B.C. 2247 to the Year of Christ 1780, or 1229 of the Armenian era, Bishop's College Press, Calcutta, 1827, page 19: "[Aram] was the first to raise the Armenian name to any degree of renown; so that contemporary nations ... called them the Aramians, or followers of Aram, a name which has been corrupted into Armenians; and the country they inhabited, by universal consent, took the name of Armenia."
  14. ^ Kurkjian, Vahan (1958). History of Armenia (1964 edition ed.). Michigan: Armenian General Benevolent Union. http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Gazetteer/Places/Asia/Armenia/_Texts/KURARM/home.html.
  15. ^ Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia. Yerevan: Armenian Encyclopedia. 1987. pp. v. 12.
  16. ^ Movsisyan, Artak (2000). Sacred Highland: Armenia in the spiritual conception of the Near East. Yerevan.
  17. ^ Kavoukjian, Martiros (1982). The Genesis of Armenian People. Montreal.
  18. ^ a b "The World Factbook: Armenia". CIA. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/am.html. Retrieved on 2007-11-15.
  19. ^ Brunner, Borgna. Time Almanac with Information Please 2007. pp. p. 685. ISBN 193340549X.
  20. ^ Kirakosian, J. S. (1972) (in Armenian). Hayastane michazkayin divanakitut'yan ew sovetakan artakin kaghakakanut'yan pastateghterum, 1828-1923 (Armenia in the documents of international diplomacy and Soviet foreign policy, 1828-1923). Yerevan. pp. pp. 149-358.
  21. ^ Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia 2004 - Page 74 by Imogen Gladman, Taylor & Francis Group
  22. ^ "The March Referendum". http://soviethistory.org/index.php?action=L2&SubjectID=1991march&Year=1991. Retrieved on 2008-11-10.
  23. ^ Croissant, Michael P. (1998). The Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict: Causes and Implications. London: Praeger. ISBN 0-275-96241-5.
  24. ^ "The Ties That Divide". Global Heritage Fund. 2006-06-17. http://www.globalheritagefund.org/news/GHF_in_the_news/economist_ties_that_divide_june_17_06.asp.
  25. ^ De Waal, Thomas. Black Garden: Armenia And Azerbaijan Through Peace and War. New York: New York University Press. pp. p. 240. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7.
  26. ^ a b "Index of Economic Freedom 2008". The Heritage Foundation. http://www.heritage.org/research/features/index/.
  27. ^ "Nations in Transit 2008" (PDF). Freedom House. http://www.freedomhouse.hu/images/fdh_galleries/NIT2008/02_tables.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-26.
  28. ^ "Nations in Transit 2008: Armenia" (PDF). Freedom House. http://www.freedomhouse.hu/images/fdh_galleries/NIT2008/NT-Armenia-final.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-26.
  29. ^ "Freedom in the World 2007" (PDF). Freedom House. http://www.freedomhouse.org/uploads/press_release/fiw07_charts.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-20.
  30. ^ Danielyan, Emil (2008-02-20). "Armenian Vote 'Largely Democratic'". ArmeniaLiberty, Radio Free Europe. http://www.armenialiberty.org/armeniareport/report/en/2008/02/14B31960-C791-4274-B7F0-50B571D0EADD.asp. Retrieved on 2008-02-20.
  31. ^ a b "Nagorno-Karabakh: The Crisis in the Caucasus". http://www.cfr.org/publication/9148/. Retrieved on 2007-04-06.
  32. ^ "Baku and Moscow - 'One Hundred Percent Strategic Partners'". Hetq Online. 2006-02-27. http://archive.hetq.am/eng/politics/0602-az.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-20.
  33. ^ "Ancestry Data". U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/DTTable?_bm=y&-geo_id=D&-ds_name=D&-_lang=en&-redoLog=false&-mt_name=ACS_2006_EST_G2000_B04003. The 2001 Canadian Census determined that there are 40,505 persons of Armenian ancestry currently living in Canada. However, these are liable to be low numbers, since people of mixed ancestry, very common in North America tend to be under-counted: the 1990 census U.S. indicates 149,694 people who speak Armenian at home. The Armenian Embassy in Canada estimates 1 million ethnic Armenians in the U.S. and 100,000 in Canada. The Armenian Church of America makes a similar estimate. By all accounts, over half of the Armenians in the United States live in California.
  34. ^ "RFE/RL Caucasus Report". Armenian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2005-01-07. http://www.armeniaforeignministry.am/news/inthenews/050107_eu.html.
  35. ^ "Interview with RA National Assembly Speaker Artur Baghdasaryan". ArmInfo News Agency. 2005-10-26. http://www.arminfo.am/political-issue22.html.
  36. ^ "Sarkisian Appoints Key Ministers in Emerging Cabinet", Armenialiberty.org, April 15, 2008.
  37. ^ "KFOR Contingent: Armenia". Official Web Site of the Kosovo Force. 23 March 2007. http://www.nato.int/kfor/structur/nations/armenia.htm. Retrieved on 2008-10-27.
  38. ^ "Last shift of Armenian peacekeepers in Iraq returns home". Ministry of Defence. 7 October 2008. http://www.mil.am/eng/index.php?page=2&p=0&id=633&y=2008&m=10&d=29. Retrieved on 29 October 2008.
  39. ^ "Regional Administration Bodies". The Government of the Republic of Armenia. http://www.gov.am/enversion/regional_7/regional.htm. Retrieved on 2008-09-11.
  40. ^ "Geographic Characteristic of The Republic of Armenia". Marzes of the Republic of Armenia in Figures, 2002-2006. National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia. 2007. http://www.armstat.am/file/article/marz_07_e_2.pdf.
  41. ^ Address by President Serzh Sargsyan to the People of Armenia and the National Assembly on 2 October 2008
  42. ^ a b Z. Lerman and A. Mirzakhanian, Private Agriculture in Armenia, Lexington Books, Lanham, MD, 2001.
  43. ^ Statistical Yearbook 2007, Armenia National Statistical Service, Yerevan
  44. ^ "http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/". UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/. Retrieved on 2008-04-25.
  45. ^ "Corruption Perceptions Index 2007". http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2007. Retrieved on 2008-04-25.
  46. ^ Asatryan, Garnik; Arakelova, Victoria (2002), The Ethnic Minorities of Armenia, Routledge , part of the OSCE
  47. ^ (Russian) The All-Union Population Census of 1989. Demoscope.ru
  48. ^ Turay, Anna. "Tarihte Ermeniler". Bolsohays:Istanbul Armenians Like many other ethnicities Armenians in India too have played a role historically and had an impact historically. Today however the community has been reduced to about a hundred living in Calcutta.. http://www.bolsohays.com/webac.asp?referans=1. Retrieved on 2007-01-04.
  49. ^ "Jerusalem - The Old City: The Armenian Quarter". Jewish Virtual Library. http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/Society_&_Culture/geo/armenianq.html.
  50. ^ San Lazzaro degli Armeni - Venice for Visitors
  51. ^ "Population in Nagorno-Karabakh 2007". National Statistical Service of Nagorno-Karabakh Republic. http://www.stat-nkr.am/2002_2007/0_2%20himcuc_6-10.pdf.
  52. ^ "The Armenian Apostolic Church (World Council of Churches)". http://www.oikoumene.org/?id=5211.
  53. ^ "Jewish Religious Community of Armenia". http://www.yehudim.am/.

## External links

<IMG> Armenia portal  
Wikipedia

Armenian language edition of Wikipedia

Find more about Armenia on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions from
Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

Government

  * Government of Armenia official government portal
  * National Assembly of Armenia
  * President of Armenia
  * The Judiciary of Armenia
  * Ministries and agencies 
    * Armenian Nuclear Regulatory Authority
    * National Statistical Service of Armenia
    * Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Armenia
    * Ministry of Finance
    * Ministry of Health of Armenia
    * Central Electoral Commission
    * Ministry of Nature Protection of Armenia
    * Department of State Property Management
  * Chief of State and Cabinet Members

General information

  * Armenia entry at The World Factbook
  * Armenia at UCB Libraries GovPubs
  * Armenia at the Open Directory Project
  * Wikimedia Atlas of Armenia

Travel

  * Armeniainfo.am official government Tourist Board
  * Electronic Visa (eVisa) for tourists
  * Armenia travel guide from Wikitravel

Other

  * Armenia-Diaspora web site
  * Armeniapedia.org - Armenian wiki (primarily English)
  * World Intellectual Property Handbook: Armenia

v â¢ d â¢ e

Administrative divisions of Armenia  
Marzer (Õ´Õ¡ÖÕ¦Õ§Ö)

Aragatsotn Â· Ararat Â· Armavir Â· Gegharkunik Â· Kotayk Â· Lori Â· Shirak Â·
Syunik Â· Tavush Â· Vayots Dzor

Flag of Armenia  
City with special status

Yerevan (capital)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Flag of Armenia Cities and towns in Armenia  
Abovyan Â· Achajur Â· Agarak Â· Aghavnatun Â· Akhtala Â· Akhuryan Â· Aknalich
Â· Akunk Â· Alapars Â· Alaverdi Â· Aparan Â· Aqori Â· Aralez Â· Ararat Â·
Aratashen Â· Arevashogh Â· Arevik Â· Arevshat Â· Argavand Â· Arinj Â· Armavir
Â· Arshaluys Â· Artashat Â· Arteni Â· Artik Â· Artsvaberd Â· Artsvanist Â·
Artsvashen Â· Arzakan Â· Arzni Â· Ashotsk Â· Ashtarak Â· Astghadzor Â· Avshar
Â· Aygavan Â· Aygedzor Â· Aygehovit Â· Aygestan Â· Aygezard Â· Ayrum Â· Azatan
Â· Azatavan Â· Berd Â· Bjni Â· Byureghavan Â· Chambarak Â· Charentsavan Â·
Dastakert Â· Dilijan Â· Dzoragyukh Â· Echmiadzin Â· Gandzakar Â· Gavar Â·
Geghanist Â· Geghashen Â· Geghhovit Â· Ghukasavan Â· Gladzor Â· Gorovan Â·
Goris Â· Gyulagarak Â· Gyumri Â· Haghpat Â· Hats'ik Â· Hayt'agh Â· Hoktember
Â· Hovtashat Â· Hrazdan Â· Ijevan Â· Janfida Â· Jermuk Â· Jrarat Â· Jrashen Â·
Jrvesh Â· Kaghsi Â· Kaghtsrashen Â· Kajaran Â· Kamaris Â· Kanakeravan Â· Kapan
Â· Karakert Â· Karchaghbyur Â· Karmirgyukh Â· Kasakh Â· Kavchut Â· Khoronk Â·
Koghbi Â· Kuchuma Â· Lanjaghbyur Â· Lchashen Â· Lernamerdz Â· Lernanist Â·
Lichk Â· Lukashin Â· Lusarat Â· Malishka Â· Maralik Â· Margahovit Â·
Marmarashen Â· Martuni Â· Masis Â· Meghradzor Â· Meghri Â· Merdzavan Â· Mets
Masrik Â· Metsavan Â· Mkhchyan Â· Mrgashat Â· Mrgavet Â· Musaler Â· Myasnikyan
Â· Nalbandyan Â· Nerk'in Getashen Â· Nor Geghi Â· Nor Hachn Â· Nor Khaberd Â·
Nor Kyanq Â· Norakert Â· Norapat Â· Norashen Â· Noratus Â· Noyemberyan Â·
Odzun Â· Ohanavan Â· Oshakan Â· Parakar Â· Pemzashen Â· Pokr Vedi Â· Proshyan
Â· Pshatavan Â· Qanaqer-Zeytun Â· Samaghar Â· Sanahin Â· Sarnaghbyur Â·
Sarukhan Â· Satala Â· Sevan Â· Shamlugh Â· Shinuhayr Â· Shnogh Â· Sisian Â·
Solak Â· Stepanavan Â· Surenavan Â· Tairov Â· Talin Â· Taperakan Â· Tashir Â·
Tatev Â· Tazagyukh Â· Tegh Â· Tsakhkadzor Â· Tsakqar Â· Tsovagyugh Â· Tsovak
Â· Tumanyan Â· Udjan Â· Urtsadzor Â· Vaghashen Â· Vanadzor Â· Vanashen Â·
Vardadzor Â· Vardenik Â· Vardenis Â· Vayk Â· Vedi Â· Verin Artashat Â·
Verishen Â· Voskehat Â· Vosketap Â· Voskevaz Â· Vostan Â· Yeghegnadzor Â·
Yeghvard Â· Yeranus Â· Yerevan Â· Zolakar Â· Zovuni Â· Zvartnots  
v â¢ d â¢ e

World Heritage Sites in Armenia  
Monasteries of Haghpat and Sanahin Â· Monastery of Geghard and the Upper Azat
Valley Â· Cathedral and Churches of Echmiadzin and the Archaeological Site of
Zvartnots  
Sites on the Tentative List:  
Basilica of Yererouk

Flag of Armenia  
Geographic locale  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries and regions of the Caucasus  
Caucasia 1952-1991

<IMG> Abkhazia  
<IMG> Adygea  
<IMG> Adjara  
<IMG> Armenia

<IMG> Azerbaijan  
<IMG> Chechnya  
<IMG> Dagestan  
<IMG> Georgia

<IMG> Ingushetia  
<IMG> Karachay-Cherkessia  
<IMG> Kabardino-Balkaria  
Flag of Krasnodar Krai Krasnodar Krai

<IMG> Nagorno-Karabakh  
<IMG> North Ossetia-Alania  
Flag of Stavropol Krai Stavropol Krai  
<IMG> South Ossetia

Caucasia in 1882  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries of Southwest Asia  
Armenia Â· Azerbaijan1 Â· Bahrain Â· Cyprus Â· Georgia1 Â· Iran Â· Iraq Â·
Israel Â· Jordan Â· Kuwait Â· Lebanon Â· Oman Â· Qatar Â· Saudi Arabia Â·
Syria Â· Turkey1 Â· United Arab Emirates Â· Yemen

1 Has part of its territory in Europe.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Countries of Europe  
Albania Â· Andorra Â· Armenia2 Â· Austria Â· Azerbaijan1 Â· Belarus Â· Belgium
Â· Bosnia and Herzegovina Â· Bulgaria Â· Croatia Â· Cyprus2 Â· Czech Republic
Â· Denmark3 Â· Estonia Â· Finland Â· France1 Â· Georgia1 Â· Germany Â· Greece
Â· Hungary Â· Iceland Â· Ireland Â· Italy1 Â· Kazakhstan1 Â· Kosovo5 Â· Latvia
Â· Liechtenstein Â· Lithuania Â· Luxembourg Â· Macedonia4 Â· Malta Â· Moldova
Â· Monaco Â· Montenegro Â· Netherlands3 Â· Norway3 Â· Poland Â· Portugal3 Â·
Romania Â· Russia1 Â· San Marino Â· Serbia Â· Slovakia Â· Slovenia Â· Spain1
Â· Sweden Â· Switzerland Â· Turkey1 Â· Ukraine Â· United Kingdom3 Â· Vatican
City

1 Has part of its territory outside Europe. 2 Entirely in West Asia but having
socio-political connections with Europe. 3 Has dependencies or similar
territories outside Europe. 4 Name disputed by Greece; see Macedonia naming
dispute. 5 Declared independence from Serbia on February 17, 2008 and is
recognised by 56 United Nations member states.  
International membership  
v â¢ d â¢ e

International organizations with Armenia as member  
ADB Â· BSEC Â· CE Â· CIS Â· CSTO Â· EAPC Â· EBRD Â· ECE Â· EAEC Â· ESCAP Â·
FAO Â· IAEA Â· IBRD Â· ICAO Â· ICFTU Â· ICRM Â· IDA Â· IFAD Â· IFC Â· IFRCS Â·
ILO Â· IMF Â· Interpol Â· IOC Â· IOM Â· ISO Â· ITU Â· LF Â· NACC Â· NAM Â·
OPCW Â· OSCE Â· PACE Â· PFP Â· UN Â· UNCTAD Â· UNESCO Â· UNIDO Â· UPU Â· UNWTO
Â· WHO Â· WIPO Â· WMO Â· WNO Â· WTO  
Italics indicates observer status  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Member states of the Council of Europe  
Albania Â· Andorra Â· Armenia Â· Austria Â· Azerbaijan Â· Belgium Â· Bosnia
and Herzegovina Â· Bulgaria Â· Croatia Â· Cyprus Â· Czech Republic Â· Denmark
Â· Estonia Â· Finland Â· France Â· Georgia Â· Germany Â· Greece Â· Hungary Â·
Iceland Â· Ireland Â· Italy Â· Latvia Â· Liechtenstein Â· Lithuania Â·
Luxembourg Â· Malta Â· Moldova Â· Monaco Â· Montenegro Â· Netherlands Â·
Norway Â· Poland Â· Portugal Â· Romania Â· Russia Â· San Marino Â· Serbia Â·
Slovakia Â· Slovenia Â· Spain Â· Sweden Â· Switzerland Â· The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia Â· Turkey Â· Ukraine Â· United Kingdom  
Observer member status: Argentina Â· Canada Â· Chile Â· Israel Â· Japan Â·
Mexico Â· Morocco Â· United States of America Â· Vatican City  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)  
Armenia Â· Azerbaijan Â· Belarus Â· Kazakhstan Â· Kyrgyzstan Â· Russia Â·
Tajikistan Â· Uzbekistan Â· Ukraine Â· Moldova  
Associate member: Turkmenistan Â· Downgraded membership: Georgia

CIS flag  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Member states and observers of the Francophonie  
Members

Albania Â· Andorra Â· Armenia Â· Belgium (French Community) Â· Benin Â·
Bulgaria Â· Burkina Faso Â· Burundi Â· Cambodia Â· Cameroon Â· Canada (New
Brunswick â¢ Quebec) Â· Cape Verde Â· Central African Republic Â· Chad Â·
Comoros Â· Cyprus1 Â· Democratic Republic of the Congo Â· Republic of the
Congo Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire Â· Djibouti Â· Dominica Â· Egypt Â· Equatorial Guinea
Â· FYR Macedonia Â· France (French Guiana â¢ Guadeloupe â¢ Martinique â¢
St. Pierre and Miquelon) Â· Gabon Â· Ghana1 Â· Greece Â· Guinea Â· Guinea-
Bissau Â· Haiti Â· Laos Â· Luxembourg Â· Lebanon Â· Madagascar Â· Mali Â·
Mauritania Â· Mauritius Â· Moldova Â· Monaco Â· Morocco Â· Niger Â· Romania Â·
Rwanda Â· St. Lucia Â· SÃ£o TomÃ© and PrÃ­ncipe Â· Senegal Â· Seychelles Â·
Switzerland Â· Togo Â· Tunisia Â· Vanuatu Â· Vietnam  
Observers

Austria Â· Croatia Â· Czech Republic Â· Georgia Â· Hungary Â· Latvia Â·
Lithuania Â· Mozambique Â· Poland Â· Serbia Â· Slovakia Â· Slovenia Â·
Thailand Â· Ukraine  
1 Associate member.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Members of the World Trade Organization (WTO)  
<IMG>

Albania Â· Angola Â· Antigua and Barbuda Â· Argentina Â· Armenia Â· Australia
Â· Bahrain Â· Bangladesh Â· Barbados Â· Belize Â· Benin Â· Bolivia Â· Botswana
Â· Brazil Â· Brunei Â· Burkina Faso Â· Burma Â· Burundi Â· Cambodia Â·
Cameroon Â· Canada Â· Cape Verde Â· Central African Republic Â· Chad Â· Chile
Â· PR China Â· Colombia Â· Democratic Republic of the Congo Â· Republic of the
Congo Â· Costa Rica Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire Â· Croatia Â· Cuba Â· Djibouti Â·
Dominica Â· Dominican Republic Â· Ecuador Â· Egypt Â· El Salvador Â· European
UnionÂ¹ Â· Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) Â· Fiji Â· Gabon Â·
The Gambia Â· Georgia Â· Ghana Â· Grenada Â· Guatemala Â· Guinea Â· Guinea-
Bissau Â· Guyana Â· Haiti Â· Honduras Â· Hong KongÂ² Â· Iceland Â· India Â·
Indonesia Â· Israel Â· Jamaica Â· Japan Â· Jordan Â· Kenya Â· South Korea Â·
Kuwait Â· Kyrgyzstan Â· Lesotho Â· Liechtenstein Â· MacauÂ² Â· Madagascar Â·
Malawi Â· Malaysia Â· Maldives Â· Mali Â· Mauritania Â· Mauritius Â· Mexico Â·
Moldova Â· Mongolia Â· Morocco Â· Mozambique Â· Namibia Â· Nepal Â· New
Zealand Â· Nicaragua Â· Niger Â· Nigeria Â· Norway Â· Oman Â· Pakistan Â·
Panama Â· Papua New Guinea Â· Paraguay Â· Peru Â· Philippines Â· Qatar Â·
Rwanda Â· St. Kitts and Nevis Â· St. Lucia Â· St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Â· Saudi Arabia Â· Senegal Â· Sierra Leone Â· Singapore Â· Solomon Islands Â·
South Africa Â· Sri Lanka Â· Suriname Â· Swaziland Â· Switzerland Â· Separate
Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and MatsuÂ³ Â· Tanzania Â·
Thailand Â· Togo Â· Tonga Â· Trinidad and Tobago Â· Tunisia Â· Turkey Â·
Uganda Â· Ukraine Â· United Arab Emirates Â· United States Â· Uruguay Â·
Venezuela Â· Vietnam Â· Zambia Â· Zimbabwe

* * *
  1. All twenty-seven member states of the European Union are also members of the WTO in their own right: Austria â¢ Belgium â¢ Bulgaria â¢ Cyprus â¢ Czech Republic â¢ Denmark â¢ Estonia â¢ Finland â¢ France â¢ Germany â¢ Greece â¢ Hungary â¢ Ireland â¢ Italy â¢ Latvia â¢ Lithuania â¢ Luxembourg â¢ Malta â¢ Netherlands and Netherlands Antilles â¢ Poland â¢ Portugal â¢ Romania â¢ Slovakia â¢ Slovenia â¢ Spain â¢ Sweden â¢ United Kingdom.
  2. Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China.
  3. Designated name for the Republic of China (Commonly Known as Taiwan)

  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC)  
<IMG> Albania  
<IMG> Armenia  
<IMG> Azerbaijan

<IMG> Bulgaria  
<IMG> Georgia  
<IMG> Greece

<IMG> Moldova  
<IMG> Romania  
<IMG> Russia

<IMG> Serbia  
<IMG> Turkey  
<IMG> Ukraine  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armenia"

Categories: Armenia | Caucasus | Republics | Landlocked countries

Hidden categories: Articles containing non-English language text | Wikipedia
semi-protected pages | Articles containing Armenian language text | Articles
including recorded pronunciations | Vague or ambiguous time | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since January
2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles needing
additional references from April 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * ÜÜªÜ¡ÜÜ
  * Arpetan
  * Asturianu
  * ÐÐ²Ð°Ñ
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐ°ÑÒ¡Ð¾ÑÑ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bikol Central
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Cebuano
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deitsch
  * Deutsch
  * ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¬ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¦ÞÞ°
  * Dolnoserbski
  * à½à½¼à½à¼à½
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * EÊegbe
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * Galego
  * Hak-kÃ¢-fa
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hawai`i
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Ilokano
  * à¦à¦®à¦¾à¦° à¦ à¦¾à¦°/à¦¬à¦¿à¦·à§à¦£à§à¦ªà§à¦°à¦¿à¦¯à¦¼à¦¾ à¦®à¦£à¦¿à¦ªà§à¦°à§
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Interlingue
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * Kapampangan
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KaszÃ«bsczi
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * Kernewek
  * ÐÑÑÐ³ÑÐ·ÑÐ°
  * Kiswahili
  * ÐÐ¾Ð¼Ð¸
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Limburgs
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Ù ÙØ²ÙØ±ÙÙÙ
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾ÐºÑÐµÐ½Ñ
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * NÄhuatl
  * Dorerin Naoero
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Norfuk / Pitkern
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Ù¾ÚØªÙ
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * QÄ±rÄ±mtatarca
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * SÃ¡megiella
  * Gagana Samoa
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Sardu
  * Scots
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡Ð»Ð¾Ð²Ñ£ÌÐ½ÑÑÐºÑ / â°â°â°â°â°¡â°â° â°â°â°
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * TÃ¼rkmenÃ§e
  * Ð£Ð´Ð¼ÑÑÑ
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * Uyghurcheâ / Ø¦ÛÙØºÛØ±ÚÛ
  * VÃ¨neto
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * Winaray
  * Wolof
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * YorÃ¹bÃ¡
  * ç²µèª
  * Zazaki
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 01:12.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



