
# Nuremberg Chronicle

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 1493 edition of the Nuremberg Chronicle, preserved in the Smithsonian
Institution National Museum of American History

The Nuremberg Chronicle, written in Latin by Hartmann Schedel, with a version
in German translation by Georg Alt, is one of the best documented early
printed books and, appearing in 1493, is an incunabulum (printed, not hand-
written).

As was common at the time, the book did not have a title page. Latin scholars
refer to it as Liber Chronicarum (Book of Chronicles) as this phrase appears
in the index introduction of the Latin edition. English speakers have long
referred to it as the Nuremberg Chronicle after the city in which it was
published. German speakers refer to it as Die Schedelsche Weltchronik
(Schedel's World History) in honour of its author.

The illustrations in many copies were hand-coloured after printing.

## Contents

  * 1 Contents
  * 2 Publication
  * 3 Illustrations
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Contents

<IMG>

<IMG>

Page depicting Constantinople with added hand-colouring

The Chronicle is an illustrated world history, in which the contents are
divided into seven ages:

  * First age: from creation to the Deluge
  * Second age: up to the birth of Abraham
  * Third age: up to King David
  * Fourth age: up to the Babylonian captivity
  * Fifth age: up to the birth of Jesus Christ
  * Sixth age: up to the present time (the largest part)
  * Seventh age: outlook on the end of the world and the Last Judgement

## [edit] Publication

<IMG>

<IMG>

Omens from a coloured copy

The Chronicle was first published in Latin on 12 July 1493 in the city of
Nuremberg. This was quickly followed by a German translation on 23 December
1493. An estimated 1400 to 1500 Latin and 700 to 1000 German copies were
published. A document from 1509 records that 539 Latin versions and 60 German
versions had not been sold. Approximately 400 Latin and 300 German copies
survived into the twenty-first century.[1] The larger illustrations were also
sold separately as prints, often hand-coloured in watercolour. Many copies of
the book are also coloured, with varying degrees of skill; there were
specialist shops for this. The colouring on some examples has been added much
later, and some copies have been broken up for sale as decorative prints.

The publisher and printer was Anton Koberger, the godfather of Albrecht DÃ¼rer
, who in the year of DÃ¼rer's birth in 1471 ceased goldsmithing to become a
printer and publisher. He quickly became the most successful publisher in
Germany, eventually owning 24 printing presses and having many offices in
Germany and abroad, from Lyon to Budapest.[2]

## [edit] Illustrations

<IMG>

<IMG>

Catching a "lion fish" - a small illustration from a Latin copy. Note the red
capital done in pen and ink, and the doodle in the margin below

The large workshop of Michael Wolgemut, then Nuremberg's leading artist in
various media, provided the unprecedented 1,809 woodcut illustrations (before
duplications are eliminated; see below). Sebastian Kammermeister and Sebald
Schreyer financed the printing in a contract dated March 16, 1492, although
preparations had been well under way for several years. Wolgemut and his
stepson Wilhelm Pleydenwurff were first commissioned to provide the
illustrations in 1487-88, and a further contract of December 29, 1491,
commissioned manuscript layouts of the text and illustrations.

Albrecht DÃ¼rer was an apprentice with Wolgemut from 1486 to 1489, so may well
have participated in designing some of the illustrations for the specialist
craftsmen (called "formschneider"s) who cut the blocks, onto which the design
had been drawn, or a drawing glued. From 1490 to 1494 DÃ¼rer was travelling. A
drawing by Wolgemut for the elaborate frontispiece, dated 1490, is in the
British Museum.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A typical opening, uncoloured

As with other books of the period, many of the woodcuts, showing towns,
battles or kings were used more than once in the book, with the text labels
merely changed; one count of the number of original woodcuts is 645. The book
is large, with a double-page woodcut measuring about 342 x 500mm.[2] Only the
city of Nuremberg is given a double page illustration with no text. The
illustration for the city of Venice is adapted from a much larger (and, it
must be said, finer) woodcut of 1486 by Erhard Reuwich in the first
illustrated printed travel book, the Sanctae Perigrinationes of 1486. This and
other sources were used where possible; where no information was available a
number of stock images were used, and reused up to eleven times. The view of
Florence was adapted from an engraving by Francesco Rosselli.[3]

## [edit] References

<IMG>

<IMG>

Aristotle, anachronistically portrayed as a scholar of the Nuremberg
Chronicle's own time.

  1. ^ "About this book - Latin and German Editions", Beloit College Morse Library
  2. ^ a b ,Giulia Bartrum, Albrecht DÃ¼rer and his Legacy, British Museum Press, 2002, pp. 94-96, ISBN 0-7141-2633-0
  3. ^ A Hyatt Mayor, Prints and People, Metropolitan Museum of Art/Princeton, 1971, nos 43 & 173.ISBN 0-691-00326-2

## [edit] External links

Commons has well over 400 images from the Book

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Nuremberg Chronicle  
Wikisource

German Wikisource has original text related to this article:

Schedelâsche Weltchronik

  * Beloit College's extensive account of their version of the Chronicle, with illustrations
  * the original woodcut world map
  * More views from the Metropolitan Museum's uncoloured copy: Rome, Nuremberg, saints
  * Online images of an uncoloured copy from the State Library of Victoria
  * Online full Latin coloured copy from the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuremberg_Chronicle"

Categories: 1493 books | Incunabula | German literature | German chronicles |
15th-century history books

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 12:57.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



