
# Uyghur people

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the language spoken by this ethnic group, see Uyghur language.

Uyghur  
Ø¦ÛÙØºÛØ±  
<IMG>  
Total population  
11.37 million[1] (35 million by unofficial sources)  
Regions with significant populations  
<IMG> People's Republic of China (Xinjiang)  
<IMG> Kazakhstan  
<IMG> Kyrgyzstan  
<IMG> Uzbekistan  
<IMG> Turkey  
<IMG> Russia  
<IMG> Tajikistan  
Languages  
Uyghur  
Religion  
Sunni Muslim  
Sufi Muslim  
Related ethnic groups  
Turkic peoples  
The Uyghur (also spelled Uygur, Uighur, Uigur, Uyghur: Ø¦ÛÙØºÛØ±;
simplified Chinese: ç»´å¾å°; traditional Chinese: ç¶­å¾ç¾; pinyin:
WÃ©iwÃº'Är) are a Turkic-speaking people of Central Asia. Many English
speakers pronounce it as "wEEger" (IPA: [Ëwi.É¡É]) but the pronunciation
"ooygOOr" (IPA: [uj.ËÉ¡ur]) is closer to native [ÊÊÉª'ÊÊË]. Today
Uyghurs live primarily in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (also known by
its controversial name Uyghurstan or East Turkistan) in the People's Republic
of China.

There are Uyghur diasporic communities in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia,
Uzbekistan, Australia,[2] Germany and Turkey and smaller ones in Afghanistan,
Russia and Taoyuan County of Hunan province in south-central Mainland
China.[3] Uyghur neighborhoods can be found in major Chinese cities like
Beijing and Shanghai.[4] There are small communities in the United States,
mainly in Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York City and Washington, DC, as
well as Toronto and Vancouver in Canada.

## Contents

  * 1 Identity
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Orkhon Uyghur
      * 2.1.1 Pre-Imperial - 745 CE
      * 2.1.2 Uyghur Empire: the golden age (744-840 CE)
    * 2.2 Modern Uyghur
      * 2.2.1 840 CE - 1600 CE
      * 2.2.2 Chagatai Khanate
      * 2.2.3 Post-1600 AD
    * 2.3 Separatism
  * 3 Culture
    * 3.1 Literature
    * 3.2 Medicine
    * 3.3 Uyghur art
    * 3.4 Uyghur music
  * 4 Orthography
  * 5 See also
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Identity

Historically the term "Uyghur" was applied to a group of Turkic-speaking
tribes that lived in the Altay Mountains. Along with the GÃ¶ktÃ¼rks
(Kokturks), the Uyghurs were one of the largest and most enduring Turkic
peoples living in Central Asia.

In the literature, the term Uyghur has a number of differing spellings,
including Uigur, Uygur, and Uighur. The word means "Confederation of Nine
Tribes" and is synonymous with the name Tokuz-Oguz. In Turkic inscriptions,
the name Tokuz-Oguz is used for the subdued Uigurs, and the resisting are
called Uigurs, pointing to semantical nuances between the two names.[5]
Etymologically, TÃ¼rkic "tokuz" = nine, and "gur" = tribe. They were one of
the Tele tribes that migrated in the 4th century from Hesi northward. The
Chinese also referred to the Uyghurs as Hoy-Hu, Ãan-Ga,[6] and Chiu Hsing
("Nine tribes," Chinese: ä¹å§; pinyin: jiÅ­xÃ¬ng). Another suggested
etymology is a composite of "uigy" quick \+ "er/ir/ur" = man for "Quick
People", [7] "Uygar" as "civilised", and derivations such as "unified,
united", though none of these are justified on historical or linguistic
grounds.[8]

<IMG>

<IMG>

An Uyghur girl in Turpan, Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region

The earliest use of the term "Uyghur" (Weihu) was during the Northern Wei
Dynasty (386-534 CE), in China. At that time, the Uyghur were part of the
Gaoche (English: "High Wheels"), a group of Turkic tribes, which Chinese later
called Tele people, from the Turkic word, "tele"[9] the "Nine-Family Tele"
association, i.e., Tokuz-Oguzes) for "wheelwagon". This group included tribes
such as Syr-Tardush, Basmyl, Oguz, Khazar , Alans, Kyrgyz, Tuva and Yakut from
the Lake Baikal Region. The forebears of the Tele belonged to those of Hun
(Chinese: Xiongnu) descendants. According to Chinese Turkic scholars Ma
Changshou and Cen Zhongmian, the Chinese word Tiele originates from the Turkic
word "TÃ¼rkler" (Turks), which is a plural form of "TÃ¼rk" (Turk) and the
Chinese word "Tujue" comes from the Turkic word "TÃ¼rkÃ¼t" which is a singular
form of TÃ¼rk.[10] The origin of Gaoche can be traced back to the Dingling
peoples of about 200 BC, contemporary with the Chinese Han
Dynasty.[11][12][13]

The first use of "Uyghur" as a reference to a political nation occurred during
the interim period between the First and Second GÃ¶ktÃ¼rk Kaganates (630-684
CE). After the collapse of the Uyghur Empire in 840 CE, Uyghur resettled to
the Tarim Basin.[citation needed]

In modern usage, "Uyghur" refers to settled Turkic urban-dwellers and farmers
of Kashgaria or Uyghurstan who follow traditional settled Central Asian
practices, as distinguished from nomadic Turkic populations in Central Asia.
The Bolsheviks reintroduced the term "Uyghur" to replace the previously used
Turki.

Today, Uyghurs live mainly in Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, China, where
they are the largest ethnic group. "Xinjiang", meaning "New Frontier", is the
Chinese name of the Autonomous Region.

## [edit] History

Main articles: Uyghur Empire, History of Mongolia, Turkic migration, and
History of Xinjiang

### [edit] Orkhon Uyghur

Uyghur history can be divided into four distinct phases: Pre-Imperial (300 BCE
- 630 CE), Imperial (630-840 CE), Idiqut (840-1209 CE), and Mongol (1209-1600
CE), with perhaps a fifth modern phase running from the death of the Silk Road
in 1600 CE until the present. Uyghur history is the story of an obscure
nomadic tribe from the Altai Mountains rising to challenge the Chinese Empire
and ultimately becoming the diplomatic arm of the Mongol invasion.

#### [edit] Pre-Imperial - 745 CE

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of the Western (purple) and Eastern (blue) GÃ¶ktÃ¼rk khaganates at their
height, c. 600 CE. Lighter areas show direct rule; darker areas show spheres
of influence.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Uyghur Empire at its height

<IMG>

<IMG>

An 8th century Uyghur Khagan

<IMG>

<IMG>

Uyghur princesses. Bezeklik, Cave 9, ca. 8th/9th century CE, wall painting

<IMG>

<IMG>

Uyghur princes wearing robes and headgears. Bezeklik, Cave 9

The ancestors of the Uyghur include the Huns (ç»). When the GÃ¶ktÃ¼rk Khanate
was established, the Uyghurs, together with other turkic tribes, became part
of GÃ¶ktÃ¼rk empire. The empire declined following Bilge Khan's death in 734.
After a series of revolts coordinated with their Chinese allies, the Uyghur
emerged as the leaders of a new turkic coalition force called the "Toquz
Oghuz". In 744 CE the Uyghur, together with other related subject tribes (the
Basmyl and Qarluq), defeated the GÃ¶ktÃ¼rk Khanate and founded the Uyghur
Empire at Mount ÃtÃ¼ken, which lasted for about 100 years (744-840 CE).

#### [edit] Uyghur Empire: the golden age (744-840 CE)

Properly called the On-Uyghur (ten Uyghurs) and Toquz-Oghuz (nine tribes)
Orkhon Khanate, the Uyghur Empire stretched from the Caspian Sea[citation
needed] to Manchuria and lasted from 744 to 840 CE. It was administered from
the imperial capital Ordu Baliq. Uyghur Empire considered conquering the Tang
Empire,[citation needed] but chose instead to use an exploitive trade policy
to drain off the wealth of China without actually destroying it. In 840 CE,
following a famine and a civil war, the Uyghur Empire was overrun by the
Kyrgyz.

### [edit] Modern Uyghur

#### [edit] 840 CE - 1600 CE

Following the collapse of the Uyghur Empire, the Uyghur established states in
three areas: present day Gansu, Xinjiang, and the Chu River the West of Tian
Shan (Tengri-Tag) Mountains.

Today one can still see Uyghurs with light-colored skin and hair. The genetic
studies show that the Uyghur (UIG) population, presenting a typical admixture
of Eastern and Western anthropometric traits, results showed that UIG was
formed by two-way admixture, with 60% European ancestry and 40% East Asian
(Turkic-Hun) ancestry. Overall linkage disequilibrium (LD) in UIG was similar
to that in its parental populations represented in East Asia and Europe with
regard to common alleles, and UIG manifested. Both the magnitude of LD and
fragmentary ancestral chromosome segments indicated a long history of Uyghur.
Under the assumption of a hybrid isolation (HI) model, it was estimated that
the admixture event of UIG occurred about 126 [107, 146] generations ago, or
2520 [2140, 2920] years ago assuming 20 years per generation.[14]

Yugor The eastern-most of the three Uyghur states was the Ganzhou Kingdom
(870-1036 CE), with its capital near present-day Zhangye in the Gansu province
of China. There, the Uyghur converted from Manicheism to Lamaism (Tibetan and
Mongol Buddhism). Unlike other Turkic peoples further west, they did not later
convert to Islam. Their descendants are now known as Yugurs (or Yogir, Yugor,
and Sary Uyghurs, literally meaning "yellow Uyghurs") and are distinct from
modern Uyghurs. In 1028-1036 CE, the Yugors were defeated in a bloody war and
forcibly absorbed into the Tangut kingdom.

Karakhoja The central of the three Uyghur states was the Karakhoja kingdom
(created during 856-866 CE), also called the "Idiqut" ("Holy Wealth, Glory")
state, and was based around the cities of Turfan (winter capital), Beshbalik
(summer capital), Kumul, and Kucha. A Buddhist state, with state-sponsored
Buddhism and Manicheism, it can be considered the center of Uyghur culture.
The Idiquts (title of the Karakhoja rulers) ruled independently until 1209,
when they submitted to the Mongols under Genghis Khan and, as vassal rulers,
existed until 1335.

Kara-Khanids, or The Karahans (Great Khans Dynasty), was the westernmost of
the three Uyghur states. The Karahans (Karakhanliks) originated from Uyghur
tribes settled in the Chu River Valley after 840 and ruled between 940-1212 in
Turkistan and MaveraÃ¼nnehir. They converted to Islam in 934 under the rule of
Sultan Satuq Bughra Khan (920-956 CE) and, after taking power over Qarluks in
940, built a federation with Muslim institutions. Together with the Samanids
of Samarkand, they considered themselves the defenders of Islam against the
Buddhist Uyghur Idiqut. The first capital of the Karahans was established in
the city of Balasagun in the Chu River Valley and later was moved to Kashgar.

The reign of the Karahans is especially significant from the point of view of
Turkic culture and art history. During this period, mosques, schools, bridges,
and caravansaries were constructed in the cities. Kashgar, Bukhara and
Samarkand became centers of learning. During this period, Turkic literature
developed. Among the most important works of the period is Kutadgu Bilig
(English: "The Knowledge That Gives Happiness"), written by Yusuf Balasaghuni
between the years 1060-1070, and Lughat-at-Turk(The Turkic dictionary) by
Mahmud of Kashgar.

Both the Idiqut and the Kara-Khanid states eventually submitted to the Kara
Khitais. After the rise of the Seljuk Turks in Iran, the Kara-Khanids became
nominal vassals of the Seljuks as well. Later they would serve the dual-
suzerainty of the Kara-Khitans to the north and the Seljuks to the south.
Finally all three states became vassals to Genghis Khan in 1209.

Most inhabitants of the Besh Balik and Turfan regions did not convert to Islam
until the 15th century expansion of the Yarkand Khanate, a Turko-Mongol
successor state based in western Tarim. Before converting to Islam, Uyghurs
were Tengriist, Manichaeans, Buddhists, or Nestorian Christians.

#### [edit] Chagatai Khanate

Main article: Chagatai Khanate

The Chagatai Khanate was a Mongol khanate initially inherited part of the
Mongol Empire that comprised the lands controlled by Chagatai Khan
(alternative spellings Chagata, Chugta, Chagta, Djagatai, Jagatai), second son
of the Mongol emperor Genghis Khan. Chagatai's ulus, or hereditary territory,
consisted of the part of the Mongol Empire which extended from the Ili River
(today in eastern Kazakhstan) and Kashgaria (in the western Tarim Basin) to
Transoxiana (modern Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan). After the death of his
father, he inherited most of what are now the five Central Asian states and
northern Iran, which he ruled until his death in 1242. These lands later came
to be known as the Chagatai Khanate, a descendant empire of the Mongol Empire
after the latter's split. These territories would later become the Turco-
Mongol states.

After the death of the Chagatayid ruler Qazan Khan in 1346, the Chagatai
Khanate was divided into western (Transoxiana) and eastern
(Moghulistan/Uyghuristan) halves, which was later known as "Kashgar and
Uyghurstan," according Balkh historian Makhmud ibn Vali (Sea of Mysteries,
1640). Kashgar historian Muhammad Imin Sadr Kashgari called the country
Uyghurstan in his book Traces of Invasion (Asar al-futuh) in 1780. Power in
the western half devolved into the hands of several tribal leaders, most
notably the Qara'unas. Khans appointed by the tribal rulers were mere puppets.
In the east, Tughlugh Timur (1347-1363), an obscure Chaghataite adventurer,
gained ascendancy over the nomadic Mongols, and converted to Islam. In 1360,
and again in 1361, he invaded the western half in the hope that he could
reunify the khanate. At their greatest extent, the Chaghataite domains
extended from the Irtysh River in Siberia down to Ghazni in Afghanistan, and
from Transoxiana to the Tarim Basin.

Tughlugh Timur was unable to completely subjugate the tribal rulers. After his
death in 1363, the Moghuls left Transoxiana, and the Qara'unas' leader Amir
Husayn took control of Transoxiana. TÄ«mur-e Lang (Timur the Lame), or
Tamerlane, a Muslim native of Transoxania who claimed descent from Genghis
Khan, desired control of the khanate for himself and opposed Amir Husayn. He
took Samarkand in 1366, and was recognized as emir in 1370, although he
continued to officially act in the name of the Chagatai khans. For over three
decades, Timur used the Chagatai lands as the base for extensive conquests,
conquering the rulers of Herat in Afghanistan, Shiraz in Persia, Baghdad in
Iraq, Delhi in India, and Damascus in Syria. After defeating the Ottoman Turks
at Angora, Timur died in 1405 while marching on Ming Dynasty China. The
Timurid Dynasty continued under his son, Shah Rukh, who ruled from Herat until
his death in 1447.

By 1369, the western half (Transoxonia and further west) of the Chagatai
Khanate had been conquered by Tamerlane in his attempt to reconstruct the
Mongol Empire. The eastern half, mostly under what is now Xinjiang, remained
under Chagatai princes that were at times allied or at war with Timurid
princes. Finally, in the 17th century, all the remaining Chagatay domains fell
under the theocratic regime of Apak Khoja and his descendant, the Khojijans,
who ruled East Turkestan under Dzungar and/or Manchu overlordships.

Both Transoxonia and the Tarim Basin of East Turkestan became known as
Moghulistan or Mughalistan, named after the ruling class of Chagatay and
Timurid states which descended from the "Moghol" (Mongol) tribe of Doghlat,
but was completely Islamicized and Turkified in language. It was the same
Moghol Timurid ruling class that established the Timurid rule on the Indian
Subcontinent known as the Mughal Empire.

Under the Chagatay Khanate's rule in East Turkestan/Uyghurstan, the culture of
the original subjects of the Karakhanids(Uyghurs) became somewhat of a
"national culture" of the largely Muslim state, that the Buddhist populations
of the former Karakhoja(Uyghurs) Idikut-ate largely converted into the Muslim
faith, and that all Chagatai-speaking Muslims, regardless whether they lived
in Turpan or Kashgar, became known by their occupations as Moghols (ruling
class), Sarts (merchants and townspeople) and Taranchis (farmers). This triple
division of classes among the same Muslim Turkic folk also existed in
Transoxonia, regardless whether they were under Timurid or Chagatay, or even
Uzbek and Khojijan princes. Even today, the sense of ethnic kinship between
the modern Uyghur and Uzbek peoples remain strong.

It is widely believed that the modern Uyghur nation acquired its current
demographic composition and its current cultural identity during the East
Turkestani Chagatay period. The Chagatay period in East Turkestan was marked
by instability and internecine warfare, with Kashgar, Yarkant and Qomul as
major centers of warfare and warlord rule. Some Chagatay princes allied with
the Timurids and Uzbeks of Transoxonia, and some sought help from the Buddhist
Kalmyks. The Chagatay prince Mirza Haidar Kurgan escaped his war-torn homeland
Kashgar in the early 16th century to Timurid Tashkent, only to be evicted by
the invading Shaybanids. Escaping to the mercy of his Mughal Timurid cousins,
which was then rulers of Delhi, India, he gained his final post as governor of
Kashmir and wrote the famous Tarikh-i-Rashidi, widely acclaimed as the most
comprehensive work on the Uyghur civilization during the East Turkestani
Chagatay reign.[15]

The Khojijans were originally the Aq Tagh tariqa of the Naqshbandi order,
which originated in Timurid Transoxonia. Struggles between two prominent
Naqshbandi tariqas the Aq Taghlik and the Kara Taghlik engulfed the entire
East Turkestani Chagatay domain in late 17th century, which Apaq Khoja finally
triumphant both as a national religious and political leader. The last ruling
Chagatay princess married one of the ruling Khojijan princes (descendants of
Apaq) and became known as Khanum Pasha. She ruled with brutality after the
death of her husband, and singlehandedly slaughtered many of her Khojijan and
Chagatayid rivals. She was known to have boiled alive the last Chagatayid
princess that could have continued the dynasty. The Khojijan Dynasty fell into
chaos despite the brutality of Khanum Pasha, and became a vassal of the
invading Dzungar Kalmyks.

The triumph of the Manchu Qing Dynasty over the Jungars brought Manchu
military governorship to the Ili Valley north of Kashgar. Some Khojijan
princes put up a struggle against Qing overlordship, but all were finally
pacified and became local rulers in a fragmented East Turkestan that
recognized Qing suzerainty.

#### [edit] Post-1600 AD

The Manchus, semi-nomads from present-day northeast China, vastly expanded the
Qing empire, which they founded in 1644, to include much of Mongolia, East
Turkistan, and Tibet. The Manchus invaded Dzungaria in 1759 and dominated it
until 1864. During this period, the Uyghurs revolted 42 times against Qing
Dynasty rulers. In the revolt of 1864, the Uyghurs were successful in
expelling the Qing Dynasty officials from East Turkistan, and founded an
independent Kashgaria kingdom, called Yettishar (English: "country of seven
cities"). Under the leadership of Yakub Beg, it included Kashgar, Yarkand,
Hotan, Aksu, Kucha, Korla and Turfan). The kingdom was recognized by the
Ottoman Empire (1873), Tsarist Russia (1872), and Great Britain (1874), which
established a mission in the capital, Kashgar.

Large Qing Dynasty forces under the overall command of General Zuo Zongtang
attacked East Turkestan in 1876. Fearing Tsarist expansion into East
Turkestan, Great Britain supported the Manchu invasion forces through loans by
British banks (mostly through Boston Bank, located in Hong Kong). After this
invasion, East Turkestan was renamed "Xinjiang" or "Sinkiang", which means
"New Dominion" or "New Territory", and it was annexed by the Manchu empire on
November 18, 1884.

Throughout the Qing Dynasty, the sedentary Turkic inhabitants of the oases
around the Tarim speaking Qarluq/Old Uyghur-Chagatay dialects were still
largely known as Taranchi, Sart, ruled by their Moghul rulers of Khojijan or
Chagatay lineages. Other parts of the Islamic World still knew this area as
Moghulistan or as the eastern part of Turkestan.

Before being renamed "New Territory" by Zuo Zongtang, this eastern part of
Turkestan was more often known to the Qing Chinese as Hui Jiang, or "The
Frontier of the Huis". Qarluq Turkic speaking Taranchi and Sart are often
known as "Chantou Hui" (Turban-wearing Hui), for their headgears distinctive
from those of the Chinese-speaking Hui. It was based on this designation of
Hui, that Sart-Taranchi participants of the Czarist Central Asian Islamic
modernist movement, the Jadid Movement, concluded that the modernized ethnonym
of the Sart-Taranchi of Moghulistan should be Uyghur, because the names Hui
and Uyghur are cognates. It was from outside of Qing Domain, well within the
Czarist controlled parts of Central Asia, that Sart-Taranchi, Uzbek and
Russian scholars first propagated the use of the modern ethnonym Uyghur. To
illustrate the artificiality of the distinctions between the modern Uzbek and
Uyghur nationality, one only needs to look at General Saipidin Eziz, the first
governor of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. General Saipidin was born
to a Kashgar Sart merchant family with Andijan roots. Technically, one with
Andijan roots would be classified as Uzbek as many Xinjiang people with
connections in Uzbekistan, and speaking Turkic dialects local to Uzbekistan,
continue to be classified as "Uzbeks in Xinjiang". However, since Kashgar
Sarts and Andijan Sarts are hardly different culturally from each other,
Saipidin grew up to identify himself primarily with his hometown Kashgar, and
has always been identified as an Uyghur. The Uzbek culture does derive largely
from the Sart culture common to most of Turkestan during the Karakhanid and
Chagatay eras. However the Uzbek Khanate which did not rule Xinjiang, but only
Uzbekistan in early modern times, had its ruling culture derived from the true
Uzbeks, a Kypchak horde similar to the Kazakhs and Karakalpaks. The modern
Uzbek nation did absorb something from this Kypchak ruling culture which can
be discerned from the doppas worn by the Uzbeks and Uyghurs. The Uyghurs
usually wear the square doppas whereas the Uzbeks usually wear the round
doppas in similar make as the Kazakh and Kazan Tatar doppas.

By 1920, Uyghur nationalism had already become a grave challenge to the Qing
and Republican Chinese warlords controlling Xinjiang. Turpan poet Abdulhaliq,
having spent his early years in Semey (Semipalatinsk) and the Jadid
intellectual centres in Uzbekistan, returned to Xinjiang with a penname that
he later styled as a surname: Uyghur. He wrote the famous nationalist poem
Oyghan, which opened with the line "Ey pekir Uyghur, oyghan!" (Hey poor
Uyghur, wake up!). He was later martyred by the Chinese warlord Sheng Shicai
in Turpan in March,1933 for inciting Uyghur nationalist sentiments through his
works.

Meanwhile, the "Great Games" among Russia, Britain and China was underway in
Central Asia, with former continuous ethnic cultures from Afghanistan through
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan to Xinjiang, being divided into artificial
"nationalities". Artificial lines have been drawn between Shiite Persian
speakers and Sunni Chagatay Turkic speakers within the same Uzbek cultural
sphere and gave rise to the modern Tajik and Uzbek nationalities. Likewise the
Russians and the Chinese deemed it necessary to draw a line between the Sart-
Taranchi on different sides of the border separating Uzbekistan and Xinjiang.
Whereas the rather similar Sart-Taranchi populations around Kashgar(Xinjiang)
and Andijan(Uzbekistan) became artificially divided into the different
ethnicities of Uyghur and Uzbeks, diverse local populations, though speaking
closely related Chagatay dialects scattered among oases of Turpan, Qumul,
Korla, Kashgar, Yarkant, Yengihissar, Khotan, Gulja through the Tarim Basin
and the edges of Xinjiang, were recognized as one modern ethnicity: Uyghur.
Official recognition of the Uyghur nationality came under the rule of Sheng
Shicai, a Republican Chinese, or nominally Kuomintang warlord who ruled
Xinjiang almost as an independent, feudal kingdom.

The Uyghur independence activists staged several uprisings against Sheng-
Kuomintang rule. Twice, in 1933 and 1944, Uyghur were successful in setting up
two independent Uyghur states: East Turkestan Republic and Republic of
Uyghurstan or Islamic Eastern Turkestan Republic. The more secular, socialist
East Turkestan Republic was multiethnic, with Kazakh, Uzbek, Han Chinese,
Kyrgyz, Russian as well as Uyghur founders, and was backed by Joseph Stalin.
In 1949, the East Turkestan agreed to form a confederate relation with Mao's
People's Republic of China, banking on the firm grip on Xinjiang by its own
pro-Soviet and ethnic nationalist local regime. However, a plane crash killed
the main body of East Turkestan Republic's supreme leadership, as this party
was on its way to Beijing to negotiate the terms of confederation. The crash
is sometimes alleged as a plot by Mao, because soon following the crash,
General Wang Zhen quickly marched on Xinjiang through the deserts, suppressing
pro-Kuomintang and anti-Chinese ethnic uprisings. The remaining East Turkestan
Republic leadership under General Saipidin Eziz quickly surrendered to Mao's
terms and agreed to turn Xinjiang into the Uyghur Autonomous Region, with the
Eastern Turkestan Republican Army pressed into the PLA and Saipidin Eziz
serving as the region's first CCP governor. Many East Turkestan Republic
loyalists, resenting Saipidin's betrayal of the Uyghur's nationalist dream,
made their exiles to Turkey and the West. Yet many other loyalists remained
behind and staged anti-CCP activities aiming at re-establishing an independent
nation in Xinjiang. Soon after that, all mentioning of the name East Turkestan
have been censored and the display of the republic's blue star-crescent flag
became illegal.

### [edit] Separatism

Main article: East Turkestan independence movement

<IMG>

<IMG>

The "KÃ¶kbayraq" flag. This flag is used by Uyghurs as a symbol of the East
Turkestan independence movement. It is almost identical to the flag of Turkey
except with a blue background. The Government of the People's Republic of
China prohibits using the flag in the country.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Uyghur protest in Munich 2008 against China policy

The name Xinjiang, which means "new territory" or "new frontier" in Chinese,
is considered offensive by many advocates of Uyghur independence who prefer to
use historical or ethnic names such as Uyghurstan or Eastern Turkestan (with
Turkestan sometimes spelled as Turkistan).[16]

Following the September 11, 2001 attacks in the USA, China voiced its support
for the United States of America in the war on terror. The Chinese government
has often referred to Uyghur nationalists as "terrorists" and received more
global support for their own "war on terror" since 9/11. Human rights
organizations have become concerned that this "war on terror" is being used by
the Chinese government as a pretext to repress ethnic Uyghurs.[17] Uyghur
exile groups also claim that the Chinese government is suppressing Uyghur
culture and religion, and responding to demands for independence with human
rights violations.[18]

According to at least one outside source, Beijing has "decimated Uyghur
culture."

> In traditional Uyghur cities like Kashgar, a vibrant bazaar town on the
border of Central Asia, the authorities tore down Uyghur stalls across the
central square, where Muslim men once gathered for open-air shaves before
heading to the central mosque. The local government replaced them with a bland
plaza patrolled by Chinese troops. In another unpopular move, Beijing offered
financial incentives for ethnic Chinese migrants to come to the province and
set up businesses. Now, ethnic [Han] Chinese dominate nearly all big
businesses in the region.[19]

Many Uyghur in the diaspora support Pan-Turkic groups. Several organizations
such as the East Turkestan Party, provide support for the Chinese Uyghurs.

Most Uyghur political groups have supported "peaceful" Uyghur nationalism,
advocating independence from China. There are two separatist groups (the East
Turkestan Islamic Movement and, disputedly, East Turkestan Liberation
Organization) that have been involved in fighting with the Chinese army and
killing the Han Chinese. Often the Chinese government refers generally to East
Turkestan nationalists as "terrorists".

On July 21, 2008, Two explosions on buses in the south-western Chinese city of
Kunming have left at least two people dead and 14 injured, according to
reports. The East Turkestan Islamic Movement claimed responsibility
afterwards. [2]

On August 4, 2008, 4 days before the Beijing Olympics, 16 Chinese police
officers were killed and 16 were injured by two men. The men - a taxi driver
and a vegetable seller from the local area, according to Chinese media - were
later arrested. [3]

On August 9 - the first day of the Beijing Olympics - there were a series of
bomb attacks in Kuqa (Kucha), Xinjiang on a police station and commercial
buildings. There were two policemen injured and five attackers killed in the
conflict. [4] Later, the state media reported that the death toll had risen to
eight with four injured. [5]

## [edit] Culture

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Three Uyghur girls at a Sunday market in the oasis city Khotan (Hotan /
Hetian), in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region of the People's Republic of
China.

The relics of the Uyghur culture constitute major collections in the museums
of Berlin, London, Paris, Tokyo, St. Petersburg, and New Delhi. During the
late 19th and early 20th centuries, scientific and archaeological expeditions
to the region of Uyghurstanâs Silk Road discovered numerous cave temples,
monastery ruins, and wall paintings, as well as valuable miniatures, books,
and documents. Explorers from Europe, America, and Japan were amazed by the
art treasures found there, and soon their reports caught the attention of an
interested public around the world. The manuscripts and documents discovered
in Xinjiang (Uyghurstan/Eastern Turkestan) reveal the very high degree of
civilization attained by the Uyghurs. This Uyghur power, prestige, and
civilization, which dominated Central Asia for over a thousand years, went
into a steep decline after the Manchu invasion of their homeland. Throughout
the history of Central Asia, they left a lasting imprint on both the culture
and tradition of the people of central Asia.

Chinese ambassador Wang Yen De to the Karakhoja Uyghur Kingdom in 981-984: "I
was impressed with the extensive civilization I have found in the Uyghur
Kingdom. The beauty of the temples, monasteries, wall paintings, statues,
towers, gardens, housings and the palaces built throughout the kingdom cannot
be described. The Uyghurs skilfully make things of silver and gold, vases and
pitchers. Some say that God has infused this talent into these people only."

Albert von Le Coq: "The Uyghur language and script contributed to the
enrichment of civilizations of the other peoples in Central Asia. Compared to
the Europeans of that time, the Uyghurs were far more advanced. Documents
discovered in Uyghur Region prove that an Uigur farmer could write down a
contract, using legal terminology. How many European farmers could have done
that at that period? This shows the extent of Uyghur civilization of that
time."[citation needed]

### [edit] Literature

Some of Uyghur books have been translated into different western languages. In
the 11th century the Uyghurs accepted the Arabic alphabet.[citation needed]

Most of the early Uyghur literary works were translations of Buddhist and
Manichean religious texts, but there were also narrative, poetic, and epic
works.[citation needed] Some of these have been translated into German,
English, Russian, and Turkish. After embracing Islam, world-renowned Uyghur
scholars emerged, and Uyghur literature flourished. Among hundreds of
important works surviving from that era are Qutatqu Bilik (Wisdom Of Royal
Glory) by YÃ¼sÃ¼p Has Hajip (1069-70), MÃ¤hmut QÃ¤ÅqÃ¤ri's Divan-i Lugat-it
TÃ¼rk\- A Dictionary of Turkic Dialects(1072), and ÃhmÃ¤t YÃ¼knÃ¤ki's
Atabetul Hakayik. Perhaps the most famous and well loved pieces of modern
Uyghur literature are Abdurehim Otkur's Iz, Oyghanghan Zimin, Zordun Sabir's
Anayurt and Ziya Samedi's (former minister of culture in Sinkiang Government
in 50's) novels Mayimkhan and Mystery of the years .[citation needed]

Ferdinand de Saussure: "Those who preserved the language and written culture
of Central Asia were the Uyghurs."[citation needed]

### [edit] Medicine

The Uyghurs had an extensive knowledge of medicine and medical practice.
Chinese Song Dynasty (906-960) sources indicate that an Uyghur physician named
Nanto traveled to China and brought with him many kinds of medicine unknown to
the Chinese. There were 103 different herbs used in Uyghur medicine recorded
in a medical compendium by Li Shizhen (1518-1593), a Chinese medical
authority. Tatar scholar, professor ReÅit Rahmeti Arat in Zur Heilkunde der
Uighuren (Medical Practices of the Uyghurs) published in 1930 and 1932, in
Berlin, discussed Uyghur medicine. Relying on a sketch of a man with an
explanation of acupuncture, he and some Western scholars suspect that
acupuncture was not a Chinese, but an Uyghur discovery. [20]

Today, traditional Uyghur medicine can still be found at street stands.
Similar to other traditional medicine, diagnosis is usually made through
checking the pulse, symptoms, and disease history, and then the pharmacist
pounds up different dried herbs, making personalized medicines according to
the prescription. Modern Uyghur medical hospitals adopted the Western medical
system and adopt Western pharmaceutical technology to produce traditional
medicines.

### [edit] Uyghur art

<IMG>

<IMG>

Wall painting at Bezeklik caves in Flaming Mountains, Turpan Depression

The cave paintings at Bezeklik and Kizil

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
### [edit] Uyghur music

  * London Uyghur Ensemble
  * Abdulla Abdurehim is a singer who mixes traditional Uighur music with pop melodies and electronic instruments, and who is probably the most well known musician from this region. He is also known as the âking of Uighur Popâ. His music was played during the opening ceremonies of the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games.

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
Russian scholar Pantusov writes that the Uyghurs manufactured their own
musical instruments; they had 62 different kinds of musical instruments and in
every Uyghur home there used to be an instrument called a "dutar".

## [edit] Orthography

Main article: Uyghur alphabet

Throughout the centuries, the Uyghurs have used the following scripts:

  1. Confederated with the GÃ¶ktÃ¼rks in the 6th and 7th centuries, they used the Orkhon script.
  2. In the 5th century, they adopted Sogdian script which after heavy modification became known as the Uyghur script, and was vertically instead of horizontaly. See Old Uyghur alphabet. This script was used for almost 800 years, not only by the Uyghurs, but also by other Turkic peoples, by the Mongols, and by the Manchus in the early stage of their rule in China.

After having studied the Chinese historical chronicles, Uighur historian
Turghun Almas asserts, that Uighur script came into the world several
centuries before Christ.

  1. After embracing Islam in the 10th century, the Uyghurs adopted the Arabic alphabet, and its use became common in the 11th century.
  2. During a short period of time (1969-1987), Uyghurs in China used a Latin script (yengi yazik).
  3. Today the Uyghurs of the former Soviet Union use Cyrillic, the Uyghurs of Xinjiang (Uyghurstan) use a modified Arabic script, and the Uyghurs of Turkey use the Latin alphabet.

> The Uighur Script

## [edit] See also

  * Tocharians
  * List of Uyghurs
  * Uyghur language
  * East Turkestan
  * Kushan Empire
  * Uyghur detainees in Guantanamo
  * Uyghur timeline
  * Ugrians
  * List of Uyghur singers

## [edit] See also

Diamond in the Dunes

## [edit] References

  1. ^ [1]
  2. ^ Ferrari, Justine (2009-01-10). "Asylum plea for Guantanamo Uyghurs". The Weekend Australian (News Limited): p. 2. http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,25197,24893693-5013404,00.html. Retrieved on 2009-01-22.
  3. ^ Ethnic Uygurs in Hunan Live in Harmony with Han Chinese
  4. ^ Chinese Cultural Studies: Ethnography of China: Brief Guide
  5. ^ Gumilev, L.N., "Ancient Turks", Moscow, 'Science', 1967, Ch. 27 http://gumilevica.kulichki.net/OT/ot27.htm
  6. ^ Gumilev L.N., "Hunnu in China", Moscow, 'Science', 1974, http://gumilevica.kulichki.net/HPH/hph16.htm
  7. ^ M. Zakiev, 2003, Origin of TÃ¼rks and Tatars, pp. 54, 58, ISBN 5-85840-317-4, in English
  8. ^ Reference?
  9. ^ Hamilton, 1962
  10. ^ Ma Changshou and Cen Zhongmian, A Historical Collection on the History of the Turks. (Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1958): 6-7.
  11. ^ Golden, Peter. An Introduction to the History of the Turkic Peoples (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1992), 94.
  12. ^ Sima Qian, Shiji. Records of the Historian. Vol. 110: Xiongnu; and Ban Gu, Han Shu, History of the Han Dynasty, Vol. 94: Xiongnu.
  13. ^ Book of Sui, vol. 84 (c. 600 CE).
  14. ^ msh238 2265..2280
  15. ^ PHI Persian Literature in Translation
  16. ^ http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/19/world/asia/19xinjiang.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1
  17. ^ China 'crushing Muslim Uighurs' BBC News Online, 2007-04-21. Retrieved 2007-04-21.
  18. ^ The Plight of the Uyghur People
  19. ^ The New Republic, "Home Court Advantage", by Joshua Kurlantzick, Post Date, March 25, 2008
  20. ^ Professor ReÅit Rahmeti Arat, Zur Heilkunde der Uighuren (Medical Practices of the Uyghurs), Berlin (1930 and 1932)

  * Chinese Cultural Studies: Ethnography of China: Brief Guide at acc6.its.brooklyn.cuny.edu
  * Findley, Carter Vaughn. 2005. The Turks in World History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516770-8; 0-19-517726-6 (pbk.)
  * Hessler, Peter. Oracle Bones: A Journey Through Time in China. New York: Harper Perennial, 2006.
  * Human Rights in China: China, Minority Exclusion, Marginalization and Rising Tensions, London, Minority Rights Group International, 2007
  * Kaltman, Blaine (2007). Under the Heel of the Dragon: Islam, Racism, Crime, and the Uighur in China. Athens: Ohio University Press. ISBN 9780896802544.
  * Kamberi, Dolkun. 2005. Uyghurs and Uyghur identity. Sino-Platonic papers, no. 150. Philadelphia, PA: Dept. of East Asian Languages and Civilizations, University of Pennsylvania.
  * Mackerras, Colin. Ed. and trans. 1972. The Uighur Empire according to the T'ang Dynastic Histories: a study in Sino-Uyghur relations 744â840. University of South Carolina Press. ISBN 0-87249-279-6
  * Millward, James A. and Nabijan Tursun, Political History and Strategies of Control, 1884â1978 in Xinjiang: China's Muslim Borderland ISBN 0-7656-1318-2
  * Rall, Ted. Silk Road to Ruin: Is Central Asia the New Middle East? New York: NBM Publishing, 2006.
  * Rudelson, Justin Ben-Adam, Oasis identities: Uyghur nationalism along China's Silk Road, New York: Columbia University Press, 1997.

## [edit] External links

Find more about Uyghurs on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions from
Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * All News about Uyghurs(Uighurs) and East Turkistan
  * The World Uyghur Congress
  * London Uyghur Ensemble
  * The Uyghur Human Rights Project
  * Introduction to Uyghur Culture and History Links to cultural and historical background, current news, research materials and photographs.
  * Uyghur News Site
  * Backgrounder: Uighurs and China's Xinjiang Region. From the Council on Foreign Relations
  * Photos of Uyghurs from Kashgar to Urumqi to Gulgia
  * Photos of Uyghurs in Xinjiang
  * Diamond in the Dunes - documentary film about a Uyghur-Han Chinese baseball team

v â¢ d â¢ e

Turkic topics  
Languages

Afshar Â· Ãynu Â· Altay Â· Azerbaijani Â· Baraba Tatar Â· Bashkir Â· Bulgar
Â· Chagatai Â· Chulym Â· Chuvash Â· Crimean Tatar Â· Cuman Â· Dolgan Â· FuyÃ¼
GÃ¯rgÃ¯s Â· Gagauz Â· Hunnic Â· Ili Turki Â· Karachay-Balkar Â· Karaim Â·
Karakalpak Â· Karamanli Turkish Â· Kazakh Â· Khakas Â· Khalaj Â· Khazar Â·
Khorasani Turkic Â· Kipchak Â· Krymchak Â· Kyrgyz Â· Kumyk Â· Kypchak group Â·
Nogai Â· Old Tatar Â· Old Turkic Â· Ottoman Turkish Â· Pecheneg Â· Qashqai Â·
Sakha Â· Salar Â· Shor Â· Kazan Tatar Â· Tofa Â· Turkic Avar Â· Turkish Â·
Turkmen Â· Tuvan Â· Urum Â· Uyghur Â· Uzbek  
Peoples

Altays Â· Azerbaijanis Â· Balkars Â· Bashkirs Â· Bulgars Â· Chulyms Â·
Chuvashs Â· Crimean Tatars Â· Cumans Â· Dolgans Â· Gagauz Â· Iraqi Turkmen Â·
Karachays Â· Crimean Karaites Â· Karakalpaks Â· Karapapak Â· Kazakhs Â· Khakas
Â· Khalajs Â· Khazars Â· Kimek Â· Kipchaks Â· Krymchaks Â· Kumyks Â· Kyrgyz Â·
Meskhetian Turks Â· NaÄaybÃ¤k Â· Nogais Â· Oghuz Turks Â· Qashqai Â· Salar Â·
Shatuo Turks Â· Syrian Turkmen Â· Tatars Â· Finnish Tatars Â· KerÃ¤Åen Tatars
Â· Lipka Tatars Â· Siberian Tatars Â· Volga Tatars Â· Telengit Â· Teleuts Â·
Tofalar Â· Turgesh â¢ Turkish Cypriots Â· Turkish people (Turks in Bulgaria
Â· Turks of Kosovo Â· Turks of Romania Â· Turks in the Republic of Macedonia
Â· Turks of Western Thrace) Â· Turkmens Â· Tuvans Â· Uyghur Â· Uzbeks Â· White
Huns Â· Yakuts Â· Yugur  
Politics

Pan-Turkism Â· Kemalism Â· Turanism  
Homeland

GÃ¶ktÃ¼rks  
States

Azerbaijan Â· Kazakhstan Â· Kyrgyzstan Â· Northern Cyprus Â· Turkey Â·
Turkmenistan Â· Uzbekistan  
Autonomous  
republics

Altai Republic Â· Bashkortostan Â· Crimea Â· Chuvashia Â· Gagauzia Â·
Karakalpakstan Â· Khakassia Â· Nakhchivan Â· Sakha Republic Â· Tatarstan Â·
Tuva Â· Xinjiang  
Studies

Old Turkic script Â· Proto-Turkic language Â· Turkic alphabets Â· Turkology  
Religions

Islam Â· Christianity Â· Buddhism Â· Shamanism Â· Tengriism  
History of the Turkic peoples  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Ethnic groups in China  
as classified by the People's Republic of China  
Achang Â· Bai Â· Blang Â· Bonan Â· Buyei Â· Dai Â· Daur Â· De'ang Â· Derung Â·
Dong Â· Dongxiang Â· Evenk Â· Gaoshan Â· Gelao Â· Han Â· Hani Â· Hezhen Â· Hui
Â· Jing Â· Jingpo Â· Jino Â· Kazakh Â· Kirgiz Â· Korean Â· Lahu Â· Lhoba Â· Li
Â· Lisu Â· Manchu Â· Maonan Â· Miao Â· Monba Â· Mongol Â· Mulao Â· Nakhi Â· Nu
Â· Oroqen Â· Pumi Â· Qiang Â· Russian Â· Salar Â· She Â· Shui Â· Tajik Â·
Tatar Â· Tibetan Â· Tu Â· Tujia Â· Uyghur Â· Uzbek Â· Va Â· Xibe Â· Yao Â· Yi
Â· Yugur Â· Zhuang  
Undistinguished ethnic groups in China  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uyghur_people"

Categories: Ethnic groups in China | Uyghurs | Ethnic groups in Kazakhstan |
Ethnic groups in Kyrgyzstan | Ethnic groups in Uzbekistan | Muslim communities
| Islam in China | Turkic peoples

Hidden categories: "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation | Articles
containing non-English language text | Articles containing Chinese language
text | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since August 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since May
2007 | Articles needing additional references from March 2008 | Articles with
unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2008 | Articles to be expanded since June 2008 | All articles to
be expanded

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Uyghurcheâ / Ø¦ÛÙØºÛØ±ÚÛ
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * West-Vlams
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 20:24.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



