
# Lake Toba

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Lake Toba  
Lake Toba - Landsat photo

Landsat photo  
Location North Sumatra, Indonesia  
Coordinates 2Â°37â²N 98Â°49â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿2.617Â°N 98.817Â°Eï»¿ / 2.617;
98.817Coordinates: 2Â°37â²N 98Â°49â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿2.617Â°N 98.817Â°Eï»¿ / 2.617;
98.817  
Lake type Volcanic/ tectonic  
Primary outflows Asahan River  
Basin countries Indonesia  
Max. length 100 km (62 mi)  
Max. width 30 km (19 mi)  
Surface area 1,130 km2 (440 sq mi)  
Max. depth 505 m (1,660 ft)[1]  
Water volume 240 km3 (58 cu mi)  
Surface elevation 905 m (2,970 ft)  
Islands Samosir  
References [1]  
Lake Toba (Indonesian: Danau Toba) is a lake and supervolcano, 100 kilometres
long and 30 kilometres wide, and 505 metres (1,666 ft) at its deepest point.
Located in the middle of the northern part of the Indonesian island of Sumatra
with a surface elevation of about 900 m (3,000 ft), the lake stretches from
2Â°53â²N 98Â°31â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿2.88Â°N 98.52Â°Eï»¿ / 2.88; 98.52 to 2Â°21â²N
99Â°06â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿2.35Â°N 99.1Â°Eï»¿ / 2.35; 99.1. It is the largest volcanic
lake in the world.[1] In addition, it is the site of a supervolcanic eruption
that occurred 75,000 years before the present, a massive climate-changing
event. The eruption is believed to have a VEI intensity of 8. This eruption,
believed to have been the largest anywhere on Earth in the last 25 million
years, may have had global catastrophic consequences; some scientists believe
that this eruption may have wiped out much of humanity and may have created a
population bottleneck that affected the genetic inheritance of all human
survivors.

## Contents

  * 1 Geology
    * 1.1 The eruption
    * 1.2 More recent activity
  * 2 People
  * 3 Flora and fauna
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
    * 5.1 Notes
    * 5.2 Sources
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Geology

The Toba caldera complex in Northern Sumatra, Indonesia consists of four
overlapping volcanic craters that adjoin the Sumatran "volcanic front". The
youngest and fourth caldera is the worldâs largest Quarternary caldera (100
by 30 kilometres) and intercepts the three older calderas. An estimate of
2500-3000 cubic kilometres of dense-rock equivalent pyroclastic material,
nicknamed the Youngest Toba tuff, was blasted from the youngest caldera during
one of the largest single eruptions in geologic history. Following the
"Youngest Toba tuff eruption", a typical resurgent dome formed within the new
caldera, joining two half-domes separated by a longitudinal graben.[2]

There are at least four cones, four stratovolcanoes and three craters visible
in the lake.[3]

### [edit] The eruption

Main article: Toba catastrophe theory

<IMG>

<IMG>

Location of Lake Toba shown in red on map.

The Toba eruption (the Toba event) occurred at what is now Lake Toba about
67,500 to 75,500 years ago.[4] It had an estimated Volcanic Explosivity Index
of 8 (described as "mega-colossal"), making it possibly the largest explosive
volcanic eruption within the last twenty-five million years having a volume
3000 cubic km greater than the Island Park Caldera supereruption (2500 cubic
km) of 2.1 million years BP.

Bill Rose and Craig Chesner of Michigan Technological University have deduced
that the total amount of erupted material was about 2800 cubic km (670 cubic
miles)[5] â around 2000 cubic km of ignimbrite that flowed over the ground,
and around 800 cubic km that fell as ash, with the wind blowing most of it to
the west. The pyroclastic flows of the eruption destroyed an area of 20,000
square km (7700 square miles), with ash deposits as thick as 600 metres (2000
feet) by the main vent.[5] By contrast, the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens
ejected around 1.2 cubic km of material, whilst the largest volcanic eruption
in historic times, at Mount Tambora in 1815, emitted the equivalent of around
100 cubic km of dense rock and created the "Year Without a Summer" as far away
as North America.[6] The eruption was also about three times the size of the
latest Yellowstone eruption of Lava Creek 630,000 years ago.[7]

The Toba eruption was the latest of a series of at least three caldera-forming
eruptions which have occurred at the volcano. Earlier calderas were formed
around 700,000 and 840,000 years ago.[8]

To give an idea of its magnitude, consider that although the eruption took
place in Indonesia, it deposited an ash layer approximately 15 cm (6 inch)
thick over the entire Indian subcontinent; at one site in central India, the
Toba ash layer today is up to 6 m (20 ft) thick[9] and parts of Malaysia were
covered with 9 m of ashfall.[10] In addition it has been calculated that 1010
metric tons of sulphuric acid was ejected into the atmosphere by the event,
causing acid rain fallout.[11]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Landsat photo of Sumatra surrounding Lake Toba

The subsequent collapse formed a caldera that, after filling with water,
created Lake Toba. The island in the center of the lake is formed by a
resurgent dome.

Though the year may never be precisely determined, the season can: only the
summer monsoon could have deposited Toba ashfall in the South China Sea,
implying that the eruption took place sometime during the northern summer.[12]
The eruption lasted perhaps two weeks, but the ensuing "volcanic winter"
resulted in a decrease in average global temperatures by 3 to 3.5 degrees
Celsius for several years. Greenland ice cores record a pulse of starkly
reduced levels of organic carbon sequestration. Very few plants or animals in
southeast Asia would have survived, and it is possible that the eruption
caused a planet-wide die-off. There is some evidence, based on mitochondrial
DNA, that the human race may have passed through a genetic bottleneck within
this timeframe, reducing genetic diversity below what would be expected from
the age of the species. According to the Toba catastrophe theory proposed by
Stanley H. Ambrose of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1998,
human populations may have been reduced to only a few tens of thousands of
individuals by the Toba eruption.[13]

### [edit] More recent activity

<IMG>

<IMG>

Children playing in Lake Toba

Smaller eruptions have occurred at Toba since. The small cone of Pusukbukit
has formed on the southwestern margin of the caldera and lava domes. The most
recent eruption may have been at Tandukbenua on the northwestern caldera edge,
since the present lack of vegetation could be due to an eruption within the
last few hundred years.[14]

Some parts of the caldera have experienced uplift due to partial refilling of
the magma chamber, for example pushing Samosir Island and the Uluan Peninsula
above the surface of the lake. The lake sediments on Samosir Island show that
it has been uplifted by at least 450 metres[8] since the cataclysmic eruption.
Such uplifts are common in very large calderas, apparently due to the upward
pressure of unerupted magma. Toba is probably the largest resurgent caldera on
Earth. Large earthquakes have occurred in the vicinity of the volcano more
recently, notably in 1987 along the southern shore of the lake at a depth of
11 km.[15] Other earthquakes have occurred in the area in 1892, 1916, and
1920-1922.[8]

Lake Toba lies near a fault line which runs along the centre of Sumatra called
the Sumatra Fracture Zone.[8] The volcanoes of Sumatra and Java are part of
the Sunda Arc, a result of the northeasterly movement of the Indo-Australian
Plate which is sliding under the eastward-moving Eurasian Plate. The
subduction zone in this area is very active: the seabed near the west coast of
Sumatra has had several major earthquakes since 1995, including the 9.3 2004
Indian Ocean Earthquake and the 8.7 2005 Sumatra earthquake, the epicenters of
which were around 300 km from Toba.

On September 12, 2007, a magnitude 8.4 Earthquake shook the ground by Sumatra
and was felt in the Indonesian capital, Jakarta. The epicenter for this
earthquake was not as close as the previous two earthquakes, but it was in the
same vicinity.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A view of Lake Toba from the island of Prapat

<IMG>

<IMG>

Batak House at Lake Toba

## [edit] People

Most of the people who live around Lake Toba are ethnically Bataks.
Traditional Batak houses are noted for their distinctive roofs (which curve
upwards at each end, as a boat's hull does) and their colorful decor.[16]

## [edit] Flora and fauna

Lake Toba offers a nurturing environment for fish such as the tilapia
mossambica, aplocheilus pachax, lebistes reticulatus, osphronemus goramy,
trichogaster trichopterus, channa striata, chana gachua, clarias batrachus,
clarias nieuhofi, clarias. sp., nemachilus fasciatus, cyprinus carpio, puntius
javanicus, puntius binotatus, osteochilus nasselti, lissochilus sp.,
labeobarbus sora, and rasbora sp.[17]

Many other types of plants and animals live within the boundaries of Lake
Toba. Flora organisms include various types of phytoplankton, emerged
macrophytes, floating macrophytes, and submerged macrophytes. Fauna include
several variations of zooplankton and benthos.[17]

## [edit] See also

  * Supervolcano
  * List of lakes in Indonesia
  * List of volcanoes in Indonesia

## [edit] References

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c Worldlakes.org
  2. ^ Chesner, C.A., Westgate, J.A., Rose, W.I., Drake, R., Deino, A. (March 1991). "Eruptive history of Earth's largest Quarternary caldera (Toba, Indonesia)". Michigan Technological University. http://www.geo.mtu.edu/~raman/papers/ChesnerGeology.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-08-23.
  3. ^ "Synonyms and Subfeatures: Toba". Global Volcanism Program. Smithsonian Institution. http://www.volcano.si.edu/world/volcano.cfm?vnum=0601-09=&volpage=synsub. Retrieved on December 13, 2008.
  4. ^ Zielinski, G. A.; P.A. Mayewski, L.D. Meeker, S. Whitlow, M. Twickler and K. Taylor (1996). "Potential Atmospheric impact of the Toba mega-eruption ~71,000 years ago". Geophysical Research Letters (United States: American Geophysical Union) 23 (8): 837â840. doi:10.1029/96GL00706.
  5. ^ a b "Supersized eruptions are all the rage!". USGS. http://hvo.wr.usgs.gov/volcanowatch/2005/05_04_28.html.
  6. ^ "Facts about the year without a summer". Discovery Channel UK. http://www.discoverychannel.co.uk/earth/year_without_summer/facts/index.shtml.
  7. ^ "Supervolcano - The 1,080-square-mile (2,800 km2) Toba caldera is the only supervolcano in existence that can be described as Yellowstone's "big" sister.". Discovery Channel. http://dsc.discovery.com/convergence/supervolcano/others/others_02.html.
  8. ^ a b c d "Toba, Sumatra, Indonesia". Oregon State University. http://volcano.und.nodak.edu/vwdocs/volc_images/southeast_asia/indonesia/toba.html. ]
  9. ^ Acharyya S.K., and Basu P.K. 1992. "Toba ash on the Indian subcontinent and its implications for correlation of late pleistocene alluvium." Quaternary Research 40:10-19
  10. ^ Scrivenor, J.B. 1931. The Geology of Malaya (London: MacMillan), noted by Weber.
  11. ^ Huang C.Y., Zhao M.X., Wang C.C., and Wei G.J. 2001. "Cooling of the South China Sea by the Toba eruption and correlation with other climate proxies ca. 71,000 years ago." Geophysical Research Letters 28:3915-3918, noted by Weber.
  12. ^ BÃ¼hring C., and Sarnthein M. 2000. "Toba ash layers in the South China Sea: evidence of contrasting wind directions during eruption ca. 74 ka." Geology 28:275-278.
  13. ^ "Yellowstone Is a Supervolcano?" (HTML). SEMP. http://www.semp.us/publications/biot_reader.php?BiotID=164. Retrieved on 2008-02-21.
  14. ^ "Toba volcano (Indonesia, Sumatra)". VolcanoDiscovery.com. http://www.volcanodiscovery.com/volcano-tours/volcanoes/indonesia/sumatra/toba/.
  15. ^ "Significant Earthquakes of the World". United States Geological Survey (USGS). http://earthquake.usgs.gov/eqcenter/eqarchives/significant/sig_1987.php.
  16. ^ "Batak People". IndonesianMusic.com. http://www.indonesianmusic.com/batak.htm.
  17. ^ a b "Danau Toba (Lake Toba)". International Lake Environment Committee. http://www.ilec.or.jp/database/asi/asi-10.html.

### [edit] Sources

  * Rampino, Michael R. and Stephen Self (1993). "Climate-volcanism feedback and the Toba eruption of 74,000 Years Ago". Quaternary Research 40 (3): 269â280. doi:10.1038/359050a0.
  * Vazquez, Jorge A. and Mary R. Reid (2004). "Probing the accumulation history of the voluminous Toba Magma". Science 305 (5686): 991â994. doi:10.1126/science.1096994.
  * Petraglia, M. et al. (2007). "Middle Paleolithic Assemblages from the Indian Subcontinent Before and After the Toba Super-Eruption". Science 317 (5834): 114â116. doi:10.1126/science.1141564.

## [edit] External links

<IMG> Indonesia portal  
  * Toba, Sumatra, Indonesia - Volcano.umd.edu Accessed 11 December 2005
  * Stanley H. Ambrose, Volcanic Winter, and Differentiation of Modern Humans Accessed 11 December 2005
  * Joel Achenbach, Who Knew, National Geographic Accessed 11 December 2005
  * George Weber, Toba Volcano
  * Lake Toba travel guide from Wikitravel

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lake_Toba"

Categories: Lake Toba | Crater lakes | Lakes of Indonesia | Subduction
volcanoes | Supervolcanoes | VEI-8 volcanoes | Volcanic calderas of Indonesia
| Volcanoes of Sumatra

Hidden categories: Articles containing Indonesian language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 07:58.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



