
# Summer of Love

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

    See Summer of Love (disambiguation).
The Summer of Love refers to the summer of 1967, when as many as 100,000
people converged on the Haight-Ashbury neighborhood of San Francisco, creating
a phenomenon of cultural and political rebellion. While hippies also gathered
in New York, Los Angeles, Atlanta, Philadelphia, Seattle, Portland,
Washington, D.C., Chicago, Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver, and across Europe,
San Francisco was the center of the hippie revolution,[1] a melting pot of
music, psychoactive drugs, sexual freedom, creative expression, and politics.
The Summer of Love became a defining moment of the 1960s, as the hippie
counterculture movement came into public awareness.[2] This unprecedented
gathering of young people is often considered to have been a social
experiment, because of alternative lifestyles that became common, both during
the summer itself and during subsequent years. These lifestyles included
communal living; the free and communal sharing of resources, often among total
strangers; and free love.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 Early 1967
  * 2 Popularization through media and music
  * 3 The summer
  * 4 Legacy
  * 5 Literature
  * 6 References
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Early 1967

Inspired by the Beats of the Fifties, who declared themselves independent from
the authoritarian order of America, the Haight-Ashbury 'anti-community' rested
on a rejection of American commercialism. Haight residents eschewed the
material benefits of modern life, encouraged by the distribution of free food
and organized shelter by the Diggers, and the creation of institutions such as
the Free Clinic for medical treatment.[4] Psychedelic drug use became but one
means to find a 'new reality'. Grateful Dead guitarist Bob Weir comments:

> 'Haight Ashbury was a ghetto of bohemians who wanted to do anything - and we
did but I don't think it has happened since. Yes there was LSD. But Haight
Ashbury was not about drugs. It was about exploration, finding new ways of
expression, being aware of one's existence.'[5]

The prelude to the Summer of Love was the Human Be-In at Golden Gate Park on
January 14, 1967, which was produced and organized by artist Michael
Bowen[6][7] as a "gathering of tribes".[8] The event was announced by the
Haight-Ashbury's own psychedelic newspaper, the San Francisco Oracle:

> "A new concept of celebrations beneath the human underground must emerge,
become conscious, and be shared, so a revolution can be formed with a
renaissance of compassion, awareness, and love, and the revelation of unity
for all mankind."[9]

The gathering of approximately 30,000 like-minded people made the Human Be-In
the first event that confirmed there was a viable hippie scene.[10]

## [edit] Popularization through media and music

The ever-increasing numbers of youth making a pilgrimage to the Haight-Ashbury
district alarmed the San Francisco authorities, whose public stance was that
they would keep the hippies away. Adam Kneeman, a long-time resident of the
Haight-Ashbury, recalls that the police did little to help; organization of
the hordes of newcomers fell to the overwhelmed residents themselves.[11]

College and high-school students began streaming into the Haight during the
spring break of 1967. San Francisco's government leaders, determined to stop
the influx of young people once schools let out for the summer, unwittingly
brought additional attention to the scene, and an ongoing series of articles
in local papers alerted the national media to the hippies' growing numbers. By
spring, Haight community leaders responded by forming the Council of the
Summer of Love, giving the word-of-mouth event an official-sounding name.[12]

The mainstream media's coverage of hippie life in the Haight-Ashbury drew the
attention of youth from all over America. Hunter S. Thompson labeled the
district "Hashbury" in The New York Times Magazine, and the activities in the
area were reported almost daily.[13]

The movement was also fed by the counterculture's own media, particularly the
San Francisco Oracle, whose pass-around readership topped a half-million at
its peak that year.[14]

The media's fascination with the "counterculture" continued with the Monterey
Pop Festival in June 1967, where approximately 30,000 people gathered for the
first day of the music festival, with the number swelling to 60,000 on the
final day.[15] The song "San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair)"
written by John Phillips of The Mamas and the Papas and sung by Scott McKenzie
was initially designed to promote the Monterey Pop Festival:

â If you're going to San Francisco,  

be sure to wear some flowers in your hair...  
If you're going to San Francisco,  
You're gonna meet some gentle people there.

â  
"San Francisco" became an instant hit (#4 in the U. S., #1 in the UK) and
quickly transcended its original purpose by popularizing an idealized image of
San Francisco. In addition, media coverage of the Monterey Pop Festival
facilitated the Summer of Love, since large numbers of fledgling hippies
headed to San Francisco to hear their favorite bands, among them Jefferson
Airplane, The Jimi Hendrix Experience, Otis Redding, The Byrds, the Grateful
Dead, The Who, and Big Brother and the Holding Company with Janis Joplin.[16]

## [edit] The summer

During the Summer of Love, as many as 100,000 young people from around the
world flocked to San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury district, as well as to nearby
Berkeley and to other San Francisco Bay Area cities, to join in a popularized
version of the hippie experience.[17] Free food, free drugs and free love were
available in Golden Gate Park, a Free Clinic (whose work continues today) was
established for medical treatment, and a Free Store gave away basic
necessities to anyone who needed them.[18]

The Summer of Love attracted a wide range of people of various ages: teenagers
and college students drawn by their peers and the allure of joining a cultural
utopia; middle-class vacationers; and even partying military personnel from
bases within driving distance. The Haight-Ashbury could not accommodate this
rapid influx of people, and the neighborhood scene quickly deteriorated.
Overcrowding, homelessness, hunger, drug problems, and crime afflicted the
neighborhood. Many people simply left in the fall to resume their college
studies.[18]

On October 6, 1967, those remaining in the Haight staged a mock funeral, "The
Death of the Hippie" ceremony, to signal the end of the played-out scene.[12]
Mary Kasper explained the message of the mock funeral as follows:

â We wanted to signal that this was the end of it, don't come out. Stay
where you are! Bring the revolution to where you live. Don't come here because
it's over and done with.[19] â  
## [edit] Legacy

When the newly-recruited Flower Children returned home, they brought new
ideas, ideals, behaviors, and styles of fashion to many major cities in the
U.S., Canada, Britain, Western Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and
Japan.[citation needed]

The phrase "Summer of Love" (or, more accurately, the "Second Summer of Love")
is sometimes used (particularly in the UK) to refer to the summers of 1988 and
1989 and the rise of Acid House music and rave culture. On September 2, 2007,
San Francisco celebrated the 40th anniversary of the Summer of Love.[20] The
40th anniversary was also celebrated at various locations in the UK including
Hawkhurst in Kent, where a small mini-festival was held on 07/07/07.[21] The
special guest that day was Barry Melton, "the Fish" of Country Joe and the
Fish fame.

## [edit] Literature

  * Lee, Martin A.; Shlain, Bruce (1985). Acid Dreams: the CIA, LSD, and the sixties rebellion. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 0-394-55013-7, ISBN 0-394-62081-X.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ E. Vulliamy, "Love and Haight", Observer Music Monthly 20 May 2007
  2. ^ P. Braunstein, and M.W. Doyle (eds), Imagine Nation: The American Counterculture of the 1960s and '70s, (New York, 2002), p.7
  3. ^ Roots of Communal Revival 1962-1966
  4. ^ M. Isserman, and M. Kazin (eds), America Divided: The Civil War of the 1960s, (Oxford University Press, 2004), pp.151-172/
  5. ^ J. McDonald quoted in E. Vulliamy, "Love and Haight", Observer Music Monthly, 20 May 2007
  6. ^ "Chronology of San Francisco Rock 1965-1969". Virtual Museum of the City of San Francisco. http://www.sfmuseum.net/hist1/rock.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-01.
  7. ^ "Copy of Certificate of Honor presented to Michael Bowen". City and County of San Francisco. 2007-09-02. http://www.beatsupernovarasa.com/beatpics/bp000151.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-01.
  8. ^ T.H. Anderson, The Movement and the Sixties: Protest in America from Greensboro to Wounded Knee, (Oxford University Press, 1995), p.172
  9. ^ San Francisco Oracle, Vol.1, Issue 5, p.2
  10. ^ T. Gitlin, The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage, (New York, 1993), p.215
  11. ^ Stuart Maconie, "A Taste of Summer" broadcast, Radio 2, 9 October 2007
  12. ^ a b "The Year of the Hippie: Timeline". PBS.org. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/love/sfeature/timeline.html. Retrieved on 2007-04-24. .
  13. ^ T. Anderson, The Movement and the Sixties: Protest in America from Greensboro to Wounded Knee, (Oxford University Press, 1995), p.174
  14. ^ "Summer of Love: Underground News". PBS American Experience companion website. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/love/sfeature/oracle.html. Retrieved on 2007-05-15.
  15. ^ T. Anderson, The Movement and the Sixties: Protest in America from Greensboro to Wounded Knee, (Oxford University Press, 1995), p.175
  16. ^ T. Gitlin, The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage, (New York, 1993), p.215-217
  17. ^ Allen Cohen
  18. ^ a b Gail Dolgin; Vicente Franco. (2007). American Experience: The Summer of Love. PBS. Retrieved on 2007-04-23.
  19. ^ "Transcript (for American Experience documentary on the Summer of Love)". PBS and WGBH. 2007-03-14. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/love/filmmore/pt.html.
  20. ^ http://www.2b1records.com/summeroflove40th/FullProc.pdf
  21. ^ http://www.solparty.org.uk

## [edit] See also

  * 1967 in music
  * Joan Baez
  * Central Park Be-In
  * The Doors
  * ÃtÃ© 67
  * Free love
  * Allen Ginsberg
  * Grateful Dead
  * Hippie
  * Janis Joplin
  * Ken Kesey
  * Timothy Leary
  * LSD
  * Moby Grape
  * The Second Summer of Love (United Kingdom, 1988/89)
  * STP (DOM)
  * "Summer of Love" episode (Sliders television series)

## [edit] External links

  * Summer of Love photo gallery
  * Summer of Love: 40 years later, from SFGate, the online publication of the San Francisco Chronicle
  * Monterey Pop art director and poster designer Tom Wilkes
  * The Summer of Love, Performers in Britain and the United States, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography and the American National Biography
  * Long Hot Summer of Love Writer Mark Jacobson reminisces about his experiences during the Summer of Love in New York, from New York magazine
  * CIS: 'Summer of Love' Reached Behind Iron Curtain, by Salome Asatiani. RFE/RL, August 30, 2007 (an article about the impact of the Summer of Love event on Soviet youth culture)

v â¢ d â¢ e

Hippies  
History

Etymology of 'hippie' Â· Beat generation/Beatniks Â· Counterculture of the
1960s Â· Human Be-In Â· Red Dog Experience Â· San Francisco Sound Â· Haight-
Ashbury Â· Drop City Â· Summer of Love Â· Monterey Pop Festival Â· The Farm Â·
Woodstock Festival  
People and groups

Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters Â· Diggers Â· Yippies Â· The Brotherhood of
Eternal Love Â· Jesus movement Â· Rainbow Family Â· Deadhead Â· New Age
travellers Â· Radical Faeries Â· People associated with the hippie movement  
Politics and ethics

Free love Â· Anti-authoritarianism Â· Simple living Â· Environmentalism Â·
Pacifism Â· Communalism Â· Counterculture Â· Bohemianism Â· Make love, not war
Â· Turn on, tune in, drop out  
Culture and fashion

Psychedelia Â· Flower power Â· Hippie trail Â· Happening Â· Peace symbols Â·
Bell-bottoms Â· Long hair Â· Tie-dye Â· Intentional community Â· Free festival
Â· Music festival Â· List of films related to the hippie subculture Â· List of
books and publications related to the hippie subculture  
Music

Folk-Rock Â· Psychedelic rock Â· Folk music Â· Psych-folk Â· Progressive rock
Â· Jam bands Â· Psychedelic trance Â· Psychedelic music Â· World music Â· New
age music  
Related subjects

Subcultures Â· Underground culture Â· New Age movement Â· Freak scene Â· Anti-
war movement Â· Civil rights movement Â· Protests of 1968 Â· New Left Â· UK
underground Â· New social movements Â· Post-materialism Â· Neotribalism Â·
Second Summer of Love  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Summer_of_Love"

Categories: 1967 in the United States | Hippie movement | History of San
Francisco, California

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 22:16.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



