
# Grunge music

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Grunge" redirects here. For other uses, see Grunge (disambiguation).

Grunge  
Stylistic origins

Alternative rock  
Hardcore punk  
Heavy metal  
Indie rock  
Post-punk  
Cultural origins

Mid-1980s, Washington  
Typical instruments

Electric guitar \- Bass guitar \- Drums \- Vocals  
Mainstream popularity High during the earlyâmid 1990s; low but existent
since then.  
Derivative forms Post-grunge  
Regional scenes  
Seattle  
Other topics  
Timeline of alternative rock \- Generation X  
Grunge (sometimes referred to as the Seattle Sound) is a subgenre of
alternative rock that emerged during the mid-1980s in the American state of
Washington, particularly in the Seattle area. Inspired by hardcore punk, heavy
metal and indie rock, grunge is generally characterized by heavily distorted
electric guitars, contrasting song dynamics, and apathetic or angst-filled
lyrics. The grunge aesthetic is stripped-down compared to other forms of rock
music, and many grunge musicians were noted for their unkempt appearances and
rejection of theatrics.

The early grunge movement coalesced around Seattle independent record label
Sub Pop in the late 1980s. Grunge became commercially successful in the first
half of the 1990s, due mainly to the release of Nirvana's Nevermind and Pearl
Jam's Ten. The success of these bands boosted the popularity of alternative
rock and made grunge the most popular form of hard rock music at the time.[1]
However, many grunge bands were uncomfortable with this popularity. Although
most grunge bands had disbanded or faded from view by the late 1990s, their
influence continues to impact modern rock music.

## Contents

  * 1 Origin of the term
  * 2 Characteristics
    * 2.1 Themes
    * 2.2 Presentation and fashion
  * 3 History
    * 3.1 Roots and influences
    * 3.2 Early development
    * 3.3 Mainstream success
    * 3.4 Decline of mainstream popularity
  * 4 Prominent bands
    * 4.1 Seattle area
    * 4.2 Outside the Seattle area
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Origin of the term

The word grunge is believed to be a back-formation from the US slang adjective
grungy,[2] which originated in about 1965 as a slang term for "dirty" or
"filthy." Mark Arm, the vocalist for the Seattle band Green Riverâand later
Mudhoneyâis generally credited as being the first to use the term grunge to
describe this sort of music. Arm first used the term in 1981, when he wrote a
letter under his given name Mark McLaughlin to the Seattle zine, Desperate
Times, criticizing his band Mr. Epp and the Calculations as "Pure grunge! Pure
noise! Pure shit!" Clark Humphrey, editor of Desperate Times, cites this as
the earliest use of the term to refer to a Seattle band, and mentions that
Bruce Pavitt of Sub Pop popularized the term as a musical label in 1987â88,
using it on several occasions to describe Green River.[3] Arm used grunge as a
descriptive term rather than a genre term, but it eventually came to describe
the punk/metal hybrid sound of the Seattle music scene.[4]

## [edit] Characteristics

<IMG>

"Touch Me I'm Sick"  
Play sound  
Sample of "Touch Me I'm Sick", a single by Mudhoney. The sample illustrates
the song's high tempo, main guitar riff, heavy use of distortion and frenetic
drumming. Also heard are band frontman Mark Arm's self-deprecating and
sarcastic lyrics.  
* * *  
Problems listening to this file? See media help.  
Grunge is generally characterized by a sludgy guitar sound that uses a high
level of distortion, fuzz and feedback effects. Grunge fuses elements of
hardcore punk and heavy metal, although some bands performed with more
emphasis on one or the other. The music shares with punk a raw sound and
similar lyrical concerns.[1] However, it also involves much slower tempos,
dissonant harmonies, and more complex instrumentation â which is reminiscent
of heavy metal. Some individuals associated with the development of grunge,
including Sub Pop producer Jack Endino and The Melvins, explained grunge's
incorporation of heavy rock influences such as Kiss as "musical provocation."
Grunge artists considered these bands "cheesy" but nonetheless enjoyed them;
Buzz Osborne of The Melvins described it as an attempt to see what ridiculous
things bands could do and get away with.[5] In the early 1990s, Nirvana's
signature "stop-start" song format became a genre convention.[1]

### [edit] Themes

Lyrics are typically angst-filled, often addressing themes such as social
alienation, apathy, confinement, and a desire for freedom. A number of factors
influenced the focus on such subject matter. Many grunge musicians displayed a
general disenchantment with the state of society, as well as a discomfort with
social prejudices. Such themes bear similarities to those addressed by punk
rock musicians[1] and the perceptions of Generation X. Music critic Simon
Reynolds said in 1992 that "there's a feeling of burnout in the culture at
large. Kids are depressed about the future."[6] However, not all grunge songs
dealt with these issues. Nirvana's satirical "In Bloom" is a notable example
of more humorous writing. Several other grunge songs are filled with either a
dark or fun sense of humorâMudhoney's "Touch Me I'm Sick" or Tad's
"Stumblin' Man"âthough this often went unnoticed by the general public at
the time. Humor in grunge often satirized glam metalâfor example,
Soundgarden's "Big Dumb Sex"âand other forms of popular rock music during
the 1980s.[7]

### [edit] Presentation and fashion

Main article: Grunge fashion

Grunge concerts were known for being straightforward, high-energy
performances. Grunge bands rejected the complex and high budget presentations
of many musical genres, including the use of complex light arrays,
pyrotechnics, and other visual effects unrelated to playing the music. Stage
acting was generally avoided. Instead the bands presented themselves as no
different from a minor local band. Jack Endino said in the 1996 documentary
Hype! that Seattle bands were inconsistent live performers, since their
primary objective was not to be entertainers, but simply to "rock out."[5]
However, concerts did involve a level of interactivity; fans and musicians
alike would participate in stage diving, crowd surfing, headbanging, pogoing,
and moshing.

Clothing commonly worn by grunge musicians in Washington consisted of thrift
store items and the typical outdoor clothing (most notably flannel shirts) of
the region, as well as a general unkempt appearance. The style did not evolve
out of a conscious attempt to create an appealing fashion; music journalist
Charles R. Cross said, "Kurt Cobain was just too lazy to shampoo," and Sub
Pop's Jonathan Poneman said, "This [clothing] is cheap, it's durable, and it's
kind of timeless. It also runs against the grain of the whole flashy aesthetic
that existed in the 80's."[6]

## [edit] History

### [edit] Roots and influences

Grunge's sound partly results from Seattle's isolation from other music
scenes. As Sub Pop's Jonathan Poneman noted, "Seattle was a perfect example of
a secondary city with an active music scene that was completely ignored by an
American media fixated on Los Angeles and New York."[8] Mark Arm claimed that
the isolation meant, "this one corner of the map was being really inbred and
ripping off each other's ideas."[9] Grunge evolved from the local punk rock
scene, and was inspired by bands such as The Fartz, The U-Men, 10 Minute
Warning, The AccÃ¼sed and the Fastbacks.[5] Additionally, the slow, heavy, and
sludgy style of The Melvins was a significant influence on the grunge
sound.[10]

Outside the Pacific Northwest, a number of artists and music scenes influenced
grunge. Alternative rock bands from the Northeastern United States, including
Sonic Youth, Pixies, and Dinosaur Jr., are important influences on the genre.
Through their patronage of Seattle bands, Sonic Youth "inadvertently nurtured"
the grunge scene, and reinforced the fiercely independent attitudes of its
musicians.[11] The influence of the Pixies on Nirvana was noted by Kurt
Cobain, who commented in a Rolling Stone interview that he "connected with the
band so heavily that I should be in that band."[12] Nirvana's use of the
Pixies' "soft verse, hard chorus" popularized this stylistic approach in both
grunge and other alternative rock subgenres.

Aside from the genre's punk and alternative rock roots, many grunge bands were
equally influenced by heavy metal of the early 1970s. Clinton Heylin, author
of Babylon's Burning: From Punk to Grunge, cited Black Sabbath as "perhaps the
most ubiquitous pre-punk influence on the northwest scene."[13] Black Sabbath
undeniably played a role in shaping the grunge sound, whether with their own
records or the records they inspired.[14] The influence of Led Zeppelin is
also evident, particularly in the work of Soundgarden, whom Q magazine noted
were "in thrall to '70s rock, but contemptuous of the genre's overt sexism and
machismo."[15] The Los Angeles hardcore punk band Black Flag's 1984 record My
War, where the band combined heavy metal with their traditional sound, made a
strong impact in Seattle. Mudhoney's Steve Turner commented, "A lot of other
people around the country hated the fact that Black Flag slowed down ... but
up here it was really great ... we were like 'Yay!' They were weird and
fucked-up sounding."[16] Turner explained grunge's integration of metal
influences, noting, "Hard rock and metal was never that much of an enemy of
punk like it was for other scenes. Here, it was like, 'There's only twenty
people here, you can't really find a group to hate.'" Bands began to mix metal
and punk in the Seattle music scene around 1984, with much of the credit for
this fusion going to The U-Men.[17]

The raw, distorted and feedback-intensive sound of some noise rock bands had
an influence on grunge. Among them are Wisconsin's Killdozer, and most notably
San Francisco's Flipper, a band known for its slowed-down and murky "noise
punk." The Butthole Surfers' mix of punk, heavy metal and noise rock was a
major influence, particularly on the early work of Soundgarden.[18]
Soundgarden and other early grunge bands were influenced by British post-punk
bands such as Gang of Four and Bauhaus, which were popular in the early 1980s
Seattle scene.[19] After Neil Young played a few concerts with Pearl Jam and
recorded the album Mirror Ball with them, some members of the media gave Young
the title "Godfather of Grunge." This was grounded on his work with his band
Crazy Horse and his regular use of distorted guitar, most notably on the album
Rust Never Sleeps.[20] A similarly influential, yet often overlooked, album is
Neurotica by Redd Kross, about which the co-founder of Sub Pop said,
"Neurotica was a life changer for me and for a lot of people in the Seattle
music community."[21]

### [edit] Early development

<IMG>

<IMG>

The cover artwork for the C/Z Records compilation album Deep Six. Released in
1986, the album was the first to showcase Seattle's developing grunge scene.

A seminal release in the development of grunge was 1986's Deep Six
compilation, released by C/Z Records (later reissued on A&M). The record
featured multiple tracks by six bands: Green River, Soundgarden, The Melvins,
Malfunkshun, Skin Yard, and The U-Men. For many of them it was their first
appearance on record. The artists had "a mostly heavy, aggressive sound that
melded the slower tempos of heavy metal with the intensity of hardcore." As
Jack Endino recalled, "People just said, 'Well, what kind of music is this?
This isn't metal, it's not punk, What is it?' [...] People went 'Eureka! These
bands all have something in common.'"[16]

Later that year Bruce Pavitt released the Sub Pop 100 compilation and Green
River's Dry As a Bone EP as part of his new label, Sub Pop. An early Sub Pop
catalog described the Green River EP as "ultra-loose GRUNGE that destroyed the
morals of a generation."[22] Sub Pop's Bruce Pavitt and Jonathan Poneman,
inspired by other regional music scenes in music history, worked to ensure
that their label projected a "Seattle sound," reinforced by a similar style of
production and album packaging. While music writer Michael Azerrad
acknowledged that early grunge bands like Mudhoney, Soundgarden, and Tad had
disparate sounds, he noted "to the objective observer, there were some
distinct similarities."[23] Early grunge concerts were sparsely attended (many
by fewer than a dozen people) but Sub Pop photographer Charles Peterson's
pictures helped create the impression that such concerts were major
events.[24] Mudhoney, which was formed by former members of Green River,
served as the flagship band of Sub Pop during their entire time with the label
and spearheaded the Seattle grunge movement.[25] Other record labels in the
Pacific Northwest that helped promote grunge included C/Z Records, Estrus
Records, EMpTy Records and PopLlama Records.[5]

Grunge attracted media attention in the United Kingdom after Pavitt and
Poneman asked journalist Everett True from the British magazine Melody Maker
to write an article on the local music scene. This exposure helped to make
grunge known outside of the local area during the late 1980s and drew more
people to local shows.[5] The appeal of grunge to the music press was that it
"promised the return to a notion of a regional, authorial vision for American
rock."[26] Grunge's popularity in the underground music scene was such that
bands began to move to Seattle and approximate the look and sound of the
original grunge bands. Mudhoney's Steve Turner said, "It was really bad.
Pretend bands were popping up here, things weren't coming from where we were
coming from."[27] As a reaction, many grunge bands diversified their sound,
with Nirvana and Tad in particular creating more melodic songs.[28] Heather
Dawn of the Seattle fanzine Backlash recalled that by 1990 many locals had
tired of the hype surrounding the Seattle scene and hoped that media exposure
had dissipated.[5]

### [edit] Mainstream success

<IMG>

<IMG>

Nirvana performing at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards.

Grunge bands had made inroads to the musical mainstream in the late 1980s.
Soundgarden was the first grunge band to sign to a major label when they
joined the roster of A&M Records in 1989. Soundgarden, along with other major
label signings Alice in Chains and Screaming Trees, performed "okay" with
their initial major label releases, according to Jack Endino.[5] Nirvana,
originally from Aberdeen, Washington, was also courted by major labels,
finally signing with Geffen Records in 1990. In September 1991, the band
released its major label debut, Nevermind. The album was at best hoped to be a
minor success on par with Sonic Youth's Goo, which Geffen had released a year
previous.[29] It was the release of the album's first single "Smells Like Teen
Spirit" that "marked the instigation of the grunge music phenomenon". Due to
constant airplay of the song's music video on MTV, Nevermind was selling
400,000 copies a week by Christmas 1991.[30] In January 1992, Nevermind
replaced pop superstar Michael Jackson's Dangerous at number one on the
Billboard 200.[31]

The success of Nevermind surprised the music industry. Nevermind not only
popularized grunge, but also established "the cultural and commercial
viability of alternative rock in general."[32] Michael Azerrad asserted that
Nevermind symbolized "a sea-change in rock music" in which the glam metal that
had dominated rock music at that time fell out of favor in the face of music
that was authentic and culturally relevant.[33] Other grunge bands
subsequently replicated Nirvana's success. Pearl Jam, which featured former
Mother Love Bone members Jeff Ament and Stone Gossard, had released its debut
album Ten in August 1991, a month before Nevermind, but album sales only
picked up a year later. By the second half of 1992 Ten became a breakthrough
success, being certified gold and reaching number two on the Billboard
charts.[34] Soundgarden's album Badmotorfinger and Alice in Chains' Dirt,
along with the Temple of the Dog album collaboration featuring members of
Pearl Jam and Soundgarden, were also among the 100 top selling albums of
1992.[35] The popular breakthrough of these grunge bands prompted Rolling
Stone to nickname Seattle "the new Liverpool."[6] Major record labels signed
most of the prominent grunge bands in Seattle, while a second influx of bands
moved to the city in hopes of success.[36]

The popularity of grunge resulted in a large interest in the Seattle music
scene's perceived cultural traits. While the Seattle music scene in the late
1980s and early 1990s in actuality consisted of various styles and genres of
music, its representation in the media "served to depict Seattle as a music
'community' in which the focus was upon the ongoing exploration of one musical
idiom, namely grunge."[37] The fashion industry marketed "grunge fashion" to
consumers, charging premium prices for items such as knit ski hats. Critics
asserted that advertising was co-opting elements of grunge and turning it into
a fad. Entertainment Weekly commented in a 1993 article, "There hasn't been
this kind of exploitation of a subculture since the media discovered hippies
in the '60s"[38] The New York Times compared the "grunging of America" to the
mass-marketing of punk rock, disco, and hip hop in previous years.[6]
Ironically the New York Times was tricked into printing a fake list of slang
terms that were supposedly used in the grunge scene; often referred to as the
grunge speak hoax. This media hype surrounding grunge was documented in the
1996 documentary Hype!.[5]

A backlash against grunge began to develop in Seattle; in 1993 Bruce Pavitt
said that in the city, "All things grunge are treated with the utmost cynicism
and amusement [. . .] Because the whole thing is a fabricated movement and
always has been."[6] Many grunge artists were uncomfortable with their success
and the resulting attention it brought. Nirvana's Kurt Cobain told Michael
Azerrad, "Famous is the last thing I wanted to be."[39] Pearl Jam also felt
the burden of success, with much of the attention falling on frontman Eddie
Vedder.[40] Nirvana's follow-up album In Utero (1993) was an intentionally
abrasive album that Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic described as a "wild
aggressive sound, a true alternative record."[41] Nevertheless, upon its
release in September 1993 In Utero topped the Billboard charts.[42] Pearl Jam
also continued to perform well commercially with its second album, Vs. (1993).
The album sold a record 950,378 copies in its first week of release, topped
the Billboard charts, and outperformed all other entries in the top ten that
week combined.[43]

### [edit] Decline of mainstream popularity

A number of factors contributed to grunge's decline in prominence. During the
latter half of the 1990s, grunge was supplanted by post-grunge, which remained
commercially viable into the start of the 21st century. Post-grunge bands such
as Candlebox and Bush emerged soon after grunge's breakthrough. These artists
lacked the underground roots of grunge and were largely influenced by what
grunge had become, namely "a wildly popular form of inward-looking, serious-
minded hard rock." Post-grunge was a more commercially viable genre that
tempered the distorted guitars of grunge with polished, radio-ready
production.[44]

Conversely, another alternative rock genre, Britpop, emerged in part as a
reaction against the dominance of grunge in the United Kingdom. In contrast to
the dourness of grunge, Britpop was defined by "youthful exuberance and desire
for recognition."[45] Britpop artists were vocal about their disdain for
grunge. In a 1993 NME interview, Damon Albarn of Britpop band Blur agreed with
interviewer John Harris' assertion that Blur was an "anti-grunge band," and
said, "Well, that's good. If punk was about getting rid of hippies, then I'm
getting rid of grunge."[46] Noel Gallagher of Oasis, while a fan of Nirvana,
wrote music that refuted the pessimistic nature of grunge. Gallagher noted in
2006 that the 1994 Oasis single "Live Forever" "was written in the middle of
grunge and all that, and I remember Nirvana had a tune called 'I Hate Myself
and I Want to Die,' and I was like . . . 'Well, I'm not fucking having that.'
As much as I fucking like him [Cobain] and all that shit, I'm not having that.
I can't have people like that coming over here, on smack, fucking saying that
they hate themselves and they wanna die. That's fucking rubbish."[47]

During the mid-1990s many grunge bands broke up or became less visible. Kurt
Cobain, labeled by Time as "the John Lennon of the swinging Northwest,"
appeared "unusually tortured by success" and struggled with an addiction to
heroin. Rumors surfaced in early 1994 that Cobain suffered a drug overdose and
that Nirvana was breaking up.[48] On April 8, 1994, Cobain was found dead in
his Seattle home from an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound; Nirvana
summarily disbanded. That same year Pearl Jam canceled its summer tour in
protest of what it charged as ticket vendor Ticketmaster's unfair business
practices.[49] Pearl Jam then began a boycott of the company; however, Pearl
Jam's initiative to play only at non-Ticketmaster venues effectively, with a
few exceptions, prevented the band from playing shows in the United States for
the next three years.[50] In 1996, Alice in Chains gave their final
performances with their ailing estranged lead singer, Layne Staley, who
subsequently died from a heroin overdose in 2002. That same year Soundgarden
and Screaming Trees released their final studio albums, Down on the Upside and
Dust, respectively. Soundgarden broke up the following year.

Some grunge bands have continued recording and touring with more limited
success, including, most significantly, Pearl Jam. While in 2006 Rolling Stone
writer Brian Hiatt described Pearl Jam as having "spent much of the past
decade deliberately tearing apart their own fame," he noted the band developed
a loyal concert following akin to that of the Grateful Dead.[51] Despite
Nirvana's demise, the band has continued to be successful posthumously. Due to
the high sales for Kurt Cobain's Journals and the band's best-of compilation
Nirvana upon their releases in 2002, The New York Times argued Nirvana "are
having more success now than at any point since Mr. Cobain's suicide in
1994."[52]

## [edit] Prominent bands

### [edit] Seattle area

  * 7 Year Bitch
  * Alice in Chains
  * Blood Circus
  * Green River
  * Gruntruck
  * Hammerbox
  * Love Battery
  * Mad Season
  * Malfunkshun
  * The Melvins
  * Mono Men
  * Mother Love Bone
  * Mudhoney
  * My Sister's Machine
  * Nirvana
  * Pearl Jam
  * Screaming Trees
  * Skin Yard
  * Soundgarden
  * Tad
  * Temple of the Dog
  * Truly
  * The U-Men

### [edit] Outside the Seattle area

  * Babes in Toyland (Minneapolis, Minnesota)
  * The Fluid (Denver, Colorado)
  * Hole (Los Angeles, California)
  * L7 (Los Angeles, California)
  * The Nymphs (Los Angeles, California)
  * Paw (Lawrence, Kansas)
  * Pond (Portland, Oregon)
  * Stone Temple Pilots (San Diego, California)
  * Another Dead Hero[1] (Manchester, England)

  
## [edit] See also

  * List of grunge music albums

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ a b c d "Grunge". Allmusic.com. http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=77:2679. Retrieved on 2007-08-03.
  2. ^ See Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary, 2007, "grunge" and Online Etymology Dictionary, 2001, "grunge, grungy". Access date for both references: October 22, 2007.
  3. ^ Humphrey, Clark. Loser: The Real Seattle Music Story. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1999. ISBN 1-929069-24-3, p. 63
  4. ^ Heylin, Clinton. Babylon's Burning: From Punk to Grunge. Conongate, 2007. ISBN 1-84195-879-4, p. 606
  5. ^ a b c d e f g h Pray, D., Helvey-Pray Productions (1996). Hype! Republic Pictures.
  6. ^ a b c d e Marin, Rick. "Grunge: A Success Story." The New York Times. November 15, 1992.
  7. ^ Freind, Bill. "Grunge". St. James Encyclopedia of Pop Culture. http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_g1epc/is_tov/ai_2419100545. Retrieved on 2005-06-23.
  8. ^ Aston, Martin. "Freak Scene." Q: Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. December 2005. p. 12
  9. ^ Wall, Mick. "Northwest Passage." Q: Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. December 2005. p. 9
  10. ^ Wall, Mick. "Northwest Passage." Q: Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. December 2005. p. 8
  11. ^ Everley, Dave. "Daydream Nation." Q: Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. December 2005. p. 39
  12. ^ Fricke, David. "Kurt Cobain: The Rolling Stone Interview." Rolling Stone. January 27, 1994
  13. ^ Heylin, p. 601
  14. ^ Carden, Andrew. "Black Sabbath." Q: Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. December 2005. p. 34
  15. ^ Brannigan, Paul. "Outshined." Q: Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. December 2005. p. 102
  16. ^ a b Azerrad, Michael. Our Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes from the American Indie Underground, 1981-1991. Boston: Little Brown and Company, 2001. ISBN 0-316-78753-1, p. 419
  17. ^ Azerrad (2001), p. 418
  18. ^ Azerrad (2001), p. 439
  19. ^ Heylin, p. 600
  20. ^ McNair, James. "Rust Never Sleeps \- Neil Young". Q: Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. December 2005. p. 36
  21. ^ "This is the most important band in America?". Entertainment Weekly. December 3, 1993. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,308818,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-06-15.
  22. ^ Azerrad (2001), p. 420
  23. ^ Azerrad (2001), pp. 436â37
  24. ^ Azerrad (2001), p. 421â22
  25. ^ Azerrad (2001), p. 411
  26. ^ Lyons, James. Selling Seattle: Representing Contemporary Urban America. Wallflower, 2004. ISBN 1-903354-96-5, pp. 128â29
  27. ^ Azerrad (2001), p. 449
  28. ^ Azerrad (2001), p. 450
  29. ^ Wice, Nathaniel. "How Nirvana Made It." Spin. April 1992.
  30. ^ Lyons, p. 120
  31. ^ "The Billboard 200." Billboard. January 11, 1992.
  32. ^ Olsen, Eric (2004-04-09). "10 years later, Cobain lives on in his music". MSNBC.com. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/4652653/. Retrieved on 2007-07-25.
  33. ^ Azerrad (1994), p. 229-30
  34. ^ Pearlman, Nina. "Black Days." Guitar World. December 2002.
  35. ^ Lyons, p. 136
  36. ^ Azerrad (2001), p. 452â53
  37. ^ Lyons, p. 122
  38. ^ "Smells Like Big Bucks". Entertainment Weekly. April 2, 1993. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,306055,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-07-25.
  39. ^ Azerrad, Michael. Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana. Doubleday, 1994. ISBN 0-385-47199-8, p. 254
  40. ^ Crowe, Cameron (1993-10-28). "Five Against the World". Rolling Stone. http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/10560431/five_against_the_world. Retrieved on 2007-06-23.
  41. ^ DeRogatis, Jim. Milk It!: Collected Musings on the Alternative Music Explosion of the 90's. Cambridge: Da Capo, 2003. ISBN 0-306-81271-1, p. 18
  42. ^ "In Numero Uno". Entertainment Weekly. October 8, 1993. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,308282,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-08.
  43. ^ "Pearl's Jam". Entertainment Weekly. November 19, 1993. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,308749,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-08-29.
  44. ^ "Post-Grunge". Allmusic.com. http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=77:2771. Retrieved on 2007-08-28.
  45. ^ "Britpop". Allmusic.com. http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=77:2681. Retrieved on 2006-10-11.
  46. ^ Harris, John. "A shite sports car and a punk reincarnation." NME. April 10, 1993
  47. ^ "Lock the Door". Stop the Clocks [bonus DVD]. Columbia, 2006.
  48. ^ Handy, Bruce (April 18, 1994). "Never mind". Time. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,980562,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-08.
  49. ^ Gordinier, Jeff (October 28, 1994). "The Brawls in Their Courts". Entertainment Weekly. http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,304203,00.html. Retrieved on 2007-09-08.
  50. ^ DeRogatis, p. 65
  51. ^ Hiatt, Brian (2006-06-16). "The Second Coming of Pearl Jam". Rolling Stone. http://www.rollingstone.com/news/coverstory/pearl_jam_the_second_coming. Retrieved on 2007-06-22.
  52. ^ Nelson, Chris (2003-01-13). "Nine Years After Cobain's Death, Big Sales for All Things Nirvana". nytimes.com. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?sec=health&res=9C03E6DE1431F930A25752C0A9659C8B63. Retrieved on 2007-08-29.

## [edit] External links

  * Allmusic article on grunge

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Alternative rock  
Alternative metal \- Baggy \- Britpop \- Christian alternative rock \- College
rock \- Dream pop \- Dunedin Sound \- Geek rock \- Gothic rock \- Grebo \-
Grunge \- Indie pop \- Indie rock \- Industrial rock \- Jangle pop \- Lo-fi \-
Madchester \- Math rock \- Noise pop \- Noise rock \- Paisley Underground \-
Post-grunge \- Post-punk revival \- Post-rock \- Psychobilly \- Riot Grrrl \-
Sadcore \- Shoegazing \- Slowcore \- Space rock \- Wicca  
Other topics

Artists \- College radio \- History \- Independent music \- Lollapalooza  
Featured article

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grunge_music"

Categories: Culture of the Pacific Northwest | Grunge music

Hidden categories: Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * Boarisch
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * O'zbek
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 02:35.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



