
# Amaranth Advisors

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Amaranth Advisors LLC was an American multistrategy hedge fund managing US$9
billion in assets. In September 2006, it collapsed after losing roughly US$6
billion in a single week on natural gas futures. The failure was one of the
largest known hedge fund collapses in history. (See List of trading losses)

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Energy Trading
  * 3 Downfall
  * 4 Aftermath
  * 5 External links
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] History

The company was founded by Nicholas Maounis and based in Greenwich,
Connecticut. "Amaranth" means "unfading" in Greek.

Throughout much of the firm's history, convertible arbitrage was the firm's
primary profit center. As more and more capital began flowing into the
convertible arbitrage strategy during the early 2000s, trading opportunities
became more difficult to find.

## [edit] Energy Trading

By 2004-2005, the firm had shifted much of its capital to energy trading.
Amaranthâs energy desk was run by a Canadian trader named Brian Hunter who
placed "spread trades" in the natural gas market. Hunter had made enormous
profits for the company by placing bullish bets on natural gas prices in 2005,
the year Hurricane Katrina had severely impacted natural gas and oil
production and refining capacity. Hoping for a repeat performance, Amaranth
wagered with 8:1 leverage that the price of the March '07 and March '08
futures contracts would increase relative to the price of the April '07 and
April '08 contracts (i.e., they were "long" the March contracts and "short"
the April contracts).

Unfortunately for Amaranth, they did not. The spread between the March and
April 2007 contracts, for example, went from US$2.49 at the end of August 2006
to US$0.58 by the end of September 2006. The price decline was catastrophic
for Amaranth, resulting in a loss of US$6.5 billion.[1]. Historically, the
spread in future prices for the March and April contracts have not been easily
predictable. The spread is dependent on meteorological and sociopolitical
events whose uncertainty makes the placing of such large bets a precarious
matter.

## [edit] Downfall

The fund had over US$9 billion under management and reports indicate "losses
may exceed 65 percent[2]." On September 20, 2006, Reuters reported that
Amaranth would transfer its energy portfolio to a third party, eventually
revealed to be Citadel Investment Group and JPMorgan Chase [3]. The losses
were not as threatening to the financial system as were the losses of Long-
Term Capital Management, but it has led to increased pressure on the SEC to
regulate hedge funds. On September 29, 2006 the founder of Amaranth sent a
letter to fund investors notifying them of the fund's suspension, and on
October 1, 2006, Amaranth hired the Fortress Investment Group to help
liquidate its assets.

## [edit] Aftermath

In 2007, Hunter founded a new hedge fund, Solengo Capital Advisors. The firm
received attention in April 2007 for suing Dealbreaker.com, a website which
had published Solengo's prospectus.

On July 25 2007, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) charged
Amaranth and head energy trader Brian Hunter with Attempted Manipulation of
the Price of Natural Gas Futures including making false statements to the New
York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) [4]. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
has also charged Amaranth and traders Brian Hunter and Matthew Donohoe with
market manipulation[5]. The CFTC and the FERC have different, conflicting,
versions of what Brian Hunter did, and are currently fighting over
jurisdiction[1].

Amaranth filed a lawsuit against JP Morgan claiming US$ 1 billion in damages,
on the grounds that the bank interfered in the company's efforts to strike a
better deal with Goldman Sachs and Citadel.[6]

## [edit] External links

  * Amaranth webpage

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Betting on the Weather and Taking an Ice-Cold Bath". New York Times. 2006-09-29. http://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/29/business/29insider.html.
  2. ^ "Goldman, Morgan hit by Amaranth losses". CNNMoney. 2006-09-20. http://money.cnn.com/2006/09/20/news/companies/goldman.reut/index.htm?postversion=2006092012.
  3. ^ "Amaranth says to transfer energy portfolio". Reuters. 2006-09-20. http://today.reuters.com/news/articleinvesting.aspx?type=mergersNews&storyID=2006-09-20T174910Z_01_N20404893_RTRIDST_0_FUNDS-AMARANTH-FUNDS-UPDATE-1.XML.
  4. ^ "U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission Charges Hedge Fund Amaranth and its Former Head Energy Trader, Brian Hunter, with Attempted Manipulation of the Price of Natural Gas Futures". CFTC. 2007-07-25. http://www.cftc.gov/newsroom/enforcementpressreleases/2007/pr5359-07.html.
  5. ^ "Commission Takes Preliminary Action in Two Major Market Manipulation Cases". Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 2007-07-26. http://www.ferc.gov/news/news-releases/2007/2007-3/07-26-07.pdf.
  6. ^ "Amaranth Sues JPMorgan for Disrupting Transactions (Update2) : Bloomberg". Bloomberg. 2007-11-14. http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=axS.FCBhb4uw.

  * "IPO Blank-Check Bounce", September 19, 2006, thestreet.com
  * Washington Post article
  * "Hedge Fund, a Gamble Too Far", First Post
  * "Flare-up", The Economist, September 21, 2006.
  * "Amaranth's Risky Business", TheStreet.com, September 18, 2006
  * "A Hedge Fund's Loss Rattles Nerves", New York Times, September 19, 2006
  * "The Amaranth Case : early lessons from the debacle", Hillary Till, EDHEC Risk & Asset Management Research Centre, October 2, 2006.
  * "The Lights Are On - October 2006", Chris Finger, RiskMetrics Group
  * "The Long Arms of Enron Reach Beyond The Grave", Salon, July 6, 2007
  * "Excessive Speculation in the Natural Gas Market", United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, June 25, 2007
  * Commodities Futures Trading Commission charges Amaranth and head energy trader Brian Hunter with Attempted Manipulation of the Price of Natural Gas Futures", CFTC, July 25, 2007

v â¢ d â¢ e

Hedge funds and Alternative investments  
Investment  
strategy

Arbitrage / Relative value

Equity market neutral â¢ Fixed income arbitrage â¢ Convertible arbitrage â¢
Statistical arbitrage â¢ Volatility arbitrage â¢ Capital structure arbitrage  
Event driven

Merger arbitrage / Risk arbitrage â¢ Distressed securities â¢ Activist
shareholder  
Directional

Long / short equity â¢ Global macro â¢ CTA/managed futures â¢ Dedicated
short  
Other

Fund of hedge funds / Multi-manager  
<IMG>  
Trading

Program trading â¢ Algorithmic trading â¢ Prime brokerage â¢ Trend
following â¢ Day trading  
Related  
terms

Markets

Equity â¢ Fixed income â¢ Commodities â¢ Money markets â¢ FX â¢
Derivatives â¢ Structured securities  
Misc

Alpha â¢ Beta â¢ Hedging â¢ Shorting â¢ Securitization â¢ Technical
analysis â¢ Fundamental analysis  
Investors

Institutional Investors â¢ Pension funds â¢ Insurance companies â¢
Endowments â¢ Investment Banks â¢ Commercial Banks â¢ Fund of hedge funds
â¢ High net worth individuals â¢ Family offices â¢ Sovereign wealth funds  
Hedge funds â¢ Hedge fund managers â¢ Alternative investment firms  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amaranth_Advisors"

Categories: Defunct financial services companies of the United States | Hedge
funds | Greenwich, Connecticut | Companies based in Fairfield County,
Connecticut

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 16:29 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



