
# Mount St. Helens

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

For the mountain in California, see Mount Saint Helena.

Mount St. Helens  
<IMG>  
3,000 ft (1 km) steam plume on May 19, 1982  
Elevation 8,365 feet (2,550 m)  
Location Washington, USA  
Range Cascade Range  
Prominence 4,605 feet (1,404 m)  
Coordinates 46Â°12â²00.17â³N 122Â°11â²21.13â³Wï»¿ / ï»¿46.2000472Â°N
122.1892028Â°Wï»¿ / 46.2000472; -122.1892028Coordinates: 46Â°12â²00.17â³N
122Â°11â²21.13â³Wï»¿ / ï»¿46.2000472Â°N 122.1892028Â°Wï»¿ / 46.2000472;
-122.1892028  
Topo map USGS Mount St. Helens  
Type Active stratovolcano  
Volcanic arc/belt Cascade Volcanic Arc  
Age of rock < 40,000 yrs  
Last eruption 2004âJuly 10, 2008  
First ascent 1853 by Thomas J. Dryer  
Easiest route Hike via south slope of volcano (closest area near eruption
site)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Mount St. Helens the day before the 1980 eruption, which removed much of the
northern face of the mountain, leaving a large crater (caldera).

Mount St. Helens is an active stratovolcano located in Skamania County,
Washington, in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States. It is 96
miles (154 km) south of Seattle and 53 miles (85 km) northeast of Portland,
Oregon. Mount St. Helens takes its English name from the British diplomat Lord
St Helens, a friend of explorer George Vancouver who made a survey of the area
in the late 18th century. The volcano is located in the Cascade Range and is
part of the Cascade Volcanic Arc, a segment of the Pacific Ring of Fire that
includes over 160 active volcanoes. This volcano is well known for its ash
explosions and pyroclastic flows.

Mount St. Helens is most famous for its catastrophic eruption on May 18, 1980,
at 8:32am PDT[1] which was the deadliest and most economically destructive
volcanic event in the history of the United States. Fifty-seven people were
killed; 250 homes, 47 bridges, 15 miles (24 km) of railways, and 185 miles
(298 km) of highway were destroyed. The eruption caused a massive debris
avalanche, reducing the elevation of the mountain's summit from 9,677 feet
(2,950 m) to 8,365 feet (2,550 m) and replacing it with a 1 mile (1.6 km) wide
horseshoe-shaped crater.[2] The debris avalanche was up to 0.7 cubic miles
(2.9 km3) in volume. The Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument was
created to preserve the volcano and allow for its aftermath to be
scientifically studied.

As with most other volcanoes in the Cascade Range, Mount St. Helens is a large
eruptive cone consisting of lava rock interlayered with ash, pumice, and other
deposits. The mountain includes layers of basalt and andesite through which
several domes of dacite lava have erupted. The largest of the dacite domes
formed the previous summit, and off its northern flank sat the smaller Goat
Rocks dome. Both were destroyed in the 1980 eruption.

Shaken by an earthquake measuring 5.1 on the Richter scale, the north face of
this tall symmetrical mountain collapsed in a massive rock debris avalanche.
Nearly 230 square miles (600 km2) of forest was blown down or buried beneath
volcanic deposits. At the same time a mushroom-shaped column of ash rose
thousands of feet skyward and drifted downwind, turning day into night as
dark, gray ash fell over eastern Washington and beyond. The eruption lasted 9
hours, but Mount St. Helens and the surrounding landscape were dramatically
changed within moments.

## Contents

  * 1 Geographic setting and description
    * 1.1 General
    * 1.2 Crater Glacier and other new rock glaciers
  * 2 Human history
    * 2.1 Importance to Native Americans
      * 2.1.1 Local legends
    * 2.2 Exploration by Europeans
    * 2.3 European settlement and use of the area
    * 2.4 Human impact from the 1980 eruption
    * 2.5 Protection and later history
  * 3 Geologic history
    * 3.1 Ancestral stages of eruptive activity
    * 3.2 Smith Creek and Pine Creek eruptive periods
    * 3.3 Castle Creek and Sugar Bowl eruptive periods
    * 3.4 Kalama and Goat Rocks eruptive periods
    * 3.5 Modern eruptive period
      * 3.5.1 1980 to 2001 activity
      * 3.5.2 2004 to 2008 activity
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Notes
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## Geographic setting and description

### General

<IMG>

<IMG>

A view of St. Helens and the nearby area from space.

Mount St. Helens is 45 miles (72 km) west of Mount Adams, in the western part
of the Cascade Range. These "sister and brother" volcanic mountains are
approximately 50 miles (80 km) from Mount Rainier, the highest of Cascade
volcanoes. Mount Hood, the nearest major volcanic peak in Oregon, is 60 miles
(100 km) southeast of Mount St. Helens.

Mount St. Helens is geologically young compared to the other major Cascade
volcanoes. It formed only within the past 40,000 years, and the pre-1980
summit cone began rising about 2,200 years ago.[3] The volcano is considered
the most active in the Cascades within the Holocene epoch (the last 10,000 or
so years).[4]

Prior to the 1980 eruption, Mount St. Helens was the fifth-highest peak in
Washington. It stood out prominently from surrounding hills because of the
symmetry and extensive snow and ice cover of the pre-1980 summit cone, earning
it the nickname "Fuji-san of America" ("Mount Fuji of America").[5] The peak
rose more than 5,000 feet (1,500 m) above its base, where the lower flanks
merge with adjacent ridges. The mountain is 6 miles (9.7 km) across at its
base, which is at an altitude of 4,400 feet (1,300 m) on the northeastern side
and 4,000 feet (1,200 m) elsewhere. At the pre-eruption tree line, the width
of the cone was 4 miles (6.4 km).

<IMG>

<IMG>

A view of the volcano from the air.

Streams that originate on the volcano enter three main river systems: the
Toutle River on the north and northwest, the Kalama River on the west, and the
Lewis River on the south and east. The streams are fed by abundant rain and
snow. The average annual rainfall is 140 inches (3,600 mm), and the snowpack
on the mountain's upper slopes can reach 16 feet (4.9 m).[6] The Lewis River
is impounded by three dams for hydroelectric power generation. The southern
and eastern sides of the volcano drain into an upstream impoundment, the Swift
Reservoir, which is directly south of the volcano's peak.

Although Mount St. Helens is in Skamania County, Washington, the best access
routes to the mountain run through Cowlitz County to the west. State Route
504, locally known as the Spirit Lake Memorial Highway, connects with the
heavily traveled Interstate 5 at Exit 49, 34 miles (55 km) to the west of the
mountain. That major north-south highway skirts the low-lying cities of Castle
Rock, Longview and Kelso along the Cowlitz River, and passes through the
Vancouver, Washington-Portland, Oregon metropolitan area less than 50 miles
(80 km) to the southwest. The community nearest the volcano is Cougar,
Washington, in the Lewis River valley 11 miles (18 km) south-southwest of the
peak. Gifford Pinchot National Forest surrounds Mount St. Helens.

### Crater Glacier and other new rock glaciers

Main article: Crater Glacier

During the winter of 1980â1981, a new glacier appeared. Now officially named
Crater Glacier, it was formerly known as the Tulutson Glacier. Shadowed by the
crater walls and fed by heavy snowfall and repeated snow avalanches, it grew
rapidly (14 feet (4.3 m) per year in thickness). By 2004, it covered about
0.36 square miles (0.93 km2), and was divided by the dome into a western and
eastern lobe. Typically, by late summer, the glacier looks dark from rockfall
from the crater walls and ash from eruptions. As of 2006, the ice had an
average thickness of 300 feet (100 m) and a maximum of 650 feet (200 m),
nearly as deep as the much older and larger Carbon Glacier of Mount Rainier.
The ice is all postâ1980, making the glacier very young geologically.
However, the volume of the new glacier is about the same as all the preâ1980
glaciers combined.[7][8][9][10][11]

With the recent volcanic activity starting in 2004, the glacier lobes were
pushed aside and upward by the growth of new volcanic domes. The surface of
the glacier, once mostly uncrevassed, turned into a chaotic jumble of icefalls
heavily criss-crossed with crevasses and seracs caused by movement of the
crater floor.[12] The new domes have almost separated the Crater Glacier into
an eastern and western lobe. Despite the volcanic activity, the termini of the
glacier have still advanced, with a slight advance on the western lobe and a
more considerable advance on the more shaded eastern lobe. Due to the advance,
two lobes of the glacier joined together in late-May 2008 and thus the glacier
completely surrounds the lava domes.[12][13][14] In addition, since 2004, new
glaciers have formed on the crater wall above Crater Glacier feeding rock and
ice onto its surface below; there are two rock glaciers to the north of the
eastern lobe of Crater Glacier.[15]

## Human history

### Importance to Native Americans

Traces of ancient campsites have been found in the Gifford Pinchot National
Forest, which surrounds the monument. Dating of these sites reveals that
people have lived in this area for at least 6,500 years.[16] Throughout human
history, Mount St. Helens eruptions have had a dramatic effect on the lives of
local inhabitants. Work by archaeologists has shown that a massive eruption
3,500 years ago buried native settlements with a thick layer of pumice. As a
result, people abandoned the area for nearly 2,000 years.[16] Later, members
of the Cowlitz, Taidnapam, Klickitat, Upper Chinook, and Yakama tribes moved
seasonally over the land, harvesting huckleberries and hunting salmon, elk,
and deer.[16]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Indigenous American legends were inspired by the volcano's beauty.

#### Local legends

American Indian lore contains numerous legends to explain the eruptions of
Mount St. Helens and other Cascade volcanoes. The most famous of these is the
Bridge of the Gods legend told by the Klickitats. In their tale, the chief of
all the gods, Tyhee Saghalie and his two sons, Pahto (also called Klickitat)
and Wy'east, traveled down the Columbia River from the Far North in search for
a suitable area to settle.[17]

They came upon an area that is now called The Dalles and thought they had
never seen a land so beautiful. The sons quarreled over the land, so to solve
the dispute their father shot two arrows from his mighty bow â one to the
north and the other to the south. Pahto followed the arrow to the north and
settled there while Wy'east did the same for the arrow to the south. Saghalie
then built Tanmahawis, the Bridge of the Gods, so his family could meet
periodically.[17]

When the two sons of the Saghalie fell in love with a beautiful maiden named
Loowit, she could not choose between them. The two young chiefs fought over
her, burying villages and forests in the process. The area was devastated and
the earth shook so violently that the huge bridge fell into the river,
creating the cascades of the Columbia River Gorge.[18]

For punishment, Saghalie struck down each of the lovers and transformed them
into great mountains where they fell. Wy'east, with his head lifted in pride,
became the volcano known today as Mount Hood. Pahto, with his head bent toward
his fallen love, was turned into Mount Adams. The fair Loowit became Mount St.
Helens, known to the Klickitats as Louwala-Clough, which means "smoking or
fire mountain" in their language (the Sahaptin called the mountain
Loowit).[19]

### Exploration by Europeans

Royal Navy Commander George Vancouver and the officers of HMS Discovery made
the Europeans' first recorded sighting of Mount St. Helens on May 19, 1792,
while surveying the northern Pacific Ocean coast. Vancouver named the mountain
for British diplomat Alleyne Fitzherbert, 1st Baron St Helens on October 20,
1792,[19] as it came into view when the Discovery passed into the mouth of the
Columbia River.

Years later, explorers, traders, and missionaries heard reports of an erupting
volcano in the area. Geologists and historians determined much later that the
eruption took place in 1800, marking the beginning of the 57-year-long Goat
Rocks Eruptive Period (see geology section).[20] Alarmed by the "dry snow,"
the Nespelem tribe of northeastern Washington danced and prayed rather than
collecting food and suffered during that winter from starvation.[20]

In late 1805 and early 1806, members of the Lewis and Clark Expedition spotted
Mount St. Helens from the Columbia River but did not report either an ongoing
eruption or recent evidence of one.[21] They did however report the presence
of quicksand and clogged channel conditions at the mouth of the Sandy River
near Portland, suggesting an eruption by Mount Hood sometime in the previous
decades.

### European settlement and use of the area

<IMG>

<IMG>

19th century photo of a fur trapper working in the Mount St. Helens area.

The area's first non-aboriginal inhabitants were European fur traders and
trappers. Most of these men worked for the fur trading enterprise of the
British-owned Hudson's Bay Company.[22] In the early 1890s, Ole' Peterson set
up housekeeping at Cougar Flats, on the Upper Lewis River.[22] He was a true
hermit â preferring to keep to himself, and enjoying the quiet solitude of
nature.

Also in the early 1890s, a 156 square miles (400 km2) mining district north of
Spirit Lake was established. By 1911, over 400 mining claims had been
filed.[22] However, the minerals were never found in profitable quantities,
and though much effort was spent in attempting to build a road or railroad
into the district, by 1911, it was clear that there were no veins of precious
minerals rich enough to offset the high transportation costs.[22]

The first authenticated eyewitness report of a volcanic eruption was made in
March 1835 by Meredith Gairdner, while working for the Hudson's Bay Company
stationed at Fort Vancouver.[23] He sent an account to the Edinburgh New
Philosophical Journal, which published his letter in January 1836. James
Dwight Dana of Yale University, while sailing with the United States Exploring
Expedition, saw the quiescent peak from off the mouth of the Columbia River in
1841. Another member of the expedition later described "cellular basaltic
lavas" at the mountain's base.[24]

In late fall or early winter of 1842, nearby settlers and missionaries
witnessed the so-called "Great Eruption." This small-volume outburst created
large ash clouds, and mild explosions followed for 15 years.[25] The eruptions
of this period were likely phreatic (steam explosions). Josiah Parrish in
Champoeg, Oregon witnessed Mount St. Helens in eruption on November 22, 1842.
Ash from this eruption may have reached The Dalles, Oregon, 48 miles (80 km)
southeast of the volcano.[4]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mount St. Helens erupting at night. Painting by Paul Kane after his 1847 visit
to the area.

In October 1843, future California governor Peter H. Burnett recounted a story
of an aboriginal American man who badly burned his foot and leg in lava or hot
ash while hunting for deer. The likely apocryphal story went that the injured
man sought treatment at Fort Vancouver, but the contemporary fort commissary
steward, Napolean McGilvery, disclaimed knowledge of the incident.[26] British
lieutenant Henry J. Warre sketched the eruption in 1845, and two years later
Canadian painter Paul Kane created watercolors of the gently smoking mountain.
Warre's work showed erupting material from a vent about a third of the way
down from the summit on the mountain's west or northwest side (possibly at
Goat Rocks), and one of Kane's field sketches shows smoke emanating from about
the same location.[27]

On April 17, 1857, the Republican, a Steilacoom, Washington newspaper,
reported that "Mount St. Helens, or some other mount to the southward, is seen
... to be in a state of eruption".[28] The lack of a significant ash layer
associated with this event indicates that it was a small eruption. This was
the first reported volcanic activity since 1854.[28]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Boats in Spirit Lake sometime before the 1980 eruption.

Before the 1980 eruption, Spirit Lake offered year-round recreational
activities. In the summer there was boating, swimming, and camping, while in
the winter there was skiing.

### Human impact from the 1980 eruption

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ash from the eruption disrupted life for millions of people. Fifty-seven
people died, and the economic cost was US$1 billion.

St. Helens catastrophically erupted on May 18, 1980. After many months of
lead-up activity, including the growth of a huge bulge on the north part of
the mountain, a moderate earthquake caused the entire north flank of the
mountain to slide away in the largest landslide in recorded history.[29] The
newly-exposed hot and pressurized rock in the volcano responded by producing
the largest historic volcanic eruption in the 48 contiguous U.S. states.[29]
(See the Geology section for more detail.)

During the lead-up to the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens, 83-year-old Harry
R. Truman, who had lived near the mountain for 54 years, became famous when he
decided not to evacuate before the impending eruption, despite repeated pleas
by local authorities. His body was never found after the eruption. Fifty-seven
people were killed or never found. Had the eruption occurred one day later,
when loggers would have been at work, rather than on a Sunday, the death toll
would almost certainly have been much higher.[6]

<IMG>

<IMG>

David A. Johnston hours before he was killed by the eruption.

Among the victims of the 1980 eruption was 30-year-old volcanologist David A.
Johnston, who was stationed on the nearby Coldwater Ridge. Moments before his
position was hit by the hot ash cloud, Johnston uttered his famous last words:
"Vancouver! Vancouver! This is it!"[30] Johnston's body was never found.

U.S. President Jimmy Carter surveyed the damage and said "Someone said this
area looked like a moonscape. But the moon looks more like a golf course
compared to what's up there."[31] A film crew, led by Seattle filmmaker Otto
Seiber, was dropped by helicopter on St. Helens on May 23 to document the
destruction. Their compasses, however, spun in circles and they quickly became
lost. A second eruption occurred on May 25, but the crew survived and was
rescued two days later by National Guard helicopter pilots. Their film, The
Eruption of Mount St. Helens, later became a popular documentary.

### Protection and later history

<IMG>

<IMG>

View of the hillside at the Johnston Ridge Observatory, 25 years after the
eruption.

In 1982, President Ronald Reagan and the U.S. Congress established the Mount
St. Helens National Volcanic Monument, a 110,000 acres (45,000 ha) area around
the mountain and within the Gifford Pinchot National Forest.[32]

Following the 1980 eruption, the area was left to gradually return to its
natural state. In 1987, the U.S. Forest Service reopened the mountain to
climbing. It remained open until 2004 when renewed activity caused the closure
of the area around the mountain (see Geology section for more detail).

Most notable was the closure of the Monitor Ridge trail, which previously let
up to 100 permitted hikers per day climb to the summit. However, on July 21,
2006, the mountain was again opened to climbers.[33]  

## Geologic history

### Ancestral stages of eruptive activity

<IMG>

<IMG>

Plate tectonics of the Cascade Range.

The early eruptive stages of Mount St. Helens are known as the "Ape Canyon
Stage" (around 40â35,000 years ago), the "Cougar Stage" (ca. 20â18,000
years ago), and the "Swift Creek Stage" (roughly 13â8,000 years ago).[34]
The modern period, since about 2500 BCE, is called the "Spirit Lake Stage."
Collectively, the pre-Spirit Lake stages are known as the "ancestral stages."
The ancestral and modern stages differ primarily in the composition of the
erupted lavas; ancestral lavas consisted of a characteristic mixture of dacite
and andesite, while modern lava is very diverse (ranging from olivine basalt
to andesite and dacite).[35]

St. Helens started its growth in the Pleistocene 37,600 years ago, during the
Ape Canyon stage, with dacite and andesite eruptions of hot pumice and
ash.[35] 36,000 years ago a large mudflow cascaded down the volcano;[35]
mudflows were significant forces in all of St. Helens' eruptive cycles. The
Ape Canyon eruptive period ended around 35,000 years ago and was followed by
17,000 years of relative quiet. Parts of this ancestral cone were fragmented
and transported by glaciers 14,000 to 18,000 years ago during the last glacial
period of the current ice age.[35]

The second eruptive period, the Cougar Stage, started 20,000 years ago and
lasted for 2,000 years.[35] Pyroclastic flows of hot pumice and ash along with
dome growth occurred during this period. Another 5,000 years of dormancy
followed, only to be upset by the beginning of the Swift Creek eruptive
period, typified by pyroclastic flows, dome growth and blanketing of the
countryside with tephra. Swift Creek ended 8,000 years ago.

### Smith Creek and Pine Creek eruptive periods

A dormancy of about 4,000 years was broken around 2500 BCE with the start of
the Smith Creek eruptive period, when eruptions of large amounts of ash and
yellowish-brown pumice covered thousands of square miles. An eruption in 1900
BCE was the largest known eruption from St. Helens during the Holocene epoch,
judged by the volume of one of the tephra layers from that period. This
eruptive period lasted until about 1600 BCE and left 18 inches (46 cm) deep
deposits of material 50 miles (80 km) distant in what is now Mt. Rainier
National Park. Trace deposits have been found as far northeast as Banff
National Park in Alberta, and as far southeast as eastern Oregon.[36] All told
there may have been up to 2.5 cubic miles (10 km3) of material ejected in this
cycle.[36] Some 400 years of dormancy followed.

St. Helens came alive again around 1200 BCE â the Pine Creek eruptive
period.[36] This lasted until about 800 BCE and was characterized by smaller-
volume eruptions. Numerous dense, nearly red hot pyroclastic flows sped down
St. Helens' flanks and came to rest in nearby valleys. A large mudflow partly
filled 40 miles (64 km) of the Lewis River valley sometime between 1000 BCE
and 500 BCE.

### Castle Creek and Sugar Bowl eruptive periods

The next eruptive period, the Castle Creek period, began about 400 BCE, and is
characterized by a change in composition of St. Helens' lava, with the
addition of olivine and basalt.[37] The pre-1980 summit cone started to form
during the Castle Creek period. Significant lava flows in addition to the
previously much more common fragmented and pulverized lavas and rocks (tephra)
distinguished this period. Large lava flows of andesite and basalt covered
parts of the mountain, including one around the year 100 BCE that traveled all
the way into the Lewis and Kalama river valleys.[37] Others, such as Cave
Basalt (known for its system of lava tubes), flowed up to 9 miles (14 km) from
their vents.[37] During the first century, mudflows moved 30 miles (50 km)
down the Toutle and Kalama river valleys and may have reached the Columbia
River. Another 400 years of dormancy ensued.

The Sugar Bowl eruptive period was short and markedly different from other
periods in Mount St. Helens history. It produced the only unequivocal
laterally directed blast known from Mount St. Helens before the 1980
eruptions.[38] During Sugar Bowl time, the volcano first erupted quietly to
produce a dome, then erupted violently at least twice producing a small volume
of tephra, directed-blast deposits, pyroclastic flows, and lahars.[38]

### Kalama and Goat Rocks eruptive periods

<IMG>

<IMG>

The symmetrical appearance of St. Helens prior to the 1980 eruption earned it
the nickname "Mount Fuji of America". The once-familiar shape was formed out
of the Kalama and Goat Rocks eruptive periods.

Roughly 700 years of dormancy were broken about 1480, when large amounts of
pale gray dacite pumice and ash started to erupt, beginning the Kalama period.
The eruption in 1480 was several times larger than the May 18, 1980
eruption.[38] In 1482, another large eruption rivaling the 1980 eruption in
volume is known to have occurred.[38] Ash and pumice piled 6 miles (9.7 km)
northeast of the volcano to a thickness of 3 feet (0.9 m); 50 miles (80 km)
away, the ash was 2 inches (5 cm) deep. Large pyroclastic flows and mudflows
subsequently rushed down St. Helens' west flanks and into the Kalama River
drainage system.

This 150-year period next saw the eruption of less silica-rich lava in the
form of andesitic ash that formed at least eight alternating light- and dark-
colored layers.[37] Blocky andesite lava then flowed from St. Helens' summit
crater down the volcano's southeast flank.[37] Later, pyroclastic flows raced
down over the andesite lava and into the Kalama River valley. It ended with
the emplacement of a dacite dome several hundred feet (~200 m) high at the
volcano's summit, which filled and overtopped an explosion crater already at
the summit.[20] Large parts of the dome's sides broke away and mantled parts
of the volcano's cone with talus. Lateral explosions excavated a notch in the
southeast crater wall. St. Helens reached its greatest height and achieved its
highly symmetrical form by the time the Kalama eruptive cycle ended, about
1647.[20] 150 years of quiet returned to the volcano.

The 57-year eruptive period that started in 1800 was named after the Goat
Rocks dome, and is the first time that both oral and written records
exist.[20] Like the Kalama period, the Goat Rocks period started with an
explosion of dacite tephra, followed by an andesite lava flow, and culminated
with the emplacement of a dacite dome. The 1800 eruption probably rivalled the
1980 eruption in size, although it did not result in massive destruction of
the cone. The ash drifted northeast over central and eastern Washington,
northern Idaho, and western Montana. There were at least a dozen reported
small eruptions of ash from 1831 to 1857, including a fairly large one in
1842. The vent was apparently at or near Goat Rocks on the northeast
flank.[20] Goat Rocks dome was the site of the bulge in the 1980 eruption, and
it was obliterated in the major eruption event on May 18, 1980 that destroyed
the entire north face and top 1,300 feet (400 m) of the mountain.

### Modern eruptive period

#### 1980 to 2001 activity

Main article: 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens

<IMG>

<IMG>

Phreatic eruption at the summit of Mount St. Helens, Washington in the spring
of 1980.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mount St. Helens erupted on May 18, 1980, at 08:32 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time.

On March 20, 1980, Mount St. Helens experienced a magnitude 4.2 earthquake.[1]
Steam venting started on March 27.[39] By the end of April, the north side of
the mountain started to bulge.[40] With little warning, a second earthquake of
magnitude 5.1 May 18 triggered a massive collapse of the north face of the
mountain. It was the largest known debris avalanche in recorded history. The
magma inside of St. Helens burst forth into a large-scale pyroclastic flow
that flattened vegetation and buildings over 230 square miles (600 km2). Over
1.5 million metric tons of sulfur dioxide were released into the
atmosphere.[41] On the Volcanic Explosivity Index scale, the eruption was
rated a five (a Plinian eruption).

The collapse of the northern flank of St. Helens mixed with ice, snow, and
water to create lahars (volcanic mudflows). The lahars flowed many miles down
the Toutle and Cowlitz Rivers, destroying bridges and lumber camps. A total of
3,900,000 cubic yards (3,000,000 m3) of material was transported 17 miles (27
km) south into the Columbia River by the mudflows.[42]

For more than nine hours, a vigorous plume of ash erupted, eventually reaching
12 to 16 miles (20 to 27 km) above sea level.[43] The plume moved eastward at
an average speed of 60 miles per hour (100 km/h) with ash reaching Idaho by
noon.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lava dome growth profile from 1980â1986.

By about 5:30 p.m. on May 18, the vertical ash column declined in stature, and
less severe outbursts continued through the night and for the next several
days. The St. Helens May 18 eruption released 24 megatons of thermal
energy;[44][45] it ejected more than 0.67 cubic miles (2.79 km3) of
material.[29] The removal of the north side of the mountain reduced St.
Helens' height by about 1,300 feet (400 m) and left a crater one to 2 miles
(3.2 km) wide and 0.5 miles (800 m) deep, with its north end open in a huge
breach. The eruption killed 57 people, nearly 7,000 big game animals (deer,
elk, and bear), and an estimated 12 million fish from a hatchery.[6] It
destroyed or extensively damaged over 200 homes, 185 miles (298 km) of highway
and 15 miles (24 km) of railways.[6]

Between 1980 and 1986, activity continued at Mount St. Helens, with a new lava
dome forming in the crater. Numerous small explosions and dome-building
eruptions occurred. From December 7, 1989 to January 6, 1990, and from
November 5, 1990 to February 14, 1991, the mountain erupted with sometimes
huge clouds of ash.[46]

#### 2004 to 2008 activity

Main article: 2004â2008 volcanic activity of Mount St. Helens

<IMG>

<IMG>

Appearance of the "Whaleback" in February 2005.

Magma reached the surface of the volcano about October 11, 2004, resulting in
the building of a new lava dome on the existing dome's south side. This new
dome continued to grow throughout 2005 and into 2006. Several transient
features were observed, such as the "whaleback," which comprised long shafts
of solidified magma being extruded by the pressure of magma beneath. These
features are fragile and break down soon after they are formed. On July 2,
2005, the tip of the whaleback broke off, causing a rockfall that sent ash and
dust several hundred meters into the air. [47]

Mount St. Helens showed significant activity on March 8, 2005, when a 36,000
feet (11,000 m) plume of steam and ash emergedâvisible from Seattle.[48]
This relatively minor eruption was a release of pressure consistent with
ongoing dome building. The release was accompanied by a magnitude 2.5
earthquake.

Another feature to emerge from the dome is called the "fin" or "slab."
Approximately half the size of a football field, the large, cooled volcanic
rock was being forced upward as quickly as 6 feet (2 m) per day.[49][50] In
mid-June 2006, the slab was crumbling in frequent rockfalls, although it was
still being extruded. The height of the dome was 7,550 feet (2,300 m), still
below the height reached in July 2005 when the whaleback collapsed.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The volcano continuously steams as seen here in late 2007.

On October 22, 2006, at 3:13 p.m. PST, a magnitude 3.5 earthquake broke loose
Spine 7. The collapse and avalanche of the lava dome sent an ash plume 2,000
feet (600 m) over the western rim of the crater; the ash plume then rapidly
dissipated.

On December 19, 2006, a large white plume of condensing steam was observed,
leading some media people to assume there had been a small eruption. However,
the Cascades Volcano Observatory of the USGS does not mention any significant
ash plume.[51] The volcano has been in continuous eruption since October 2004,
but this eruption has in large part consisted of a gradual extrusion of lava
forming a dome in the crater.

On January 16, 2008, steam began seeping from a fracture atop the lava dome.
Associated seismic activity is the most noteworthy since 2004. Scientists have
suspended activities in the crater and the mountain flanks, but the risk of a
major eruption is deemed low.[52] During the end of January, the eruption
paused; no more lava was being extruded from the lava dome. On July 10, 2008
it was determined that the eruption had ended after more than six months of no
volcanic activity.[53]

## See also

  * Geology of the Pacific Northwest
  * Cascade Volcanoes
  * Silver Lake (Washington)

## Notes

  1. ^ a b "Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument". USDA Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/gpnf/mshnvm/. (accessed November 26, 2006)
  2. ^ "May 18, 1980 Eruption of Mount St. Helens". USDA Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/gpnf/mshnvm/education/teachers-corner/library/volcanic-eruption-summary.shtml. Retrieved on 2007-08-11.
  3. ^ Mullineaux, The Eruptive History of Mount St. Helens, USGS Professional Paper 1250, page 3
  4. ^ a b USGS Description of Mount St. Helens, USGS.gov (accessed 15 Nov 2006)
  5. ^ Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 201
  6. ^ a b c d Tilling et al., Eruptions of Mount St. Helens: Past, Present, and Future, USGS Special Interest Publication, 1990 (accessed 12 Nov 2006)
  7. ^ Brugman, Melinda M.; Austin Post (1981). "USGS Circular 850-D: Effects of Volcanism on the Glaciers of Mount St. Helens". http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/usgspubs/cir/cir850D. Retrieved on 2007-03-07.
  8. ^ Wiggins, Tracy B.; Hansen, Jon D.; Clark, Douglas H. (2002). "Growth and flow of a new glacier in Mt. St. Helens Crater". Abstracts with Programs - Geological Society of America 34 (5): 91.
  9. ^ Schilling, Steve P.; Paul E. Carrara, Ren A. Thompson, and Eugene Y. Iwatsubo (2004). "Posteruption glacier development within the crater of Mount St. Helens, Washington, USA". Quaternary Research (Elsevier Science (USA)) 61 (3): 325â329. doi:10.1016/j.yqres.2003.11.002.
  10. ^ McCandless, Melanie; Plummer, Mitchell; Clark, Douglas (2005). "Predictions of the growth and steady-state form of the Mount St. Helens Crater Glacier using a 2-D glacier model". Abstracts with Programs - Geological Society of America 37 (7): 354.
  11. ^ Schilling, Steve P.; David W. Ramsey, James A. Messerich, and Ren A. Thompson (2006-08-08). "USGS Scientific Investigations Map 2928: Rebuilding Mount St. Helens". http://pubs.usgs.gov/sim/2006/2928/. Retrieved on 2007-03-07.
  12. ^ a b "Volcano Review" (PDF). US Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/gpnf/mshnvm/volcano-review/documents/Volcano_Review_2008_Final_lowrez-201.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-07.
  13. ^ Schilling, Steve (2008-05-30). "MSH08_aerial_new_dome_from_north_05-30-08". United States Geological Survey. http://vulcan.wr.usgs.gov/Imgs/Jpg/MSH/MSH08/MSH08_aerial_new_dome_from_north_05-30-08_med.jpg. Retrieved on 2008-06-07. \- Glacier is still connected south of the lava dome.
  14. ^ Schilling, Steve (2008-05-30). "MSH08_aerial_st_helens_crater_from_north_05-30-08". United States Geological Survey. http://vulcan.wr.usgs.gov/Imgs/Jpg/MSH/MSH08/MSH08_crater_glacier_arms_touching_05-30-08_med.jpg. Retrieved on 2008-06-07. \- Glacier arms touch on North end of glacier.
  15. ^ Haugerud, R. A.; Harding, D. J., Mark, L. E.; Zeigler, J., Queija, V., Johnson, S. Y. (2004-12). "Lidar measurement of topographic change during the 2004 eruption of Mount St. Helens, WA". http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004AGUFM.V53D..01H. Retrieved on 2007-09-26.
  16. ^ a b c Native Americans, USGS (accessed 12 Nov 2006)
  17. ^ a b Archie Satterfield, Country Roads of Washington (Backinprint.com: 2003) ISBN 0-595-26863-3, page 82
  18. ^ The Bridge of the Gods, theoutlaws.com (accessed November 26, 2006)
  19. ^ a b USGS. "Volcanoes and History: Cascade Range Volcano Names". http://vulcan.wr.usgs.gov/LivingWith/Historical/volcano_names.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-20.
  20. ^ a b c d e f Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 217
  21. ^ Pringle, Roadside Geology of Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument and Vicinity
  22. ^ a b c d Explorers and Settlers, USGS.gov (accessed 12 Nov 2006)
  23. ^ Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 219
  24. ^ The Volcanoes of Lewis and Clark, USGS.gov (accessed 15 Nov 2006)
  25. ^ Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, pages 220â221
  26. ^ Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 224
  27. ^ Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 225, 227
  28. ^ a b Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 228
  29. ^ a b c Mount St. Helens â From the 1980 Eruption to 2000, USGS Fact Sheet 036-00 (accessed 12 Nov 2006)
  30. ^ Scott LaFee. "Perish the thought: A life in science sometimes becomes a death, too." SignOnSanDiego.com: December 3, 2003. Retrieved October 26, 2006.
  31. ^ Mount St. Helens: Senator Murray Speaks on the 25th Anniversary of the May 18, 1980 Eruption, Senate.gov (accessed 12 Nov 2006)
  32. ^ Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument: General Visitor Information, USDA Forest Service (accessed 12 Nov 2006)
  33. ^ Climbing Mount St. Helens, USDA Forest Service (accessed 12 Nov 2006)
  34. ^ "Mount St. Helens - Summary of Volcanic History". USDA Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/gpnf/mshnvm/education/teachers-corner/library/volcanic-history-summary.shtml. (accessed November 26, 2006)
  35. ^ a b c d e Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 214
  36. ^ a b c Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 215
  37. ^ a b c d e Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 216
  38. ^ a b c d Mount St. Helens Eruptive History, USGS.gov (accessed 15 Nov 2006)
  39. ^ "Summary of Events Leading Up to the May 18, 1980 Eruption of Mount St. Helens: March 22â28.". USDA Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/gpnf/mshnvm/education/teachers-corner/library/pre-eruption-0322.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-10-28.
  40. ^ "Summary of Events Leading Up to the May 18, 1980 Eruption of Mount St. Helens: April 26âMay 2.". USDA Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/gpnf/mshnvm/education/teachers-corner/library/pre-eruption-0426.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-10-28.
  41. ^ "Emission of sulfur dioxide gas from Mount St. Helens, 1980-1988". United States Geological Survey. 2008-09-25. http://volcanoes.usgs.gov/activity/methods/gas/msh1980-88.php. Retrieved on 2009-03-25.
  42. ^ Harris, Fire Mountains of the West, 1st edition, page 209
  43. ^ Kiver and Harris, Geology of U.S. Parklands, 6th edition, page 149
  44. ^ Mount St. Helens â From the 1980 Eruption to 2000, Fact Sheet 036-00 usgs.gov
  45. ^ Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument fs.fed.us, '24 megatons thermal energy'
  46. ^ Bobbie Myers, 1992, Small Explosions Interrupt 3-year Quiescence at Mount St. Helens, Washington: IN: Earthquakes and Volcanoes, v.23, n.2, p.58â73 (accessed November 26, 2006)
  47. ^ see USGS before and after images
  48. ^ Mount St. Helens, Washington, "Plume in the Evening", March 8, 2005, USGS.gov (accessed 15 Nov 2006)
  49. ^ Northwest NewsChannel8. "New slab growing in Mount St. Helens dome". http://www.kgw.com/news-local/stories/kgw_050306_env_mt_st_helens_slab.7608185.html. Retrieved on 2006-10-20.
  50. ^ See close-up of the slab.
  51. ^ Cascades Volcano Observatory, vulcan.wr.usgs.gov (accessed January 4, 2007)
  52. ^ Small Quake Report- ap.google.com (accessed January 16, 2008)
  53. ^ "CVO Menu - Mount St. Helens Eruption 2004". Vulcan.wr.usgs.gov. http://vulcan.wr.usgs.gov/Volcanoes/MSH/Eruption04/framework.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-06.

## References

  * Harris, Stephen L. (1988). "Mount St. Helens: A Living Fire Mountain". Fire Mountains of the West: The Cascade and Mono Lake Volcanoes (1st ed.). Missoula, Montana: Mountain Press Publishing Company. pp. 201â228. ISBN 0-87842-220-X.
  * Mullineaux, D.R.; Crandell, D.R. (1981). The Eruptive History of Mount St. Helens, USGS Professional Paper 1250. Retrieved on October 28, 2006.
  * Mullineaux, D.R. (1996). Pre-1980 Tephra-Fall Deposits Erupted From Mount St. Helens, USGS Professional Paper 1563. Retrieved on October 28, 2006.
  * Pringle (1993). Roadside Geology of Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument and Vicinity, Washington State Department of Natural Resources, Division of Geology and Earth Resources Information; Circular 88.
  * USGS/Cascades Volcano Observatory, Vancouver, Washington. DESCRIPTION: Mount St. Helens Volcano, Washington. Retrieved on October 28, 2006.

## External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Mount St. Helens  
  * Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument \- official US Forest Service website
  * "St. Helens". Global Volcanism Program. Smithsonian Institution. http://www.volcano.si.edu/world/volcano.cfm?vnum=1=1201-05-. Retrieved on 2008-12-18.
  * Mount St. Helens photographs and current conditions from the United States Geological Survey website
  * USGS: Mount St. Helens Eruptive History
    * USGS: Mount St. Helens â From the 1980 Eruption to 2000
    * Most recent photos (most aerial) from the United States Geological Survey
  * University of Washington Libraries: Digital Collections: 
    * Mount St. Helens Post-Eruption Chemistry Database This collection contains photographs of Mount St. Helens, post-eruption, taken over the span of three years to provide a look at both the human and the scientific sides of studying the eruption of a volcano.
    * Mount St. Helens Succession Collection This collection consists of 235 photographs in a study of plant habitats following the May 18, 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens.
  * Audio recording of the May 18, 1980 eruption Recorded 140 miles (225 km) southwest of the mountain. Believed to be the only audio recording of the eruption.
  * Mount St. Helens at the Open Directory Project

v â¢ d â¢ e

Major Cascade Volcanoes  
British Columbia

Mount Silverthrone Â· Silverthrone Caldera Â· Franklin Glacier Volcano Â·
Plinth Peak Â· Mount Meager Â· Mount Job Â· Capricorn Mountain Â· Pylon Peak
Â· Devastator Peak Â· Mount Cayley Â· Mount Garibaldi

<IMG>  
Washington

Mount Baker Â· Glacier Peak Â· Mount Rainier Â· Mount St. Helens Â· Mount
Adams  
Oregon

Mount Hood Â· Mount Jefferson Â· Three Sisters Â· Broken Top Â· Mount Bachelor
Â· Newberry Volcano Â· Mount Thielsen Â· Mount Mazama (Crater Lake) Â· Mount
McLoughlin  
California

Medicine Lake Volcano Â· Mount Shasta Â· Shastina Â· Mount Tehama Â· Lassen
Peak  
Featured article

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mount_St._Helens"

Categories: Active volcanoes | Cascade Range | Mountains of Washington (U.S.
state) | Stratovolcanoes | VEI-5 volcanoes | Volcanoes of Washington (U.S.
state) | Subduction volcanoes | Cascade Volcanoes

Hidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 16:07.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



