
# Rock and roll

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the 1940sâearly 1960s style of music. For the general
rock music genre, see rock music. For other uses, see rock and roll
(disambiguation).

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)  
Rock and roll  
Stylistic origins

Gospel  
Folk music  
Country music  
Jump blues  
Chicago blues  
Swing music  
Boogie-woogie  
Rhythm and blues  
Cultural origins

United States in the period up to the 1950s  
Typical instruments

Electric guitar, string bass or later bass guitar, drums, piano, saxophone
(occasionally)  
Mainstream popularity One of the best selling music forms since the 1950s  
Derivative forms Rock \- Rockabilly \- Soft rock \- Pop  
Rock and roll (often written as rock & roll or rock ânâ roll) is a form of
music that evolved in the United States in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Its
roots lay mainly in rhythm and blues, country, folk, gospel, and jazz. The
style quickly spread to the rest of the world and developed further, leading
ultimately to modern rock music.

The term "rock and roll" now covers at least two different meanings, both in
common usage. The American Heritage Dictionary[1] and the Merriam-Webster
Dictionary[2] both define rock and roll as synonymous with rock music.
Conversely, Allwords.com defines the term to refer specifically to the music
of the 1950s.[3] For the purpose of differentiation, this article uses the
latter definition, while the broader musical genre is discussed in the rock
music article.

Classic rock and roll is usually played with one or two electric guitars (one
lead, one rhythm), a string bass or (after the mid-1950s) an electric bass
guitar, and a drum kit. In the earliest rock and roll styles of the late 1940s
and early 1950s, either the piano or saxophone was often the lead instrument,
but these were generally replaced or supplemented by guitar in the middle to
late 1950s. The beat is essentially a boogie woogie blues rhythm with an
accentuated backbeat, the latter almost always provided by a snare drum.

The massive popularity and eventual worldwide view of rock and roll gave it a
unique social impact. Far beyond simply a musical style, rock and roll, as
seen in movies and in the new medium of television, influenced lifestyles,
fashion, attitudes, and language. It went on to spawn various sub-genres,
often without the initially characteristic backbeat, that are now more
commonly called simply "rock music" or "rock".

## Contents

  * 1 Origins of the style
  * 2 Origins of the phrase
  * 3 Early rock and roll records
    * 3.1 Rockabilly
    * 3.2 Cover versions
  * 4 Cultural impact
    * 4.1 Teen culture
    * 4.2 Military
    * 4.3 Dance styles
  * 5 British rock and roll
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Origins of the style

Main article: Origins of rock and roll

The immediate origins of rock and roll lie in the late 1940s and early 1950s
through a mixing together of various popular musical genres of the time. These
included blues, country music, R&B, folk music, and gospel music.

However, elements of rock and roll can be heard in many "hillbilly" and "race"
music records of the 1920s and 1930s. Often music was usually relegated to
"race music" outlets (music industry code for rhythm and blues stations) and
was rarely heard by mainstream white audiences. A few black rhythm and blues
musicians, notably Louis Jordan, the Mills Brothers, and The Ink Spots,
achieved crossover success; in some cases (such as Jordan's "Choo Choo
Ch'Boogie") this success was achieved with songs written by white songwriters.
The Western swing genre in the 1930s, generally played by white musicians,
also shared similarities with rock and roll, and in turn directly influenced
rockabilly and rock and roll, as can be heard, for example, on Elvis Presley's
"Jailhouse Rock" (1957).

Going back even further, rock and roll can trace one lineage to the old Five
Points, Manhattan district of mid-19th century New York City, the scene of the
first fusion of heavily rhythmic African shuffles and sand dances with melody-
driven European genres, particularly the Irish jig[4].

In the 1956 film Rock, Rock, Rock, Alan Freed, as himself, tells the audience
that "Rock and roll is a river of music that has absorbed many streams: rhythm
and blues, jazz, rag time, cowboy songs, country songs, folk songs. All have
contributed to the big beat."

The following is a table underlining some (but not all) of the main influences
on Rock and roll. What should be noted is that prior to rock and roll, music
was categorized based on race, nationality, location, style, instrumentation,
vocal techniques, and even religion. However, with the immense popularity and
commercial success of Elvis Presley in 1956, Rock and roll became cornerstone
of the music industry in America. No more was music defined and categorized as
it had been. Rather, it became inclusive of almost every genre of music that
had gained a certain amount of popularity.

Country Influences Rhythm & Blues Influences Others  
  * Rockabilly
  * Western Swing
  * Bluegrass
  * Honky Tonk

  * Traditional Blues
  * Jazz
  * Boogie Woogie
  * Negro Spirituals

  * Traditional Folk
  * Gospel
  * Pop Music
  * Big Bands

  
## [edit] Origins of the phrase

In 1951, Cleveland, Ohio disc jockey Alan Freed began playing rhythm and blues
and country music for a multi-racial audience. Freed is credited with first
using the phrase "rock and roll" to describe the music he played. However, the
term had already been introduced to US audiences, particularly in the lyrics
of many rhythm and blues records. Three different songs with the title "Rock
And Roll" were recorded in the late 1940s; one by Paul Bascomb in 1947,
another by Wild Bill Moore in 1948, and yet another by Doles Dickens in 1949,
and the phrase was in constant use in the lyrics of R&B songs of the time. One
such record where the phrase was repeated throughout the song was "Rock And
Roll Blues," recorded in 1949 by Erline "Rock And Roll" Harris. The phrase was
also included in advertisements for the film Wabash Avenue, starring Betty
Grable and Victor Mature. An ad for the movie that ran April 12, 1950 billed
Ms. Grable as "...the first lady of rock and roll" and Wabash Avenue as
"...the roaring street she rocked to fame".

Before then, the phrase "rocking and rolling", as secular black slang for
dancing or sex, appeared on record for the first time in 1922 on Trixie
Smith's "My Man Rocks Me With One Steady Roll". Even earlier, in 1916, the
term "rocking and rolling" was used with a religious connotation, on the
phonograph record "The Camp Meeting Jubilee" by an unnamed male
"quartette".[5] The word "rock" had a long history in the English language as
a metaphor for "to shake up, to disturb or to incite". In 1937, Chick Webb and
Ella Fitzgerald recorded "Rock It for Me," which included the lyric, "So won't
you satisfy my soul with the rock and roll." "Rocking" was a term used by
black gospel singers in the American South to mean something akin to spiritual
rapture. By the 1940s, however, the term was used as a double entendre,
ostensibly referring to dancing, but with the subtextual meaning of sex, as in
Roy Brown's "Good Rocking Tonight." The verb "roll" was a medieval metaphor
which meant "having sex". Writers for hundreds of years have used the phrases
"They had a roll in the hay" or "I rolled her in the clover"[6]. The terms
were often used together ("rocking and rolling") to describe the motion of a
ship at sea, for example as used in 1934 by the Boswell Sisters in their song
"Rock and Roll"[7], which was featured in the 1934 film "Transatlantic Merry-
Go-Round",[8][9] and in Buddy Jones' "Rockin' Rollin' Mama" (1939). Country
singer Tommy Scott was referring to the motion of a railroad train in the 1951
"Rockin and Rollin'". [10].

An alternative claim is that the origins of "rocking and rolling" can be
traced back to steel driving men working on the railroads in the
Reconstruction South. These men would sing hammer songs to keep the pace of
their hammer swings. At the end of each line in a song, the men would swing
their hammers down to drill a hole into the rock. The shakers â the men who
held the steel spikes that the hammer men drilled â would "rock" the spike
back and forth to clear rock or "roll", twisting the spike to improve the
"bite" of the drill.[11]

## [edit] Early rock and roll records

Main article: First rock and roll record

There is much debate as to what should be considered the first rock & roll
record. One leading contender is "Rocket 88" by Jackie Brenston and his Delta
Cats (in fact, Ike Turner and his band The Kings of Rhythm), recorded by Sam
Phillips for Sun Records in 1951. Four years later, Bill Haley's "Rock Around
the Clock" (1955) became the first rock and roll song to top Billboard
magazine's main sales and airplay charts, and opened the door worldwide for
this new wave of popular culture. Rolling Stone magazine argued in 2004 that
"That's All Right (Mama)" (1954), Elvis Presley's first single for Sun Records
in Memphis, was the first rock and roll record[12]. But, at the same time, Big
Joe Turner's "Shake, Rattle & Roll", later covered by Haley, was already at
the top of the Billboard R&B charts.

Turner was one of many forerunners. His 1939 recording, "Roll 'Em Pete", is
close to '50s rock and roll. Sister Rosetta Tharpe was also recording
shouting, stomping music in the 1930s and 1940s that in some ways contained
major elements of mid-1950s rock and roll. She scored hits on the pop charts
as far back as 1938 with her gospel songs, such as "This Train" and "Rock Me",
and in the 1940s with "Strange Things Happenin' Every Day", "Up Above My
Head", and "Down by the Riverside." . Other significant records of the 1940s
and early 1950s included Roy Brown's "Good Rocking Tonight" and Hank Williams'
"Move It On Over" and Amos Milburn's "Chicken Shack Boogie" (all 1947); Jimmy
Preston's "Rock the Joint" and Fats Domino's "The Fat Man" and Big Joe
Turner's "Ooo-Ouch-Stop" (all 1949); and Les Paul and Mary Ford's "How High
the Moon" (1951).

Both rock and roll and boogie woogie have four beats (usually broken down into
eight eighth-notes/quavers) to a bar, and follow twelve-bar blues chord
progression. Rock and roll however has a greater emphasis on the backbeat than
boogie woogie. Little Richard combined boogie-woogie piano with a heavy
backbeat and over-the-top, shouted, gospel-influenced vocals that the Rock and
Roll Hall of Fame says "blew the lid off the '50s." However, others before
Little Richard were combining these elements, including Esquerita, Cecil Gant,
Amos Milburn, Piano Red, and Harry Gibson. Little Richard's wild style, with
shouts and "woo woos," had itself been used by female gospel singers,
including the 1940s' Marion Williams. Roy Brown did a Little Richard style
"yaaaaaaww" long before Richard in "Ain't No Rockin no More."

Bo Diddley's 1955 hit "Bo Diddley" backed with "I'm A Man" introduced a new,
pounding beat, and unique guitar playing that inspired many artists. Other
artists with early rock and roll hits were Chuck Berry and Little Richard, as
well as many vocal doo-wop groups. According to the Rock and Roll Hall of
Fame's website, "While no individual can be said to have invented rock and
roll, Chuck Berry comes the closest of any single figure to being the one who
put all the essential pieces together."[13] Within the decade crooners such as
Eddie Fisher, Perry Como, and Patti Page, who had dominated the previous
decade of popular music, found their access to the pop charts significantly
curtailed.

### [edit] Rockabilly

Main article: Rockabilly

"Rockabilly" usually (but not exclusively) refers to the type of rock and roll
music which was played and recorded in the mid 1950s by white singers such as
Elvis Presley, Carl Perkins and Jerry Lee Lewis, who drew mainly on the
Country roots of the music. Many other popular rock and roll singers of the
time, such as Fats Domino, Chuck Berry and Little Richard, came out of the
black rhythm and blues tradition, making the music attractive to white
audiences, and are not usually classed as "rockabilly".

In July 1954, Elvis Presley recorded the regional hit "That's All Right
(Mama)" at Sam Phillips' Sun studios in Memphis. Two months earlier in May
1954, Bill Haley & His Comets recorded "Rock Around the Clock". Although only
a minor hit when first released, when used in the opening sequence of the
movie Blackboard Jungle, a year later, it really set the rock and roll boom in
motion. The song became one of the biggest hits in history, and frenzied teens
flocked to see Haley and the Comets perform it, causing riots in some cities.
"Rock Around the Clock" was a breakthrough for both the group and for all of
rock and roll music. If everything that came before laid the groundwork,
"Clock" introduced the music to a global audience.

### [edit] Cover versions

Main article: Cover version

Many of the earliest white rock and roll hits were covers or partial re-writes
of earlier rhythm and blues or blues songs. Through the late 1940s and early
1950s, R&B music had been gaining a stronger beat and a wilder style, with
artists such as Fats Domino and Johnny Otis speeding up the tempos and
increasing the backbeat to great popularity on the juke joint circuit. Before
the efforts of Freed and others, black music was taboo on many white-owned
radio outlets. However, savvy artists and producers quickly recognized the
potential of rock, and raced to cash in with white versions of this black
music. White musicians also fell in love with the music and played it
everywhere they could. This, however, is somewhat unfair and a lot of the
early rock hits were country based songs too. Many of Presley's early hits
were covers, like "That's All Right" (a countryfied arrangement of a blues
number, its flip side Blue Moon of Kentucky was also successful), "Baby, Let's
Play House", "Lawdy Miss Clawdy" and "Hound Dog". "Heartbreak Hotel", the song
that brought Presley to a worldwide audience (and his first ever release that
was not a cover) was composed by country writers.

Covering was customary in the music industry at the time; it was made
particularly easy by the compulsory license provision of United States
copyright law (still in effect [14]). One of the first successful rock and
roll covers was Wynonie Harris's transformation of Roy Brown's "Good Rocking
Tonight" from a jump blues to a showy rocker. The most notable trend, however,
was white pop covers of black R&B numbers. Exceptions to this rule included
Wynonie Harris covering the Louis Prima rocker "Oh Babe" in 1950, and Amos
Milburn covering what may have been the first white rock and roll record,
Hardrock Gunter's "Birmingham Bounce," in 1949.

Black performers saw their songs recorded by white performers, an important
step in the dissemination of the music, but often at the cost of feeling and
authenticity (not to mention revenue). Most famously, Pat Boone recorded
sanitized versions of Little Richard songs, though Boone found "Long Tall
Sally" so intense that he couldn't cover it. Later, as those songs became
popular, the original artists' recordings received radio play as well. Little
Richard once called Pat Boone from the audience and introduced him as "the man
who made me a millionaire."

The cover versions were not necessarily straightforward imitations. For
example, Bill Haley's incompletely bowdlerized cover of "Shake, Rattle and
Roll" transformed Big Joe Turner's humorous and racy tale of adult love into
an energetic teen dance number, while Georgia Gibbs replaced Etta James's
tough, sarcastic vocal in "Roll With Me, Henry" (covered as "Dance With Me,
Henry") with a perkier vocal more appropriate for an audience unfamiliar with
the song to which James's song was an answer, Hank Ballard's "Work With Me,
Annie."

Blues would continue to inspire rock performers for decades. Delta blues
artists such as Robert Johnson and Skip James also proved to be important
inspirations for British blues-rockers such as The Yardbirds, Cream, and Led
Zeppelin. The reverse, black artists making hits with covers of songs by white
songwriters, although less common, did occur. Amos Milburn got a hit with Don
Raye's "Down the Road a Piece," Maurice Rocco covered Raye's "Beat Me Daddy
Eight To The Bar,", Chuck Berry's first hit single Maybellene was a rewritten
version of Bob Wills' Ida Red, and Wynonie Harris covered "Don't Roll Your
Bloodshot Eyes At Me" by Hank Penny and "Oh, Babe" by Louis Prima, for the R&B
market.

## [edit] Cultural impact

Alan Freed is credited with first using the phrase "rock and roll" to describe
a mix of both "black" and "white" music played for a multi-racial audience.
While working as a disc jockey at radio station WJW in Cleveland, he also
organized the first rock and roll concert, called "The Moondog Coronation
Ball" on March 21, 1952. The event proved a huge drawing card â the first
event had to be ended early due to overcrowding. Thereafter, Freed organized
many rock and roll shows attended by both whites and blacks, further helping
to introduce African-American musical styles to a wider audience.

Rock and roll appeared at a time when racial tensions in the United States
were coming to the surface. African Americans were protesting segregation of
schools and public facilities. The "separate but equal" doctrine was nominally
overturned by the Supreme Court in 1954, and the difficult task of enforcing
this new doctrine lay ahead. This new musical form combining elements of white
and black music inevitably provoked strong reactions.

After "The Moondog Coronation Ball", the record industry soon understood that
there was a white market for black music that was beyond the stylistic
boundaries of rhythm and blues. Even the considerable prejudice and racial
barriers could do nothing against market forces. Rock and roll was an
overnight success in the U.S., making ripples across the Atlantic, and perhaps
culminating in 1964 with the British Invasion.

The social effects of rock and roll were worldwide and massive. Far beyond
simply a musical style, rock and roll influenced lifestyles, fashion,
attitudes, and language. In addition, rock and roll may have helped the cause
of the civil rights movement because both African American teens and white
American teens enjoyed the music. It also birthed many other rock influenced
styles. Progressive, alternative, punk, and heavy metal are just a few of the
genres that sprang forth in the wake of Rock and Roll.

### [edit] Teen culture

A teen idol was a recording artist who attracted a very large following of
(mostly) female teenagers because of their good looks and "sex appeal" as much
as their musical qualities. A good example is Frank Sinatra in the 1940s,
although a case can be made for Rudy Vallee even earlier. With the birth of
rock and roll, Elvis Presley became one of the greatest teen idols of all
time. His success led promoters to the deliberate creation of new "rock and
roll" idols, such as Frankie Avalon and Ricky Nelson. Other musicians of the
time also achieved mass popularity.

Teen idols of the rock and roll years were followed by many other artists with
massive appeal to a teenaged audience, including The Beatles and The Monkees.
Teen idols were not only known for their catchy pop music, but good looks also
played a large part in their successes. It was because of this that certain
fan magazines, geared to the fans of teen idols (16 Magazine, Tiger Beat,
etc.), were created. These monthly magazines typically featured a popular teen
idol on the cover, as well as pin-up photographs, a Q&A, and a list of each
idol's "faves" (i.e. favorite color, favorite vegetable, favorite hair color,
etc.). Teen idols also influenced toys, Saturday morning cartoons and other
products. At the height of each teen idol's popularity, it was not uncommon to
see Beatle wigs, Davy Jones' "love beads" or Herman's Hermits lunchboxes for
sale.

### [edit] Military

During the Vietnam war, the term "Rock and Roll" referred to firing an
automatic weapon (usually the M-16 assault rifle) on full automatic while held
at the hip like a guitar. They often used the term "Let's Rock and Roll."

### [edit] Dance styles

From its early-1950s inception through the early 1960s, rock and roll music
spawned new dance crazes. Teenagers found the irregular rhythm of the backbeat
especially suited to reviving the jitterbug dancing of the big-band era.
"Sock-hops," gym dances, and home basement dance parties became the rage, and
American teens watched Dick Clark's American Bandstand to keep up on the
latest dance and fashion styles. From the mid-1960s on, as "rock and roll"
yielded gradually to "rock," later dance genres followed, starting with the
twist, and leading up to funk, disco, house and techno.

## [edit] British rock and roll

Main article: British rock

The trad jazz movement brought blues artists to Britain, and in 1955 Lonnie
Donegan's version of "Rock Island Line" began skiffle music which inspired
many young people to have a go. These included John Lennon and Paul McCartney,
whose group The Quarrymen, formed in March 1957, would gradually change and
develop into The Beatles. These developments primed the United Kingdom to
respond creatively to American rock and roll, which had an impact across the
globe. In Britain, skiffle groups, record collecting and trend-watching were
in full bloom among the youth culture prior to the rock era, and colour
barriers were less of an issue with the idea of separate "race records"
seeming almost unimaginable. Countless British youths listened to R&B and rock
pioneers and began forming their own bands. Britain quickly became a new
center of rock and roll.

In 1958 three British teenagers became Cliff Richard and the Drifters (later
renamed Cliff Richard and the Shadows). The group recorded a hit, "Move It",
marking not only what is held to be the very first true British rock and roll
single, but also the beginning of a different sound â British rock. Richard
and his band introduced to Britain many important changes, such as using a
"lead guitarist" (Hank Marvin) and an electric bass.

The British scene developed, with others including Tommy Steele, Adam Faith
and Billy Fury vying to emulate the stars from the U.S. Some touring acts
attracted particular popularity in Britain, an example being Gene Vincent.
This inspired many British teens to buy records more than ever and follow the
music scene, thus laying the groundwork for Beatlemania.

At the start of the 1960s, instrumental dance music was very popular in the
UK. Hits such as "Apache" by The Shadows and "Telstar" by The Tornados
(produced by Joe Meek), form a British branch of instrumental music.

At the same time, in the late 1950s and early 1960s, R&B fans such as Alexis
Korner promoted authentic American blues music directly in London clubs, and
elsewhere, at a time when this music was declining in popularity back in the
USA. This led directly to the formation of such groups as The Rolling Stones
and The Yardbirds in London, The Animals in Newcastle, and Them in Belfast. In
the USA, such groups became known as part of the British Invasion.

## [edit] Further reading

  * The Fifties by Pulitzer Prize winning author David Halberstam (1996) Random House (ISBN 0-517-15607-5) provides information and analysis on Fifties popular culture exploring major social and cultural changes including television, transistor radios, the phenomenon of Elvis Presley and the rise of rock-and-roll.
  * The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock and Roll : The Definitive History of the Most Important Artists and Their Music by editors James Henke, Holly George-Warren, Anthony Decurtis, Jim Miller. (1992) Random House (ISBN 0-679-73728-6)
  * The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll by Holly George-Warren, Patricia Romanowski, Jon Pareles (2001) Fireside Press (ISBN 0-7432-0120-5).
  * Rock and Roll: A Social History, by Paul Friedlander, Westview Press, 1996. ISBN 0-8133-2725-3
  * The Sound of the City: the Rise of Rock and Roll, by Charlie Gillett, New York: E.P. Dutton, 1970.
  * "The Rock Window: A Way of Understanding Rock Music" by Paul Friedlander, in Tracking: Popular Music Studies, Volume I, number 1, Spring, 1988.

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Music portal  
  * 20th century music
  * First rock and roll record
  * List of rock genres
  * List of rock and roll albums
  * List of deaths in rock and roll
  * The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
  * Music
  * Rockabilly Hall of Fame
  * Rock music

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Rock music". The American Heritage Dictionary. Bartleby.com. http://www.bartleby.com/61/92/R0279250.html. Retrieved on December 15, 2008.
  2. ^ "Rock and roll". Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary. Merriam-Webster Online. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/rock%20and%20roll. Retrieved on December 15, 2008.
  3. ^ "Rock and roll". AllWords.com. http://www.allwords.com/word-rock+and+roll.html. Retrieved on December 15, 2008.
  4. ^ Origin of dances at Radio Canada (French)
  5. ^ http://www.littlewonderrecords.com/music-library.html and click record number 158 to hear it
  6. ^ Bill Haley & The Comets
  7. ^ The Sisters
  8. ^ Transatlantic Merry-Go-Round (1934)
  9. ^ Go, Cat, Go! by Carl Perkins and David McGee 1996 page 76 Hyperion Press ISBN 0-7868-6073-1
  10. ^ Scott, Tommy (RCS Artist Discography)
  11. ^ Scott Reynolds Nelson, Steel Drivin' Man pg. 75
  12. ^ Elvis Presley at Sun Studios in 1954
  13. ^ "Chuck Berry". The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum. http://www.rockhall.com/inductee/chuck-berry.
  14. ^ CD Baby: How to Legally Sell Downloads of Cover Songs

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Rock music  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Rock music  
  * The Camp Meeting Jubilee 1910 recording
  * The Smithsonian's history of the electric guitar
  * History of Rock

v â¢ d â¢ e

Rock music  
Alternative rock Â· Anatolian rock Â· Arena rock Â· Art rock Â· Beat music Â·
Blues-rock Â· Boogaloo Â· British Invasion Â· Canterbury scene Â· Cello rock
Â· Chinese rock Â· Christian rock Â· Comedy rock Â· Country rock Â· Folk rock
Â· Frat rock Â· Garage rock Â· Glam rock Â· Hard rock Â· Heartland rock Â·
Heavy metal Â· Instrumental rock Â· Jam Â· Krautrock Â· Pop rock Â· Power pop
Â· Progressive rock Â· Psychedelic rock Â· Pub rock (UK) Â· Pub rock
(Australia) Â· Punk rock Â· Rap rock Â· Rockabilly Â· Rock and roll Â· Samba
rock Â· Soft rock Â· Southern rock Â· Stoner rock Â· Surf rock  
Other topics

List of rock genres \- Rock and Roll Hall of Fame \- Social effects of rock
music  
v â¢ d â¢ e

World rock  
Argentina Â· Armenia Â· Australia Â· Austria Â· Belarus Â· Belgium Â· Bosnia
and Herzegovina Â· Brazil Â· Cambodia Â· Canada Â· Chile Â· China Â· Colombia
Â· Croatia Â· Costa Rica Â· Cuba Â· Czech Republic Â· Denmark Â· Dominican
Republic Â· Egypt Â· Estonia Â· Finland Â· France Â· Greece Â· Germany Â·
Hungary Â· Iceland Â· India Â· Indonesia Â· Iran Â· Ireland Â· Israel Â· Italy
Â· Japan Â· Korea Â· Latvia Â· Lithuania Â· Malaysia Â· Mexico Â· Nepal Â·
Netherlands Â· New Zealand Â· Norway Â· Pakistan Â· Peru Â· Philippines Â·
Poland Â· Portugal Â· Romania Â· Russia Â· Serbia Â· Slovenia Â· South Africa
Â· Spain Â· Sweden Â· Switzerland Â· Taiwan Â· Tatar Â· Thailand Â· Turkey Â·
Ukraine Â· United Kingdom Â· United States Â· Uruguay Â· Venezuela Â· Vietnam
Â· Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Â· Zambia  
v â¢ d â¢ e

United States topics  
History

Timeline

Pre-Columbian Â· Colonial era (Thirteen Colonies) Â· Declaration of
Independence Â· American Revolution Â· Territorial changes Â· American Civil
War Â· Reconstruction era Â· African-American Civil Rights Movement
(1896â1954) Â· World War I Â· Great Depression Â· World War II (Home front)
Â· Cold War Â· Korean War Â· African-American Civil Rights Movement
(1955â1968) Â· Feminist Movement Â· Vietnam War Â· Post-Cold War
(1991-present) Â· War on Terrorism (War in Afghanistan Â· Iraq War)  
By topic

Demographic Â· Economic Â· Military Â· Postal Â· Technological and industrial
Â· Inventions and discoveries  
Federal  
government

Law  
U.S. Constitution  
Bill of Rights  
Civil liberties  
Federalism  
Separation of powers

Law Enforcement  
Department of Justice (DOJ)  
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)

Legislature \- Congress  
House of Representatives  
Senate  
Vice President

Executive \- President  
Executive Office of the President  
Cabinet/Executive departments  
Independent agencies  
Policies

Judiciary \- Supreme Court  
Federal courts  
Courts of appeal  
District courts

Intelligence  
U.S. Intelligence Community  
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)  
Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)  
National Security Agency (NSA)

Military  
Army  
Marine Corps  
Navy  
Air Force  
Coast Guard  
Politics

State governments Â· Local governments Â· Elections (Electoral College) Â·
Political divisions Â· Political ideologies Â· Political parties (Democratic
Party Â· Republican Party Â· Third parties) Â· Political scandals Â· Political
status of Puerto Rico Â· Red states and blue states Â· Uncle Sam  
Geography

Cities, towns and villages Â· Counties Â· Extreme points Â· Islands Â·
Mountains (Appalachian Â· Rocky) Â· National Park System Â· Regions (New
England Â· Mid-Atlantic Â· Southern Â· Midwestern Â· Great Plains Â·
Northwestern Â· Southwestern) Â· Rivers (Mississippi Â· Missouri Â· Colorado)
Â· States Â· Territory Â· Water supply and sanitation  
Economy

Banking Â· Communications Â· Companies Â· Federal Reserve System Â· Insurance
Â· Standard of living (Personal income Â· Household income Â· Homeownership Â·
Income inequality) Â· Tourism Â· Transportation (Airports Â· Highways Â·
Interstate Highway System Â· Passenger vehicles Â· Railroads Â· Trucking
industry) Â· U.S. dollar Â· Wall Street Â· Total debt  
Society

Adolescent sexuality Â· Crime Â· Demographics Â· Education Â· Health care Â·
Health insurance Â· Incarceration Â· Languages (American English Â· Spanish)
Â· Media Â· People Â· Public holidays Â· Religion Â· Social class (Affluence
Â· American Dream Â· American middle class Â· Educational attainment Â·
Poverty Â· Professional and working class conflict) Â· Sports  
Culture

American literature (Beat Generation Â· Folklore Â· Harlem Renaissance Â·
Poetry Â· Transcendentalism) Â· Architecture Â· Cuisine Â· Dance Â· Fashion Â·
Flag Â· Music (American classical music Â· American folk music Â· American
popular music Â· Country music Â· Blues Â· Jazz Â· Rock and roll) Â· Radio Â·
Television / Cinema (Hollywood) Â· Visual arts (Abstract expressionism)  
Issues

Abortion Â· Affirmative action Â· American exceptionalism Â· Anti-Americanism
Â· Capital punishment Â· Drug policy / Prohibition Â· Energy policy Â·
Environmental movement Â· Gun politics Â· Health care reform Â· Human rights
Â· Immigration (United StatesâMexico barrier Â· Third Border Initiative) Â·
Obesity Â· Racism Â· Same-sex marriage  
Portal  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rock_and_roll"

Categories: American styles of music | African American culture | African
American music | Culture of the Southern United States | Music genres | Radio
formats | Rock music | Youth culture in the United Kingdom | Popular music

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Limburgs
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sardu
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 23:36.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



