
# Pando (tree)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Pando (or The Trembling Giant)[1] is a clonal colony of a single male Quaking
Aspen (Populus tremuloides) tree located in the U.S. state of Utah, all
determined to be part of a single living organism by identical genetic
markers[2] and one massive underground root system. The plant is estimated to
weigh collectively 6,000 tonnes (6,615 tons),[3] making it the heaviest known
organism.[4] The root system of Pando is claimed by some to be among the
oldest known living organisms in existence at 80,000 years of age,[5] though
the method used to produce this estimate (an estimate on when climatic
conditions were last suitable for seedling germination) is not supported by
current evidence of germination.[6]

## Contents

  * 1 Name
  * 2 History
  * 3 Size and age
  * 4 Debate
  * 5 Location
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References

  
## [edit] Name

The name "Pando" was chosen because it is Latin for "I spread",[1][7] while
the nickname "The Trembling Giant" can be attributed to the common name of
Populus tremuloides, the trembling aspen, whose leaves frequently rattle.

## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

An aspen grove at Fishlake National Forest

Pando is thought to have grown for much of its lifetime under ideal
circumstances: frequent fires have prevented its main competitor, conifers,
from colonizing the area, and climate change, transitioning from a wet and
humid weather pattern to semi-arid, has obstructed widespread seedling
establishment and the accompanying rivalry from younger aspens.

During intense fires, the organism survived by its root system, sending up new
stems in the aftermath of each wildfire. If its postulated age is correct, the
climate into which Pando was born is markedly different from that of today,
and it may be as many as ten millennia since Pando's last successful
flowering, according to an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) report:

> Clonal groups of P. tremuloides in eastern North America are very common,
but generally less than 0.1 ha in size, while in areas of Utah, groups as
large as 80 ha have been observed (Kemperman and Barnes 1976). In the semi-
arid western United States, some argue that widespread seedling establishment
has not occurred since the last glaciation, some 10,000 years ago (Einspahr
and Winton 1976, McDonough 1985). Indeed, some biologists feel that western
clones could be as old as 1 million years (Barnes 1966, 1975). It has been
claimed that a single clone, nicknamed "Pando" (Latin for I spread), covers 43
hectares, contains more than 47,000 stems and weighs in excess of 6 million
kg, making it the largest known organism (Grant et al. 1992, Mitton and Grant
1996)

> âOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Consensus
Document on the Biology of Populus L. (Poplars)[3]

However, others have observed that both flowering, and successful large-scale
seedling establishment, occur frequently, even during dry years, in the modern
period,[6] invalidating the dating method.

<IMG>

<IMG>

US Postal Stamp depicting Pando

Pando was discovered by Burton V. Barnes of the University of Michigan in the
1970s. Barnes was widely considered an expert on North American aspen at the
time, having been one of the first to describe the clonal growth of aspen from
an extensive root system as part of his dissertation at Michigan in the late
1950s. Barnes had described Pando as a single organism based on its
morphological characteristics. Michael Grant of the University of Colorado at
Boulder re-examined Pando and claimed it to be the world's most massive
organism in 1992.

In 2006 the United States Postal Service made a stamp in commemoration of the
aspen, calling it one of the forty "Wonders of America."[8]

## [edit] Size and age

<IMG>

<IMG>

The trunk or stem of a Quaking Aspen

The clonal colony encompasses 43 hectares (107 acres) and has around 47,000
stems, which continually die and are renewed by its roots. Many of the stems
are connected by its root system. The average age of Pando's trunks (or
technically, stems) is 130 years, as deciphered by tree rings. Michael Grant
in BioScience said:

> ...quaking aspen regularly reproduces via a process called suckering. An
individual stem can send out lateral roots that, under the right conditions,
send up other erect stems; from all above-ground appearances the new stems
look just like individual trees. The process is repeated until a whole stand,
of what appear to be individual trees, forms. This collection of multiple
stems, called ramets, all form one, single, genetic individual, usually termed
a clone.

## [edit] Debate

<IMG>

<IMG>

Quaking Aspen in Utah

Some experts speculate that Pando's reign since 1992 as the heaviest-known
organism may be short lived. Less well-studied Quaking Aspens in Utah may be
80 hectares in extent and one million years old. Other large colonies could
exist elsewhere. A clonal colony of at least seven Coastal Redwoods could
weigh more,[9] although no such stand is known to exist. Other scientists
think that portions of Pando's root system may be dead and might have led the
plant to split into separate groups and therefore would not be one organism,
though the collective groups would remain the same singular, genetic
individual.

Tree experts also note that the organism's age cannot be determined with the
level of precision found in tree rings; some claim Pando's age is closer to 1
million years.[4] Its current 80,000 year designation is based on a complex
set of factors including the history of its local environment such as: The
evidence indicating that there are few if any naturally occurring new aspens
in most of the western United States since a climate shift took place 10,000
years ago and eliminated favorable soil conditions for seedlings; the rate of
growth (including the differences of rates in distinct climates when
accounting for its local-climate history, that males grow slower than females,
and that aspens grow slower at higher elevations â Pando is at 2697 m, or
8,848 ft, above sea level); its size; and its genetic code in comparison to
the mutations found among aspens born in the modern era. Michael Grant summed
it thus:

> Despite enormous crops of viable seeds, successful seedling establishment
appears to be a rare event in the semiarid West, but the establishment of new
trees from seeds appears to be common in the moist, humid forests of New
England... aspen establishment from seeds probably has not occurred in the
western United States since the last glaciation, some 10,000 years ago... Part
of the rationale behind current age estimates for aspen clones is that sexual
reproduction is effectively frustrated by the rarity of a favorable suite of
conditions in semiarid environments... High levels of genetic variation and
excesses of heterozygotes are found in [the aspen of] semiarid environments...
Clonal reproduction is more common in arid environments... Heterozygotes often
exhibit superior longevity in forest trees [across many species]... growth
rate of aspen decline with elevation, steepness of slope, age of the ramet,
and exposure to wind... growth rate decreased dramatically with elevation...
The researchers reported that the area of the female clones was 41% greater
than males, the number of female ramets 52% greater, and the basal area of
females 56% greater [when compared at the same age and environment]...

This is however not supported by other observations in the region, which show
that seedling establishment of new clones is regular, and often abundant on
sites exposed by wildfire.[10] J. L. Howard (U.S. Forest Service Fire Effects
Information System) states:[6]

> Kay documented postfire quaking aspen seedling establishment following 1986
and 1988 fires in Grand Teton and Yellowstone National Parks, respectively. He
found seedlings were concentrated in kettles and other topographic
depressions, seeps, springs, lake margins, and burnt-out riparian zones. A few
seedlings were widely scattered throughout the burns. In Grand Teton National
Park, establishment was greatest (950-2,700 seedlings/ha) in 1989, a wet year,
but hundreds to thousands of seedlings established each year despite drought
conditions in 1986-1988 and 1990-1991. Seedlings surviving past one season
occurred almost exclusively on severely burned surfaces.

Other candidates for oldest living organism include possibly older fungal mats
in Oregon, older Creosote Bushes, and strands of the marine plant Posidonia
oceanica in the Mediterranean Sea.

## [edit] Location

Pando lives in Fishlake National Forest, near Fish Lake on the Fish Lake
Plateau located at the western edge of the Colorado Plateau in South-central
Utah.

## [edit] See also

  * Largest organism
  * List of long-living organisms
  * Vegetative reproduction
  * Genet/Ramet
  * Rhizome
  * Basal shoot

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Grant, Michael C. (1993-10-01). "The Trembling Giant". Discover Magazine. http://discovermagazine.com/1993/oct/thetremblinggian285. Retrieved on 2008-05-08.
  2. ^ Pando by the National Park Service
  3. ^ a b OECD Environment Directorate (2000) (Microsoft Word document). Consensus Document on the Biology of Populus L. (Poplars). Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2000doc.nsf/4f7adc214b91a685c12569fa005d0ee7/c125692700623b74c1256a0600551816/$FILE/JT00103743.DOC. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  4. ^ a b Genetic Variation and the Natural History of Quaking Aspen, Jeffry B. Mitton; Michael C. Grant, BioScience, Vol. 46, No. 1. (Jan., 1996), pp. 25-31.
  5. ^ Quaking Aspen by the Bryce Canyon National Park Service
  6. ^ a b c U.S. Forest Service Fire Effects Information System: Populus tremuloides botanical and ecological characteristics
  7. ^ Research and Development Information Outreach, USDA Forest Service (Fall 1999). "Quaking in Their Roots: The Decline of Quaking Aspen". Natural Inquirer (US Department of Agriculture) 2 (1): 7â11. http://www.naturalinquirer.usda.gov/NIKids.cfm?act=viewarticle&issue=4&article=25. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  8. ^ Wonders of America: Land of Superlatives at usps.com
  9. ^ Bob van Pelt
  10. ^ Kay, Charles E. (1993). Aspen seedlings in recently burned areas of Grand Teton and Yellowstone National Parks. Northwest Science. 67(2): 94-104.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pando_(tree)"

Categories: Individual trees | Salicaceae | Flora of Utah

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 19 April 2009, at 19:04 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



