
# 1970s

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve the article or discuss
these issues on the talk page.

  * It needs additional references or sources for verification. Tagged since July 2008.  

  * Its neutrality is disputed. Tagged since July 2008.  

  * It may contain original research or unverifiable claims. Tagged since July 2008.  

  
Millennium: 2nd millennium  
Centuries: 19th century \- 20th century \- 21st century  
Decades: 1940s 1950s 1960s \- 1970s \- 1980s 1990s 2000s  
Years: 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979  
Categories: Births \- Deaths \- Architecture  
Establishments \- Disestablishments  
The 1970s, or the Seventies was the decade that ran from January 1, 1970 to
December 31, 1979.

In the western world, social progressive values that began in the 1960s, such
as increasing political awareness and political and economic liberty of women,
continued to grow. The hippie culture, which started in the 1960s, continued
in the early 1970s and faded towards the middle part of the decade, which
involved opposition to the Vietnam War, opposition to nuclear weapons, the
advocacy of world peace, and hostility to the authority of government. The
environmentalist movement began to increase dramatically in this period.
Western countries experienced an economic recession due to oil crisis caused
by oil embargoes by Arab countries in the Middle East, while Japan's economy
boomed. The crisis saw the first instance of stagflation which began a
political and economic trend of the replacement of Keynesian economic theory
with neoliberal economic theory, in with the first neoliberal government being
created in the United Kingdom with election of the Conservative Party under
Margaret Thatcher in 1979.

In Asia, affairs regarding the People's Republic of China changed
significantly following the recognition of the PRC by the United Nations, the
death of Mao Zedong and the beginning of market liberalization by Mao's
successors. The economy of Japan witnessed a large boom in this period. The
United States withdrew its military forces from their previous involvement in
Vietnam which had grown enormously unpopular. In 1979, the Soviet Union
invaded Afghanistan which led to an ongoing war for ten years. The 1970s saw
an initial increase in violence in the Middle East as Egypt and Syria declared
war on Israel, but in the late 1970s, the situation in the Middle East was
fundamentally altered when Egypt signed a peace agreement with Israel which
was followed by Egyptian President Anwar Sadat being assassinated. Political
tensions in Iran exploded with the Iranian Revolution which overthrew the
Iranian monarchy and established an Islamic theocracy in Iran.

The economies of many third world countries continued to make steady progress
in the early 1970s, because of the green revolution. They might have thrived
and become stable in the way that Europe recovered after the war through the
Marshall Plan; however, their economic growth was slowed by the oil crisis.

  

## Contents

  * 1 Worldwide trends
  * 2 Economy
    * 2.1 Oil crisis
  * 3 Social movements
    * 3.1 Environmentalism
    * 3.2 Feminism
    * 3.3 Civil rights
  * 4 Science and technology
  * 5 Culture
    * 5.1 Role of women in society
    * 5.2 Music
    * 5.3 Cinema
    * 5.4 Television
    * 5.5 Literature
    * 5.6 Architecture
    * 5.7 Social science
    * 5.8 Sports
  * 6 International issues
    * 6.1 Africa
    * 6.2 America
    * 6.3 Asia
    * 6.4 Europe
  * 7 References

  
## [edit] Worldwide trends

The 1970s emerged from a transition of the global social structure from the
decline of colonial imperialism since the end of World War II to globalization
and the rise of a new middle class in the developing world.

Globally, the 1970s had several features that were similar and definitive
across economic levels and regions. Some defining points of the 1970s were the
Arab-Israeli war of 1973 and the subsequent oil shock of 1973, the economic
strain caused by the rapid increase in the price of oil and its influence on
the Bretton Woods system of international economic stabilisation, and the
effect of the contraceptive pill on social dynamics.

Developing nations that were rich in oil experienced economic growth; others,
not so endowed, saw the economic strain of oil price hikes lead to economic
decline, particularly in Africa where a number of moderately democratic states
became dictatorial regimes. Many Middle Eastern democracies crumbled into
chaotic regimes with pseudo-democratic governments. Several Asian countries
also saw the rise of dictators, including South Korea, Malaysia and Indonesia.

As well, people were influenced by the rapid pace of societal change and the
aspiration for a more egalitarian society in cultures that were long colonised
and have an even longer history of hierarchical social structure.

The first face lifts were attempted in the 1970s.

The green revolution of the late 1960s brought about self sufficiency in food
in many developing economies. At the same time an increasing number of people
began to seek urban prosperity over agrarian life. This consequently saw the
duality of transition of diverse interaction across social communities amid
increasing information blockade across social class.

Other common global ethos of the seventies world include: increasingly
flexible and varied gender roles for women in industrialised societies. More
women could enter the work force. However, the gender role of men remained as
that of a bread-winner. The period also saw the socioeconomic effect of an
ever-increasing number of women entering the non-agrarian economic workforce.
The Iranian revolution also affected global attitudes to and among those of
the Muslim faith toward the end of the 1970s.

The global experience of the cultural transition of the 1970s and an
experience of a global zeitgeist revealed the interdependence of economies
since World War II, in a world increasingly polarised between the United
States and the Soviet Union.

Novelist Tom Wolfe coined the term Me decade in New York magazine in August
1976 referring to the 1970s. The term describes a general new attitude of
Americans towards self-awareness and, in clear contrast with the 1960s, away
from history, community, and human reciprocity awareness.

## [edit] Economy

The 1970s were perhaps the worst decade of Western and certainly of American
economic performance since the Great Depression.[1] Although there was no
severe economic depression as witnessed in the 1930s, economic growth rates
were considerably lower than previous decades. As a result, the 1970s
adversely distinguished itself from the prosperous postwar period between 1945
and 1973. Then, the world economy was buoyed by the Marshall Plan and the
robust American economy. However, the high standing enjoyed by the American
economy gradually became discomposed by years of loose domestic spending[1]
(begun during the Kennedy administration[1] and continued with the Great
Society campaign) and funding for the Vietnam War. The oil shocks of 1973 and
1979 added to the existing ailments and conjured high inflation throughout
much of the world for the rest of the decade. Soaring oil prices compelled
most American businesses to raise their prices as well, with inflationary
results. In contrast, Japan's economy continued to expand and prosper during
the decade.

The average annual inflation rate from 1900 to 1970 was approximately 2.5%.
From 1970, however, the average rate hit about 6%, topping out at 13.3% by
1979. This period is also known for "stagflation", a phenomenon in which
inflation and unemployment steadily increased, therefore leading to double-
digit interest rates that rose to unprecedented levels (above 12% per year).
The prime rate hit 21.5 in December 1980, the highest in history.[1] By the
time of 1980, when U.S. President Jimmy Carter was running for re-election
against Ronald Reagan, the misery index (the sum of the unemployment rate and
the inflation rate) had reached an all-time high of 21.98%.

In Eastern Europe, Soviet-style command economies began showing signs of
stagnation, in which successes were persistently dogged by setbacks. The oil
shock increased East European, particularly Soviet, exports, but a growing
inability to increase agricultural output caused growing concern to the
governments of the COMECON block, and a growing dependence on food imported
from Western nations.

On the other hand, export-driven economic development in the Far East,
especially by the Four Asian Tigers (Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore, and
Taiwan), resulted in rapid economic transformation and industrialization.
Their abundance of cheap labor, combined with educational and other policy
reforms, set the foundation for development in the region during the 1970s and
beyond.

### [edit] Oil crisis

Economically, the seventies were marked by the energy crisis which peaked in
1973 and 1979 (see 1973 oil crisis and 1979 oil crisis). After the first oil
shock in 1973, gasoline was rationed in many countries. Europe particularly
depended on the Middle East for oil; the U.S. was also affected even though it
had its own oil reserves. Many European countries introduced car-free days and
weekends. In the U.S., customers with a license plate ending in an odd number
were only allowed to buy gasoline on odd-numbered days, while even-numbered
plate-holders could only purchase gasoline on even-numbered days. The
experience that oil reserves were not endless and technological development
was not sustainable without harming the environment ended the age of
modernism. As a result, ecological awareness rose substantially.

## [edit] Social movements

### [edit] Environmentalism

### [edit] Feminism

Main article: Second-wave feminism

The Feminist Movement in the United States which began in the 1960s carried
over to the 1970s, and took a prominent role within society. The fiftieth
anniversary of the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution (which legalized female suffrage) in 1970 was commemorated by the
Women's Strike for Equality and other protests.

With the anthology Sisterhood is Powerful and other works, such as Sexual
Politics, being published at the start of the decade, feminism started to
reach a larger audience than ever before.

Gloria Steinem, Betty Friedan, Betty Ford, Shirley Chisholm, Bella Abzug,
Robin Morgan, Kate Millet, Elizabeth Holtzman, and many other women-and men-
led the movement for women's equality.

Most efforts of the movement, especially aims at social equality and repeal of
the remaining oppressive, sexist laws, were successful. Doors of opportunity
were more numerous and much further open than before as women gained unheard
of success in business, politics, education, science, the law, and even the
home. Though most aims of the movement were successful, however, there were
some significant failures, most notably the failure to ratify the Equal Rights
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution with only three more states needed to
ratify it (efforts to ratify ERA in the unratified states continues to this
day and twenty-two states have adopted state ERAs). Also, the wage gap failed
to close, but it did become smaller (there is also action still taken to
ensure pay equality to this day).

The feminist era ended in the early 1980s with the belief that the goals set
for equality had been largely met and with new conservative leadership in
Washington, D.C.. American women created a brief, but powerful, third-wave in
the early 1990s which addressed sexual harrasment (inspired by the Anita Hill-
Clarence Thomas Senate Judiciary Committee hearings of 1991) and violence
against women. The results of the movement included a new awareness of such
issues amongst women, and unprecedented numbers of women elected to public
office, particularly the United States Senate.

### [edit] Civil rights

While still around in the '70s, the African American Civil Rights Movement had
achieved its main goals, lost much passion with the murders of the Reverend
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Senator Bobby Kennedy, and backed into the
shadows, largely to make way for the feminist revolution which it itself had
overshadowed for most of the 1960s. The seventies were seen as the "woman's
turn", though many feminists incorporated civil rights ideals into their
movement. A courageous feminist who had inherited the leadership position of
the civil rights movement from her husband, Coretta Scott King, as leader of
the black movement, called for an end to all discrimination, helping and
encouraging the Woman's Liberation movement, and other movements as well. At
the National Women's Conference in 1977 a minority women's resolution,
promoted by King and others, passed to ensure racial equality in the
movement's goals, after which, in one of the most emotional moments of the
Conference, women of all races joined hands and sung "We Shall Overcome".
Similarly, gay rights made a huge step forward in the 1970s with the election
of political figures such as Harvey Milk to public office and the onslaught of
anti-gay legislations passed and not passed during the tail-end of the decade.
Many celebrities, including Freddie Mercury and Andy Warhol, also "came out"
during this decade, bringing further attention to gay causes and culture.

## [edit] Science and technology

Main articles: 1970s in science and 1970s in technology

<IMG>

<IMG>

Voyager spacecraft and space explorations

The 1970s witnessed an explosion in the understanding of solid-state physics,
driven by the development of the integrated circuit, and the laser. Stephen
Hawking developed his theories of black holes and the boundary-condition of
the universe at this period. The biological sciences greatly advanced, with
molecular biology, bacteriology, virology, and genetics achieving their modern
forms in this decade. Biodiversity became a cause of major concern as habitat
destruction, and Stephen Jay Gould's theory of punctuated equilibrium
revolutionized evolutionary thought. Space exploration reached its zenith in
the 1970s with the ambitious Voyager program aimed at outer planets in the
solar system, though Apollo lunar flights terminated in 1972. The Soviet Union
developed vital knowledge involving long-term human life in free-fall on the
Salyut and later Mir space stations.

The birth of modern computing was in the 1970s, which saw the development of
the world's first general microprocessor, the C programming language,
rudimentary personal computers, pocket calculators, the first supercomputer,
and consumer video games. The 1970s were also the start of fiber optics, which
transformed the communications industry. In automotive technology, United
States and especially Europe turned toward more lightweight, fuel efficient
vehicles, with the trend started by the Japanese. Automotive historians have
also described the period as 'the era of poor quality control', though the
integration of the computer and robot, particularly in Japan, allowed
unprecedented improvements in mass production, and though Japan produced
advanced high-quality vehicles, dramatically increasing its market share in
the auto industry. In consumer goods, microwave ovens and Cassette tapes
surged in popularity, and the first consumer videocassette recorders became
available. Genetic engineering became a commercially viable technology.

## [edit] Culture

### [edit] Role of women in society

<IMG>

<IMG>

Isabel MartÃ­nez de PerÃ³n becomes the first woman President of Argentina in
1974 and the first woman non-monarch head of state in the Western hemisphere.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Margaret Thatcher shortly after becoming the United Kingdom's first woman
Prime Minister in 1979. Thatcher's political and economic agenda began the
first government committed to neoliberalism.

The role of women in society was profoundly altered with growing feminism
across the world and with the presence and rise of a significant number of
women as heads of state outside of monarchies and heads of government in a
number of countries across the world during the 1970s, many being the first
women to hold such positions. Non-monarch women heads of state and heads of
government in this period included Isabel MartÃ­nez de PerÃ³n as the first
woman President in Argentina and the first woman non-monarch head of state in
the Western hemisphere in 1974 until being deposed in 1976, Elisabeth Domitien
becomes the first woman Prime Minister of the Central African Republic, Indira
Gandhi continuing as Prime Minister of India until 1977 (and taking office
again in 1980), Prime Minister Golda Meir of Israel and acting Chairman Soong
Ching-ling of the People's Republic of China continuing their leadership from
the sixties, Lidia Gueiler Tejada becoming the interim President of Bolivia
beginning from 1979 to 1980, Maria de Lourdes Pintasilgo becoming the first
woman Prime Minister of Portugal in 1979, and Margaret Thatcher becoming the
first woman Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Both Indira Gandhi
and Margaret Thatcher would remain important political figures in the
following decade in the 1980s.

### [edit] Music

Main article: 1970s in music

<IMG>

<IMG>

Patti Smith performing in Copenhagen, October 6, 1976

The early 1970s saw the rise of popular soft rock music, with such legendary
recording artists as The Carpenters, Elton John, James Taylor, John Denver,
The Eagles, America, Chicago, The Doobie Brothers, Bread and Steely Dan as
well as the further rise of such popular, influential rhythm and blues (R&B)
artists as multi-instrumentalist Stevie Wonder and the popular quintet The
Jackson 5. The mid-1970s also saw the rise of disco music, which dominated
popular music during the last half of the decade with bands like the Bee Gees,
ABBA (which later became the second most successful band of all time), Boney
M, Donna Summer, K.C. and the Sunshine Band, etc. In response to this, rock
music became increasingly hard-edged with artists such as Led Zeppelin and
Black Sabbath. Minimalism also emerged, lead by composers such as Philip
Glass, Steve Reich and Michael Nyman. This was a break from the intellectual
serial music of the tradition of Schoenberg which lasted from the early 1900s
to 1960s.

Experimental classical music influenced both art rock and progressive rock as
well as the punk rock and New Wave genres. Hard rock and Heavy metal also
emerged among British bands The Who, Black Sabbath, Deep Purple, Uriah Heep,
Led Zeppelin and Judas Priest. Australian band AC/DC also found its hard rock
origins in the early 1970s. In Europe, there was a surge of popularity in the
early decade for glam rock. The mid-seventies saw the rise of punk music from
its protopunk/garage band roots in the 1960s and early 1970s. Major acts
include the Ramones, Blondie, Patti Smith, the Sex Pistols, and The Clash. The
highest-selling album was Pink Floyd's Dark Side of The Moon (1973). It
remained on the Billboard Top 200 Albums Chart for 741 weeks. The rise of
Disco music occurred in the late 1970s; however, the first half of the 1970s
saw many jazz musicians from the Miles Davis school achieve cross-over success
through jazz-rock fusion. In Germany, Manfred Eicher started the ECM label,
which quickly made a name for 'chamber jazz'. Towards the end of the decade,
Jamaican reggae music, already popular in the Caribbean and Africa since the
early 1970s, became very popular in the U.S. and in Europe, mostly because of
reggae superstar and legend Bob Marley. The late '70s also saw the beginning
of hip hop music with the song "Rapper's Delight" by Sugarhill Gang. Country
music remained very popular in the U.S. In 1977, it became more mainstream
after Kenny Rogers became a solo singer and scored many hits on both the
country and pop charts.

### [edit] Cinema

Main article: 1970s in film

In 1970s European cinema, the failure of the Prague Spring brought about
nostalgic motion pictures such as IstvÃ¡n SzabÃ³'s Szerelmesfilm (1970).
German New Wave and Rainer Fassbinder's existential movies characterized film-
making in Germany. The movies of the Swedish director Ingmar Bergman reached a
new level of expression in motion pictures like Cries and Whispers (1973).

Asian cinema of the 1970s catered to the rising middle class fantasies and
struggles. In the Bollywood cinema of India, this was epitomised by the movies
of Bollywood superhero Amitabh Bachchan. Another Asian touchstone beginning in
the early '70s was traditional Hong Kong martial arts film which sparked a
greater interest in Chinese martial arts to the West. Martial arts film
reached the peak of its popularity largely in part due to its greatest icon,
Bruce Lee.

Hollywood emerged from its early 1970s slump with young film-makers. Top-
grossing Jaws (1975) ushered in the blockbuster era of film-making, though it
was eclipsed two years later by the science-fiction epic Star Wars (1977).

The Rocky Horror Picture Show bombed terribly (1974) only to reappear as a
midnight show (1977).

### [edit] Television

Main article: 1970s in television

In the United Kingdom, color channels were now available; three stations had
begun broadcasting in color between 1977 and 1979. UK dramas included Play for
Today and Pennies From Heaven. The science fiction show Doctor Who reached its
peak. Many popular British situation comedies (sit-coms) were gentle,
innocent, unchallenging comedies of middle-class life; typical examples were
Terry and June, Sykes, and The Good Life. A more diverse view of society was
offered by series like Porridge and Rising Damp. In police dramas there was a
move towards increasing realism; popular shows included Dixon of Dock Green,
Softly, Softly, and The Sweeney.

In the United States, long-standing trends were declining. The Red Skelton
Show and The Ed Sullivan Show, long-revered American institutions, were
canceled. The "family sitcom" saw its last breath at the start of the new
decade with The Brady Bunch and The Partridge Family. Television was
transformed by what became termed as "social consciousness" programming such
as All in the Family, which broke down television barriers. With the women's
movement reflected in new shows about single women in 'traditionally male'
careers, such as The Mary Tyler Moore Show, Police Woman and others. The
television western, which had been very popular in the 1960s, died out during
the 1970s, with Bonanza, The Virginian, and Gunsmoke ending their runs. By the
mid- to late 1970s, "jiggle television"--programs centered around sexual
gratification and bawdy humor and situations such as Charlie's Angels and
Three's Company\--became popular. Soap operas expanded their audience beyond
housewives with the rise of All My Children and As the World Turns. Game shows
such as Match Game, The Hollywood Squares and Family Feud were also popular
daytime television. The height of Match Game's popularity occurred between
1973 and 1977, before it was overtaken by Family Feud in 1978. Television's
current longest-running game show, The Price is Right began its run hosted by
Bob Barker in 1972. Another influential genre was the television newscast,
which built on its initial widespread success in the 1960s. Finally, the
variety show received its last hurrah during this decade, with shows such as
The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour and Donny & Marie.

### [edit] Literature

Main article: 1970s in literature

Fiction in the early '70s brought a return to old-fashioned storytelling,
especially with Erich Segal's Love Story. The seventies also saw the decline
of previously well-respected writers, such as Saul Bellow and Peter De Vries,
who both released poorly received novels at the start of the decade. Racism
remained a key literary subject. John Updike emerged as a major literary
figure. Reflections of the 1960s experience also found roots in the literature
of the decade through the works of Joyce Carol Oates and Morris Wright. With
the rising cost of hard-cover books and the increasing readership of "genre
fiction," the paperback became a popular medium. Criminal non-fiction also
became a popular topic. Irreverence and satire, typified in Kurt Vonnegut's
Breakfast of Champions, were common literary elements. The horror genre also
emerged, and by the late seventies Stephen King had become one of the most
popular genre novelists.

In non-fiction, several books related to Nixon and the Watergate scandal
topped the best-selling lists. 1977 brought many high-profile biographical
works of literary figures, such as those of Virginia Woolf, Agatha Christie,
and J.R.R. Tolkien.

### [edit] Architecture

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Sears Tower became the world's tallest building when completed in 1973.

Architecture in the 1970s began as a continuation of styles created by such
architects as Frank Lloyd Wright and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Early in the
decade, several architects competed to build the tallest building in the
world. Of these buildings, the most notable are the John Hancock Center and
Sears Tower in Chicago, both designed by Bruce Graham and Fazlur Khan and the
World Trade Center towers that were in New York by American architect Minoru
Yamasaki. The decade also brought experimentation in geometric design, pop-
art, postmodernism and early deconstructivism.

In 1974, Louis Kahn's last and arguably most famous building, the National
Assembly Building of Dhaka, Bangladesh was completed. The building's use of
open spaces and groundbreaking geometry brought rare attention to the small
southeast Asian country. Hugh Stubbins' Citicorp Center revolutionized the
incorporation of solar panels in office buildings. The seventies brought
further experimentation in glass and steel construction and geometric design.
Chinese architect I. M. Pei's John Hancock Tower in Boston, Massachusetts is
an example, although like many buildings of the time, the experimentation was
flawed and glass panes fell from the faÃ§ade. In 1976, the completed CN Tower
in Toronto became the world's tallest free-standing structure on land, an
honor it held until 2007. The fact that no taller tower had been built between
the construction of the CN Tower and the Burj Dubai shows how innovative the
architecture and engineering of the structure truly was.

But modern architecture was increasingly criticized, both from the point of
view of postmodern architects such as Philip Johnson, Charles Moore and
Michael Graves who advocated a return to pre-modern styles of architecture and
the incorporation of pop elements as a means of communicating with a broader
public. Other architects, such as Peter Eisenman of the New York Five
advocated the pursuit of form for the sake of form and drew on semiotics
theory for support.

"High Tech" architecture moved forward as Buckminster Fuller continued his
experiments in geodesic domes while the George Pompidou Center, designed by
Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers, which opened in 1977, was a prominent example.
As the decade drew to a close, Frank Gehry broke out in new direction with his
own house in Santa Monica, a highly complex structure, half excavated out of
an existing bungalow and half cheaply built construction using materials such
as chicken wire fencing.

### [edit] Social science

Social science intersected with hard science in the works in natural language
processing by Terry Winograd (1973) and the establishment of the first
cognitive sciences department in the world at MIT in 1979. The fields of
generative linguistics and cognitive psychology went through a renewed vigour
with symbolic modeling of semantic knowledge while the final devastation of
the long standing tradition of behaviorism came about through the severe
criticism of B.F. Skinner's work in 1971 by the cognitive scientist Noam
Chomsky.

### [edit] Sports

Main article: 1970s in sports

In the 1970s, the renegade sports leagues of the American Basketball
Association (founded in 1967), the North American Soccer League (also founded
in 1967), the World Hockey Association (lasting from 1972 through 1979), and
the World Series Cricket (lasting from 1977 to 1979) challenged older,
established organizations. The "Battle of the Sexes" tennis match between
Billie Jean King and Bobby Riggs, who proclaimed the women's game to be
inferior, was a turning point in sports during the decade; after King's
victory, the match was heralded as a major victory for women in athletics.

The 1972 Summer Olympics were marred by terrorism and Cold War-related
international controversy. Among the competition's highlights was the
performance of swimmer Mark Spitz, who set seven World Records to win a record
of seven gold medals in one Olympics. The 1976 Summer Olympics were
highlighted by the legendary performance of Romanian female gymnast Nadia
Comaneci and the strong U.S. boxing team.

## [edit] International issues

  * Major conflict between pro-western (capitalist) and pro-eastern (communist) forces in multiple countries, while attempts are made by the Soviet Union and the United States to lessen the chance for conflict, such as both countries endorsing nuclear nonproliferation.
  * Rise in the utilization of terrorism by militant groups across the world.
  * The presence and rise of a significant number of women as heads of state and heads of government in a number of countries across the world, many being the first women to hold such positions, such as Soong Ching-ling continuing as the first Chairwoman of the People's Republic of China until 1972, Isabel MartÃ­nez de PerÃ³n as the first woman President in Argentina in 1974 until being deposed in 1976, Elisabeth Domitien becomes the first woman Prime Minister of Lesotho, Indira Gandhi continuing as Prime Minister of India until 1977, Lidia Gueiler Tejada becoming the interim President of Bolivia beginning from 1979 to 1980, Maria de Lourdes Pintasilgo becoming the first woman Prime Minister of Portugal in 1979, and Margaret Thatcher becoming the first woman Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
  * Oil crises in 1973 and 1979.

### [edit] Africa

  * Idi Amin, President of Uganda from 1971 to 1979, after rising to power in a coup becomes infamous for his brutal dictatorship in Uganda. Amin's regime persecutes opposition to his rule, pursues a racist agenda of removing Asians from Uganda (particularly Indians who arrived in Uganda during British colonial rule). Amin initiates the UgandanâTanzanian War in 1978 in alliance with Libya based on an expansionist agenda to annex territory from Tanzania which results in Ugandan defeat and Amin's overthrow in 1979.
  * The Angolan Civil War begins in 1975, resulting in intervention by multiple countries on the Marxist and anti-Marxist sides, with Cuba and Mozambique supporting the Marxist faction while South Africa and Zaire support the anti-Marxists.
  * Haile Selassie is overthrown from power in Ethiopia, ending one of the world's longest lasting monarchies in history.
  * The death of Steve Biko.

### [edit] America

<IMG>

<IMG>

United States President Richard Nixon in 1974, shortly after resigning as
President.

  * Rise of separatism in the province of Quebec in Canada. In 1970, radical Quebec nationalist and Marxist militants of the Front de libÃ©ration du QuÃ©bec (FLQ) kidnap the Quebec labour minister Pierre Laporte and British Trade Commissioner John Cross during the October Crisis, resulting in Laporte being killed, and the enactment of martial law in Canada under the War Measures Act, resulting in a campaign by the Canadian government which arrests suspected FLQ supporters. The election of the Parti QuÃ©bÃ©cois led by RenÃ© Levesque in the province of Quebec in Canada, brings the first political party committed to Quebec independence into power in Quebec. Levesque's government pursues an agenda to secede Quebec from Canada by democratic means and strengthen Francophone QuÃ©bÃ©cois culture in the late 1970s, such as the controversial Charter of the French Language more commonly known in Quebec and Canada as "Bill 101".
  * United States President Richard Nixon resigns as President in 1974 while facing charges for impeachment for the Watergate scandal.
  * Augusto Pinochet rises to power as ruler of Chile after overthrowing the socialist Chilean President Salvador Allende in 1973 with the assistance of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) of the United States. Pinochet would remain a dictator of Chile until 1990.
  * Jorge Rafael Videla seizes control of Argentina in 1976 through a coup sponsored by the Argentine military, establishing himself as a dictator of a military junta government in the country.

### [edit] Asia

  * On September 6, 1970 the world witnessed the beginnings of modern rebellious fighting in what is today called as Skyjack Sunday. Palestinian terrorists hijacked four airliners and took over 300 people on board as hostage. Later the hostages were released but the planes exploded in front of world wide media coverage.
  * Multiple conflicts and crises occur in India and Pakistan during the 1970s including the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Bangladesh Liberation War, and the Indian Emergency 1975â1977.
  * Martial law was declared in the Philippines on September 21, 1972 by President Ferdinand Marcos.
  * The Vietnam War came to a close in the early Seventies with the Paris Peace Accords. Opposition had increased in the United States which led to U.S. withdrawal in the early part of 1973. However, in 1975 North Vietamese forces invaded the South and quickly took over the government breaking the treaty.
  * In Cambodia the communist leader Pol Pot led a revolution against the American backed government of Lon Nol. On April 17, 1975 his forces captured Phnom Penh the capitol, two years after America had halted the bombings of their positions. His communist government, the Khmer Rouge, moved the citizens into communal housing which led to starvation. The estimated death toll in the genocide ranges between 800,000 and 2.3 million. Vietnam invaded the country in 1979 which led to a long ensuing war between the nations.
  * Major political changes in the People's Republic of China. The PRC is recognized by the United States and the subsequently the United Nations, after negotiations succeed between United States President Richard Nixon and the PRC's Chairman Mao Zedong. Mao's death results in the end of the Cultural Revolution, the arrest of Gang of Four in 1976, and economic liberalization under Deng Xiaoping.
  * Major change in Egyptian relations with Israel and the United States after Egyptian President Anwar Sadat signs a peace treaty with Israel at Camp David in the United States, ending outstanding disputes between Egypt and Israel. Sadat's decision was unpopular and he was assassinated in 1978.
  * In Iraq, Saddam Hussein began to rise to power by helping to modernize the country. One major initiative was removing the western monopoly on oil which later during the high prices of 1973 oil crisis would help Hussein's ambitious plans. On July 16, 1979 he assumed the presidency cementing his rise to power. His presidency led to the breaking off of a Syrian-Iraqi unification, which had been sought under Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr and would later lead to the IranâIraq War starting in the 1980s.
  * The Iranian Revolution of 1979 transformed Iran from an autocratic pro-west monarchy under Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi to a theocratic Islamist government under the leadership of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Distrust between the revolutionaries and Western powers led to the Iran hostage crisis on November 4, 1979 where 66 diplomats, mainly from the U.S., were held captive.
  * Japan's economic growth surpassed the rest of the world in the 1970s.

### [edit] Europe

<IMG>

<IMG>

United States President Jimmy Carter and Soviet Union leader Leonid Brezhnev
sign the SALT II treaty, June 18, 1979, in Vienna, Austria.

  * In 1971, Erich Honecker was chosen to lead East Germany, a role he would fill for the whole of the 1970s and 1980s. The mid-1970s were a time of extreme recession for East Germany, and as a result of the country's higher debts, consumer goods became more and more scarce. If East Germans had enough money to procure a television set, a telephone, or a Trabant automobile, they were placed on waiting lists which caused them to wait as much as a decade for the item in question.
  * The 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, Germany witness the kidnapping and murder of Israeli athletes by Palestinian Arab nationalist militants of the Black September terrorist organization.
  * Growing internal tensions take place in Yugoslavia beginning with the Croatian Spring movement in 1971 which demands greater decentralization of power to the constituent republics of Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia's communist ruler Joseph Broz Tito subdues the Croatian Spring movement and arrests its leaders, but does initiate major constitutional reform resulting in the 1974 Constitution which decentralized powers to the republics, gave them the official right to separate from Yugoslavia, and weakened the influence of Serbia (Yugoslavia's largest and most populous constituent republic) in the federation by granting significant powers to the Serbian autonomous provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina. In addition, the 1974 Constitution consolidated Tito's dictatorship by proclaiming him president-for-life. The 1974 Constitution would become resented by Serbs and began a gradual escalation of ethnic tensions.
  * Enver Hoxha's rule in Albania was characterized in the 1970s by growing isolation, first from a very public schism with the Soviet Union the decade before, and then by a split in friendly relations with China in 1978. Albania normalized relations with Yugoslavia in 1971, and attempted trade agreements with other European nations, but was met with vocal disapproval by the governments in Washington, D.C. and London.
  * On October 16, 1978, Karol WojtyÅa, a Polish cardinal, was elected Pope, becoming Pope John Paul II after the sudden death of Pope John Paul I. John Paul II would become a highly popular Pope and was known for challenging authoritarian communism, especially in his home country of Poland.
  * The Soviet Union under the leadership of Leonid Brezhnev, the country pursues an agenda to lessen tensions with its rival superpower, the United States, while beginning the Soviet-Afghan war in 1979. The Soviet Union becomes the world's leading producer in steel, and oil in the decade. Despite this growth, inflation continued to grow for the second straight decade, and production consistently fell short of demand in agriculture and manufacturing.
  * Margaret Thatcher and the Conservative party rise to power in the United Kingdom in 1979, initiating a neoliberal economic policy of reducing government spending, weakening the power of trade unions, and promoting economic and trade liberalization.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. pp. 292â293. ISBN 0465041957.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1970s"

Categories: 1970s

Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from July 2008 | NPOV
disputes from July 2008 | Articles that may contain original research since
July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * GÃ idhlig
  * è´èª
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Nouormand
  * O'zbek
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ripoarisch
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * SÃ¡megiella
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Basa Sunda
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TatarÃ§a/Ð¢Ð°ÑÐ°ÑÑÐ°
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Walon
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 18:58.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



