
# Hummus

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the food. For the biological matter in soil, see Humus.
For the band, see Humus (band).

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hummus with olive oil, lemon juice, cumin and sumac

Hummus (a transliteration of the Arabic: Ø­Ù ÙØµâ; also spelled hamos,
houmous, hommos, hommus, hummos, hummous or humus; see romanization of Arabic)
is a Levantine Arab[1] dip or spread made from cooked, mashed chickpeas,
blended with tahini, olive oil, lemon juice, salt and garlic. It is a popular
food in various local forms throughout the Middle Eastern world.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Etymology
  * 2 Historical origins
    * 2.1 History of the ingredients
  * 3 Nutritional information
  * 4 Serving methods
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 Bibliography

  
## [edit] Etymology

The word comes from Arabic: Ø­Ù ÙØµâá¸¥ummuá¹£[3] 'chickpeas'. Like other
Arabic loanwords, its spelling in English is unstable.[3] The earliest known
use of the word hummus in English, noted by the Oxford English Dictionary
(OED), was in 1955.[4] The three most common spellings for the word as
transliterated into English are hummus, hommos and hoummos. The spelling humus
is avoided in English due to its having the same spelling as another English
word humus, though this is the most common Turkish spelling[3] and the OED
indicates the word entered the English language from Turkish.[4] The full
Arabic name of the prepared spread is Ø­ÙÙ ÙÙØµ Ø¨Ø·Ø­ÙÙØ© (á¸¥ummuá¹£ bi
á¹­aá¸¥Ä«na) which means chickpeas with tahina.

## [edit] Historical origins

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hummus with pine nuts

Many cuisine-related sources carry forward a folklore which describes hummus
as one of the oldest known prepared foods[5][6][7] with a long history in the
Middle East which stretches back to antiquity, but its historical origins are
unknown.[8][9] The historical enigma is such that the origins of hummus-bi-
tahini could be much more recent than is widely believed. One of the earliest
verifiable descriptions of hummus comes from 18th-century Damascus and the
same source claims it was unknown elsewhere.[10]

Meanwhile some cookbooks repeat the legend that hummus was first prepared in
the 12th century by Saladin.[11] Sources such as Cooking in Ancient
Civilizations by Cathy K. Kaufman[12] carry speculative recipes for an ancient
Egyptian hummus, substituting vinegar for lemon juice, but acknowledge we do
not know how the Egyptians ate their chick-peas. Similarly, no recipe for
hummus has been identified among the many books on cooking surviving from
ancient Rome.

Charles Perry, co-author of Medieval Arab Cookery notes that owing to hummus
bi tahina being an everyday staple, and because of the lack of Arab recipe
books published between the 14th and 20th century, no recipes documenting the
recipe's early ingredients have been found. He says the nearest medieval
example recorded in a 13th century Arab cookbook, Kitab Wasf al-Atima al-
Mutada is Hummus kasa, which substitutes vinegar for lemon, includes extra
herbs and adds walnuts, hazelnuts, almonds and pistachios.[13][14]

### [edit] History of the ingredients

Chickpeas and sesame, the crops from which hummus's main ingredients are
taken, were known and cultivated in the ancient Mediterranean and Middle
Eastern worlds. Chickpeas are hummus's principal ingredient, and have been a
human food item for over 10,000 years.[15] The chickpea was used as a food
item in Palestine before 4000 BC, was one of the earliest crops cultivated in
Mesopotamia and was a common street dish in ancient Rome;[12] indeed the
famous Roman orator, Cicero, was named for an ancestor who had a wart on his
nose shaped like a chickpea. Archeological evidence identifies chickpeas in
the Sumerian diet before 2500 BC.[16] They are noted in a 13th century work by
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn al-Karim al Katab al Baghdadi of Persia
for a "simple dish" of meat, pulses and spices.[17] It is unknown whether
chickpeas were commonly mashed in any of these cultures. Tahini (sesame paste)
likewise lacks any clear historical context. Sesame was grown as a crop in
ancient Assyrian and Babylonian gardens and is mentioned by Columella.[18] It
was common in Roman and Persian kitchens in the form of sesame oil but not as
the tahini paste of hummus-bi-tahini.[19]

Other ingredients are used in sundry recipes of hummus-bi-tahini. The olive
originated in Syria and Palestine, where it was being cultivated by the fourth
millennium BC. A variety may have been indigenous to Crete, where olives were
being cultivated by 2500 BC. The Bible mentions olive oil many times and it
was exported from Palestine to places such as Egypt. Several Roman writers
indicate that salt was used in extracting the oil.[20] Garlic was grown in the
gardens of King Merodach-Baladan II of Babylon and probably was in Greece by
the early Bronze Age.[21] The lemon was last to arrive in the Middle East and
Mediterranean world, originating in India. However, depictions of lemons have
been found at Pompeii and Tusculum, so this fruit must have reached the Roman
world, at least as a luxury import, by the first century.[22]

## [edit] Nutritional information

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lebanese hummus, garnished with whole chickpeas, on a Yemeni serving dish

Hummus is high in iron and vitamin C, and also has significant amounts of
folate and vitamin B6.[23] The chickpeas make it a good source of protein and
dietary fiber. Depending on the recipe hummus carries varying amounts of
monounsaturated fat.[24] Hummus is useful in vegetarian and vegan diets and
like other combinations of grains and pulses, when eaten with bread it serves
as a complete protein.

## [edit] Serving methods

As an appetizer and dip hummus is scooped with flatbread (such as pita).
Hummus is also served as part of a meze or as an accompaniment to falafel,
grilled chicken, fish or eggplant. Garnishes include chopped tomato, cucumber,
cilantro, parsley, sautÃ©ed mushrooms, whole chickpeas, olive oil, hard-boiled
eggs, paprika, ful, olives and pickles. Outside the Middle East it is
sometimes served with tortilla chips or crackers.

Hummus ful (pronounced /fuËl/) is topped with a paste made from fava beans
boiled until soft and then crushed. Hummus masubha/mashawsha is a mixture of
hummus paste, warm chickpeas and tahini.

In Vegetarian Dishes from the Middle East Arto der Hartoiunian calls hummus
"one of the most popular and best-known of all Syrian dishes" and "a must on
any mezzeh table."[25] Syrians in Canada's Arab diaspora prepare and consume
hummus along with other dishes like falafel, kibbe and tabouleh, even among
the third and fourth-generation offspring of the original immigrants.[26]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lebanese style hummus topped with whole chickpeas and olive oil.

For Palestinians hummus has long been a staple food, garnished with olive oil
and "nana" mint leaves, paprika, parsley or cumin.[27] A related dish popular
in the region of Palestine (including Jordan) is laban ma' hummus ("yogurt and
chickpeas") which uses yogurt in the place of tahini and butter in the place
of olive oil. The chickpeas are first boiled alone before the other
ingredients are added and it is served hot.[28]

Food critic Jana Gur wrote that the ethos of some early Jewish settlers in
modern Israel "was rejection of everything that reeked of Diaspora and an
eager, almost childish, embrace of the Levant. The infatuation with falafel
and hummus, staples of Arabic cuisine, started there."[29] The outcome,
according to another commentator, was that "Shawarma, falafel and hummus soon
became âsabraâ foods,"[30] a common part of everyday meals in Israel.[31]
Many restaurants run by Mizrahi Jews and Arab citizens of Israel are dedicated
to hot hummus, which may be served as chick peas softened with baking soda
along with garlic, olive oil, cumin and tahini. One of the fancier hummus
versions available is traditional hummus masabacha, made with lemon-spiked
tahini garnished with whole chick peas, a sprinkling of paprika and a drizzle
of olive oil.[32] Hummus is eaten in restaurants, supermarkets and hummus-only
shops called humusiot.

In October 2008 the Association of Lebanese Industrialists sought protected
status from the European Commission for hummus as a uniquely Lebanese food,
similar to the Protected Geographical Status rights held over regional food
items by various European Union countries.[33][34][35] A food editor
interviewed on the BBC program Cooking in the Danger Zone stated that while
Hummus may be very popular in Israel, "Humous is Arabic. Falafel...is
completely Arabic and this salad that we call an Israeli Salad, actually
itâs an Arab salad, Palestinian salad."[36]

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikibooks has a book on the topic of

Cookbook:Hummus  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Hummus  
  * Arab cuisine
  * Armenian cuisine
  * Greek cuisine
  * Iraqi cuisine
  * Jewish cuisine
  * Israeli cuisine
  * Lebanese cuisine
  * Levantine cuisine
  * Palestinian cuisine
  * Syrian cuisine
  * Turkish cuisine

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Sami Zubaida, "National, Communal and Global Dimensions in Middle Eastern Food Cultures" in Sami Zubaida and Richard Tapper, A Taste of Thyme: Culinary Cultures of the Middle East, London and New York, 1994 and 2000, ISBN 1-86064-603-4, p. 35.
  2. ^ eddybles.com, Feta Artichoke Hummus, retrieved 28 February 2008
  3. ^ a b c Pam Peters (2007). The Cambridge Guide to Australian English Usage. Cambridge University Press. pp. 370\. ISBN 0521878217.
  4. ^ a b Oxford English Dictionary (Second Edition) CD-ROM Version 3.1.1 (2007), Oxford, Oxford University Press
  5. ^ mideastfood.about.com, Hummus 101, retrieved 28 February 2008
  6. ^ choice.com, More about hummus, "Hummus has existed for thousands of years." retrieved 5 May 2008
  7. ^ insidehookah.com Food - Hummus, "...it is evident that itâs been a Middle Eastern/Mediterranean favorite, and sometimes staple, for thousands of years." retrieved 5 May 2008
  8. ^ www.straightdope.com, Who invented hummus?, 21 March 2001, "Hummus has been around for too long, in too many forms, and the origin is lost in antiquity... There's no way of knowing where it started...", retrieved 5 May 2008
  9. ^ Jaffe, Jody, bethesdamagazine.com, Scrumptious Hummus, 2007, "...hummus has been around since humans have been hunting and gathering... the history of hummus is murky, with several cultures claiming origin." retrieved 05 May 2008
  10. ^ James Grehan, Everyday Life and Consumer Culture in Eighteenth-Century Damascus ISBN 029598676X
  11. ^ Adrienne's Gourmet Foods, Hummus, retrieved 3 September 2008
  12. ^ a b Brothwell & Brothwell pp. 105-7
  13. ^ Alice Fordham (October 10, 2008). "Middle Eats: What are Lebanonâs chances of legally laying claim to hummus?". NOW Lebanon. http://www.nowlebanon.com/NewsArticleDetails.aspx?ID=62188.
  14. ^ Perry and Rodinson, 1998, p. 383.
  15. ^ Tannahill p. 25
  16. ^ Tannahill p. 61
  17. ^ Tannahill p. 174
  18. ^ Brothwell & Brothwell pp. 157, 146
  19. ^ Tannahill p. 176
  20. ^ Brothwell & Brothwell pp. 154-7
  21. ^ Brothwell & Brothwell p. 109
  22. ^ Brothwell & Brothwell pp. 140, 269
  23. ^ Bricklin, 1994, p. 115.
  24. ^ Hummus NutritionData.com
  25. ^ Arto der Hartoiunian Vegetarian Dishes from the Middle East, London 1983, p.33.
  26. ^ Paul R. Magocsi (1999). Encyclopedia of Canada's Peoples. University of Toronto Press. pp. p. 1244. ISBN 0802029388. http://books.google.ca/books?id=dbUuX0mnvQMC&pg=PA1244&dq=falafel+history&lr=&as_brr=3&sig=o6O7x6z91yzlNhE_6Ao7YetKQjQ.
  27. ^ Ibrahim, Lailie, Institute for Middle East Understanding, Hummus, a Palestinian staple, 31 March 2006, retrieved 9 March 2008.
  28. ^ Salloum and Peters, 1996, p. 204.
  29. ^ Gur, Jane, Santa Fe New Mexican, "Hummus History: Tales of a Wandering Chickpea", 21 October 2008, retrieved 11 December 2008
  30. ^ Volcot-Freeman, Eythan-David "Culinary Zionism: an ingathering of edibles", Present Tense Magazine, retrieved 1 December 2008.
  31. ^ Even mentioned by the Israel Defense Force Cookbook, see Houston Chronicle "Diversity in the dining room helps ring in Israel's new year"
  32. ^ Food & Wine, May 2008; On the Hummus Hunt in Israel by Jen Murphy, p. 66,
  33. ^ Karam, Zeina, "Hummus war looms between Lebanon and Israel", Associated Press, 7 October 2008, retrieved 10 December 2008.
  34. ^ Carolynne Wheeler (11 Oct 2008). "Hummus food fight between Lebanon and Israel". The Daily Telegraph. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/3178040/Hummus-food-fight-between-Lebanon-and-Israel.html.
  35. ^ "Whose hummus is it anyway?". The Times of South Africa. Nov 09, 2008. http://www.thetimes.co.za/PrintEdition/Lifestyle/Article.aspx?id=877641.
  36. ^ BBC Cooking in the Danger Zone: Israel and Palestinian Territories, Page 6

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Afzal-Khan, Fawzia; Seshadri-Crooks, Kalpana (2000), The Pre-occupation of Postcolonial Studies, Duke University Press, ISBN 0822325217, 9780822325215
  * Amster, Linda; Sheraton, Mimi (2003), The New York Times Jewish Cookbook: More Than 825 Traditional and Contemporary Recipes from Around the World, St. Martin's Press, ISBN 0312290934, 9780312290931
  * Bricklin, Mark (1994), Prevention Magazine's Nutrition Advisor: The Ultimate Guide to the Health-Boosting and Health-Harming Factors in Your Diet, Rodale, ISBN 0875962254, 9780875962252
  * Brothwell, C. D.; Brothwell, B. (1998), Food in Antiquity: A survey of the Diet of Early Peoples, Expanded Edition, John Hopkins University, ISBN 0801857406
  * Rodinson, Maxime; Perry, Charles (1998), Medieval Arab Cookery, Prospect Books (UK), ISBN 0907325912, 978-0907325918
  * Salloum, Habeeb; Peters, James (1996), From the Lands of Figs and Olives: Over 300 Delicious and Unusual Recipes, I.B.Tauris, ISBN 1860640389
  * Tannahill, Reay (1973), Food in History, Stein and Day, ISBN 0812814671

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hummus"

Categories: Arab cuisine | Arabic loanwords | Levantine cuisine | Middle
Eastern cuisine | Mediterranean cuisine | Appetizers | Dips | Legume dishes |
Vegetarian cuisine | Vegan cuisine

Hidden categories: Articles containing Arabic language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Cebuano
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 5 April 2009, at 12:23.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



