
# Mahayana

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

M a h Ä y Ä n a  
<IMG>  
B u d d h i s m  
Lands  
China â¢ Taiwan  
Korea â¢ India â¢ Japan  
Nepal â¢ Tibet â¢ Bhutan  
Mongolia â¢ Vietnam  
Doctrine  
Bodhisattva â¢ Bodhicitta  
Karuá¹Ä â¢ PrajÃ±Ä  
ÅunyatÄ â¢ Buddha Nature  
TrikÄya â¢ Eternal Buddha  
MahÄyÄna SÅ«tras  
PrajÃ±ÄpÄramitÄ SÅ«tras  
Avataá¹saka SÅ«tra  
Lotus SÅ«tra  
Nirvana SÅ«tra  
VimalakÄ«rti SÅ«tra  
Laá¹kÄvatÄra SÅ«tra  
History  
Silk Road â¢ NÄgÄrjuna  
Asanga â¢ Vasubandhu  
Bodhidharma  
Portal  
view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
Mahayana (Sanskrit: à¤®à¤¹à¤¾à¤¯à¤¾à¤¨, mahÄyÄna literally 'Great Vehicle')
is one of the two main existing schools of Buddhism and a term for
classification of Buddhist philosophies and practice. It was founded in India.
The name Mahayana is used in three main senses:

  1. As a living tradition, Mahayana is the larger of the two major traditions of Buddhism existing today, the other being Theravada. This classification is largely undisputed by all Buddhist schools.
  2. According to the Mahayana method of classification of Buddhist philosophies, Mahayana refers to a level of spiritual motivation[1] (also known as Bodhisattvayana[2]). According to this classification, the alternative approach is called Hinayana, or Shravakayana. It is also recognized by Theravada Buddhism, but is not considered very relevant for practice.[3]
  3. According to the Vajrayana scheme of classification of practice paths, Mahayana refers to one of the three routes to enlightenment, the other two being Hinayana and Vajrayana. This classification is part of the teachings of Vajrayana Buddhism, and is not recognized by Mahayana and Theravada Buddhism.

Although the Mahayana movement traces its origin to Gautama Buddha, scholars
believe that it originated in India in the 1st century CE,[4][5] or the 1st
century BCE.[6][7] Scholars think that Mahayana only became a mainstream
movement in India in the fifth century CE, since that is when Mahayanic
inscriptions started to appear in epigraphic records in India.[8] Before the
11th century CE (while Mahayana was still present in India), the Mahayana
Sutras were still in the process of being revised. Thus, several different
versions may have survived of the same sutra. These different versions are
invaluable to scholars attempting to reconstruct the history of Mahayana.

In the course of its history, Mahayana spread throughout East Asia. The main
countries in which it is practiced today are China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam
and worldwide amongst Tibetan Buddhist practitioners as a result of the
Himalayan diaspora following the Chinese invasion of Tibet. The main schools
of Mahayana Buddhism today are Pure Land, Zen, Nichiren Buddhism, Shingon,
Tibetan Buddhism and Tendai. The latter three schools have both Mahayana and
Vajrayana practice traditions.

## Contents

  * 1 Origin of the name
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 Early Mahayana Buddhism
      * 2.1.1 Origins of Mahayana
      * 2.1.2 Earliest Mahayana Sutras
      * 2.1.3 Earliest inscription related to Mahayana
    * 2.2 Late Mahayana Buddhism
  * 3 Doctrine
    * 3.1 Universalism
    * 3.2 Bodhisattva
    * 3.3 Compassion
    * 3.4 Skillful Means
    * 3.5 Salvation
    * 3.6 Buddha-nature
  * 4 Mahayana Scriptures
    * 4.1 Three Turnings
  * 5 Mahayana and the Canon
  * 6 Mahayana and Theravada
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 References
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Origin of the name

The historical source of the name Mahayana is polemical,[9][10] having its
origin in a debate about what the real teachings of the Buddha[11] are. As
such, its use in any context except as that pertaining to a living tradition
is controversial amongst Theravadin practitioners and some scholars.

The earliest known mention of "Mahayana" occurs in the Lotus Sutra between the
first century BCE and the first century CE.[dubious â discuss][12] However,
some scholars such as Seishi Karashima suggest the term first used in an
earlier Gandhari Prakrit version of the Lotus Sutra was not "mahÄyÄna" but
the Prakrit word "mahÄjÄna" in the sense of "mahÄjÃ±Äna" (great knowing).
At a later stage when the early Prakrit word was converted into Sanskrit, this
"mahÄjÄna", being phonetically ambivalent, was mistakenly converted into
"mahÄyÄna", possibly by contamination arising through proximity to the
famous Parable of the Burning House which talks of carts (Skt: yÄna).[13]

## [edit] History

Mahayana Buddhism in India can be divided into two periods: early Mahayana
Buddhism and late Mahayana Buddhism[14]

#### [edit] Early Mahayana Buddhism

The period of Early Mahayana Buddhism concerns the origins of Mahayana and the
contents of early Mahayana Sutras.[15]

##### [edit] Origins of Mahayana

The origins of Mahayana are still not completely understood.[16] Although the
Mahayana movement traces its origin to Gautama Buddha, scholars believe that
it originated in South India in the 1st century CE,[17][18] or the 1st century
BCE.[19][20] Alternatively, some scholars say there is some evidence that
Mahayana originated in North-west India in the 1st century CE.[21] Some
scholars say that Mahayana could have initially developed in the south-east of
India as a non-monastic tradition, and that later it underwent a process of
monasticization and emerged in the north-west of India as a monastic
movement.[22] Mahayana was first propagated into China by Lokaksema, the first
translator of Mahayana sutras into Chinese during the second century CE.[23]

Three sources appear to have made significant contributions to the rise of
Mahayana Buddhism:[24]

  1. The Early Buddhist Schools. Some important Mahayana texts such as the Prajnaparamita often refer to doctrines associated with the Sarvastivada, which were mentioned or incorporated into Mahayana texts.[25] In terms of content, however, the Mahasanghika doctrine is closer to Mahayana thought,[26] particularly those of the sub-schools such as the Lokottaravadins.[27]
  2. Biographical literature of the Buddha composed by people said to have belonged to 'the vehicle that praised the Buddha'. This literature (comprising the Jatakas, Avadanas and other texts describing the life of Buddha) may have had its origins in the various Early Schools, but developed in ways that transcended the existing sectarian lines and contributed to the rise of Mahayana Buddhism. Buddhist poets wrote their work with purposes different from those of scholars who were concerned with doctrinal issues, and they used literary expressions which transcended doctrinal lines between the schools.[28]
  3. Stupa worship. Stupas â which were initially mere monuments to Gautama Buddha â increasingly became the place of devotion and of spreading Buddhism to the masses, the majority of whom were illiterate laymen. On the inside wall of the stupa, pictures were drawn or sculpted depicting the life of Buddha and his previous lives as a bodhisattva. This has given rise to devotion to the Buddha and the bodhisattvas,[29] distinct from the purely monastic sangha of the Early Buddhist schools. However, this theory has been rejected by a number of scholars.[30] Early Mahayanists may well have used the stupas that were not affiliated with the Early Buddhist Schools as the basis for proselytizing.[31]

The commonly expressed misconception that Mahayana started as a lay-inspired
movement[32] is based on a selective reading of a very tiny sample of extant
Mahayana Sutra literature.[33] Currently scholars have moved away from this
limited corpus of literature, and have started to open up early Mahayana
literature which is very ascetic and expounds the ideal of the monks' life in
the forest.[34] A scholarly consensus about the origin of the Mahayana has not
yet been reached, but it has been suggested that by the time Mahayana in India
became mainstream in the fifth century CE, it had become what it originally
most strongly objected to: a fully landed, sedentary, lay-oriented monastic
institution.[35] Before that, the Mahayana movement may well have been either
a marginalized ascetic group of monks living in the forest, or a group of
conservatives embedded in mainstream, socially engaged early Buddhist
monasteries.[36] Most scholars conclude that Mahayana remained a marginal
movement until the 5th century AD.[37][38]

##### [edit] Earliest Mahayana Sutras

<IMG>

<IMG>

The monk Lokaksema translated early Mahayana sutras to Chines.

The earliest sutras which show some Mahayana influence are called the Proto-
Mahayana Sutras such as the Ajitasena Sutra. These sutras contains a mixture
of Mahayana and pre-Mahayana ideas, and occur in a world where monasticism is
the norm, which is typical of the Pali Suttas; there is none of the antagonism
towards the ÅrÄvakas or the notion of Arahantship, which is typical of many
later Mahayana Sutras such as the Lotus Sutra, or Vimalakirti Nirdesha.
However, the sutra also has an Arahant seeing all the Buddha fields, it is
said that reciting the name of the sutra will save beings from suffering and
the hell realms, and a meditative practice is described which allows the
practitioner to see with the eyes of a Buddha, and to receive teachings from
them that are very much typical of Mahayana Sutras.

The earliest proper Mahayana Sutras were the very first versions of the
Perfection of Wisdom series and texts concerning Aksobhya Buddha, which were
probably composed in the first century BCE in the south of India[39].[40][41]
Some slightly later early Mahayana Sutras are the Chinese translations made by
the Kushan monk Lokaksema in the Chinese capital of Luoyang, between 178 and
189 CE[42] He translated the following sutras: Astasahasrika,
Aksobhyatathagatasyavyuha, Surangamasamadhisutra, an early version of a sutra
connected to the Avatamsakasutra, Drumakinnararajapariprccha, Bhadrapalasutra,
Ajatasatrukaukrtyavinodana, and the Kasyapaparivarta,[43] which were probably
composed in the north of India in the first century CE.[44][45] Thus scholars
generally think that the earliest Mahayana sutras were mainly composed in the
south of India, and later the activity of writing additional scriptures was
continued in the north.

But, to equate evidence for the presence of an evolving body of Mahayana
scriptures with the existence at the time of Mahayana as a distinct religious
movement, has been described as being an assumption which may be a serious
misstep.[46]

##### [edit] Earliest inscription related to Mahayana

<IMG>

<IMG>

An early Mahayana Buddhist triad. From left to right, a Kushan devotee, the
Bodhisattva Maitreya, the Buddha, the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, and a
Buddhist monk. 2nd-3rd century CE, Gandhara.

The earliest stone inscription containing a recognizably Mahayana formulation
and a mention of the Buddha Amitabha was found in the Indian subcontinent in
Mathura, and dated to around 180 CE. Remains of a statue of a Buddha bear the
Brahmi inscription:

    "Made in the year 28 of the reign of king Huvishka, ... for the Buddha Amitabha" (Mathura Museum).
However, this image was in itself extremely marginal and isolated in the
overall context of Buddhism in India at the time, and had no lasting or long-
term consequences[47]

The epigraphical evidence for Mahayana in the period before the 5th century is
very limited in comparison to the multiplicity of Mahayana writings
transmitted from Central Asia to China at that time.[48][49]

#### [edit] Late Mahayana Buddhism

During the period of Late Mahayana Buddhism, four major types of thought
developed: Madhyamaka, Yogacara, Tathagatagarbha, and Buddhist Logic as the
last and most recent.[50] In India, the two main philosophical schools of the
Mahayana were the Madhyamaka and the later Yogacara.[51] There were no great
Indian teachers associated with tathagatagarbha thought.[52]

From the 5th century CE onwards, Mahayana was a strong movement in India,
possibly owing to support by the Gupta dynasty. It spread from India to South-
East Asia, and towards the north to Central Asia, China, Korea and Japan. The
influence of Mahayana in China seems to have been reached at an earlier time
than in India, where Mahayan remained an obscure group until the 5th century.

Buddhism (and Mahayana) disappeared from India during the 11th century, and
consequently lost its influence in South-East Asia where it was replaced by
Theravada Buddhism from Sri Lanka.

## [edit] Doctrine

Few things can be said with certainty about Mahayana Buddhism, especially its
early Indian form, other than that the Buddhism practiced in China, Vietnam,
Korea, Tibet, and Japan is Mahayana Buddhism.[53][54] Mahayana can be
described as a loosely bound bundle of many teachings, which was thus able to
contain the various contrasting ideas found between those differing teachings
of whose elements it is comprised.[55]

Mahayana is a large religious and philosophical structure. It constitutes an
inclusive faith characterized by the adoption of new Mahayana sutras in
addition to the earlier Agama texts, and a shift in the basic purpose and
concepts of Buddhism. Mahayana sees itself as penetrating further and more
profoundly into the Buddha's Dharma. There is a tendency in Mahayana sutras to
regard adherence to Mahayana sutras as generating spiritual benefits greater
than those which arise from being a follower of the non-Mahayana approaches to
Dharma. Thus the Srimala Sutra claims that the Buddha said that devotion to
Mahayana is inherently superior in its virtues to the following of the Sravaka
or Pratyekabuddha path.[56]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Buddha Amithaba in Tibetan Buddhism, traditional Thanka painting.

Mahayana Buddhist schools de-emphasize the ideal of the release from Suffering
and the attainment of Nirvana, found in the Early Buddhist Schools. The
fundamental principles of Mahayana doctrine were based around the possibility
of universal liberation from suffering for all beings (hence "great vehicle")
and the existence of Buddhas and Bodhisattva embodying Buddha-nature (ä½æ§).
Some Mahayana schools simplify the expression of faith by allowing salvation
to be alternatively obtained through the grace of the Buddha Amitabha (à¤
à¤®à¤¿à¤¤à¤¾à¤­) by having faith and devoting oneself to chanting to Amitabha.
This devotional lifestyle of Buddhism is most strongly emphasized by the Pure
Land schools and has greatly contributed to the success of Mahayana in East
Asia, where spiritual elements traditionally relied upon chanting of a
Buddha's name, of mantras or dharanis; reading of Mahayana sutras and
mysticism. In Chinese Buddhism, most monks, let alone lay people, practise
Pure Land, some combining it with Chan (Zen).[57]

Most Mahayana schools believe in a pantheon of quasi-divine Bodhisattvas
(à¤¬à¥à¤§à¤¿à¤¸à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤µ) that devote themselves to personal
excellence, ultimate knowledge, and the salvation of humanity and all other
sentient beings (animals, ghosts, demigods, etc.). Zen Buddhism is a school of
Mahayana which often de-emphasizes the pantheon of Bodhisattvas and instead
focuses on the meditative aspects of the religion. In Mahayana, the Buddha is
seen as the ultimate, highest being, present in all times, in all beings, and
in all places, and the Bodhisattvas come to represent the universal ideal of
altruistic excellence.

Mahayana Buddhism can in general be characterized by:

  * Universalism, in that, in those schools of Mahayana that still have large followings, everyone will become a Buddha (see, for example, the Lotus Sutra);
  * Bodhicitta as the main focus of realization (see, for example, the Nirvana Sutra and various Prajnaparamita Sutras);
  * Compassion through the transferral of merit;
  * Transcendental immanence, in that the immortal Buddha Principle (see, for example, Buddha-nature, Mahaparinirvana Sutra, Angulimaliya Sutra, Srimala Sutra, Tathagatagarbha Sutra) is present within all beings.

âPhilosophicalâ Mahayana tends to focus on the first three characteristics
(universalism, enlightened wisdom, compassion) and, in some schools, the
Buddha-nature, without showing much interest in supernatural constructions,
while âdevotionalâ Mahayana focuses mainly on salvation towards other-
worldly realms (see, for example, the Sukhavati sutras).

### [edit] Universalism

Mahayana traditions generally consider that attainment of the level of an
arhat is not final. This is based on a subtle doctrinal distinction between
the Mahayana and some of the early Buddhist schools concerning the issues of
nirvana-with-remainder and nirvana-without-remainder. The Mahayana position
here is similar to that of the early school of the Mahasanghika.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Buddha attaining Maha-Parinirvana - Depicted in cave 26 of Ajanta Caves, India

Some of the early schools considered that nirvana-without-remainder always
follows nirvana-with-remainder (buddhas first achieve enlightenment and then,
at 'death', mahaparinirvana) and that nirvana-without-remainder is final;
whereas the Mahayana traditions consider that nirvana-without-remainder is
always followed by nirvana-with-remainder â the state of attainment of the
Hinayana arhat is not final, and is eventually succeeded by the state of
buddhahood, or total Awakening.

This distinction is most evident regarding doctrinal concerns about the
capability of a Buddha after nirvana (which is identified by the early schools
as being nirvana-without-remainder). Most importantly, amongst the early
schools, a samyaksambuddha is not able to directly point the way to nirvana
after death. This is a major distinction between the early schools and some
schools of the Mahayana, who conversely state that once a samyaksambuddha
arises, he or she continues to directly and actively point the way to nirvana
until there are no beings left in samsara (à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¤¾à¤°). Because the views
of early schools and Mahayana differ in this respect, this is exactly why some
Mahayana schools do not talk about a bodhisattva postponing nirvana, and
exactly why the early schools do. However, some Mahayana schools do talk of a
bodhisattva deliberately refraining from Buddhahood.[58]

For example, the early schools held that Maitreya (à¤®à¥à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¯) will
not attain nirvana while Gautama Buddha's teachings still exist. In contrast,
some Mahayana schools hold that Maitreya will be the next buddha manifest in
this world and will introduce the dharma when it no longer exists; he is not
postponing his nirvana to do so, and when he dies (or enters mahaparinirvana),
he will likewise continue to teach the dharma for all time. Moreover, some
Mahayana schools argue that although it is true that for this world-system,
Maitreya will be the next buddha to manifest, there are an infinite number of
world-systems, many of which have currently active buddhas or buddhas-to-be
manifesting.

Because the Mahayana traditions assert that eventually everyone will achieve
samyaksam (buddhahood) or total enlightenment, the Mahayana is labeled
universalist, whereas the stance of the early scriptures is that attaining
nibbana depends on effort and is not pre-determined.[59]

### [edit] Bodhisattva

The later Mahayana school holds that pursuing only the release from suffering
and attainment of Nirvana (as held by Pre-sectarian Buddhism and the Early
Buddhist Schools) is too narrow an aspiration, because it lacks the motivation
of actively resolving to liberate all other beings from samsara, as well as
oneself.

The primary focus of some Mahayana schools is bodhicitta, the vow to strive
for buddhahood or awakened mind both for oneself and for the benefit of all
other sentient beings. As Ananda Coomaraswamy notes, "The most essential part
of the Mahanyana is its emphasis on the Bodhisattva ideal, which replaces the
Arhatta, or ranks before it."[60] According to Mahayana teachings, being a
high-level bodhisattva involves possessing a mind of great compassion
conjoined with insight into reality (prajna), realizing emptiness and/or the
buddhic essence of all things. Mahayana teaches that the practitioner will
realize the final goal of full Awakening (Buddhahood): an omniscient, blissful
mind completely free from suffering and its causes, that is able to work
tirelessly for the benefit of all living beings.

Six virtues or perfections (paramitas) are listed for the bodhisattva:
generosity, morality, patience, energy, meditation, and wisdom. Many
âphilosophicalâ schools and Mahayana Sutras have focused on the nature of
enlightenment and nirvana itself, from the Madhyamika and its rival Yogacara,
to the Tathagatagarbha teachings and Zen.

### [edit] Compassion

<IMG>

<IMG>

Avalokitesvara - the Boddhisattva of compassion - with 1,000 arms, part of the
Dazu Rock Carvings at Mount Baoding, Dazu County, Chongqing, China.

Compassion, or Karuna, is the other key concept of Mahayana, and is a
necessity to Bodhicitta. Compassion is important in all schools of Buddhism,
but is particularly emphasized in Mahayana. It is also linked to the idea that
acquired merit can be transmitted to others.[citation needed]

The bodhisattvas are the main actors of compassion, Avalokitesvara (known in
East Asia as Guan Yin) being foremost among them. Although having reached
enlightenment, bodhisattvas usually make a vow to postpone entering into
nirvana until all other beings have also been saved. They devote themselves to
helping others reach enlightenment. This teaching may be a "skillful means"
teaching; one strives to liberate all beings only as long as one is under the
delusion that there are any actual "beings" to save.[citation needed]

The Mahayana idea that liberation is universal (see below) also allows for one
to focus less on the release of personal suffering and more on humanity's
salvation, and is consequently described to be more universally compassionate
and caring for the welfare of others than other traditions of
Buddhism.[citation needed]

A comparison between the Hinayana and Mahayana Buddhist philosophy approaches,
made by the 10th century Tibetan author JÃ© Gampopa in The Jewel Ornament of
Liberation follows:

> âClinging to the well-being of mere peace' signifies the lower capacity
[Hinayana] attitude wherein the longing to transcend suffering is focused on
oneself alone. This precludes the cherishing of others and hence there is
little development of altruism. [...] When loving kindness and compassion
become part of one, there is so much care for other conscious beings that one
could not bear to liberate oneself alone. [...] Master Manjushriikiirti has
said: âA Mahayana follower should not be without loving kindness and
compassion for even a single moment', and âIt is not anger and hatred but
loving kindness and compassion that vouchsafe the welfare of others'.

### [edit] Skillful Means

Main article: upaya

The term Skillful Means (Sanskrit:upÄya) is used in the Lotus Sutra, the
earliest dated Mahayana Sutra, and is a concept accepted in all Mahayana
schools of thought. It refers to any effective method which aids the
attainment of Awakening. It does not necessarily mean that that particular
method is "untrue", but simply refers to any means or stratagem that is
conducive to spiritual growth and which leads the various types of beings to
Awakening and Nirvana. A skillful means could thus be certain motivational
words for a particular listener or even the noble Eightfold Path itself. Basic
Buddhism (what Mahayana would term sravaka-yana or pratyekabuddha-yana) is an
expedient method for getting people started on the noble Buddhic path and
allowing them to advance quite far. But the path is not wholly traversed
(according to some Mahayana schools) until the practitioner has striven for,
and attained, Buddhahood for the liberation from unhappiness of all other
sentient beings. In an ultimate sense, all of verbalised Dharma is a "skillful
means", since Dharma or Truth cannot really be expressed in words or concepts.
Anything that effectively points the way to liberation can be termed a
"skillful means" - an effective method for awakening beings from the sleep of
spiritual ignorance. Mahayana often adopts a pragmatic notion of truth:[61]
doctrines are "true" in the sense of being spiritually beneficial.

Some scholars have stated that the exercise of skill to which it refers, the
ability to adapt one's message to the audience, is of enormous importance in
the Pali Canon.[62] In fact the Pali term upÄya-kosalla does occur in the
Pali Canon, in the Sangiti Sutta of the Digha Nikaya.[63]

### [edit] Salvation

âDevotionalâ Mahayana developed a rich cosmography, with various
supernatural Buddhas and Bodhisattvas residing in paradisiacal realms. The
concept of trinity, or trikaya, supports these constructions, making the
Buddha himself into a transcendental god-like figure.

Under various conditions, these realms could be attained by devotees after
their death so that when reborn they could strive towards buddhahood in the
best possible conditions. Depending on the sect, this salvation to
âparadiseâ can be obtained by faith, imaging, or sometimes even by the
simple invocation of the Buddhaâs name. This approach to salvation is at the
origin of the mass appeal of devotional Buddhism, especially represented by
the Pure Land (æµåå®).

This rich cosmography also allowed Mahayana to be quite syncretic and
accommodating of other faiths or deities. Various origins have been suggested
to explain its emergence, such as âpopular Hindu devotional cults (bhakti),
and Persian and Greco-Roman theologies, which filtered into India from the
northwestâ (Tom Lowenstein, âThe vision of the Buddhaâ).

### [edit] Buddha-nature

The teaching of a "Buddha Principle" (Buddha-dhatu) or "Buddha Nature" innate
to and inseparable from all sentient beings is a doctrine which according to a
number of Mahayana sutras constitutes the "absolutely final culmination" of
the Buddha's Dharma (see Nirvana Sutra). It may be based on the "luminous
mind" concept found in the Agamas. The essential idea (articulated in the
Tathagatagarbha sutras, but not accepted by all Mahayana) is that no being is
without a concealed but indestructible interior link to Awakening (bodhi), and
that this link is an uncreated element [dhatu] or principle deep inside each
being which constitutes nothing less than the deathless, diamond-like "essence
of the Self" (Nirvana Sutra). The Mahaparinirvana Sutra states that: "The
essence of the Self (atman) is the subtle Tathagatagarbha ..." while the later
Lankavatara Sutra states that the tathagatagarbha might be taken to be atman,
but it is not. In the tathagatagarbha class of sutras, the word "atman" is
used in a way defined by and specific to these sutras, see Atman (Buddhism).

According to some scholars, the "tathagatagarbha"/Buddha nature discussed in
some Mahayana sutras does not represent a substantial self (atman); rather, it
is a positive language and expression of sunyata (emptiness) and represents
the potentiality to realize Buddhahood through Buddhist practices.[64] It is
the "true self" in representing the innate aspect of the individual which
makes actualizing the ultimate personality possible.

The actual "seeing and knowing" of this Buddha-dhatu (co-terminous with the
Dharmakaya or Self of Buddha) is said to usher in nirvanic Liberation. This
Buddha-dhatu or Tathagatagarbha is stated to be found in every single person,
ghost, god and creature, etc, and uncreated, deathless and ultimately beyond
rational grasping or conceptualisation. Yet it is this already real and
present, hidden internal element of bodhi (Awakeness) which, according to the
Tathagatagarbha sutras, prompts beings to seek after Liberation from worldly
suffering and enables them to attain the spotless bliss which lies at the
heart of their being. Once the veils of negative thoughts, feelings and
unwholesome behaviour (the kleshas) have been eliminated from the mind and
character, the indwelling Buddha-dhatu (Buddha Principle / "Buddha Nature") is
enabled to shine forth unimpededly and to transform the seer of it into a
Buddha.

Prior to the period of these sutras, Mahayana metaphysics had been dominated
by teachings on emptiness in the form of Madhyamaka philosophy. The language
used by this approach is primarily negative, and the Tathagatagarbha genre of
sutras can be seen as an attempt to state orthodox Buddhist teachings of
dependent origination and on the mysterious reality of nirvana using positive
language instead, to prevent people from being turned away from Buddhism by a
false impression of nihilism. In these sutras the perfection of the wisdom of
not-self is stated to be the true self; the ultimate goal of the path is then
characterized using a range of positive language that had been used in Indian
philosophy previously by essentialist philosophers, but which was now
transmuted into a new Buddhist vocabulary to describe a being who has
successfully completed the Buddhist path.[65]

## [edit] Mahayana Scriptures

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Dharma wheel, often used to represent the noble eightfold path

Main article: Mahayana Sutras

Like TheravÄda Buddhism, MahÄyÄna Buddhism takes the basic teachings of the
Buddha as recorded in early scriptures as the starting point of its teachings,
such as those concerning karma and rebirth, the Four Noble Truths, the Middle
Way and the Eightfold Path. Whereas these basic teachings are preserved in the
Pali Canon, transmitted by the TheravÄdin tradition, MahÄyÄna Buddhists use
different recensions of these discourses in compilations known as the Agamas,
which largely overlap with the Pali Canon in content. The surviving agamas in
Chinese translation belong to at least two schools, while most of the agamas
were never translated into Tibetan. In addition to accepting the scriptures of
the various early Buddhist schools as valid, MahÄyÄna Buddhism also
maintains large additional collections of sutras not found or recognized in
TheravÄda Buddhism. In Mahayana Buddhism, these Mahayana sutras have a
greater importance than the Agamas. Although these scriptures claim to be the
factual words of the Buddha, scholars believe that they were written by monks
who felt the need to restate and change the doctrines of Early Buddhism.[66]

The first of the Mahayana-specific writings were written probably around the
1st century BCE[67] or 1st century CE.[68] Some of the Mahayana Sutras, such
as certain parts of the Perfection of Wisdom sutras, are presented as actual
sermons of the Buddha that had been hidden. By some accounts, these sermons
were passed on by oral tradition, as with other sutras; other accounts state
that they were hidden and then revealed several centuries later by some
mythological route. In addition to sutras, some Mahayana texts are essentially
commentaries.

Among the earliest major Mahayana scriptures attested to historically are the
Perfection of Wisdom (Prajna-Paramita) sutras, the Avatamsaka Sutra, the Lotus
Sutra, the VimalakÄ«rti Sutra, and the Nirvana Sutra.

### [edit] Three Turnings

Dating back at least to the Samdhinirmochana Sutra is a classification of
exoteric corpus of Buddhism into three categories, based on types of
understanding the nature of reality, known as the "three turnings of the wheel
of dharma (truth)": those sutra discourses containing the basic doctrines
supposedly aimed at the initial disciples or ÅrÄvakas, the emptiness
teachings associated with Madhyamika and the Prajna Paramita sutras, and the
doctrines associated with YogÄcÄra which present the most accurate view of
reality according to this scheme as originally devised (it was originally a
YogÄcÄra schema). However, many Tibetan teachers, particularly the Gelugpa
school, regard the second turning as the highest teaching. The Tathagatagarbha
teachings are normally included in the third turning of the wheel if the need
arises to classify them. The Chinese tradition has a different scheme.

The Mahayana canon was further expanded somewhat after Buddhism was
transmitted to other countries such as China and Tibet, where the existing
texts were translated. New texts, such as the Platform Sutra and the Sutra of
Perfect Enlightenment (åè¦ºç¶) were explicitly not of Indian origin, but
were widely accepted as valid scriptures on their own merits. Other later
writings included the Linji Lu (è¨æ¸é), a commentary by ChÃ¡n (ç¦ªå®)
master Linji Yixuan (è¨æ¸ç¾©ç). In the course of the development of Korean
Buddhism and Japanese Buddhism, further important commentaries were composed.
These included, for example, in Korea, some of the writings of Jinul, and in
Japan, works such as DÅgen's ShÅbÅgenzÅ.

Some of the main Mahayana Sutras, codified in Sanskrit, have not survived over
time and have been lost.[69] Versions later translated into Tibetan language
and Chinese language have survived.[69]

## [edit] Mahayana and the Canon

Scholars have noted that many key Mahayana ideas are closely connected to the
earliest texts of Buddhism. The seminal work of Mahayana philosophy,
Nagarjuna's Mulamadhyamakakarika, mentions the Canon's "Katyaayana Sutra" by
name, and may be an extended commentary on that work (found in the
agamas).[70] Nagarjuna systematized the Madhyamaka school of Mahanaya
philosophy. Nagarjuna may have arrived at his positions from a desire to
achieve a consistent exegesis of the Buddha's doctrine as recorded in the
Canon. In the eyes of Nagarjuna the Buddha was not merely a forerunner, but
the very founder of the Madhyamaka system.[71] Nagarjuna also referred to a
passage in the canon regarding "nirvanic consciousness" in two different
works.[72]

Yogachara, the other prominent Mahayana school which exists in dialectic with
the Madhyamaka school, gave a special significance to the Canon's "Lesser
Discourse on Emptiness".[73] A passage there (which the discourse itself
emphasizes) is often quoted in later Yogachara texts as a true definition of
emptiness.[74]

Both the Madhyamakas and the Yogacarins saw themselves as preserving the
Buddhist Middle Way between the extremes of nihilism (everything is unreal)
and substantialism (substantial entities exist). The Yogacarins criticized the
Madhyamakas for tending towards nihilism, while the Madhyamakas criticized the
Yogacarins for tending towards substantialism.[75]

Key Mahayana texts introducing the concepts of "bodhicitta" and "buddha-
nature" use language parallel to passages in the Canon containing the Buddha's
description of "luminous mind" and may have been based on this idea.[76]

## [edit] Mahayana and Theravada

Although the Theravada school is usually described as belonging to
"Hinayana"[77][78][79][80][81], some authors have argued that it should not be
considered such from the Mahayana perspective. Their view is based on a
different understanding of the concept "Hinayana". Rather than regarding the
term as referring to any school of Buddhism that hasn't accepted the Mahayana
canon and doctrines (such as those pertaining to the role of the
Boddhisatva)[78][80], these authors argue that the classification of a school
as "Hinayana" should be crucially dependent on the adherence to a specific
phenomenological position. They point out that unlike the now-extinct
Sarvastivada school which was the primary object of Mahayana criticism, the
Theravada does not claim the existence of independent dharmas; in this it
maintains the attitude of early Buddhism.[82][83][84] On the contrary, some
contemporary Theravadin figures have indicated a sympathetic stance toward the
Mahayana philosophy found in the Heart Sutra and the Fundamental Stanzas on
the Middle Way.[85][86] The Mahayanists were bothered by the substantialist
thought of the Sarvastivadins and Sautrantikas, and in emphasizing the
doctrine of emptiness, Kalupahana holds that they endeavored to preserve the
early teaching.[87] The Theravadins too refuted the Sarvastivadins and
Sautrantikas (and other schools) on the grounds that their theories were in
conflict with the non-substantialism of the canon. The Theravada arguments are
preserved in the Kathavatthu.[88] Thus, according to this view, no form of
real "Hinayana" Buddhism survives today.

## [edit] See also

  * History of Buddhism
  * Mahayana sutras
  * Silk Road transmission of Buddhism
  * Early Buddhist Schools
  * Schools of Buddhism
  * Rebirth

  * Shunyata
  * Buddha nature
  * Tathagatagarbha
  * Nirvana Sutra
  * God in Buddhism
  * Faith in Buddhism

  * Lotus Sutra
  * Pure Land
  * Zen
  * Dzogchen
  * Tendai
  * Buddhist Ceremonies

  
## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Harvey, Introduction to Buddhism, Cambridge University Press, 1990, page 94
  2. ^ The Mahayana, 'Great Vehicle' or 'Great Carriage' (for carrying all beings to nirvana), is also, and perhaps more correctly and accurately, known as the Bodhisattvayana, the bodhisattva's vehicle. Indian Buddhism, A. K. Warder, 3rd edition, 1999, p.338
  3. ^ Peter Harvey, "An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics." Cambridge University Press, 2000, page 123.
  4. ^ The Mahayana movement claims to have been founded by the Buddha himself. Scholars however, think that it originated in South India in the 1st century CEâ â Indian Buddhism, AK Warder, 3rd edition, 1999, p. 335.
  5. ^ Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 293
  6. ^ Buddhist Saints in India, Reginald A. Ray, 1994, p.404
  7. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 252
  8. ^ Certainly, we have for this period an extensive body of inscriptions from virtually all parts of India. ... But nowhere in this extensive body of material is there any reference, prior to the fifth century, to a named Mahayana. There are, on the other hand, scores of references to what used to be called Hinayana groups â the Sarvastivadins, Mahasamghikas, and so on. From this point of view, at least, this was not âthe period of the Mahayana,â but âthe period of the Hinayana.â, Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 493
  9. ^ âThe later school which arrogated to itself the title Mahayanaâ. Indian Buddhism, AK Warder, 3rd edition 1999, p.4
  10. ^ 'It is certain that the term Mahayana (which means âgreat or large vehicleâ) was in origin a polemical label used by only one side' MacMillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, p. 492
  11. ^ It is certain that the term Mahayana (which means âgreat or large vehicleâ) was in origin a polemical label used by only one side â and perhaps the least significant side â of a protracted, if uneven, Indian debate about what the real teachings of the Buddha are, Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 492
  12. ^ Theravada - Mahayana Buddhism Ven. Dr. W. Rahula Theravada - Mahayana Buddhism
  13. ^ I have assumed that, in the earliest stage of the transmission of the Lotus Sutra, the Middle Indic forn jÄá¹a or *jÄna (= Pkt < Skt jÃ±Äna, yÄna) had stood in these places ... I have assumed, further, that the MahÄyÄnist terms buddha-yÄnÄ ("the Buddha-vehicle"), mahÄyÄna ("the great vehicle"), hÄ«nayÄna ("the inferior vehicle") meant originally buddha-jÃ±Äna ("buddha-knowledge"), mahÄjÃ±Äna ("great knowledge") and hÄ«najÃ±Äna ("inferior knowledge"). Seishi Karashima, Some Features of the Language of the Saddharma-puá¹á¸arÄ«ka-sÅ«tra, Indo-Iranian Journal 44: 207-230, 2001.
  14. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 7
  15. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 8
  16. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 260
  17. ^ The Mahayana movement claims to have been founded by the Buddha himself. Scholars however, think that it originated in South India in the 1st century CEâ â Indian Buddhism, AK Warder, 3rd edition, 1999, p. 335.
  18. ^ Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 293
  19. ^ Buddhist Saints in India, Reginald A. Ray, 1994, p.404
  20. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 252
  21. ^ Buddhist Saints in India, Reginald A. Ray, 1994, p.404, 405
  22. ^ Buddhist Saints in India, Reginald A. Ray, 1994, p.407
  23. ^ The most important evidence â in fact the only evidence â for situating the emergence of the Mahayana around the beginning of the common era was not Indian evidence at all, but came from China. Already by the last quarter of the second century C.E. there was a small, seemingly idiosyncratic collection of substantial Mahayana sutras translated into what Erik ZÃ¼rcher calls âbroken Chineseâ by an Indoscythian, whose Indian name has been reconstructed as Lokaksema., Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 492
  24. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 260
  25. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 261, 262
  26. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 261, 262
  27. ^ Buddhist Saints in India, Reginald A. Ray, 1994, p.405
  28. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 263, 268
  29. ^ Akira Hirakawa, A History of Indian Buddhism: From Sakyamuni to Early Mahayana, 1993, p. 271
  30. ^ e.g. Williams, Mahayana Buddhism
  31. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 246
  32. ^ One of the most frequent assertions about the Mahayana ... is that it was a lay-influenced, or even lay-inspired and dominated, movement that arose in response to the increasingly closed, cold, and scholastic character of monastic Buddhism. This, however, now appears to be wrong on all counts. MacMillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 494
  33. ^ MacMillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 494
  34. ^ As scholars have moved away from this limited corpus, and have begun to explore a wider range of Mahayana Sutras, they have stumbled on, and have started to open up, a literature that is often stridently ascetic and heavily engaged in reinventing the forest ideal, an individualistic, antisocial, ascetic ideal that is encapsulated in the apparently resurrected image of âwandering alone like a rhinoceros.â MacMillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 494
  35. ^ At this point we can only postulate that the Mahaï¿½yaï¿½na may have had a visible impact in India only when, in the fifth century, it had become what it had originally most strongly objected to: a fully landed, sedentary, lay-oriented monastic institution
  36. ^ either a collection of marginalized ascetic groups living in the forest, or groups of cantankerous and malcontent conservatives embedded in mainstream, socially engaged monasteries, all of whom continued pouring out pamphlets espousing their views and values, pamphlets that we now know as Mahayana Sutras. We simply do not know. MacMillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 494 and 495
  37. ^ ...From this point of view, at least, this was not âthe period of the Mahayana,â but âthe period of the Hinayana.â, Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 493
  38. ^ At this point we can only postulate that the Mahaï¿½yaï¿½na may have had a visible impact in India only when, in the fifth century, it had become what it had originally most strongly objected to: a fully landed, sedentary, lay-oriented monastic institution, MacMillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 494
  39. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 263, 268
  40. ^ âThe south (of India) was then vigorously creative in producing Mahayana Sutrasâ â AK Warder, Indian Buddhism, 3rd edition, 1999, p. 335.
  41. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 253
  42. ^ The most important evidence â in fact the only evidence â for situating the emergence of the Mahayana around the beginning of the common era was not Indian evidence at all, but came from China. Already by the last quarter of the second century C.E. there was a small, seemingly idiosyncratic collection of substantial Mahayana sutras translated into what Erik ZÃ¼rcher calls âbroken Chineseâ by an Indoscythian, whose Indian name has been reconstructed as Lokaksema., Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 492
  43. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 248-251
  44. ^ âThe sudden appearance of large numbers of (Mahayana) teachers and texts (in North India in the second century AD) would seem to require some previous preparation and development, and this we can look for in the South.â AK Warder, Indian Buddhism, 3rd edition, 1999 p. 335.
  45. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 252, 253
  46. ^ But even apart from the obvious weaknesses inherent in arguments of this kind there is here the tacit equation of a body of literature with a religious movement, an assumption that evidence for the presence of one proves the existence of the other, and this may be a serious misstep., Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 493
  47. ^ In other words, once nontextual evidence is taken into account the picture changes dramatically. Rather than being datable to the beginning of the common era, this strand of Mahayana Buddhism, at least, appeared to have no visible impact on Indian Buddhist cult practice until the second century, and even then what impact it had was extremely isolated and marginal, and had no lasting or long-term consequences â there were no further references to Amitabha in Indian image inscriptions. Almost exactly the same pattern occurs (concerning Mahayana) on an even broader scale when nontextual evidence is considered., Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 493
  48. ^ Certainly, we have for this period an extensive body of inscriptions from virtually all parts of India. ... But nowhere in this extensive body of material is there any reference, prior to the fifth century, to a named Mahayana., Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 493
  49. ^ What is particularly disconcerting here is the disconnect between expectation and reality: We know from Chinese translations that large numbers of Mahayana sutras were being composed in the period between the beginning of the common era and the fifth century. But outside of texts, at least in India, at exactly the same period, very different â in fact seemingly older â ideas and aspirations appear to be motivating actual behavior, and old and established Hinayana groups appear to be the only ones that are patronized and supported., Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 494
  50. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 8,9
  51. ^ Peter Harvey, "An Introduction to Buddhism." Cambridge University Press, 1993, page 95.
  52. ^ Peter Harvey, "An Introduction to Buddhism." Cambridge University Press, 1993, page 113.
  53. ^ There are, it seems, very few things that can be said with certainty about Mahayana Buddhism, Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 492
  54. ^ But apart from the fact that it can be said with some certainty that the Buddhism embedded in China, Korea, Tibet, and Japan is Mahayana Buddhism, it is no longer clear what else can be said with certainty about Mahayana Buddhism itself, and especially about its earlier, and presumably formative, period in India., Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 492
  55. ^ It has become increasingly clear that Mahayana Buddhism was never one thing, but rather, it seems, a loosely bound bundle of many, and â like Walt Whitman â was large and could contain, in both senses of the term, contradictions, or at least antipodal elements., Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 492
  56. ^ The Shrimaladevi Sutra, tr. by Dr. Shenpen Hookham, Longchen Foundation, Oxford 1998, p.27
  57. ^ Welch, Practice of Chinese Buddhism, Harvard, 1967, page 396
  58. ^ Cook, Hua-Yen Buddhism, Pennsylvania State University Press, 1977
  59. ^ Peter Harvey, "The Selfless Mind." Curzon Press 1995, page 87.
  60. ^ Coomaraswamy, Ananda (1975). Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism. Boston: University Books, Inc.. pp. 229.
  61. ^ Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, Routledge, 1990, page 2
  62. ^ ââIt is true that the term translated 'skill in means', upaya-kausalya, is post-canonical, but the exercise of skill to which it refers, the ability to adapt one's message to the audience, is of enormous importance in the Pali Canon.ââ How Buddhism Began, Richard F. Gombrich, Munshiram Manoharlal, 1997, p. 17
  63. ^ Thus Have I Heard: the Long Discourses of the Buddha, tr M. Walshe, Wisdom Pubns, 1987, page 486
  64. ^ Heng-Ching Shih, "The Significance Of 'Tathagatagarbha' â A Positive Expression Of 'Sunyata.'" http://zencomp.com/greatwisdom/ebud/ebdha191.htm.
  65. ^ Sallie B. King, The Doctrine of Buddha-Nature is impeccably Buddhist. [1], pages 1-6.
  66. ^ âSometime after the founding of the Purva Saila school in the 1st century B.C. certain monks felt the need not simply for new interpretations of the original sutras (such as, for example, the new Abhidharma texts of the schools ...), but for wholesale restatements of the doctrine. For this purpose they rewrote the sutras, or wrote new sutras.â AK Warder, Indian Buddhism, 3rd edition, p. 335.
  67. ^ A History of Indian Buddhism - Hirakawa Akira (translated and edited by Paul Groner) - Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1993, p. 252
  68. ^ Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2004, page 293
  69. ^ a b Mahayana (Encyclopedia Britannica 2002)
  70. ^ David Kalupahana, Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna. Motilal Banarsidass, 2006, page 5.
  71. ^ Christian Lindtner, Master of Wisdom. Dharma Publishing 1997, page 324.
  72. ^ Christian Lindtner, Master of Wisdom. Dharma Publishing, 1997, page 322. Lindtner says that Nagarjuna is referencing the DN.
  73. ^ Gadjin M. Nagao, Madhyamika and Yogachara. Leslie S. Kawamura, translator, SUNY Press, Albany 1991, page 53.
  74. ^ Gadjin M. Nagao, Madhyamika and Yogachara. Leslie S. Kawamura, translator, SUNY Press, Albany 1991, page 200.
  75. ^ Peter Harvey, "An Introduction to Buddhism." Cambridge University Press, 1993, page 106.
  76. ^ Peter Harvey, Consciousness Mysticism in the Discourses of the Buddha. In Karel Werner, ed., The Yogi and the Mystic. Curzon Press 1989, page 97.
  77. ^ [2]
  78. ^ a b Gombrich, Richard Francis. 1988. TheravÄda Buddhism. P.83
  79. ^ Collins, Steven. 1990. Selfless Persons: Imagery and Thought in TheravÄda Buddhism. P.21
  80. ^ a b Gellner, David N. 2005. Rebuilding Buddhism. P.14
  81. ^ Swearer, Donald. 2006. Theravada Buddhist Societies. In: Mark Juergensmeyer (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Global Religions. P.83
  82. ^ Frank J. Hoffman and Deegalle Mahinda, PÄli Buddhism. Routledge Press 1996, page 192.
  83. ^ Richard King, Indian Philosophy: An Introduction to Hindu and Buddhist Thought. Edinburgh University Press, 1999, page 86.
  84. ^ Nyanaponika, Nyaponika Thera, Nyanaponika, Bhikkhu Bodhi, Abhidhamma Studies: Buddhist Explorations of Consciousness and Time. Wisdom Publications, 1998, page 42.
  85. ^ Donald S. Lopez and Dge-Ê¼dun-chos-Ê¼phel, The Madman's Middle Way: Reflections on Reality of the Tibetan Monk Gendun Chopel. University of Chicago Press 2006, page 24.
  86. ^ Gil Fronsdal, in Tricycle, posted online on November 8, 2007. [3]
  87. ^ David Kalupahana, Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna. Motilal Banarsidass, 2006, page 6.
  88. ^ David Kalupahana, Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna. Motilal Banarsidass, 2006, page 24.

## [edit] References

  * "Mahayana". Encyclopedia Britannica. EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica. 2002.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Paul Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, Routledge, 1989
  * Schopen, G. "The inscription on the Kusan image of Amitabha and the character of the early Mahayana in India", Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 10, 1990
  * âThe Vision of the Buddhaâ, Tom Lowenstein, ISBN 1-903296-91-9
  * Kevin Lynch, The Way Of The Tiger: A Buddhist's Guide To Achieving Nirvana, Yojimbo Temple, 2005
  * Beal, Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese, (London, 1871)
  * S. Kuroda, Outline of Mahayana, (Tokyo, 1893)
  * D. T. Suzuki, Outline of Mahayana Buddhism, (London, 1907)
  * Murdoch, History of Japan, volume i., (Yokohama, 1910)
  * D. T. Suzuki, in The Monist, volume xxiv, (Chicago, 1914). The Monist was edited by Paul Carus.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Mahayana  
  * Digital Dictionary of Buddhism
  * Sacred Library Contains many Mahayana Sutras
  * Comparison of Buddhist Traditions (Mahayana - Therevada - Tibetan)
  * Mahayana Buddhist Sutras in English
  * The Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra: complete text and analysis.
  * Major Mahayana Tathagatagarbha sutras in English translation
  * Buddhas and Bodhisattvas in Mahayana Buddhism

v â¢ d â¢ e

Buddhism â¢ Portal  
Articles: Concepts â¢ History â Timeline â¢ Schools â¢ Texts â¢
Countries â Regions â¢ Culture â¢ Lists: Temples â People â Topics  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Buddhism topics  
History

Timeline Â· Gautama Buddha Â· Buddhist councils Â· History of Buddhism in
India Â· Decline of Buddhism in India Â· Ashoka the Great Â· Greco-Buddhism Â·
Silk Road transmission of Buddhism

<IMG>  
Foundations

Three Jewels (Buddha Â· Dharma Â· Sangha) Â· Four Noble Truths Â· Noble
Eightfold Path Â· Nirvana Â· Middle Way  
Key Concepts

Three Marks of Existence: (Impermanence Â· Suffering Â· Not-self) Â· Dependent
Origination Â· Five Aggregates Â· Karma Â· VipÄka Â· Rebirth Â· Samsara Â·
Defilements Â· Five Hindrances Â· Ten Fetters Â· Sense Bases Â· Four Great
Elements Â· Renunciation Â· Bodhi Â· Parinirvana Â· Two truths doctrine Â·
Emptiness Â· Bodhicitta Â· Bodhisattva Â· Buddha-nature Â· Bhumi Â· Trikaya Â·
Mindstream  
Cosmology

Ten spiritual realms Â· Six Realms (Hell Â· Animal realm Â· Hungry Ghost realm
Â· Asura realm Â· Human realm Â· Heaven) Â· Three Spheres  
Practices

Threefold Training: (Morality Â· Concentration Â· Wisdom) Â· Faith Â· Buddhist
devotion Â· Puja: (Offerings Â· Prostration Â· Chanting) Â· Smaran Â·
Enlightenment Qualities Â· Seven Factors of Enlightenment Â· Perfections Â·
Taking refuge Â· Four Divine Abidings: (Loving-kindness Â· Compassion Â·
Sympathetic joy Â· Equanimity) Â· Effort Â· Mindfulness Â· JhÄna Â· Merit Â·
Paritta Â· Generosity Â· Morality: (Five Precepts Â· Eight Precepts Â· Ten
Precepts Â· Bodhisattva vows Â· Patimokkha) Â· Bhavana Â· Meditation:
(Kammaá¹­á¹­hÄna Â· Recollection Â· Mindfulness of Breathing Â· Serenity
meditation Â· Insight meditation Â· Shikantaza Â· Zazen Â· KÅan Â· Mandala Â·
Tonglen Â· Tantra)  
Attainment

Types of Buddha Â· Bodhisattva Â· Four stages of enlightenment: (Stream-
enterer Â· Once-returner Â· Non-returner Â· Arahant)  
Monasticism

Monk Â· Nun Â· Novice monk Â· Novice nun Â· Anagarika Â· Ajahn Â· Sayadaw Â·
Zen master Â· Roshi Â· Lama Â· Rinpoche Â· Geshe Â· Tulku Â· Householder Â·
Lay follower Â· Disciple Â· Ngagpa  
Major Figures

Gautama Buddha Â· SÄriputta Â· MahamoggallÄna Â· Ananda Â· Maha Kassapa Â·
Buddhaghosa Â· Nagasena Â· Bodhidharma Â· Nagarjuna Â· Asanga Â· Padmasambhava
Â· Dalai Lama  
Texts

Tipitaka: (Vinaya Pitaka Â· Sutta Pitaka Â· Abhidhamma Pitaka) Â· Commentaries
Â· Mahayana sutras Â· Chinese Buddhist canon (Tripitaka Koreana) Â· Tibetan
Buddhist canon  
Branches

Theravada Â· Mahayana: (Chan/Zen Â· Pure Land Â· Tendai Â· Nichiren Â·
Madhyamaka Â· Yogacara) Â· Vajrayana: (Tibetan Buddhism Â· Shingon) Â· Early
Buddhist schools Â· Pre-sectarian Buddhism Â· Basic points unifying Theravada
and Mahayana  
Countries

Bhutan Â· Burma Â· Cambodia Â· China Â· India Â· Indonesia Â· Japan Â· Korea
Â· Laos Â· Malaysia Â· Mongolia Â· Nepal Â· Russia Â· Singapore Â· Sri Lanka
Â· Thailand Â· Tibet Â· Vietnam Â· Western countries  
Comparative  
Buddhism

Science Â· Psychology Â· Hinduism Â· Jainism Â· East Asian religions Â·
Christianity Â· Theosophy Â· Gnosticism  
Lists

Buddhists Â· Buddhas Â· Twenty-eight Buddhas Â· Bodhisattvas Â· Temples Â·
Books Â· Buddhism-related topics Â· Terms and concepts  
Miscellaneous  
topics

TathÄgata Â· Maitreya Â· AvalokiteÅvara (Guan Yin) Â· AmitÄbha Â· BrahmÄ
Â· MÄra Â· Dhammapada Â· Visuddhimagga Â· Vinaya Â· Sutra Â· Abhidharma Â·
Buddhist philosophy Â· Buddhology Â· Eschatology Â· Reality in Buddhism Â· God
in Buddhism Â· Liturgical languages: (Pali Â· Sanskrit) Â· Dharma talk Â·
Buddhist calendar Â· Kalpa Â· Buddhism and evolution Â· Buddhism and
homosexuality Â· Fourteen unanswerable questions Â· Ethics Â· Culture Â·
Monastic robe Â· Cuisine Â· Vegetarianism Â· Art Â· Greco-Buddhist art Â·
Buddha statue Â· Budai Â· Symbolism (Dharmacakra Â· Flag Â· Bhavacakra Â·
Thangka) Â· Mantra (Om mani padme hum) Â· Prayer wheel Â· Mala Â· Mudra Â·
Holidays Â· Vesak Â· Uposatha Â· Vassa Â· Architecture: (Vihara Â· Wat Â·
Stupa Â· Pagoda) Â· Pilgrimage: (Lumbini Â· Bodh Gaya Â· Sarnath Â·
Kushinagar) Â· Bodhi tree Â· Mahabodhi Temple Â· Higher Knowledge Â·
Supernormal Powers Â· Miracles of the Buddha Â· Physical characteristics of
the Buddha Â· Family of the Buddha Â· Places where Gautama Buddha stayed  
Category Â· Portal  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahayana"

Categories: Mahayana Buddhism | Buddhist philosophical concepts | Buddhist
terms | Sanskrit words and phrases | Buddhist practices

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Articles with disputed
statements from November 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since August 2008 | Articles with unsourced
statements since March 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since
February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 20:05.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



