
# History of Africa

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (March 2009)  
The history of Africa begins with the first emergence of Homo sapiens in East
Africa, continuing into its modern present as a patchwork of diverse and
politically developing nation states

<IMG>

<IMG>

Obelisk at temple of Luxor, Egypt. c. 1200 BC

Africa's written history starts with the rise of Egyptian civilization in the
4th millennium BC, and in succeeding centuries follows the development of the
many diverse societies beyond the Nile Valley. From an early date this has
involved critical interactions with non-African civilizations. These ranged
from the Phoenicians, who established the merchant empire of Carthage, to the
Romans, who colonised all of North Africa in the first century BC.
Christianity began its spread through large areas of northern Africa at this
time, reaching as far south as Kush and Ethiopia. In the late 7th century,
North and East Africa were heavily influenced by the spread of Islam, which
eventually led to the appearance of new cultures such as those of the Swahili
people in East Africa, and powerful kingdoms including the Songhai Empire in
the sub-saharan west. Farther south, Ghana, Oyo, and the Benin Empire
developed with little influence from either Islam or Christianity. The rise of
Islam led to an increase in the Arab slave trade that would culminate in the
19th century. This presaged the forced transport of African people and
cultures to the New World in the Atlantic slave trade, and the beginning of
the European scramble for Africa. Africa's colonial period lasted from the
late 1800s until the advent of African independence movements in 1951, when
Libya became the first former colony to become independent. Modern African
history has been rife with revolutions and wars as well as the growth of
modern African economies and democratization across the continent.

African history has been a challenge for researchers in the field of African
studies due to the scarcity of written sources in large parts of Sub-Saharan
Africa. Scholarly techniques such as the recording of oral history, historical
linguistics, archeology and genetics have been crucial.

## Contents

  * 1 Prehistory
    * 1.1 Evolution and spread of humans
    * 1.2 Emergence of agriculture
    * 1.3 Metallurgy
    * 1.4 Bantu expansion
      * 1.4.1 Central Africa
      * 1.4.2 Southern Africa
  * 2 Antiquity
    * 2.1 North Africa
    * 2.2 Horn of Africa
    * 2.3 East Africa
  * 3 7th to 16th century
    * 3.1 North and east Africa
    * 3.2 West Africa
  * 4 European exploration
    * 4.1 The slave trade
  * 5 European conquest
    * 5.1 19th-century European explorers
    * 5.2 Partition among European powers
    * 5.3 Berlin Conference
  * 6 20th century: 1900-1945
    * 6.1 The early 20th century
    * 6.2 Interbellum
  * 7 The postcolonial era: 1945 to 1993
    * 7.1 Decolonization
    * 7.2 East Africa
    * 7.3 North Africa
    * 7.4 Southern Africa
    * 7.5 West Africa
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
    * 9.1 Notes
    * 9.2 Literature
  * 10 Further reading

  
## [edit] Prehistory

Further information: Prehistoric Central North Africa and African archaeology

<IMG>

It has been suggested that this section be split into a new article entitled
Prehistoric Africa. (Discuss)  
<IMG>

It has been suggested that Ancient African history be merged into this article
or section. (Discuss)  
### [edit] Evolution and spread of humans

According to paleontological, early hominid skull anatomy was similar to their
close cousins, the great African apes, but they had adopted a bipedal form of
locomotion, giving them a crucial advantage, as this enabled them to live in
both forested areas and on the open savanna at a time when Africa was drying
up, with savanna encroaching on forested areas.

By 3 million years ago several australopithecine hominid species had developed
throughout southern, eastern and central Africa.

The next major evolutionary step occurred approximately 2 million years ago,
when primitive stone tools were first used to scavenge kills made by other
predators, and harvest carrion for their bones and marrow. In hunting, H.
habilis was probably not capable of competing with large predators, and was
still more prey than hunter, although s/he probably did steal eggs from nests,
and may have been able to catch small game, and weakened larger prey (cubs and
older animals).

Around 1.8 million years ago Homo erectus first appeared in the fossil record
in Africa, but nearly simultaneously in the fossil record of the Caucasus
region. Some of the earlier representatives of this species were still fairly
small brained and used primitive stone tools, much like H. habilis. The brain
later grew in size and H. erectus eventually developed a more complex stone
tool technology called the Acheulean. Possibly the first hunters, H. erectus
mastered the art of making fire, and were the first hominids to leave Africa,
colonizing the entire Old World, and perhaps later giving rise to Homo
floresiensis. Although some recent writers suggest that H. georgicus, a H.
habilis descendant, was the first and most primitive hominid to ever live
outside Africa, many scientists consider H. georgicus to be an early and
primitive member of the H. erectus species.

The fossil record shows Homo sapiens living in southern and eastern Africa at
least 100,000 and possibly 150,000 years ago. Around 40,000 years ago, their
expansion out of Africa launched the colonization of our planet by modern
human-beings. Their migration is indicated by linguistic, cultural and
(increasingly) computer-analyzed genetic evidence.[1]

### [edit] Emergence of agriculture

See also: History of West Africa

Neolithic rock engravings, or 'petroglyphs' and the megaliths in the Sahara
desert of Libya attest to early hunter-gatherer culture in the dry grasslands
of North Africa during the glacial age. At the end of the Ice Age (perhaps
around 10,500 BC), the Sahara had become a green fertile valley again, and its
African populations returned from the interior and coastal highlands south of
the Sahara. In sub-Saharan Africa agriculture arose possibly as early as the
15th millennium BC.[2]

The region of the present Sahara was an early site for the practice of
agriculture (in the second stage of the culture characterized by the so-called
"wavy-line ceramics" ca. 4000 BCE.).

From this time the climate of the Sahara region gradually became drier. The
population trekked out of the Sahara region towards the Nile Valley below the
Second Cataract where they made permanent or semi-permanent settlements. A
major climatic recession occurred, lessening the heavy and persistent rains in
Central and Eastern Africa. Since then dry conditions have prevailed in
Eastern Africa.

After the desertification of the Sahara, settlement in North Africa became
concentrated in the valley of the Nile, where the pre-literate Nomes of Egypt
laid a base for the culture of ancient Egypt. Archeological findings show that
primitive tribes lived along the Nile long before the dynastic history of the
pharaohs began. By 6000 B.C., organized agriculture had appeared.

People from the Great Lakes Region settled along the eastern shore of the
Mediterranean Sea to become the proto-Canaanites who dominated the lowlands
between the Jordan River, the Mediterranean and the Sinai Desert.

By 3000 BC agriculture arose independently in Ethiopia, where coffee, teff,
finger millet, sorghum, barley, and enset. Donkeys were also independently
domesticated somewhere in the region of Ethiopia and Somalia, but most
domesticated animals spread there from the Sahel and Nile regions.[3]
Agricultural crops were also adopted from other regions around this time as
pearl millet, cowpea, groundnut, cotton, watermelon and bottle gourds began to
be grown agriculturally in both West Africa and the Sahel Region while finger
millet, peas, lentil and flax took hold in Ethiopia.[4]

Ethiopia had a distinct, ancient culture with an intermittent history of
contact with Eurasia after the diaspora of hominids out of Africa. It
preserved a unique language, culture and crop system. The crop system is
adapted to the northern highlands and does not partake of any other area's
crops. The most famous member of this crop system is coffee, but one of the
more useful plants is sorghum, a dry-land grain; teff is also endemic to the
region.

Also by 3000 BC agriculture arose independently in both the tropical portions
of West Africa, where African yams and oil palms were domesticated. No animals
were independently domesticated in these regions, although domestication did
spread there from the Sahel and Nile regions.[3] Agricultural crops were also
adopted from other regions around this time as pearl millet, cowpea,
groundnut, cotton, watermelon and bottle gourds began to be grown
agriculturally in both West Africa and the Sahel Region while finger millet,
peas, lentil and flax took hold in Ethiopia.[4]

### [edit] Metallurgy

The first metal to be smelted in Africa was probably lead, with the oldest
artifacts dating from Egypt of the fourth millenium BCE.[5] Copper was already
being used in Egypt during the predynastic period, and bronze (an alloy of
copper and tin) came into use not long after 3000 BCE at the latest[6] and in
Nubia around 1750 BCE. The use of gold and silver in Egypt also dates back to
the predynastic period[7] By the 1st millennium BCE, iron-working had been
introduced in Northern Africa and quickly began spreading across the Sahara
into regions further south.[8] By 500 BCE, metalworking began to become
commonplace in West Africa, possibly after being introduced by the
Carthaginians. Iron-working was fully established by roughly 500 BCE in areas
of East and West Africa, though other regions did not begin iron-working until
the early centuries CE. Some copper objects from Egypt, North Africa, Nubia
and Ethiopia have been excavated in West Africa dating from around 500 BCE
time period, suggesting that trade networks had been established by this
time.[9]

### [edit] Bantu expansion

Main article: Bantu expansion

#### [edit] Central Africa

Further information: Early Congolese history, Congo Free State, and History of
the Republic of the Congo

Around 1000 BC, Bantu migrants had reached the Great Lakes of East Africa.
Halfway through that millennium, the Bantu had also settled as far south as
the countries of what are now Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
One of the major events that occurred in Central Africa during this period was
the establishment of the Kanem Empire in what is now Chad. The Kanem Empire
would flourish in the coming centuries setting the stage for future great
states in the Sahel region of Africa.

#### [edit] Southern Africa

Further information: Ancient History of South Africa, History of South Africa,
History of Namibia, and History of Botswana

Settlements of Bantu-speaking peoples, who were iron-using agriculturists and
herdsmen, were already present south of the Limpopo River by the 4th or 5th
century (see Bantu expansion) displacing and absorbing the original Khoi-San
speakers. They slowly moved south and the earliest ironworks in modern-day
KwaZulu-Natal Province are believed to date from around 1050. The southernmost
group was the Xhosa people, whose language incorporates certain linguistic
traits from the earlier Khoi-San people, reaching the Fish River, in today's
Eastern Cape Province.

## [edit] Antiquity

### [edit] North Africa

Main article: History of North Africa

Further information: Nome (Egypt), Ancient Egypt, Kush, Kerma, Meroe, Nubia,
Carthage, Ancient Libya, and Alexandria

Africa's earliest evidence of written history was in Ancient Egypt, and the
Egyptian calendar is still used as the standard for dating Bronze Age and Iron
Age cultures throughout the region.

In about 3100 B.C. Egypt was united under the first known Narmer, who
inaugurated the first of the 30 dynasties into which Egypt's ancient history
is divided: the Old, Middle Kingdoms and the New Kingdom. The pyramids at Giza
(near Cairo), which were built in the Fourth dynasty, testify to the power of
the pharaonic religion and state. The Great Pyramid, the tomb of Pharaoh Khufu
(also known as Cheops), is the only surviving monument of the Seven Wonders of
the Ancient World. Ancient Egypt reached the peak of its power, wealth, and
territorial extent in the period called the New Empire (1567â1085 B.C.).

The importance of Ancient Egypt to the development of the rest of Africa has
been debated. The earlier generation of Western academia generally saw Egypt
as a Mediterranean civilization with little impact on the rest of Africa.
Recent scholarship however, has begun to discredit this notion. Some have
argued that various early Egyptians like the Badarians probably migrated
northward from Nubia, while others see a wide-ranging movement of peoples
across the breadth of the Sahara before the onset of desiccation. Whatever may
be the origins of any particular people or civilization, however, it seems
reasonably certain that the Predynastic communities of the Nile valley were
essentially indigenous in culture, drawing little inspiration from sources
outside the continent during the several centuries directly preceding the
onset of historical times... (Robert July, Pre-Colonial Africa, 1975, p.
60-61)[10]

Just prior to Saharan desertification, the communities that developed south of
Egypt, in what is now modern day Sudan, were full participants in the
Neolithic revolution and lived a settled to semi-nomadic lifestyle with
domesticated plants and animals.[11] Megaliths found at Nabta Playa are
examples of probably the world's first known archaeoastronomy devices, out
dating Stonehenge by some 1000 years.[1] This complexity, as observed at Nabta
Playa, and expressed by different levels of authority within the society
there, likely formed the basis for the structure of both the Neolithic society
at Nabta and the Old Kingdom of Egypt.[12] The early A-group peoples, whom
inhabited today's northern Sudan and were contemporary with pre-dynastic
Naquadan Upper Egypt, were responsible for what may have been one of the
oldest known kingdoms in the Nile valley, which the Egyptians called "Ta-seti"
(Land of the Bow). Their demise with the onset of Dynastic Egypt, later gave
rise to such Kingdoms as Kush, Kerma and Meroe whom collectively comprised
what is sometimes referred to as Nubia. The last of the kingdoms would see
their final devastating blow by a leader of a rising Kingdom in Ethiopia,
Ezana of Axum, effectively bringing to an end the classical Nubian
civilizations.

Separated by the 'sea of sand', the Sahara, North Africa and Sub-Saharan
Africa have been linked by fluctuating trans-Saharan trade routes largely
between northwest and northeastern Africans and the Berber peoples, Bedouins
and Arabs. Phoenician, Greek and Roman history of North Africa can be followed
in entries for the Roman Empire and for its individual provinces in the
Maghreb, such as Mauretania, Africa, Tripolitania, Cyrenaica, Aegyptus etc.

Countries bordering the Mediterranean were colonised and settled by the
Phoenicians before 1000 BC. Carthage, founded about 814 BC, speedily grew into
a city without rival in the Mediterranean. The Phoenicians subdued the Berber
tribes who, then as now, formed the bulk of the population, and became masters
of all the habitable region of North Africa west of the Great Syrtis, and
found in commerce a source of immense prosperity.

Greeks founded the city of Cyrene in Ancient Libya around 631 BC. Cyrenaica
became a flourishing colony, though being hemmed in on all sides by absolute
desert it had little or no influence on inner Africa. The Greeks, however,
exerted a powerful influence in Egypt. To Alexander the Great the city of
Alexandria owes its foundation (332 BC), and under the Hellenistic dynasty of
the Ptolemies attempts were made to penetrate southward, and in this way was
obtained some knowledge of Ethiopia.

From around 500 B.C. to around 500 A.D., the civilization of the Garamantes
(probably the ancestors of the Tuareg) existed in what is now the Libyan
desert.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Pyramids at Meroe, Nubia. c. 500 BC

The three powers of Cyrenaica, Egypt and Carthage were eventually supplanted
by the Romans. After centuries of rivalry with Rome, Carthage finally fell in
146 BC. Within little more than a century Egypt and Cyrene had become
incorporated in the Roman empire. Under Rome the settled portions of the
country were very prosperous, and a Latin strain was introduced into the land.
Though Fezzan was occupied by them, the Romans elsewhere found the Sahara an
impassable barrier. Nubia and Ethiopia were reached, but an expedition sent by
the emperor Nero to discover the source of the Nile ended in failure. The
utmost extent of Mediterranean geographical knowledge of the continent is
shown in the writings of Ptolemy (2nd century), who knew of or guessed the
existence of the great lake reservoirs of the Nile, of trading posts along the
shores of the Indian Ocean as far south as Rhapta in modern Tanzania, and had
heard of the river Niger.

Interaction between Asia, Europe and North Africa during this period was
significant, major effects include the spread of classical culture around the
shores of the Mediterranean; the continual struggle between Rome and the
Berber tribes; the introduction of Christianity throughout the region, and the
cultural effects of the churches in Tunisia, Egypt and Ethiopia. The classical
era drew to a close with the invasion and conquest of Rome's African provinces
by the Vandals in the 5th century. Power passed back in the following century
to the Byzantine Empire.

### [edit] Horn of Africa

Ethiopia had centralized rule for many millennia and the Aksumite Kingdom,
which developed there, had created a powerful regional merchant empire with
trade routes going as far as India.

According to the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, merchant communities in
northern Somalia that had already been present by the 1st century were also
trading frankincense and other items with the inhabitants of the Arabian
Peninsula as well as with then Roman-controlled Egypt through such ports as
Zeila and Berbera.[13]

### [edit] East Africa

Historically, the Swahili could be found as far north as northern Kenya, and
as far south as Rovuma River in Mozambique. Although once believed to be the
descendants of Persian colonists, the ancient Swahili are now recognized by
most historians, historical linguists, and archaeologists as a Bantu people
who had sustained and important interactions with Muslim merchants beginning
in the late 7th and early 8th century AD. Middle Age Swahili Kingdoms are
known to have had trade port islands and trade routes[14] with the Islamic
world and Asia and were described by Greek historians are "metropolises".[15]
Famous African trade ports such as Mombasa, Zanzibar, and Kilwa[16] were known
to Chinese sailors such as Zheng He and medieval Islamic historians such as
the Berber Islamic voyager Abu Abdullah ibn Battua.[17]

## [edit] 7th to 16th century

<IMG>

<IMG>

Civilizations before European colonization.

From the 7th century onward Islamic religious and cultural influence replaced
that of Christianity across much of northern Africa. Only in Egypt under Arab
rule, and where independence was maintained in Ethiopia, did Christianity
survive in any strength. In this period Islamic influence spread slowly south
toward sub-saharan kingdoms like the Songhai Empire, and along the Indian
Ocean coast, although it never penetrated the Benin Empire or the other
civilisations of the forest-belt south of the savannah.

Muslim Arabs conquered northern Africa from the Red Sea to the Atlantic and
continued into Spain beginning with the invasion of Egypt in the 7th century.
Throughout North Africa Christianity nearly disappeared, except in Egypt where
the Coptic Church remained strong partly because of the influence of Ethiopia.
Some argue that when the Arabs had converted Egypt they attempted to wipe out
the Copts, Ethiopia, who also practiced Coptic Christianity, warned the
Muslims that if they attempted to wipe out the Copts, Ethiopia would decrease
the flow of water from Lake Tana into the Blue Nile which flows into the
greater Nile. This is speculated to be one of the reasons that the Coptic
minorities still exist today.

### [edit] North and east Africa

The first Arab immigrants had recognized the authority of the caliphs of
Baghdad, and the Aghlabite dynastyâfounded by Aghlab, one of Haroun al-
Raschid's generals, at the close of the 8th centuryâruled as vassals of the
caliphate. However, early in the 10th century the Fatimid dynasty established
itself in Egypt, where Cairo had been founded AD 968, and from there ruled as
far west as the Atlantic. Later still arose other dynasties such as the
Almoravides and Almohades. Eventually the Turks, who had conquered
Constantinople in 1453, and had seized Egypt in 1517, established the
regencies of Algeria, Tunisia and Tripoli (between 1519 and 1551), Morocco
remaining an independent Arabized Berber state under the Sharifan dynasty,
which had its beginnings at the end of the 13th century.

In the 11th century there was a sizable Arab immigration to North Africa,
resulting in a large absorption of Berber culture. Even before this the
Berbers had generally adopted the speech and religion of their conquerors.
Arab influence and the Islamic religion thus became indelibly stamped on
northern Africa. Together they spread southward across the Sahara. They also
became firmly established along the eastern seaboard, where Arabs, Persians
and Indians planted flourishing colonies, such as Mombasa, Malindi and Sofala.
In this they played a maritime and commercial role analogous to that filled in
earlier centuries by the Carthaginians on the northern seaboard. Until the
14th century, Europe and the Arabs of North Africa were both ignorant of these
eastern cities and states.

Under the early Arab dynasties, Moorish culture had attained a high degree of
sophistication, while the spirit of adventure and the proselytizing zeal of
the followers of Islam led to a considerable extension of their knowledge of
the continent. The camel, first introduced into Africa by the Persian
conquerors of Egypt in 500 BC, enabled the Arabs to traverse the desert more
easily. In this way Senegambia and the middle Niger regions were drawn into
the Islamic sphere of influence, becoming key centres of the trans-Saharan
trade and for the exchange of ideas.

For a time the African Muslim conquests in southern Europe had virtually made
of the Mediterranean a Muslim lake, but the expulsion in the 11th century of
the Saracens from Sicily and southern Italy by the Normans was followed by
European attacks on Tunisia and Tripoli. Somewhat later a busy trade with the
African coastlands, and especially with Egypt, was developed by Venice, Pisa,
Genoa and other cities of North Italy. By the end of the 15th century Spain
had expelled its Muslim rulers, but even while the Moors remained in Granada,
Portugal was strong enough to carry the war into Africa. In 1415 a Portuguese
force captured the citadel of Ceuta on the Moorish coast. From that time
onward Portugal repeatedly interfered in the affairs of Morocco, while Spain
acquired ports in Algeria and Tunisia.

Portugal, however, suffered a crushing defeat in 1578 at al Kasr al Kebir. The
Moors were led by Abd el Malek I of the then recently established Saadi
Dynasty. The Barbary states, under the influence of Moors expelled from Spain,
degenerated into communities of pirates, and under Turkish influence
civilization and commerce declined. The story of these states from the
beginning of the 16th century to the third decade of the 19th century, is
largely made up of piratical exploits on the one hand and of ineffectual
reprisals on the other.

### [edit] West Africa

By the 9th century AD a string of dynastic states, including the earliest
Hausa states, stretched across the sub-saharan savannah from the western coast
to central Sudan. The most powerful of these states were Ghana, Gao, and the
Kanem-Bornu Empire. Ghana declined in the 11th century but was succeeded by
the Mali Empire which consolidated much of western Sudan in the 13th century.
Kanem accepted Islam in the 11th century. Islam then spread through the
interior of West Africa, as the religion of the mansas of the Mali Empire (c.
1235â1400). Following the fabled 1324 hajj of Kankan Musa I, Timbuktu became
renowned as a centre of Islamic scholarship and as the location of sub-Saharan
Africa's first university. That city had been reached in 1352 by the great
Arab traveler Ibn Battuta, whose journey to Mombasa and Quiloa (Kilwa)
provided the first accurate knowledge of those flourishing Muslim cities of
the Swahili on the east African seaboards.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Songhai Empire, c. 1500

Following the breakup of Mali a local leader named Sonni Ali (1464 -1492)
founded the Songhai Empire in the region of middle Niger and the western Sudan
and took control of the trans-Saharan trade. Sonni Ali seized Timbuktu in 1468
and Jenne in 1473, building his regime on trade revenues and the cooperation
of Muslim merchants. His successor Askiya Mohammad Ture (1493 - 1528) made
Islam the official religion, built mosques, and brought Muslim scholars,
including al-Maghili (d.1504), the founder of an important tradition of
Sudanic African Muslim scholarship, to Gao.[18] By the 11th century some Hausa
states - such as Kano, jigawa,Katsina, and Gobir \- had developed into walled
towns engaging in trade, servicing caravans, and the manufacture of goods.
Until the 15th century these small states were on the periphery of the major
Sudanic empires of the era, paying tribute to Songhai to the west and Kanem-
Borno to the east.

Arab progress southward was stopped by the broad belt of dense forest,
stretching almost across the continent somewhat south of 10Â° North latitude,
which barred their advance much as the Sahara had proved an obstacle to their
predecessors. The rain forest cut them off from knowledge of the Guinea coast
and of all Africa beyond. One of the regions which was the last to come under
Arab rule was that of Nubia, which had been controlled by Christians up to the
14th century.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bronze sculpture of the Benin Kingdom, Nigeria, early 16th century

In the forested regions of the West African coast, independent kingdoms grew
up with little influence from the Muslim north. Ife, historically the first of
these Yoruba city-states, established government under a priestly king, or
Oni. Ife was noted as the religious and cultural centre of the region, and for
its unique naturalistic tradition of bronze sculpture. The Ife model of
government was adapted at Oyo, where a member of its ruling dynasty controlled
several smaller city-states. By the 15th century the Oyo Empire had cut off
the mother city from the savanna. Yorubaland established a community in the
Edo-speaking area east of Ife at the beginning of the 14th century. This
developed into the Benin Empire. By the 15th century Benin had become an
independent trading power, blocking Ife's access to the coastal ports. Benin,
which may have housed 100,000 inhabitants at its height, spread over twenty-
five square kilometres, and was enclosed by three concentric rings of
earthworks. By the late 15th century Benin was in contact with Portugal. At
its apogee in the 16th and 17th centuries, Benin encompassed parts of
southeastern Yorubaland and the western Igbo.

Monomotapa was a medieval kingdom (c. 1250-1629) which used to stretch between
the Zambezi and Limpopo rivers of Southern Africa in the modern states of
Zimbabwe and Mozambique. It enjoys great fame for the ruins at its old capital
of Great Zimbabwe.

In 1487, Bartolomeu Dias became the first European to reach the southernmost
tip of Africa.

## [edit] European exploration

Main article: European exploration of Africa

During the fifteenth century Prince Henry "the Navigator," son of King John I,
planned to acquire African territory for Portugal. Under his inspiration and
direction Portuguese navigators began a series of voyages of exploration which
resulted in the circumnavigation of Africa and the establishment of Portuguese
sovereignty over large areas of the coastlands.

Portuguese ships rounded Cape Bojador in 1434, Cape Verde in 1445, and by 1480
the whole Guinea coast was known to the Portuguese. In 1482 Diogo CÃ£o reached
the mouth of the Congo, the Cape of Good Hope was rounded by Bartolomeu Dias
in 1488, and in 1498 Vasco da Gama, after having rounded the Cape, sailed up
the east coast, touched at Sofala and Malindi, and went from there to India.
Portugal claimed sovereign rights wherever its navigators landed, but these
were not exercised in the extreme south of the continent.

The Guinea coast, as the nearest to Europe, was first exploited. Numerous
European forts and trading stations were established, the earliest being SÃ£o
Jorge da Mina (Elmina), begun in 1482. The chief commodities dealt in were
slaves, gold, ivory and spices. The European discovery of America (1492) was
followed by a great development of the slave trade, which, before the
Portuguese era, had been an overland trade almost exclusively confined to
Muslim Africa. The lucrative nature of this trade and the large quantities of
alluvial gold obtained by the Portuguese drew other nations to the Guinea
coast. English mariners went there as early as 1553, and they were followed by
Spaniards, Dutch, French, Danish and other adventurers. Colonial supremacy
along the coast passed in the 17th century from Portugal to the Netherlands
and from the Dutch in the 18th and 19th centuries to France and Britain. The
whole coast from Senegal to Lagos was dotted with forts and "factories" of
rival European powers, and this international patchwork persisted into the
20th century although all the West African hinterland had become either French
or British territory.

Southward from the mouth of the Congo to the region of Damaraland (in what is
present-day Namibia), the Portuguese, from 1491 onward, acquired influence
over the inhabitants, and in the early part of the 16th century through their
efforts Christianity was largely adopted in the Kongo Empire. An incursion of
tribes from the interior later in the same century broke the power of this
semi-Christian state, and Portuguese activity was transferred to a great
extent farther south, SÃ£o Paulo de Loanda (present-day Luanda) being founded
in 1576. Before Angolan independence in 1975, the sovereignty of Portugal over
this coastal region, except for the mouth of the Congo, had been only once
challenged by a European power, the Dutch, from 1640 to 1648 in which Portugal
lost control of the seaports.

### [edit] The slave trade

Main article: African slave trade

The earliest external African slave trade was trans-Saharan. Although there
had long been some trading along the Nile River and very limited trading
across the western desert, the transportation of large numbers of slaves did
not become viable until camels were introduced from Arabia in the 10th
century. At this point, a trans-Saharan trading network came into being to
transport slaves north. Unlike the Americas, slaves in North Africa were
mainly servants rather than labourers, and an equal or greater number of
females than males were taken, who were often employed as chambermaids to the
women of northern harems. It was also not uncommon to turn male slaves into
eunuchs.

The Atlantic slave trade was a later development, but would eventually become
far greater and have a much bigger impact. Increasing penetration of the
Americas by the Portuguese, Spaniards, English, French, Dutch (among others)
created a huge demand for labor in Brazil, Guianas, Caribbean and North
America. Workers were needed for agriculture, mining and other tasks. To meet
this new demand, a trans-Atlantic slave trade developed. Slaves purchased in
those West African regions known to Europeans as the Slave Coast, Gold Coast,
and CÃ´te d'Ivoire were often the unfortunate by-product of fighting between
rival African states. Powerful African kings on the Bight of Biafra might sell
their captives internally or exchange them with European slave traders for
trade goods such as firearms, rum, fabrics and seed grain. It should be noted
that European traders also conducted their own, quite independent, slave
raids.

## [edit] European conquest

<IMG>

<IMG>

An 1812 map of Africa by Arrowsmith and Lewis

Main article: Colonization of Africa

In 1652, a victualling station was established at the Cape of Good Hope by Jan
van Riebeeck on behalf of the Dutch East India Company. For most of the 17th
and 18th centuries, the slowly-expanding settlement was a Dutch possession.
Great Britain seized the Cape of Good Hope area in 1795 ostensibly to stop it
falling into the hands of the French, but also seeking to use Cape Town in
particular as a stop on the route to Australia and India. It was later
returned to the Dutch in 1803, but soon afterwards the Dutch East India
Company declared bankruptcy, and the British annexed the Cape Colony in 1806.

Although the Napoleonic Wars distracted the attention of Europe from the
exploration of Africa, there were nevertheless significant developments. The
invasion of Egypt (1798â1801) first by France and then by Great Britain
resulted in an effort by Turkey to regain direct control over that country,
followed in 1811 by the establishment under Mehemet Ali of an almost
independent state, and the extension of Egyptian rule over the eastern Sudan
(from 1820 onward). In South Africa the struggle with Napoleon led the United
Kingdom to seize Dutch settlements at the Cape, and in 1814 Cape Colony, which
had been continuously occupied by British troops since 1806, was formally
ceded to the British crown.

The Zulu Kingdom (1817-1879) was a southern African state in what is now South
Africa. The small kingdom gained world fame during and after the Anglo-Zulu
War, part of the South African Wars (1879-1915).

Considerable changes had meanwhile been made in other parts of the continent,
the most notable being the invasion of Algiers by France in 1830. This action
put an end to the independent Barbary states, a major obstacle to Frances
Mediterranean strategy. Egyptian authority continued its southward expansion
with consequent additions to European the knowledge of the Nile. The city of
Zanzibar, on the island of that name rapidly attained importance. Accounts of
a vast inland sea, and the "discovery" in 1840â1848, by the missionaries
Johann Ludwig Krapf and Johann Rebmann, of the snow-clad mountains of
Kilimanjaro and Kenya, stimulated in Europe the desire for further knowledge.

### [edit] 19th-century European explorers

By the middle of the 19th century, Protestant missions were carrying on active
missionary work on the Guinea coast, in South Africa and in the Zanzibar
dominions. It was being conducted among people of whom Europeans knew
little.In many instances missionaries turned explorer or became agents of
trade and colonialism. One of the first to attempt to fill up the remaining
blank spaces in the European map was David Livingstone, who had been engaged
since 1840 in missionary work north of the Orange. In 1849 Livingstone crossed
the Kalahari Desert from south to north and reached Lake Ngami, and between
1851 and 1856 he traversed the continent from west to east, making known the
great waterways of the upper Zambezi. During these journeyings Livingstone
"discovered", November 1855, the famous Victoria Falls, so named after the
Queen of the United Kingdom. These falls are called Mosi-oa-Tunya by Africans.
In 1858â1864 the lower Zambezi, the Shire and Lake Nyasa were explored by
Livingstone, Nyasa having been first reached by the confidential slave of
Antonio da Silva Porto, a Portuguese trader established at Bihe in Angola, who
crossed Africa during 1853â1856 from Benguella to the mouth of the Rovuma. A
prime goal for explorers was to locate the source of the River Nile.
Expeditions by Burton and Speke (1857â1858) and Speke and Grant (1863)
located Lake Tanganyika and Lake Victoria. It was eventually proved to be the
latter from which the Nile flowed.

Henry Morton Stanley, who had in 1871 succeeded in finding and succoring
Livingstone, started again for Zanzibar in 1874, and in one of the most
memorable of all exploring expeditions in Africa circumnavigated Victoria
Nyanza and Tanganyika, and, striking farther inland to the Lualaba, followed
that river down to the Atlantic Oceanâreached in August 1877âand proved it
to be the Congo.

Explorers were also active in other parts of the continent. Southern Morocco,
the Sahara and the Sudan were traversed in many directions between 1860 and
1875 by Gerhard Rohlfs, Georg Schweinfurth and Gustav Nachtigal. These
travellers not only added considerably to geographical knowledge, but obtained
invaluable information concerning the people, languages and natural history of
the countries in which they sojourned. Among the discoveries of Schweinfurth
was one that confirmed the Greek legends of the existence beyond Egypt of a
"pygmy race". But the first western discoverer of the pygmies of Central
Africa was Paul du Chaillu, who found them in the Ogowe district of the west
coast in 1865, five years before Schweinfurth's first meeting with them; du
Chaillu having previously, as the result of journeys in the Gabon region
between 1855 and 1859, made popular in Europe the knowledge of the existence
of the gorilla, perhaps the gigantic ape seen by Hanno the Carthaginian, and
whose existence, up to the middle of the 19th century, was thought to be as
legendary as that of the Pygmies of Aristotle.

### [edit] Partition among European powers

Main article: Scramble for Africa

In the last quarter of the 19th century the map of Africa was transformed.
Lines of partition, drawn often through trackless African countryside, marked
out the "possessions" of Germany, France, Britain and the other Great Powers.
Railways penetrated the interior, vast areas were "opened up" to European
conquest.

The causes which led to the partition of Africa can be found in the economic
and political state of western Europe at the time. Germany, recently united
under Prussian rule as the result of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, was
seeking new outlets for her energies, new markets for her growing industries,
and with the markets, colonies.

Germany was the last country to enter into the race to acquire colonies, and
when Bismarckâthe German Chancellor âacted, Africa was the only field left
to exploit. South America was widely considered the fiefdom of the United
States based on the Monroe Doctrine, while Britain, France, the Netherlands,
Portugal and Spain had already divided much of Asia and the rest of the world
between themselves.

Part of the reason Germany began to expand into the colonial sphere at this
time, despite Bismarck's lack of enthusiasm for the idea, was a shift in the
world view of the Prussian governing elite. Indeed, European elites as a whole
began to view the world as a finite place, one in which only the strong would
predominate. The influence of social Darwinism was deep, encouraging a view of
the world as essentially characterized by zero-sum relationships.

For different reasons the war of 1870 was also the starting-point for France
in the building up of a new colonial empire. In her endeavour to regain the
position lost in that war France had to look beyond Europe. To the two causes
mentioned must be added others. Britain and Portugal, when they found their
interests threatened, bestirred themselves, while Italy also conceived it
necessary to become an African power.

It was not, however, the action of any of the great powers of Europe which
precipitated the struggle. This was brought about by the projects of LÃ©opold
II, king of the Belgians. The discoveries of Livingstone, Stanley and others
had aroused especial interest among two classes of men in western Europe, one
the manufacturing and trading class, which saw in Central Africa possibilities
of commercial exploitation, the other the philanthropic and missionary class,
which beheld in the newly discovered lands millions of "savages" to
Christianize and "civilize". The possibility of utilizing both these classes
in the creation of a vast private estate, of which he should be the head,
formed itself in the mind of LÃ©opold II even before Stanley had navigated the
Congo. The king's action proved successful; but no sooner was the nature of
his project understood in Europe than it provoked the rivalry of France and
Germany, and thus the international struggle was begun.

### [edit] Berlin Conference

Main article: Berlin Conference

From 1885 the scramble among the powers went on with renewed vigour, and in
the fifteen years that remained of the century the work of partition, so far
as international agreements were concerned, was practically completed.

Soldiers of King Menelik II fended off the Italians, keeping Ethiopia
independent from European colonization.

No African countries were consulted during the partitioning of Africa. An
"International treaty" was signed that disregarded the ethnic, social and
economic composition of the people that lived in that area. This was to
resurface years later, as ethnic or "tribal" conflict after the African
countries gained their independence.

## [edit] 20th century: 1900-1945

### [edit] The early 20th century

<IMG>

<IMG>

Map of Africa just before World War I (larger image (456 kB))

All of the continent was claimed by European powers, except for Ethiopia
("Abyssinia") and Liberia.

The European powers set up a variety of different administrations in Africa at
this time, with different ambitions and degrees of power. In some areas, parts
of British West Africa for example, colonial control was tenuous and intended
for simple economic extraction, strategic power, or as part of a long term
development plan.

In other areas Europeans were encouraged to settle, creating settler states in
which a European minority came to dominate society. Settlers only came to a
few colonies in sufficient numbers to have a strong impact. British settler
colonies included British East Africa, now Kenya, Northern and Southern
Rhodesia, later Zambia and Zimbabwe, and South Africa, which already had a
significant population of European settlers, the Boers.

In the Second Boer War, between the British Empire and the two Boer republics
of the Orange Free State and the South African Republic (Transvaal Republic),
the Boers unsuccessfully resisted absorption in to the British Empire.

France planned to settle Algeria and eventually incorporate it into the French
state as an equal to the European provinces. Its proximity across the
Mediterranean allowed plans of this scale.

In most areas colonial administrations did not have the manpower or resources
to fully administer the territory and had to rely on local power structures to
help them. Various factions and groups within the societies exploited this
European requirement for their own purposes, attempting to gain a position of
power within their own communities by cooperating with Europeans. One aspect
of this struggle included what Terence Ranger has termed the "invention of
tradition." In order to legitimize their own claims to power in the eyes of
both the colonial administrators, and their own people, people would
essentially manufacture "traditional" claims to power, or ceremonies. As a
result many societies were thrown into disarray by the new order.

During World War I the British and German Empires battled on several
occasions, the most notable being the Battle of Tanga, and a sustained
guerrilla campaign by the German General Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck.

### [edit] Interbellum

After World War I the formerly German colonies in Africa were taken over by
France and the United Kingdom.

During this era a sense of local patriotism or nationalism took deeper root
among African intellectuals and politicians. Some of the inspiration for this
movement came from the First World War in which European countries had relied
on colonial troops for their own defense. Many in Africa realized their own
strength with regard to the colonizer for the first time. At the same time,
some of the mystique of the "invincible" European was shattered by the
barbarities of the war. However, in most areas European control remained
relatively strong during this period.

Italy, under the government of Benito Mussolini, invaded Ethiopia, the last
independent African nation, in 1935 and occupied the country until 1941.

## [edit] The postcolonial era: 1945 to 1993

### [edit] Decolonization

<IMG>

<IMG>

Dates of independence of African countries

Main articles: Decolonization and Decolonisation of Africa

The decolonisation of Africa started with Libya in 1951. (Although Liberia,
South Africa, Egypt and Ethiopia were already independent.) Many countries
followed in the 50s and 60s, with a peak in 1960 with independence of a large
part of French West Africa. Most of the remaining countries gained
independence throughout the 1960s, although some colonizers (Portugal in
particular) were reluctant to relinquish sovereignty, resulting in bitter wars
of independence which lasted for a decade or more. The last African countries
to gain formal independence were Guinea-Bissau from Portugal in 1974,
Mozambique from Portugal in 1975, Angola from Portugal in 1975, Djibouti from
France in 1977, Zimbabwe from United Kingdom in 1980, and Namibia from South
Africa in 1990. Eritrea later split off from Ethiopia in 1993.

Because many cities were founded, enlarged and renamed by the Europeans, after
independence many place names (for example Stanleyville, LÃ©opoldville,
Rhodesia) were renamed: see historical African place names for these.

### [edit] East Africa

Main article: East Africa

The Mau Mau Rebellion took place in Kenya from 1952 until 1956, but was put
down by British and local forces. A State of Emergency remained in place until
1960. Kenya became independent in 1963, and Jomo Kenyatta served as its first
president.

The early 1990s also signaled the start of major clashes between the Hutus and
the Tutsis in Rwanda and Burundi. In 1994 this culminated in the Rwandan
Genocide, a conflict in which over 800 000 people were murdered.

### [edit] North Africa

Main article: North Africa

In 1954 Gamal Abdel Nasser deposed the monarchy on Egypt and came to power.
Muammar al-Gaddafi led a coup in Libya in 1969 and has remained in power.

Egypt was involved in several wars against Israel, and was allied with other
Arab countries. The first was right after the Israel was founded, in 1947.
Egypt went to war again in 1967 and lost the Sinai Peninsula to Israel. They
went to war yet again in 1973. In 1979 Anwar Sadat and Menachem Begin signed
the Camp David Accords, which gave back the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt in
exchange for the recognition of Israel. The accords are still in effect today.
In 1981 Sadat was assassinated by an Islamist for signing the accords.

### [edit] Southern Africa

Main article: Southern Africa

In 1948 the apartheid laws were started in South Africa by the dominant party,
the National Party. These were largely a continuation of existing policies,
e.g. the Land Act of 1913. The difference was the policy of "separate
development;" Where previous policies had only been disparate efforts to
economically exploit the African Majority, Apartheid represented an entire
philosophy of separate racial goals, leading to both the divisive laws of
'petty apartheid,' and the grander scheme of African Homelands.

In 1994 the South African government abolished Apartheid. South Africans
elected Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress in the country's first
multiracial presidential election.

### [edit] West Africa

Main article: History of West Africa

Following World War II, nationalist movements arose across West Africa, most
notably in Ghana under Kwame Nkrumah. In 1957, Ghana became the first sub-
Saharan colony to achieve its independence, followed the next year by France's
colonies; by 1974, West Africa's nations were entirely autonomous. Since
independence, many West African nations have been plagued by corruption and
instability, with notable civil wars in Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and
CÃ´te d'Ivoire, and a succession of military coups in Ghana and Burkina Faso.
Many states have failed to develop their economies despite enviable natural
resources, and political instability is often accompanied by undemocratic
government.

## [edit] See also

History of the African Union  
Logo of the African Union  
This article is part of a series

* * *  
History of Africa  
Union of African States  
Organisation of African Unity  
African Economic Community  
Sirte Declaration  
Constitutive Act of the African Union  
Union Launch  
* * *
the African Union Portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
  * Late Stone Age
  * African archaeology
  * African Empires
  * Bantu expansion
  * Economic history of Africa
  * Legends of Africa
  * Pan-Africanism
  * Synoptic table of the principal old world prehistoric cultures
  * Wikimedia Atlas of Africa

## [edit] References

This article incorporates text from the EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica, Eleventh
Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

### [edit] Notes

  1. ^ The genetic studies by Luca Cavalli-Sforza are considered pioneering in tracing the spread of modern humans from Africa.
  2. ^ (Van Sertima, 1984, p. 20)
  3. ^ a b Diamond, Jared M. (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W.W. Norton. pp. 100\. ISBN 0-393-03891-2.
  4. ^ a b Diamond, Jared M. (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W.W. Norton. pp. 126â127. ISBN 0-393-03891-2.
  5. ^ Nicholson, Paul T; Shaw, Ian (2000). Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology. Cambridge University Press. pp. 168\. ISBN 9780521452571.
  6. ^ Nicholson & Shaw, pp 149â60
  7. ^ Nicholson & Shaw, pp 161â165, 170
  8. ^ Martin and O'Meara. "Africa, 3rd Ed." Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1995.
  9. ^ O'Brien, Patrick Karl (2002). Atlas of world history. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. pp. 22â23. ISBN 0-19-521921-X.
  10. ^ July, Robert, Pre-Colonial Africa, 1975, Charles Scribners and Sons, New York, p. 60-61
  11. ^ Dr. Stuart Tyson Smith
  12. ^ Late Neolithic megalithic structures at Nabta Playa \- Wendorf (1998)
  13. ^ Mohamed Diriye Abdullahi, Cultures and Customs of Somalia, (Greenwood Publishing Group: 2001), p.13
  14. ^ Eastern and Southern Africa 500-1000 AD
  15. ^ Tanzanian dig unearths ancient secret by Tira Shubart
  16. ^ A History of Mozambique
  17. ^ Ibn Battuta: Travels in Asia and Africa 1325-1354
  18. ^ Ira M. Lapidus, A History of Islamic Societies, Cambridge 1988

### [edit] Literature

  * Diamond, Jared M. (1999). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W.W.Norton. ISBN 0-393-31755-2.
  * Stearns, Peter, ed. (2001), The encyclopedia of world history: Ancient, medieval, and modern, chronologically arranged

## [edit] Further reading

  * Cheikh Anta Diop (1987) Precolonial Black Africa Chicago Review Press, Incorporated
  * Clark, J. Desmond (1970) The Prehistory of Africa Thames and Hudson
  * Davidson, Basil (1964) The African Past, Penguin, Harmondsworth
  * Freund, Bill (1998) The Making of Contemporary Africa, Lynne Rienner, Boulder, 1998 (including a substantial "Annotated Bibliography" pp. 269-316)
  * Reader, John 1997 Africa: A Biography of the Continent, Hamish Hamilton ISBN 0241130476
  * Shillington, Kevin (1989) History of Africa, St. Martin's, New York
  * UNESCO (1980-1994) General History of Africa 8 volumes
  * ThÃ©ophile Obenga (1980) Pour une Nouvelle Histoire PrÃ©sence Africaine, Paris

Links to related articles  
* 
v â¢ d â¢ e

History of Africa  
Sovereign states

Algeria Â· Angola Â· Benin Â· Botswana Â· Burkina Faso Â· Burundi Â· Cameroon
Â· Cape Verde Â· Central African Republic Â· Chad Â· Comoros Â· Democratic
Republic of the Congo Â· Republic of the Congo Â· CÃ´te d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast)
Â· Djibouti Â· Egypt1 Â· Equatorial Guinea Â· Eritrea Â· Ethiopia Â· Gabon Â·
The Gambia Â· Ghana Â· Guinea Â· Guinea-Bissau Â· Kenya Â· Lesotho Â· Liberia
Â· Libya Â· Madagascar Â· Malawi Â· Mali Â· Mauritania Â· Mauritius Â· Morocco
Â· Mozambique Â· Namibia Â· Niger Â· Nigeria Â· Rwanda Â· SÃ£o TomÃ© and
PrÃ­ncipe Â· Senegal Â· Seychelles Â· Sierra Leone Â· Somalia Â· South Africa
Â· Sudan Â· Swaziland Â· Tanzania Â· Togo Â· Tunisia Â· Uganda Â· Zambia Â·
Zimbabwe  
Dependencies,  
autonomies,  
other territories

Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Â· Madeira (Portugal) Â· Mayotte /
RÃ©union (France) Â· Puntland Â· St. Helena (UK) Â· Socotra (Yemen) Â·
Somaliland Â· Southern Sudan Â· Western Sahara Â· Zanzibar (Tanzania)  
Italics indicate an unrecognised or partially recognised country. 1
Transcontinental country.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Africa topics  
Culture

Architecture (World Heritage Sites) Â· Art Â· Cinema (Film festivals Â· List
of films) Â· Cuisine Â· Etiquette Â· Languages Â· Literature (Writers by
country) Â· Music (Musicians) Â· Religion  
Demographics

People Â· Countries by population Â· Countries by population density Â·
HIV/AIDS Â· Urbanization (List of most populous cities Â· of largest
metropolitan areas)  
Economy

Countries by GDP Â· Countries by HDI Â· Central banks and currencies Â·
Education Â· Poverty Â· Renewable energy Â· Stock exchanges Â· Internet  
Geography

Countries (by geographical area)  Â· Ecology Â· List of impact craters Â· List
of islands Â· List of rivers Â· Regions  
History

Colonisation (European exploration Â· African slave trade Â· Atlantic slave
trade Â· Scramble for Africa) Â· Decolonization Â· Economic history Â· Empires
Â· Military history (List of conflicts)  
Politics

African Union Â· Elections Â· Human rights Â· Pan-Africanism  
Society

African philosophy Â· Caste system Â· Media (List of radio stations Â· of
television stations)  
Sport

African Cricket Association Â· All-Africa Games Â· Australian rules football
Â· Confederation of African Football (African Cup of Nations) Â· Confederation
of African Rugby (Africa Cup) Â· FIBA Africa Â· Stadiums by capacity Â· Tour
d'Afrique  
Years

2004 in Africa Â· 2005 in Africa Â· 2006 in Africa Â· 2007 in Africa Â· 2008
in Africa Â· 2009 in Africa  
v â¢ d â¢ e

History by continent  
Africa Â· Americas (North America Â· South America) Â· Antarctica Â· Asia Â·
Australia Â· Eurasia Â· Europe Â· Oceania  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Africa"

Categories: History of Africa | World history

Hidden categories: Cleanup from March 2009 | All pages needing cleanup |
Wikipedia articles to be split from December 2008 | Articles to be merged
since May 2008 | All articles to be merged | Wikipedia articles incorporating
text from the 1911 EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * VÃ¨neto
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 03:43.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



