
# Tsukiji fish market

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Tsukiji as seen from Shiodome

Tsukiji fish market (ç¯å°å¸å ´ ,Tsukiji shijÅ?) is the biggest wholesale
fish and seafood market in the world and also one of the largest wholesale
food markets of any kind. The market is located in Tsukiji in central Tokyo,
and is a major attraction for foreign visitors.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Location
  * 2 Economics
  * 3 Operations
  * 4 History
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links
  * 7 Further reading

  
## [edit] Location

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vendors display the morning's catch at the market at 4 a.m.

<IMG>

<IMG>

End of the fresh tuna auction at Tsukiji

The Tokyo Metropolitan Central Wholesale Market, commonly known as Tsukiji
fish market is located near the TsukijishijÅ Station on the Toei Åedo Line
and Tsukiji Station on the Tokyo Metro Hibiya Line. There are two distinct
sections of the market as a whole. The "inner market" (jonai shijo) is the
licensed wholesale market, where the auctions and most of the processing of
the fish take place, and where licensed wholesale dealers (approximately 900
of them) operate small stalls. The "outer market" (jogai shijo) is a mixture
of wholesale and retail shops that sell Japanese kitchen tools, restaurant
supplies, groceries, and seafood, and many restaurants, especially sushi
restaurants. Most of the shops in the outer market close by the early
afternoon, and in the inner market even earlier.

## [edit] Economics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Tuna auction at Tsukiji

The market handles more than 400 different types of seafood from tiny sardines
to 300kg tuna, from cheap seaweed to the most expensive caviar. Overall, more
than 700,000 metric tons of seafood are handled every year at the three
seafood markets in Tokyo, with a total value in excess of 600 billion yen
(approximately 5.5 billion US dollars). Tsukiji alone handles over 2000 metric
tons of seafood per day. The number of registered employees varies from 60,000
to 65,000, including wholesalers, accountants, auctioneers, company officials,
and distributors.

## [edit] Operations

<IMG>

<IMG>

A tray of six fugu rubripes on ice for sale at Tsukiji

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cutting frozen tuna with a band saw

The market opens most mornings except Sundays and holidays and some infrequent
closing days within the week[2] at 3:00 a.m. with the arrival of the products
by ship, truck and plane from all over the world. Particularly impressive is
the unloading of tons of frozen tuna. The auction houses (wholesalers known in
Japanese as oroshi gyÅsha) then estimate the value and prepare the incoming
products for the auctions. The buyers (licensed to participate in the
auctions) also inspect the fish to estimate which fish they would like to bid
for and at which price.

The auctions start around 5:20 a.m. Bidding can only be done by licensed
participants. These bidders include intermediate wholesalers [nakaoroshi
gyousha] who operate stalls within the marketplace, and other licensed buyers
who are agents for restaurants, food processing companies, and large
retailers.

The auctions usually end around 7:00 a.m. Afterwards, the purchased fish is
either loaded onto trucks to be shipped to the next destination, or on small
carts and moved to the many shops located inside of the market. There the shop
owners cut and prepare the products for retail. In case of large fish, for
example tuna and swordfish, cutting and preparation is elaborate. Frozen tuna
and swordfish are often cut with large band saws, and fresh tuna is carved
with extremely long knives (some well over a meter in length) called Oroshi
hocho, maguro-bocho, or Hancho hocho.

The market is most busy between 5:30 and 8:00 a.m., and the activity declines
significantly afterwards. Many shops start to close around 11:00 a.m., and the
market closes for cleaning around 1:00 p.m. Tourists may visit the market
daily between 5 a.m. and 6:15 a.m. and watch the proceedings from a designated
area.[3] However, due to the increase in numbers of sightseers and the
associated problems they cause, the market decided to ban all tourists from
the tuna auctions during the period between 15 December 2008 and 17 January
2009.[4] The market reopened to tourists after this period with the provision
of security guards and new rules prohibiting flash photography. The market is
closed the 2nd and 4th Wednesdays of each month, Sundays, and Holidays.

Inspectors from the Tokyo Metropolitan Government supervise activities in the
market to enforce the Food Hygiene Law.

## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

An oroshi hocho in use at the Tsukiji fish market in Tokyo

The first market in Tokyo was established by Tokugawa Ieyasu during the Edo
period to provide food for Edo castle (nowadays Tokyo). Tokugawa Ieyasu
invited fishermen from Tsukudajima, Osaka to Edo in order to provide fish for
the castle. Fish not bought by the castle was sold near the Nihonbashi bridge,
at a market called uogashi (literally, "fish quay") which was one of many
specialized wholesale markets that lined the canals of Edo (as Tokyo was known
until the 1870s).

In August 1918, following the so-called "Rice Riots" (Kome Soudou), which
broke out in over one hundred cities and towns in protest against food
shortages and the speculative practices of wholesalers, the Japanese
government was forced to create new institutions for the distribution of
foodstuffs, especially in urban areas. A Central Wholesale Market Law was
established in March 1923. The Great KantÅ earthquake on September 1, 1923,
devastated much of central Tokyo, including the Nihonbashi fish market. In the
aftermath of the earthquake, the market was relocated to the Tsukiji district,
and after the construction of a modern market facility was completed in 1935,
the fish market began operations under the provisions of the 1923 Central
Wholesale Market Law. Three major markets in Tsukiji, Kanda and Koto began
operating in 1935. Smaller branch markets were established in Ebara, Toshima,
and Adachi, and elsewhere. At present, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government's
system of wholesale markets includes more than a dozen major and branch
markets, handling seafood, produce, meat, and cut flowers.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ McCurry, Justin (5 December 2008). "Tokyo catch: Fish market bars tourists". The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/dec/05/japan. Retrieved on 17 February 2009.
  2. ^ "http://www.tsukiji-market.or.jp/etc/calendar/2008.html."Tsukiji Closing Calendar 2008
  3. ^ BBC NEWS: "Tokyo scales back fish tourists" (28 March 2008). Retrieved on 3 December 2008.
  4. ^ Too many foreigners forces ban on tourists to Tsukiji fish market, Mainichi Daily News, December 3, 2008. Retrieved on 3 December 2008.

## [edit] External links

  * Official Homepage (English)
  * Tsukiji Research Home Page
  * Tskuji fish market auction video

## [edit] Further reading

  * Tsukiji: The Fish Market at the Center of the World, Theodore C. Bestor, University of California Press, Berkeley, 2004 (ISBN 0-520-22024-2)
  * " Tokyo's Tsukiji Fish Market Threatened By Globalization," Bloomberg News, September 28, 2005.

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Tsukiji fish market  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Fishing industry  
Commercial fishing

Trawling Â· Pair trawling Â· Midwater trawling Â· Bottom trawling Â· Seining
Â· Longlining Â· Trolling Â· Dredging Â· Trepanging Â· Lobsters Â· Crabs Â·
Fishing vessels

<IMG>  
Fish processing

Fish factory Â· Factory ship Â· Fish preservation Â· Slurry ice Â· Gibbing Â·
Fish flake Â· Salted cod Â· Unsalted cod  
Fish products

Seafood Â· Fish roe Â· Fish meal Â· Fish emulsion Â· Fish hydrolysate Â· Fish
oil Â· Fish sauce Â· Shrimp paste Â· Seafood list Â· Crustaceans Â· Molluscs  
Fish marketing

Live food fish trade Â· Shrimp marketing Â· Chasse-marÃ©e  
Fish markets

Billingsgate Â· Fulton Â· Maine Avenue Â· Princes Street Â· Scania Â· Tsukiji
Â· more...  
Fish types

Demersal fish Â· Bottom feeders Â· Groundfish Â· Whitefish Â· Oily fish Â·
Filter feeders Â· Freshwater fish Â· Finfish Â· Shellfish Â· Crustaceans Â·
Echinoderms  
By area

World fish production Â· Fishing by country Â· Fishing banks Â· Other areas  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Fisheries and fishing topic areas  
Fisheries

Fisheries science Â· Wild fisheries Â· Oceanic habitats Â· Fish farming Â·
Aquaculture Â· Fish types Â· Fisheries management Â· Fishing quota Â·
Sustainability

<IMG>  
Fishing

Fisherman Â· Artisan fishing Â· Fishing vessels Â· Fishing history  
Industry

Commercial fishing Â· Processing Â· Products Â· Marketing Â· Markets  
Recreational

Angling Â· Game fishing Â· Fly fishing Â· Catch and release Â· Regional
fishing Â· Angling personalities  
Techniques

Gathering Â· Spearfishing Â· Line fishing Â· Netting Â· Trawling Â· Trapping
Â· Other  
Tackle

Hook Â· Line Â· Sinker Â· Rod Â· Bait Â· Lures Â· Artificial flies Â· Bite
alarms  
Locations

Fishing by country Â· Regional Â· Fishing villages Â· Fishing banks  
List of articles by topic areas Â· Alphabetical list of articles Â· Fisheries
glossary  
Coordinates: 35Â°39â²41â³N 139Â°46â²11â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿35.66139Â°N
139.76972Â°Eï»¿ / 35.66139; 139.76972

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tsukiji_fish_market"

Categories: Tokyo | Fish markets | Visitor attractions in Tokyo

Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 20:23.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



