
# Abiogenesis

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Primordial soup" redirects here. For the board game, see Primordial Soup
(board game).

"Origin of life" redirects here. For non-materialistic views on the origins of
life, see Creation myth.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Pre-Cambrian stromatolites in the Siyeh Formation, Glacier National Park. In
2002, William Schopf of UCLA published a paper in the scientific journal
Nature arguing that geological formations such as this possess 3.5 Ga (billion
years old) fossilized cyanobacteria microbes. If true, they would be the
earliest known life on earth.

In the natural sciences, abiogenesis, or origin of life, is the study of how
life on Earth could have arisen from inanimate matter. It should not be
confused with evolution, which is the study of how groups of living things
change over time. Amino acids, often called "the building blocks of life",
occur naturally, due to chemical reactions unrelated to life. In all living
things, these amino acids are organized into proteins, and the construction of
these proteins is mediated by nucleic acids. Thus the question of how life on
Earth originated is a question of how the first nucleic acids arose.

Some facts about the origin of life are well understood, others are still the
subject of current research. The first living things on Earth are thought to
be single cell prokaryotes. The oldest ancient fossil microbe-like objects are
dated to be 3.5 Ga (billion years old), just a few hundred million years
younger than Earth itself.[1][2] By 2.4 Ga, the ratio of stable isotopes of
carbon, iron and sulfur shows the action of living things on inorganic
minerals and sediments[3][4] and molecular biomarkers indicate photosynthesis,
demonstrating that life on Earth was widespread by this time.[5][6]

On the other hand, the exact sequence of chemical events that led to the first
nucleic acids is not known. Several hypotheses about early life have been
proposed, most notably the iron-sulfur world theory (metabolism without
genetics) and the RNA world hypothesis (RNA life-forms).

## Contents

  * 1 History of the concept in science
    * 1.1 Spontaneous generation
    * 1.2 Pasteur and Darwin
    * 1.3 Haldane and Oparin: The Primordial Soup Theory
  * 2 Early conditions
  * 3 Current models
    * 3.1 Origin of organic molecules
      * 3.1.1 "Soup" theory today: Miller's experiment and subsequent work
        * 3.1.1.1 Regarding the reducing atmosphere
        * 3.1.1.2 Regarding monomer formation
        * 3.1.1.3 Regarding monomer accumulation
        * 3.1.1.4 Regarding further transformation
      * 3.1.2 The deep sea vent theory
      * 3.1.3 Fox's experiments
      * 3.1.4 Eigen's hypothesis
      * 3.1.5 WÃ¤chtershÃ¤user's hypothesis
      * 3.1.6 Radioactive beach hypothesis
      * 3.1.7 Models to explain homochirality
      * 3.1.8 Self-organization and replication
    * 3.2 From organic molecules to protocells
      * 3.2.1 "Genes first" models: the RNA world
      * 3.2.2 "Metabolism first" models: iron-sulfur world and others
      * 3.2.3 Possible role of bubbles
  * 4 Other models
    * 4.1 Autocatalysis
    * 4.2 Clay theory
    * 4.3 Gold's "Deep-hot biosphere" model
    * 4.4 "Primitive" extraterrestrial life
    * 4.5 Lipid World
    * 4.6 Polyphosphates
    * 4.7 PAH world hypothesis
    * 4.8 Multiple genesis
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 See also
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] History of the concept in science

### [edit] Spontaneous generation

Main article: Spontaneous generation

Until the early 19th century, people generally believed in the ongoing
spontaneous generation of certain forms of life from non-living matter. This
was paired with heterogenesis, beliefs where one form of life derives from a
different form (e.g. bees from flowers).[7] Classical notions of abiogenesis,
now more precisely known as spontaneous generation, held that certain complex,
living organisms are generated by decaying organic substances. According to
Aristotle it was a readily observable truth that aphids arise from the dew
which falls on plants, fleas from putrid matter, mice from dirty hay,
crocodiles from rotting logs at the bottom of bodies of water, and so
forth.[8]

In the 17th century, such assumptions started to be questioned; for example,
in 1646, Sir Thomas Browne published his Pseudodoxia Epidemica (subtitled
Enquiries into Very many Received Tenets, and Commonly Presumed Truths), which
was an attack on false beliefs and "vulgar errors." His conclusions were not
widely accepted. For example, his contemporary, Alexander Ross wrote: "To
question this (i.e., spontaneous generation) is to question reason, sense and
experience. If he doubts of this let him go to Egypt, and there he will find
the fields swarming with mice, begot of the mud of Nylus, to the great
calamity of the inhabitants."[9]

In 1665, Robert Hooke published the first drawings of a microorganism. Hooke
was followed in 1676 by Anthony van Leeuwenhoek, who drew and described
microorganisms that are now thought to have been protozoa and bacteria.[10]
Many felt the existence of microorganisms was evidence in support of
spontaneous generation, since microorganisms seemed too simplistic for sexual
reproduction, and asexual reproduction through cell division had not yet been
observed.

The first solid evidence against spontaneous generation came in 1668 from
Francesco Redi, who proved that no maggots appeared in meat when flies were
prevented from laying eggs. It was gradually shown that, at least in the case
of all the higher and readily visible organisms, the previous sentiment
regarding spontaneous generation was false. The alternative seemed to be
biogenesis: that every living thing came from a pre-existing living thing
(omne vivum ex ovo, Latin for "every living thing from an egg").

In 1768, Lazzaro Spallanzani demonstrated that microbes were present in the
air, and could be killed by boiling. In 1861, Louis Pasteur performed a series
of experiments which demonstrated that organisms such as bacteria and fungi do
not spontaneously appear in sterile, nutrient-rich media.

### [edit] Pasteur and Darwin

By the middle of the 19th century, the theory of biogenesis had accumulated so
much evidential support, due to the work of Pasteur and others, that the
alternative theory of spontaneous generation had been effectively disproven.
Pasteur himself remarked, after a definitive finding in 1864, "Never will the
doctrine of spontaneous generation recover from the mortal blow struck by this
simple experiment."[11] The collapse of spontaneous generation, however, left
a vacuum of scientific thought on the question of how life had first arisen.

In a letter to Joseph Dalton Hooker on February 1, 1871,[12] Charles Darwin
addressed the question, suggesting that the original spark of life may have
begun in a "warm little pond, with all sorts of ammonia and phosphoric salts,
lights, heat, electricity, etc. present, so that a protein compound was
chemically formed ready to undergo still more complex changes". He went on to
explain that "at the present day such matter would be instantly devoured or
absorbed, which would not have been the case before living creatures were
formed."[13] In other words, the presence of life itself makes the search for
the origin of life dependent on the sterile conditions of the laboratory.

### [edit] Haldane and Oparin: The Primordial Soup Theory

Further information: Miller-Urey experiment

<IMG>

<IMG>

Aleksandr Oparin (right) at the laboratory

No new notable research or theory on the subject appeared until 1924, when
Aleksandr Ivanovich Oparin reasoned that atmospheric oxygen prevents the
synthesis of certain organic compounds that are necessary building blocks for
the evolution of life. In his The Origin of Life,[14][15] Oparin proposed that
the "spontaneous generation of life" that had been attacked by Louis Pasteur,
did in fact occur once, but was now impossible because the conditions found in
the early earth had changed, and the presence of living organisms would
immediately consume any spontaneously generated organism. Oparin argued that a
"primeval soup" of organic molecules could be created in an oxygen-less
atmosphere through the action of sunlight. These would combine in ever-more
complex fashions until they formed coacervate droplets. These droplets would
"grow" by fusion with other droplets, and "reproduce" through fission into
daughter droplets, and so have a primitive metabolism in which those factors
which promote "cell integrity" survive, those that do not become extinct. Many
modern theories of the origin of life still take Oparin's ideas as a starting
point.

Around the same time, J. B. S. Haldane suggested that the Earth's pre-biotic
oceansâvery different from their modern counterpartsâwould have formed a
"hot dilute soup" in which organic compounds could have formed. This idea was
called biopoiesis or biopoesis, the process of living matter evolving from
self-replicating but nonliving molecules.[16][17]

## [edit] Early conditions

Morse and MacKenzie[18] have suggested that oceans may have appeared first in
the Hadean era, as soon as 200 Ma (million years) after the Earth was formed,
in a hot 100 Â°C (212 Â°F) reducing environment, and that the pH of about 5.8
rose rapidly towards neutral. This has been supported by Wilde[1] who has
pushed the date of the zircon crystals found in the metamorphosed quartzite of
Mount Narryer in Western Australia, previously thought to be 4.1â4.2 Ga, to
4.404 GA. This means that oceans and continental crust existed within 150 Ma
of Earth's formation.

Despite this, the Hadean environment was one highly hazardous to life.
Frequent collisions with large objects, up to 500 kilometres (310 mi) in
diameter, would have been sufficient to vaporise the ocean within a few months
of impact, with hot steam mixed with rock vapour leading to high altitude
clouds completely covering the planet. After a few months the height of these
clouds would have begun to decrease but the cloud base would still have been
elevated for about the next thousand years. After that, it would have begun to
rain at low altitude. For another two thousand years rains would slowly have
drawn down the height of the clouds, returning the oceans to their original
depth only 3,000 years after the impact event.[19]

Between 3.8 and 4.1 Ga, changes in the orbits of the gaseous giant planets may
have caused a late heavy bombardment that pockmarked the moon and other inner
planets (Mercury, Mars, and presumably Earth and Venus). This would likely
have sterilized the planet had life evolved before that time.

By examining the time interval between such devastating environmental events,
the time interval when life might first have come into existence can be found
for different early environments. The study by Maher and Stephenson shows that
if the deep marine hydrothermal setting provides a suitable site for the
origin of life, abiogenesis could have happened as early as 4.0 to 4.2 Ga,
whereas if it occurred at the surface of the earth abiogenesis could only have
occurred between 3.7 and 4.0 Ga.[20]

Other research suggests a colder start to life. Work by Leslie Orgel and
colleagues on the synthesis of purines has shown that freezing temperatures
are advantageous, due to the concentrating effect for key precursors such as
HCN.[21] Research by Stanley Miller and colleagues suggested that while
adenine and guanine require freezing conditions for synthesis, cytosine and
uracil may require boiling temperatures.[22] Based on this research Miller
suggested a beginning of life involving freezing conditions and exploding
meteorites.[23] A new article in Discover Magazine points to research by the
Miller group indicating the formation of seven different amino acids and 11
types of nucleobases in ice when ammonia and cyanide were left in a freezer
from 1972â1997.[24][25] This article also describes research by Hauke Trinks
showing the formation of RNA molecules 400 bases long under freezing
conditions using an RNA template, a single-strand chain of RNA that guides the
formation of a new strand of RNA. As that new RNA strand grows, it adheres to
the template.[26] The explanation given for the unusual speed of these
reactions at such a low temperature is eutectic freezing. As an ice crystal
forms, it stays pure: only molecules of water join the growing crystal, while
impurities like salt or cyanide are excluded. These impurities become crowded
in microscopic pockets of liquid within the ice, and this crowding causes the
molecules to collide more often.

Evidence of the early appearance of life comes from the Isua supercrustal belt
in Western Greenland and from similar formations in the nearby Akilia Islands.
Carbon entering into rock formations has a concentration of elemental Î´13C of
about â5.5, where because of a preferential biotic uptake of 12C, biomass
has a Î´13C of between â20 and â30. These isotopic fingerprints are
preserved in the sediments, and Mojzis has used this technique to suggest that
life existed on the planet already by 3.85 billion years ago.[27] Lazcano and
Miller (1994) suggest that the rapidity of the evolution of life is dictated
by the rate of recirculating water through mid-ocean submarine vents. Complete
recirculation takes 10 million years, thus any organic compounds produced by
then would be altered or destroyed by temperatures exceeding 300 Â°C (572
Â°F). They estimate that the development of a 100 kilobase genome of a
DNA/protein primitive heterotroph into a 7000 gene filamentous cyanobacterium
would have required only 7 Ma.[28]

## [edit] Current models

There is no truly "standard model" of the origin of life. Most currently
accepted models draw at least some elements from the framework laid out by the
Oparin-Haldane hypothesis. Under that umbrella, however, are a wide array of
disparate discoveries and conjectures such as the following, listed in a rough
order of postulated emergence:

  1. Some theorists suggest that the atmosphere of the early Earth may have been chemically reducing in nature, composed primary of Methane (CH4), Ammonia (NH3), Water (H2O), Hydrogen sulfide (H2S), Carbon dioxide (CO2) or carbon monoxide (CO), and Phosphate (PO43-), with molecular oxygen (O2) and ozone (O3) either rare or absent.
  2. In such a reducing atmosphere, electrical activity can catalyze the creation of certain basic small molecules (monomers) of life, such as amino acids. This was demonstrated in the Miller-Urey experiment by Stanley L. Miller and Harold C. Urey in 1953.
  3. Phospholipids (of an appropriate length) can spontaneously form lipid bilayers, a basic component of the cell membrane.
  4. A fundamental question is about the nature of the first self-replicating molecule. Since replication is accomplished in modern cells through the cooperative action of proteins and nucleic acids, the major schools of thought about how the process originated can be broadly classified as "proteins first" and "nucleic acids first".
  5. The principal thrust of the "nucleic acids first" argument is as follows: 
    1. The polymerization of nucleotides into random RNA molecules might have resulted in self-replicating ribozymes (RNA world hypothesis)
    2. Selection pressures for catalytic efficiency and diversity might have resulted in ribozymes which catalyse peptidyl transfer (hence formation of small proteins), since oligopeptides complex with RNA to form better catalysts. The first ribosome might have been created by such a process, resulting in more prevalent protein synthesis.
    3. Synthesized proteins might then outcompete ribozymes in catalytic ability, and therefore become the dominant biopolymer, relegating nucleic acids to their modern use, predominantly as a carrier of genomic information.

As of 2009, no one has yet synthesized a "protocell" using basic components
which would have the necessary properties of life (the so-called "bottom-up-
approach"). Without such a proof-of-principle, explanations have tended to be
short on specifics. However, some researchers are working in this field,
notably Steen Rasmussen at Los Alamos National Laboratory and Jack Szostak at
Harvard University. Others have argued that a "top-down approach" is more
feasible. One such approach, attempted by Craig Venter and others at The
Institute for Genomic Research, involves engineering existing prokaryotic
cells with progressively fewer genes, attempting to discern at which point the
most minimal requirements for life were reached. The biologist John Desmond
Bernal, coined the term Biopoesis for this process, and suggested that there
were a number of clearly defined "stages" that could be recognised in
explaining the origin of life.

  * Stage 1: The origin of biological monomers
  * Stage 2: The origin of biological polymers
  * Stage 3: The evolution from molecules to cell

Bernal suggested that evolution may have commenced early, some time between
Stage 1 and 2.

### [edit] Origin of organic molecules

There are two possible sources of organic molecules on the early Earth:

  1. Terrestrial origins - organic synthesis driven by impact shocks or by other energy sources (such as ultraviolet light or electrical discharges) (eg.Miller's experiments)
  2. Extraterrestrial origins - delivery by objects (eg carbonaceous chondrites) or gravitational attraction of organic molecules or primitive life-forms from space

Recently, estimates of these sources suggest that the heavy bombardment before
3.5 Ga within the early atmosphere made available quantities of organics
comparable to those produced by other energy sources.[29]

#### [edit] "Soup" theory today: Miller's experiment and subsequent work

Biochemist Robert Shapiro has summarized the "Primordial Soup" theory of
Oparin and Haldane in its "mature form" as follows:[30]

  1. The early Earth had a chemically reducing atmosphere, as discussed above.
  2. This atmosphere, exposed to energy in various forms, produced simple organic compounds ("monomers").
  3. These compounds accumulated in a "soup".
  4. By further transformation, more complex organic polymersâ and ultimately lifeâ developed in the soup.

##### [edit] Regarding the reducing atmosphere

Whether the mixture of gases used in the Miller-Urey experiment truly reflects
the atmospheric content of early Earth is a controversial topic. Other less
reducing gases produce a lower yield and variety. It was once thought that
appreciable amounts of molecular oxygen were present in the prebiotic
atmosphere, which would have essentially prevented the formation of organic
molecules; however, the current scientific consensus is that such was not the
case. (See Oxygen Catastrophe).

##### [edit] Regarding monomer formation

Main article: Miller experiment

One of the most important pieces of experimental support for the "soup" theory
came in 1953. A graduate student, Stanley Miller, and his professor, Harold
Urey, performed an experiment that demonstrated how organic molecules could
have spontaneously formed from inorganic precursors, under conditions like
those posited by the Oparin-Haldane Hypothesis. The now-famous "Miller-Urey
experiment" used a highly reduced mixture of gasesâmethane, ammonia and
hydrogenâto form basic organic monomers, such as amino acids.[31] This
provided direct experimental support for the second point of the "soup" theory
as described above, and it is around the remaining three points of the theory
that much of the debate now centers.

Apart from the Miller-Urey experiment, described above, the next most
important step in research on prebiotic organic synthesis was the
demonstration by John OrÃ³ that the nucleic acid purine base, adenine, was
formed by heating aqueous ammonium cyanide solutions.[32]

##### [edit] Regarding monomer accumulation

The "soup" theory relies on the assumption proposed by Darwin (see above) that
in an environment with no pre-existing life, organic molecules may have
accumulated and provided an environment for chemical evolution.

##### [edit] Regarding further transformation

The spontaneous formation of complex polymers from abiotically generated
monomers under the conditions posited by the "soup" theory is not at all a
straightforward process. Besides the necessary basic organic monomers,
compounds that would have prohibited the formation of polymers were formed in
high concentration during the Miller-Urey and OrÃ³ experiments. The Miller
experiment, for example, produces many substances that would undergo cross-
reactions with the amino acids or terminate the peptide chain.

More fundamentally, it can be argued that the most crucial challenge
unanswered by this theory is how the relatively simple organic building blocks
polymerise and form more complex structures, interacting in consistent ways to
form a protocell. For example, in an aqueous environment hydrolysis of
oligomers/polymers into their constituent monomers would be favored over the
condensation of individual monomers into polymers.

#### [edit] The deep sea vent theory

The deep sea vent, or hydrothermal vent, theory for the origin of life on
Earth posits that life may have begun at submarine hydrothermal vents, where
hydrogen-rich fluids emerge from below the sea floor and interface with carbon
dioxide-rich ocean water. Sustained chemical energy in such systems is derived
from redox reactions, in which electron donors, such as molecular hydrogen,
react with electron acceptors, such as carbon dioxide (see iron-sulfur world
theory).

#### [edit] Fox's experiments

In the 1950s and 1960s, Sidney W. Fox studied the spontaneous formation of
peptide structures under conditions that might plausibly have existed early in
Earth's history. He demonstrated that amino acids could spontaneously form
small peptides. These amino acids and small peptides could be encouraged to
form closed spherical membranes, called microspheres.[33]

#### [edit] Eigen's hypothesis

In the early 1970s the problem of the origin of life was approached by Manfred
Eigen and Peter Schuster of the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry. They examined the transient stages between the molecular chaos and
a self-replicating hypercycle in a prebiotic soup.[34]

In a hypercycle, the information storing system (possibly RNA) produces an
enzyme, which catalyzes the formation of another information system, in
sequence until the product of the last aids in the formation of the first
information system. Mathematically treated, hypercycles could create
quasispecies, which through natural selection entered into a form of Darwinian
evolution. A boost to hypercycle theory was the discovery that RNA, in certain
circumstances forms itself into ribozymes, capable of catalyzing their own
chemical reactions.[35] However, these reactions are limited to self-excisions
(in which a longer RNA molecule becomes shorter), and much rarer small
additions that are incapable of coding for any useful protein. The hypercycle
theory is further degraded since the hypothetical RNA would require the
existence of complex biochemicals such as nucleotides which are not formed
under the conditions proposed by the Miller-Urey experiment.

#### [edit] WÃ¤chtershÃ¤user's hypothesis

Main article: iron-sulfur world theory

<IMG>

<IMG>

Deep-sea black smoker

Another possible answer to this polymerization conundrum was provided in 1980s
by GÃ¼nter WÃ¤chtershÃ¤user, in his iron-sulfur world theory. In this theory,
he postulated the evolution of (bio)chemical pathways as fundamentals of the
evolution of life. Moreover, he presented a consistent system of tracing
today's biochemistry back to ancestral reactions that provide alternative
pathways to the synthesis of organic building blocks from simple gaseous
compounds.

In contrast to the classical Miller experiments, which depend on external
sources of energy (such as simulated lightning or UV irradiation),
"WÃ¤chtershÃ¤user systems" come with a built-in source of energy, sulfides of
iron and other minerals (e.g. pyrite). The energy released from redox
reactions of these metal sulfides is not only available for the synthesis of
organic molecules, but also for the formation of oligomers and polymers. It is
therefore hypothesized that such systems may be able to evolve into
autocatalytic sets of self-replicating, metabolically active entities that
would predate the life forms known today.

The experiment produced a relatively small yield of dipeptides (0.4% to 12.4%)
and a smaller yield of tripeptides (0.10%) but the authors also noted that:
"under these same conditions dipeptides hydrolysed rapidly."[36]

#### [edit] Radioactive beach hypothesis

Zachary Adam at the University of Washington, Seattle, claims that stronger
tidal processes from a much closer moon may have concentrated grains of
uranium and other radioactive elements at the high water mark on primordial
beaches where they may have been responsible for generating life's building
blocks.[37] According to computer models reported in Astrobiology,[38] a
deposit of such radioactive materials could show the same self-sustaining
nuclear reaction as that found in the Oklo uranium ore seam in Gabon. Such
radioactive beach sand provides sufficient energy to generate organic
molecules, such as amino acids and sugars from acetonitrile in water.
Radioactive monazite also releases soluble phosphate into regions between
sand-grains, making it biologically "accessible". Thus amino acids, sugars and
soluble phosphates can all be simultaneously produced, according to Adam.
Radioactive actinides, then in greater concentrations, could have formed part
of organo-metallic complexes. These complexes could have been important early
catalysts to living processes.

John Parnell of the University of Aberdeen suggests that such a process could
provide part of the "crucible of life" on any early wet rocky planet, so long
as the planet is large enough to have generated a system of plate tectonics
which brings radioactive minerals to the surface. As the early Earth is
believed to have many smaller "platelets" it would provide a suitable
environment for such processes.[39]

#### [edit] Models to explain homochirality

Main article: Homochirality

Some process in chemical evolution must account for the origin of
homochirality, i.e. all building blocks in living organisms having the same
"handedness" (amino acids being left-handed, nucleic acid sugars (ribose and
deoxyribose) being right-handed, and chiral phosphoglycerides). Chiral
molecules can be synthesized, but in the absence of a chiral source or a
chiral catalyst are formed in a 50/50 mixture of both enantiomers. This is
called a racemic mixture. Clark has suggested that homochirality may have
started in space, as the studies of the amino acids on the Murchison meteorite
showed L-alanine to be more than twice as frequent as its D form, and
L-glutamic acid was more than 3 times prevalent than its D counterpart. It is
suggested that polarised light has the power to destroy one enantiomer within
the proto-planetary disk. Noyes[40] showed that beta decay caused the
breakdown of D-leucine, in a racemic mixture, and that the presence of 14C,
present in larger amounts in organic chemicals in the early Earth environment,
could have been the cause. Robert M. Hazen reports upon experiments conducted
in which various chiral crystal surfaces act as sites for possible
concentration and assembly of chiral monomer units into macromolecules.[41]
Once established, chirality would be selected for.[42] Work with organic
compounds found on meteorites tends to suggest that chirality is a
characteristic of abiogenic synthesis, as amino acids show a left-handed bias,
whereas sugars show a predominantly right-handed bias.[43]

#### [edit] Self-organization and replication

Main article: Self-organization

While features of self-organization and self-replication are often considered
the hallmark of living systems, there are many instances of abiotic molecules
exhibiting such characteristics under proper conditions. For example Martin
and Russel show that physical compartmentation by cell membranes from the
environment and self-organization of self-contained redox reactions are the
most conserved attributes of living things, and they argue therefore that
inorganic matter with such attributes would be life's most likely last common
ancestor.[44]

Virus self-assembly within host cells has implications for the study of the
origin of life,[45] as it lends further credence to the hypothesis that life
could have started as self-assembling organic molecules.[46]

### [edit] From organic molecules to protocells

The question "How do simple organic molecules form a protocell?" is largely
unanswered but there are many hypotheses. Some of these postulate the early
appearance of nucleic acids ("genes-first") whereas others postulate the
evolution of biochemical reactions and pathways first ("metabolism-first").
Recently, trends are emerging to create hybrid models that combine aspects of
both.

#### [edit] "Genes first" models: the RNA world

Main article: RNA world hypothesis

The RNA world hypothesis describes an early Earth with self-replicating and
catalytic RNA but no DNA or proteins. This has spurred scientists to try to
determine if relatively short RNA molecules could have spontaneously formed
that were capable of catalyzing their own continuing replication.[47] A number
of hypotheses of modes of formation have been put forward. Early cell
membranes could have formed spontaneously from proteinoids, protein-like
molecules that are produced when amino acid solutions are heatedâwhen
present at the correct concentration in aqueous solution, these form
microspheres which are observed to behave similarly to membrane-enclosed
compartments. Other possibilities include systems of chemical reactions taking
place within clay substrates or on the surface of pyrite rocks. Factors
supportive of an important role for RNA in early life include its ability to
act both to store information and catalyse chemical reactions (as a ribozyme);
its many important roles as an intermediate in the expression and maintenance
of the genetic information (in the form of DNA) in modern organisms; and the
ease of chemical synthesis of at least the components of the molecule under
conditions approximating the early Earth. Relatively short RNA molecules which
can duplicate others have been artificially produced in the lab.[48] Such
replicase RNA, which functions as both code and catalyst provides a template
upon which copying can occur. Jack Szostak has shown that certain catalytic
RNAs can, indeed, join smaller RNA sequences together, creating the potential,
in the right conditions for self-replication. If these were present, Darwinian
selection would favour the proliferation of such self-catalysing structures,
to which further functionalities could be added.[49] Lincoln and Joyce
identified an RNA enzyme capable of self sustained replication.[50]

Researchers have pointed out difficulties for the abiotic synthesis of
nucleotides from cytosine and uracil.[51] Cytosine has a half-life of 19 days
at 100 Â°C (212 Â°F) and 17,000 years in freezing water.[52] Larralde et al.,
say that "the generally accepted prebiotic synthesis of ribose, the formose
reaction, yields numerous sugars without any selectivity."[53] and they
conclude that their "results suggest that the backbone of the first genetic
material could not have contained ribose or other sugars because of their
instability." The ester linkage of ribose and phosphoric acid in RNA is known
to be prone to hydrolysis.[54]

A slightly different version of the RNA-world hypothesis is that a different
type of nucleic acid, such as PNA, TNA or GNA, was the first one to emerge as
a self-reproducing molecule, to be replaced by RNA only later.[55][56]
Pyrimidine ribonucleosides and their respective nucleotides have been
prebiotically synthesised by a sequence of reactions which by-pass the free
sugars, and are assembled in a stepwise fashion by going against the dogma
that nitrogenous and oxygenous chemistries should be avoided. In a series of
publications, The Sutherland Group at the School of Chemistry, University of
Manchester have demonstrated high yielding routes to cytidine and uridine
ribonucleotides built from small 2 and 3 carbon fragments such as
glycolaldehyde, glyceraldehyde or glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, cyanamide and
cyanoacetylene. One of the steps in this sequence allows the isolation of
enantiopure ribose aminooxazoline if the enantiomeric excess of glyceraldehyde
is 60 % or greater.[57] This can be viewed as a prebiotic purification step,
where the said compound spontaneously crystallised out from a mixture of the
other pentose aminooxazolines. Ribose aminooxazoline can then react with
cyanoacetylene in a mild and highly efficient manner to give the alpha
cytidine ribonucleotide. Photoanomerization with UV light allows for inversion
about the 1' anomeric centre to give the correct beta stereochemistry.[58]
James Ferris's studies have shown that clay minerals of montmorillonite will
catalyze the formation of RNA in aqueous solution, by joining activated mono
RNA nucleotides to join together to form longer chains.[59] Although these
chains have random sequences, the possibility that one sequence began to non-
randomly increase its frequency by increasing the speed of its catalysis is
possible to "kick start" biochemical evolution.

#### [edit] "Metabolism first" models: iron-sulfur world and others

Several models reject the idea of the self-replication of a "naked-gene" and
postulate the emergence of a primitive metabolism which could provide an
environment for the later emergence of RNA replication.

One of the earliest incarnations of this idea was put forward in 1924 with
Aleksandr Ivanovich Oparin's notion of primitive self-replicating vesicles
which predated the discovery of the structure of DNA. More recent variants in
the 1980s and 1990s include GÃ¼nter WÃ¤chtershÃ¤user's iron-sulfur world
theory and models introduced by Christian de Duve based on the chemistry of
thioesters. More abstract and theoretical arguments for the plausibility of
the emergence of metabolism without the presence of genes include a
mathematical model introduced by Freeman Dyson in the early 1980s and Stuart
Kauffman's notion of collectively autocatalytic sets, discussed later in that
decade.

However, the idea that a closed metabolic cycle, such as the reductive citric
acid cycle, could form spontaneously (proposed by GÃ¼nter WÃ¤chtershÃ¤user)
remains debated. In an article entitled "Self-Organizing Biochemical
Cycles",[60] the late Leslie Orgel summarized his analysis of the proposal by
stating, "There is at present no reason to expect that multistep cycles such
as the reductive citric acid cycle will self-organize on the surface of
FeS/FeS2 or some other mineral." It is possible that another type of metabolic
pathway was used at the beginning of life. For example, instead of the
reductive citric acid cycle, the "open" acetyl-CoA pathway (another one of the
five recognised ways of carbon dioxide fixation in nature today) would be
compatible with the idea of self-organisation on a metal sulfide surface. The
key enzyme of this pathway, carbon monoxide dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase
harbours mixed nickel-iron-sulfur clusters in its reaction centers and
catalyses the formation of acetyl-CoA (which may be regarded as a modern form
of acetyl-thiol) in a single step.

#### [edit] Possible role of bubbles

Waves breaking on the shore create a delicate foam composed of bubbles. Winds
sweeping across the ocean have a tendency to drive things to shore, much like
driftwood collecting on the beach. It is possible that organic molecules were
concentrated on the shorelines in much the same way. Shallow coastal waters
also tend to be warmer, further concentrating the molecules through
evaporation. While bubbles composed mostly of water burst quickly, water
containing amphiphiles forms much more stable bubbles, lending more time to
the particular bubble to perform these crucial reactions.

Amphiphiles are oily compounds containing a hydrophilic head on one or both
ends of a hydrophobic molecule. Some amphiphiles have the tendency to
spontaneously form membranes in water. A spherically closed membrane contains
water and is a hypothetical precursor to the modern cell membrane. If a
protein would increase the integrity of its parent bubble, that bubble had an
advantage, and was placed at the top of the natural selection waiting list.
Primitive reproduction can be envisioned when the bubbles burst, releasing the
results of the 'experiment' into the surrounding medium. Once enough of the
'right stuff' was released into the medium, the development of the first
prokaryotes, eukaryotes, and multicellular organisms could be achieved.[61]

Similarly, bubbles formed entirely out of protein-like molecules, called
microspheres, will form spontaneously under the right conditions. But they are
not a likely precursor to the modern cell membrane, as cell membranes are
composed primarily of lipid compounds rather than amino-acid compounds (for
types of membrane spheres associated with abiogenesis, see protobionts,
micelle, coacervate).

A recent model by Fernando and Rowe[62] suggests that the enclosure of an
autocatalytic non-enzymatic metabolism within protocells may have been one way
of avoiding the side-reaction problem that is typical of metabolism first
models.

## [edit] Other models

### [edit] Autocatalysis

British ethologist Richard Dawkins wrote about autocatalysis as a potential
explanation for the origin of life in his 2004 book The Ancestor's Tale.
Autocatalysts are substances which catalyze the production of themselves, and
therefore have the property of being a simple molecular replicator. In his
book, Dawkins cites experiments performed by Julius Rebek and his colleagues
at the Scripps Research Institute in California in which they combined amino
adenosine and pentafluorophenyl ester with the autocatalyst amino adenosine
triacid ester (AATE). One system from the experiment contained variants of
AATE which catalysed the synthesis of themselves. This experiment demonstrated
the possibility that autocatalysts could exhibit competition within a
population of entities with heredity, which could be interpreted as a
rudimentary form of natural selection.

### [edit] Clay theory

A model for the origin of life based on clay was forwarded by A. Graham
Cairns-Smith of the University of Glasgow in 1985 and explored as a plausible
illustration by several other scientists, including Richard Dawkins[63]. Clay
theory postulates that complex organic molecules arose gradually on a pre-
existing, non-organic replication platformâsilicate crystals in solution.
Complexity in companion molecules developed as a function of selection
pressures on types of clay crystal is then exapted to serve the replication of
organic molecules independently of their silicate "launch stage".

Cairns-Smith is a staunch critic of other models of chemical evolution.[64]
However, he admits, that like many models of the origin of life, his own also
has its shortcomings (Horgan 1991).

In 2007, Kahr and colleagues reported their experiments to examine the idea
that crystals can act as a source of transferable information, using crystals
of potassium hydrogen phthalate. "Mother" crystals with imperfections were
cleaved and used as seeds to grow "daughter" crystals from solution. They then
examined the distribution of imperfections in the crystal system and found
that the imperfections in the mother crystals were indeed reproduced in the
daughters. The daughter crystals had many additional imperfections. For a
gene-like behavior the additional imperfections should be much less than the
parent ones, thus Kahr concludes that the crystals "were not faithful enough
to store and transfer information form one generation to the next".[65][66]

### [edit] Gold's "Deep-hot biosphere" model

In the 1970s, Thomas Gold proposed the theory that life first developed not on
the surface of the Earth, but several kilometers below the surface. The
discovery in the late 1990s of nanobes (filamental structures that are smaller
than bacteria, but that may contain DNA) in deep rocks [67] might be seen as
lending support to Gold's theory.

It is now reasonably well established that microbial life is plentiful at
shallow depths in the Earth, up to 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) below the
surface,[67] in the form of extremophile archaea, rather than the better-known
eubacteria (which live in more accessible conditions). It is claimed that
discovery of microbial life below the surface of another body in our solar
system would lend significant credence to this theory. Thomas Gold also
asserted that a trickle of food from a deep, unreachable, source is needed for
survival because life arising in a puddle of organic material is likely to
consume all of its food and become extinct. Gold's theory is that flow of food
is due to out-gassing of primordial methane from the Earth's mantle; more
conventional explanations of the food supply of deep microbes (away from
sedimentary carbon compounds) is that the organisms subsist on hydrogen
released by an interaction between water and (reduced) iron compounds in
rocks.

### [edit] "Primitive" extraterrestrial life

An alternative to Earthly abiogenesis is the hypothesis that primitive life
may have originally formed extraterrestrially, either in space or on a nearby
planet (Mars). (Note that exogenesis is related to, but not the same as, the
notion of panspermia). A supporter of this theory was Francis Crick.

Organic compounds are relatively common in space, especially in the outer
solar system where volatiles are not evaporated by solar heating. Comets are
encrusted by outer layers of dark material, thought to be a tar-like substance
composed of complex organic material formed from simple carbon compounds after
reactions initiated mostly by irradiation by ultraviolet light. It is supposed
that a rain of material from comets could have brought significant quantities
of such complex organic molecules to Earth.

An alternative but related hypothesis, proposed to explain the presence of
life on Earth so soon after the planet had cooled down, with apparently very
little time for prebiotic evolution, is that life formed first on early Mars.
Due to its smaller size Mars cooled before Earth (a difference of hundreds of
millions of years), allowing prebiotic processes there while Earth was still
too hot. Life was then transported to the cooled Earth when crustal material
was blasted off Mars by asteroid and comet impacts. Mars continued to cool
faster and eventually became hostile to the continued evolution or even
existence of life (it lost its atmosphere due to low volcanism); Earth is
following the same fate as Mars, but at a slower rate.

Neither hypothesis actually answers the question of how life first originated,
but merely shifts it to another planet or a comet. However, the advantage of
an extraterrestrial origin of primitive life is that life is not required to
have evolved on each planet it occurs on, but rather in a single location, and
then spread about the galaxy to other star systems via cometary and/or
meteorite impact. Evidence to support the plausibility of the concept is
scant, but it finds support in recent study of Martian meteorites found in
Antarctica and in studies of extremophile microbes.[68] Additional support
comes from a recent discovery of a bacterial ecosytem whose energy source is
radioactivity.[69]

A recent experiment led by Jason Dworkin, subjected a frozen mixture of water,
methanol, ammonia and carbon monoxide to UV radiation, mimicking conditions
found in an extraterrestrial environment. This combination yielded large
amounts of organic material that self-organised to form bubbles when immersed
in water. Dworkin considered these bubbles to resemble cell membranes that
enclose and concentrate the chemistry of life, separating their interior from
the outside world.

The bubbles produced in these experiments were between 10 to 40 micrometres
(0.00039 to 0.0016 in), or about the size of red blood cells. Remarkably, the
bubbles fluoresced, or glowed, when exposed to UV light. Absorbing UV and
converting it into visible light in this way was considered one possible way
of providing energy to a primitive cell. If such bubbles played a role in the
origin of life, the fluorescence could have been a precursor to primitive
photosynthesis. Such fluorescence also provides the benefit of acting as a
sunscreen, diffusing any damage that otherwise would be inflicted by UV
radiation. Such a protective function would have been vital for life on the
early Earth, since the ozone layer, which blocks out the sun's most
destructive UV rays, did not form until after photosynthetic life began to
produce oxygen.[70]

### [edit] Lipid World

This theory postulates that the first self-replicating object was lipid-
like.[71] It is known that phospholipids form bilayers in water while under
agitationâ the same structure as in cell membranes. These molecules were not
present on early earth, however other amphiphilic long chain molecules also
form membranes. Furthermore, these bodies may expand (by insertion of
additional lipids), and under excessive expansion may undergo spontaneous
splitting which preserves the same size and composition of lipids in the two
progenies. The main idea in this theory is that the molecular composition of
the lipid bodies is the preliminary way for information storage, and evolution
led to the appearance of polymer entities such as RNA or DNA that may store
information favorably. Still, no biochemical mechanism has been offered to
support the Lipid World theory.

### [edit] Polyphosphates

The problem with most scenarios of abiogenesis is that the thermodynamic
equilibrium of amino acid versus peptides is in the direction of separate
amino acids. What has been missing is some force that drives polymerization.
The resolution of this problem may well be in the properties of
polyphosphates.[72][73] Polyphosphates are formed by polymerization of
ordinary monophosphate ions PO4â3. Several mechanisms for such
polymerization have been suggested. Polyphosphates cause polymerization of
amino acids into peptides. They are also logical precursors in the synthesis
of such key biochemical compounds as ATP. A key issue seems to be that calcium
reacts with soluble phosphate to form insoluble calcium phosphate (apatite),
so some plausible mechanism must be found to keep calcium ions from causing
precipitation of phosphate. There has been much work on this topic over the
years, but an interesting new idea is that meteorites may have introduced
reactive phosphorus species on the early earth.[74]

### [edit] PAH world hypothesis

Main article: PAH world hypothesis

Other sources of complex molecules have been postulated, including
extraterrestrial stellar or interstellar origin. For example, from spectral
analyses, organic molecules are known to be present in comets and meteorites.
In 2004, a team detected traces of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH's) in
a nebula.[75] Those are the most complex molecules so far found in space. The
use of PAH's has also been proposed as a precursor to the RNA world in the PAH
world hypothesis.[76] The Spitzer Space Telescope has recently detected a
star, HH 46-IR, which is forming by a process similar to that by which the sun
formed. In the disk of material surrounding the star, there is a very large
range of molecules, including cyanide compounds, hydrocarbons, and carbon
monoxide. PAHs have also been found all over the surface of galaxy M81, which
is 12 million light years away from the Earth, confirming their widespread
distribution in space.[77]

### [edit] Multiple genesis

Different forms of life may have appeared quasi-simultaneously in the early
history of Earth.[78] The other forms may be extinct, leaving distinctive
fossils through their different biochemistry (e.g., using arsenic instead of
phosphorus), survive as extremophiles, or simply be unnoticed through their
being analogous to organisms of the current life tree. Hartman[79] for example
combines a number of theories together, by proposing that:

> The first organisms were self-replicating iron-rich clays which fixed carbon
dioxide into oxalic and other dicarboxylic acids. This system of replicating
clays and their metabolic phenotype then evolved into the sulfide rich region
of the hotspring acquiring the ability to fix nitrogen. Finally phosphate was
incorporated into the evolving system which allowed the synthesis of
nucleotides and phospholipids. If biosynthesis recapitulates biopoesis, then
the synthesis of amino acids preceded the synthesis of the purine and
pyrimidine bases. Furthermore the polymerization of the amino acid thioesters
into polypeptides preceded the directed polymerization of amino acid esters by
polynucleotides.

Lynn Margulis's endosymbiotic theory suggests that multiple forms of bacteria
entered into symbiotic relationship to form the eucaryotic cell. The
horizontal transfer of genetic material between bacteria promotes such
symbiotic relationships, and thus many separate organisms may have contributed
to building what has been recognised as the Last Universal Common Ancestor
(LUCA) of modern organisms. James Lovelock's Gaia theory, proposes that such
bacterial symbiosis establishes the environment as a system produced by and
supportive of life. His arguments strongly weaken the case for life having
evolved elsewhere in the solar system.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Wilde SA, Valley JW, Peck WH, Graham CM (January 2001). "Evidence from detrital zircons for the existence of continental crust and oceans on the Earth 4.4 Gyr ago". Nature 409 (6817): 175â8. doi:10.1038/35051550. PMID 11196637.
  2. ^ Schopf JW, Kudryavtsev AB, Agresti DG, Wdowiak TJ, Czaja AD (March 2002). "Laser--Raman imagery of Earth's earliest fossils". Nature 416 (6876): 73â6. doi:10.1038/416073a. PMID 11882894.
  3. ^ Hayes, John M.; Waldbauer, Jacob R. (2006). "The carbon cycle and associated redox processes through time". Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 361 (1470): 931â950. doi:10.1098/rstb.2006.1840.
  4. ^ Archer, Corey; Vance, Derek (2006). "Coupled Fe and S isotope evidence for Archean microbial Fe(III) and sulfate reduction". Geology 34 (3): 153â156. doi:10.1130/G22067.1.
  5. ^ Cavalier-Smith, Thomas; Brasier, Martin; Embley, T. Martin (2006). "Introduction: how and when did microbes change the world?". Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 361 (1470): 845â850. doi:10.1098/rstb.2006.1847.
  6. ^ Summons, Roger E.; et al. (2006). "Steroids, triterpenoids and molecular oxygen". Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 361 (1470): 951â968. doi:10.1098/rstb.2006.1837.
  7. ^ Philip P. Wiener, ed (1973). "Spontaneous Generation". Dictionary of the History of Ideas. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/DHI/dhi.cgi?id=dv4-39. Retrieved on 2009-01-24.
  8. ^ Lennox, James (2001). Aristotle's Philosophy of Biology: Studies in the Origins of Life Science. New York, NY: Cambridge Press. pp. 229â258. ISBN 978-0521659765.
  9. ^ Balme, D. M. (1962). "Development of Biology in Aristotle and Theophrastus: Theory of Spontaneous Generation". Phronesis: a journal for Ancient Philosophy 7 (1â2): 91â104. doi:10.1163/156852862X00052.
  10. ^ Dobell, C. (1960), "Antony Van Leeuwenhoek and his little animals"New York (EUA)
  11. ^ Oparin, Aleksandr I. (1953). Origin of Life. Dover Publications, New York. pp. p.196. ISBN 0486602133.
  12. ^ First life on Earth windmillministries.org, Retrieved on 2008-01-18
  13. ^ "It is often said that all the conditions for the first production of a living organism are now present, which could ever have been present. But if (and oh! what a big if!) we could conceive in some warm little pond, with all sorts of ammonia and phosphoric salts, light, heat, electricity, &c., present, that a proteine compound was chemically formed ready to undergo still more complex changes, at the present day such matter would be instantly devoured or absorbed, which would not have been the case before living creatures were formed." written in 1871, published in Darwin, Francis, ed. 1887. The life and letters of Charles Darwin, including an autobiographical chapter. London: John Murray. Volume 3. p. 18
  14. ^ Oparin, A. I. (1924) Proiskhozhozhdenie zhizny, Moscow (Translated by Ann Synge in Bernal (1967), The Origin of Life, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, pages 199-234.
  15. ^ Oparin, A. I. The Origin of Life. New York: Dover (1952)
  16. ^ Bernal, J.D. (1969)"Origins of Life" (Wiedenfeld and Nicholson)
  17. ^ Bryson, Bill (2003) A Short History of Nearly Everything pp. 300â302; ISBN 0-552-99704-8
  18. ^ Morse, J. W.; MacKenzie, F. T. (1998). "Hadean Ocean Carbonate chemistry". Aquatic Geochemistry 4: 301â319. doi:10.1023/A:1009632230875.
  19. ^ Sleep, Norman H.; et al. (1989). "Annihilation of ecosystems by large asteroid impacts on early Earth". Nature 342: 139â142. doi:10.1038/342139a0.
  20. ^ Maher, Kevin A.; Stephenson, David J. (1988). "Impact frustration of the origin of life". Nature 331 (6157): 612â614. doi:10.1038/331612a0.
  21. ^ Orgel, Leslie E. (2004). "Prebiotic adenine revisited: Eutectics and photochemistry". Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 34: 361â369. doi:10.1023/B:ORIG.0000029882.52156.c2.
  22. ^ Robertson, Michael P.; Miller, Stanley L. (1995). "An efficient prebiotic synthesis of cytosine and uracil". Nature 375 (6534): 772â774. doi:10.1038/375772a0.
  23. ^ Bada, J. L.; Bigham, C.; Miller, S. L. (1994). "Impact Melting of Frozen Oceans on the Early Earth: Implications for the Origin of Life" (abstract). PNAS 91 (4): 1248â1250. doi:10.1073/pnas.91.4.1248. PMID 11539550. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/91/4/1248.
  24. ^ "Did Life Evolve in Ice?". DISCOVER Magazine. http://discovermagazine.com/2008/feb/did-life-evolve-in-ice/article_view?b_start:int=0&-C=. Retrieved on 2008-07-03.
  25. ^ Levy, M.; Miller, S. L.; Brinton, K.; Bada, J. L. (June 2000). "Prebiotic synthesis of adenine and amino acids under Europa-like conditions". Icarus 145 (2): 609â13. doi:10.1006/icar.2000.6365. PMID 11543508. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez. Retrieved on 2008-02-11.
  26. ^ Trinks, Hauke; SchrÃ¶der, Wolfgang; Biebricher, Christof (October 2005). "Ice And The Origin Of Life". Origins of Life and Evolution of the Biosphere 35 (5): 429â445. doi:10.1007/s11084-005-5009-1. http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/klu/orig/2005/00000035/00000005/00005009#aff_1. Retrieved on 2008-02-11.
  27. ^ Mojzis, S. J.; et al. (1996). "Evidence for life on earth before 3,800 million years ago". Nature 384 (6604): 55â59. doi:10.1038/384055a0.
  28. ^ Lazcano, A.; Miller, S. L. (1994). "How long did it take for life to begin and evolve to cyanobacteria?". Journal of Molecular Evolution 39: 546â554. doi:10.1007/BF00160399.
  29. ^ Chyba, Christopher; Sagan, Carl (1992). "Endogenous production, exogenous delivery and impact-shock synthesis of organic molecules: an inventory for the origins of life". Nature 355 (6356): 125â132. doi:10.1038/355125a0.
  30. ^ Shapiro, Robert (1987). Origins: A Skeptic's Guide to the Creation of Life on Earth. Bantam Books. p. 110.
  31. ^ Miller, Stanley L. (1953). "A Production of Amino Acids Under Possible Primitive Earth Conditions". Science 117: 528â529. doi:10.1126/science.117.3046.528. PMID 13056598.
  32. ^ OrÃ³, J. (1961). "Mechanism of synthesis of adenine from hydrogen cyanide under possible primitive Earth conditions". Nature 191: 1193â1194. doi:10.1038/1911193a0.
  33. ^ Experiments on origin of organic molecules Nitro.biosci.arizona.edu, Retrieved on 2008-01-13
  34. ^ Manfred Eigen and Peter Schuster: The Hypercycle: A principle of natural self-organization, 1979, Springer ISBN 0-387-09293-5
  35. ^ origin of life thebioreview.com Retrieved on 2008-01-14
  36. ^ Huber, C.; WÃ¤chterhÃ¤user, G. (1998). "Peptides by activation of amino acids with CO on (Ni,Fe)S surfaces: implications for the origin of life". Science 281 (5377): 670â672. doi:10.1126/science.281.5377.670. PMID 9685253.
  37. ^ Dartnell, Lewis (2008-01-12). "Life's a beach on planet Earth". New Scientist.
  38. ^ Adam, Zachary (2007). "Actinides and Life's Origins". Astrobiology 7 (6): 852â872. doi:10.1089/ast.2006.0066.
  39. ^ Parnell, John (2004). "Mineral Radioactivity in Sands as a Mechanism for Fixation of Organic Carbon on the Early Earth" (PDF). Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 34 (6): 533â547. doi:10.1023/B:ORIG.0000043132.23966.a1. http://www.springerlink.com/content/mp42778372jv6054/fulltext.pdf.
  40. ^ Noyes, H. Pierre; Bonner, William A.; and Tomlin, J. A. (1977), "On the origin of biological chirality via natural beta-decay" (Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres, Volume 8, Number 1 / April, 1977)
  41. ^ Hazen, Robert M (2005), "Genesis: the scientific quest for life's origin" (JosephHenry Books)
  42. ^ Clark, S. (1999). "Polarised starlight and the handedness of Life". American Scientist 97: 336â343. doi:10.1511/1999.4.336.
  43. ^ Astroscience Magazine [1] Accessed 26 April 2008
  44. ^ Martin, William; Russel, Michael J. (2003). "On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells". Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 358 (1429): 59â85. doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1183.
  45. ^ Koonin EV, Senkevich TG, Dolja VV (2006). "The ancient Virus World and evolution of cells". Biol. Direct 1: 29. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-1-29. PMID 16984643. PMC: 1594570. http://www.biology-direct.com/content/1//29. Retrieved on 2008-10-20.
  46. ^ Vlassov AV, Kazakov SA, Johnston BH, Landweber LF (August 2005). "The RNA world on ice: a new scenario for the emergence of RNA information". J. Mol. Evol. 61 (2): 264â73. doi:10.1007/s00239-004-0362-7. PMID 16044244.
  47. ^ Ma W, Yu C, Zhang W, Hu J (November 2007). "Nucleotide synthetase ribozymes may have emerged first in the RNA world". RNA (New York, N.Y.) 13 (11): 2012â9. doi:10.1261/rna.658507. PMID 17878321.
  48. ^ Johnston, W. K.; et al. (2001). "RNA-Catalyzed RNA Polymerization: Accurate and General RNA-Templated Primer Extension". Science 292 (5520): 1319â1325. doi:10.1126/science.1060786. PMID 11358999.
  49. ^ Szostak, Jack W. (June 4, 2008). "The Origins of Function in Biological Nucleic Acids, Proteins, and Membranes". HHMI. http://www.hhmi.org/research/investigators/szostak.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-29.
  50. ^ Lincoln, Tracey A.; Joyce, Gerald F. (January 8, 2009). "Self-Sustained Replication of an RNA Enzyme". Science (New York: American Association for the Advancement of Science). doi:10.1126/science.1167856. ISSN 1095-9203. PMID 19131595. http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/1167856. Retrieved on 2009-01-13.
  51. ^ Orgel, L. (1994). "The origin of life on earth". Scientific American 271 (4): 81.
  52. ^ Levy, Matthew; Miller, Stanley L. (1998). "The stability of the RNA bases: Implications for the origin of life". PNAS 95: 7933â7938. doi:10.1073/pnas.95.14.7933. PMID 9653118.
  53. ^ Larralde, R.; Robertson, M. P.; Miller, S. L. (1995). "Rates of Decomposition of Ribose and Other Sugars: Implications for Chemical Evolution". PNAS 92 (18): 8158â8160. doi:10.1073/pnas.92.18.8158. PMID 7667262.
  54. ^ Lindahl, Tomas (1993). "Instability and decay of the primary structure of DNA". Nature 362 (6422): 709â715. doi:10.1038/362709a0.
  55. ^ Orgel, Leslie (2000). "A Simpler Nucleic Acid". Science 290 (5495): 1306â1307. doi:10.1126/science.290.5495.1306. PMID 11185405.
  56. ^ Nelson, K. E.; Levy, M.; Miller, S. L. (2000). "Peptide nucleic acids rather than RNA may have been the first genetic molecule" (abstract). PNAS 97 (8): 3868â3871. doi:10.1073/pnas.97.8.3868. PMID 10760258. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/abstract/97/8/3868.
  57. ^ Carole Anastasi, Michael A. Crowe, Matthew W. Powner, John D. Sutherland Angewandte Chemie International Edition Volume 45, Issue 37 , Pages6176 - 6179
  58. ^ Matthew W. Powner, John D. Sutherland ChemBioChem Volume 9, Issue 15 , Pages2386 - 2387
  59. ^ Wenhua Huang and James P. Ferris (2006), "One-step, regioselective synthesis of up to 50 mers of RNA oligomers by montmorillonite catalysis", (J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 128, 8914-8919).
  60. ^ Orgel, Leslie E. (2000). "Self-organizing biochemical cycles". PNAS 97 (23): 12503â12507. doi:10.1073/pnas.220406697. PMID 11058157.
  61. ^ "The Cell: Evolution of the First Organism" by Joseph Panno
  62. ^ publications
  63. ^ Dawkins, Richard (1996) [1986]. The Blind Watchmaker. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. pp. 148-161. ISBN 0-393-31570-3.
  64. ^ Genetic Takeover: And the Mineral Origins of Life ISBN 0-521-23312-7
  65. ^ Test of Cairns-Smiths crystals-as-genes hypothesis, Theresa Bullard, John Freudenthal, Serine Avagyan and Bart Kahr, Faraday Discuss., 2007, DOI: 10.1039/b616612c
  66. ^ Caroline Moore (16 July 2007). "Crystals as genes?". Chemical Science. http://www.rsc.org/Publishing/ChemScience/Volume/2007/08/Crystals_as_genes.asp.
  67. ^ a b NanobesâIntro microscopy-uk.org, Retrieved on 2008-01-14
  68. ^ Tough Earth bug may be from Mars - 25 September 2002 - New Scientist
  69. ^ Lin, Li-Hung; Pei-Ling Wang, Douglas Rumble, Johanna Lippmann-Pipke, Erik Boice, Lisa M. Pratt, Barbara Sherwood Lollar, Eoin L. Brodie, Terry C. Hazen, Gary L. Andersen, Todd Z. DeSantis, Duane P. Moser, Dave Kershaw, T. C. Onstott (October 2006). "Long-Term Sustainability of a High-Energy, Low-Diversity Crustal Biome". Science 314: 479â482. doi:10.1126/science.1127376. 5798. PMID 17053150.
  70. ^ Astrobiology Manazine [2] Accessed 26 April 2008
  71. ^ Origin of Life at the Weizmann Institute
  72. ^ [3]
  73. ^ The Origin Of Life
  74. ^ Pasek, Matthew A. (2008). "Rethinking early Earth phosphorus geochemistry". Proceedings National Academy of Sciences U.S. 105: 853â858. doi:10.1073/pnas.0708205105.
  75. ^ Discovery of Blue Fluorescence by Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Molecules in the Red Rectangle. A. N. Witt, et al
  76. ^ Battersby, S. (2004). Space molecules point to organic origins. Retrieved January 11, 2004 from http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn4552-space-molecules-point-to-organic-origins.html
  77. ^ Astrobiology Mgazine [4]Accessed 26 April 2008
  78. ^ Are Aliens Among Us? In pursuit of evidence that life arose on Earth more than once, scientists are searching for microbes that are radically different from all known organisms Scientific American. 19 November 2007
  79. ^ Hartman, Hyman (1998) "Photosynthesis and the Origin of Life" (Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres, Volume 28, Numbers 4â6 / October, 1998)

## [edit] Further reading

  * Arrhenius, Gustaf; et al. (1997). "Entropy and Charge in Molecular Evolutionâthe Case of Phosphate". Journal of Theoretical Biology 187 (4): 503â522. doi:10.1006/jtbi.1996.0385.
  * Buehler, Lukas K. (2000â2005) The physico-chemical basis of life, http://www.whatislife.com/about.html accessed 27 October 2005.
  * Davies, Paul (1998). The Fifth Miracle. Penguin Science, London. ISBN 0-140-28226-2.
  * De Duve, Christian (January 1996). Vital Dust: The Origin and Evolution of Life on Earth. Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-09045-1.
  * Fernando CT, Rowe, J (2007). "Natural selection in chemical evolution". Journal of Theoretical Biology 247: 152â67. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.01.028.
  * Hartman, Hyman (1998). "Photosynthesis and the Origin of Life". Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 28 (4â6): 515â521. doi:10.1023/A:1006548904157.
  * Harris, Henry (2002). Things come to life. Spontaneous generation revisited. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198515383.
  * Hazen, Robert M. (December 2005). Genesis: The Scientific Quest for Life's Origins. Joseph Henry Press. ISBN 0-309-09432-1. http://newton.nap.edu/books/0309094321/html.
  * Gribbon, John (1998). The Case of the Missing Neutrino's and other Curious Phenomena of the Universe. Penguin Science, London. ISBN 0-140-28734-5.
  * Horgan, J (1991). "In the beginning". Scientific American 264: 100â109. (Cited on p. 108).
  * Huber, C. and WÃ¤chterhÃ¤user, G., (1998). "Peptides by activation of amino acids with CO on (Ni,Fe)S surfaces: implications for the origin of life". Science 281: 670â672. doi:10.1126/science.281.5377.670. PMID 9685253. (Cited on p. 108).
  * Knoll, Andrew H. (2003). Life on a Young Planet: The First Three Billion Years of Evolution on Earth. Princeton University Press.
  * Luisi, Pier Luigi (2006). The Emergence of Life: From Chemical Origins to Synthetic Biology. Cambridge University Press.
  * Martin, W. and Russell M.J. (2002). "On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society: Biological sciences 358: 59â85. doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1183.
  * Maynard Smith, John; Szathmary, Eors (2000-03-16). The Origins of Life: From the Birth of Life to the Origin of Language. Oxford Paperbacks. ISBN 0-19-286209-X.
  * Morowitz, Harold J. (1992) "Beginnings of Cellular Life: Metabolism Recapitulates Biogenesis". Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-05483-1
  * NASA Astrobiology Institute: Earth's Early Environment and Life
  * NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Exobiology: Gustaf O. Arrhenius
  * Pitsch, Stefan; Krishnamurthy, Ramanarayanan; Arrhenius, Gustaf (2000). "Concentration of Simple Aldehydes by Sulfite-Containing Double-Layer Hydroxide Minerals: Implications for Biopoesis" (abstract). Helvetica Chimica Acta 83 (9): 2398 2411\. doi:10.1002/1522-2675(20000906)83:9<2398::AID-HLCA2398>3.0.CO;2-5. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/abstract/73501648/ABSTRACT.
  * Russell MJ, Hall AJ, Cairns-Smith AG, Braterman PS (1988). "Submarine hot springs and the origin of life". Nature 336: 117. doi:10.1038/336117a0.
  * Dedicated issue of Philosophical Transactions B on Major Steps in Cell Evolution freely available.
  * Dedicated issue of Philosophical Transactions B on the Emergence of Life on the Early Earth freely available.

## [edit] See also

  * Important publications in origin of life
  * Astrochemistry
  * Biogenesis
  * Drake equation
  * History of Earth
  * Mimivirus
  * Planetary habitability
  * Rare Earth hypothesis
  * Common descent
  * Zeolites
  * Origin of the world's oceans
  * Mediocrity principle
  * Autocatalytic reactions and order creation
  * List of independent discoveries
  * Entropy and life

## [edit] External links

  * The Origin of Life Video by John Maynard Smith
  * "Harvard Team Creates the World's 1st Synthesized Cells"
  * Martin M Hanczyc and Jack W Szostak. Replicating vesicles as models of primitive cell growth and division. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2004, 8:660â664.PDF (192 KB)
  * Martin A. Nowak and Hisashi Ohtsuki.Prevolutionary dynamics and the origin of evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2008
  * "Exploring Life's Origins: a Virtual Exhibit"
  * "SELF-REPLICATION: Even peptides do it" by Stuart A. Kauffman (web archive version as original page no longer accessible)
  * Origins of Life website including papers, resources, by Dr. Michael Russell at the U. of Glasgow
  * Possible Connections Between Interstellar Chemistry and the Origin of Life on the Earth
  * Scientists Find Clues That Life Began in Deep SpaceâNASA Astrobiology Institute
  * Self-organizing biochemical cyclesâby Leslie Orgel
  * How Life Began: New Research Suggests Simple Approach
  * Primordial Soup's On: Scientists Repeat Evolution's Most Famous Experimentâan article in Scientific American. March 28, 2007
  * Illustrations from Evolution (textbook)

v â¢ d â¢ e

Origin of life  
Primeval soup Â· Hypercycle Â· Protobiont Â· Universal common descent Â· Last
universal ancestor Â· RNA world hypothesis Â· Iron-sulfur world theory Â· PAH
world hypothesis Â· MillerâUrey experiment Â· Panspermia  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abiogenesis"

Categories: Origin of life | Evolutionarily significant biological phenomena |
Evolutionary biology

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * AzÉrbaycan
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Interlingua
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 19:30.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



