
# World government

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"World empire" redirects here. For the computer game, see World Empire.

"World State" redirects here. For The World State in Aldous Huxley's novel
'Brave New World', see The World State.

This article describes the political concept. For conspiracy theories about
world government see New World Order (conspiracy)

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details. (May
2008)  
<IMG>

This article includes a list of references or external links, but its sources
remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to
improve this article by introducing more precise citations where appropriate.
(August 2008)  
World government is the concept of a political body that would make, interpret
and enforce international law. Inherent to the concept of a world government
is the idea that nations would be required to pool or surrender (depending on
point of view) sovereignty over some areas. In effect, a world government
would add another level of administration above the existing national
governments or provide coordination over areas national governments are not
capable of adequately addressing as independent polities. The authority
granted this level and how it relates to national governments and/or citizens
is debated by both proponents and opponents of world government.

Some people see international institutions (such as the International Criminal
Court, United Nations and International Monetary Fund) and various
supranational and continental unions (such as Organization of American States,
European Union, African Union, Union of South American Nations and Association
of Southeast Asian Nations) as the beginning elements of a world government
system. An organization comprising legislators from various nations known as
Parliamentarians for Global Action have promoted ideas of democratic global
governance, though such promotion has varied in its scope and intensity during
the organization's history.

## Contents

  * 1 History of the world government idea
    * 1.1 Early concepts
      * 1.1.1 The 19th century
      * 1.1.2 Previous attempts
    * 1.2 Post-World War II
      * 1.2.1 "The Golden Age"
      * 1.2.2 The 1950s call for Legal Realism
      * 1.2.3 1950 to present
  * 2 Existing regional unions of nations
    * 2.1 European Union
    * 2.2 African Union
    * 2.3 ASEAN
    * 2.4 Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
    * 2.5 Union of South American Nations
    * 2.6 South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
    * 2.7 The World Constitution and Parliament Association
  * 3 The current global governance system
  * 4 Criticism
  * 5 Resources
    * 5.1 Published works
    * 5.2 Organizations
    * 5.3 Initiatives
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] History of the world government idea

### [edit] Early concepts

The need for a global government to preserve the peace between nations was
discussed in ancient Greek and Roman times, and, in modern times the idea has
been recognized since the early 14th century (Dante, for example, discusses it
in his book Monarchia, 1329). In 1625, the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius wrote De
Jure Belli ac Pacis (The Laws of War and Peace), which is commonly taken as
the starting-point of modern international law. The idea of a federation
gained much momentum during the late 18th century, a period in which the first
modern democratic federation, the U.S., was established (1788), and in which
Immanuel Kant wrote the essay "Perpetual Peace: a philosophical sketch"
(1795). In his essay, Kant describes three basic requirements for organizing
human affairs to permanently abolish the threat of a future war:

  * The civil constitution of each state shall be republican.
  * The law of nations shall be founded on a federation of free states.
  * The rights of people, as citizens of the world, shall be limited to the conditions of universal hospitality (i.e., people would be allowed to visit other countries, but not to stay unless invited).

#### [edit] The 19th century

In 1811, a German philosopher Karl Krause, suggested, in an essay titled "The
Archetype of Humanity", the formation of five regional federations: Europe,
Asia, Africa, America and Australia, aggregated under a world republic. In
1842, the English poet Lord Alfred Tennyson, published the oft-quoted lines
"Locksley Hall": For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see / Saw
a Vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be /... / Till the war-
drum throbb'd no longer / and the battle-flags were furled / In the Parliament
of man, the Federation of the world. / There the common sense of most shall
hold / a fretful realm in awe / And the kindly earth shall slumber / lapt in
universal law.

Between 1852 and 1892 BahÃ¡'u'llÃ¡h founded the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith, and identified
the establishment of a global commonwealth of nations as a key principle of
his new religion. He envisioned a set of new social structures based on
participation and consultation among the world's peoples, including a world
legislature, an international court, and an international executive empowered
to carry out the decisions of these legislative and judicial bodies. Connected
principles of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ religion include universal systems of weights and
measures, currency unification, and the adoption of a global auxiliary
language.[1] The BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith currently counts in excess of 5 million
members spread across the globe.

Following the U.S. experiment, Switzerland (1848) and Canada (1867) formed the
first multi-state federations, uniting distinct ethnic/cultural/lingual
regions under a common government.

Ulysses S. Grant commented, "I believe at some future day, the nations of the
earth will agree on some sort of congress which will take cognizance of
international questions of difficulty and whose decisions will be as binding
as the decisions of the Supreme Court are upon us."[2]

International Peace Congresses were held in Europe every two years starting in
1843, but lost their momentum after 1853 due to the renewed outbreak of wars
in Europe (Crimea) and North America (American Civil War). International
organizations started forming in the late 19th century â the International
Red Cross in 1863, the Telegraphic Union in 1865 and the Universal Postal
Union in 1874. The increase in international trade at the turn of the 20th
century accelerated the formation of international organizations, and, by the
start of World War I in 1914, there were approximately 450 of them. Support
for the idea of establishing international law grew during that period as
well. The Institute of International Law was formed in 1873 by the Belgian
Jurist Gustave Rolin-Jaequemyns, leading to the creation of concrete legal
drafts, for example by the Swiss Johaan Bluntschli in 1866[citation needed].
In 1883, James Lorimer published "The Institutes of the Law of Nations" in
which he explored the idea of a world government establishing the global rule
of law. The first embryonic world parliament, called the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, was organized in 1886 by Cremer and Passy, composed of legislators from
many countries. In 1904 the Union formally proposed "an international congress
which should meet periodically to discuss international questions".

#### [edit] Previous attempts

No complete world government has ever existed, but over human history there
have been several empires or dictatorships that encompassed substantial
portions of the then known world. Famous examples are Alexander the Great and
his empire, the Roman Empire, the Mongol Empire, and the British Empire. In
the case of the British, a quarter of the world's land surface and
approximately a third of the world's population was part of the Empire. This
is the single closest time that the world has come to a total political
unification.

Forms of Communism see it necessary to disestablish all states by means of a
world revolution. The result being is a society void of states and leaders.

Since then, unsuccessful attempts were made throughout the first half of the
20th century to establish global institutions to resolve international
disputes peacefully, or, when these fail, to establish laws in the conduct of
wars between nations. The most remarkable ones include the Hague Conferences
of 1899 and 1907, which failed to prevent World War I, and the League of
Nations (1919-1938), which failed to prevent World War II.

### [edit] Post-World War II

World War II, 1939-1945, resulted in an unprecedented scale of destruction of
lives (50 million dead, most of them civilians), and the availability of city-
destroying atomic weaponry. Some of the acts committed against civilians
during the war were on such a massive scale of savagery, they came to be
widely considered as crimes against humanity itself. As the war's conclusion
drew near, many shocked voices called for the establishment of institutions
able to permanently prevent deadly international conflicts. This led to the
founding of the United Nations in 1945, which adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights in 1948. Many, however, felt that the UN,
essentially a forum for discussion and coordination between sovereign
governments, was insufficiently empowered for the task. A number of prominent
persons, such as Albert Einstein, Winston Churchill, Bertrand Russell and
Mahatma Gandhi, called on governments to proceed further by taking gradual
steps towards forming an effectual federal world government.

#### [edit] "The Golden Age"

The years between the conclusion of World War II and 1950, when the Korean War
started and the Cold War mindset became dominant in international politics,
were the "golden age" of the world federalist movement. Wendell Wilkie's book
"One World", first published in 1943, sold over 2 million copies. Another
book, Emery Reves' "The Anatomy of Peace" (1945) laid out the arguments for
replacing the UN with a federal world government and quickly became the
"bible" of world federalists. The grassroots world federalist movement in the
US, led by people such as Grenville Clark, Norman Cousins, Alan Cranston and
Robert Hutchins, organized itself into increasingly larger structures, finally
forming, in 1947, the United World Federalists (later renamed to World
Federalist Association, then Citizens for Global Solutions), claiming
membership of 47,000 in 1949.

Similar movements concurrently formed in many other countries, leading to the
formation, at a 1947 meeting in Montreux, Switzerland, of a global coalition,
now called World Federalist Movement. By 1950, the movement claimed 56 member
groups in 22 countries, with some 156,000 members. In France, 1948, Garry
Davis began an unauthorized speech calling for a world government from the
balcony of the UN General Assembly, until he was dragged away by the guards.
Mr. Davis renounced his American citizenship and started a Registry of World
Citizens, which claimed to have registered over 750,000 people in less than
two years. Opinion polls carried out by UNESCO in 1948-1949 found world
government favored by a majority of respondents in six European countries and
rejected in three other countries (Australia, Mexico and the United
States)[citation needed]. On September 4, 1953, Davis, from the City Hall of
Ellsworth, Maine, announced the formation of the "World Government of World
Citizens" based on 3 "World Laws" â One God (or Absolute Value), One World,
and One Humanity[3]. Following this declaration mandated he claimed by article
21(3) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, he formed the United World
Service Authority in New York City as the administrative agency of the new
government. Its first task was to design and issue a "World Passport" based on
article 13(2) of the UDHR. To date, over 800,000 of these documents have been
issued to individuals worldwide. They have been recognized de facto by over
150 countries[citation needed].

#### [edit] The 1950s call for Legal Realism

Legal anthropologist E. Adamson Hoebel concluded his treatise on broadening
the legal realist tradition to include non-Western nations[4]: âWhatever the
idealist may desire, force and the threat of force are the ultimate power in
the determination of international behavior, as in the law within the nation
or tribe. But until force and the threat of force in international relations
are brought under social control by the world community, by and for the world
society, they remain the instruments of social anarchy and not the sanctions
of world law. The creation in clear-cut terms of the corpus of world law cries
for the doing. If world law, however, is to be realized at all, there will
have to be minimum of general agreement as to the nature of the physical and
ideational world and the relation of men in society to it. An important and
valuable next step will be found in deep-cutting analysis of the major law
systems of the contemporary world in order to lay bare their basic postulates
â postulates that are too generally hidden; postulates felt, perhaps, by
those who live by them, but so much taken for granted that they are rarely
expressed or exposed for examination. When this is done â and it will take
the efforts of many keen intellects steeped in the law of at least a dozen
lands and also aware of the social nexus of the law â then mankind will be
able to see clearly for the first time and clearly where the common consensus
of the great living social and law systems lies. Here will be found the common
postulates and values upon which the world community can build. At the same
time the truly basic points of conflict that will have to be worked upon for
resolution will be revealed. Law is inherently purposive.

#### [edit] 1950 to present

While enthusiasm for multinational federalism in Europe incrementally led,
over the following decades, to the formation of the European Union, the onset
of the Cold War (1950-1990) eliminated the prospects of any progress towards
federation with a more global scope. The movement quickly shrunk in size to a
much smaller core of activists, and the FWG idea all but disappeared from wide
public discourse.

Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, interest in a federal
world government and, more generally, in the global protection of human
rights, was renewed. The most visible achievement of the world federalism
movement during the 1990s is the Rome Statute of 1998, which led to the
establishment of the International Criminal Court in 2002. In Europe, progress
towards forming a federal union of European states gained much momentum,
starting in 1952 as a trade deal between the German and French people lead, in
1992, to the Maastricht Treaty that established the name and enlarged the
agreement that the European Union (EU) is based upon. The EU expanded (1995,
2004, 2007) to encompass, in 2007, nearly half a billion people in 27 member
states. Following EU's example, the African Union was founded in 2002 and the
Union of South American Nations in 2004.

## [edit] Existing regional unions of nations

### [edit] European Union

The most relevant model for the incremental establishment of a global
federation may be the European Union, which politically unites a large group
of widely diverse, some formerly hostile, nations spread over a large
geographical area and 500 million people. Though the EU is still evolving, it
already has many attributes of a federal government, such as open internal
borders, a directly elected parliament, a court system, an official currency
(Euro) and a centralized economic policy.

The EU's lead is being followed by the African Union, the Union of South
American Nations, the Organization of Central American States, and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. A multitude of regional associations,
aggregating most nations of the world, are at different stages of development
towards a growing extent of economic, and sometimes political, integration.

### [edit] African Union

The African Union (AU) is an organisation consisting of fifty-three African
states. Established on July 9 2002, the AU was formed as a successor to the
amalgamated African Economic Community (AEC) and the Organisation of African
Unity (OAU). Eventually, the AU aims to have a single currency and a single
integrated defence force, as well as other institutions of state, including a
cabinet for the AU Head of State. The purpose of the union is to help secure
Africa's democracy, human rights, and a sustainable economy, especially by
bringing an end to intra-African conflict and creating an effective common
market.

### [edit] ASEAN

ASEAN, pronounced /ËÉËsiËÉËn/ AH-see-ahn in English, or the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations, is a geo-political and economic organization of 10
countries located in Southeast Asia, which was formed on August 8, 1967 by
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand[5] as a display
of solidarity toward communist expansion in Vietnam and insurgency within
their own borders. Its claimed aims include the acceleration of economic
growth, social progress, cultural development among its members, and the
promotion of regional peace.[6] All members later founded the Asia Cooperation
Dialogue, which aims to unite the entire continent.

### [edit] Shanghai Cooperation Organisation

The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) is an intergovernmental
organization which was founded on June 14, 2001 by the leaders of the People's
Republic of China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
Except for Uzbekistan, these countries had been members of the Shanghai Five;
after the inclusion of Uzbekistan in 2001, the members renamed the
organization.

### [edit] Union of South American Nations

The Union of South American Nations was founded in 2006-2008 and is modeled on
the European Union. It incorporates all the independent states of South
America. These states are Argentina , Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Ecuador, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

### [edit] South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation

The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) is an economic
and political organization of eight countries in Southern Asia. In terms of
population, its sphere of influence is the largest of any regional
organization: almost 1.5 billion people, the combined population of its member
states. It was established on December 8, 1985 by India, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
Sri Lanka, Nepal, Maldives and Bhutan. In April 2007, at the Association's
14th summit, Afghanistan became its eighth member.

### [edit] The World Constitution and Parliament Association

The World Constitution and Parliament Association (WCPA) was created in 1958
to promote democratic world government. During the next 33 years the WCPA held
four Global Constituent Assemblies centered around creating a Constitution for
the Federation of Earth. At the fourth assembly in Troia, Portugal in 1991,
final amendments to the Constitution were made and approved. Even before this
assembly, the organization has been involved in a worldwide campaign to ratify
the[Earth Constitution]under the provisions set forth in Article 17. Since
1982, the WCPA has also organized sessions of the Provisional World
Parliament, the first of which was in Brighton, England and the tenth session
of which was in Kara, Togo in 2007. Under the authority of Article 19 of the
Constitution, the Parliament debates and passes provisional world legislation
that serves as a model and a guide for developing democratic world government.
The Parliament also works toward a founding ratification convention at which
the nations and people of Earth join together to ratify the Constitution and
initiate a new demilitarized, democratic world order.

## [edit] The current global governance system

There is today no functioning global international military, executive,
legislature, judiciary, or constitution, with jurisdiction over the entire
planet, although Gideon Rachman, who is a former attendee of the controversial
Bilderberg group[7] wrote an article in the Financial Times about a world
government currently being setup[8].

The earth is divided geographically and demographically into mutually-
exclusive territories and political structures called states which are
independent and sovereign in most cases. One may also make the case that
political and economical independence although related are not the same and
even though former colonies have acquired political independence since World
War II, they have become more dependent financially upon each other. There are
numerous bodies, institutions, unions, coalitions, agreements and contracts
between these units of authority, but except in cases where a nation is under
military occupation by another all such arrangements depend on the continued
consent of the participant nations. Thus the use of violence is unprohibited
throughout the realm and is only checked by the threat of retaliatory violence
or nonviolent sanctions (see Gene Sharp), so where no such threat exists a
nation may use violence against another.

Among the voluntary organizations and international arrangements the following
are:

  * The United Nations (UN) is the primary formal organization coordinating activities between states on a global scale and the only inter-governmental organization with a truly universal membership (192 governments). In addition to the main organs and various humanitarian programs and commissions of the UN itself, there are about 20 functional organizations affiliated with the UN's Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), such as the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organization, and International Telecommunications Union.[9] Of particular interest politically are the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization.

  * The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), were formed together at the Mount Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, United States in July 1944, to foster global monetary cooperation and to fight poverty by financially assisting states in need. The World Trade Organization (WTO) sets the rules of international trade. It already has a semi-legislative body (The General Council, reaching decisions by consensus), and a judicial body (The Dispute Settlement Body). Another influential economical international organization is the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), with membership of 30 democratic members.

  * G8, an association of eight of the highest GDP Nations of the World. The leaders of the G8 countries meet annually in person to coordinate their policies in confronting global issues, such as poverty, terrorism, infectious diseases, climate change.

  * Militarily, the UN deploys peacekeeping forces, usually to build and maintain post-conflict peace and stability. When a more aggressive international military action is undertaken, either ad-hoc coalitions (e.g., multinational force in Iraq), or regional military alliances (eg, NATO) are used.

  * International law encompasses international treaties, customs, and globally acceptable legal principles. With the exceptions of cases brought before the ICC and ICJ (see below), the laws are interpreted by national courts. Many violations of treaty or customary law obligations are overlooked.

  * The International Court of Justice (ICJ) (also known as World Court) is the judiciary organ of the United Nations. It settles disputes submitted to it voluntarily by states (only), and gives advisory opinions on legal questions submitted to it by other organs of the UN, such as the General Assembly or Security Council.

A recent development in international law is the International Criminal Court
(ICC), the first ever permanent international criminal court, which was
established to ensure that the gravest international crimes do not go
unpunished. The ICC treaty was signed by 139 national governments, of which
100 ratified it into law by October 2005.

In addition to the formal, or semi-formal, international organizations and
laws mentioned above, many other mechanisms act to regulate human activities
across national borders. In particular, international trade in goods, services
and currencies (the "global market") has a tremendous impact on the lives of
people in almost all parts of the world, creating deep interdependency amongst
nations (see globalization). Trans-national (or multi-national) corporations,
some with resources exceeding those available to most governments, govern
activities of people on a global scale. The rapid increase in the volume of
trans-border digital communications and mass-media distribution (e.g.,
Internet, satellite television) has allowed information, ideas, and opinions
to rapidly spread across the world, creating a complex web of international
coordination and influence, mostly outside the control of any formal
organizations or laws.

See also: United Nations and United Nations Parliamentary Assembly

## [edit] Criticism

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)  
Depending on one's point of view, a world government would erase traditional
notions of sovereignty, a construct that is presently under intense debate.
Many critics contend that the establishment of a world government would be
essentially meaningless without an event or conflict that poses a serious
threat to the planet or individual member states. The argument that
intergovernmental organisations such as the United Nations could be a basis
for world government is often criticised by realists who contend that such
organisations have little or no real ability to affect global events and
constitute only a de jure world government and not the de facto institutions
needed. This is based on nationalist ideals or the experience of world-
governmental candidates such as the European Union (EU) or the United Nations
in addressing situations like the crisis in Darfur or other such conflicts.

Furthermore, conflicts such as the Second World War involving a number of the
planet's major powers led to the breakup of near global entities such as the
British Empire and others; this suggests to critics that such extended
organisations and regimes are not immune from global catastrophes. As another
example, critics point to the League of Nations, established to prevent a re-
occurrence of the First World War and the closest express of global government
then to date, which nonetheless could not in fact prevent the Second World War
as intended.

Another common criticism is how a world government might reflect the worse
aspects of nationalism, such as imperialism, in its imposition of cultural
values. The concern is that a dictatorship would be formed to enforce a world
government, whether beneficial (see H.G. Wells' The Shape of Things to Come)
or detrimental. These concerns arises from the contrary view of nationalism as
consistent with the compulsion for self-determination. Proponents of world
government, however, counter that a federated approach to world government
would instead respect the member cultures and encourage greater recognition of
multiculturalism than individual nation-states.

A perceived disappearance of individual or national autonomy is perhaps the
most widely cited reason for the current disdain for the idea of world
government. Euroscepticism is popular in the United Kingdom for example, where
parties like UK Independence Party oppose the European Union because of the
emerging possibility of it becoming a superstate rather than a free trade
organisation as the original European Economic Community was established. Such
Euroskeptics also see the European Union as being run by its more dominant
members and not as a true democratic union. Similar notions are shared
elsewhere in the world, based on the expectation that supranational government
would necessarily entail populations of other countries controlling one's own
government. The more extreme critics of world government suggest the formation
of similar institutions as the global level, if indeed undemocratic, would
provide dissidents "nowhere to run."

## [edit] Resources

### [edit] Published works

  * Stark, Jim. Rescue Plan for Planet Earth: Democratic World Government through a Global Referendum (Toronto: Key Publishing House Inc, 2008)
  * Baratta, Joseph. The Politics of World Federation (Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2003). Introduction available on line.
  * Hamer, Chistopher. A Global Parliament - Principles of World Federation (Oyster Bay, NSW: Oyster Bay Books, 1998.) Full text available online.
  * Monbiot, George. Manifesto for a New World Order (New York: New Press, 2005). Published in the United Kingdom as Age of Consent.
  * Strauss, Andrew. Taking Democracy Global: Assessing the Benefits and Challenges of a Global Parliamentary Assembly. (London: One World Trust, 2005).
  * Dervis, Kermal. A Better Globalization: Legitimacy, Governance, and Reform. (Washington: Center for Global Development, 2005.) Selections available online.
  * Rajan, Chella. Global Politics and Institutions. GTI Paper 3#. (Boston: Tellus Institute, 2006). Additional papers in the GTI series available here.
  * Cabrera, Luis. Political Theory of Global Justice: A Cosmopolitan Case for the World State (London: Routledge, 2004;2006).
  * Craig, Campbell. Glimmer of a New Leviathan: Total War in the Realism of Niebuhr, Morgenthau, and Waltz (New York: Columbia University Press, 2003).
  * Deudney, Daniel. Bounding Power: Republican Security Theory from the Polis to the Global Village (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006).
  * Etzioni, Amitai. From Empire to Community: A New Approach to International Relations (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004)
  * Marchetti, Raffaele. Global Democracy: For and Against. Ethical Theory, Institutional Design and Social Struggles (London: Routledge, 2008).
  * Tamir, Yael. "Who's Afraid of a Global State?" in Kjell Goldman, Ulf Hannerz, and Charles Westin, eds., Nationalism and Internationalism in the Post-Cold War Era (London: Routledge, 2000).
  * Tannsjo, Torbjorn. Global Democracy: The Case for a World Government (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2008). Argues that not only is world government necessary if we want to deal successfully with global problems it is also, pace Immanuel Kant and John Rawls, desirable in its own right.
  * Wendt, Alexander. âWhy a World State is Inevitable,â European Journal of International Relations, Vol. 9, No. 4 (2003), pp. 491â542
  * Yunker, James A. Rethinking World Government: A New Approach (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 2005).
  * Yunker, James A. Political Globalization: A New Vision of Federal World Government (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 2007).
  * Allida Black, June Hopkins, "League of Nations." 2003.http://www.nps.gov/archive/elro/glossary/league-of-nations.htm (accessed 4/9/2008)
  * Bruner Michael, Melissa Green, Lawrence McBride, The NYSTROM Atlas of World History, Edition 1, The NYSTROM Atlas, Volume 1, World History, Chicago, NYSTROM, 2004.
  * Carr, Karen. "The Roman Republic." March 11,2008. http://www.historyforkids.org/learn/romans/history/earlyrepublic.htm (accessed 3/11/2008).
  * Daniel Chu and Elliot Skinner, A Glorious Age in Africa, Edition 1, None, Volume 1, A Glorious Age in Africa, Tenton, Africa World Press, 2000.
  * Hooker, Richard, âThe Mongolian Empire: The Yuanâ, 6/6/1999, http://www.wsu.edu/~dee/CHEMPIRE/YUAN.HTM, 2/14/2008
  * MSN Encarta, "World Government." 2007.http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761586535/world_government.html (accessed 5/4/2008).
  * Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "World Government." December 4, 2006.http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/world-government/#ConPowResRes (accessed 4/13/2008).
  * Trueman, Chris. "League of Nations." http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/leagueofnations.htm (accessed 4/9/2008).
  * United Nations Staff, "History of the UN." 2000.http://www.un.org/aboutun/history.htm (accessed 4/10/2008).
  * We the People, The Roxbury Latin School.

### [edit] Organizations

  * The World Federalist Movement (WFM) is a global citizens movement with 23 member and 16 associated organizations around the globe working towards the establishment of a federated world government. The U.S. member organization is Citizens for Global Solutions, and the Canadian organization is World Federalist Movement - Canada
  * The Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI) is a well-funded research and education center in Canada dedicated to the subject. It is preparing to launch IGLOO: "a global online research community focused solely on strengthening governance around the world."
  * One World Trust (OWT) is a charity based in the United Kingdom and member of the World Federalist Movement. Its current work aims to promote reforms of existing global organizations leading to greater accountability.
  * Civitatis International is a non-governmental organization based in the United Kingdom that produces legal research promoting increased systems of global governance to policymakers.
  * The Committee for a Democratic UN is a network of parliamentarians and non-governmental organizations from Germany, Switzerland and Austria which is based on world federalist philosophy.
  * Democratic World Federalists is a San-Francisco-based civil society organization with supporters worldwide, advocates a democratic federal system of world government.

### [edit] Initiatives

  * Vote World Government (VWG) is a Canadian NGO which has independently begun a global referendum posing the following question : Do you support the creation of a directly-elected, representative and democratic world government?

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: World
government  
## [edit] See also

  * Anti-nationalism
  * Cosmopolitanism
  * New World Order (conspiracy theory)
  * Democratic globalization
  * Democratic World Federalists
  * Federalism
  * Global Citizens Movement

  * Global Justice
  * Globalization
  * Humanism
  * Internationalism (politics)
  * International organization
  * International auxiliary language
  * League of Nations

  * Lunar government
  * Millennialism
  * New World Order
  * Pax Americana
  * Planetary Phase of Civilization
  * Superclass
  * Supranationalism

  * Trade bloc
  * World citizen
  * World domination
  * World Federalist Movement
  * World Service Authority
  * World Union
  * World government in science fiction

## [edit] References

  * Ankerl, Guy. Global communication without universal civilization. INU societal research. Vol.1: Coexisting contemporary civilizations : Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western. Geneva: INU Press. ISBN 2-88155-004-5.

  1. ^ Smith, P. (1999). A Concise Encyclopedia of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith. Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publications. pp. 363â364. ISBN 1851681841.
  2. ^ Schwartzberg, Joseph E.. "Reform of the General Assembly" (PDF). Revitalizing the United Nations : Reform Through Weighted Voting. New York and The Hague: Institute For Global Policy, World Federalist Movement. pp. 3\. ISBN 0-9710727-4-4. OCLC 56124473. http://oldsite.globalsolutions.org/programs/intl_instit/UN_ref/Schwartzberg_Weighted_Voting.pdf. Retrieved on 2005-12-14.
  3. ^ www.worldservice.org/ells.html
  4. ^ The Law of Primitive Man (1954:331-333)
  5. ^ Bangkok Declaration. Wikisource. Retrieved March 14, 2007
  6. ^ Overview, ASEAN Secretariat official website. Retrieved June 12, 2006
  7. ^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2003_Bilderberg_Meeting,
  8. ^ http://www.ft.com/cms/s/7a03e5b6-c541-11dd-b516-000077b07658,Authorised=false.html?_i_location=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ft.com%2Fcms%2Fs%2F0%2F7a03e5b6-c541-11dd-b516-000077b07658.html%3Fnclick_check%3D1&_i_referer=&nclick_check=1
  9. ^ Chart

## [edit] External links

  * World government entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy by Catherine Lu, December 4, 2006
  * Immanuel Kant: "Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch" (English translation of "Zum ewigen Frieden")

v â¢ d â¢ e

Supranationalism / World government  
Theory

Supranationalism Â· Federalism Â· Confederation Â· Intergovernmentalism Â·
Anti-nationalism Â· Globalization Â· Democratic mundialization Â· Pax Â·
Cosmopolitanism Â· New World Order Â· Supranational union  
International bodies

United Nations Â· Interpol Â· International Monetary Fund Â· World Bank Group
Â· World Trade Organization Â· Commonwealth of Nations  
Regional bodies

European Union Â· Latin Union Â· Council of Europe Â· Arab League Â· African
Union Â· Union of South American Nations Â· Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
Â· Association of Southeast Asian Nations Â· Association of Caribbean States
Â· Central American Integration System Â· Commonwealth of Independent States
Â· Organization of American States Â· South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation Â· Pacific Islands Forum Â· North Atlantic Treaty Organization  
International  
parliaments

United Nations General Assembly Â· European Parliament Â· Arab Parliament Â·
Pan-African Parliament Â· Latin American Parliament Â· South American
Parliament Â· Mercosur Parliament Â· Inter-Parliamentary Union  
International courts

International Criminal Court Â· International Court of Justice Â·
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia Â· International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda Â· African Court of Justice Â· Caribbean Court of
Justice Â· Inter-American Court of Human Rights Â· European Court of Justice
Â· European Court of Human Rights  
Law and treaties

International law (Public Â· Private Â· Supranational) Â· United Nations
Charter Â· Universal Declaration of Human Rights Â· Geneva Conventions Â· Rome
Statute of the ICC Â· Kyoto Protocol Â· European Union treaties Â· European
Union law Â· Treaty of Chaguaramas  
History

Holy Roman Empire Â· League of Nations Â· Permanent Court of International
Justice Â· Nuremberg Trials Â· Permanent Court of Arbitration  
Proposals and  
concepts

United Nations Parliamentary Assembly Â· United States of Africa Â· Central
Asian Union Â· Pacific Union Â· North American Union Â· Federal Europe  
Movements

Federal Union Â· World Federalist Movement Â· Global citizens movement Â·
World Union  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_government"

Categories: World government | Federalism | Government | International law |
International relations | Globalization

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since May 2008
| All articles that may contain original research | Articles lacking in-text
citations from August 2008 | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles
with unsourced statements since September 2008 | Articles needing additional
references from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 15 April 2009, at 18:36 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



