
# International Women's Day

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

International Women's Day  
Observed by Albania, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Hungary, India,
Italy, Israel, Laos, Latvia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Macedonia, Malta, Mexico,
Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Syria, Tajikistan, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Zambia  
Date March 8  
Related to Mother's Day, International Men's Day  
International Women's Day (IWD) is marked on March 8 every year. It is a major
day of global celebration for the economic, political and social achievements
of women.

Started as a political event, the holiday blended in the culture of many
countries (primarily Russia and the countries of former Soviet bloc). In some
celebrations, the day lost its political flavour, and became simply an
occasion for men to express their love to the women around them in a way
somewhat similar to Mother's Day and St Valentine's Day mixed together. In
others, however, the political and human rights theme as designated by the
United Nations runs strong, and political and social awareness of the
struggles of women worldwide are brought out and examined in a hopeful manner.

The IWD is also celebrated as the first spring holiday, as in the listed
countries the first day of March is considered the first day of the spring
season.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 2009 International Women's Day
  * 3 Women's Day in modern culture
  * 4 Controversies
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

March 8 rally in Dhaka, Bangladesh

<IMG>

<IMG>

Female members of the Australian Builders Labourers Federation march on
International Women's Day 1975 in Sydney

The first IWD was observed on 28 February 1909 in the United States following
a declaration by the Socialist Party of America. Among other relevant historic
events, it came to commemorate the 1911 Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire. The
idea of having an international women's day was first put forward at the turn
of the 20th century amid rapid world industrialization and economic expansion
that led to protests over working conditions. By urban legend,[1][2] women
from clothing and textile factories staged one such protest on 8 March 1857 in
New York City.[3] The garment workers were protesting against very poor
working conditions and low wages. The protesters were attacked and dispersed
by police. These women established their first labor union in the same month
two years later.

More protests followed on 8 March in subsequent years, most notably in 1908
when 15,000 women marched through New York City demanding shorter hours,
better pay and voting rights[citation needed]. In 1910 the first international
women's conference was held in Copenhagen (in the labour-movement building
located at Jagtvej 69, which until recently housed Ungdomshuset) by the Second
International and an 'International Women's Day' was established, which was
submitted by the important German Socialist Clara Zetkin, although no date was
specified.[4] The following year, 1911, IWD was marked by over a million
people in Austria, Denmark, Germany and Switzerland, on March 19.[5] However,
soon thereafter, on March 25, the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire in New York
City killed over 140 garment workers. A lack of safety measures was blamed for
the high death toll. Furthermore, on the eve of World War I, women across
Europe held peace rallies on 8 March 1913. In the West, International Women's
Day was commemorated during the 1910s and 1920s, but dwindled. It was revived
by the rise of feminism in the 1960s.

Demonstrations marking International Women's Day in Russia proved to be the
first stage of the Russian Revolution of 1917.

Following the October Revolution, the Bolshevik feminist Alexandra Kollontai
persuaded Lenin to make it an official holiday in the Soviet Union, and it was
established, but was a working day until 1965. On May 8, 1965 by the decree of
the USSR Presidium of the Supreme Soviet International Women's Day was
declared as a non working day in the USSR "in commemoration of the outstanding
merits of Soviet women in communistic construction, in the defense of their
Motherland during the Great Patriotic War, in their heroism and selflessness
at the front and in the rear, and also marking the great contribution of women
to strengthening friendship between peoples, and the struggle for peace. But
still, women's day must be celebrated as are other holidays."

## [edit] 2009 International Women's Day

On occasion of 2009 International Women's Day the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) has warned that the specific health-care needs of women
are often ignored or insufficiently taken into account in war situations.

In the worldâs least developed countries, many of which are at war, women
are 300 times more likely to die in childbirth or from pregnancy-related
complications than in developed countries, according to UNICEF. While armed
conflicts and other violence affect entire communities, women are particularly
at risk of rape and other forms of sexual violence. Because of poor security
conditions or because they have no means of transportation, it is often
impossible for women to reach a health-care facility so as to give birth
safely.[6]

## [edit] Women's Day in modern culture

<IMG>

<IMG>

The 1932 Soviet poster dedicated to the 8th of March holiday. The text reads:
"8th of March is the day of the rebellion of the working women against the
kitchen slavery" and "Down with the oppression and narrow-mindedness of the
household work!". Originally in the USSR the holiday had a clear political
character, emphasizing the role of the Soviet state in liberation of women
from the second-class citizens' position.

<IMG>

<IMG>

However, with time the meaning of the holiday evolved to an apolitical
celebration of women with an emphasis on their beauty and motherhood. Most
late Soviet 8th of March postcards carried no political meaning.

The day is an official holiday in Angola,[7] Armenia,[8] Azerbaijan,[9]
Belarus,[10] Brazil,[citation needed] Burkina Faso,[11] Cambodia,[12] China
(for women only),[13] Croatia,[citation needed] Cuba,[citation needed] Guinea-
Bissau,[7] Eritrea,[7] Kazakhstan,[14] Kyrgyzstan,[15] Laos,[16] Madagascar
(for women only),[17] Moldova,[18] Mongolia,[19] Montenegro,[citation needed],
Nepal (for women only),[7] Poland,[citation needed] Russia,[7]
Serbia,[citation needed] Tajikistan,[7] Turkmenistan,[7] Uganda,[7]
Ukraine,[7] Uzbekistan,[7] Vietnam,[citation needed] and Zambia.[20]

In some countries, such as Cameroon[21] or Romania,[citation needed] the day
is is not a public holiday, but is widely obbserved nonetheless.

On this day it is customary for men to give the women in their lives -
mothers, wives, girlfriends, daughters, colleagues, etc - flowers and small
gifts. In some countries (such as Romania or Poland) it is also observed as an
equivalent of Mother's Day, where children also give small presents to their
mothers and grandmothers.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union celebrations of IWD were abandoned in
Armenia. Instead April 7 was introduced as state holiday of âBeauty and
Motherhood.â The new holiday immediately got popular among Armenians, as it
commemorates one of the main holidays of Armenian Church, Annunciation.
However, people still kept celebrating IWD on March 8 as well. Public
discussion held on the topic of two âWomenâs Daysâ in Armenia resulted
in the recognition of the so called âWomenâs Monthâ which is the period
between March 8 and April 7.

In Italy, to celebrate the day, men give yellow mimosas to women.[22][23]
Yellow mimosas and chocolate are also one of the most common March 8 presents
in Russia and Albania.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Croatia, Hungary, Romania, Moldova,
Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Bulgaria, Slovenia and Serbia the custom of
giving women flowers still prevails. Women sometimes get gifts from their
employers too. Schoolchildren often bring gifts for their teachers as well.

In countries like Portugal and Romania, it is usual, at the night of 8 March,
for groups of women celebrate in "women-only" dinners and parties.[citation
needed]

In India, IWD holds a lot of significance. Many celebrations are held during
the day.

In Pakistan working women in formal and informal sectors celebrate
International Women's Day every year to commemorate their ongoing struggle for
due rights, despite facing many cultural and religious restrictions. Some
women working for change in society use IWM to help the movement for women's
rights. In Poland, for instance, every International Women's Day includes
large feminist demonstrations in major cities ([24]).

In 1975, which had been designated as International Womenâs Year, the United
Nations gave official sanction to and began sponsoring International Women's
Day.

The 2005 Congress (conference) of the British Trades Union Congress
overwhelmingly approved a resolution calling for IWD to be designated a public
holiday in the United Kingdom.

Today many events are held by women's groups around the world. The global
women's organization Aurora hosts a free worldwide register of IWD local
events (www.internationalwomensday.com) so that women and the media can locate
local activity. Many governments and organizations around the world support
IWD. For example, HSBC hosts a range of IWD activity including co-hosting of
the United Kingdom's flagship IWD event with women's group Aurora. Global
interest in IWD shows a steady increase.

## [edit] Controversies

In some isolated cases International Women's Day has been led to questionable
practices that effectively discriminated against men. For example Tower
Hamlets Council closed off one of its libraries to all males to "celebrate"
the occasion, forcing them to travel elsewhere, going as far as even banning
male staff from the premises.[25]

In the Czech Republic (then part of Czechoslovak Socialist Republic), huge
Soviet style celebrations were held annually. After the fall of Communism, the
holiday, generally considered to be one of the major symbols of the old
regime, fell into obscurity. International Women's Day was re-established as
an official "important day" by the Parliament only recently, on the proposal
of the Socialists and Communists. This has provoked some controversy as a
large part of public as well as the political right see the holiday as a relic
of the nation's Communist past. In 2008, the conservative Catholic People's
party's deputies proposed abolishment of the holiday unsuccessfully. However,
some non-government organizations consider International Women's Day's
official recognition as an important reminder of the women's role in the
society. Still, unlike in the past, the holiday is no longer observed by the
general public in any significant way.

International Women's Day encountered violence in Tehran, Iran on March 4,
2007, when police beat hundreds of men and women who were planning a rally.
Police arrested dozens of women and some were released after several days of
solitary confinement and interrogation.[26] Shadi Sadr and Mahbubeh
Abbasgholizadeh, and several more community activists, were released on March
19 2007, ending a fifteen day hunger strike.[27]

In 2009, L'Osservatore Romano published an article entitled "The Washing
Machine and the Liberation of Women" that was controversially meant to
demonstrate that the washing machine had done more for the liberation of woman
than the contraceptive pill and abortion pill, which are often associated to
Women's Day. The article shocked Italian feminists and provoked criticism from
Opposition MP Paola Concia. [28] A study from Montreal University also
presented a similar point of view to that of L'Osservatore. [29]

## [edit] See also

  * International Men's Day
  * Mother's Day

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Temma Kaplan, On the Socialist Origins of International Women's Day, in: Feminist Studies, 11, 1985, S. 163-171. (PDF)
  2. ^ Liliane Kandel / FranÃ§oise Picq, Le Mythe des origines Ã propos de la journÃ©e internationale des femmes, in: La Revue d'en face, 12, 1982, S. 67-80.
  3. ^ Angela Howard Zophy, Handbook of American women's history, Garland, 1990, 187.
  4. ^ Unites Nations page on the background of the IWD
  5. ^ [1]
  6. ^ Greater need, fewer resources: ensuring adequate health care for women during armed conflict
  7. ^ a b c d e f g h i j International Women's Day (IWD)
  8. ^ [2]
  9. ^ [3]
  10. ^ (Russian) President's decree on public holidays in Belarus, 1998
  11. ^ [4]
  12. ^ [5]
  13. ^ [6]
  14. ^ [7]
  15. ^ [8]
  16. ^ [9]
  17. ^ [10]
  18. ^ (Romanian) Article 111 (1c) of the work codex of Moldova
  19. ^ [11]
  20. ^ [12]
  21. ^ [13]
  22. ^ (Italian) la Repubblica/societa: 8 marzo, niente manifestazione tante feste diverse per le donne
  23. ^ Repubblica.it Â» politica Â» Festa della donna, parla Ciampi "La paritÃ Ã¨ ancora lontana"
  24. ^ http://www.ippf.org/en/News/Intl+news/March+8+in+Poland+Still+Marching+Together+for+Freedom+and+Equality.htm
  25. ^ the london paper
  26. ^ BBC.CO.UK
  27. ^ HRW.ORG
  28. ^ Washer liberated women, Vatican says
  29. ^ Fridges And Washing Machines Liberated Women, Study Suggests

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: International women's
day  
  * Women and war - International Committee of the Red Cross
  * International Museum of Women
  * Article from international communist organization on International Women's Day
  * International Women's Day 2007 - United Nations web site
  * www.internationalwomensday.com
  * International Women's Day Celebration
  * More detailed overview
  * Sewing a better future on International Womenâs Day

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Women%27s_Day"

Categories: Civil awareness days | Feminism | Holidays in Russia | Holidays in
the Soviet Union | International observances | March observances | United
Nations days | Women

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * O'zbek
  * áá¶áá¶ááááá
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 16 March 2009, at 14:28.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



