
# Rome

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Semi-protected

For the civilisation of classical antiquity, see Ancient Rome.  
For other uses, see Rome (disambiguation).

Rome  
Skyline of Rome  
Flag of Rome  
Flag Official seal of Rome  
Seal  
Nickname(s): The Eternal City  
Motto: SenÄtus Populusque RÅmÄnus (SPQR) (Latin)  
Location of Rome

Location of Rome  
Coordinates: 41Â°54â²N 12Â°30â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿41.9Â°N 12.5Â°Eï»¿ / 41.9;
12.5Coordinates: 41Â°54â²N 12Â°30â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿41.9Â°N 12.5Â°Eï»¿ / 41.9; 12.5  
Country Italy  
Region Lazio  
Province Rome (RM)  
Founded 21 April, 753 BC (traditional)  
Government  
- Mayor Gianni Alemanno  
Area  
- Total 1,285 km2 (496.1 sq mi)  
Elevation +20 m (66 ft)  
Population (31 January 2009)[1]  
- Total 2,726,539  
- Density 2,121.3/km2 (5,495.9/sq mi)  
Time zone CET (UTC+1)  
- Summer (DST) CEST (UTC+2)  
Postal codes 00121 to 00199  
Area code(s) 06  
Patron saints Saint Peter and Saint Paul  
Website comune.roma.it  
Rome (pronounced /roÊm/; Italian: Roma, pronounced [Ëroma]; Latin: Roma) is
the capital city of Italy and Lazio,[2] and is Italy's largest and most
populous city, with 2,726,539[1] residents in an urban area of some 1,285.5
km2 (496.3 sq mi).[3] It is located in the central-western portion of the
Italian Peninsula, on the Tiber river.

Rome's history as a city spans over two and a half thousand years, as one of
the founding cities of Western Civilisation. It was the centre of the Roman
Empire, which dominated Europe, North Africa and the Middle East for four
hundred years from the 1st Century BC till the 4th Century AD. Rome has a
significant place in the story of Christianity up to the present day as the
home of the Roman Catholic Church and the site of the Vatican City, an
independent city-state run by the Catholic Church within as an enclave of
Rome.

As one of the few major European cities that escaped World War II relatively
unscathed, central Rome remains essentially Renaissance and Baroque in
character. Rome is the third-most-visited tourist destination in the European
Union,[4] and its historic centre is listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage
Site.[5] As a modern city it has been capital of the unified Italy since 1870,
and grew mainly in two periods either side of Word War II.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 From founding to Empire
    * 1.2 Fall of the Empire and Middle Ages
    * 1.3 Renaissance Rome
    * 1.4 Towards the reunification of Italy
    * 1.5 20th century
  * 2 Administration
    * 2.1 Capital of Italy
    * 2.2 City Government
    * 2.3 Administrative divisions
  * 3 Geography
    * 3.1 Location
    * 3.2 Topography
    * 3.3 Climate
  * 4 Demographics
    * 4.1 Ethnic Groups
    * 4.2 Religion
  * 5 Cityscape
    * 5.1 Ancient Rome
    * 5.2 Medieval
    * 5.3 Renaissance and Baroque
    * 5.4 Neoclassicism
    * 5.5 Fascist architecture
    * 5.6 Parks and gardens
  * 6 Economy
  * 7 Culture
    * 7.1 Education
    * 7.2 Music
    * 7.3 Cinema
    * 7.4 Language
    * 7.5 Sports
  * 8 Transportation
  * 9 International entities, organisations and involvement
  * 10 Sister and partner cities
    * 10.1 Sister city
    * 10.2 Partner cities
  * 11 See also
  * 12 References
  * 13 Notes
  * 14 Documentaries
  * 15 External links

  
## History

Main article: History of Rome

### From founding to Empire

<IMG>

<IMG>

Capitoline Wolf suckles the infant twins Romulus and Remus

Rome's early history is shrouded in legend. According to Roman tradition, the
city was founded by the twins Romulus and Remus on 21 April 753 BC.[6]
Archaeological evidence supports the view that Rome grew from pastoral
settlements on the Palatine Hill built in the area of the future Roman Forum.
While some archaeologists argue that Rome was indeed founded in the middle of
the 8th century BC, the date is subject to controversy.[7] The original
settlement developed into the capital of the Roman Kingdom (ruled by a
succession of seven kings, according to tradition), and then the Roman
Republic (from 510 BC, governed by the Senate), and finally the Roman Empire
(from 27 BC, ruled by an Emperor). This success depended on military conquest,
commercial predominance, as well as selective assimilation of neighbouring
civilisations, most notably the Etruscans and Greeks. From its foundation
Rome, although losing occasional battles, had been undefeated in war until 386
BC, when it was briefly occupied by the Gauls.[8] According to the legend, the
Gauls offered to deliver Rome back to its people for a thousand pounds of
gold, but the Romans refused, preferring to take back their city by force of
arms rather than ever admitting defeat, after which the Romans recovered the
city in the same year.

Roman dominance expanded over most of Europe and the shores of the
Mediterranean Sea, while its population surpassed one million inhabitants. For
almost a thousand years, Rome was the most politically important, richest, and
largest city in the Western world, and remained so after the Empire started to
decline and was split, even as it lost its capital status to Milan and then to
Ravenna, and was surpassed in prestige by the Eastern capital
Constantinople.[citation needed]

### Fall of the Empire and Middle Ages

<IMG>

<IMG>

Fifteenth-century miniature depicting the Sack of Rome of 410

With the reign of Constantine I, the Bishop of Rome gained political as well
as religious importance, eventually becoming known as the Pope and
establishing Rome as the centre of the Catholic Church. After the Sack of Rome
in 410 AD by Alaric I and the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 AD, Rome
alternated between Byzantine and Germanic control. Its population declined to
a mere 20,000 during the Early Middle Ages, reducing the sprawling city to
groups of inhabited buildings interspersed among large areas of ruins and
vegetation. Rome remained nominally part of the Byzantine Empire until 751 AD,
when the Lombards finally abolished the Exarchate of Ravenna. In 756, Pepin
the Short gave the Pope temporal jurisdiction over Rome and surrounding areas,
thus creating the Papal States. In 846, Muslim Arabs invaded Rome and looted
St. Peter's Basilica.[9]

Rome remained the capital of the Papal States until its annexation by the
Kingdom of Italy in 1870; the city became a major pilgrimage site during the
Middle Ages and the focus of struggles between the Papacy and the Holy Roman
Empire starting with Charlemagne, who was crowned its first emperor in Rome in
800 by Pope Leo III. Apart from brief periods as an independent city during
the Middle Ages, Rome kept its status as Papal capital and "holy city" for
centuries, even when the Papacy briefly relocated to Avignon (1309â1377).

### Renaissance Rome

The latter half of the 15th century saw the seat of the Italian Renaissance
move to Rome from Florence. The Papacy wanted to equal and surpass the
grandeur of other Italian cities and to this end created ever more extravagant
churches, bridges, and public spaces, including a new Saint Peter's Basilica,
the Sistine Chapel, Ponte Sisto (the first bridge to be built across the Tiber
since antiquity), and Piazza Navona. The Popes were also patrons of the arts
engaging such artists as Michelangelo, Perugino, Raphael, Ghirlandaio, Luca
Signorelli, Botticelli, and Cosimo Rosselli.

The period was also infamous for papal corruption, with many Popes fathering
children, and engaging in nepotism and simony. The corruption of the Popes and
the extravagance of their building projects led, in part, to the Reformation
and, in turn, the Counter-Reformation.

### Towards the reunification of Italy

<IMG>

<IMG>

Giuseppe Garibaldi defends the Roman Republic in 1849

Italy became caught up in the nationalistic turmoil of the 19th century and
twice gained and lost a short-lived independence. Rome became the focus of
hopes of Italian reunification when the rest of Italy was reunited under the
Kingdom of Italy with a temporary capital at Florence. In 1861, Rome was
declared the capital of Italy even though it was still under the control of
the Pope. During the 1860s, the last vestiges of the Papal States were under
French protection. And it was only when this was lifted in 1870, owing to the
outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, that Italian troops were able to capture
Rome.

### 20th century

After a victorious World War I, Rome witnessed the rise to power of Italian
Fascism guided by Benito Mussolini, who marched on the city in 1922,
eventually declaring a new Empire and allying Italy with Nazi Germany. This
was a period of rapid growth in population, from 212,000 people at the time of
unification to more than 1,000,000, but this trend was halted by World War II,
during which Rome was damaged by both Allied forces bombing and Nazi
occupation. After the execution of Mussolini and the end of the war, a 1946
referendum abolished the monarchy in favour of the Italian Republic.

Rome grew momentously after the war, as one of the driving forces behind the
"Italian economic miracle" of post-war reconstruction and modernisation. It
became a fashionable city in the 1950s and early 1960s, the years of la dolce
vita ("the sweet life"), and a new rising trend in population continued till
the mid-1980s, when the commune had more than 2,800,000 residents; after that,
population started to slowly decline as more residents moved to nearby
suburbs.

## Administration

<IMG>

<IMG>

Palazzo del Campidoglio, Rome City Hall

### Capital of Italy

Rome is the national capital of Italy and is the seat of the Italian
Government. The official residences of the President of the Italian Republic
and the Italian Prime Minister, the seats of both houses of the Italian
Parliament and that of the Italian Constitutional Court are located in the
historic centre. The state ministries are spread out around the city; these
include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is located in Palazzo della
Farnesina near the Olympic stadium.

### City Government

Rome constitutes one of Italy's 8,101 communes, albeit the largest both by
extent and by population. It is governed by a Mayor, currently Gianni
Alemanno, and a city council. The seat of the commune is in on the Capitoline
Hill the historic seat of government in Rome. The local administration in Rome
is commonly referred to as "Campidoglio", the name of the hill in the Roman
dialect.

### Administrative divisions

Main article: Administrative subdivision of Rome

<IMG>

<IMG>

The 19 municipi of Rome

Rome is divided into 19 administrative areas, called municipi or
municipalities. They were created for administrative reasons to increase
decentralisation in the city. Each municipality is governed by a president and
a council of four members who are elected by the residents of the municipality
every five years. The municipalities frequently cross the boundaries of the
traditional, non-administrative divisions of the city.

Rome is also divided into differing types of non-administrative divisions. The
historic centre is divided into 22 rioni, all of which are located within the
Aurelian Walls except Prati and Borgo. After the designation of the newest and
last rione, Prati, newer districts of the city were designated as quarters.
There are 35 of these and they go all the way to the sea at Ostia, where they
are called marine quarters. Rome also has six officially designated suburban
zones and 52 agricultural zones. Many of the latter, however, have actually
been subject to considerable development.

## Geography

### Location

Rome is in the Lazio region of central Italy on the Tiber river (Italian:
Tevere). The original settlement developed on hills that faced onto a ford
beside the Tiber island, the only natural ford of the river. The historic
centre of Rome was built on seven hills: the Aventine Hill, the Caelian Hill,
the Capitoline Hill, the Esquiline Hill, the Palatine Hill, the Quirinal Hill,
and the Viminal Hill. The city is also crossed by another river the Aniene
which joins the Tiber north of the historic centre.

Although the city centre is about 24 km (14.9 mi) inland from the Tyrrhenian
Sea, the city territory extends to the shore, where the south-western district
of Ostia is located. The altitude of the central part of Rome ranges from 13 m
(43 ft) above sea level (at the base of the Pantheon) to 139 m (456 ft) above
sea level (the peak of Monte Mario).[10] The Commune of Rome covers an overall
area of about 1,285 km2 (496 sq mi), including many green areas.

### Topography

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rome seen from satellite

Throughout the history of Rome, the urban limits of the city were considered
to be the area within the city walls. Originally, these consisted of the
Servian Wall, which was built twelve years after the Gaulish sack of the city
in 390 BC. This contained most of the Esquiline and Caelian hills, as well as
the whole of the other five. Rome outgrew the Servian Wall, but no more walls
were constructed until almost 700 years later, when, in 270 AD, Emperor
Aurelian began building the Aurelian Walls. These were almost 19 km (12 mi)
long, and were still the walls the troops of the Kingdom of Italy had to
breach to enter the city in 1870. Modern Romans frequently consider the city's
urban area to be delimited by its ring-road, the Grande Raccordo Anulare,
which circles the city centre at a distance of about 10 km.

The Commune of Rome, however, covers considerably more territory and extends
to the sea at Ostia, the largest town in Italy that is not a commune in its
own right. The Commune covers an area roughly three times the total area
within the Raccordo and is comparable in area to the entire provinces of Milan
and Naples, and to an area six times the size of the territory of these
cities. It also includes considerable areas of abandoned marsh land which is
suitable neither for agriculture nor for urban development.

As a consequence, the density of the Commune is not that high, the communal
territory being divided between highly-urbanised areas and areas designated as
parks, nature reserves, and for agricultural use. The Province of Rome is the
largest by area in Italy. At 5,352 kmÂ², its dimensions are comparable to the
region of Liguria.

### Climate

Rome enjoys a typical Mediterranean climate that is characteristic of the
Mediterranean coasts of Italy. It is at its most comfortable from April
through June, and from mid-September to October; in particular, the Roman
ottobrate (which can be roughly translated as the "beautiful October days")
are famously known as sunny and warm days. By August, the temperature during
the heat of the day often exceeds 32 Â°C (90 Â°F). Traditionally, many
businesses closed during August, and Romans abandoned the city for holiday
resorts. In more recent years, however, in response to growing tourism and
changing work habits, the city is increasingly staying open for the whole
summer. The average high temperature in December is about 13 Â°C (55 Â°F), but
subzero lows are not uncommon.[citation needed]  

<IMG> Weather averages for Rome <IMG>  
Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec  
Average high Â°C (Â°F) 12  
(54) 13  
(55) 16  
(61) 19  
(66) 23  
(73) 27  
(81) 31  
(88) 31  
(88) 27  
(81) 22  
(72) 17  
(63) 13  
(55)  
Average low Â°C (Â°F) 2  
(36) 3  
(37) 4  
(39) 7  
(45) 11  
(52) 14  
(57) 17  
(63) 17  
(63) 14  
(57) 10  
(50) 6  
(43) 3  
(37)  
Precipitation mm (inches) 83  
(3.27) 76  
(2.99) 68  
(2.68) 68  
(2.68) 48  
(1.89) 40  
(1.57) 22  
(0.87) 35  
(1.38) 76  
(2.99) 106  
(4.17) 119  
(4.69) 91  
(3.58)  
Source: Weather.com[11] 2008  
## Demographics

<IMG>

<IMG>

St. Peter's Basilica from the River Tiber. The iconic dome dominates the
skyline of Rome

At the time of the Emperor Augustus, Rome was the largest city in the world,
and probably the largest built until the 19th century. Estimates of its peak
population range from 450,000 to over 3.5 million people, with 1 to 2 million
being most popular with historians. Estimates have been made using the weight
and consumption of imported grain and the free dole to 20% of the population.
In the 1st and 2nd centuries, this suggests an 800,000 - 1.2 million
inhabitants based on various per captia consumption figures. The figure 25.5
million modii of grain (400 million pounds) in storage in the time of emperor
Septimius Severus is taken from the late 4th century Historia Augusta. The
city population may have been as high as 600,000 until the loss of the richest
North African Provinces in the 430s, 440s, and 450s. Thereafter, the
population fell rapidly without grain imports (except for some from Sicily and
Sardinia) and the unwillingness of the upper classes to support the continued
cost to them after the loss of many of their own estates outside Italy.
Moreover, it was not worth the effort to maintain an artificially large
population. However, every effort was made to keep the area of the Palatine
and Forum intact as well as the largest Baths and some other amenities for a
smaller population of 90-150,000. After the fall of the Roman Empire, the
city's population fell dramatically to less than 50,000 people, and continued
to either stagnate or shrink until the Renaissance.[citation needed] When the
Kingdom of Italy annexed Rome in 1870, the city had a population of about
200,000, which rapidly increased to 600,000 by the eve of World War I. The
Fascist regime of Mussolini tried to block an excessive demographic rise of
the city, but failed to prevent it from reaching one million people by 1931.
After the Second World War, growth continued, helped by a post-war economic
boom. A construction boom also created a large number of suburbs during the
1950s and 1960s.  
Year Population  
350 BC 30,000  
250 BC 150,000  
44 BC 1,000,000  
120 1,000,000  
330 800,000  
410 700-800,000  
530 90-150,000  
650 70,000  
1000 20,000  
1400 20,000  
1526 50,000â60,000  
1528 20,000  
Year Population  
1600 100,000  
1750 156,000  
1800 163,000  
1820 139,900  
1850 175,000  
1853 175,800  
1858 182,600  
1861 194,500  
1871 212,432  
1881 273,952  
1901 422,411  
1911 518,917  
Year Population  
1921 660,235  
1931 930,926  
1936 1,150,589  
1951 1,651,754  
1961 2,188,160  
1971 2,781,993  
1981 2,840,259  
1991 2,775,250  
2001 2,663,182  
2007 2,718,768  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Map depicting late ancient Rome  
In 2007, there were 2,718,768 people resident in Rome (some 4 million live in
the greater Rome area), located in the province of Rome, Lazio, of whom 47.2%
were male and 52.8% were female. Minors (children ages 18 and younger)
totalled 17.00 percent of the population compared to pensioners who number
20.76 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent
(minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners). The average age of a Roman resident
is 43 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002
and 2007, the population of Rome grew by 6.54 percent, while Italy as a whole
grew by 3.56 percent.[12] The current birth rate of Rome is 9.10 births per
1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.

### Ethnic Groups

As of 2006, 92.63% of the population was Italian, either born in Rome or
coming from other cities in the country. The largest ethnic minority groups
came from other European countries (mostly from Romania and Poland): 3.14%,
East Asia (mostly Filipino): 1.28%, and the Americas (mostly from Argentina):
1.09%.

### Religion

See also: Churches of Rome

<IMG>

<IMG>

St. Peter's Square in the Vatican City

Much like the rest of Italy, Rome is predominantly Roman Catholic. Although
Rome is home to the Vatican City and St. Peter's Basilica, Rome's cathedral is
the Basilica of St. John Lateran, located to the south-east of the city-
centre. There are around 900 churches in Rome in total, aside from the
cathedral itself, some others of note include: the Basilica di Santa Maria
Maggiore, the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls, the Basilica di San
Clemente, San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane and the Church of the Gesu. There are
also the ancient Catacombs of Rome underneath the city. Numerous highly
important religious educational institutions are also in Rome, such as the
Pontifical Lateran University, Pontifical Biblical Institute, Pontifical
Gregorian University, and Pontifical Oriental Institute.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Basilica of St. John Lateran, the cathedral of Rome

The territory of Vatican City is part of the Mons Vaticanus, and of the
adjacent former Vatican Fields, where St. Peter's Basilica, the Apostolic
Palace, the Sistine Chapel, and museums were built, along with various other
buildings. The area was part of the Roman rione of Borgo until 1929. Being
separated from the city, on the west bank of the Tiber river, the area was an
outcrop of the city that was protected by being included within the walls of
Leo IV, and later expanded by the current fortification walls of Paul III/Pius
IV/Urban VIII. When the Lateran Treaty of 1929 that gave the state its present
form was being prepared, the boundaries of the proposed territory was
influenced by the fact that much of it was all but enclosed by this loop. For
some tracts of the frontier, there was no wall, but the line of certain
buildings supplied part of the boundary, and for a small part of the frontier
a modern wall was constructed.

The territory includes Saint Peter's Square, distinguished from the territory
of Italy only by a white line along the limit of the square, where it touches
Piazza Pio XII. St. Peter's Square is reached through the Via della
Conciliazione, which runs from the Tiber River to St. Peter's. This grand
approach was constructed by Benito Mussolini after the conclusion of the
Lateran Treaty. According to the Lateran Treaty, certain properties of the
Holy See that are located in Italian territory, most notably Castel Gandolfo
and the major basilicas, enjoy extraterritorial status similar to that of
foreign embassies.

## Cityscape

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Colosseum and the Arch of Constantine

#### Ancient Rome

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Pantheon

One of the symbols of Rome is the Colosseum (70â80 AD), the largest
amphitheatre ever built in the Roman Empire. Originally capable of seating
60,000 spectators, it was used for gladiatorial combat. A list of important
monuments of ancient Rome includes the Roman Forum, the Domus Aurea, the
Pantheon, Trajan's Column, Trajan's Market, the Catacombs, the Circus Maximus,
the Baths of Caracalla, Castel Sant'Angelo, the Mausoleum of Augustus, the Ara
Pacis, the Arch of Constantine, the Pyramid of Cestius, and the Bocca della
VeritÃ .

#### Medieval

See also: Medieval architecture

<IMG>

<IMG>

Santa Maria in Trastevere

Often overlooked, Rome's medieval heritage is one of the largest in Italian
cities. Basilicas dating from the Paleochristian age include Santa Maria
Maggiore and San Paolo Fuori le Mura (the latter largely rebuilt in the 19th
century), both housing precious 4th century AD mosaics. Later notable medieval
mosaic and fresco art can be also found in the churches of Santa Maria in
Trastevere, Santi Quattro Coronati, and Santa Prassede. Lay buildings include
a number of towers, the largest being the Torre delle Milizie and the Torre
dei Conti, both next the Roman Forum, and the huge staircase leading to the
basilica of Santa Maria in Ara Coeli.

#### Renaissance and Baroque

See also: Renaissance architecture and Baroque architecture

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Trevi Fountain

Rome was a major world centre of the Renaissance, second only to Florence, and
was profoundly affected by the movement. The most impressive masterpiece of
Renaissance architecture in Rome is the Piazza del Campidoglio by
Michelangelo, along with the Palazzo Senatorio, seat of the city government.
During this period, the great aristocratic families of Rome used to build
opulent dwellings as the Palazzo del Quirinale (now seat of the President of
the Italian Republic), the Palazzo Venezia, the Palazzo Farnese, the Palazzo
Barberini, the Palazzo Chigi (now seat of the Italian Prime Minister), the
Palazzo Spada, the Palazzo della Cancelleria, and the Villa Farnesina.

Rome is also famous for her huge and majestic squares (often adorned with
obelisks), many of which were built in the 17th century. The principal squares
are Piazza Navona, Piazza di Spagna, Campo de' Fiori, Piazza Venezia, Piazza
Farnese and Piazza della Minerva. One of the most emblematic examples of
Baroque art is the Fontana di Trevi by Nicola Salvi. Other notable 17th-
century baroque palaces are the Palazzo Madama, now the seat of the Italian
Senate and the Palazzo Montecitorio, now the seat of the Chamber of Deputies
of Italy.

#### Neoclassicism

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Quirinal Palace

See also: Neoclassical architecture

In 1870, Rome became the capital city of the new Kingdom of Italy. During this
time, neoclassicism, a building style influenced by the architecture of
antiquity, became a predominant influence in Roman architecture. During this
period, many great palaces in neoclassical styles were built to host
ministries, embassies, and other governing agencies. One of the best-known
symbols of Roman neoclassicism is the Monument of Vittorio Emanuele II or
"Altar of the Fatherland", where the Grave of the Unknown Soldier, that
represents the 650,000 Italians that fell in World War I, is located.

#### Fascist architecture

See also: Fascist architecture

The Fascist regime that ruled in Italy between 1922 and 1943 developed an
architectural style that was characterised by its links with ancient Roman
architecture. The most important Fascist site in Rome is the E.U.R district,
designed in 1938 by Marcello Piacentini. It was originally conceived for the
1942 world exhibition, and was called "E.42" ("Esposizione 42"). The world
exhibition, however, never took place because Italy entered the Second World
War in 1940. The most representative building of the Fascist style at E.U.R.
is the Palazzo della CiviltÃ Italiana (1938â1943), the iconic design of
which has been labelled the cubic or Square Colosseum.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Galleria Borghese

After World War II, the Roman authorities found that they already had the seed
of an off-centre business district of the type that other capitals were still
planning (London Docklands and La DÃ©fense in Paris). Also the Palazzo della
Farnesina, the current seat of Italian Foreign Ministry, was designed in 1935
in Fascist style.

### Parks and gardens

Public parks and nature reserves cover a large area in Rome, and the city has
one of the largest areas of green space amongst European capitals.[13] The
most notable part of this green space is represented by the large number of
villas and landscaped gardens created by the Italian aristocracy. While many
villas were destroyed during the building boom of the late 19th century, a
great many remain. The most notable of these are Villa Borghese, Villa Ada,
and Villa Doria Pamphili.

Rome has a number of regional parks of much more recent origin including the
Pineto Regional Park and the Appian Way Regional Park. There are also nature
reserves at Marcigliana and at Tenuta di Castelporziano.

## Economy

<IMG>

<IMG>

Eni's headquarters in EUR, Rome's business district

With a 2005 GDP of â¬94.376 billion (US$121.5 billion),[14] the city produces
6.7% of the national GDP (more than any other single city in Italy), and its
unemployment rate, lowered from 11.1% to 6.5% between 2001 and 2005, is now
one of the lowest rates of all the European Union capital cities.[14] Rome
grows +4,4% annually and continues to grow at a higher rate in comparison to
any other city in the rest of the country.[14]

Although the economy of Rome is characterized by the absence of heavy industry
and it is largely dominated by services, high-technology companies (IT,
aerospace, defense, telecommunications), research, construction and commercial
activities (especially banking), and the huge development of tourism are very
dynamic and extremely important to its economy. Rome's international airport,
Fiumicino, is the largest in Italy, and the city hosts the head offices of the
vast majority of the major Italian companies, as well as the headquarters of
three of the world's 100 largest companies: Enel, Eni, and Telecom Italia.[15]

Universities, national radio and television and the movie industry in Rome are
also important parts of the economy: Rome is also the hub of the Italian film
industry, thanks to the CinecittÃ  studios, working since the 1930s. The city
is also a centre for banking and insurance as well as electronics, energy,
transport, and aerospace industries. Numerous international companies and
agencies headquarters, government ministries, conference centres, sports
venues, and museums are located in Rome's principal business districts: the
Esposizione Universale Roma (EUR); the Torrino (further south from the EUR);
the Magliana; the Parco de' Medici-Laurentina and the so-called Tiburtina-
valley along the ancient Via Tiburtina. Tourism is inevitably one of Rome's
chief industries, with numerous notable museums including the Vatican Museum,
the Borghese Gallery, and the Musei Capitolini: in 2005 the city registered
19.5 million of global visitors, up of 22.1% from 2001.[14] In 2006 Rome has
been visited by 6.03 million of international tourists, reaching the 8th place
in the ranking of the world's 150 most visited cities.[16]

## Culture

Historic Centre of Rome, the Properties of the Holy See in that City Enjoying
Extraterritorial Rights and San Paolo Fuori le Mura*  
UNESCO World Heritage Site  
* * *
<IMG>  
Type Cultural  
Criteria i, ii, iii, iv, vi  
Reference 91  
Region** Europe and North America  
Inscription history  
Inscription 1980 (4th Session)  
Extensions 1990  
* Name as inscribed on World Heritage List.  
** Region as classified by UNESCO.  
### Education

Rome is a nation-wide centre for higher education. Its first university, La
Sapienza (founded in 1303), is the largest in Europe and the second-largest in
the world, with more than 150,000 students attending.[citation needed] Two new
public universities were founded: Tor Vergata in 1982, and Roma Tre in 1992,
although the latter has now become larger than the former. Rome also contains
a large number of pontifical universities and institutes, including the
Pontifical Gregorian University (The oldest Jesuit university in the world,
founded in 1551), the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas, and many
others. The city also hosts various private universities, such as the LUMSA,
the UniversitÃ Cattolica del Sacro Cuore (Roman centre), the LUISS, Istituto
Europeo di Design, the St. John's University, the John Cabot University, the
IUSM, the American University of Rome, the Scuola Lorenzo de' Medici, the Link
Campus of Malta, the S. Pio V University of Rome, and the UniversitÃ Campus
Bio-Medico. Rome is also the location of the John Felice Rome Center, a campus
of Loyola University Chicago.

### Music

Rome is an important centre for music. It hosts the Accademia Nazionale di
Santa Cecilia (founded in 1585), for which new concert halls have been built
in the new Parco della Musica, one of the largest musical venues in the world.
Rome also has an opera house, the Teatro dell'Opera di Roma, as well as
several minor musical institutions. The city also played host to the
Eurovision Song Contest in 1991 and the MTV Europe Music Awards in 2004.

### Cinema

<IMG>

<IMG>

Set of Gangs of New York in CinecittÃ  studios, Rome

Rome hosts the CinecittÃ  Studios, the largest film and television production
facility in continental Europe and the centre of the Italian cinema, where a
large number of today's biggest box office hits are filmed. The 99-acre
(40-ha) studio complex is 5.6 miles (9 km) from the centre of Rome and is part
of one of the biggest production communities in the world, second only to
Hollywood, with well over 5,000 professionals â from period costume makers
to visual effects specialists. More than 3,000 productions have been made on
its lot, from recent features like The Passion of the Christ, Gangs of New
York, HBO's Rome, The Life Aquatic and Dino De Laurentiisâ Decameron, to
such cinema classics as Ben-Hur, Cleopatra, and the films of Federico Fellini.

Founded in 1937 by Benito Mussolini, the studios were bombed by the Western
Allies during the Second World War. In the 1950s, CinecittÃ was the filming
location for several large American film productions, and subsequently became
the studio most closely associated with Federico Fellini. Today CinecittÃ is
the only studio in the world with pre-production, production, and full post-
production facilities on one lot, allowing directors and producers to walk in
with their script and "walk out" with a completed film.

### Language

The original language of Rome was Latin, which evolved during the Middle Ages
into Italian. The latter emerged as the confluence of various regional
dialects, among which the Tuscan dialect predominated, but the population of
Rome also developed its own dialect, the Romanesco. The ancient romanesco,
used during the Middle Ages, was a southern Italian dialect, very close to the
Neapolitan. The influence of the Florentine culture during the renaissance,
and, above all, the immigration to Rome of many Florentines, amongst them the
two Medici Popes (Leo X and Clement VII) and their suite, caused a major shift
in the dialect, which began to resemble more the Tuscan varieties (the
immigration of Florentines was mainly due to the Sack of Rome in 1527 and the
subsequent demographic decrease). This remained largely confined to Rome until
the 19th century, but then expanded to other zones of Lazio (Civitavecchia,
Latina), from the beginning of the 20th century, thanks to the rising
population of Rome and to better transportation systems. As a consequence,
Romanesco abandoned its traditional forms to mutate into the dialect spoken
within the city, which is more like standard Italian, although it remains
distinct from the other Romanesco-influenced local dialects of Lazio.
Dialectal literature in the traditional form Romanesco includes the works of
such authors as Giuseppe Gioachino Belli, Trilussa, and Cesare Pascarella.
Contemporary Romanesco is mainly represented by popular actors such as Aldo
Fabrizi, Alberto Sordi, Nino Manfredi, Anna Magnani, Gigi Proietti, Enrico
Montesano, and Carlo Verdone.

### Sports

<IMG>

<IMG>

Stadio Olimpico

Rome hosted the 1960 Summer Olympics and is an official candidate to hosting
the 2020 Summer Olympics.

Football is the most popular sport in Rome, as in the rest of the country. The
Olympic Stadium hosted the final game of the 1990 FIFA World Cup; it is also
the home stadium for local Serie A clubs A.S. Roma and S.S. Lazio, whose
rivalry has become a staple of Roman sports culture. Indeed, famous
footballers who play for these teams and are also born in the city tend to
become especially popular, as has been the case with players such as Francesco
Totti and Daniele De Rossi (both for A.S. Roma).

While far from being as popular as football, Rugby union is gaining wider
acceptance. The Stadio Flaminio is the home stadium for the Italy national
rugby union team, which has been playing in the Six Nations Championship since
2000, albeit with less than satisfactory performances, as they have never won
the championship so far. Rome is home to local rugby teams, such as Unione
Rugby Capitolina, Rugby Roma, and S.S. Lazio.

Every May, Rome hosts the ATP Masters Series tennis tournament on the clay
courts of the Foro Italico. Cycling was immensely popular in the post-WWII
period, although its popularity has faded in the last decades; Rome has hosted
the final portion of the Giro d'Italia twice, in 1989 and 2000. Rome is also
home to many other sports teams, including basketball (Virtus Roma),
volleyball (M. Roma Volley), handball or waterpolo.

## Transportation

<IMG>

<IMG>

Roma Termini railway station

Rome is at the centre of the radial network of roads that roughly follow the
lines of the ancient roman roads that began at the Capitoline Hill and
connected Rome with its empire. Today Rome is circled, at a distance of about
10 km (6 mi), by the ring-road called the Grande Raccordo Anulare.

Due to its location in the centre of the Italian peninsula, Rome is a
principal railway node for central Italy. Rome's main train station, Termini,
is one of the biggest train stations in Europe and the most heavily-used in
Italy, with around 400 thousand travellers passing through every day. The
second-largest station in the city, Roma Tiburtina, is currently being
redeveloped as a high-speed rail terminus.[17]

Rome is also served by three airports. The intercontinental Leonardo Da Vinci
International Airport is Italy's chief airport and is more commonly known as
"Fiumicino Airport", as it is located within the nearby Commune of Fiumicino,
south-west of Rome. The older Rome Ciampino Airport is a joint civilian and
military airport. It is more commonly referred to as "Ciampino Airport", as it
is located beside Ciampino, south-east of Rome. A third airport, the Aeroporto
dell'Urbe, is a small, low-traffic airport located about 6 km north of the
city centre, which handles most helicopter and private flights.

The city suffers from considerable traffic problems largely due to this radial
street pattern, making it difficult for Romans to move easily from the
vicinity of one of the radial roads to another without going into the historic
centre or using the ring-road. Problems that are not helped by limited size of
Rome's metro system when compared to other cities of similar size. In
addition, Rome has only 21 taxis for every 10,000 inhabitants, far below other
major European cities.[18] Chronic congestion caused by cars during the 1970s
and 1980s led to restrictions being placed on vehicle access to the inner
city-centre during the hours of daylight. Areas where these restriction apply
are known as Limited Traffic Zones (Zona a Traffico Limitato (ZTL) in
Italian). More recently, heavy night-time traffic in Trastevere and San
Lorenzo has led to the creation of night-time ZTLs in those districts, and
there are also plans to create another night-time ZTL in Testaccio.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Metropolitana of Rome

A 2-line metro system called the Metropolitana operates in Rome. Construction
on the first branch started in the 1930s. The line had been planned to quickly
connect the main train station with the newly-planned E42 area in the southern
suburbs, where the 1942 World Fair was supposed to be held. The event never
took place because of war. The area was later partly redesigned and renamed
EUR (Esposizione Universale di Roma: Rome Universal Exhibition) in the 1950s
to serve as a modern business district. The line was finally opened in 1955,
and it is now part of the B Line. The A line opened in 1980 from Ottaviano to
Anagnina stations, later extended in stages (1999 â 2000) to Battistini. In
the 1990s, an extension of the B line was opened from Termini to Rebibbia.
This underground network is generally reliable (although it may become very
congested at peak times and during events, especially the A line) as it is
relatively short. As of 2005, its total length is 38 km (24 mi). The two
existing lines, A & B, intersect at Roma Termini station. A new branch of the
B line (B1) is under construction with an estimated cost of â¬500 million. It
is scheduled to open in 2010. B1 will connect to line B at Piazza Bologna and
will have 4 stations over a distance of 3.9 km (2 mi). A third line, line C,
is under construction with an estimated cost of â¬3 billion and will have 30
stations over a distance of 25.5 km (16 mi). It will partly replace the
existing Rail Road line, Termini-Pantano. It will feature full automated,
driverless trains.[19] The first section is due to open in 2011 and the final
sections in 2015, but archaeological findings often delay underground
construction work. A fourth line, line, is also planned. It will have 22
stations over a distance of 20 km (12 mi). The first section is projected to
open in 2015 and the final sections before 2035.

Above-ground public transport in Rome is made up of a bus and tram network.
This network is run by Trambus S.p.A. under the auspices of ATAC S.p.A. (which
originally stood for the Bus and Tram Agency of the Commune, Azienda Tranvie
ed Autobus del Comune in Italian). The bus network is currently made up of in
excess of 350 bus lines and over 8 thousand bus stops, whereas the more-
limited tram system currently has 39 km of track and 192 stops.[20]

## International entities, organisations and involvement

<IMG>

<IMG>

FAO headquarters in Rome (former Department of Italian East Africa)

Rome is unique in having a sovereign state located entirely within its city
limits, the Vatican City. The Vatican is a enclave of Rome and a sovereign
possession of the Holy See, the supreme government of the Roman Catholic
Church. Rome hosts foreign embassies to both Italy and the Holy See, although
frequently the same ambassador is accredited to both.

Another body, the Sovereign Military Order of Malta (SMOM), took refuge in
Rome in 1834 after having lost Malta to Napoleon. It is sometimes classified
as having sovereignty but does not claim any territory in Rome or anywhere
else, hence leading to dispute over its actual sovereign status.

Rome is also the seat of significant international organisations of the United
Nations, such as the World Food Programme (WFP), the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), and the International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD).

Rome has traditionally been heavily involved in the process of European
political integration. In 1957, the city hosted the signing of the Treaty of
Rome, which established the European Economic Community (predecessor to the
European Union), and also played host to the official signing of the proposed
European Constitution in July 2004.

Rome is the seat of the NATO Defence College and is the place where the
Statute of the International Criminal Court was formulated.

## Sister and partner cities

Rome has one sister city, and a number of partner cities:

#### Sister city

  * Flag of France Paris, France (French: Seule Paris est digne de Rome; seule Rome est digne de Paris; Italian: Solo Parigi Ã¨ degna di Roma; solo Roma Ã¨ degna di Parigi; English: Only Paris is worthy of Rome; only Rome is worthy of Paris).[21]

#### Partner cities

  * Flag of Bolivia Achacachi, Bolivia.
  * Flag of Spain Marbella, Spain.
  * Flag of Algeria Algiers, Algeria.
  * Flag of the People's Republic of China Beijing, China.
  * Flag of Serbia Belgrade, Serbia.
  * Flag of Brazil BrasÃ­lia, Brazil.

  * Flag of Egypt Cairo, Egypt.
  * Flag of the United States Cincinnati, United States.
  * Flag of Ukraine Kiev, Ukraine.
  * Flag of the United Kingdom London, United Kingdom.
  * Flag of Canada Montreal, Canada.
  * Flag of the United States New York City, United States.

  * Flag of Bulgaria Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
  * Flag of South Korea Seoul, South Korea.
  * Flag of Australia Sydney, Australia.
  * Flag of Japan Tokyo, Japan.
  * Flag of Belgium Tongeren, Belgium.

  
## See also

  * Churches of Rome
  * Glocal Forum, the International on-governmental organization with main office located in Rome
  * Large Cities Climate Leadership Group
  * List of ancient monuments in Rome
  * Shopping areas and markets in Rome

## References

  1. ^ a b "Bilancio Demografico della Popolazione Residente Comune di Roma - Anno 2009" (in Italian). The Office of Statistics and Census of the Commune of Rome. http://www.romastatistica.it/studieric%5CBilancio%20demografico_mensile_Anno2009.pdf. Retrieved on 3 March 2009.
  2. ^ "Rome (Italy)". Encarta. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761556259/rome.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-10.
  3. ^ "Urban Audit". Urbanaudit.org. http://www.urbanaudit.org/DataAccessed.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-03-03.
  4. ^ "Top 150 City Destinations London Leads the Way". Euromonitor International. Caroline Bremner. http://www.euromonitor.com/Top_150_City_Destinations_London_Leads_the_Way. Retrieved on 2008-11-09.
  5. ^ "Historic Centre of Rome, the Properties of the Holy See in that City Enjoying Extraterritorial Rights and San Paolo Fuori le Mura". UNESCO World Heritage Center. http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/91. Retrieved on 2008-06-08.
  6. ^ "Rome: Pre-20th-Century History". Lonely Planet. http://www.lonelyplanet.com/worldguide/italy/rome/history. Retrieved on 2008-07-04.
  7. ^ Wilford, John Nobel (2007-06-12). "More Clues in the Legend (or Is It Fact?) of Romulus". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/12/science/12rome.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-11.
  8. ^ Livy, Book 5.
  9. ^ Italian Peninsula, 500â1000 A.D., The Metropolitan Museum of Art
  10. ^ Ravaglioli, Armando (1997) (in Italian). Roma anno 2750 ab Urbe condita. Rome: Tascabili Economici Newton. ISBN 888183670X.
  11. ^ "Monthly Averages for Rome, Italy". The Weather Channel. http://www.weather.com/outlook/travel/businesstraveler/wxclimatology/monthly/ITXX0067. Retrieved on 2008-06-01.
  12. ^ Statistiche demografiche ISTAT
  13. ^ "Green Areas". RomaPerKyoto.org. http://www.romaperkyoto.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=35&Itemid=52. Retrieved on 2008-11-09.
  14. ^ a b c d Rapporto Censis 2006
  15. ^ DeCarlo, Scott (2006-03-30). "The World's 2000 Largest Public Companies". Forbes. http://www.forbes.com/2006/03/29/06f2k_worlds-largest-public-companies_land.html. Retrieved on 2007-01-16.
  16. ^ Caroline Bremner (2007-10-11). "Top 150 City Destinations: London Leads the Way". Euromonitor International. http://www.euromonitor.com/Top_150_City_Destinations_London_Leads_the_Way. Retrieved on 2008-08-03. This article has the complete list of 150 cities
  17. ^ â Entry on Roma Tiburtina station on the official website of the Italian high-speed rail service (in Italian)
  18. ^ "Central Rome Streets Blocked by Taxi Drivers". New York Times. 2007-11-30. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/30/world/europe/30rome.html?scp=93&sq=Rome&st=nyt. Retrieved on 2008-02-10.
  19. ^ Kington, Tom (2007-05-14). "Roman remains threaten metro". Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2007/may/14/italy.artnews. Retrieved on 2008-08-10.
  20. ^ The figures are from the ATAC website (in Italian).
  21. ^ "International relations: Special partners". Portal of the City of Paris. http://www.v1.paris.fr/EN/city_government/international/special_partners.asp. Retrieved on 2008-11-09.

## Notes

  * Lucentini, Mario (2002) (in Italian). La Grande Guida di Roma. Rome: Newton & Compton Editori. ISBN 88-8289-053-8.
  * Spoto, Salvatore (1999) (in Italian). Roma Esoterica. Rome: Newton & Compton Editori. ISBN 88-8289-265-4.
  * Richard Brilliant (2006). Roman Art. An American's View. Rome: Di Renzo Editore. ISBN 88-8323-085-X.

## Documentaries

  * The Holy Cities: Rome produced by Danae Film Production, distributed by HDH Communications; 2006.

## External links

Find more about Rome on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions from
Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

Official

  * Official site of the City of Rome (Italian)
  * APT (official Tourist Office) of the City of Rome (English)
  * Rome Museums â Official site (Italian)
  * Vatican Museums (English)
  * Capitoline Museums (English)

Other

  * Rome travel guide from Wikitravel
  * Rome travel guides at the Open Directory Project
  * City models of Ancient Rome

Rome  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Capitals of European states and territories  
Capitals of non-sovereign territories or constituent nations shown in bold
italics  
Central Southern Western Northern  
Berlin, Germany  
Bratislava, Slovakia  
Budapest, Hungary  
Ljubljana, Slovenia  
Prague, Czech Republic  
Vienna, Austria  
Warsaw, Poland  
Vaduz, Liechtenstein

Eastern

Astana, Kazakhstan 1  
Baku, Azerbaijan 1  
Bucharest, Romania  
ChiÅinÄu, Moldova  
Kiev, Ukraine  
Minsk, Belarus  
Moscow, Russia 1  
Sukhumi, Abkhazia 3  
Tbilisi, Georgia 1  
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia 3  
Yerevan, Armenia 2

Ankara, Turkey 1  
Athens, Greece  
Belgrade, Serbia  
Gibraltar, Gibraltar4  
Nicosia, Cyprus 2  
Nicosia, Northern Cyprus 2, 3  
Podgorica, Montenegro  
Pristina, Kosovo 3  
Rome, Italy  
San Marino, San Marino  
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina  
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia  
Sofia, Bulgaria  
Tirana, Albania  
Valletta, Malta  
Vatican City, Vatican City  
Zagreb, Croatia

Amsterdam, Netherlands  
Andorra la Vella, Andorra  
Berne, Switzerland  
Brussels, Belgium 6  
Douglas, Isle of Man4  
Dublin, Ireland  
Lisbon, Portugal  
London, United Kingdom  
Luxembourg, Luxembourg  
Madrid, Spain  
Monaco, Monaco  
Paris, France  
St. Helier, Jersey4  
St. Peter Port, Guernsey4  

Copenhagen, Denmark  
Helsinki, Finland  
Longyearbyen, Svalbard  
Mariehamn, Ã land Islands  
Oslo, Norway  
ReykjavÃ­k, Iceland  
Riga, Latvia  
Stockholm, Sweden  
Tallinn, Estonia  
TÃ³rshavn, Faroe Islands  
Vilnius, Lithuania  
1 Transcontinental country. 2 Entirely in Southwest Asia but having socio-
political connections with Europe. 3 Partially recognised country. 4 Crown
Dependency or Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom. 5 Part of Spain. 6
Also the seat of the European Union, see Location of European Union
institutions and Brussels and the European Union.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Capital cities of the Member States of the European Union  
Amsterdam Â· Athens Â· Berlin Â· Bratislava Â· Brussels Â· Bucharest Â·
Budapest Â· Copenhagen Â· Dublin Â· Helsinki Â· Lisbon Â· Ljubljana Â· London
Â· Luxembourg City Â· Madrid Â· Nicosia Â· Paris Â· Prague Â· Riga Â· Rome Â·
Sofia Â· Stockholm Â· Tallinn Â· Valletta Â· Vienna Â· Vilnius Â· Warsaw  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Lazio Â· Comuni of the Province of Rome  
Lazio

Affile Â· Agosta Â· Albano Laziale Â· Allumiere Â· Anguillara Sabazia Â·
Anticoli Corrado Â· Anzio Â· Arcinazzo Romano Â· Ardea Â· Ariccia Â· Arsoli Â·
Artena Â· Bellegra Â· Bracciano Â· Camerata Nuova Â· Campagnano di Roma Â·
Canale Monterano Â· Canterano Â· Capena Â· Capranica Prenestina Â· Carpineto
Romano Â· Casape Â· Castel Gandolfo Â· Castel Madama Â· Castel San Pietro
Romano Â· Castelnuovo di Porto Â· Cave Â· Cerreto Laziale Â· Cervara di Roma
Â· Cerveteri Â· Ciampino Â· Ciciliano Â· Cineto Romano Â· Civitavecchia Â·
Civitella San Paolo Â· Colleferro Â· Colonna Â· Fiano Romano Â· Filacciano Â·
Fiumicino Â· Fonte Nuova Â· Formello Â· Frascati Â· Gallicano nel Lazio Â·
Gavignano Â· Genazzano Â· Genzano di Roma Â· Gerano Â· Gorga Â· Grottaferrata
Â· Guidonia Montecelio Â· Jenne Â· Labico Â· Ladispoli Â· Lanuvio Â· Lariano
Â· Licenza Â· Magliano Romano Â· Mandela Â· Manziana Â· Marano Equo Â·
Marcellina Â· Marino Â· Mazzano Romano Â· Mentana Â· Monte Compatri Â· Monte
Porzio Catone Â· Monteflavio Â· Montelanico Â· Montelibretti Â· Monterotondo
Â· Montorio Romano Â· Moricone Â· Morlupo Â· Nazzano Â· Nemi Â· Nerola Â·
Nettuno Â· Olevano Romano Â· Palestrina Â· Palombara Sabina Â· Percile Â·
Pisoniano Â· Poli Â· Pomezia Â· Ponzano Romano Â· Riano Â· Rignano Flaminio Â·
Riofreddo Â· Rocca Canterano Â· Rocca Priora Â· Rocca Santo Stefano Â· Rocca
di Cave Â· Rocca di Papa Â· Roccagiovine Â· Roiate Â· Rome Â· Roviano Â·
Sacrofano Â· Sambuci Â· San Cesareo Â· San Gregorio da Sassola Â· San Polo dei
Cavalieri Â· San Vito Romano Â· Sant'Angelo Romano Â· Sant'Oreste Â· Santa
Marinella Â· Saracinesco Â· Segni Â· Subiaco Â· Tivoli Â· Tolfa Â· Torrita
Tiberina Â· Trevignano Romano Â· Vallepietra Â· Vallinfreda Â· Valmontone Â·
Velletri Â· Vicovaro Â· Vivaro Romano Â· Zagarolo

Province of Rome  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Regional capitals of Italy  
L'Aquila, Abruzzo  
Aosta, Aosta Valley  
Bari, Apulia  
Potenza, Basilicata

Catanzaro, Calabria  
Naples, Campania  
Bologna, Emilia-Romagna  
Trieste, Friuli-Venezia Giulia

Rome, Lazio  
Genoa, Liguria  
Milan, Lombardy  
Ancona, Marche

Campobasso, Molise  
Turin, Piedmont  
Cagliari, Sardinia  
Palermo, Sicily

Trento, Trentino-Alto Adige/SÃ¼dtirol  
Florence, Tuscany  
Perugia, Umbria  
Venice, Veneto  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Summer Olympic Games host cities  
1896: Athens â¢ 1900: Paris â¢ 1904: St. Louis â¢ 1908: London â¢ 1912:
Stockholm â¢ 1920: Antwerp â¢ 1924: Paris â¢ 1928: Amsterdam â¢ 1932: Los
Angeles â¢ 1936: Berlin â¢ 1948: London â¢ 1952: Helsinki â¢ 1956:
Melbourne â¢ 1960: Rome â¢ 1964: Tokyo â¢ 1968: Mexico City â¢ 1972:
Munich â¢ 1976: Montreal â¢ 1980: Moscow â¢ 1984: Los Angeles â¢ 1988:
Seoul â¢ 1992: Barcelona â¢ 1996: Atlanta â¢ 2000: Sydney â¢ 2004: Athens
â¢ 2008: Beijing â¢ 2012: London 2016: TBA 2020: TBA  
v â¢ d â¢ e

World Heritage Sites in Italy  
For official site names, see each article or the List of World Heritage Sites
in Italy.  
Aeolian Islands Â· Aquileia Â· Archaeological Area of Agrigento Â· Pompeii,
Herculaneum, Torre Annunziata Â· Botanical Garden, Padua Â· Caserta Palace,
Aqueduct of Vanvitelli, San Leucio Complex Â· Castel del Monte Â· Cilento and
Vallo di Diano, Paestum, Velia, Certosa di Padula Â· Amalfi Coast Â· Crespi
d'Adda Â· Ravenna Â· Cerveteri, Tarquinia Â· Ferrara Â· Florence Â· Assisi Â·
Matera Â· Cathedral, Torre Civica, Piazza Grande, Modena Â· Naples Â· Genoa Â·
Mantua Â· Piazza del Duomo, Pisa Â· Pienza Â· Portovenere, Cinque Terre
(Monterosso al Mare, Vernazza, Corniglia, Manarola, Riomaggiore), Palmaria,
Tino, Tinetto Â· Residences of the Royal House of Savoy Â· Rock Drawings in
Valcamonica Â· Rome1 Â· Sabbioneta Â· Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy Â·
San Gimignano Â· Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan Â· Val di Noto (Caltagirone,
Militello in Val di Catania, Catania, Modica, Noto, Palazzolo Acreide, Ragusa,
Scicli) Â· Siena Â· Barumini nuraghes Â· Syracuse, Necropolis of Pantalica Â·
Alberobello Â· Urbino Â· Val d'Orcia Â· Venice Â· Verona Â· Vicenza, Palladian
Villas of the Veneto Â· Hadrian's Villa Â· Villa d'Este Â· Villa Romana del
Casale

Flag of Italy  
1 Shared with the Holy See.  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Landmarks of Rome  
Basilicas and other religious sites

Catacombs of Rome Â· San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane Â· Basilica di San
Clemente Â· Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore Â· Basilica of Saint Paul Outside
the Walls Â· Basilica of St. John Lateran Â· Chiesa del GesÃ¹ Â· Ghetto Â·
Santa Croce in Gerusalemme Â· Santa Maria degli Angeli Â· Santa Maria in
Aracoeli Â· Santa Maria in Cosmedin Â· Santa Maria in Trastevere Â· Santa
Prassede Â· Santa Sabina Â· St. Peter's Basilica Â· Sant'Ivo alla Sapienza Â·
Sistine Chapel  
Gardens, parks and natural attractions

Tiber Island Â· Villa Ada Â· Villa Borghese Â· Villa Doria Pamphili Â· Villa
Medici  
Ancient temples, monuments and sporting venues

Ara Pacis Â· Castel Sant'Angelo Â· Circus Maximus Â· Colosseum Â· Column of
Marcus Aurelius Â· Largo di Torre Argentina Â· Monument to Vittorio Emanuele
II Â· Obelisks Â· Palazzo Barberini Â· Pantheon Â· Pyramid of Cestius Â· Roman
Forum Â· Temple of Hercules Victor Â· Temple of Jupiter (Capitoline Hill) Â·
Theatre of Marcellus Â· Temple of Portunus Â· Trajan's Column Â· Trajan's
Market Â· Mausoleum of Augustus  
Aqueducts, squares, fountains, towers and walls

Trevi Fountain Â· Baths of Caracalla Â· Aurelian Walls Â· Servian Wall Â·
Palazzo Farnese Â· Piazza Navona Â· Spanish Steps Â· Torre delle Milizie  
Sculptures

Apollo Belvedere Â· Augustus of Prima Porta Â· La Bocca della VeritÃ  Â·
LaocoÃ¶n and His Sons  
Seven Hills

Aventine Hill Â· Caelian Hill Â· Capitoline Hill Â· Esquiline Hill Â· Palatine
Hill Â· Quirinal Hill Â· Viminal Hill  
Coordinates: 41Â°54â²N 12Â°30â²Eï»¿ / ï»¿41.9Â°N 12.5Â°Eï»¿ / 41.9; 12.5  
  
  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rome"

Categories: Cities and towns in the Lazio | Communes of the Province of Rome |
Host cities of the Summer Olympic Games | World Heritage Sites in Italy | Rome
| Capitals in Europe | Settlements established in the 8th century BC | Ancient
cities | Holy cities

Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages | Articles
containing non-English language text | Articles containing Latin language text
| All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since January 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007 |
Articles containing French language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * á áá­á
  * Anglo-Saxon
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * ÜÜªÜ¡ÜÜ
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * ArmÃ£neashce
  * Arpetan
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐ°ÑÒ¡Ð¾ÑÑ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bikol Central
  * Boarisch
  * à½à½¼à½à¼à½¡à½²à½
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Ð§ÄÐ²Ð°ÑÐ»Ð°
  * Äesky
  * Corsu
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deitsch
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EmiliÃ n e rumagnÃ²l
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FÃ¸royskt
  * Fiji Hindi
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Furlan
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * ð²ð¿ðð¹ððº
  * æè¨
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KaszÃ«bsczi
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * Kernewek
  * Kiswahili
  * ÐÐ¾Ð¼Ð¸
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Ladino
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LÃ­guru
  * Limburgs
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Malagasy
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * à¤¨à¥à¤ªà¤¾à¤²à¥
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Nnapulitano
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Nouormand
  * Novial
  * Occitan
  * Uyghurcheâ / Ø¦ÛÙØºÛØ±ÚÛ
  * O'zbek
  * PiemontÃ¨is
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * QÄ±rÄ±mtatarca
  * Reo MÄ`ohi
  * Ripoarisch
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Rumantsch
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * SÃ¡megiella
  * à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤
  * Sardu
  * Seeltersk
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡Ð»Ð¾Ð²Ñ£ÌÐ½ÑÑÐºÑ / â°â°â°â°â°¡â°â° â°â°â°
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TarandÃ­ne
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * Tok Pisin
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * VÃ¨neto
  * VolapÃ¼k
  * VÃµro
  * West-Vlams
  * Winaray
  * Wolof
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * Zazaki
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 00:10.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



