
# Soundgarden

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Sound Garden" redirects here. For the art installation, see A Sound Garden.

Soundgarden  
Soundgarden in 1991, left to right: Kim Thayil, Matt Cameron, Chris Cornell
and Ben Shepherd  

Soundgarden in 1991, left to right: Kim Thayil, Matt Cameron, Chris Cornell
and Ben Shepherd  
Background information  
Origin Seattle, Washington, USA  
Genre(s) Alternative metal, alternative rock, grunge  
Years active 1984â1997  
Label(s) Sub Pop, SST, A&M  
Associated acts Skin Yard, Temple of the Dog, Pearl Jam, Hater, Wellwater
Conspiracy, Audioslave  
Members  
Chris Cornell  
Kim Thayil  
Matt Cameron  
Ben Shepherd  
Former members  
Hiro Yamamoto  
Scott Sundquist  
Jason Everman  
Soundgarden was an American rock band formed in Seattle, Washington in 1984 by
lead singer and drummer Chris Cornell, lead guitarist Kim Thayil, and bassist
Hiro Yamamoto. Matt Cameron became the band's permanent drummer in 1986 while
bassist Ben Shepherd became a permanent replacement for Yamamoto in 1990.

Soundgarden was one of the key bands in the creation of grunge, a style of
alternative rock that developed in Seattle and was based around the band's
record label Sub Pop. Soundgarden was the first grunge band to sign to a major
label, though the band did not achieve commercial success until Seattle
contemporaries Nirvana and Pearl Jam popularized grunge in the early 1990s.

Soundgarden achieved its biggest success with the 1994 album, Superunknown,
which debuted at number one on the Billboard charts and yielded the Grammy
Awardâwinning singles "Black Hole Sun" and "Spoonman". In 1997, the band
broke up due to internal strife over its creative direction. Soundgarden has
sold eight million records in the U.S.,[1] and an estimated twenty million
albums worldwide.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Formation and early years: 1984â1986
    * 1.2 First releases: 1987â1990
    * 1.3 Badmotorfinger: 1991â1993
    * 1.4 Superunknown: 1994â1995
    * 1.5 Down on the Upside and break-up: 1996â1997
    * 1.6 Post-Soundgarden
  * 2 Musical style and influences
  * 3 Legacy
  * 4 Discography
  * 5 Awards
  * 6 See also
  * 7 Notes and references
  * 8 Further reading
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History

### [edit] Formation and early years: 1984â1986

Soundgarden was formed in 1984 by Chris Cornell (drums and vocals) and Hiro
Yamamoto (bass); they were later joined by Kim Thayil (guitar). Thayil had
moved to Seattle from Park Forest, Illinois with Yamamoto and Bruce Pavitt,
who would later start Sub Pop Records.[3] The band named themselves after a
wind-channeling pipe sculpture, "A Sound Garden," located on NOAA property
next to Magnuson Park, Seattle, Washington.[4]

Cornell originally played drums while singing, but in 1985 the band enlisted
Scott Sundquist to allow Cornell to concentrate on vocals.[5] The band
traveled around playing various concerts with this line-up for about a year.
The band's first recordings were three songs that appeared on a 1986
compilation for C/Z Records called Deep Six. It also featured songs by fellow
grunge pioneers Green River, Skin Yard, Malfunkshun, The U-Men, and The
Melvins. Kathleen C. Fennessy of Allmusic stated that the compilation
"documents a formative period in Northwest rock history."[6] In 1986,
Sundquist left the band to spend time with his family,[7] and was replaced by
Matt Cameron, who was the drummer for Skin Yard.

### [edit] First releases: 1987â1990

KCMU DJ Jonathan Poneman was impressed after seeing Soundgarden perform one
night, later saying, "I saw this band that was everything rock music should
be."[8] Poneman offered to fund a release by the band, so Thayil told him to
team up with Bruce Pavitt. Poneman offered to contribute $20,000 in funding
for Sub Pop, effectively turning it into a full-fledged record label.[9]
Soundgarden signed to Sub Pop, and the label released "Hunted Down" in 1987 as
the band's first single. The B-side of the "Hunted Down" single, "Nothing to
Say", appeared on the KCMU compilation tape, Bands That Will Make Money, which
was distributed to record companies. Upon hearing the song, record labels
began contacting the band.[10] Through Sub Pop, the band released the
Screaming Life EP in 1987, and the Fopp EP in 1988. A combination of the two
was issued as Screaming Life/Fopp in 1990.

Though the band was being courted by major labels, in 1988 it signed to the
lesser known SST Records to release its debut album, Ultramega OK, released on
October 31, 1988. Cornell said that the band "made a huge mistake with
Ultramega OK" due to using a producer suggested by SST who "didn't know what
was happening in Seattle."[11][12] Steve Huey of Allmusic said that the album
is the "best expression of Soundgarden's early, Stooges/MC5-meets-
Zeppelin/Sabbath sound."[13] The band's first music video, "Flower"
(Flower.OGG sample (helpÂ·info)), was directed by Mark Miremont, and aired
regularly on MTV's 120 Minutes. Soundgarden supported Ultramega OK with a tour
in the United States in the spring of 1989 and a tour in Europe, which began
in May 1989 and was the band's first overseas tour.[14] Ultramega OK earned
the band a Grammy nomination for Best Metal Performance in 1990.

After touring in support of Ultramega OK the band signed with A&M Records. The
signing caused a rift between Soundgarden and its traditional audience. Thayil
said, "In the beginning, our fans came from the punk rock crowd. They
abandoned us when they thought we had sold out the punk tenets, getting on a
major label and touring with Guns N' Roses. There were fashion issues and
social issues, and people thought we no longer belonged to their scene, to
their particular sub-culture."[15] The band subsequently began work on its
first album for a major label. Cornell said, "At the time Hiro [Yamamoto] had
excommunicated himself from the band and there wasn't a free-flowing system as
far as music went, so I ended up writing a lot of it."[16] On September 5,
1989, the band released its second album, Louder Than Love. Regarding the
album, Steve Huey of Allmusic said that the band took "a step toward the metal
mainstream" with "a slow, grinding, detuned mountain of Sabbath/Zeppelin riffs
and Chris Cornell wailing."[17] Because of some of the song lyrics, most
notably on "Hands All Over" (HandsAllOver.OGG sample (helpÂ·info)) and "Big
Dumb Sex", the band faced various retail and distribution problems upon the
album's release.[18] Louder Than Love became the band's first album to chart
on the Billboard 200, peaking at number 108 on the chart in 1990.

A month before touring for Louder Than Love commenced, bassist Hiro Yamamoto,
who was becoming frustrated that he wasn't contributing much,[19] left to go
back to college.[20] He was replaced by Jason Everman, formerly of Nirvana.
The band embarked on a North American tour that went from December 1989 to
March 1990. On this tour the band served as the opening act for Voivod on the
band's Nothingface tour, with Faith No More also serving as an opening act at
the beginning and end of the tour.[20] The band then went on to tour Europe.
Bassist Jason Everman was fired immediately after Soundgarden completed its
promotional tour for Louder Than Love in mid-1990. Thayil said that "Jason
just didn't work out."[21] Louder Than Love spawned the EP Loudest Love and
the video compilation Louder Than Live, both released in 1990.

### [edit] Badmotorfinger: 1991â1993

Bassist Ben Shepherd replaced previous bassist Jason Everman and the new line-
up recorded Soundgarden's third album in 1991. Cornell said that Shepherd
brought a "fresh and creative" approach to the recording sessions,[22] and the
band as a whole said that his knowledge of music and writing skills redefined
the band.[21] The resulting album, Badmotorfinger, was released on October 8,
1991. Steve Huey of Allmusic said that the songwriting on Badmotorfinger
"takes a quantum leap in focus and consistency." He added, "It's surprisingly
cerebral and arty music for a band courting mainstream metal audiences."[23]
Thayil suggested that the album's lyrics are "like reading a novel [about]
man's conflict with himself and society, or the government, or his family, or
the economy, or anything."[24] The first single from Badmotorfinger, "Jesus
Christ Pose" (JesusChristPose.OGG sample (helpÂ·info)), garnered attention
when MTV decided to ban its corresponding music video in 1991.[10] Many
listeners were outraged by the song and its video, perceiving it as anti-
Christian. The band received death threats while on tour in the United Kingdom
in support of the album.[25] Cornell explained that the lyrics criticize
public figures who use religion (particularly the image of Jesus Christ) to
portray themselves as being persecuted.[26] Although overshadowed at the time
of its release by the sudden popularity of Nirvana's Nevermind, the focus of
attention brought by Nevermind to the Seattle scene helped Soundgarden gain
wider attention.[27] The singles "Outshined" and "Rusty Cage" were able to
find an audience at alternative rock radio and MTV. Badmotorfinger was
nominated for a Grammy for Best Metal Performance in 1992. The album was among
the 100 top selling albums of 1992.[28]

Following the release of Badmotorfinger, Soundgarden went on a tour in North
America that ran from October 1991 to November 1991.[16] Afterward, the band
took a slot opening for Guns N' Roses in North America on the band's Use Your
Illusion Tour. Soundgarden was personally selected by Guns N' Roses as its
opening band.[29] The band took a slot opening for Skid Row in North America
in February 1992 on the band's Slave to the Grind tour,[30] and then headed to
Europe for a month-long headlining theater tour.[21] The band returned for a
tour in the United States and subsequently rejoined Guns N' Roses in the
summer of 1992 in Europe as part of the Use Your Illusion Tour along with
fellow opening act Faith No More.[21] Regarding the time spent opening for
Guns N' Roses, Cornell said, "It wasn't a whole lot of fun going out in front
of 40,000 people for 35 minutes every day. Most of them hadn't heard our songs
and didn't care about them. It was a bizarre thing."[25] The band would go on
to play the 1992 Lollapalooza tour with the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Pearl Jam,
and Ministry, among others. The band later released the video compilation
Motorvision, which was filmed at the Paramount Theatre in 1992. The band also
made an appearance in the movie Singles performing "Birth Ritual". The song
appeared on the soundtrack, as did a Cornell solo song, "Seasons".

### [edit] Superunknown: 1994â1995

Soundgarden began work on its fourth album after touring in support of
Badmotorfinger. Cornell said that while working on the album the band members
allowed each other more freedom than on past records,[31] while Thayil
observed that the band spent a lot more time working on the actual recording
of the songs than on previous records.[32] Released on March 8, 1994,
Superunknown became the band's breakthrough album, driven by the singles
"Spoonman", "The Day I Tried to Live", "Black Hole Sun" (BlackHoleSun.OGG
sample (helpÂ·info)), "My Wave", and "Fell on Black Days". Upon its release in
March 1994, Superunknown debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 album
chart.[33] The songs on Superunknown captured the creativity and heaviness of
the band's earlier works, while showcasing the group's newly evolving style.
Lyrically, the album was quite dark and mysterious, as much of it is often
interpreted to be dealing with substance abuse, suicide, and depression.
Cornell was inspired by the writings of Sylvia Plath at the time.[34] The
album was also more experimental than previous releases, with some songs
incorporating Middle-Eastern or Indian music. J.D. Considine of Rolling Stone
said Superunknown "demonstrates far greater range than many bands manage in an
entire career." He also stated, "At its best, Superunknown offers a more
harrowing depiction of alienation and despair than anything on In Utero."[35]
The music video for "Black Hole Sun" became a hit on MTV and received the
award for Best Metal/Hard Rock Video at the 1994 MTV Video Music Awards.
Soundgarden won two Grammy Awards in 1995; "Black Hole Sun" received the award
for Best Hard Rock Performance and "Spoonman" received the award for Best
Metal Performance. Superunknown has been certified five times platinum in the
United States and remains Soundgarden's most successful album.

The band began touring in January 1994 in Australia, Japan, and New
Zealand,[36] areas where the record came out early,[37] as well as regions
where the band had never toured before.[38] This round of touring ended in
February 1994, and then in March 1994 the band moved on to Europe.[36] The
band began a theater tour of the United States on May 27, 1994,[36][39] with
the opening acts Tad and Eleven.[37] In late 1994, after touring in support of
Superunknown, doctors discovered that Cornell had severely strained his vocal
cords. Soundgarden cancelled several shows to avoid causing any permanent
damage. Cornell said, "I think we kinda overdid it! We were playing five or
six nights a week and my voice pretty much took a beating. Towards the end of
the American tour I felt like I could still kinda sing, but I wasn't really
giving the band a fair shake. You don't buy a ticket to see some guy croak for
two hours! That seemed like kind of a rip off."[40] The band would make up the
dates later in 1995.[41] Superunknown spawned the EP Songs from the
Superunknown and the CD-ROM Alive in the Superunknown, both released in 1995.

### [edit] Down on the Upside and break-up: 1996â1997

Following the worldwide tour in support of its previous album, Superunknown,
the band commenced work on what would become the band's final album. The
members of Soundgarden opted to self-produce the record.[42] However, tensions
within the group reportedly arose during the sessions, with Thayil and Cornell
allegedly clashing over Cornell's desire to shift away from the heavy guitar
riffing that had become the band's trademark.[43] Cornell said, "By the time
we were finished, it felt like it had been kind of hard, like it was a long,
hard haul. But there was stuff we were discovering."[44] The band's fifth
album, Down on the Upside, was released on May 21, 1996. The album was notably
less heavy than the group's preceding albums, and marked a further departure
from the band's grunge roots. Soundgarden explained at the time that it wanted
to experiment with other sounds.[45] David Browne of Entertainment Weekly
said, "Few bands since Led Zeppelin have so crisply mixed instruments both
acoustic and electric."[46] The overall mood of the album's lyrics isn't as
dark as on previous Soundgarden albums, with Cornell describing some songs as
"self-affirming."[47] The album spawned several singles, including "Pretty
Noose", "Burden in My Hand" (BurdenInMyHand.OGG sample (helpÂ·info)), and
"Blow Up the Outside World". Despite favorable reviews, the album did not
match the sales of Superunknown.[1]

The band took a slot on the 1996 Lollapalooza tour with Metallica, who had
insisted on Soundgarden's appearance on the tour.[48] After Lollapalooza, the
band embarked on a worldwide tour.[49] Tensions continued to increase during
the band's ensuing tour in support of the album. When asked if the band hated
touring, Cornell said, "We really enjoy it to a point and then it gets
tedious, because it becomes repetitious. You feel like fans have paid their
money and they expect you to come out and play them your songs like the first
time you ever played them. That's the point where we hate touring."[50] At the
tour's final stop in Honolulu, Hawaii on February 9, 1997, Shepherd threw his
bass into the air in frustration after suffering equipment failure, and
subsequently stormed off the stage.[51] The band retreated, with Cornell
returning to conclude the show with a solo encore.[52] On April 9, 1997, the
band announced its disbanding. Thayil said, "It was pretty obvious from
everybody's general attitude over the course of the previous half year that
there was some dissatisfaction."[53] Soundgarden's final release, a greatest
hits compilation entitled A-Sides, was released the following fall.

### [edit] Post-Soundgarden

Chris Cornell released a solo album in September 1999, entitled Euphoria
Morning. Later, in 2001, he formed the supergroup Audioslave with the former
instrumental members of Rage Against the Machine and recorded three albums as
Audioslave's vocalist (Audioslave (2002), Out of Exile (2005), and Revelations
(2006)). Cornell departed Audioslave in early 2007, resulting in the band's
break-up. His second solo album, Carry On, was released in June 2007 and his
third solo album, Scream, was released in March 2009, both to mixed commercial
and critical success.

Kim Thayil joined forces with former Dead Kennedys vocalist Jello Biafra,
former Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic and drummer Gina Mainwal for one show,
performing as the No WTO Combo during the WTO ministerial conference in
Seattle on December 1, 1999. Thayil later contributed guitar tracks to Steve
Fisk's 2001 album, 999 Levels of Undo, as well as Dave Grohl's 2004 side-
project album, Probot. In 2006, Thayil performed guitar on the album Altar,
the collaboration between the bands Sunn O))) and Boris.

Matt Cameron initially turned his efforts to his side-project Wellwater
Conspiracy, to which both Shepherd and Thayil have contributed performances.
He then worked briefly with The Smashing Pumpkins on the band's 1998 album,
Adore, and was even rumored as a replacement for Jimmy Chamberlin. In 1998, he
stepped in on drums for Pearl Jam's Yield Tour, and subsequently joined Pearl
Jam as a permanent member and has recorded three albums as the band's drummer
(Binaural (2000), Riot Act (2002), and Pearl Jam (2006)).

Ben Shepherd was the vocalist on Wellwater Conspiracy's 1997 debut studio
album, Declaration of Conformity, however he left the band in 1998. He has
toured with Mark Lanegan and played bass on two of Lanegan's albums: the 1999
album, I'll Take Care of You, and the 2001 album, Field Songs. Shepherd and
Cameron were part of the side-project band Hater while they were members of
Soundgarden and in 2005 Shepherd released the band's long-delayed second
album, The 2nd.

In an interview in early August 2007, Cornell mentioned that Thayil has wanted
to release a box set or B-sides album of Soundgarden rarities, although no
further information was given.[54] Furthermore, on March 12, 2008, Cornell had
this to say about a B-Sides album, as well as a possible box set, upon being
asked if there was any forward movement on this project: "...I think itâs
one of those things where itâs probably kind of overdue. I think that we
made a huge contribution to our generation of rock music, and when it comes to
the business representatives of Soundgarden, I think they kind of let
Soundgarden down as far as keeping our legacy out there and active. We need to
kind of go back in, I think, and get some things going to, yâknow, get stuff
out there to our fansâ¦and to new fans, because new fans are being made.
Like, when I was a kid, I discovered bands that had been broken up but that
Iâd been turned on to by my older brothers. I think itâs important that a
box set come out, and that a B-sides album comes out, and that we have an
active website, where people can be active fans of the band, and merchandising
and things like that. I think we were an important band."[55]

Regarding a future Soundgarden reunion, Cornell stated in an October 2005
interview that it would "probably not happen." He continued, "It's almost like
we sealed the lid and said, this is Soundgarden and this is its lifespan, and
put it out there. And it looks really great to me. I think getting back
together would take the lid off that and then could possibly change what... to
me seems like the perfect lifespan of the band. I can't think of any reason to
mess with that."[56] In interviews following his departure from Audioslave in
February 2007, Cornell reiterated that the members of Soundgarden had no
interest in reuniting,[57] stressing the point further in a later interview
with NME, where he stated, "When Soundgarden broke up, my discussions with the
rest of the band was 'We have to have an agreement that we will never tour
Soundgarden â Soundgarden will never exist â without it being a unanimous
decision and that everyone who was in the band is in the band.'"[58] On March
24, 2009, Thayil, Cameron, and Shepherd reunited, with Tad Doyle on lead
vocals, to perform "Hunted Down", "Nothing to Say", and "Spoonman" at a Tom
Morello solo show at the Crocodile Cafe in Seattle.[59]

## [edit] Musical style and influences

Soundgarden was a pioneer of the grunge music genre, which mixed elements of
punk rock and heavy metal into a dirty, aggressive sound. Soundgarden's sound
during the early years of the Seattle grunge scene has been described as
consisting of "gnarled neo-Zeppelinisms."[60] The influence of Led Zeppelin
was evident, with Q magazine noting that Soundgarden were "in thrall to '70s
rock, but contemptuous of the genre's overt sexism and machismo."[61] Sub Pop
viewed the band as having an angle that featured "a hunky lead singer and
fused Led Zeppelin and the Butthole Surfers."[62] The Butthole Surfers' mix of
punk, heavy metal and noise rock was a major influence on the early work of
Soundgarden.[62] Soundgarden and other early grunge bands were also influenced
by British post-punk bands such as Gang of Four and Bauhaus, which were
popular in the early 1980s Seattle scene.[63] Soundgarden broadened its
musical range with its later releases. By 1994âs Superunknown, the band
began to incorporate more pop and psychedelic influences into its music.[64]
As a member of Soundgarden, Cornell became known for his wide vocal range and
his dark, existentialist lyrics.

Soundgarden would often utilize alternative tunings and odd time signatures in
its songs. Many Soundgarden songs were performed in drop D tuning, including
"Jesus Christ Pose", "Outshined", "Spoonman", and "Black Hole Sun". The E
strings of the instruments were at times tuned lower, such as on "Rusty Cage",
where the bottom E string is tuned all the way down to B.[65] Some songs use
more unorthodox tunings: "My Wave" and "The Day I Tried to Live" are both in a
E-E-B-B-B-E tuning.[66] Soundgarden's use of odd-meter time signatures was
varied as well; while such songs as "Jesus Christ Pose" are in typical 4/4
time, "Outshined" is in 7/4, "My Wave" uses 5/4, "Fell on Black Days" is in
6/4, "Never the Machine Forever" uses 9/8, "Rusty Cage" uses 4/4 in its chorus
and a repeated pattern of 6/4, 2/4, and 5/4 in its coda, and "Spoonman"
alternates between 7/4 and 4/4 sections. Thayil has said that Soundgarden
usually did not consider the time signature of a song until after the band had
written it, and said that the use of odd meters was "a total accident."[66]

## [edit] Legacy

Soundgarden was one of the early bands of the 1980s Seattle music scene and is
regarded as being one of the originators of the genre later known as grunge.
The development of the Seattle independent record label Sub Pop is tied
closely to Soundgarden. The funding provided by Sub Pop co-founder Jonathan
Poneman for Soundgarden's early releases lead to the expansion of Sub Pop as a
serious record label. Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain was a fan of Soundgarden's
early music,[67] and reportedly Soundgarden's involvement with Sub Pop
influenced Cobain to sign Nirvana with the label.[68] Soundgarden was the
first grunge band to sign to a major label when the band joined the roster of
A&M Records in 1989. Soundgarden, however, did not achieve initial success;
rather, successive album releases by the band were met with increased sales
and wider attention.[43]

Soundgarden has been praised for its technical musical ability and the
expansion of its sound as its career progressed.[69][70] "Heavy yet ethereal,
powerful yet always-in-control, Soundgarden's music was a study in contrasts,"
said Henry Wilson of Hit Parader. Wilson proclaimed the band's music as "a
brilliant display of technical proficiency tempered by heart-felt
emotion."[70] Soundgarden is one of the bands credited with the development of
the genre of alternative metal,[71] with Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic
stating that "Soundgarden made a place for heavy metal in alternative
rock."[27] The band inspired and influenced a number of bands, ranging from
Between the Buried and Me to The Dillinger Escape Plan and
Evanescence.[72][73][74]

Regarding Soundgarden's legacy, in a 2007 interview Cornell said, "I think and
this is now with some distance in listening to the records but on the outside
looking in with all earnestness I think Soundgarden made the best records out
of that scene. I think we were the most daring and experimental and genre
pushing really and I'm really proud of it. And I guess that's why I have
trepidation about the idea of reforming. I don't know what it would mean. I
guess I just have this image of who we were and I had probably a lot of
anxiety during the period of being Soundgarden, as we all did, that it was a
responsibility and it was an important band of music and we didn't want to
mess it up and we managed to not, which I felt is a great achievement."[75]

## [edit] Discography

Main article: Soundgarden discography

  * Ultramega OK (1988)
  * Louder Than Love (1989)
  * Badmotorfinger (1991)
  * Superunknown (1994)
  * Down on the Upside (1996)

## [edit] Awards

Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Soundgarden

## [edit] See also

  * List of alternative rock artists
  * List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Mainstream Rock chart

## [edit] Notes and references

  1. ^ a b "Gold and Platinum Database Search". http://riaa.com/goldandplatinumdata.php?resultpage=1&table=SEARCH_RESULTS&artist=Soundgarden&startMonth=1&endMonth=1&startYear=1958&endYear=2008&sort=Artist&perPage=25. Retrieved on 2007-02-12.
  2. ^ Kaufman, Gil (September 25, 1998). "Ex-Soundgarden Singer Chris Cornell Plows Ahead With Solo Debut". VH1.com. http://www.vh1.com/artists/news/502068/09251998/soundgarden.jhtml. Retrieved on 2008-01-19.
  3. ^ DeRogatis, Jim. Milk It!: Collected Musings on the Alternative Music Explosion of the 90's. Cambridge: Da Capo, 2003. ISBN 0-306-81271-1, pg. 69
  4. ^ "Nirvana and the Story of Grunge". Q. pg. 102. December 2005.
  5. ^ George-Warren, Holly, Patricia Romanowski, and Jon Pareles. The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll. Rolling Stone Press. 2001. ISBN 0-671-43457-8.
  6. ^ Fennessy, Kathleen C. "Deep Six". Allmusic.
  7. ^ Anderson, Kyle (2007). Accidental Revolution. New York: St. Martin's Griffin. pp. 112â116. ISBN 0312358199.
  8. ^ Azerrad, Michael. Our Band Could Be Your Life. Little Brown and Company, 2001. ISBN 0-316-78753-1, pg. 422
  9. ^ Berkenstadt, Jim, and Charles R. Cross. Classic Rock Albums: Nevermind. Schirmer, 1998. ISBN 0-02-864775-0, pg. 19
  10. ^ a b Gilbert, Jeff. "Primecuts: Kim Thayil". Guitar School. May 1994.
  11. ^ "Yeah! I'm a Moody Bastard". Kerrang!. August 19, 1995.
  12. ^ Alexander, Phil. "Soundgarden". Raw. 1989.
  13. ^ Huey, Steve. "Ultramega OK". Allmusic.
  14. ^ "Haughty Culture". Kerrang!. April 8, 1989.
  15. ^ Gilbert, Jeff. "Soundgarden." Guitar World. December 1995.
  16. ^ a b "Colour Me Badmotorfinger!". Raw. October 30, 1991.
  17. ^ Huey, Steve. "Louder Than Love". Allmusic.
  18. ^ Barber, Patrick. "Soundgarden". Pit. 1990.
  19. ^ "How Does Your Garden Grow?". Sounds. October 21, 1989.
  20. ^ a b Loera, Carlos. "Soundgarden". Loud. 1990.
  21. ^ a b c d Neely, Kim. "Soundgarden: The Veteran Band from Seattle Proves There's Life After Nirvana". Rolling Stone. July 9, 1992.
  22. ^ "'Garden of Eden". Kerrang!. August 31, 1991.
  23. ^ Huey, Steve. "Badmotorfinger". Allmusic.
  24. ^ "Soundgarden". Guitar for the Practicing Musician. December 1992.
  25. ^ a b "I Don't Care About Performing for 20,000!". Raw. September 15, 1993.
  26. ^ Magnuson, Ann. "Sub Zep?". Spin. February 1992.
  27. ^ a b Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Soundgarden". Allmusic. Retrieved on June 13, 2005.
  28. ^ Lyons, James. Selling Seattle: Representing Contemporary Urban America. Wallflower, 2004. ISBN 1-903354-96-5, pp. 136
  29. ^ Sherry, James. "Soundgarden". Metal Hammer. December 1991.
  30. ^ Jones, Alison F. "Pounding for Pot: Soundgarden's Matt Cameron". High Times. July 1992.
  31. ^ Thompson, Dave. "I Slept With Soundgarden and Other Chilling Confessions". Alternative Press. March 1994.
  32. ^ "Let's Make a Grunge Album!". Raw. December 8, 1993.
  33. ^ "Changing of the Garden". Entertainment Weekly. March 25, 1994. Retrieved on May 2, 2004.
  34. ^ Lanham, Tom. "In Search of the Monster Riff". Pulse!. March 1994.
  35. ^ Consideine, J.D. "Soundgarden: Superunknown". Rolling Stone. July 31, 1997.
  36. ^ a b c Neely, Kim. "Into the Superunknown". Rolling Stone. June 16, 1994. Retrieved on May 3, 2008.
  37. ^ a b "Soundgarden: No Hype Allowed". The Music Paper. July 1994.
  38. ^ Smith, Chris. "Down in a Hole". Raw. August 17, 1994.
  39. ^ "Soundgarden Won't Be Staying Superunknown". USA Today. March 11, 1994.
  40. ^ "Black Hole Sons!". Kerrang!. August 12, 1995.
  41. ^ Atkinson, Peter. "Soundgarden: From Superunknown to Superstars". Jam. May 24, 1996.
  42. ^ Blush, Steven. "Soundgarden". Seconds. 1996.
  43. ^ a b Colopino, John. "Soundgarden Split". Rolling Stone. May 29, 1997.
  44. ^ Appleford, Steve. "Soundgarden". Ray Gun. June 1996.
  45. ^ Turman, Katherine. "Soundgarden: Seattle's Sonic Boom". Hypno. 1996.
  46. ^ Browne, David. "Down on the Upside". Entertainment Weekly. May 24, 1996.
  47. ^ True, Everett. "Soundgarden". Melody Maker. May 25, 1996.
  48. ^ Bell, Max. "Soundgarden - Like Falling Off a Hog". Blah Blah Blah. June 1996.
  49. ^ Waters, Rodney. "Getting Down with Soundgarden". Hit Parader. October 1996.
  50. ^ "Gardener's Question Time". Kerrang!. March 1, 1997.
  51. ^ "Nirvana and the Story of Grunge", pg. 100.
  52. ^ Berger, John. "'Garden' of supersonic delight". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. February 10, 1997.
  53. ^ Gilbert, Jeff. "Sound of Silence". Guitar World. February 1998.
  54. ^ "Chris Cornell Keen On Soundgarden Rarities Album". Starpulse. http://www.starpulse.com/news/index.php/2007/08/04/chris_cornell_keen_on_soundgarden_rariti/. Retrieved on 2007-09-03.
  55. ^ Harris, Will (2009-03-16). "A chat with Chris Cornell, Chris Cornell interview, Soundgarden, Scream, Timbaland". www.bullz-eye.com. http://www.bullz-eye.com/music/interviews/2009/chris_cornell.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-26.
  56. ^ Hay, Travis. "Transcript of Exclusive Interview with Chris Cornell". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. October 15, 2005.
  57. ^ Harris, Chris. "Chris Cornell Talks Audioslave Split, Nixes Soundgarden Reunion". MTVNews.com. February 15, 2007
  58. ^ "Soundgarden Reform - Without Chris Cornell". NME. 2009-03-27. http://www.nme.com/news/soundgarden/43744. Retrieved on 2009-03-31.
  59. ^ Cunningham, Jonathan (2009-03-25). "Last Night: Tadgarden, the Nightwatchman, Steve Earle, Wayne Kramer, Mark Arm and Boots Riley at The Crocodile". Seattle Weekly. http://blogs.seattleweekly.com/reverb/2009/03/last_night_tadgarden_nightwatc.php. Retrieved on 2009-03-25.
  60. ^ Azerrad, pg. 436
  61. ^ Brannigan, Paul. "Outshined." Q: Nirvana and the Story of Grunge. December 2005. p. 102
  62. ^ a b Azerrad, pg. 439
  63. ^ Heylin, Clinton. Babylon's Burning: From Punk to Grunge. Conongate, 2007. ISBN 1-84195-879-4, p. 600
  64. ^ Huey, Steve. "Superunknown". Allmusic.
  65. ^ Woodard, Josef. "Soundgarden's Kim Thayil & Chris Cornell". Musician. March 1992.
  66. ^ a b Rotondi, James. "Alone in the Superunknown." Guitar Player. June 1994.
  67. ^ Al & Cake. "An interview with...Kurt Cobain". Flipside. May/June 1992.
  68. ^ Tortorici, Frank (September 4, 1998). "Soundgarden's Kim Thayil". VH1.com. http://www.vh1.com/artists/news/501000/19980903/soundgarden.jhtml. Retrieved on 2009-03-02.
  69. ^ Phalen, Tom. "That Rock Thing: As Soundgarden Matures, the Band Finds Itself on Solid Ground". The Seattle Times. December 5, 1996.
  70. ^ a b Wilson, Henry. "Soundgarden: A Fond Farewell". Hit Parader. June 1997.
  71. ^ "Alternative Metal". Allmusic.
  72. ^ "Between the Buried and Me". Allmusic. http://www.allmusic.com/cg/amg.dll?p=amg&sql=11:dpfpxq80ldde~T1. Retrieved on 2009-03-02.
  73. ^ "Ben Weinman of The Dillinger Escape Plan". KPSU. November 29, 2005.
  74. ^ "Evanescence Frontwoman on Lineup Changes, Marriage And Family Values Tour". blabbermouth.net. July 20, 2007.
  75. ^ "Cornell Hesitant To Tamper With Soundgarden Legacy". Ultimate-Guitar.com. http://www.ultimate-guitar.com/news/video_news/cornell_hesitant_to_tamper_with_soundgarden_legacy.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-02.

## [edit] Further reading

  * Chun, Gary C. W. "Tantrum Mars Soundgarden Show". The Honolulu Advertiser. February 10, 1997.
  * Prato, Greg. "Black Hole Sons". Classic Rock Magazine. Summer 2005.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Soundgarden  
  * Soundgarden at Allmusic
  * Soundgarden at Last.fm

v â¢ d â¢ e

Soundgarden  
Chris Cornell Â· Kim Thayil Â· Matt Cameron Â· Ben Shepherd  
Scott Sundquist Â· Hiro Yamamoto Â· Jason Everman  
Studio albums

Ultramega OK Â· Louder Than Love Â· Badmotorfinger Â· Superunknown Â· Down on
the Upside  
Extended plays

Screaming Life Â· Fopp Â· Loudest Love Â· SOMMS Â· Songs from the Superunknown  
Compilations

Screaming Life/Fopp Â· A-Sides  
Videos

Louder Than Live Â· Motorvision  
Singles

"Hunted Down" Â· "Flower" Â· "Loud Love" Â· "Hands All Over" Â· "Room a
Thousand Years Wide" Â· "Jesus Christ Pose" Â· "Outshined" Â· "Rusty Cage" Â·
"Spoonman" Â· "The Day I Tried to Live" Â· "Black Hole Sun" Â· "My Wave" Â·
"Fell on Black Days" Â· "Pretty Noose" Â· "Burden in My Hand" Â· "Blow Up the
Outside World" Â· "Ty Cobb" Â· "Bleed Together"  
Related articles

Discography Â· Band members Â· Awards and nominations Â· Grunge music Â· Skin
Yard Â· Temple of the Dog Â· Pearl Jam Â· Alice Mudgarden Â· Singles Â· Hater
Â· Wellwater Conspiracy Â· Audioslave  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soundgarden"

Categories: 1980s music groups | 1990s music groups | A&M Records artists |
Alternative metal musical groups | American alternative rock music groups |
Grammy Award winners | Grunge groups | Musical groups disestablished in 1997 |
Musical groups established in 1984 | Musical groups from Washington (U.S.
state) | Musical quartets | Rock music groups | Soundgarden | SST Records
artists | Sub Pop artists | Washington (U.S. state) heavy metal musical groups

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * KaszÃ«bsczi
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * ÅlÅ¯nski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 23:27.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



