
# Indian Rebellion of 1857

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Indian Rebellion of 1857/8  
Part of Indian independence movement  
<IMG>  
A 1912 map of 'Northern India The Mutiny 1857-9' showing the centres of
rebellion including the principal ones: Meerut, Delhi, Cawnpore (Kanpur),
Lucknow, Jhansi, and Gwalior.  
Date May 10, 1857  
Location India (cf. 1857)[1]  
Result Rebellion Suppressed,  
End of Company rule in India  
Control taken by the British Crown  
Territorial  
changes Indian Empire created out of former-East India Company territory, some
land returned to native rulers, other land confiscated by the Crown.  
Belligerents  
Rebellious East India Company Sepoys,  
7 Indian princely states,  
deposed rulers of the independent states of Oudh, Jhansi  
Some Indian civilians.  
Flag of the United Kingdom British Army  
<IMG> East India Company's Sepoys, Native Irregulars and British regulars,
British civilian volunteers raised in Bengal presidency  
20 Princely states including the independent states of Nepal, Kashmir as well
as smaller states in region  
Commanders  
Bahadur Shah II  
Nana Sahib  
Mirza Mughal  
Bakht Khan  
Rani Lakshmi Bai  
Tantya Tope  
Begum Hazrat Mahal Commander-in-Chief, India:  
George Anson (to May 1857)  
Sir Patrick Grant  
Sir Colin Campbell (from August 1857)  
Jang Bahadur[2]  
  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Indian Rebellion of 1857  
Badli-ki-Serai â Delhi â Najafgarh â Agra â 1st Cawnpore â Chinhat
â 1st Lucknow â 2nd Cawnpore â 2nd Lucknow â Central India  
The Indian Rebellion of 1857 began as a mutiny of sepoys of British East India
Company's army on 10 May 1857, in the town of Meerut, and soon erupted into
other mutinies and civilian rebellions largely in the upper Gangetic plain and
central India, with the major hostilities confined to present-day Uttar
Pradesh, Bihar, northern Madhya Pradesh, and the Delhi region.[3] The
rebellion posed a considerable threat to Company power in that region,[4] and
it was contained only with the fall of Gwalior on 20 June 1858.[3] The
rebellion is also known as India's First War of Independence, the Great
Rebellion, the Indian Mutiny, the Revolt of 1857, the Uprising of 1857 and the
Sepoy Mutiny.

The rebels quickly captured large swathes of the North-Western Provinces and
Oudh, including Delhi, where they installed the Mughal ruler, Bahadur Shah
Zafar, as Emperor of Hindustan. The Company response came rapidly as well: by
September 1857, with help from fresh reinforcements, Delhi had been
retaken.[3] Nevertheless, it then took the better part of 1858 for the
rebellion to be completely suppressed in Oudh.[3]

Other regions of Company controlled IndiaâBengal province, the Bombay
Presidency, and the Madras Presidencyâremained largely calm.[3] In Punjab,
only recently annexed by the East India Company, the Sikh princes backed the
Company by providing both soldiers and support.[3] The large princely states,
Hyderabad, Mysore, Travancore, and Kashmir, as well as the smaller ones of
Rajputana, by not joining the rebellion, served, in the Governor-General Lord
Canning's words, as "breakwaters in a storm" for the Company.[5]

In some regions, especially in Oudh, the rebellion took on the attributes of a
patriotic revolt against European presence;[6] however, although the rebel
leaders, especially the Rani of Jhansi, became folk heroes in the burgeoning
nationalist movement in India half a century later,[3] they themselves
"generated no coherent ideology or programme on which to build a new
order."[7] Still, the rebellion proved to be an important watershed in Indian
history;[8] it led to the dissolution of the East India Company in 1858, and
forced the British to reorganize the army, the financial system, and the
administration in India.[9] India was thereafter directly governed by the
British government âoriginally via the India Office and a cabinet level
Secretary of State for Indiaâin the new British Raj, a system of governance
that underwent several reforms prior to Indian independence in 1947.[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Brief history of East India Company expansion in India
  * 2 Causes of the rebellion
  * 3 Onset of the Rebellion
    * 3.1 Mangal Pandey
    * 3.2 April 1857
    * 3.3 Meerut and Delhi
  * 4 Support and opposition
  * 5 The Revolt
    * 5.1 Initial stages
    * 5.2 Delhi
    * 5.3 Cawnpore (Kanpur)
    * 5.4 Lucknow
    * 5.5 Jhansi
    * 5.6 Other regions
  * 6 Aftermath
    * 6.1 Retaliation â "The Devil's Wind"
    * 6.2 Reaction in Britain
    * 6.3 Reorganisation
    * 6.4 Military reorganisation
  * 7 Nomenclature
  * 8 Debate about character
  * 9 The 150th anniversary
  * 10 Notes
  * 11 References
    * 11.1 Text-books and academic monographs
    * 11.2 Articles in journals and collections
    * 11.3 Other histories
    * 11.4 First person accounts and classic histories
    * 11.5 Tertiary Sources
    * 11.6 Fictional & Narrative Literature
  * 12 See also
  * 13 External links

  
## [edit] Brief history of East India Company expansion in India

<IMG>

<IMG>

India in 1765 and 1805 showing East India Company Territories

<IMG>

<IMG>

India in 1837 and 1857 showing East India Company and other territories

Main article: Company rule in India

Although the British East India Company had earlier administered the factory
areas established for trading purposes, its victory in the Battle of Plassey
in 1757 marked the beginning of its rule in India. The victory was
consolidated in 1764 at the Battle of Buxar (in Bihar), when the defeated
Mughal emperor, Shah Alam II, granted control of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa to
the Company. The Company soon expanded its territories around its bases in
Bombay and Madras: the Anglo-Mysore Wars (1766â1799) and the Anglo-Maratha
Wars (1772â1818) gave it the control of most of India south of the Narmada
River.

After the turn of the 19th century, Governor-General Wellesley began what
became two decades of accelerated expansion of Company territories.[10] This
was achieved either by subsidiary alliances between the Company and local
rulers or by direct military annexation. The subsidiary alliances created the
Princely States (or Native States) of the Hindu maharajas and the Muslim
nawabs, prominent among which were Cochin (1791), Jaipur (1794), Travancore
(1795), Hyderabad (1798), Mysore (1799), Cis-Sutlej Hill States (1815),
Central India Agency (1819), Kutch and Gujarat Gaikwad territories (1819),
Rajputana (1818), and Bahawalpur (1833).[10] The annexed regions included the
Northwest Provinces (comprising Rohilkhand, Gorakhpur, and the Doab, 1801),
Delhi (1803), and Sindh (1843). Punjab, Northwest Frontier Province, and
Kashmir were annexed after the Anglo-Sikh Wars in 1849; however, Kashmir was
immediately sold under the Treaty of Amritsar (1850) to the Dogra Dynasty of
Jammu and thereby became a princely state. In 1854 Berar was annexed, and the
state of Oudh was added two years later.

## [edit] Causes of the rebellion

Main article: Causes of the Indian Rebellion of 1857

The rebellion began with military revolts by sepoys of the Bengal Presidency
army; in 1857 the presidency consisted of present-day Bangladesh and the
Indian states of West Bengal, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. However, most rebel
soldiers were from the Uttar Pradesh region, and,in particular, from Northwest
Provinces (especially, Ganga-Jumna Doab) and Oudh, and many came from
landowning families. Within weeks of the initial mutiniesâas the rebel
soldiers wrested control of many urban garrisons from the British â the
rebellion was joined by various discontented groups in the hinterlands, in
both farmed areas and the backwoods. The latter group, forming the civilian
rebellion, consisted of feudal nobility, landlords, peasants, rural merchants,
and some tribal groups. The sepoys were a combination of Muslim and Hindu
soldiers. Just before the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857 there were over 200,000
Indians in the army compared to about 40,000 British. The forces were divided
into three presidency armies: the Bombay; the Madras; and the Bengal. The
Bengal army recruited higher castes, such as âRajputs and Brahmansâ,
mostly from the âAvadh(or oudh) and Biharâ region and even restricted the
enlistment of lower castes in 1855 in contrast to the Madras and Bombay armies
were âmore localized, caste-neutral armiesâ that âdid not prefer high-
caste men.â[11] The domination of the Bengal high-caste in the army has been
blamed in part for the Sepoy mutiny of 1857. In 1772, when Warren Hastings was
appointed the first Governor-General of the Companyâs Indian territories,
one of his first undertakings was the rapid expansion of the Companyâs army.
Since the available soldiers, or Sepoys, from Bengal â many of whom had
fought against the Company in the Battle of Plassey â were now suspect in
British eyes, Hastings recruited farther west from the high-caste rural
Rajputs and Brahmins of Oudh and Bihar, a practice that continued for the next
75 years. However, in order to forestall any social friction, the Company also
took pains to adapt its military practices to the requirements of their
religious rituals. Consequently, these soldiers dined in separate facilities;
in addition, overseas service, considered polluting to their caste, was not
required of them, and the army soon came officially to recognize Hindu
festivals. âThis encouragement of high caste ritual status, however, left
the government vulnerable to protest, even mutiny, whenever the sepoys
detected infringement of their prerogatives.â[12]

<IMG>

Charles Canning, the Governor-General of India during the rebellion.

<IMG>

Lord Dalhousie, the Governor-General of India from 1848 to 1856, who devised
the Doctrine of Lapse.

<IMG>

Lakshmibai, The Rani of Jhansi, one of the principal leaders of the rebellion
who earlier had lost her kingdom as a result of the Doctrine of Lapse.

<IMG>

Sir Syed Ahmed Khan founder of the Muhammedan Anglo-Oriental College, wrote
one of the early critiques, The Causes of the Indian Mutiny, in 1859.  
It has been suggested that after the annexation of Oudh by the East India
Company in 1856, many sepoys were disquieted both from losing their
perquisites, as landed gentry, in the Oudh courts and from the anticipation of
any increased land-revenue payments that the annexation might augur.[13]
Others have stressed that by 1857, some Indian soldiers, misreading the
presence of missionaries as a sign of official intent, were persuaded that the
East India Company was masterminding mass conversions of Hindus and Muslims to
Christianity.[14] Although earlier in the 1830s, evangelists such as William
Carey and William Wilberforce had successfully clamored for the passage of
social reform such as the abolition of Sati and allowing the remarriage of
Hindu widows, there is little evidence that the sepoy's allegiance was
affected by this.[13] However, changes in the terms of their professional
service may have created resentment. With East India Company victories in wars
or with annexation, as the extent of Company jurisdiction expanded, the
soldiers were now not only expected to serve in less familiar regions (such as
in Burma in the Anglo-Burmese Wars in 1856), but also make do without the
"foreign service," remuneration that had previously been their due.[15]
Another financial grievance stemmed from the general service act, which denied
retired Sepoys a pension; whilst this only applied to new recruits it was
suspected that it would also apply to those already in service. In addition
the Bengal army was paid less than both the Madras and Bombay armies, which
compounded the fears over pensions.[16]

There were also grievances over the issue of promotions, based on seniority
(length of service). This, as well as the increasing number of European
officers in the battalions,[16] made promotion difficult.

The final spark was provided by the controversy over the new Pattern 1853
Enfield Rifle. To load the new rifle, the sepoys had to bite the cartridge
open. It was believed that the paper cartridges that were standard issue with
the rifle were greased with lard (pork fat) which was regarded as unclean by
Muslims, or tallow (beef fat), regarded as anathema to Hindus.[17] East India
Company officers first became aware of the impending trouble over the
cartridges in January, when they received reports of an altercation between a
high-caste sepoy and a low-caste labourer at Dum Dum.[18] The labourer had
taunted the sepoy that by biting the cartridge, he had himself lost caste,
although at this time the Dum-Dum arsenal had not actually started to produce
the new round, nor had a single practice shot fired.[19] On January 27 Colonel
Richard Birch (the Military Secretary) ordered that all cartridges issued from
depots were to be free from grease, and that Sepoys could grease them
themselves using whatever mixture âthey may preferâ.[20] This however,
merely caused many Sepoys to be convinced that the rumours were true and that
their fears were justified.

The civilian rebellion was more multifarious in origin. The rebels consisted
of three groups: feudal nobility, rural landlords called taluqdars, and the
peasants. The nobility, many of whom had lost titles and domains under the
Doctrine of Lapse, which refused to recognise the adopted children of princes
as legal heirs, felt that the Company had interfered with a traditional system
of inheritance. Rebel leaders such as Nana Sahib and the Rani of Jhansi
belonged to this group; the latter, for example, was prepared to accept East
India Company supremacy if her adopted son was recognized as the heir.[21] In
other areas of central India, such as Indore and Saugar, where such loss of
privilege had not occurred, the princes remained loyal to the Company even in
areas where the sepoys had rebelled.[22] The second group, the taluqdars had
lost half their landed estates to peasant farmers as a result of the land
reforms that came in the wake of annexation of Oudh. As the rebellion gained
ground, the taluqdars quickly reoccupied the lands they had lost, and
paradoxically, in part due to ties of kinship and feudal loyalty, did not
experience significant opposition from the peasant farmers, many of whom
joined the rebellion to the great dismay of the British.[23] It has also been
suggested that heavy land-revenue assessment in some areas by the British
resulted in many landowning families either losing their land or going into
great debt with money lenders, and providing ultimately a reason to rebel;
money lenders, in addition to the East India Company, were particular objects
of the rebels' animosity.[24] The civilian rebellion was also highly uneven in
its geographic distribution, even in areas of north-central India that were no
longer under British control. For example, the relatively prosperous
Muzaffarnagar district, a beneficiary of a Company irrigation scheme, and next
door to Meerut where the upheaval began, stayed mostly calm throughout.[25]

The first Indian critique of the rebellion appeared in 1859. In his Urdu book,
Asbab-e Baghawat-e Hind (Causes of the Indian Mutiny),[26] Sir Sayyid Ahmed
Khan asserted

> âI believe that there was but one primary cause of the rebellion, the
others being merely incidental and arising out of it ... [T]he Natives of
India, without perhaps a single exception, blame the Government for having
deprived them of their position and dignity and for keeping them down ... Was
not the Government aware that the Natives of the very highest rank trembled
before its officers, and were in daily fear of suffering the greatest insults
and indignities at their hands?â[27]

Sir Sayyid's critique was later translated into English and stimulated both
interest and debate among the British. Some of his points have been echoed by
modern historians. â(The rebellion) was the result of two generations of
social disruption and official insensitivity ...â.[28] Although at that time
some civilian leaders such as Khan Bhadur Khan of Bareilly stressed the threat
posed to the populace's religions by the new education programs begun by the
British, historical statistics have shown that this was not generally the
case. For example, in Etawah district, where during the period 1855-57, nearly
200 schools had been opened by the British and tax levied on the population,
relative calm prevailed and the schools remained opened during the
rebellion.[29]

## [edit] Onset of the Rebellion

Several months of increasing tension and inflammatory incidents preceded the
actual rebellion. Fires, possibly the result of arson, broke out near Calcutta
on 24 January 1857. On February 26, 1857 the 19th Bengal Native Infantry (BNI)
regiment came to know about new cartridges which allegedly had a casing made
of cow and pig fat, which had to be bitten off by mouth. The cow being sacred
to Hindus, and pig haram to Muslims, soldiers refused to use them. Their
Colonel confronted them angrily with artillery and cavalry on the parade
ground, but then accepted their demand to withdraw the artillery, and cancel
the next morning's parade.[30]

### [edit] Mangal Pandey

Main article: Mangal Pandey

<IMG>

<IMG>

Mangal Pandey

On March 29, 1857 at the Barrackpore (now Barrackpur) parade ground, near
Calcutta (now Kolkata), 29-year-old Mangal Pandey of the 34th BNI, angered by
the recent actions by the East India Company, declared that he would rebel
against his commanders. When his adjutant Lt. Baugh came out to investigate
the unrest, Pandey opened fire but hit his horse instead.[31]

General John Hearsey came out to see him on the parade ground, and claimed
later that Mangal Pandey was in some kind of "religious frenzy". He ordered a
Jemadar Ishwari Prasad to arrest Mangal Pandey, but the Jemadar refused. The
whole regiment, with the single exception of a soldier called Shaikh Paltu,
drew back from restraining or arresting Mangal Pandey. Shaikh Paltu restrained
Pandey from continuing his attack.[31]

After failing to incite his comrades into an open and active rebellion, Mangal
Pandey tried to take his own life by placing his musket to his chest, and
pulling the trigger with his toe. He only managed to wound himself, and was
court-martialled on April 6. He was hanged on April 8.

The Jemadar Ishwari Prasad was sentenced to death and hanged on April 22. The
regiment was disbanded and stripped of their uniforms because it was felt that
they harboured ill-feelings towards their superiors, particularly after this
incident. Shaikh Paltu was promoted to the rank of Jemadar in the Bengal Army.

Sepoys in other regiments thought this a very harsh punishment. The show of
disgrace while disbanding contributed to the extent of the rebellion in view
of some historians, as disgruntled ex-sepoys returned home to Awadh with a
desire to inflict revenge, as and when the opportunity arose.

### [edit] April 1857

During April, there was unrest and fires at Agra, Allahabad and Ambala. At
Ambala in particular, which was a large military cantonment where several
units had been collected for their annual musketry practice, it was clear to
General Anson, Commander-in-Chief of the Bengal Army, that some sort of riot
over the cartridges was imminent. Despite the objections of the civilian
Governor-General's staff, he agreed to postpone the musketry practice, and
allow a new drill by which the soldiers tore the cartridges with their fingers
rather than their teeth. However, he issued no general orders making this
standard practice throughout the Bengal Army and, rather than remain at Ambala
to defuse or overawe potential trouble, he then proceeded to Simla, the cool
"hill station" where many high officials spent the summer.

Although there was no open revolt at Ambala, there was widespread incendiarism
during late April. Barrack buildings (especially those belonging to soldiers
who had used the Enfield cartridges) and European officers' bungalows were set
on fire.[32]

As law and order broke down in Company controlled India anarchy and looting
became commonplace with Company administrators using what resources they had
to impose order and defend the areas under their control from groups like the
Gujars.

### [edit] Meerut and Delhi

<IMG>

<IMG>

An 1858 photograph of a mosque in Meerut where some of the rebel soldiers may
have worshipped.

At Meerut was another large military cantonment. Stationed there were 2,357
Indian sepoys and 2,038 British troops with 12 British-manned guns. Although
the state of unrest within the Bengal Army was well known, on April 24,
Lt.-Colonel George Carmichael-Smyth, the unsympathetic commanding officer of
the 3rd Bengal Light Cavalry, ordered 90 of his men to parade and perform
firing drills. All except five of the men on parade refused to accept their
cartridges. On May 9, the remaining 85 men were court martialled, and most
were sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment with hard labour. Eleven
comparatively young soldiers were given five years' imprisonment. The entire
garrison was paraded and watched as the condemned men were stripped of their
uniforms and placed in shackles. As they were marched off to jail, the
condemned soldiers berated their comrades for failing to support them.

The next day was Sunday, the Christian day of rest and worship. Some Indian
soldiers warned off-duty junior European officers (including Hugh Gough, then
a lieutenant of horse) that plans were afoot to release the imprisoned
soldiers by force, but the senior officers to whom this was reported took no
action. There was also unrest in the city of Meerut itself, with angry
protests in the bazaar and some buildings being set on fire. In the evening,
most European officers were preparing to attend church, while many of the
European soldiers were off duty and had gone into canteens or into the bazaar
in Meerut. The Indian troops, led by the 3rd Cavalry, broke into revolt.
European junior officers who attempted to quell the first outbreaks were
killed by their own men. European officers' and civilians' quarters were
attacked, and four civilian men, eight women and eight children died. Crowds
in the bazaar attacked the off-duty soldiers there. The sepoys freed their 85
imprisoned comrades from the jail, along with 800 other prisoners (debtors and
criminals).[33]

Some sepoys (especially from the 11th Bengal Native Infantry) escorted trusted
British officers and women and children to safety before joining the
revolt.[34] Some officers and their families escaped to Rampur, where they
found refuge with the Nawab. About 50 Indian civilians (some of whom were
officers' servants who tried to defend or conceal their employers) were also
killed by the sepoys.[35] Exaggerated tales of the number and manner of death
of Europeans who died during the uprising at Meerut were later to provide a
pretext for Company forces to commit reprisals against Indian civilians and
rebellious sepoys during the later suppression of the Revolt.

The senior Company officers, in particular Major General Hewitt, the commander
of the division (who was nearly 70 years old and in poor health), were slow to
react. The British troops (mainly the 1st Battalion of the 60th Rifles and two
European-manned batteries of the Bengal Artillery) rallied, but received no
orders to engage the rebellious sepoys and could only guard their own
headquarters and armouries. When, on the morning of May 11 they prepared to
attack, they found Meerut was quiet and the rebels had marched off to Delhi.

That same morning, the first parties of the 3rd Cavalry reached Delhi. From
beneath the windows of the King's apartments in the palace, they called on him
to acknowledge and lead them. Bahadur Shah did nothing at this point
(apparently treating the sepoys as ordinary petitioners), but others in the
palace were quick to join the revolt. During the day, the revolt spread.
European officials and dependents, Indian Christians and shop keepers within
the city were attacked, some by sepoys and others by crowds of rioters.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Flagstaff Tower, Delhi, where the European survivors of the rebellion
gathered on May 11, 1857

There were three battalions of Bengal Native Infantry stationed in or near the
city. Some detachments quickly joined the rebellion, while others held back
but also refused to obey orders to take action against the rebels. In the
afternoon, a violent explosion in the city was heard for several miles.
Fearing that the arsenal, which contained large stocks of arms and ammunition,
would fall intact into rebel hands, the nine British Ordnance officers there
had opened fire on the sepoys, including the men of their own guard. When
resistance appeared hopeless, they blew up the arsenal. Although six of the
nine officers survived, the blast killed many in the streets and nearby houses
and other buildings.[36] The news of these events finally tipped the sepoys
stationed around Delhi into open rebellion. The sepoys were later able to
salvage at least some arms from the arsenal, and a magazine two miles (3 km)
outside Delhi, containing up to 3,000 barrels of gunpowder, was captured
without resistance.

Many fugitive European officers and civilians had congregated at the Flagstaff
Tower on the ridge north of Delhi, where telegraph operators were sending news
of the events to other British stations. When it became clear that no help
could arrive, they made their way in carriages to Karnal. Those who became
separated from the main body or who could not reach the Flagstaff Tower also
set out for Karnal on foot. Some were helped by villagers on the way, others
were robbed or murdered.

The next day, Bahadur Shah held his first formal court for many years. It was
attended by many excited or unruly sepoys. The King was alarmed by the turn
events had taken, but eventually accepted the sepoys' allegiance and agreed to
give his countenance to the rebellion. On 16 May, up to 50 Europeans who had
been held prisoner in the palace or had been discovered hiding in the city
were said to have been killed by some of the King's servants under a peepul
tree in a courtyard outside the palace.[37][38]

## [edit] Support and opposition

<IMG>

<IMG>

States during the rebellion

The news of the events at Delhi spread rapidly, provoking uprisings among
sepoys and disturbances in many districts. In many cases, it was the behaviour
of British military and civilian authorities themselves which precipitated
disorder. Learning of the fall of Delhi by telegraph, many Company
administrators hastened to remove themselves, their families and servants to
places of safety. At Agra, 160 miles (260 km) from Delhi, no less than 6,000
assorted non-combatants converged on the Fort.[39] The haste with which many
civilians left their posts encouraged rebellions in the areas they left,
although others remained at their posts until it was clearly impossible to
maintain any sort of order. Several were murdered by rebels or lawless gangs.

The military authorities also reacted in disjointed manner. Some officers
trusted their sepoys, but others tried to disarm them to forestall potential
uprisings. At Benares and Allahabad, the disarmings were bungled, also leading
to local revolts.[40]

Although rebellion became widespread, there was little unity among the rebels.
While Bahadur Shah Zafar was restored to the imperial throne there was a
faction that wanted the Maratha rulers to be enthroned also, and the Awadhis
wanted to retain the powers that their Nawab used to have.

There were calls for jihad[41] by Muslim leaders like Maulana Fazl-e-Haq
Khairabadi including the millenarian Ahmedullah Shah, taken up by the Muslims,
particularly Muslim artisans, which caused the British to think that the
Muslims were the main force behind this event. In Awadh, Sunni Muslims did not
want to see a return to Shiite rule, so they often refused to join what they
perceived to be a Shia rebellion. However, some Muslims like the Aga Khan
supported the British. The British rewarded him by formally recognizing his
title. The Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah, resisted these calls because, it has
been suggested, he feared outbreaks of communal violence.

In Thana Bhawan, the Sunnis declared Haji Imdadullah their Ameer. In May 1857
the Battle of Shamli took place between the forces of Haji Imdadullah and the
British.

The Sikhs and Pathans of the Punjab and North-West Frontier Province supported
the British and helped in the recapture of Delhi.[42][43] Some historians have
suggested that the Sikhs wanted to avenge the annexation of Punjab eight years
earlier by the Company with the help of Purbias (Bengalis and Marathis -
Easterner) who helped the British. It has also been suggested that the Sikhs
felt insulted by the attitude of Sepoys that (in their view) had only beaten
the Khalsa with British help, they resented and despised them far more than
the British.[44]

In 1857, the Bengal Army had 86,000 men of which 12,000 were European, 16,000
Punjabi and 1,500 Gurkha soldiers, out of a total of (for the three Indian
armies) 311,000 native troops, and 40,160 European troops as well as 5,362
officers.[45] Fifty-four of the Bengal Army's 75 regular Native Infantry
Regiments rebelled, although some were immediately destroyed or broke up with
their sepoys drifting away to their homes. Almost all the remainder were
disarmed or disbanded to prevent or forestall rebellions. All ten of the
Bengal Light Cavalry regiments rebelled.

The Bengal Army also included 29 Irregular Cavalry and 42 Irregular Infantry
regiments. These included a substantial contingent from the recently annexed
state of Awadh, which rebelled en masse. Another large contingent from Gwalior
also rebelled, even though that state's ruler remained allied to the British.
The remainder of the Irregular units were raised from a wide variety of
sources and were less affected by the concerns of mainstream Indian society.
Three bodies in particular actively supported the Company; three Gurkha and
five of six Sikh infantry units, and the six infantry and six cavalry units of
the recently-raised Punjab Irregular Force.[46][47]

On April 1, 1858, the number of Indian soldiers in the Bengal army loyal to
the Company was 80,053.[48][49] This total included a large number of soldiers
hastily raised in the Punjab and North-West Frontier after the outbreak of the
Rebellion.

The Bombay army had three mutinies in its 29 regiments whilst the Madras army
had no mutinies, though elements of one of its 52 regiments refused to
volunteer for service in Bengal.[50]

Most of southern India remained passive with only sporadic and haphazard
outbreaks of violence. Most of the states did not take part in the war as many
parts of the region were ruled by the Nizams or the Mysore royalty and were
thus not directly under British rule.

## [edit] The Revolt

### [edit] Initial stages

Bahadur Shah Zafar proclaimed himself the Emperor of the whole of India. Most
contemporary and modern accounts suggest that he was coerced by the sepoys and
his courtiers to sign the proclamation against his will.[51] The civilians,
nobility and other dignitaries took the oath of allegiance to the Emperor. The
Emperor issued coins in his name, one of the oldest ways of asserting Imperial
status, and his name was added to the acceptance by Muslims that he is their
King. This proclamation, however, turned the Sikhs of Punjab away from the
rebellion, as they did not want to return to Islamic rule, having fought many
wars against the Mughal rulers.

The province of Bengal was largely quiet throughout the entire period.
Initially, the Indian soldiers were able to significantly push back Company
forces, and captured several important towns in Haryana, Bihar, Central
Provinces and the United Provinces. When the European troops were reinforced
and began to counterattack, the sepoys who mutinied were especially
handicapped by their lack of a centralised command and control system.
Although they produced some natural leaders such as Bakht Khan (whom the
Emperor later nominated as commander-in-chief after his son Mirza Mughal
proved ineffectual), for the most part they were forced to look for leadership
to rajahs and princes. Some of these were to prove dedicated leaders, but
others were self-interested or inept.

Rao Tularam of Rewari (Haryana) and Pran Sukh Yadav fought with the British
Army at Nasibpur and then went to collect arms from Russia which had just been
in a war with the British in the Crimea. When a tribal leader from Peshawar
sent a letter offering help, the king replied that he should not come to Delhi
because the treasury was empty and the army had become uncontrollable.[52]

### [edit] Delhi

Main article: Siege of Delhi

The British were slow to strike back at first. It took time for troops
stationed in Britain to make their way to India by sea, although some
regiments moved overland through Persia from the Crimean War, and some
regiments already en route for China were diverted to India.

It took time to organize the European troops already in India into field
forces, but eventually two columns left Meerut and Simla. They proceeded
slowly towards Delhi and fought, killed, and hung numerous Indians along the
way. Two months after the first outbreak of rebellion at Meerut, the two
forces met near Karnal. The combined force (which included two Gurkha units
serving in the Bengal Army under contract from the Kingdom of Nepal), fought
the main army of the rebels at Badli-ke-Serai and drove them back to Delhi.

The Company established a base on the Delhi ridge to the north of the city and
the Siege of Delhi began. The siege lasted roughly from July 1 to September
21. However, the encirclement was hardly complete, and for much of the siege
the Company forces were outnumbered and it often seemed that it was the
Company forces and not Delhi that was under siege, and the rebels could easily
receive resources and reinforcements. For several weeks, it seemed that
disease, exhaustion and continuous sorties by rebels from Delhi would force
the Company forces to withdraw, but the outbreaks of rebellion in the Punjab
were forestalled or suppressed, allowing the Punjab Movable Column of British,
Sikh and Pakhtun soldiers under John Nicholson to reinforce the besiegers on
the Ridge on August 14.[53][54] On August 30 the rebels offered terms, which
were refused.[55]

<IMG>

The Jantar Mantar observatory in Delhi in 1858, damaged in the fighting.

<IMG>

Mortar damage to Kashmiri Gate, Delhi, 1858

<IMG>

Hindu Rao's house in Delhi, now a hospital, was extensively damaged in the
fighting.

<IMG>

Bank of Delhi was attacked by mortar and gunfire.  
An eagerly-awaited heavy siege train joined the besieging force, and from
September 7, the siege guns battered breaches in the walls and silenced the
rebels' artillery. An attempt to storm the city through the breaches and the
Kashmiri gate was launched on September 14. The attackers gained a foothold
within the city but suffered heavy casualties, including John Nicholson. The
British commander wished to withdraw, but was persuaded to hold on by his
junior officers. After a week of street fighting, the British reached the Red
Fort. Bahadur Shah had already fled to Humayun's tomb. The British had retaken
the city.

The troops of the besieging force proceeded to loot and pillage the city. A
large number of the citizens were killed in retaliation for the Europeans and
Indian civilians that had been killed by the rebel sepoys. During the street
fighting, artillery had been set up in the main mosque in the city and the
neighbourhoods within range were bombarded. These included the homes of the
Muslim nobility from all over India, and contained innumerable cultural,
artistic, literary and monetary riches.

The British soon arrested Bahadur Shah, and the next day British officer
William Hodson shot his sons Mirza Mughal, Mirza Khizr Sultan, and grandson
Mirza Abu Bakr under his own authority at the Khooni Darwaza (the bloody gate)
near Delhi Gate. On hearing the news Zafar reacted with shocked silence while
his wife Zinat Mahal was happy as she believed her son was now Zafar's
heir.[56]

Shortly after the fall of Delhi, the victorious attackers organised a column
which relieved another besieged Company force in Agra, and then pressed on to
Cawnpore, which had also recently been recaptured. This gave the Company
forces a continuous, although still tenuous, line of communication from the
east to west of India.

### [edit] Cawnpore (Kanpur)

Main article: Siege of Cawnpore

<IMG>

<IMG>

A memorial erected (circa 1860) by the British after the Mutiny at the Bibi
Ghar Well. After India's Independence the statue was moved to the Memorial
Church, Cawnpore. Albumen silver print by Samuel Bourne, 1860.

In June, sepoys under General Wheeler in Cawnpore (present day Kanpur)
rebelled and besieged the European entrenchment. Wheeler was not only a
veteran and respected soldier, but also married to a high-caste Indian lady.
He had relied on his own prestige, and his cordial relations with the Nana
Sahib to thwart rebellion, and took comparatively few measures to prepare
fortifications and lay in supplies and ammunition.

The besieged endured three weeks of the Siege of Cawnpore with little water or
food, suffering continuous casualties to men, women and children. On June 25
Nana Sahib made an offer of safe passage to Allahabad. With barely three days'
food rations remaining, the British agreed provided they could keep their
small arms and that the evacuation should take place in daylight on the
morning of the 27th (the Nana Sahib wanted the evacuation to take place on the
night of the 26th). Early in the morning of June 27, the European party left
their entrenchment and made their way to the river where boats provided by the
Nana Sahib were waiting to take them to Allahabad.[57] Several sepoys who had
stayed loyal to the Company were removed by the mutineers and killed, either
because of their loyalty or because "they had become Christian." A few injured
British officers trailing the column were also apparently hacked to death by
angry sepoys. After the European party had largely arrived at the dock, which
was surrounded by sepoys positioned on both banks of the Ganges,[58] with
clear lines of fire, firing broke out and the boats were abandoned by their
crew, and caught or were set[59] on fire using pieces of red hot charcoal.[60]
The British party tried to push the boats off but all except three remained
stuck. One boat with over a dozen wounded men initially escaped, but later
grounded, was caught by mutineers and pushed back down the river towards the
carnage at Cawnpore. Towards the end rebel cavalry rode into the water to
finish off any survivors.[60] After the firing ceased the survivors were
rounded up and the men shot.[60] By the time the massacre was over, all the
male members of the party were dead while the women and children were removed
and held hostage (and later killed in The Bibigarh massacre).[61] Only four
men eventually escaped alive from Cawnpore on one of the boats: two private
soldiers (both of whom died later during the Rebellion), a lieutenant, and
Captain Mowbray Thomson, who wrote a first-hand account of his experiences
entitled The Story of Cawnpore (London, 1859).

Whether the firing was planned or accidental remains unresolved. Most early
histories assume it was planned either by the Nana Sahib (Kaye and Malleson)
or that Tantia Tope and Brigadier Jwala Pershad planned it without the Nana
Sahib's knowledge (G W Forrest). The stated reasons for the planned nature
are: the speed with which the Nana Sahib agreed to the British conditions
(Mowbray Thomson); and the firepower arranged around the ghat which was far in
excess of what was necessary to guard the European troops (most histories
agree on this). During his trial, Tatya Tope denied the existence of any such
plan and described the incident in the following terms: the Europeans had
already boarded the boats and he (Tatya Tope) raised his right hand to signal
their departure. That very moment someone from the crowd blew a loud bugle
which created disorder and in the ongoing bewilderment, the boatmen jumped off
the boats. The rebels started shooting indiscriminately. Nana Sahib, who was
staying in Savada Kothi (Bungalow) nearby, was informed about what was
happening and immediately came to stop it.[62] Some British histories allow
that it might well have been the result of accident or error; someone
accidentally or maliciously fired a shot, the panic-stricken British opened
fire, and it became impossible to stop the massacre.[63]

The surviving women and children were taken to the Nana Sahib and then
confined first to the Savada Kothi and then to the home of the local
magistrate's clerk (The Bibigarh)[64] where they were joined by refugees from
Fatehgarh. Overall five men and two hundred and six women and children were
confined in The Bibigarh for about two weeks. In one week 25 were brought out
dead, due to dysentery and cholera.[59] Meanwhile a Company relief force that
had advanced from Allahabad defeated the Indians and by July 15 it was clear
that the Nana Sahib would not be able to hold Cawnpore and a decision was made
by the Nana Sahib and other leading rebels that the hostages must be killed.
After the sepoys refused to carry out this order, two Muslim butchers, two
Hindu peasants and one of Nana's bodyguards went into The Bibigarh. Armed with
knives and hatchets they murdered the women and children.[65] after the
massacre the walls were covered in bloody hand prints, and the floor littered
with fragments of human limbs.[66] The dead and the dying were thrown down a
nearby well, when the well was full, the 50-foot (15 m) deep well was filled
with remains to within 6 feet (1.8 m) of the top,[67] the remainder were
thrown into the Ganges.[68]

Historians have given many reasons for this act of cruelty. With Company
forces approaching Cawnpore and some believing that they would not advance if
there were no hostages to save, their murders were ordered. Or perhaps it was
to ensure that no information was leaked after the fall of Cawnpore. Other
historians have suggested that the killings were an attempt to undermine Nana
Sahib's relationship with the British.[69] Perhaps it was due to fear, the
fear of being recognized by some of the prisoners for having taken part in the
earlier firings.[61]

<IMG>

Photograph entitled, "The Hospital in General Wheeler's entrenchment,
Cawnpore." (1858) The hospital was the site of the first major loss of
European lives in Cawnpore (Kanpur)

<IMG>

1858 picture of Sati Chaura Ghat on the banks of the Ganges River, where on 27
June 1857 many British men lost their lives and the surviving women and
children were taken prisoner by the rebels.

<IMG>

Bibigurh house where European women and children were killed and the well
where their bodies were found, 1858.

<IMG>

The Bibigurh Well site where a memorial had been built. Samuel Bourne, 1860.  
The killing of the women and children proved to be a mistake. The British
public was aghast and the anti Imperial and pro-Indian proponents lost all
their support. Cawnpore became a war cry for the British and their allies for
the rest of the conflict. The Nana Sahib disappeared near the end of the
Rebellion and it is not known what happened to him.

Other British accounts[70][71][72] state that indiscriminate punitive measures
were taken in early June, two weeks before the murders at the Bibi-Ghar (but
after those at both Meerut and Delhi), specifically by Lieutenant Colonel
James George Smith Neill of the Madras Fusiliers (a European unit), commanding
at Allahabad while moving towards Cawnpore. At the nearby town of Fatehpur, a
mob had attacked and murdered the local European population. On this pretext,
Neill ordered all villages beside the Grand Trunk Road to be burned and their
inhabitants to be hanged. Neill's methods were "ruthless and horrible"[73] and
far from intimidating the population, may well have induced previously
undecided sepoys and communities to revolt.

Neill was killed in action at Lucknow on September 26 and was never called to
account for his punitive measures, though contemporary British sources
lionised him and his "gallant blue caps".[74] By contrast with the actions of
soldiers under Neill, the behaviour of most rebel soldiers was creditable.
"Our creed does not permit us to kill a bound prisoner", one of the
matchlockmen explained, "though we can slay our enemy in battle."[71]

When the British retook Cawnpore, the soldiers took their sepoy prisoners to
The Bibigarh and forced them to lick the bloodstains from the walls and
floor.[75] They then hanged or "blew from the cannon" (the traditional Mughal
punishment for mutiny) the majority of the sepoy prisoners. Although some
claimed the sepoys took no actual part in the killings themselves, they did
not act to stop it and this was acknowledged by Captain Thompson after the
British departed Cawnpore for a second time.

### [edit] Lucknow

Main article: Siege of Lucknow

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sir Henry Montgomery Lawrence British Commissioner of Oudh who died during the
siege of Lucknow.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Secundra Bagh after the slaughter of 2,000 Rebels by the 93rd Highlanders and
4th Punjab Regiment. Albumen silver print by Felice Beato, 1858.

Very soon after the events in Meerut, rebellion erupted in the state of Awadh
(also known as Oudh, in modern-day Uttar Pradesh), which had been annexed
barely a year before. The British Commissioner resident at Lucknow, Sir Henry
Lawrence, had enough time to fortify his position inside the Residency
compound. The Company forces numbered some 1700 men, including loyal sepoys.
The rebels' assaults were unsuccessful, and so they began a barrage of
artillery and musket fire into the compound. Lawrence was one of the first
casualties. The rebels tried to breach the walls with explosives and bypass
them via underground tunnels that led to underground close combat. After 90
days of siege, numbers of Company forces were reduced to 300 loyal sepoys, 350
British soldiers and 550 non-combatants.

On September 25 a relief column under the command of Sir Henry Havelock and
accompanied by Sir James Outram (who in theory was his superior) fought its
way from Cawnpore to Lucknow in a brief campaign in which the numerically
small column defeated rebel forces in a series of increasingly large battles.
This became known as 'The First Relief of Lucknow', as this force was not
strong enough to break the siege or extricate themselves, and so was forced to
join the garrison. In October another, larger, army under the new Commander-
in-Chief, Sir Colin Campbell, was finally able to relieve the garrison and on
the November 18, they evacuated the defended enclave within the city, the
women and children leaving first. They then conducted an orderly withdrawal to
Cawnpore, where they defeated an attempt by Tantya Tope to recapture the city
in the Second Battle of Cawnpore.

Early in 1858, Campbell once again advanced on Lucknow with a large army, this
time seeking to suppress the rebellion in Awadh. He was aided by a large
Nepalese contingent advancing from the north under Jang Bahadur,[76] who
decided to side with the Company in December 1857[citation needed]. Campbell's
advance was slow and methodical, and drove the large but disorganised rebel
army from Lucknow with few casualties to his own troops. This nevertheless
allowed large numbers of the rebels to disperse into Awadh, and Campbell was
forced to spend the summer and autumn dealing with scattered pockets of
resistance while losing men to heat, disease and guerilla actions.

### [edit] Jhansi

Main article: Central India Campaign (1858)

Jhansi was a Maratha-ruled princely state in Bundelkhand. When the Raja of
Jhansi died without a male heir in 1853, it was annexed to the British Raj by
the Governor-General of India under the Doctrine of lapse. His widow, Rani
Lakshmi Bai, protested that she had not been allowed to adopt a successor, as
per Indian custom.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Jhansi Fort, which was taken over by rebel forces, and subsequently
defended against British recapture by the Rani of Jhansi.

When war broke out, Jhansi quickly became a centre of the rebellion. A small
group of Company officials and their families took refuge in Jhansi's fort,
and the Rani negotiated their evacuation. However, when they left the fort,
they were massacred by the rebels. Although the treachery might have occurred
without the Rani's consent, the Europeans suspected her of complicity, despite
her protestations of innocence.

By the end of June 1857, the Company had lost control of much of Bundelkhand
and eastern Rajasthan. The Bengal Army units in the area, having rebelled,
marched to take part in the battles for Delhi and Cawnpore. The many princely
states which made up this area began warring amongst themselves. In September
and October 1857, the Rani led the successful defence of Jhansi against the
invading armies of the neighbouring rajas of Datia and Orchha.

On 3 February Rose broke the 3-month siege of Saugor. Thousands of local
villagers welcomed him as a liberator, freeing them from rebel occupation[77]

In March 1858, the Central India Field Force, led by Sir Hugh Rose, advanced
on and laid siege to Jhansi. The Company forces captured the city, but the
Rani fled in disguise.

After being driven from Jhansi and Kalpi, on June 1, 1858 Rani Lakshmi Bai and
a group of Maratha rebels captured the fortress city of Gwalior from the
Scindia rulers, who were British allies. This might have reinvigorated the
rebellion but the Central India Field Force very quickly advanced against the
city. The Rani died on June 17, the second day of the Battle of Gwalior
probably killed by a carbine shot from the 8th Hussars, according to the
account of three independent Indian representatives. The Company forces
recaptured Gwalior within the next three days. In descriptions of the scene of
her last battle, she was compared to Joan Of Arc by some commentators.[78]

Indore

Colonel Henry Durand, the then Company resident at Indore had brushed away any
possibility of uprising in Indore.[79] However, on July 1, sepoys in Holkar's
army revolted and opened fire on the pickets of Bhopal Cavalry. When Colonel
Travers rode forward to charge, Bhopal Cavalry refused to follow. The Bhopal
Infantry also refused orders and instead leveled their guns at European
sergeants and officers. Since all possibility of mounting an effective
deterrent was lost, Durand decided to gather up all the European residents and
escape, although 39 European residents of Indore were killed.[80]

### [edit] Other regions

Punjab

What was then referred to by the British as the Punjab was a very large
administrative division, centred on Lahore. It included not only the present-
day Indian and Pakistani Punjabi regions but also the North West Frontier
districts bordering Afghanistan.

Much of the region had been the Sikh kingdom, ruled by Ranjit Singh until his
death in 1839. The kingdom had then fallen into disorder, with court factions
and the Khalsa (the Sikh army) contending for power at the Lahore Durbar
(court). After two Anglo-Sikh Wars, the entire region was annexed by the East
India Company in 1849. In 1857, the region still contained the highest numbers
of both European and Indian troops.

The inhabitants of the Punjab were not as sympathetic to the sepoys as they
were elsewhere in India, which limited many of the outbreaks in the Punjab to
disjointed uprisings by regiments of sepoys isolated from each other. In some
garrisons, notably Ferozepore, indecision on the part of the senior European
officers allowed the sepoys to rebel, but the sepoys then left the area,
mostly heading for Delhi.[81] At the most important garrison, that of Peshawar
close to the Afghan frontier, many comparatively junior officers ignored their
nominal commander (the elderly General Reed) and took decisive action. They
intercepted the sepoys' mail, thus preventing their coordinating an uprising,
and formed a force known as the "Punjab Movable Column" to move rapidly to
suppress any revolts as they occurred. When it became clear from the
intercepted correspondence that some of the sepoys at Peshawar were on the
point of open revolt, the four most disaffected Bengal Native regiments were
disarmed by the two British infantry regiments in the cantonment, backed by
artillery, on May 22. This decisive act induced many local chieftains to side
with the British.[82]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Marble Lectern in memory of 35 British soldiers in Jhelum

Some regiments in frontier garrisons subsequently rebelled, but became
isolated among hostile Pakhtun villages and tribes. There were several mass
executions, amounting to several hundred, of sepoys from units which rebelled
or who deserted in the Punjab and North West Frontier provinces during June
and July. The British had been recruiting irregular units from Sikh and
Pakhtun communities even before the first unrest among the Bengal units, and
the numbers of these were greatly increased during the Rebellion.

At one stage, faced with the need to send troops to reinforce the besiegers of
Delhi, the Commissioner of the Punjab suggested handing the coveted prize of
Peshawar to Dost Mohammed Khan of Afghanistan in return for a pledge of
friendship. The British Agents in Peshawar and the adjacent districts were
horrified. Referring to the massacre of a retreating British army in 1840,
Herbert Edwardes wrote, "Dost Mahomed would not be a mortal Afghan ... if he
did not assume our day to be gone in India and follow after us as an enemy.
Europeans cannot retreat - Kabul would come again."[83] In the event Lord
Canning insisted on Peshawar being held, and Dost Mohammed, whose relations
with Britain had been equivocal for over 20 years, remained neutral.

The final large-scale military uprising in the Punjab took place on July 9,
when most of a brigade of sepoys at Sialkot rebelled and began to move to
Delhi. They were intercepted by John Nicholson with an equal British force as
they tried to cross the Ravi River. After fighting steadily but unsuccessfully
for several hours, the sepoys tried to fall back across the river but became
trapped on an island. Three days later, Nicholson annihilated the 1100 trapped
sepoys in the Battle of Trimmu Ghat.[84]

Jhelum in Punjab was also a centre of resistance against the British. Here 35
British soldiers of HM XXIV regiment (South Wales Borderers), died on 7 July
1857. To commemorate this victory St. John's Church Jhelum was built and the
names of those 35 British soldiers are carved on a marble lectern present in
that church.

Jaunpur

Landlords of the Raghuvamsha clan of Rajputs; Taluqa-Dobhi, District -
Jaunpur;[85] played a prominent part in the Rebellion. On hearing of the
uprisings against British rule in the surrounding districts of Ghazipur,
Azamgarh and Banaras, the Rajputs of Dobhi organised themselves into an armed
force and attacked the Company all over the region. They also cut the Company
communications along the Banaras-Azamgarh road and advanced towards the former
Banaras State.

In the first encounter with the British regular troops, the Rajputs suffered
heavy losses, but withdrew in order. Regrouping themselves, they made a bid to
capture Banaras. In the meantime, Azamgarh had been besieged by another large
force of rebels. The Company was unable to send reinforcement to Azamgarh due
to the challenge posed by the Dobhi Rajputs. A clash became inevitable and the
Company attacked the Rajputs with the help of the Sikhs and the Hindustani
cavalry at the end of June 1857. The Rajputs were handicapped as the
torrential monsoon rains soaked their supplies of gun-powder. The Rajputs,
however, bitterly opposed the Company advance with swords and spears and the
few serviceable guns and muskets that they had. The battle took place about 5
miles North of Banaras at a place called Pisnaharia-ka-Inar. The Rajputs were
driven back with heavy losses across the Gomti river. The British army crossed
the river and sacked every Rajput village in the area.

A few months later, Kunwar Singh of Jagdishpur (District Arrah, Bihar),
advanced and occupied Azamgarh. The Banaras Army sent against him was defeated
outside Azamgarh. The Company rushed reinforcements and there was a furious
battle in which the Rajputs of Dobhi helped Kunwar Singh, their distant
relative. Kunwar Singh had to withdraw and the Rajputs became the subject of
cruel reprisals by the Company. The leaders of the Dobhi Rajputs were invited
to a conference and treacherously arrested by the Company troops which had
surrounded the place in Senapur village in May 1858. All were summarily
executed by hanging from a mango tree, along with nine of there other
followers. The dead bodies were further shot with muskets and left hanging
from the trees. After few days, the bodies were taken down by the villagers
and cremated.

Arrah

Kunwar Singh, the 75 year old Rajput Raja of Jagdishpur, whose estate was in
the process of being sequestrated by the Revenue Board, instigated and assumed
the leadership of revolt in Bihar.[86]

On 25 July, rebellion erupted in the garrisons of Dinapur. The rebels quickly
moved towards the cities of Arrah and were joined by Kunwar Singh and his men.
Mr. Boyle, a British engineer in Arrah, had already prepared his house for
defense against such attacks. As the rebels approached Arrah, all European
residents took refuge at Mr. Boyle's house. A siege soon ensued and 50 loyal
sepoys defended the house against artillery and musketry fire from the rebels.

On 29 July, 400 men were sent out from Dinapore to relieve Arrah, but this
force was ambushed by the rebels around a mile away from the siege house,
severely defeated, and driven back. On 30 July, Major Vincent Eyre who was
going up the river with his troops and guns reached Buxar and heard about the
siege. He immediately disembarked his guns and troops (the 5th Fusiliers) and
started marching towards Arrah. On August 2, Some 16 miles (26 km) short of
Arrah, the Major was ambushed by the rebels. After an intense fight, the 5th
Fusilliers charged and stormed the rebel positions successfully. On 3 August,
major Eyre and his men reached the siege house and successfully ended the
siege.[87]

## [edit] Aftermath

### [edit] Retaliation â "The Devil's Wind"

<IMG>

<IMG>

British soldiers looting Qaisar Bagh, Lucknow, after its recapture (steel
engraving, late 1850s)

From the end of 1857, the British had begun to gain ground again. Lucknow was
retaken in March 1858. On 8 July 1858, a peace treaty was signed and the war
ended. The last rebels were defeated in Gwalior on 20 June 1858. By 1859,
rebel leaders Bakht Khan and Nana Sahib had either been slain or had fled. As
well as hanging mutineers, the British had some "blown from cannon"-- an old
Mughal punishment adopted many years before in India. A method of execution
midway between firing squad and hanging but more demonstrative, sentenced
rebels were set before the mouth of cannons and blown to pieces.[88] In terms
of sheer numbers, the casualties were significantly higher on the Indian side.
A letter published after the fall of Delhi in the "Bombay Telegraph" and
reproduced in the British press testified to the scale and nature of the
retaliation:

> .... All the city people found within the walls (of the city of Delhi) when
our troops entered were bayoneted on the spot, and the number was
considerable, as you may suppose, when I tell you that in some houses forty
and fifty people were hiding. These were not mutineers but residents of the
city, who trusted to our well-known mild rule for pardon. I am glad to say
they were disappointed.[citation needed]

Another brief letter from General Montgomery to Captain Hodson, the conqueror
of Delhi exposes how the British military high command approved of the cold
blooded massacre of Delhites: "All honour to you for catching the king and
slaying his sons. I hope you will bag many more!"

Another comment on the conduct of the British soldiers after the fall of Delhi
is of Captain Hodson himself in his book, Twelve years in India: "With all my
love for the army, I must confess, the conduct of professed Christians, on
this occasion, was one of the most humiliating facts connected with the
siege." (Hodson was killed during the recapture of Lucknow in early 1858).

Edward Vibart, a 19-year-old officer, also recorded his experience:

> It was literally murder... I have seen many bloody and awful sights lately
but such a one as I witnessed yesterday I pray I never see again. The women
were all spared but their screams on seeing their husbands and sons butchered,
were most painful... Heaven knows I feel no pity, but when some old grey
bearded man is brought and shot before your very eyes, hard must be that man's
heart I think who can look on with indifference...

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vasili Vasilyevich Vereshchagin. Depiction of the mass execution of rebels in
British India by cannon.

Some British troops adopted a policy of "no prisoners". One officer, Thomas
Lowe, remembered how on one occasion his unit had taken 76 prisoners - they
were just too tired to carry on killing and needed a rest, he recalled. Later,
after a quick trial, the prisoners were lined up with a British soldier
standing a couple of yards in front of them. On the order "fire", they were
all simultaneously shot, "swept... from their earthly existence". This was not
the only mass execution Lowe participated in: on another occasion his unit
took 149 prisoners, and they were lined up and simultaneously shot.

As a result, the end of the war was followed by the execution of a vast
majority of combatants from the Indian side as well as large numbers of
civilians perceived to be sympathetic to the rebel cause. The British press
and government did not advocate clemency of any kind, though Governor General
Canning tried to be sympathetic to native sensibilities, earning the scornful
sobriquet "Clemency Canning". Soldiers took very few prisoners and often
executed them later. Whole villages were wiped out for apparent pro-rebel
sympathies. The Indians called this retaliation "the Devil's Wind."[citation
needed]

> To the steady beat of drums, the captured rebels were first stripped of
their uniforms and then tied to cannons, their bellies pushed hard against the
gaping mouths of the big guns. The order to fire was given. With an enormous
roar, all the cannons burst into life at once, generating a cloud of black
smoke that snaked into the summer sky. When the smoke cleared, there was
nothing left of the rebels' bodies except their arms, still tied to the
cannons, and their blackened heads, which landed with a soft thud on the
baking parade ground. It was a terrible way to die and a terrible sight to
witness.[89]

The aftermath of the rebellion has been the focus of new work using Indian
sources and population studies. In The Last Mughal, William Dalrymple examines
the effects on the Muslim population of Delhi after the city was retaken by
the British and finds that intellectual and economic control of the city
shifted from Muslim to Hindu hands because the British, at that time, saw an
Islamic hand behind the mutiny.[90] Amaresh Mishra, a journalist and history
student, after examining labor force records for the period, concludes that
almost ten million Indians lost their lives during the reprisals though his
methodology is disputed because it neither accounts for unrelated causes of
deaths nor for the movement and displacement of the population that likely
followed that period of unrest. It has to be noted that Mishra's version of
events is dramatically different from the traditional view held by most
historians. Accounting for these factors, another historian, Saul David,
estimates the number of deaths to be in the hundreds of thousands[91].

### [edit] Reaction in Britain

<IMG>

<IMG>

Justice, a print by Sir John Tenniel in an September issue of Punch.

The scale and savagery of the punishments handed out by the British "Army of
Retribution" were considered largely appropriate and justified in a Britain
shocked by the barrage of press reports about atrocities carried out on
Europeans and Christians.[92] Accounts of the time frequently reach the
"hyperbolic register", according to Chris Herbert, especially in the often-
repeated claim that the "Red Year" of 1857 marked "a terrible break" in
British experience.[93] Such was the atmosphere - a national "mood of
retribution and despair" that led to "almost universal approval" of the
measures taken to pacify the revolt.[94]

The popular poet Martin Tupper \- "in a ferment of indignation" - played a
major part in shaping the public's response. His poems, filled with calls for
the razing of Delhi and the erection of "groves of gibbets" are telling:

> "And England, now avenge their wrongs by vengeance deep and dire,/ Cut out
their canker with the sword, and burn it out with fire;/ Destroy those traitor
regions, hang every pariah hound,/ And hunt them down to death, in all hills
and cities âround."[95]

Punch, normally cynical and dispassionate where other periodicals were
jingoistic, in August published a two-page cartoon depicting the British Lion
attacking a Bengal Tiger that had attacked an English woman and child; the
cartoon received considerable attention at the time, with the New York Times
writing a piece about it in September as emblematic of a near-universal
British desire for revenge.[96] It was re-issued as a print, and made the
career of John Tenniel, later famous as the illustrator of Alice.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The British Lion's Vengeance on the Bengal Tiger, a print by Sir John Tenniel
in an August issue of Punch.

The December 1857 issue of Charles Dickens' Household Words contained an essay
by Dickens and Wilkie Collins in which Dickens says, in words that are
representative of that otherwise progressive novelist's "reversal" of views
when it came to Imperial affairs, and are considered by some scholars to be
emblematic of the middle Victorian literary encounter with imperialism:

> "I wish I were a commander in chief in India. The first thing I would do to
strike that Oriental Race with amazement....should be to proclaim to them that
my holding that appointment by the leave of God, to mean that I should do my
utmost to exterminate the race upon whom the stain of the late cruelties
rested; and that I was there for that purpose and no other, ...now proceeding,
with all convenient dispatch and merciful swiftness of execution, to blot it
out of mankind and raze it off the face of the Earth."[97]

According to distinguished Victorianist Peter Brantlinger, no event raised
national hysteria in Britain to a higher pitch, and no event in the 19th
century took a greater hold on the British imagination, so much so that
"Victorian writing about the Mutiny expresses in concentrated form the racist
ideology that Edward Said calls Orientalism".[97]

While incidents of rape committed by Indian rebels against European women and
girls were rare during the rebellion, inaccurate, or falsified reports were
accepted as factual and these were often used to justify the excesses of the
British reaction to the Rebellion. These newspapers printed various apparently
eyewitness accounts of English women and girls being raped by Indian rebels,
that were later found to be in general false. One such account published by
The Times, regarding an incident where 48 English girls as young as 10-14 had
been raped by Indian rebels in Delhi, was criticized as a false propaganda
story by Karl Marx, who pointed out that the story was written by a clergyman
in Bangalore, far from the events of the rebellion.[98]

### [edit] Reorganisation

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bahadur Shah Zafar exiled in Rangoon. Photograph by Robert Tytler and Charles
Shepherd, May 1858.

Bahadur Shah was tried for treason by a military commission assembled at
Delhi, and exiled to Rangoon where he died in 1862, bringing the Mughal
dynasty to an end. In 1877 Queen Victoria took the title of Empress of India
on the advice of Prime Minister, Benjamin Disraeli.

The rebellion saw the end of the British East India Company's rule in India.
In August, by the Government of India Act 1858, the company was formally
dissolved and its ruling powers over India were transferred to the British
Crown. A new British government department, the India Office, was created to
handle the governance of India, and its head, the Secretary of State for
India, was entrusted with formulating Indian policy. The Governor-General of
India gained a new title (Viceroy of India), and implemented the policies
devised by the India Office. The British colonial administration embarked on a
program of reform, trying to integrate Indian higher castes and rulers into
the government and abolishing attempts at Westernization. The Viceroy stopped
land grabs, decreed religious tolerance and admitted Indians into civil
service, albeit mainly as subordinates.

Essentially the old East India Company bureaucracy remained, though there was
a major shift in attitudes. In looking for the causes of the Mutiny the
authorities alighted on two things: religion and the economy. On religion it
was felt that there had been too much interference with indigenous traditions,
both Hindu and Muslim. On the economy it was now believed that the previous
attempts by the Company to introduce free market competition had undermined
traditional power structures and bonds of loyalty, placing the peasantry at
the mercy of merchants and money-lenders. In consequence the new British Raj
was constructed in part around a conservative agenda, based on a preservation
of tradition and hierarchy.

On a political level it was also felt that the previous lack of consultation
between rulers and ruled had been yet another significant factor in
contributing to the uprising. In consequence, Indians were drawn into
government at a local level. Though this was on a limited scale a crucial
precedent had been set, with the creation of a new 'white collar' Indian
elite, further stimulated by the opening of universities at Calcutta, Bombay
and Madras, a result of the Indian Universities Act. So, alongside the values
of traditional and ancient India, a new professional middle class was starting
to arise, in no way bound by the values of the past. Their ambition can only
have been stimulated by Victoria's Proclamation of November 1858, in which it
is expressly stated that "We hold ourselves bound to the natives of our Indian
territories by the same obligations of duty which bind us to our other
subjects...it is our further will that... our subjects of whatever race or
creed, be freely and impartially admitted to offices in our service, the
duties of which they may be qualified by their education, ability and
integrity, duly to discharge."

Acting on these sentiments, Lord Ripon, viceroy from 1880 to 1885, extended
the powers of local self-government and sought to remove racial practices in
the law courts by the Ilbert Bill. But a policy at once liberal and
progressive at one turn was reactionary and backward at the next, creating new
elites and confirming old attitudes. The Ilbert Bill only had the effect of
causing a White mutiny, and the end of the prospect of perfect equality before
the law. In 1886 measures were adopted to restrict Indian entry into the civil
service.

### [edit] Military reorganisation

The Bengal army dominated the Indian army before the mutiny in 1857 and a
direct result after the mutiny was the scaling back of the size of the Bengali
contingent in the army.[99] Of the 67000 Hindus in the Bengal Army in 1842,
28000 were identified as Rajputs and 25000 as Brahmins, a category that
included Bhumihar Brahmins. The Brahmin presence in the Bengal Army was
reduced in the late nineteenth century because of their perceived primary role
as mutineers in the Rebellion. The British looked for increased recruitment in
the Punjab for the Bengal army as a result of the apparent discontent that
resulted in the Sepoy conflict.[100]

The rebellion transformed both the "native" and European armies of British
India. There was a large-scale disbandment of the presidency armies; the
Bengal Army almost completely vanishing from the order of battle. These troops
were replaced by new units recruited from castes hitherto under-utilised by
the British and from the so-called "Martial Races", which were not part of
mainstream Indian culture like the Sikhs and the Gurkhas. Regiments which had
remained loyal were often retained.

The inefficiencies of the old organisation, which had estranged sepoys from
their British officers, were addressed, and the post-1857 units were mainly
organised on the "irregular" system. (Before the rebellion, Bengal Infantry
units had 26 British officers, who held every position of authority down to
the second-in-command of each company. In irregular units, there were only six
or seven or even fewer European officers, who associated themselves far more
closely with their soldiers, while more trust and responsibility was given to
the Indian officers.)

The British increased the ratio of British to Indian soldiers within India.
Sepoy artillery was abolished also, leaving all artillery (except some small
detachments of mountain guns) in British hands. The post-rebellion changes
formed the basis of the military organisation of British India until the early
20th century.

## [edit] Nomenclature

There is no universally agreed name for the events of this period,

  * In India and Pakistan it has often been termed as the "War of Independence of 1857" or "First War of Independence"[101] but it is not uncommon to use terms such as the "Revolt of 1857". The concept of the Rebellion being "First War of Independence" is not without its critics in India.[102][103][104][105]

The use of the term "Indian Mutiny" is considered by some Indian politicians
as unacceptable and offensive, as it is perceived to belittle what they see as
a "First War of Independence" and therefore reflecting a biased, imperialistic
attitude of the erstwhile colonists. Others dispute this interpretation.

For example, in October, 2006, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, the lower house
of Indian Parliament said:

â The War of 1857 was undoubtedly an epoch-making event in Indiaâs
struggle for freedom. For what the British sought to deride as a mere sepoy
mutiny was Indiaâs First War of Independence in a very true sense, when
people from all walks of life, irrespective of their caste, creed, religion
and language, rose against the British rule. â  
â [106]  
  * In the UK and parts of the Commonwealth it is commonly called the "Indian Mutiny", but terms such as "Great Indian Mutiny", the "Sepoy Mutiny", the "Sepoy Rebellion", the "Sepoy War", the "Great Mutiny", the "Rebellion of 1857", "the Uprising", the "Mahomedan Rebellion",and the "Revolt of 1857" have also been used.[107].[108][109]

  * The term "The Indian Insurrection" was used in the British and British colonial press at the time, and commonly in Australia, and New Zealand such as The Empire Newspaper[110] and Taranaki Herald.[111]

See also: First War of Indian Independence (term)

## [edit] Debate about character

Almost from the moment the first sepoys mutinied in Meerut, the nature and the
scope of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 has been contested and argued over.
Speaking in the House of Commons in July 1857, Benjamin Disraeli labeled it a
'national revolt' while Lord Palmerston, the Prime Minister, tried to downplay
the scope and the significance of the event as a 'mere military mutiny'.[112]
Reflecting this debate, the early historian of the rebellion, Charles Ball,
sided with the mutiny in his title (using mutiny and sepoy insurrection) but
labeled it a 'struggle for liberty and independence as a people' in the
text.[113] Historians remain divided on whether the rebellion can properly be
considered a war of Indian independence or not,[114] although it is popularly
considered to be one in India. Arguments against include:

  * A united India did not exist at that time in political, cultural, or ethnic terms
  * The rebellion was put down with the help of other Indian soldiers drawn from the Madras Army, the Bombay Army and the Sikh regiments, 80% of the British forces were Indian;[115]
  * Many of the local rulers fought amongst themselves rather than uniting against the British.
  * Many rebel Sepoy regiments disbanded and went home rather than fight.
  * Not all of the rebels accepted the return of the Moghuls.
  * The King of Delhi had no real control over the mutineers.[116]
  * The revolt was largely limited to north and central India. Whilst risings occurred elsewhere they had little impact due to their limited nature.
  * A number of revolts occurred in areas not under British rule, and against native rulers, often as a result of local internal politics.
  * The revolt was fractured along religious, ethnic and regional lines.[117]

â "the demon of communalism also raised its head. The Muslims spat over the
Hindus and openly defiled their houses by sprinkling them with cows' blood and
placing cows' bones within the compounds. Concrete instances are given where
Hindu Sepoy came into clash with Muslim hooligans and a complete riot ensued.
The Hindus, oppressed by the Muslims, were depressed at the success of the
Mutiny, and daily offered prayers to God for the return of "the English."[118]
â  
A second school of thought while acknowledging the validity of the above-
mentioned arguments opines that this rebellion may indeed be called a war of
India's independence. The reasons advanced are:

  * Even though the rebellion had various causes (e.g. Sepoy grievances, British high-handedness, the Doctrine of Lapse etc.), most of the rebel sepoys set out to revive the old Mughal empire, that signified a national symbol for them, instead of heading home or joining services of their regional principalities, which would not have been unreasonable if their revolt were only inspired by grievances; 
<IMG>

<IMG>

The hanging of two participants in the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Albumen
silver print by Felice Beato, 1858

  * There was a widespread popular revolt in many areas such as Awadh, Bundelkhand and Rohilkhand. The rebellion was therefore more than just a military rebellion, and it spanned more than one region;
  * The sepoys did not seek to revive small kingdoms in their regions, instead they repeatedly proclaimed a "country-wide rule" of the Moghuls and vowed to drive out the British from "India", as they knew it then. (The sepoys ignored local princes and proclaimed in cities they took over: Khalq Khuda Ki, Mulk Badshah Ka, Hukm Subahdar Sipahi Bahadur Ka \- i.e. the world belongs to God, the country to the Emperor and executive powers to the Sepoy Commandant in the city). The objective of driving out "foreigners" from not only one's own area but from their conception of the entirety of "India", signifies a nationalist sentiment;
  * The troops of the Bengal Army were used extensively in warfare by the British and had therefore travelled extensively across the Indian subcontinent, leading them perhaps to develop some notion of a nation-state called India. They displayed for the first time in this rebellion, some contemporary British accounts (Malleson) suggest, patriotic sentiments in the modern sense.

â To live in India, now, was like standing on the verge of a volcanic
crater, the sides of which were fast crumbling away from our feet, while the
boiling lava was ready to erupt and consume us...The infanticide Rajput, the
bigoted Brahmin, the fanatic Mussalman, had joined together in the cause; cow-
killer and the cow-worshipper, the pig-hater and the pig-eater... had revolted
together. - Thomas Lowe, British Chronicler, 1860[119] â  
In summary:

  1. If the criterion of a National War of Independence is "a war (or numerous conflicts) spread all over the nation cutting across regional lines", the rebellion does not qualify.
  2. If the criterion for a National War of Independence is "a war, which even if geographically confined to certain regions, is waged with the intention of driving out from the complete national area a power perceived to be foreign", the rebellion does qualify.

## [edit] The 150th anniversary

The Government of India celebrated the year 2007 as the 150th anniversary of
"India's First War of Independence". Several books written by Indian authors
were released in the anniversary year including Amresh Mishra's "War of
Civilizations" a controversial history of the Rebellion of 1857, and
"Recalcitrance" by Anurag Kumar, one of the few novels written in English by
an Indian based on the events of 1857.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Indian_revolt_of_1857_states_map.svg
  2. ^ The Gurkhas by W. Brook Northey, John Morris. ISBN 8120615778. Page 58
  3. ^ a b c d e f g Bandyopadhyay 2004, pp. 169-172 Bose & Jalal 2003, pp. 88-103 Quote: "The 1857 rebellion was by and large confined to northern Indian Gangetic Plain and central India.", Brown 1994, pp. 85-87, and Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 100-106
  4. ^ Bayly 1990, p. 170 Quote: "What distinguished the events of 1857 was their scale and the fact that for a short time they posed a military threat to British dominance in the Ganges Plain."
  5. ^ a b Spear 1990, pp. 147-148
  6. ^ Bandyopadhyay 2004, p. 177, Bayly 2000, p. 357
  7. ^ Brown 1994, p. 94
  8. ^ Bandyopadhyay 2004, p. 179
  9. ^ Bayly 1990, pp. 194-197
  10. ^ a b Ludden 2002, p. 133
  11. ^ Rajit K. Mazumder, The Indian Army and the Making of the Punjab. (Delhi, Permanent Black, 2003), 7-8.
  12. ^ Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 61
  13. ^ a b Brown 1994, p. 88
  14. ^ Metcalf 1990, p. 48
  15. ^ Bandyopadhyay 2004, p. 171, Bose & Jalal 2003, p. 90
  16. ^ a b Essential histories, The Indian Mutiny 1857-1858, Gregory Fremont-Barnes, Osprey 2007, page25
  17. ^ Victorian Web 1857 Indian Rebellion
  18. ^ Hibbert 1980, p. 63
  19. ^ David 2003, p. 53
  20. ^ David 2003, p. 54
  21. ^ Bandyopadhyay 2004, p. 172, Bose & Jalal 2003, p. 91, Brown 1994, p. 92
  22. ^ Bandyopadhyay 2004, p. 172
  23. ^ Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 102
  24. ^ Bose & Jalal 2003, p. 91, Metcalf 1991, Bandyopadhyay 2004, p. 173
  25. ^ Brown 1994, p. 92
  26. ^ Khan 1859
  27. ^ Quoted in Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 100
  28. ^ Bayly 2000, p. 357
  29. ^ Stokes & Bayly (ed.) 1986, Brown 1994, p. 91
  30. ^ Memorandum from Lieutenant-Colonel W. St. L. Mitchell (CO of the 19th BNI) to Major A. H. Ross about his troop's refusal to accept the Enfield cartridges, 27 February 1857, Archives of Project South Asia, South Dakota State University and Missouri Southern State University
  31. ^ a b "The Indian Mutiny of 1857", Col. G. B. Malleson, reprint 2005, Rupa & Co. Publishers, New Delhi
  32. ^ Hibbert 1980, pp. 73-75
  33. ^ Hibbert 1980, pp. 80-85
  34. ^ Sir John Kaye & G.B. Malleson.: The Indian Mutiny of 1857, (Delhi: Rupa & Co.) reprint 2005 p49
  35. ^ David 2003, p. 93
  36. ^ Hibbert 1980, pp. 98-101
  37. ^ Hibbert 1980, pp. 93-95
  38. ^ Dalrymple, The Last Moghul, pp.223-224
  39. ^ Hibbert 1980, pp. 152-163
  40. ^ Michael Edwardes, Battles of the Indian Mutiny, pp 52-53
  41. ^ Indian mutiny was 'war of religion' - BBC
  42. ^ The Story of the Storm â 1857
  43. ^ Zachary Nunn. The British Raj
  44. ^ Harris 2001, p. 57
  45. ^ Harris 2001
  46. ^ A.H. Amin, Pakistan Army Defence Journal
  47. ^ A.H. Amin, Orbat.com
  48. ^ Lessons from 1857
  49. ^ The Indian Army: 1765 - 1914
  50. ^ David 2003, p. 19
  51. ^ The Indin Mutiny 1857-58, Gregory Fremont-Barnes, Osprey 2007, page 34
  52. ^ Qizilbash, Basharat Hussain (30 June 2006) The tragicomic hero The Nation. Nawai-e-Waqt Group.
  53. ^ God's Acre. The Hindu Metro Plus Delhi. October 28, 2006.
  54. ^ 'The Rising: The Ballad of Mangal Pandey'. Daily Mail, August 27, 2005
  55. ^ essential histories, the Indian Mutiny 1857-58, Gregory Fremont-Barnes, Osprey 2007, page 40
  56. ^ Dalrymple 2006, p. 400
  57. ^ The story of Cawnpore: The Indian Mutiny 1857, Capt. Mowbray Thomson, Brighton, Tom Donovan, 1859, pp. 148-159.
  58. ^ Essential Histories, the Indian Mutiny 1857-58, Gregory Fremont-Barnes, Osprey 2007, page 49
  59. ^ a b S&T magazine No. 121 (September 1998), page 56
  60. ^ a b c Hibbert 1980, p. 191
  61. ^ a b A History of the Indian Mutiny by G. W. Forrest, London, William Blackwood, 1904
  62. ^ Kaye's and Malleson's History of the Indian Mutiny. Longman's, London, 1896. Footnote, p. 257.
  63. ^ Edwardes, Battles of the Indian Mutiny, p.56
  64. ^ David 2003, p. 250
  65. ^ Harris 2001, p. 92
  66. ^ Harris 2001, p. 95
  67. ^ Essential Histories, the Indian Mutiny 1857-58, Gregory Fremont-Barnes, Osprey 2007, page 53
  68. ^ S&T magazine No. 121 (September 1998), page 58
  69. ^ John Harris, The Indian mutiny, Wordsworth military library 2001, page 92,
  70. ^ J.W. Sherer, Daily Life during the Indian Mutiny, 1858, p. 56
  71. ^ a b Andrew Ward, Our bones are scattered - The Cawnpore massacres and the Indian Mutiny of 1857, John Murray, 1996
  72. ^ Ramson, Martin & Ramson, Edward, The Indian Empire, 1858
  73. ^ Michael Edwardes, Battles of the Indian Mutiny, Pan, 1963 ISBN 330-02524-4
  74. ^ Units of the Army of the Madras Presidency wore blue rather than black shakoes or forage caps
  75. ^ Raugh, Harold E. (2004). The Victorians at War, 1815-1914: An Encyclopedia of British Military. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. p. 89\. ISBN 978-1576079256. OCLC 54778450.
  76. ^ Hibbert 1980, p. 358,428
  77. ^ Essential Histories, the Indian Mutiny 1857-58, Gregory Fremont-Barnes, Osprey 2007, page 79
  78. ^ Lachmi Bai Rani of Jhansi, the Jeanne d'Arc of India (1901), White, Michael (Michael Alfred Edwin), 1866, New York: J.F. Taylor & Company, 1901
  79. ^ Biographies
  80. ^ [1]
  81. ^ Memoirs of Charles John Griffiths
  82. ^ Charles Allen, Soldier Sahibs, p.276
  83. ^ Charles Allen, Soldier Sahibs, p.283
  84. ^ Charles Allen, Soldier Sahibs, pp. 290-293
  85. ^ WHO'S WHO of INDIAN MARTYRS, Volume Three. Department of Culture. Ministry of Education and Social welfare. Government of India, New Delhi. The National Printing Works, Darya Ganj, Delhi, India
  86. ^ [2]
  87. ^ [3][4]
  88. ^ Sahib: The British Soldier in India 1750-1914 Richard Holmes HarperCollins 2005
  89. ^ Daily Mail, August 27, 2005 The Rising: The Ballad of Mangal Pandey
  90. ^ Dalrymple 2006
  91. ^ [5]
  92. ^ Chakravarty, G. (2004). The Indian Mutiny and the British Imagination. Cambridge University Press.
  93. ^ Herbert, C. (2008). War of No Pity: The Indian Mutiny and Victorian Trauma. Princeton University Press.
  94. ^ Judd, D. (2005). The Lion and the Tiger: The Rise and Fall of the British Raj, 1600-1947. Oxford University Press.
  95. ^ Derek Hudson. Martin Tupper: His Rise and Fall, Constable, 1972.
  96. ^ "Wrath of the British Lion", The New York Times: 4, 9 September 1857, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9C00EFDA163CEE34BC4153DFBF66838C649FDE
  97. ^ a b Brantlinger, Patrick (1990). Rule of darkness: British literature and imperialism, 1830-1914. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-9767-1.
  98. ^ Beckman, Karen Redrobe (2003), Vanishing Women: Magic, Film, and Feminism, Duke University Press, pp. 33-4, ISBN 0822330741
  99. ^ Rajit K. Mazumder, The Indian Army and the Making of the Punjab. (Delhi, Permanent Black, 2003), 11.
  100. ^ Bickers, Robert A.; R. G. Tiedemann (2007). The Boxers, China, and the World. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 231(at p 63). ISBN 978-0742553958.
  101. ^ First Indian War of Independence January 8, 1998
  102. ^ A number of dispossessed dynasts, both Hindu and Muslim, exploited the well-founded caste-suspicions of the sepoys and made these simple folk their cat's paw in gamble for recovering their thrones. The last scions of the Delhi Mughals or the Oudh Nawabs and the Peshwa, can by no ingenuity be called fighters for Indian freedom Hindusthan Standard, Puja Annual, 195 p. 22 referenced in the Truth about the Indian mutiny article by Dr Ganda Singh
  103. ^ In the light of the available evidence, we are forced to the conclusion that the uprising of 1857 was not the result of careful planning, nor were there any master-minds behind it. As I read about the events of 1857, I am forced to the conclusion that the Indian national character had sunk very low. The leaders of the revolt could never agree. They were mutually jealous and continually intrigued against one another. ... In fact these personal jealousies and intrigues were largely responsible for the Indian defeat.Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Surendranath Sen: Eighteen Fifty-seven (Appx. X & Appx. XV)
  104. ^ >Hasan 1998, p. 149
  105. ^ Nanda 1965, p. 701
  106. ^ Address at the Function marking the 150th Anniversary of the Revolt of 1857
  107. ^ India's First War of Independence 1857
  108. ^ Le Monde article on the revolt
  109. ^ German National Geographic article
  110. ^ The Empire, Sydney, Australia, 11 July 1857
  111. ^ Taranaki Herald, New Zealand, 29 August 1857
  112. ^ The Indian Mutiny and Victorian Trauma by Christopher Herbert, Princeton University Press, Princeton 2007
  113. ^ The History of the Indian Mutiny: Giving a detailed account of the sepoy insurrection in India by Charles Ball, The London Printing and Publishing Company, London, 1860
  114. ^ V.D. Savarkar argues that the rebellion was a war of Indian independence. The Indian War of Independence: 1857 (Bombay: 1947 [1909]). Most historians have seen his arguments as discredited, with one venturing so far as to say, 'It was neither first, nor national, nor a war of independence.' Eric Stokes has argued that the rebellion was actually a variety of movements, not one movement. The Peasant Armed (Oxford: 1980). See also S.B. Chaudhuri, Civil Rebellion in the Indian Mutinies 1857-1859" (Calcutta: 1957)
  115. ^ The Indian Mutiny, Spilsbury Julian, Orion, 2007
  116. ^ S&T magazine issue 121 (September 1988), page 20
  117. ^ The communal hatred led to ugly communal riots in many parts of U.P. The green flag was hoisted and Muslims in Bareilly, Bijnor, Moradabad, and other places the Muslims shouted for the revival of Muslim kingdom." R.C. Majumdar: Sepoy Mutiny and Revolt of 1857 (page 2303-31).
  118. ^ from the account of Bidrohi Bengali of Durgadas Bandyopadhyaya R. C. Majumdar: Sepoy Mutiny and Revolt of 1857 (page 177).
  119. ^ Sitaram Yechury. The Empire Strikes Back. Hindustan Times. January 2006.

## [edit] References

### [edit] Text-books and academic monographs

  * Alavi, Seema (1996), The Sepoys and the Company: Tradition and Transition 1770-1830, Oxford University Press, p. 340, ISBN 0195634845 .

  * Anderson, Clare (2007), Indian Uprising of 1857â8: Prisons, Prisoners and Rebellion, New York: Anthem Press, pp. 217, ISBN 9781843312499, http://atlantis.terrassl.net/anthempress.com/product_info.php?cPath=52&products_id=293&osCsid=9a2s9o8mdu8066m551rr407123 .

  * Bandyopadhyay, Sekhara (2004), From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India, New Delhi: Orient Longman, pp. 523, ISBN 8125025960 .

  * Bayly, Chistopher Alan (1988), Indian Society and the Making of the British Empire, Cambridge University Press, pp. 230, ISBN 0521250927 .

  * Bayly, Christopher Alan (2000), Empire and Information: Intelligence Gathering and Social Communication in India, c 1780-1870, Cambridge University Press, pp. 412, ISBN 0521570859 .

  * Bose, Sugata; Jalal, Ayesha (2004), Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy (2nd ed.), London: Routledge, pp. 253, ISBN 0415307872 .

  * Brown, Judith M. (1994), Modern India: The Origins of an Asian Democracy (2nd ed.), Oxford University Press, pp. 480, ISBN 0198731132, http://www.oup.com/uk/catalogue/?ci=9780198731139 .

  * Harris, John (2001), The Indian Mutiny, Ware: Wordsworth Editions, pp. 205, ISBN 1840222328 .

  * Hibbert, Christopher (1980), The Great Mutiny: India 1857, London: Allen Lane, pp. 472, ISBN 0140047522 .

  * Judd, Denis (2004), The Lion and the Tiger: The Rise and Fall of the British Raj, 1600-1947, Oxford University Press, xiii, 280, ISBN 0192803581 .

  * Keene, Henry George (1883), Fifty-Seven. Some account of the administration of Indian Districts during the revolt of the Bengal Army, London: W.H. Allen, pp. 145 .

  * Kulke, Hermann; Rothermund, Dietmar (2004), A History of India (4th ed.), London: Routledge, xii, 448, ISBN 0415329205 .

  * Ludden, David (2002), India And South Asia: A Short History, Oxford: Oneworld, xii, 306, ISBN 1851682376, http://www.oneworld-publications.com/cgi-bin/cart/commerce.cgi?pid=145&log_pid=yes .

  * Majumdar, R.C.; Raychaudhuri, H.C.; Datta, Kalikinkar (1967), An Advanced History of India (3rd ed.), London: Macmillan, pp. 1126 .

  * Markovits, Claude, ed. (2004), A History of Modern India 1480-1950, London: Anthem, pp. 607, ISBN 1843311526 .

  * Metcalf, Barbara D.; Metcalf, Thomas R. (2006), A Concise History of Modern India (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp. 337, ISBN 0521682258 .

  * Metcalf, Thomas R. (1990), The Aftermath of Revolt: India, 1857-1870, New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 352, ISBN 8185054991 .

  * Metcalf, Thomas R. (1997), Ideologies of the Raj, Cambridge University Press, pp. 256, ISBN 0521589371 .

  * Mukherjee, Rudrangshu (2002), Awadh in Revolt 1857-1858: A Study of Popular Resistance (2nd ed.), London: Anthem, ISBN 1843310759 .

  * Palmer, Julian A.B. (1966), The Mutiny Outbreak at Meerut in 1857, Cambridge University Press, pp. 175 .

  * Ray, Rajat Kanta (2002), The Felt Community: Commonality and Mentality before the Emergence of Indian Nationalism, Oxford University Press, pp. 596, ISBN 0195658639 .

  * Robb, Peter (2002), A History of India, Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 344, ISBN 0333691296 .

  * Roy, Tapti (1994), The politics of a popular uprising: Bundelkhand 1857, Delhi: Oxford University Press, pp. 291, ISBN 0195636120 .

  * Stanley, Peter (1998), White Mutiny: British Military Culture in India, 1825-1875, London: Hurst, pp. 314, ISBN 1850653305 .

  * Stein, Burton (2001), A History of India, New Delhi: Oxford University Press, pp. 432, ISBN 0195654463 .

  * Stokes, Eric (1980), The Peasant and the Raj: Studies in Agrarian Society and Peasant Rebellion in Colonial India, Cambridge University Press, pp. 316, ISBN 0521297702 .

  * Stokes, Eric; Bayly, C.A. (ed.) (1986), The Peasant Armed: The Indian Revolt of 1857, Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 280, ISBN 0198215703 .

  * Taylor, P.J.O. (1997), What really happened during the mutiny: a day-by-day account of the major events of 1857-1859 in India, Delhi: Oxford University Press, pp. 323, ISBN 0195641825 .

  * Wolpert, Stanley (2004), A New History of India (7th ed.), Oxford University Press, pp. 530, ISBN 0195166787 .

### [edit] Articles in journals and collections

  * Alavi, Seema (Feb., 1993), "The Company Army and Rural Society: The Invalid Thanah 1780-1830", Modern Asian Studies 27 (1): 147-178, <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0026-749X%28199302%2927%3A1%3C147%3ATCAARS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T>
  * Baker, David (1991), "Colonial Beginnings and the Indian Response: The Revolt of 1857-58 in Madhya Pradesh", Modern Asian Studies 25 (3): 511-543, <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0026-749X%28199107%2925%3A3%3C511%3ACBATIR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-6>
  * Blunt, Alison (July, 2000), "Embodying war: British women and domestic defilement in the Indian Â«MutinyÂ», 1857â8", Journal of Historical Geography 26 (3): 403-428, DOI 10.1006/jhge.2000.0236
  * English, Barbara (Feb., 1994), "The Kanpur Massacres in India in the Revolt of 1857", Past and Present (no. 142): 169-178, <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0031-2746%28199402%290%3A142%3C169%3ATKMIII%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L>
  * Frykenberg, Robert E., "India to 1858", in Winks, Robin, Oxford History of the British Empire: Historiography, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2001, 194-213, ISBN 0199246807
  * Hasan, Farhad (1998), "Review of Tapti Roy, The Politics of a Popular Uprising, OUP, 1994.", Social Scientist 26 (1): 148-151.
  * Klein, Ira (2000), "Materialism, Mutiny and Modernization in British India", Modern Asian Studies 34 (3): 545-580, <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0026-749X%28200007%2934%3A3%3C545%3AMMAMIB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I>
  * Lahiri, Nayanjot (Jun., 2003), "Commemorating and Remembering 1857: The Revolt in Delhi and Its Afterlife", World Archaeology 35 (1): 35-60, <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0043-8243%28200306%2935%3A1%3C35%3ACAR1TR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C>
  * Mukherjee, Rudrangshu (Aug., 1990), "'Satan Let Loose upon Earth': The Kanpur Massacres in India in the Revolt of 1857", Past and Present (no. 128): 92-116, <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0031-2746%28199008%290%3A128%3C92%3A%22LLUET%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2>
  * Mukherjee, Rudrangshu (Feb., 1994), "The Kanpur Massacres in India in the Revolt of 1857: Reply", Past and Present (no. 142): 178-189, <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0031-2746%28199402%290%3A142%3C178%3ATKMIII%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J>
  * Nanda, Krishan (1965), The Western Political Quarterly, Vol. 18, No. 3 (Sep., 1965), pp. 700-701, University of Utah on behalf of the Western Political Science Association.
  * Roy, Tapti (Feb., 1993), "Visions of the Rebels: A Study of 1857 in Bundelkhand", Modern Asian Studies 27 (1): 205-228 (Special Issue: How Social, Political and Cultural Information Is Collected, Defined, Used and Analyzed), <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0026-749X%28199302%2927%3A1%3C205%3AVOTRAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P>
  * Stokes, Eric (Dec., 1969), "Rural Revolt in the Great Rebellion of 1857 in India: A Study of the Saharanpur and Muzaffarnagar Districts", The Historical Journal 12 (4): 696-627, <http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0018-246X%28196912%2912%3A4%3C606%3ARRITGR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P>
  * Washbrook, D. A., "India, 1818-1860: The Two Faces of Colonialism", in Porter, Andrew, Oxford History of the British Empire: The Nineteenth Century, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2001, 395-421, ISBN 0199246785

### [edit] Other histories

  * Dalrymple, William. 2006. The Last Mughal. Viking Penguin, 2006, ISBN 0-67099-925-3
  * David, Saul (2003), The Indian Mutiny: 1857, London: Penguin Books, Pp. 528, ISBN 0141005548
  * Mishra, Amaresh. 2007. War of Civilisations: The Long Revolution (India AD 1857, 2 Vols.), ISBN 9788129112828
  * Ward, Andrew. Our Bones Are Scattered. New York: Holt & Co., 1996.

### [edit] First person accounts and classic histories

  * Barter, Captain Richard The Siege of Delhi. Mutiny memories of an old officer, London, The Folio Society, 1984.
  * Campbell, Sir Colin. Narrative of the Indian Revolt. London: George Vickers, 1858.
  * Collier, Richard. The Great Indian Mutiny. New York: Dutton, 1964.
  * Kaye, John William. A History of the Sepoy War In India (3 vols). London: W.H. Allen & Co., 1878.
  * Forrest, George W. "A History of the Indian Mutiny", William Blackwood and Sons, London, 1904. (4 vols).
  * Fitchett, W.H., B.A.,LL.D., A Tale of the Great Mutiny, Smith, Elder & Co., London, 1911.
  * Innes, Lt. General McLeod: The Sepoy Revolt, A.D. Innes & Co., London, 1897.
  * Kaye, Sir John & Malleson, G.B.: The Indian Mutiny of 1857, Rupa & Co., Delhi, (1st edition 1890) reprint 2005.
  * Khan, Syed Ahmed (1859), Asbab-e Baghawat-e Hind'', Translated as The Causes of the Indian Revolt, Allahabad, 1873
  * Malleson, Colonel G.B. The Indian Mutiny of 1857. New York: Scribner & Sons, 1891.
  * Marx, Karl & Freidrich Engels. The First Indian War of Independence 1857-1859. Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1959.
  * Pandey, Sita Ram, From Sepoy to Subedar, Being the Life and Adventures of Subedar Sita Ram, a Native Officer of the Bengal Native Army, Written and Related by Himself, trans. Lt. Col. Norgate, (Lahore: Bengal Staff Corps, 1873), ed. James Lunt, (Delhi: Vikas Publications, 1970).
  * Raikes, Charles: Notes on the Revolt in the North-Western Provinces of India, Longman, London, 1858.
  * Roberts, Field Marshal Lord, Forty-one Years in India, Richard Bentley, London, 1897 Forty-one years in India at Project Gutenberg
  * Russell, William Howard, My Diary in India in the years 1858-9, Routledge, London, 1860, (2 vols.)
  * Sen, Surendra Nath, Eighteen fifty-seven, (with a foreword by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad), Indian Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Delhi, 1957.
  * Thomson, Mowbray (Capt.), "The Story of Cawnpore: The Indian Mutiny 1857", Donovan, London, 1859.
  * Trevelyan, Sir George Otto, Cawnpore, Indus, Delhi, (first edition 1865), reprint 2002.
  * Wilberforce, Reginald G, An Unrecorded Chapter of the Indian Mutiny, Being the Personal Reminiscences of Reginald G. WIlberforce, Late 52nd Infantry, Compiled from a Diary and Letters Written on the Spot London: John Murray 1884, facsimile reprint: Gurgaon: The Academic Press, 1976.

### [edit] Tertiary Sources

  * "Indian Mutiny." Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Online. http://www.eb.com:180/cgi-bin/g?DocF=micro/342/91.html. 23 March 1998.
  * "Lee-Enfield Rifle." Encyclopedia Britannica Online. 23 March 1998.

### [edit] Fictional & Narrative Literature

  * Conan Doyle, Arthur "The Sign of the Four" short story feathuring Sherlock Holmes originally appearing in Lippincott's Monthly Magazine 1890\. Reprinted.
  * Farrell, J.G. The Siege of Krishnapur. New York: Carroll & Graf, 1985 (orig. 1973; Booker Prize winner).
  * Fenn, Clive Robert. For the Old Flag: A Tale of the Mutiny. London: Sampson Low, 1899.
  * Grant, James. First Love and Last Love: A Tale of the Mutiny. New York: G. Routledge & Sons, 1869.
  * Kaye, Mary Margaret. Shadow of the Moon. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1979.
  * Kilworth, Garry Douglas. Brothers of the Blade: Constable & Robinson, 2004.
  * Masters, John. Nightrunners of Bengal. New York: Viking Press, 1951.
  * Raikes, William Stephen. 12 Years of a Soldier's Life In India. Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1860.
  * Rossetti, Christina Georgina. "In the Round Tower at Jhansi, June 8, 1857." Goblin Market and Other Poems. 1862.
  * Anurag Kumar. Recalcitrance: a novel based on events of 1857-58 in Lucknow. Lucknow: AIP Books, Lucknow 2008.
  * Stuart, V.A. The Alexander Sheridan Series: # 2: 1964. The Sepoy Mutiny; # 3: 1974. Massacre at Cawnpore; # 4: 1974. The Cannons of Lucknow; 1975. # 5: The Heroic Garrison. Reprinted 2003 by McBooks Press. (Note: # 1 - Victors & Lords deals with the Crimean War.)

## [edit] See also

  * Category:Places of Indian Rebellion of 1857
  * Vellore Mutiny
  * Titumir
  * British Raj
  * John Paton (VC)
  * History of South Asia
  * List of wars of independence
  * List of revolutions and rebellions
  * Timeline of the Indian Rebellion of 1857
  * East India Company
  * Recalcitrance
  * Indian Mutiny Medal

## [edit] External links

  * http://www.columbia.edu/itc/mealac/pritchett/00routesdata/1800_1899/1857revolt/nanasahib/nanasahib.html
  * Sepoy Blog, A day by day account of 1857 Rebellion
  * Truth behind 1857 panthic.org part I, part II, part III
  * First War of Independence - Sify
  * 1857 first freedom fight:: à¥§à¥®à¥«à¥­ :: à¤ à¤à¤à¤¡ à¤­à¤¾à¤°à¤¤à¤®à¥
  * 1857 was not the first war of Independence
  * Development of Situation-January to July 1857 - Maj (Retd) AGHA HUMAYUN AMIN from WASHINGTON DC defencejounal.com
  * The Library of Congress (US) - Research Centers - Country Study - India @ 1857
  * Alexander Ganse (World History at KMLA - Mutiny 1857
  * The Sepoy War of 1857 - Emory.edu
  * The Indian Mutiny BritishEmpire.co.uk
  * Paintings related to events of 1857
  * British Army Official Records of the Era
  * Karl Marx, New York Tribune, 1853-1858, The Revolt in India marxists.org
  * In Pictures: Rare images of the 1857 uprising in India, BBC News, 12 May 2007
  * India Rising National Army Museum (UK)
  * A Great British Tradition, John Newsinger on the Great Indian Rebellion, Socialist Review, May 2007.
  * Narrative of Munshi Jeewan Lal

v â¢ d â¢ e

Indian independence movement  
History

Colonisation Â· East India Company Â· British India Â· French India Â·
Portuguese India Â· Plassey Â· Buxar Â· Anglo-Mysore Wars Â· Anglo-Maratha
Wars (First Â· Second Â· Third) Â· First Anglo-Sikh War Â· Second Anglo-Sikh
War Â· British Raj Â· more

Gandhi during the Salt March, 1930  
  
Gandhi during the Salt March, 1930  
  
Congress flag of India \(1931\)  
  
Flag of Azad Hind  
Philosophies  
and ideologies

Indian nationalism Â· Swaraj Â· Hindu nationalism Â· Gandhism Â· Satyagraha Â·
Indian Muslim nationalism Â· Swadeshi Â· Socialism Â· Khilafat Movement  
Events and  
movements

Polygar War Â· Vellore Mutiny Â· Rebellion of 1857 Â· Partition of Bengal Â·
Revolutionaries Â· Delhi-Lahore Conspiracy Â· The Indian Sociologist Â· The
Sedetious conspiracy Â· Champaran and Kheda Â· Rowlatt Committee Â· Rowlatt
Bills Â· Jallianwala Bagh Massacre Â· Non-Cooperation Â· Qissa Khwani bazaar
massacre Â· Flag Satyagraha Â· Bardoli Â· 1928 Protests Â· Nehru Report Â·
Purna Swaraj Â· Salt Satyagraha Â· Round table conferences Â· Act of 1935 Â·
Legion Freies Indien Â· Cripps' mission Â· Quit India Â· Indian National Army
Â· Tiger Legion Â· Bombay Mutiny Â· Coup d'Ãtat de Yanaon Â· Provisional
Government of India  
Organisations

Indian National Congress Â· Anushilan Samiti Â· Jugantar Â· Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh Â· India House Â· Berlin Committee Â· Ghadar Â· Home Rule Â·
Khaksar Tehrik Â· Khudai Khidmatgar Â· Hindustan Republican Association Â·
Swaraj Party Â· Indian Independence League Â· Azad Hind Â· more  
Social  
reformers

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi Â· Mahatma Jyotirao Phule Â· Gopal Ganesh Agarkar
Â· Shahu Maharaj Â· Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Â· Dhondo Keshav Karve Â· Vitthal
Ramji Shinde Â· Mahadev Govind Ranade Â· Swami Dayananda Saraswati Â·
Ramakrishna Â· Swami Vivekananda Â· Vinoba Bhave Â· Baba Amte Â· Ram Mohan Roy
Â· Gopal Hari Deshmukh  
Indian leaders  
and activists

Puli Thevar Â· Yashwantrao Holkar Â· Veerapandiya Kattabomman Â· Sangolli
Rayanna Â· Baba Ram Singh Â· Mangal Pandey Â· Veer Kunwar Singh Â· Rae Ahmed
Nawaz Khan Kharalâ Â· Rani of Jhansi Â· Bahadur Shah Zafar Â· Bal Gangadhar
Tilak Â· Gopal Krishna Gokhale Â· Dadabhai Naoroji Â· Bhikaiji Cama Â· Shyamji
Krishna Varma Â· Annie Besant Â· Har Dayal Â· Subramanya Bharathi Â· Lala
Lajpat Rai Â· Bipin Chandra Pal Â· Rash Behari Bose Â· Chittaranjan Das Â·
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan Â· Maulana Azad Â· Chandrasekhar Azad Â· Rajaji Â·
Bhagat Singh Â· Sarojini Naidu Â· Purushottam Das Tandon Â· Alluri
Sitaramaraju Â· M. Ali Jinnah Â· Sardar Patel Â· Subhash Chandra Bose Â·
Jawaharlal Nehru Â· Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi Â· Allama Mashriqi Â· Akkamma
Cherian Â· Swadeshabhimani Ramakrishna Pillai Â· more  
British leaders

Robert Clive Â· James Outram Â· Dalhousie Â· Irwin Â· Linlithgow Â· Wavell Â·
Stafford Cripps Â· Mountbatten Â· more  
Independence

Cabinet Mission Â· Indian Independence Act Â· Partition of India Â· Political
integration Â· Constitution Â· Republic of India  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_Rebellion_of_1857"

Categories: Indian Rebellion of 1857 | British rule in India | British East
India Company | Military of British India | Mutinies | Rebellions in India |
Rebellions in Asia | Wars involving India | Wars involving the United Kingdom
| 1857 in India | 1858 in India

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since December 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since April 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 10:30.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



