
# Anthrax

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the disease. For other uses, see Anthrax
(disambiguation).

<IMG>

This article may require copy-editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone or
spelling. You can assist by editing it now. A how-to guide is available.
(March 2009)  
Anthrax  
Classification and external resources  
<IMG>  
Microphotograph of a Gram stain the bacterium Bacillus anthracis which causes
anthrax.  
ICD-10 A22.minor  
ICD-9 022  
OMIM [2] 606410 608041  
DiseasesDB 1203  
MedlinePlus 001325  
eMedicine med/148  
MeSH D000881  
Anthrax is an acute disease in humans and animals caused by Bacillus
anthracis, which is highly lethal in all forms. There are effective vaccines
against anthrax, and some forms of the disease respond well to antibiotic
treatment.

The anthrax bacillus is one of only a few that can form long-lived spores: in
a hostile environment, caused perhaps by the death of an infected host or
extremes of temperature, the bacteria produce inactive dormant spores which
can remain viable for many decades and perhaps centuries. These spores are
found on all continents except Antarctica. When spores are inhaled, ingested,
or come into contact with a skin lesion on a host they reactivate and multiply
rapidly.

Anthrax most commonly infects wild and domesticated herbivorous mammals which
ingest or inhale the spores while eating grass or browsing. Ingestion is
assumed to be the most common route by which herbivores contract anthrax, but
this is yet to be proven. Carnivores living in the same environment may ingest
infected animals and become infected themselves. Anthrax can also infect
humans when they are exposed to blood and other tissues from infected animals
(via inhalation or direct inoculation through broken skin), eat tissue from
infected animals, or are exposed to a high density of anthrax spores from an
animal's fur, hide, or wool.

Anthrax spores can be grown in vitro and used as a biological weapon. Anthrax
does not spread directly from one infected animal or person to another, but
spores can be transported by clothing, shoes etc.; and the body of a mammal
that died of anthrax can be a very dangerous source of anthrax spores.

The name anthrax comes from anthrakitis, the Greek word for anthracite (coal),
in reference to the black skin lesions victims develop in a cutaneous skin
infection.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Description of the bacterium
  * 3 Exposure
  * 4 Mode of infection
    * 4.1 Pulmonary (pneumonic, respiratory, or inhalational) anthrax
    * 4.2 Gastrointestinal (gastroenteric) anthrax
    * 4.3 Cutaneous (skin) anthrax
  * 5 Treatment and prevention
  * 6 Anthrax vaccines
  * 7 Site cleanup
  * 8 History
    * 8.1 Discovery
    * 8.2 First vaccination
  * 9 Biological warfare
    * 9.1 Soviet accident: April 2, 1979
    * 9.2 Anthrax bioterrorism
    * 9.3 Decontaminating mail
  * 10 See also
  * 11 References
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

<IMG>

<IMG>

Color-enhanced scanning electron micrograph shows splenic tissue from a monkey
with inhalational anthrax; featured are rod-shaped bacilli (yellow) and an
erythrocyte (red).

Anthrax is one of the oldest recorded diseases of grazing animals such as
sheep and cattle and is believed to be the Sixth Plague mentioned in the Book
of Exodus in the Bible.[1] Anthrax is also mentioned by Greek and Roman
authors such as Homer (in The Iliad), Virgil (Georgics), and Hippocrates.
Anthrax can also infect humans, usually as the result of coming into contact
with infected animal hides, fur, wool ("Woolsorter's disease"), leather or
contaminated soil. Anthrax ("siberian ulcer" [2]) is now fairly rare in
humans, although it still regularly occurs in ruminants, such as cattle,
sheep, goats, camels, wild buffalo, and antelopes, in hind-gut fermenters such
as zebras and rhinos, and in other wildlife such as elephants and lions in
certain endemic areas of the world.

Bacillus anthracis bacteria spores are soil-borne and because of their long
lifetime, they are still present globally and at animal burial sites of
anthrax-killed animals for many decades; spores have been known to have
reinfected animals over 70 years after burial sites of anthrax-infected
animals were disturbed. [3]

Until the twentieth century, anthrax infections killed hundreds and thousands
of animals and people each year in Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and
Southern Vietnam, specifically in the concentration camps during WWI, and
North America.[4] French scientist Louis Pasteur developed the first effective
vaccine for anthrax in 1881.[5][6][7] Thanks to over a century of animal
vaccination programs, sterilization of raw animal waste materials and anthrax
eradication programs in North America, Australia, New Zealand, Russia, Europe
and parts of Africa and Asia, anthrax infection is now relatively rare in
domestic animals with normally only a few dozen cases reported every year.
Anthrax is even rarer in dogs and cats: there had only ever been one
documented case in dogs in the USA by 2001, although the disease affects
livestock.[8] Anthrax typically does not cause disease in carnivores and
scavengers, even when these animals consume anthrax-infected carcasses.
Anthrax outbreaks do occur in some wild animal populations with some
regularity.[9] The disease is more common in developing countries without
widespread veterinary or human public health programs.

There are 89 known strains of anthrax. The virulent Ames strain, which had
been used in the 2001 anthrax attacks in the United States, has received the
most news coverage of any anthrax outbreak. However, the Vollum strain,
developed but never used as a biological weapon during the Second World War,
is much more dangerous. The Vollum (also incorrectly referred to as Vellum)
strain was isolated in 1935 from a cow in Oxfordshire, UK. This is the same
strain that was used during the Gruinard bioweapons trials. A variation of
Vollum known as "Vollum 1B" was used during the 1960s in the US and UK
bioweapon programs. Vollum 1B was isolated from William A. Boyles, a 46-year-
old USAMRIID scientist who died in 1951 after being accidentally infected with
the Vollum strain. The Sterne strain, named after a South African researcher,
is an attenuated strain used as a vaccine.

## [edit] Description of the bacterium

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gram-positive anthrax bacteria (purple rods) in cerebrospinal fluid sample. If
present, a Gram-negative bacterial species would appear pink. (The other cells
are white blood cells).

Main article: Bacillus anthracis

Bacillus anthracis is a rod-shaped Gram-positive bacterium, about 1 by 9
micrometers in size. It was shown to cause disease by Robert Koch in 1877.[7]
The bacterium normally rests in endospore form in the soil, and can survive
for up to decades in this state. Herbivores are often infected whilst grazing
or browsing, especially when eating rough, irritant or spiky vegetation: the
vegetation has been hypothesized to cause wounds within the gastrointestinal
tract permitting entry of the bacterial endo-spores into the tissues, though
this has not been proven. Once ingested or placed in an open cut, the
bacterium begins multiplying inside the animal or human and typically kills
the host within a few days or weeks. The endo-spores germinate at the site of
entry into the tissues and then spread via the circulation to the lymphatics,
where the bacteria multiply. It is the production of two powerful exo-toxins
(edema toxin and lethal toxin) by the bacteria that causes death.
Veterinarians can often tell a possible anthrax-induced death by its sudden
occurrence, and by the dark, non-clotting blood that oozes from the body
orifices. Most anthrax bacteria inside the body after death are out-competed
and destroyed by anaerobic bacteria within minutes to hours post-mortem.
However, anthrax vegetative bacteria that escape the body via oozing blood or
through the opening of the carcass may form hardy spores. One spore forms per
one vegetative bacterium. The triggers for spore formation are not yet known,
though oxygen tension and lack of nutrients may play roles. Once formed, these
spores are very hard to eradicate.

The infection of herbivores (and occasionally humans) via the inhalational
route normally proceeds as follows: once the spores are inhaled, they are
transported through the air passages into the tiny air sacs (alveoli) in the
lungs. The spores are then picked up by scavenger cells (macrophages) in the
lungs and are transported through small vessels (lymphatics) to the lymph
nodes in the central chest cavity (mediastinum). Damage caused by the anthrax
spores and bacilli to the central chest cavity can cause chest pain and
difficulty breathing. Once in the lymph nodes, the spores germinate into
active bacilli which multiply and eventually burst the macrophages, releasing
many more bacilli into the bloodstream to be transferred to the entire body.
Once in the blood stream these bacilli release three substances: lethal
factor, oedema factor and protective antigen. Protective antigen combines with
these other two factors to form lethal toxin and oedema toxin, respectively.
These toxins are the primary agents of tissue destruction, bleeding, and death
of the host. If antibiotics are administered too late, even if the antibiotics
eradicate the bacteria, some hosts will still die. This is because the toxins
produced by the bacilli remain in their system at lethal dose levels.

In order to enter the cells, the edema and lethal factors use another protein
produced by B. anthracis, protective antigen. Oedema factor inactivates
neutrophils (a type of phagocytic cell) so that they cannot phagocytose
bacteria. Historically, it was believed that lethal factor caused macrophages
to make TNF-alpha and interleukin 1, beta (IL1B), both normal components of
the immune system used to induce an inflammatory reaction, ultimately leading
to septic shock and death. However, recent evidence indicates that anthrax
also targets endothelial cells (cells that lines serous cavities, lymph
vessels, and blood vessels), causing vascular leakage of fluid and cells, and
ultimately hypovolemic shock (low blood volume), and septic shock.

The virulence of a strain of anthrax is dependent on multiple factors,
primarily the poly-D-glutamic acid capsule that protects the bacterium from
phagocytosis by host neutrophils and its toxins, edema toxin and lethal toxin.

## [edit] Exposure

Occupational exposure to infected animals or their products (such as skin wool
and meat) is the usual pathway of exposure for humans. Workers who are exposed
to dead animals and animal products are at the highest risk, especially in
countries where anthrax is more common. Anthrax in livestock grazing on open
range where they mix with wild animals still occasionally occurs in the United
States and elsewhere. Many workers who deal with wool and animal hides are
routinely exposed to low levels of anthrax spores but most exposures are not
sufficient to develop anthrax infections. Presumably, the bodyâs natural
defenses can destroy low levels of exposure. These people usually contract
cutaneous anthrax if they catch anything. Historically, the most dangerous
form of inhalational anthrax was called Woolsorters' disease because it was an
occupational hazard for people who sorted wool. Today this form of infection
is extremely rare, as almost no infected animals remain. The last fatal case
of natural inhalational anthrax in the United States occurred in California in
1976, when a home weaver died after working with infected wool imported from
Pakistan. The autopsy was done at UCLA hospital. To minimize the chance of
spreading the disease, the deceased was transported to UCLA in a sealed
plastic body bag within a sealed metal container.[10]

In November 2008, a drum maker in the United Kingdom who worked with untreated
animal skins became the latest person to die from anthrax.[11]

## [edit] Mode of infection

<IMG>

<IMG>

Inhalational anthrax - Mediastinal widening

Anthrax can enter the human body through the intestines (ingestion), lungs
(inhalation), or skin (cutaneous) and causes distinct clinical symptoms based
on its site of entry. An infected human will generally be quarantined.
However, anthrax does not usually spread from an infected human to a
noninfected human. But if the disease is fatal the personâs body and its
mass of anthrax bacilli becomes a potential source of infection to others and
special precautions should be used to prevent further contamination.
Inhalational anthrax, if left untreated until obvious symptoms occur, may be
fatal.

Anthrax can be contracted in laboratory accidents or by handling infected
animals or their wool or hides. It has also been used in biological warfare
agents and by terrorists to intentionally infect humans, as occurred in, for
example, the 2001 anthrax attacks.

### [edit] Pulmonary (pneumonic, respiratory, or inhalational) anthrax

Respiratory infection in humans initially presents with cold or flu-like
symptoms for several days, followed by severe (and often fatal) respiratory
collapse. This disease can rarely be treated, even if caught in early stages
of infection; mortality is nearly 100%.[12] A lethal infection is reported to
result from inhalation of about 10,000â20,000 spores, though this dose
varies amongst host species.[13] Like all diseases there is probably a wide
variation to susceptibility with evidence that some people may die from much
lower exposures; there is little documented evidence to verify the exact or
average number of spores needed for infection. Inhalational anthrax is also
known as woolsorters' or ragpickers' disease as these professions were more
susceptible to the disease due to their exposure to infected animal products.
Other practices associated with exposure include the slicing up of animal
horns for the manufacture of buttons, the handling of hair bristles used for
the manufacturing of brushes, and the handling of animal skins. Whether these
animal skins came from animals that died of the disease or from animals that
had simply laid on ground that had spores on it is unknown. This mode of
infection is used as a bioweapon.

### [edit] Gastrointestinal (gastroenteric) anthrax

Gastrointestinal infection in humans is most often caused by eating anthrax-
infected meat and is characterized by serious gastrointestinal difficulty,
vomiting of blood, severe diarrhea, acute inflammation of the intestinal
tract, and loss of appetite. Some lesions have been found in the intestines
and in the mouth and throat. After the bacteria invades the bowel system, it
spreads through the bloodstream throughout the body, making even more toxins
on the way. Gastrointestinal infections can be treated but usually result in
fatality rates of 25% to 60%, depending upon how soon treatment commences.
[14]

### [edit] Cutaneous (skin) anthrax

<IMG>

<IMG>

Anthrax skin lesion.

Cutaneous (on the skin) anthrax infection in humans shows up as a boil-like
skin lesion that eventually forms an ulcer with a black centre (eschar). The
black eschar often shows up as a large, painless necrotic ulcer (beginning as
an irritating and itchy skin lesion or blister that is dark and usually
concentrated as a black dot, somewhat resembling bread mold) at the site of
infection. Cutaneous infections generally form within the site of spore
penetration between 2 and 5 days after exposure. Unlike bruises or most other
lesions, cutaneous anthrax infections normally do not cause pain. [14]

Cutaneous anthrax is rarely fatal if treated[12], but without treatment about
20% of cutaneous skin infection cases progress to toxemia and death.

## [edit] Treatment and prevention

Anthrax cannot be spread directly from person to person, but a patientâs
clothing and body may be contaminated with anthrax spores. Effective
decontamination of people can be accomplished by a thorough wash down with
antimicrobial effective soap and water. Waste water should be treated with
bleach or other anti-microbial agent. Effective decontamination of articles
can be accomplished by boiling contaminated articles in water for 30 minutes
or longer. Chlorine bleach is ineffective in destroying spores and vegetative
cells on surfaces, though formaldehyde is effective. Burning clothing is very
effective in destroying spores. After decontamination, there is no need to
immunize, treat or isolate contacts of persons ill with anthrax unless they
were also exposed to the same source of infection. Early antibiotic treatment
of anthrax is essentialâdelay seriously lessens chances for survival.
Treatment for anthrax infection and other bacterial infections includes large
doses of intravenous and oral antibiotics, such as fluoroquinolones, like
ciprofloxacin (cipro), doxycycline, erythromycin, vancomycin or penicillin. In
possible cases of inhalation anthrax, early antibiotic prophylaxis treatment
is crucial to prevent possible death. If death occurs from anthrax the body
should be isolated to prevent possible spread of anthrax germs. Burial does
not kill anthrax spores.

If a person is suspected as having died from anthrax, every precaution should
be taken to avoid skin contact with the potentially contaminated body and
fluids exuded through natural body openings. The body should be put in strict
quarantine. A blood sample taken in a sealed container and analyzed in an
approved lab should be used to ascertain if anthrax is the cause of death.
Microscopic visualization of the encapsulated bacilli, usually in very large
numbers, in a blood smear stained with polychrome methylene blue (McFadyean
stain) is fully diagnostic, though culture of the organism is still the gold
standard for diagnosis. Full isolation of the body is important to prevent
possible contamination of others. Protective, impermeable clothing and
equipment such as rubber gloves, rubber apron, and rubber boots with no
perforations should be used when handling the body. No skin, especially if it
has any wounds or scratches, should be exposed. Disposable personal protective
equipment is preferable, but if not available, decontamination can be achieved
by autoclaving. Disposable personal protective equipment and filters should be
autoclaved, and/or burned and buried. Bacillus anthracis bacillii range from
0.5-5.0 Î¼m in size. Anyone working with anthrax in a suspected or confirmed
victim should wear respiratory equipment capable of filtering this size of
particle or smaller. The US National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) and Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) approved high
efficiency-respirator, such as a half-face disposable respirator with a high-
efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter, is recommended. All possibly
contaminated bedding or clothing should be isolated in double plastic bags and
treated as possible bio-hazard waste. The victim should be sealed in an
airtight body bag. Dead victims that are opened and not burned provide an
ideal source of anthrax spores. Cremating victims is the preferred way of
handling body disposal. No embalming or autopsy should be attempted without a
fully equipped biohazard lab and trained and knowledgeable personnel.

Delays of only a few days may make the disease untreatable and treatment
should be started even without symptoms if possible contamination or exposure
is suspected. Animals with anthrax often just die without any apparent
symptoms. Initial symptoms may resemble a common cold â sore throat, mild
fever, muscle aches and malaise. After a few days, the symptoms may progress
to severe breathing problems and shock and ultimately death. Death can occur
from about two days to a month after exposure with deaths apparently peaking
at about 8 days after exposure. [15] Antibiotic-resistant strains of anthrax
are known.

In recent years there have been many attempts to develop new drugs against
anthrax, but existing drugs are effective if treatment is started soon enough.

Early detection of sources of anthrax infection can allow preventative
measures to be taken. In response to the anthrax attacks of October, 2001 the
United States Postal Service (USPS) installed BioDetection Systems (BDS) in
their large scale mail cancellation facilities. BDS response plans were
formulated by the USPS in conjunction with local responders including fire,
police, hospitals and public health. Employees of these facilities have been
educated about anthrax, response actions and prophylactic medication. Because
of the time delay inherent in getting final verification that anthrax has been
used, prophylactic antibiotic treatment of possibly exposed personnel must be
started as soon as possible.

The most effective form of prevention is vaccination against infection but
this must be done well in advance of exposure to the bacillus, and does not
protect indefinitely.

Components of tea, such as polyphenols, have the ability to inhibit the
activity both of bacillus anthracis and its toxin considerably; spores,
however, are not affected. The addition of milk to the tea completely inhibits
its antibacterial activity against anthrax[16]. Activity against the anthrax
bacillum in the laboratory does not prove that drinking tea affects the course
of an infection.

## [edit] Anthrax vaccines

An FDA-licensed vaccine, produced from one non-virulent strain of the anthrax
bacterium, is manufactured by BioPort Corporation, subsidiary of Emergent
BioSolutions. The trade name is BioThrax, although it is commonly called
Anthrax Vaccine Adsorbed (AVA). It is administered in a six-dose primary
series at 0,2,4 weeks and 6,12,18 months; annual booster injections are
required thereafter to maintain immunity. The injections are typically very
painful, and may leave the area of injection with swelling; this area may be
painful for several days.

Unlike the West, the Soviets developed and used a live spore anthrax vaccine,
known as the STI vaccine, produced in Tbilisi, Georgia. Its serious side
effects restrict use to healthy adults.[17]

## [edit] Site cleanup

Anthrax spores can survive for long periods of time in the environment after
release. Methods for cleaning anthrax-contaminated sites commonly use
oxidizing agents such as peroxides, ethylene oxide, Sandia Foam,[18] chlorine
dioxide (used in Hart Senate office building), and liquid bleach products
containing sodium hypochlorite. These agents slowly destroy bacterial spores.
A bleach solution for treating hard surfaces has been approved by the EPA.[19]
It can be prepared by mixing one part bleach (5.25%-6.00%) to one part white
vinegar to eight parts water. Bleach and vinegar must not be combined together
directly, as doing so could produce chlorine gas. Rather some water must first
be added to the bleach (e.g., two cups water to one cup of bleach), then
vinegar (e.g., one cup), and then the rest of the water (e.g., six cups). The
pH of the solution should be tested with a paper test strip; and treated
surfaces must remain in contact with the bleach solution for 60 minutes
(repeated applications will be necessary to keep the surfaces wet).

Chlorine dioxide has emerged as the preferred biocide against anthrax-
contaminated sites, having been employed in the treatment of numerous
government buildings over the past decade. Its chief drawback is the need for
in situ processes to have the reactant on demand.

To speed the process, trace amounts of a non-toxic catalyst composed of iron
and tetro-amido macrocyclic ligands are combined with sodium carbonate and
bicarbonate and converted into a spray. The spray formula is applied to an
infested area and is followed by another spray containing tertiary-butyl
hydroperoxide.[citation needed]

Using the catalyst method, a complete destruction of all anthrax spores takes
30 minutes.[citation needed] A standard catalyst-free spray destroys fewer
than half the spores in the same amount of time. They can be heated, exposed
to the harshest chemicals, and they do not easily die.

Cleanups at a Senate office building, several contaminated postal facilities
and other U.S. government and private office buildings showed that
decontamination is possible, but it is time-consuming and costly. Clearing the
Senate office building of anthrax spores cost $27 million, according to the
Government Accountability Office. Cleaning the Brentwood postal facility
outside Washington cost $130 million and took 26 months. Since then newer and
less costly methods have been developed.[20]

Clean up of anthrax-contaminated areas on ranches and in the wild is much more
problematic. Carcasses may be burned, though it often takes up to three days
to burn a large carcass and this is not feasible in areas with little wood.
Carcasses may be buried, though the burying of large animals deeply enough to
prevent resurfacing of spores requires much manpower and expensive tools.
Carcasses have been soaked in formaldehyde to kill spores, though this has
obvious environmental contamination issues. Block burning of vegetation in
large areas enclosing an anthrax outbreak has been tried; this, while
environmentally destructive, causes healthy animals to move away from an area
with carcasses in search of fresh graze and browse. Some wildlife workers have
experimented with covering fresh anthrax carcasses with shadecloth and heavy
objects. This prevents some scavengers from opening the carcasses, thus
allowing the putrefactive bacteria within the carcass to kill the vegetative
B. anthracis cells and preventing sporulation. This method also has drawbacks,
as scavengers such as hyenas are capable of infiltrating almost any exclosure.
The occurrence of previously dormant anthrax, stirred up from below the ground
surface by wind movement in a drought-stricken region with depleted grazing
and browsing, may be seen as a form of natural culling and a first step in
rehabilitation of the area.

## [edit] History

### [edit] Discovery

Robert Koch, a German physician and scientist, first identified the bacteria
which caused the anthrax disease in 1875.[21] His pioneering work in the late
nineteenth century was one of the first demonstrations that diseases could be
caused by microbes. In a groundbreaking series of experiments he uncovered the
life cycle and means of transmission of anthrax. His experiments not only
helped create an understanding of anthrax, but also helped elucidate the role
of microbes in causing illness at a time when debates were still held over
spontaneous generation versus cell theory. Koch went on to study the
mechanisms of other diseases and was awarded the 1905 Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine for his discovery of the bacteria causing tuberculosis.
Koch is today recognized as one of history's most important biologists and a
founder of modern bacteriology.

### [edit] First vaccination

In May 1881 Louis Pasteur performed a public experiment to demonstrate his
concept of vaccination. He prepared two groups of 25 sheep, one goat and
several cows. The animals of one group were injected with an anti-anthrax
vaccine prepared by Pasteur twice, at an interval of 15 days; the control
group was left unvaccinated. Thirty days after the first injection both groups
were injected with a culture of live anthrax bacteria. All the animals in the
non-vaccinated group died, while all of the animals in the vaccinated group
survived.[22]

After mastering method of vaccination Pasteur applied the concept to rabies.
He went on to develop vaccines against small pox, cholera, and swine
erysipelas.

The human vaccine for anthrax became available in 1954. This was a cell-free
vaccine instead of the live-cell Pasteur-style vaccine used for veterinary
purposes. An improved cell-free vaccine became available in 1970.[23]

## [edit] Biological warfare

"Anthrax was first tested as a biological warfare agent by Unit 731 of the
Japanese Kwantung Army in Manchuria during the 1930s; some of this testing
involved intentional infection of prisoners of war, thousands of whom died.
Anthrax, designated at the time as Agent N, was also investigated by the
allies in the 1940s. The British army tested experimental anthrax weapons on
Gruinard Island, off the northwest coast of Scotland, in 1943. Gruinard was
burned over at least once, yet as of the late 1980s, it was still too heavily
contaminated with spores to allow unprotected human access, indicating the
hardiness of anthrax spores. Weaponized anthrax was part of the U.S. stockpile
prior to its destruction in 1972."

<IMG>

<IMG>

Colin Powell holding a model vial of anthrax while giving a presentation to
the United Nations Security Council.

Anthrax spores can and have been used as a biological warfare weapon. Its
first modern incidence occurred when Scandinavian "freedom fighters" (the
rebel groups) supplied by the German General Staff used anthrax with unknown
results against the Imperial Russian Army in Finland in 1916.[24] There is a
long history of practical bioweapons research in this area. For example, in
1942 British bioweapons trials[25] severely contaminated Gruinard Island in
Scotland with anthrax spores of the Vollum-14578 strain, making it a no-go
area until it was decontaminated in 1990.[26] The Gruinard trials involved
testing the effectiveness of a submunition of an "N-bomb"âa biological
weapon. Additionally, five million "cattle cakes" impregnated with anthrax
were prepared and stored at Porton Down in 'Operation Vegetarian'âan anti-
livestock weapon intended for attacks on Germany by the Royal Air Force[27]
The infected cattle cakes were to be dropped on Germany in 1944. However
neither the cakes nor the bomb were used; the cattle cakes were incinerated in
late 1945.

More recently the Rhodesian government used anthrax against cattle and humans
in the period 1978â1979 during its war with black nationalists.[28]

American military and British Army personnel are routinely vaccinated against
anthrax prior to active service in places where biological attacks are
considered a threat. The anthrax vaccine, produced by BioPort Corporation,
contains non-living bacteria, and is approximately 93% effective in preventing
infection.[citation needed]

Weaponized stocks of anthrax in the US were destroyed in 1971â72 after
President Nixon ordered the dismantling of US biowarfare programs in 1969 and
the destruction of all existing stockpiles of bioweapons. Research is known to
continue in the United States on ways to counteract bioweapons attacks.

The Soviet Union created and stored 100 to 200 tons of anthrax spores on
Vozrozhdeniya Island. They were abandoned in 1992 and destroyed in 2002.

### [edit] Soviet accident: April 2, 1979

Despite signing the 1972 agreement to end bioweapon production the government
of the Soviet Union had an active bioweapons program that included the
production of hundreds of tons of weapons-grade anthrax after this period. On
April 2, 1979 some of the over one million people living in Sverdlovsk (now
called Ekaterinburg, Russia), about 850 miles east of Moscow, were exposed to
an accidental release of anthrax from a biological weapons complex located
near there. At least 94 people were infected, of whom at least 68 died. One
victim died four days after the release, ten over an eight-day period at the
peak of the deaths, and the last six weeks later. Extensive cleanup,
vaccinations and medical interventions managed to save about 30 of the
victims. [29] Extensive cover-ups and destruction of records by the KGB
continued from 1979 until Russian President Boris Yeltsin admitted this
anthrax accident in 1992. Jeanne Guillemin reported in 1999 that a combined
Russian and United States team investigated the accident in 1992.[30][31][32]

Nearly all of the night shift workers of a ceramics plant directly across the
street from the biological facility (compound 19) became infected, and most
died. Since most were men, there were suspicions by Western governments that
the Soviet Union had developed a sex-specific weapon.[33] The government
blamed the outbreak on the consumption of anthrax-tainted meat and ordered the
confiscation of all uninspected meat that entered the city. They also ordered
that all stray dogs be shot and that people not have contact with sick
animals. There was also a voluntary evacuation and anthrax vaccination program
established for people from 18â55.[34]

To support the cover-up story Soviet medical and legal journals published
articles about an outbreak in livestock that caused GI anthrax in people who
consumed infected meat, and cutaneous anthrax in people who came into contact
with the animals. All medical and public health records were confiscated by
the KGB.[34] In addition to the medical problems that the outbreak caused, it
also prompted Western countries to be (justifiably) more suspicious of a
covert Soviet Bioweapons program and to increase their surveillance of
suspected sites. In 1986 the US government was allowed to investigate the
incident, and concluded that the exposure was from aerosol anthrax from a
military weapons facility.[35] In 1992, President Yeltsin admitted that he was
"absolutely certain" that "rumors" about the Soviet Union violating the 1972
Bioweapons Treaty were true. The Soviet Union, like the US and UK, had agreed
to submit information to the UN about their bioweapons programs but omitted
known facilities and never acknowledged their weapons program.[33]

### [edit] Anthrax bioterrorism

Theoretically anthrax spores can be cultivated with minimal special equipment
and a first-year collegiate microbiological education, but in practice the
procedure is difficult and dangerous. To make large amounts of an aerosol form
of anthrax suitable for biological warfare, extensive practical knowledge,
training and highly advanced equipment are required.

Concentrated anthrax spores were used for bioterrorism in the 2001 anthrax
attacks in the United States, delivered by mailing postal letters containing
the spores. Only a few grams of material were used in these attacks and in
August 2008 the US Department of Justice announced they believed that Dr.
Bruce Ivins, a senior biodefense researcher, was responsible. [36] These
events also spawned many anthrax hoaxes.

Due to these events, the U.S. Postal Service installed biohazard detection
systems at its major distribution centers to actively scan for anthrax being
transported through the mail. [37]

### [edit] Decontaminating mail

In response to the postal anthrax attacks and hoaxes the US Postal Service
sterilized some mail using a process of gamma irradiation and treatment with a
proprietary enzyme formula supplied by Sipco Industries Ltd.[38]

A scientific experiment performed by a high school student, later published in
The Journal of Medical Toxicology, suggested that a domestic electric iron at
its hottest setting (at least 400 Â°F (204 Â°C)) used for at least 5 minutes
should destroy all anthrax spores in a common postal envelope.[39]

## [edit] See also

  * 2001 anthrax attacks
  * Anthrax hoaxes
  * Ames strain
  * Gruinard Island \- site of British bioweapons trials in 1942
  * Sverdlovsk Anthrax leak
  * Anthrax toxin
  * Anthrax Detection Device
  * Anthrax Vaccine
  * Anthrax Vaccine Immunization Program, or AVIP: the program for vaccinating all members of the armed services in the United States.
  * Black death
  * Unit 731

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Blanc, H. W. (1890). "Anthrax: the disease of the Egyptian plagues". New Orleans Med Surg J 18: 1â25.
  2. ^ Jeanne Guillemin. Anthrax. The Investigation of a Deadly Outbreak
  3. ^ "Anthrax" by Jeanne Guillemin, University of California Press, 2001, ISBN 0-520-22917-7, pg. 3
  4. ^ Cherkasskiy, B. L. (1999). "A national register of historic and contemporary anthrax foci". Journal of Applied Microbiology 87 (2): 192â195. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2672.1999.00868.x.
  5. ^ David V. Cohn (1996-02-11). "Life and Times of Louis Pasteur". School of Dentistry, University of Louisville. http://louisville.edu/library/ekstrom/special/pasteur/cohn.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  6. ^ Mikesell, P.; Ivins, B. E.; Ristroph, J. D.; Vodkin, M. H.; Dreier, T. M.; Leppla, S. H. (1983), "Plasmids, Pasteur, and Anthrax" (PDF), ASM News 49: 320â322, http://www.asm.org/ASM/files/CCLIBRARYFILES/FILENAME/0000000221/490783p320.pdf
  7. ^ a b "Robert Koch (1843-1910)". About.com. http://german.about.com/library/blerf_koch.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  8. ^ "Can Dogs Get Anthrax?" Canine Nation, 30 October 2001. Retrieved 17 February 2007.
  9. ^ Dragon, D. C. (1999). "A review of anthrax in Canada and implications for research on the disease in northern bison". Journal of Applied Microbiology 87: 208. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2672.1999.00872.x.
  10. ^ Suffin, S. C.; Carnes, W. H.; Kaufmann, A. F. (September 1978). "Inhalation anthrax in a home craftsman". Human Pathology 9 (5): 594â597. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/101438.
  11. ^ "Man who breathed in anthrax dies," BBC News, 2 November 2008. Retrieved 2 November 2008.
  12. ^ a b Bravata DM, Holty JE, Liu H, McDonald KM, Olshen RA, Owens DK (2006), Systematic review: a century of inhalational anthrax cases from 1900 to 2005, Annals of Internal Medicine; 144(4): 270â80.
  13. ^ "Anthrax, Then and Now". MedicineNet.com. http://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.asp?articlekey=18812&page=2. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  14. ^ a b "Anthrax Q & A: Signs and Symptoms". Emergency Preparedness and Response. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2003. http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/anthrax/faq/signs.asp. Retrieved on 2007-04-19.
  15. ^ ANTHRAX, the investigation of a Deadly Outbreak, Jeanne Guillemin, University of California Press, 1999, ISBN 0=520-22917-7, chart of Russian deaths at Sverdlovsk, 1979, pg 27
  16. ^ "Anthrax and tea". Society for Applied Microbiology. 2008-03-17. http://www.sfam.org.uk/newsarticle.php?214&2. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  17. ^ ANTHRAX, the investigation of a Deadly Outbreak, Jeanne Guillemin, University of California Press, 1999, ISBN 0=520-22917-7, pg 34
  18. ^ "Sandia decon formulation, best known as an anthrax killer, takes on household mold". 2007-04-26. http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2007-04/dnl-sdf042607.php. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  19. ^ "Using Bleach to Destroy Anthrax and Other Microbes". Society for Applied Microbiology. http://ehso.com/bleach.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  20. ^ The Bulletin Vol. 57 - No. 36 October 17, 2003PDF (332 KiB)[verification needed]
  21. ^ Madigan M; Martinko J (editors). (2005). Brock Biology of Microorganisms (11th ed. ed.). Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-144329-1.
  22. ^ Decker, Janet. Deadly Diseases and Epidemics, Anthrax. Chelesa House Publishers, 2003. ISBN 0-7910-7302-5 p 27â28.
  23. ^ "Anthrax and Anthrax Vaccine - Epidemiology and Prevention of Vaccine-Preventable Diseases", National Immunization Program, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, January 2006. (PPT format)
  24. ^ Bisher, Jamie, "During World War I, Terrorists Schemed to Use Anthrax in the Cause of Finnish Independence," Military History, August 2003, pp. 17-22. Anthrax Sabotage in Finland
  25. ^ [1]
  26. ^ "Saddam's germ war plot is traced back to one Oxford cow," The Times
  27. ^ "UK planned to wipe out Germany with anthrax". Sunday Herald (Glasgow). 2001-10-14. http://www.fpp.co.uk/bookchapters/WSC/Bwar2.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  28. ^ Southern African News Feature : the plague wars
  29. ^ ANTHRAX, the investigation of a Deadly Outbreak, Jeanne Guillemin, University of California Press, 1999, ISBN 0=520-22917-7, names of victims, pg 275-277
  30. ^ Guillmin, op. cit.
  31. ^ "Plague war: The 1979 anthrax leak". Frontline. PBS. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/plague/sverdlovsk/. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  32. ^ Michael C. Fishbein. "Anthrax - From Russia with Love". Infectious Diseases: Causes, Types, Prevention, Treatment and Facts. MedicineNet.com. http://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.asp?articlekey=18982. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  33. ^ a b Alibek, K. Biohazard. New York, New York: Dell Publishing, 1999.
  34. ^ a b Meselson, M. et al (1994). "The Sverdlovsk Outbreak of 1979". Science 266(5188) 1202â1208
  35. ^ Sternbach, G. (2002). "The History of Anthrax". The Journal of Emergency Medicine 24(4) 463â467.
  36. ^ Bohn, Kevin (2008-08-06). "U.S. officials declare researcher is anthrax killer". CNN. http://www.cnn.com/2008/CRIME/08/06/anthrax.case/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-08-07.
  37. ^ "Cepheid, Northrop Grumman Enter Into Agreement for the Purchase of Anthrax Test Cartridges". Security Products. 2007-16-08. http://secprodonline.com/articles/2007/08/16/cepheid-northrop-grumman.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-26-03.
  38. ^ "Latest Facts Update". USPS. 2002-02-12. http://www.usps.com/news/facts/lfu_021202.htm. Retrieved on 2008-08-13.
  39. ^ "High school senior discovers ironing deactivates anthrax," Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, 20 February 2006

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikinews has related news: 9/11 Anthrax investigation quietly
loses urgency  
Sister project Wikinews has related news: US Military To Buy Anthrax And
Bioweapons Production Systems  
  * Anthrax, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
  * Anthrax factsheet from European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, agency of European Union
  * Agent Fact Sheet: Anthrax, Center for Biosecurity
  * "Anthrax". CDC Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases. http://www.cdc.gov/nczved/dfbmd/disease_listing/anthrax_gi.html. Retrieved on June 17.
  * Bioterrorism Category A Agents - Information Resources
  * "Bacillus anthracis and anthrax". Todar's Online Textbook of Bacteriology (University of Wisconsin-Madison Department of Bacteriology). http://textbookofbacteriology.net/Anthrax.html. Retrieved on June 17.
  * "Focus on anthrax". Nature.com. http://www.nature.com/nature/anthrax/index.html. Retrieved on June 17.
  * 2008 Ivins Court Documents and DOJ Report in convenient form.

v â¢ d â¢ e

United States biological weapons program  
Weaponized agents

Anthrax Â· Botulism Â· Brucellosis Â· Q fever Â· Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B
Â· Rice blast Â· Tularemia Â· VEE Â· Wheat stem rust  
Researched agents

AHF Â· BHF Â· Bird flu Â· CHIKV Â· Dengue fever Â· EEE Â· Glanders Â·
Hantavirus Â· Lassa fever Â· Melioidosis Â· Newcastle disease Â· Plague Â·
Potato blight Â· Psittacosis Â· Ricin Â· RVF Â· Rinderpest Â· Smallpox Â·
Typhus Â· WEE Â· Yellow fever  
Weapons

E120 bomblet Â· E133 cluster bomb Â· E14 munition Â· E23 munition Â· E48
particulate bomb Â· E61 bomb Â· E77 balloon bomb Â· E86 cluster bomb Â· E96
cluster bomb Â· Flettner rotor bomblet Â· M114 bomb Â· M115 bomb Â· M143
bomblet Â· M33 cluster bomb  
Operations and testing

Edgewood Arsenal experiments Â· Operation Big Buzz Â· Operation Big Itch Â·
Operation Dark Winter Â· Operation Dew Â· Operation Drop Kick Â· Operation LAC
Â· Operation May Day Â· Operation Polka Dot Â· Operation Whitecoat Â· Project
112 Â· Project Bacchus Â· Project Clear Vision Â· Project Jefferson  
Facilities

U.S. Army Biological Warfare Labs Â· Building 101 Â· Building 257 Â· Building
470 Â· Deseret Test Center Â· Dugway Proving Ground Â· Edgewood Arsenal Â·
Fort Detrick Â· Fort Douglas Â· Fort Terry Â· Granite Peak Installation Â·
Horn Island Testing Station Â· One-Million-Liter Test Sphere Â· Pine Bluff
Arsenal Â· Rocky Mountain Arsenal Â· Vigo Ordnance Plant  
Related topics

Biological agent Â· Biological warfare Â· Entomological warfare Â· List of
topics Â· U.S. bio-weapons ban Â· War Bureau of Consultants  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Infectious diseases Â· Bacterial diseases: G+ (primarily A00-A79,
001-041,080-109)  
Firmicutes/  
(low-G+C)

Bacilli

Lactobacillales  
(Cat-)

Streptococcus

Alpha hemolytic

optochin susceptible: S. pneumoniae (Pneumococcal infection)  
optochin resistant: S. viridans (S. mitis, S. mutans, S. oralis, S. sanguinis,
S. sobrinus, milleri group)  
Beta hemolytic

A, bacitracin susceptible: S. pyogenes (Scarlet fever, Erysipelas, Rheumatic
fever, Streptococcal pharyngitis)  
B, bacitracin resistant, CAMP test+: S. agalactiae  
Gamma hemolytic

D, BEA+: Enterococcus faecalis Â· Streptococcus bovis  
Bacillales  
(Cat+)

Staphylococcus

Cg+ S. aureus (Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, Toxic shock syndrome)  
Cg- novobiocin susceptible (S. epidermidis) Â· novobiocin resistant (S.
saprophyticus)  
Bacillus

Bacillus anthracis (Anthrax) Â· Bacillus cereus (Food poisoning)  
Listeria

Listeria monocytogenes (Listeriosis)  
Clostridia

spore-forming, motile: Clostridium difficile (Pseudomembranous colitis) Â·
Clostridium botulinum (Botulism) Â· Clostridium tetani (Tetanus)

spore-forming, nonmotile: Clostridium perfringens (Gas gangrene, Clostridial
necrotizing enteritis)

non-spore forming: Peptostreptococcus  
Mollicutes

Mycoplasmataceae

Ureaplasma urealyticum (Ureaplasma infection) Â· Mycoplasma genitalium Â·
Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Mycoplasma pneumonia)  
Anaeroplasmatales

Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae (Erysipeloid)  
Actinobacteria/  
(high-G+C)

Actinomycineae

Actinomycetaceae

Actinomyces israelii (Actinomycosis/Actinomycetoma) Â· Tropheryma whipplei
(Whipple's disease)  
Propionibacteriaceae

Propionibacterium acnes  
Corynebacterineae

Mycobacteriaceae

M. tuberculosis/M. bovis

Tuberculosis: Ghon focus/Ghon's complex Â· Pott disease Â· brain (Meningitis,
Rich focus) Â· cutaneous (Scrofula, Bazin disease, Lupus vulgaris, Prosector's
wart) Â· Miliary Â· Tuberculous pericarditis  
M. leprae

Leprosy  
Nontuberculous

R1: M. kansasii  
R3: M. avium complex (MAA, MAP, MAI, Lady Windermere syndrome) Â· M. ulcerans
(Buruli ulcer)  
Nocardiaceae

Nocardia asteroides/Nocardia brasiliensis (Nocardiosis, Maduromycosis,
Mycetoma) Â· Rhodococcus equi  
Corynebacteriaceae

Corynebacterium diphtheriae (Diphtheria) Â· Corynebacterium minutissimum
(Erythrasma) Â· Corynebacterium jeikeium  
Bifidobacteriaceae

Gardnerella vaginalis  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthrax"

Categories: Bacterial diseases | Biological weapons | Bovine diseases |
Livestock | 2001 anthrax attacks | Zoonoses | Medical disasters | Microbiology

Hidden categories: All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing
factual verification since August 2008 | All pages needing factual
verification | Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from March 2009 | All
articles needing copy edit | Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages | All
articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since
February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Magyar
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 22:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



