
# Marriage

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the music record label, see Marriage Records.

"Married" redirects here. For the radio comedy programme, see Married (radio
series).

"Matrimony" redirects here. For the sacrament or liturgical rite in
Christianity, see Christian views of marriage. For the card game, see
Matrimony (solitaire).

<IMG>

Close relationships  
Types of relationships  
Boyfriend Â· Casual Â· Cohabitation Â· Concubinage Â· Courtesan Â· Domestic
partnership Â· Family Â· Friendship Â· Girlfriend Â· Husband Â· Kinship Â·
Marriage Â· Mistress (lover) Â· Monogamy Â· Non-monogamy Â· Pederasty Â·
Polyamory Â· Polyfidelity Â· Polygamy Â· Romantic friendship Â· Same-sex
relationship Â· Significant other Â· Soulmate Â· Widowhood Â· Wife

Major relationship events  
Courtship Â· Bonding Â· Divorce Â· Relationship breakup Â· Romance Â·
Separation Â· Wedding

Feelings and emotions  
Affinity Â· Attachment Â· Compersion Â· Infatuation Â· Intimacy Â· Jealousy Â·
Limerence Â· Love Â· Passion Â· Platonic love Â· Polyamory Â· Psychology of
sexual monogamy

Human practices  
Bride price (Dower Â· Dowry) Â· Hypergamy Â· Relationship abuse (Child abuse
Â· Elder abuse Â· Spousal abuse) Â· Sexuality Â· Teen dating violence  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Scales of justice  
Family law  
Entering into marriage  
Prenuptial agreement  
Marriage  
Common-law marriage  
Same-sex marriage  
Legal states similar  
to marriage  
Cohabitation Â· Civil union  
Domestic partnership  
Registered partnership  
Putative marriage  
Dissolution of marriage  
Annulment Â· Divorce Â· Alimony  
Issues affecting children  
Paternity Â· Legitimacy Â· Adoption  
Legal guardian Â· Foster care  
Ward Â· Emancipation of minors  
Grandparent visitation

Child Protective Services  
(United States)

Parental responsibility  
Contact (including visitation)  
Residence in English law  
Custody Â· Child support  
Related areas  
Spousal abuse Â· Child abuse  
Child abduction Â· Child marriage  
Adultery Â· Bigamy Â· Incest  
Conflict of laws  
Marriage Â· Nullity Â· Divorce  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Marriage is a legally sanctioned union, usually between a man and a woman. In
a monogamous marriage, there are two partners, while a polygamous marriage
includes more than two. The marital union may also be called matrimony or
wedlock, while the ceremony that marks its beginning is a wedding.

Historically, marriage was about children, property and inheritance. Marriage
for love is a recent concept. The anthropology handbook Notes and Queries
defines marriage as, "a union of a man and a woman such that children of the
woman are recognized as legitimate by both parents."[1] More recent research
disputes the idea that marriage is motivated by a desire to legitimize the
status of children. A man's need for assurance as to the paternity of his
children makes him willing to provide something of value to a woman or her kin
in exchange for sexual control.

Marriage may take many forms: for example, a union between one man and one
woman as husband and wife is a monogamous heterosexual marriage; polygamy â
in which a person takes more than one spouse â which includes, polygyny in
which a man takes more than one wife, and polyandry in which a woman takes
more than one husband have been common in some societies.[2] Recently, some
jurisdictions[3] and denominations[4][5][6] have begun to recognize same-sex
marriage, uniting people of the same sex.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights declares that "Men and women of full
age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the
right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to
marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. Marriage shall be entered
into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses." The Cairo
Declaration on Human Rights in Islam gives men and women the "right to
marriage" regardless of their race, colour or nationality, but not religion.

## Contents

  * 1 Definitions
  * 2 History
    * 2.1 European marriages
      * 2.1.1 State recognition
    * 2.2 Chinese marriage
  * 3 Selection of a partner
  * 4 Marriage ceremony
  * 5 Cohabitation
  * 6 Sex and procreation
  * 7 Marriage law
    * 7.1 Rights and obligations
    * 7.2 Right to marriage
    * 7.3 Marriage restrictions
    * 7.4 State recognition
  * 8 Marriage and religion
    * 8.1 Christianity
    * 8.2 Judaism
    * 8.3 Islam
    * 8.4 BahÃ¡'Ã­
    * 8.5 Hinduism
    * 8.6 Same sex marriage
  * 9 Financial considerations
    * 9.1 Dowry
    * 9.2 Bride price and dower
    * 9.3 Modern customs
    * 9.4 Taxation
    * 9.5 Other considerations
  * 10 Termination
  * 11 Post-Marital Residence
  * 12 Contemporary views on marriage
    * 12.1 Criticisms
    * 12.2 Controversial views
  * 13 See also
    * 13.1 Related concepts
  * 14 References
  * 15 External links

  
## [edit] Definitions

In his three volume The History of Human Marriage (1921), Edward Westermarck
defined marriage as "a more or less durable connection between male and
female, lasting beyond the mere act of propagation till after the birth of the
offspring." The anthropological handbook Notes and Queries (1951) gives this
classic cross-cultural definition: "a union of a man and a woman such that
children of the woman are recognized as legitimate by both parents."[1]
Because the Nuer of Sudan allow for female-female marriage, Kathleen Gough
suggested "a woman and one or more other persons."[7]

One problem with the Notes and Queries definition is that some cultures define
all children as legitimate, or define legitimacy without reference to
marriage.[8] In modern society, the children of unmarried mothers have
citizenship and equal rights. If illegitimacy means only that a mother is
unmarried, it is circular to define marriage in terms of legitimacy.[8] Edmund
Leach argued that no one definition of marriage applied to all cultures.[9] He
offered a list of ten rights associated with marriage, including sexual
monopoly and rights with respect to children.[9] The specific rights differed
according to culture, he wrote.[9]

## [edit] History

See also: History of civil marriage in the U.S. and Timeline of same-sex
marriage

<IMG>

Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further
information might be found on the talk page. (July 2008)  
The origin of marriage may lie in a man's need for assurance as to paternity
of his children. He might therefore be willing to pay a bride price or provide
for a woman in exchange for exclusive sexual access.[10] Legitimacy is the
consequence of this transaction rather than its motivation. In Comanche
society, married women work harder, lose sexual freedom, and do not seem to
obtain any benefit from marriage.[11] But nubile woman are a source of
jealousy and strife in the tribe, so they are given little choice other than
to get married. "In almost all societies, access to women is institutionalized
in some way so as to moderate the intensity of this competition."[12]

The way in which a marriage is conducted has changed over time, as has the
institution itself. Although the institution of marriage pre-dates reliable
recorded history, many cultures have legends or religious beliefs concerning
the origins of marriage.[13]

### [edit] European marriages

For most of European history, marriage was more or less a business agreement
between two families who arranged the marriages of their children. Romantic
love, and even simple affection, were not considered essential.[14]
Historically, the perceived necessity of marriage has been stressed.[15]

In Ancient Greece, no specific civil ceremony was required for the creation of
a marriage - only mutual agreement and the fact that the couple must regard
each other as husband and wife accordingly.[16] Men usually married when they
were in their 20s or 30s [17] and expected their wives to be in their early
teens. It has been suggested that these ages made sense for the Greek because
men were generally done with military service by age 30, and marrying a young
girl ensured her virginity.[18] Married Greek women had few rights in ancient
Greek society and were expected to take care of the house and children.[19]
Time was an important factor in Greek marriage. For example there were
superstitions that being married during a full moon was good luck and,
according to Robert FlaceliÃ¨re, Greeks married in the winter.[18]

Like with the Greeks, Roman marriage and divorce required no specific
government or religious approval.[15] Both marriage and divorce could happen
by simple mutual agreement.[15] There were several types of marriages in Roman
society. The traditional ("conventional") form called conventio in manum
required a ceremony with witnesses and was also dissolved with a ceremony.[15]
In this type of marriage, a woman lost her family rights of inheritance of her
old family and gained them with her new one. She now was subject to the
authority of her husband.[20] There was the free marriage known as sine manu.
In this arrangement, the wife remained a member of her original family; she
stayed under the authority of her father, kept her family rights of
inheritance with her old family and did not gain any with the new family.[20]
A law in the Theodosian Code (C. Th. 9.7.3) issued in 342 CE prohibited same-
sex marriage, but the exact intent of the law and its relation to social
practice is unclear, as only a few examples of same-sex marriage in ancient
Rome exist.[21]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A woodcut of a medieval wedlock ceremony from Germany.

From the early Christian era (30 to 325 CE), marriage was thought of as
primarily a private matter, with no religious or other ceremony being
required. Until 1545, Christian marriages in Europe were by mutual consent,
declaration of intention to marry and upon the subsequent physical union of
the parties.[22][23] The couple would promise verbally to each other that they
would be married to each other; the presence of a priest or witnesses was not
required.[24] This promise was known as the "verbum." If freely given and made
in the present tense (e.g., "I marry you"), it was unquestionably binding;[22]
if made in the future tense ("I will marry you"), it would constitute a
betrothal. One of the functions of churches from the Middle Ages was to
register marriages, which was not obligatory. There was no state involvement
in marriage and personal status, with these issues being adjudicated in
ecclesiastical courts.

In the 12th century, aristocrats believed love was incompatible with marriage
and sought romance in adultery.[14] Troubadors invented courtly love which
involved secret but chaste trysts between a lover and a beloved.

The average age of marriage in the late 1200s into the 1500s was around 25
years of age.[25] Beginning in the 1500s it was unlawful for a woman younger
than 20 years of age to marry.[26][23]

As part of the Counter-Reformation, in 1545 the Council of Trent decreed that
a Roman Catholic marriage would be recognized only if the marriage ceremony
was officiated by a priest with two witnesses. The Council also authorized a
Catechism, issued in 1566, which defined marriage as, "The conjugal union of
man and woman, contracted between two qualified persons, which obliges them to
live together throughout life."[27] This change did not extend to the regions
affected by the Protestant Reformation, where marriage by consent continued to
be the norm. As part of the Reformation, the role of recording marriages and
setting the rules for marriage passed to the state. By the 1600s many of the
Protestant European countries had a state involvement in marriage.

#### [edit] State recognition

In the early modern period, John Calvin and his Protestant colleagues
reformulated Christian marriage by enacting the Marriage Ordinance of Geneva,
which imposed "The dual requirements of state registration and church
consecration to constitute marriage"[28] for recognition.

In England and Wales, Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act 1753 required a formal
ceremony of marriage, thereby curtailing the practice of Fleet Marriage.[29]
These were clandestine or irregular marriages performed at Fleet Prison, and
at hundreds of other places. From the 1690s until the Marriage Act of 1753 as
many as 300,000 clandestine marriages were performed at Fleet Prison
alone.[30] The Act required a marriage ceremony to be officiated by an
Anglican priest in the Anglican Church with two witnesses and registration.
The Act did not apply to Jewish marriages or those of Quakers, whose marriages
continued to be governed by their own customs.

In England and Wales, since 1837, civil marriages have been recognised as a
legal alternative to church marriages under the Marriage Act 1836. In Germany,
civil marriages were recognised in 1875. This law permitted a declaration of
the marriage before an official clerk of the civil administration, when both
spouses affirm their will to marry, to constitute a legally recognised valid
and effective marriage, and allowed an optional private clerical marriage
ceremony.

### [edit] Chinese marriage

Main article: Chinese marriage

The mythological origin of Chinese marriage is a story about NÃ¼wa and Fu Xi
who invented proper marriage procedures after becoming married.

In ancient Chinese society, people of the same surname were not supposed to
marry and doing so was seen as incest. However, because marriage to one's
maternal relatives was not thought of as incest, families sometimes
intermarried from one generation to another. Over time, Chinese people became
more geographically mobile. Couples were married in what is called an extra-
clan marriage[clarification needed], better known as antithetic marriage. This
occurred around 5000 BC. According to modern Chinese scholars of a Marxist
persuasion, society supported a matrilineal family model, therefore husbands
needed to move to, and live with, their wivesâ families[citation needed].
Yet individuals remained members of their biological families. When a couple
died, the husband and the wife were buried separately in the respective
clansâ graveyard. In a maternal marriage, a male would become a son-in-law
who lived in the wifeâs home. This happened in the transformation of
antithetic marriage into monogamy, which signifies the decline of matriarchy
and the growing dominance of patriarchy in the ancient China[citation
needed][clarification needed].

## [edit] Selection of a partner

Main articles: Arranged marriage and Forced marriage

<IMG>

<IMG>

An arranged marriage between Louis XIV of France and Maria Theresa of Spain

The selection of a marriage partner may involve either the couple going
through a selection process of courtship or the marriage may be arranged by
the couple's parents or an outside party, a matchmaker.

A pragmatic (or 'arranged') marriage is made easier by formal procedures of
family or group politics. A responsible authority sets up or encourages the
marriage; they may, indeed, engage a professional matchmaker to find a
suitable spouse for an unmarried person. The authority figure could be
parents, family, a religious official, or a group consensus.

In some cases, the authority figure may choose a match for purposes other than
marital harmony. Some of the most popular uses of arranged marriage are for
dowry or immigration[citation needed].

In rural Indian villages, child marriage is also practiced, with parents at
times arranging the wedding, sometimes even before the child is born. This
practice is now illegal under the Child Marriage Restraint Act.

In some societies ranging from Central Asia to the Caucasus to Africa, the
custom of bride kidnapping still exists, in which a woman is captured by a man
and his friends. Sometimes this covers an elopement, but sometimes it depends
on sexual violence. In previous times, raptio was a larger-scale version of
this, with groups of women captured by groups of men, sometimes in war; the
most famous example is The Rape of the Sabine Women, which provided the first
citizens of Rome with their wives.

Other marriage partners are more or less imposed on an individual. For
example, widow inheritance provides a widow with another man from her late
husband's brothers.

## [edit] Marriage ceremony

Main article: Wedding

<IMG>

<IMG>

Couple married in a Shinto ceremony in Takayama, Gifu prefecture.

A marriage is usually formalised at a wedding or marriage ceremony. The
ceremony may be officiated either by a religious official, by a government
official or by a state approved celebrant. In many European and some Latin
American countries, any religious ceremony must be held separately from the
required civil ceremony. Some countries â such as Belgium, Bulgaria, the
Netherlands, Romania and Turkey[31] â require that a civil ceremony take
place before any religious one. In some countries â notably the United
States, Canada, the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, Norway and Spain
â both ceremonies can be held together; the officiant at the religious and
civil ceremony also serving as agent of the state to perform the civil
ceremony. To avoid any implication that the state is "recognizing" a religious
marriage (which is prohibited in some countries) â the "civil" ceremony is
said to be taking place at the same time as the religious ceremony. Often this
involves simply signing a register during the religious ceremony. If the civil
element of the religious ceremony is omitted, the marriage is not recognised
by government under the law.

While some countries, such as Australia, permit marriages to be held in
private and at any location, others, including England and Wales, require that
the civil ceremony be conducted in a place open to the public and specially
sanctioned by law. In England, the place of marriage need no longer be a
church or registry office, but could also be a hotel, historic building or
other venue that has obtained the necessary licence. An exception can be made
in the case of marriage by special emergency license, which is normally
granted only when one of the parties is terminally ill. Rules about where and
when persons can marry vary from place to place. Some regulations require that
one of the parties reside in the locality of the registry office.

Within the parameters set by the law of the jurisdiction in which a marriage
or wedding takes place, each religious authority has rules for the manner in
which weddings are to be conducted by their officials and members.

## [edit] Cohabitation

See also: cohabitation

Marriage is an institution which can join together people's lives in a variety
of emotional and economic ways. In many Western cultures, marriage usually
leads to the formation of a new household comprising the married couple, with
the married couple living together in the same home, often sharing the same
bed, but in some other cultures this is not the tradition.[32] Among the
Minangkabau of West Sumatra, residency after marriage is matrilocal, with the
husband moving into the household of his wife's mother.[33] Residency after
marriage can also be patrilocal or avunculocal. Also, in southwestern China,
walking marriages, in which the husband and wife do not live together, have
been a traditional part of the Mosuo culture.[34] Walking marriages have also
been increasingly common in modern Beijing. Guo Jianmei, director of the
center for women's studies at Beijing University, told a Newsday
correspondent, "Walking marriages reflect sweeping changes in Chinese
society."[35] A similar arrangement in Saudi Arabia, called misyar marriage,
also involves the husband and wife living separately but meeting
regularly.[36]

Conversely, marriage is not a prerequisite for cohabitation. In some cases
couples living together do not wish to be recognised as married, such as when
pension or alimony rights are adversely affected, or because of taxation
consideration, or because of immigration issues, and for many other reasons.

In some cases cohabitation may constitute a common-law marriage, and in some
countries the laws recognise cohabitation in preference to the formality of
marriage for taxation and social security benefits. This is the case, for
example, in Australia.[37]

## [edit] Sex and procreation

Marriage typically requires consummation by sexual intercourse, and non-
consummation (that is, failure or refusal to engage in sex) may be grounds for
an annulment.[38]

There are some married couples who remain childless either by choice or due to
infertility or other factors preventing conception or bearing of children. In
some cultures, marriage imposes an obligation on women to bear children. In
northern Ghana, for example, payment of bridewealth signifies a woman's
requirement to bear children, and women using birth control face substantial
threats of physical abuse and reprisals.[39]

On the other hand, marriage is not a prerequisite for having children, and
having children outside of marriage is today not as uncommon as it used to be.
In the United States, the National Center for Health Statistics reported that
in 1992, 30.1 percent of births were to unmarried women.[40][41] In 2006, that
number had risen to 38.5 percent.[42] Until recently, children born outside of
marriage were termed illegitimate and suffered legal disadvantages and social
stigma. In recent years the legal relevance of illegitimacy has declined and
social acceptance increased, especially in western countries.

Many of the world's major religions look with disfavor on sexual relations
outside of marriage.[43] Sexual relations by a married person with someone
other than his/her spouse is normally called adultery, and is also frequently
disapproved by the major world religions (some calling it a sin), and has
often been - in some jurisdictions continues to be - a crime and grounds for
divorce. (See adultery.)

## [edit] Marriage law

Main article: marriage law

### [edit] Rights and obligations

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Ketubah in Aramaic, a Jewish marriage-contract outlining the duties of each
partner.

See also: Rights and responsibilities of marriages in the United States

A marriage, by definition, bestows rights and obligations on the married
parties, and sometimes on relatives as well, being the sole mechanism for the
creation of affinal ties (in-laws). These may include:

  * giving a husband/wife or his/her family control over a spouseâs sexual services, labor, and property.
  * giving a husband/wife responsibility for a spouseâs debts.
  * giving a husband/wife visitation rights when his/her spouse is incarcerated or hospitalized.
  * giving a husband/wife control over his/her spouseâs affairs when the spouse is incapacitated.
  * establishing the second legal guardian of a parentâs child.
  * establishing a joint fund of property for the benefit of children.
  * establishing a relationship between the families of the spouses.

These rights and obligations vary considerably between societies, and between
groups within society.[44]

### [edit] Right to marriage

Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights declares that "Men and
women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or
religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to
equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. Marriage
shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending
spouses." The Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam gives men and women
the "right to marriage" regardless of their race, colour or nationality, but
not religion.

### [edit] Marriage restrictions

Main article: Marriage law#Marriage restrictions

Marriage is an institution that is historically filled with restrictions. From
age, to gender, to social status, restrictions are placed on marriage by
society for reasons of passing on healthy genes, to keep property
concentrated, or (in some cases) because of prejudice and fear.

Some legal, social, or religious restrictions apply in some countries on the
genders of the couple. In response to changing social and political attitudes,
some jurisdictions and religious denominations now recognize marriages between
people of the same sex. In some jurisdictions these are sometimes called civil
unions or domestic partnerships, while some others explicitly prohibit same-
sex marriages.

Societies have often placed restrictions on marriage to relatives, though the
degree of prohibited relationship varies widely. In most societies, marriage
between brothers and sisters has been forbidden. All mainstream religions
prohibit some marriages on the basis of the consanguinity (lineal descent) and
affinity (kinship by marriage) of the prospective marriage partners, though
the standards vary.

There have been countless restrictions placed on marriage by different
societies throughout human history, including recently. Restrictions against
polygamy and marrying within a particular group or race have been common. Many
societies, even some with a cultural tradition of polygamy, recognize monogamy
as the only valid form of marriage. Many societies have also adopted other
restrictions on whom one can marry, such as prohibitions of marrying persons
with the same surname, or persons with the same sacred animal. Societies have
also at times required marriage from within a certain group. Anthropologists
refer to these restrictions as endogamy. An example of such restrictions would
be a requirement to marry someone from the same tribe.

### [edit] State recognition

Main article: Marriage law#State recognition

In many jurisdictions, a civil marriage may take place as part of the
religious marriage ceremony, although they are theoretically distinct. Some
jurisdictions allow civil marriages in circumstances which are notably not
allowed by particular religions, such as same-sex marriages or civil unions.

Marriage relationships may also be created by the operation of the law alone,
as in common-law marriage, sometimes called "marriage by habit and repute."

The status in the eyes of one authority may not be the same as for another,
e.g., a marriage may be recognised civilly, but not by a church, and vice
versa.[citation needed]

## [edit] Marriage and religion

See also: Buddhist view of marriage

All mainstream religions have strong views relating to marriage. Most
religions perform a wedding ceremony to solemnize the beginning of a marriage.
Some regard marriage as simply a contract, while others regard it as a sacred
institution.

### [edit] Christianity

<IMG>

<IMG>

Christian wedding in Kyoto, Japan.

Main article: Christian views of marriage

Liturgical Christian communions - notably Anglicanism, Catholicism, and
Orthodoxy \- consider marriage (sometimes termed holy matrimony) to be an
expression of divine grace, termed a sacrament or mystery. In Western ritual,
the ministers of the sacrament are the husband and wife themselves, with a
bishop, priest, or deacon merely witnessing the union on behalf of the church,
and adding a blessing. In Eastern ritual churches, the bishop or priest
functions as the actual minister of the Sacred Mystery (Eastern Orthodox
deacons may not perform marriages). Western Christians commonly refer to
marriage a vocation, while Eastern Christians consider it an ordination and a
martyrdom, though the theological emphases indicated by the various names are
not excluded by the teachings of either tradition. Marriage is commonly
celebrated in the context of a Eucharistic service (a nuptial Mass or Divine
Liturgy). The sacrament of marriage is indicative of the relationship between
Christ and the Church (Ephesians 5:29-32), yet most Reformed Christians would
deny the elevation of marriage to the status of a sacrament, nevertheless it
is considered a covenant between spouses before God. (cf. Ephesians 5:31-33)

In Catholicism, a principle objective of marriage is procreation: "[e]ntering
marriage with the intention of never having children is a grave wrong and more
than likely grounds for an annulment."[45] Members of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints believe that "marriage between a man and a woman
is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for
the eternal destiny of His children." The LDS belief is that marriage between
a man and a woman can last beyond death and into eternity.[46]

### [edit] Judaism

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Jewish wedding, painting by Jozef IsraÃ«ls, 1903.

Main article: Jewish views of marriage

In Judaism, marriage is viewed as a contractual bond commanded by God in which
a man and a woman come together to create a relationship in which God is
directly involved.[47] Though procreation is not the sole purpose, a Jewish
marriage is also expected to fulfill the commandment to have children.[48] The
main focus centers around the relationship between the husband and wife.
Kabbalistically, marriage is understood to mean that the husband and wife are
merging together into a single soul. This is why a man is considered
"incomplete" if he is not married, as his soul is only one part of a larger
whole that remains to be unified.[49]

### [edit] Islam

Main article: Islamic marital jurisprudence

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Muslim couple being wed alongside the Tungabhadra River at Hampi, India.

Islam also commends marriage, with the age of marriage being whenever the
individuals feel ready, financially and emotionally.

In Islam, polygamy is allowed for men, with the specific limitation that they
can only have up to four wives at any one time, given that they are able to
and willing to partition their time and wealth equally among the respective
wives.

For a Muslim wedding to take place, the bride and her guardian must both agree
on the marriage. Should either the guardian or the girl disagree on the
marriage, it may not legally take place. In essence, while the guardian/father
of the girl has no right to force her to marry, he has the right to stop a
marriage from taking place, given that his reasons are valid. The purpose of
this practice is to ensure that a woman finds a suitable partner whom she has
chosen not out of sheer emotion.

From an Islamic (Shari'Ah) law perspective, the minimum requirements and
responsibilities in a Muslim marriage are that the groom provide living
expenses (housing, clothing, food, maintenance) to the bride, and in return,
the bride must be a partner(sexually) to the husband. All other rights and
responsibilities are to be decided between the husband and wife, and may even
be included as stipulations in the marriage contract before the marriage
actually takes place, so long as they do not go against the minimum
requirements of the marriage (for example: the woman marries the man with the
condition that she will not sleep with him).

In Sunni Islam, marriage must take place in the presence of at least 2
reliable witnesses, with the consent of the guardian of the bride and the
consent of both spouses(including the girl). Following the marriage, the
couple is immediately allowed to consummate the marriage.

The wedding party can be held days, or months later whenever the couple and
their families want to announce the marriage in public.

In Shia Islam marriage doesn't require any witness or official statement or
presence in a definite place.[50] To create a religious contract between them,
it is sufficient that a man and a woman indicate an intention to marry each
other and recite the requisite words.[51][52] A couple can live with each
other as a family without an official contract. Of course there are some
criteria which should be observed; for example, the woman should be
single.[53][54]

### [edit] BahÃ¡'Ã­

In the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith marriage is encouraged and viewed as a mutually
strengthening bond, but is not obligatory. A BahÃ¡'Ã­ marriage requires the
couple to choose each other, and then the consent of all living parents.[55]

### [edit] Hinduism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hindu marriage ceremony from a Rajput wedding.

Main article: Marriage in Hinduism

Hinduism sees marriage as a sacred duty that entails both religious and social
obligations. Old Hindu literature in Sanskrit gives many different types of
marriages and their categorization ranging from "Gandharva Vivaha" (instant
marriage by mutual consent of participants only, without any need for even a
single third person as witness) to normal (present day) marriages, to
"Rakshasa Vivaha" (marriage performed by abduction of one participant by the
other participant, usually, but not always, with the help of other persons).

### [edit] Same sex marriage

Main article: Religious arguments about same-sex marriage

For the most part, religious traditions in the world reserve marriage to
heterosexual unions, but there are exceptions including Unitarian
Universalist, Metropolitan Community Church, and Quaker, United Church of
Canada and Reform Jewish congregations.[56][57]

## [edit] Financial considerations

The financial aspects of marriage vary between cultures and have changed over
time.

In some cultures, dowries and bride prices continue to be required today. In
both cases, the financial arrangements are usually made between the groom (or
his family) and the bride's family; with the bride in many cases not being
involved in the arrangement, and often not having a choice in whether to
participate in the marriage.

In Early Modern Britain, the social status of the couple was supposed to be
equal. After the marriage, all the property (called "fortune") and expected
inheritances of the wife belonged to the husband.

### [edit] Dowry

Main article: dowry

A dowry was not an unconditional gift, but was usually a part of a wider
marriage settlement. For example, if the groom had other children, they could
not inherit the dowry, which had to go to the bride's children. In the event
of her childlessness, the dowry had to be returned to her family, but
sometimes not until the groom's death or remarriage. Often the bride was
entitled to inherit at least as much as her dowry from her husband's
estate.[citation needed]

In some cultures, dowries continue to be required today, while some countries
impose restrictions on the payment of dowry.

### [edit] Bride price and dower

In other cultures, the groom or his family were expected to pay a bride price
to the bride's family for the right to marry the daughter, or dower, which was
payable to the bride. This required the groom to work for the bride's family
for a set period of time.

In the Jewish tradition, the rabbis in ancient times insisted on the marriage
couple entering into a marriage contact, called a ketubah. Besides other
things, the ketubah provided for an amount to be paid by the husband in the
event of a divorce or his estate in the event of his death. This amount was a
replacement of the biblical dower or bride price, which was payable at the
time of the marriage by the groom to the bride or her parents.[citation
needed][58] This innovation was put in place because the biblical bride price
created a major social problem: many young prospective husbands could not
raise the bride price at the time when they would normally be expected to
marry. So, to enable these young men to marry, the rabbis, in effect, delayed
the time that the amount would be payable, when they would be more likely to
have the sum. It may also be noted that both the dower and the ketubah amounts
served the same purpose: the protection for the wife should her support cease,
either by death or divorce. The only difference between the two systems was
the timing of the payment. It is the predecessor to the wife's present-day
entitlement to maintenance in the event of the breakup of marriage, and family
maintenance in the event of the husband not providing adequately for the wife
in his will. Another function performed by the ketubah amount was to provide a
disincentive for the husband contemplating divorcing his wife: he would need
to have the amount to be able to pay to the wife.

Morning gifts, which might also be arranged by the bride's father rather than
the bride, are given to the bride herself; the name derives from the Germanic
tribal custom of giving them the morning after the wedding night. She might
have control of this morning gift during the lifetime of her husband, but is
entitled to it when widowed. If the amount of her inheritance is settled by
law rather than agreement, it may be called dower. Depending on legal systems
and the exact arrangement, she may not be entitled to dispose of it after her
death, and may lose the property if she remarries. Morning gifts were
preserved for many centuries in morganatic marriage, a union where the wife's
inferior social status was held to prohibit her children from inheriting a
noble's titles or estates. In this case, the morning gift would support the
wife and children. Another legal provision for widowhood was jointure, in
which property, often land, would be held in joint tenancy, so that it would
automatically go to the widow on her husband's death. Islamic tradition has
similar practices. A 'mahr', either immediate or deferred, is the woman's
portion of the groom's wealth (divorce) or estate (death). These amounts are
usually set based on the groom's own and family wealth and incomes, but in
some parts these are set very high so as to provide a disincentive for the
groom exercising the divorce, or the husband's family 'inheriting' a large
portion of the estate, especially if there are no male offspring from the
marriage. In some countries, including Iran, the mahr or alimony can amount to
more than a man can ever hope to earn, sometimes up to US$ 1000,000 (4000
official Iranian gold coins). If the husband cannot pay the mahr, either in
case of a divorce or on demand, according to the current laws in Iran, he will
have to pay it by installments. Failure to pay the mahr might even lead to
imprisonment.[59]

### [edit] Modern customs

In many countries today, each marriage partner has the choice of keeping his
or her property separate or combining properties. In the latter case, called
community property, when the marriage ends by divorce each owns half. In many
legal jurisdictions, laws related to property and inheritance provide by
default for property to pass upon the death of one party in a marriage firstly
to the spouse and secondly to the children. Wills and trusts can make
alternative provisions for property succession.

In some legal systems, the partners in a marriage are "jointly liable" for the
debts of the marriage. This has a basis in a traditional legal notion called
the "Doctrine of Necessities" whereby a husband was responsible to provide
necessary things for his wife. Where this is the case, one partner may be sued
to collect a debt for which they did not expressly contract. Critics of this
practice note that debt collection agencies can abuse this by claiming an
unreasonably wide range of debts to be expenses of the marriage. The cost of
defence and the burden of proof is then placed on the non-contracting party to
prove that the expense is not a debt of the family. The respective maintenance
obligations, both during and eventually after a marriage, are regulated in
most jurisdictions; alimony is one such method.

Some have attempted to analyse the institution of marriage using economic
theory; for example, anarcho-capitalist economist David Friedman has written a
lengthy and controversial study of marriage as a market transaction (the
market for husbands and wives).[60]

### [edit] Taxation

In some countries, spouses are allowed to average their incomes; this is
advantageous to a married couple with disparate incomes. To compensate for
this somewhat, many countries provide a higher tax bracket for the averaged
income of a married couple. While income averaging might still benefit a
married couple with a stay-at-home spouse, such averaging would cause a
married couple with roughly equal personal incomes to pay more total tax than
they would as two single persons. This is commonly called the marriage
penalty.

Moreover, when the rates applied by the tax code are not based on averaging
the incomes, but rather on the sum of individuals' incomes, higher rates will
definitely apply to each individual in a two-earner households in progressive
tax systems. This is most often the case with high-income taxpayers and is
another situation where some consider there to be a marriage penalty.

Conversely, when progressive tax is levied on the individual with no
consideration for the partnership, dual-income couples fare much better than
single-income couples with similar household incomes. The effect can be
increased when the welfare system treats the same income as a shared income
thereby denying welfare access to the non-earning spouse. Such systems apply
in Australia and Canada, for example.

### [edit] Other considerations

Sometimes people marry for purely pragmatic reasons, sometimes called a
marriage of convenience or sham marriage. For example, according to one
publisher of information about "green card" marriages, "Every year over
450,000 United States citizens marry foreign-born individuals and petition for
them to obtain a permanent residency (Green Card) in the United States."[61]
While this is likely an over-estimate, in 2003 alone 184,741 immigrants were
admitted to the U.S. as spouses of U.S. citizens.[62]

Some people want to marry a person with higher or lower status than them.
Others want to marry people who have similar status. Hypergyny refers to the
act of seeking out those who are of slightly higher social status. In most
cases, hypergyny refers to women wanting men of higher status. Isogyny refers
to the act of seeking out those who are of similar status.

## [edit] Termination

In most societies, the death of one of the partners terminates the marriage,
and in monogamous societies this allows the other partner to remarry, though
sometimes after a waiting or mourning period.

Many societies also provide for the termination of marriage through divorce.
Marriages can also be annulled in some societies, where an authority declares
that a marriage never happened. In either event the people concerned are free
to remarry (or marry). After divorce, one spouse may have to pay alimony.

Several cultures have practiced temporary and conditional marriages. Examples
include the Celtic practice of handfasting and fixed-term marriages in the
Muslim community. Pre-Islamic Arabs practiced a form of temporary marriage
that carries on today in the practice of Nikah Mut'ah, a fixed-term marriage
contract. Muslim controversies related to Nikah Mut'ah have resulted in the
practice being confined mostly to Shi'ite communities.

## [edit] Post-Marital Residence

Early theories explaining the determinants of postmarital residence (e.g.,
Lewis Henry Morgan, Edward Tylor, or George Peter Murdock) connected it with
the sexual division of labor. However, to date, cross-cultural tests of this
hypothesis using worldwide samples have failed to find any significant
relationship between these two variables. However, Korotayev's tests show that
the female contribution to subsistence does correlate significantly with
matrilocal residence in general; however, this correlation is masked by a
general polygyny factor. Although an increase in the female contribution to
subsistence tends to lead to matrilocal residence, it also tends
simultaneously to lead to general non-sororal polygyny which effectively
destroys matrilocality. If this polygyny factor is controlled (e. g., through
a multiple regression model), division of labor turns out to be a significant
predictor of postmarital residence. Thus, Murdock's hypotheses regarding the
relationships between the sexual division of labor and postmarital residence
were basically correct, though, as has been shown by Korotayev, the actual
relationships between those two groups of variables are more complicated than
he expected (see, e.g., Korotayev A. Form of marriage, sexual division of
labor, and postmarital residence in cross-cultural perspective: A
reconsideration. Journal of anthropological research ISSN 0091-7710. 2003,
Vol. 59, No. 1, pp. 69-89, Korotayev A. Division of Labor by Gender and
Postmarital Residence in Cross-Cultural Perspective: A Reconsideration. Cross-
Cultural Research. 2003, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp.335-372 DOI:
10.1177/1069397103253685).

In modern societies we observe a trend toward the neolocal residence (see,
e.g., Marriage, Family, and Kinship: Comparative Studies of Social
Organization, by Melvin Ember and Carol R. Ember. New Haven: HRAF Press,
1983).

## [edit] Contemporary views on marriage

### [edit] Criticisms

Main article: Criticism of marriage

Many people have proposed arguments against marriage for various reasons.
These include political and religious criticisms, pragmatic reference to the
divorce rate, as well as celibacy for religious or philosophical reasons.

### [edit] Controversial views

Some views about marriage are controversial. Advocates of same-sex rights
criticize the exclusion of homosexual relationships from legal and social
recognition and the rights and obligations it provides. At the same time
advocates of the traditional marriage movement oppose any attempt to define
marriage to include anything other than the union of one man and one woman,
claiming that to do so would "deprive the term of its fundamental and defining
meaning."[63]

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Marriage  
  * Age at first marriage
  * Age disparity in sexual relationships
  * Feminism
  * List of people with longest marriages
  * Marriage privatization
  * Men's Rights
  * Misandry
  * Radical Feminism
  * Same-Sex Marriage
  * Sexual conflict
  * Types of marriages

### [edit] Related concepts

  * Adultery \- Sexual intercourse between a married person and a partner other than the lawful spouse.
  * Alimony \- obligation of support.
  * Annulment \- legal procedure for declaring a marriage null and void.
  * Aufruf \- A ceremony in which Jews pelt the couple to be married with candy on the Shabbat before the wedding.
  * Betrothal \- formal state of engagement to be married.
  * Brideservice
  * Child marriage
  * Chinese marriage
  * Christian views of marriage \- views of Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Protestant, and others
  * Civil marriage \- marriages which are constituted by a government official and not a religious congregation.
  * Divorce \- ending of a marriage.
  * Engagement
  * Family therapy/Relationship counseling
  * Free love \- a social movement opposed to marriage
  * Head and Master laws
  * Husband/Wife
  * Human sexuality
  * Human-animal marriage \- ceremonial ritual practice in some cultures, with no legal standing
  * Human sexual behavior
  * Hypergamy
  * Inheritance
  * Islamic marital jurisprudence
  * Living apart together
  * Mail-order bride
  * Marriage (conflict)
  * Marriage gap
  * Marriage in the United States
  * Marriage law
  * Marriageable age
  * Monogamy/Polygamy
  * Nikah urfi
  * Separation \- a step in the ending of a marriage.
  * Social unit
  * Wedding
  * Wedding ring

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Notes and Queries on Anthropology. Royal Anthropological Institute. 1951. .
  2. ^ Murdock, George Peter (1949). Social Structure. New York: The MacMillan Company. ISBN 0-02-922290-7. See also: Kaingang.
  3. ^ Arce, Rose. Massachusetts court upholds same-sex marriage. Feb. 6, 2004. CNN. Retrieved February 17, 2007.
  4. ^ "Religious Groups' Official Positions on Same-Sex Marriage". pewforums.org. http://pewforum.org/docs/?DocID=291. Retrieved on 2008-10-16.
  5. ^ Shaila Dewan (July 5, 2005). "United Church of Christ Backs Same-Sex Marriage". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2005/07/05/national/05church.html. Retrieved on 2008-10-16.
  6. ^ "Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations BLGT Community guide". http://www.uua.org/visitors/justicediversity/6252.shtml. Retrieved on 2008-10-16.
  7. ^ Gough, E. Kathleen (1959), The Nayars and the Definition of Marriage, pp. 89:23-34 . Nuer female-female marriage is done to keep property within a family that has no sons; It's not a form of lesbianism.
  8. ^ a b White, David L.; Geoffrey Miles White (2000). Voyaging Through the Contemporary Pacific. pp. 112-113. ISBN 0742500454, 9780742500457.
  9. ^ a b c Leach, Edmund (1955). "Polyandry, Inheritance and the Definition of Marriage" (PDF). Man. http://www.citizenlink.org/pdfs/fosi/marriage/DifferingDefinitionsofMarriage.pdf. .
  10. ^ Hanlon & White, p. 120.
  11. ^ Hanlon & White, p. 119.
  12. ^ Hanlon & White, p. 116.
  13. ^ Westermarck, Edward Alexander (1903). The History of Human Marriage. Macmillan and Co., Ltd., London. ISBN 1402185480 (reprint).
  14. ^ a b psychology today on the history of marriage
  15. ^ a b c d Magnus Hirschfeld Archive of Sexology
  16. ^ history for kids Greek Marriage
  17. ^ historylink102.com Ancient Greek Marriage
  18. ^ a b richeast.org Greek Marriage
  19. ^ Greek Marriage from ancienthistory.about.com
  20. ^ a b roman empire.net marriage
  21. ^ Kuefler, Mathew (2007). "The Marriage Revolution in Late Antiquity: The Theodosian Code and Later Roman Marriage Law". Journal of Family History 32: 343-370. http://jfh.sagepub.com/cgi/content/short/32/4/343.
  22. ^ a b upenn.edu Excerpt from Marriage, Sex, and Civic Culture in Late Medieval London "the sacramental bond of marriage could be made only through the freely given consent of both parties"
  23. ^ a b marriage.about.com
  24. ^ ExploreGenealogy.co.uk Marriage Records
  25. ^ Schofield, Phillipp R. 2003. Peasant and community in Medieval England, 1200-1500. Medieval culture and society. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan. p 98.
  26. ^ Spitz, Lewis (1987). (The Rise of modern Europe) The protestant Reformation 1517-1559.. Harper Torchbooks. p. 9\. ISBN 0061320692.
  27. ^ Witte Jr., John (1997). From Sacrament to Contract: Marriage, Religion, and Law in the Western Tradition. Westminster John Knox Press. pp. 39â40. ISBN 0664255434.
  28. ^ Witte Jr., John (1997). From Sacrament to Contract: Marriage, Religion, and Law in the Western Tradition. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 91\. ISBN 0664255434.
  29. ^ Leneman, Leah (1999). "The Scottish Case That Led to Hardwicke's Marriage Act". Law and History Review. http://www.historycooperative.org/journals/lhr/17.1/leneman.html.
  30. ^ Gillis, John R. (1985). For Better, for Worse: British Marriages, 1600 to the Present. Oxford University Press. p. 92\. ISBN 019503614X. http://books.google.com/books?id=t3kiLAQxrnMC.
  31. ^ Turkish Civil and Penal Code Reforms from a Gender Perspective: The Success of two Nationwide CampaignsPDF (6.21 MB) (p. 18)
  32. ^ Rosenblatt, Paul C. (2006). Two in a Bed: The Social System of Couple Bed Sharing. State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-7914-6829-1. http://www.sunypress.edu/details.asp?id=61306.
  33. ^ Sanday, Peggy Reeves (2002). Women at the center: life in a modern matriarchy. Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-8906-7.
  34. ^ Lu, Yuan; Sam Mitchell (November 2000). "Land Of The Walking Marriage - Mosuo people of China". Natural History (American Museum of Natural History).
  35. ^ Gargan, Edward A. (2001-03-19). "China's New Brides Put Freedom First / All perks, no work in 'walking marriages'". Newsday. pp. A.04.
  36. ^ Karam, Souhail (July 21, 2006). "Misyar offers marriage-lite in strict Saudi society". Reuters. http://www.boston.com/news/world/middleeast/articles/2006/07/21/misyar_offers_marriage_lite_in_strict_saudi_society/.
  37. ^ Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 - Sect 995.1(1): ""spouse" of a person includes a person who, although not legally married to the person, lives with the person on a genuine domestic basis as the person's husband or wife."
  38. ^ For example, John Ruskinâs failed marriage to Effie Gray.
  39. ^ Bawah, AA.; Akweongo P, Simmons R, Phillips JF. (1999). "Women's fears and men's anxieties: the impact of family planning on gender relations in northern Ghana." (PDF). Studies in Family Planning (Population Council) 30 (1): 54â66. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4465.1999.00054.x. ISSN: 0039-3665. http://www.popcouncil.org/pdfs/councilarticles/sfp/SFP301Bawah.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-12-29.
  40. ^ Jones, Richard E.; Kristin H. Lopez (2006). Human Reproductive Biology, Third Edition. Academic Press. ISBN 0120884658.
  41. ^ Ventura, SJ. (1995) (PDF). Births to unmarried mothers: United States, 1980â92.. National Center for Health Statistics. ISBN 0-8406-0507-2. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_21/sr21_053.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-12-29.
  42. ^ "Teenage Birth Rate Rises for First Time Since â91"". New York Times. 2007-12-06. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/06/washington/06birth.html?em&ex=1197176400&en=62f9e9412af61f8b&ei=5087%0A.
  43. ^ Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance (2006-12-31). "Human sexuality and gender topics: Subjects of major concern to many faith groups". Religioustolerance.org. http://www.religioustolerance.org/chr_sex.htm. Retrieved on 2007-02-04.
  44. ^ Leach, Edmund (1968). Paul Bonannan and John Middleton. ed. Marriage, Family, and Residence. The Natural History Press. ISBN 1121644708.
  45. ^ Sacrament of Holy Matrimony, by P.McLachlan http://www.catholic-pages.com/marriage/sacrament.asp
  46. ^ http://www.lds.org/library/display/0,4945,161-1-11-1,00.html
  47. ^ (Deuteronomy 24:1)
  48. ^ (Genesis 1:28)
  49. ^ "Why Marry?". Chabad.org. http://www.chabad.org/library/article_cdo/aid/448425/jewish/Why-Marry.htm. Retrieved on 2007-12-19.
  50. ^ Witnesses for Marriage
  51. ^ The method of pronouncing the marriage formula
  52. ^ Marriage formula
  53. ^ Conditions of pronouncing Nikah
  54. ^ Women with whom matrimony is Haraam
  55. ^ Smith, Peter (2000). "Marriage". A concise encyclopedia of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith. Oxford: Oneworld Publications. pp. p. 232-233. ISBN 1-85168-184-1.
  56. ^ "World Religions and Same Sex Marriage", Marriage Law Project, Columbus School of Law at The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, July 2002 revision [1]PDF (84.1 KB)
  57. ^ Affirming Congregations and Ministries of the United Church of Canada
  58. ^ See also Exodus 22:15-16
  59. ^ A translation of some parts of the Civil Code of Iran
  60. ^ The Economics of Love and Marriage
  61. ^ United States Immigration Support.org - Green Card Through Marriage
  62. ^ Immigration to the United States: Fiscal years 1820-2003PDF (2.03 MB)
  63. ^ Rabbinical Council of America (2004-03-30). Same-Sex Marriage. Press release. http://www.rabbis.org/news/article.cfm?id=100556.

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or
guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate
external links.  
Sister project Look up marriage in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Marriage  
  * African Marriage Rituals
  * Gillis, John R. (1985). For Better, for Worse: British Marriages, 1600 to the Present. Oxford University Press. ISBN 019503614X. http://books.google.com/books?id=t3kiLAQxrnMC.
  * 'Forever and a Day' or 'Just One Night'? On Adaptive Functions of Long-Term and Short-Term Romantic Relationships
  * "Legal Regulation of Marital Relations: An Historical and Comparative Approach â Gautier 19 (1): 47 â International Journal of Law, Policy and the Family". http://lawfam.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/19/1/47. Retrieved on 2007-06-13.
  * "Marriage â its various forms and the role of the State" on BBC Radio 4âs In Our Time featuring Janet Soskice, Frederik Pedersen and Christina Hardyment
  * "Radical principles and the legal institution of marriage: domestic relations law and social democracy in Sweden  â Bradley 4 (2): 154 â International Journal of Law, Policy and the Family". http://lawfam.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/abstract/4/2/154. Retrieved on 2007-06-13.
  * Recordings & Photos from a College Historical Society debate on the role of marriage in modern life, featuring Senator David Norris and Senator Ronan Mullen.
  * The National Marriage Project at Rutgers University

v â¢ d â¢ e

Articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights  
General principles  
Article 1: Freedom, Egalitarianism, Dignity and Brotherhood  
Article 2: Universality of rights  
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  
Article 1 and 2: Right to freedom from discrimination Â· Article 3: Right to
life, liberty and security of person Â· Article 4: Freedom from slavery Â·
Article 5: Freedom from torture and cruel and unusual punishment Â· Article 6:
Right to personhood Â· Article 7: Equality before the law Â· Article 8: Right
to effective remedy from the law Â· Article 9: Freedom from arbitrary arrest,
detention and exile Â· Article 10: Right to a fair trial Â· Article 11.1:
Presumption of innocence Â· Article 11.2: Prohibition of retrospective law Â·
Article 12: Right to privacy Â· Article 13: Freedom of movement Â· Article 14:
Right of asylum Â· Article 15: Right to a nationality Â· Article 16: Right to
marriage and family life Â· Article 17: Right to property Â· Article 18:
Freedom of thought, conscience and religion Â· Article 19: Freedom of opinion
and expression Â· Article 20.1: Freedom of assembly Â· Article 20.2: Freedom
of association Â· Article 21.1: Right to participation in government Â·
Article 21.2: Right of equal access to public office Â· Article 21.3: Right to
universal suffrage  
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  
Article 1 and 2: Right to freedom from discrimination Â· Article 22: Right to
social security Â· Article 23.1: Right to work Â· Article 23.2: Right to equal
pay for equal work Â· Article 23.3: Right to just remuneration Â· Article
23.4: Right to join a trade union Â· Article 24: Right to rest and leisure Â·
Article 25.1: Right to an adequate standard of living Â· Article 25.2: Right
to special care and assistance for mothers and children Â· Article 26.1: Right
to education Â· Article 26.2: Human rights education Â· Article 26.3: Right to
choice of education Â· Article 27.1: Right to participate in culture Â·
Article 27.2: Right to intellectual property  
Context, limitations and duties  
Article 28: Social order Â· Article 29.1: Social responsibility Â· Article
29.2: Limitations of human rights Â· Article 29.3: The supremacy of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations  
Article 30: Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any
State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to perform any
act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth
herein.  
Category:Human rights Â· Human rights portal  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marriage"

Categories: Family | Marriage | Mating | Demography | Old French loanwords

Hidden categories: Articles to be expanded since July 2008 | All articles to
be expanded | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles needing
clarification from April 2009 | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since April 2009 | Articles with unsourced
statements since November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since
October 2007 | Wikipedia external links cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Aymar aru
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æè¨
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Ù ÙØ²ÙØ±ÙÙÙ
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Qaraqalpaqsha
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Shqip
  * à·à·à¶à·à¶½
  * Simple English
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TatarÃ§a/Ð¢Ð°ÑÐ°ÑÑÐ°
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Walon
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 April 2009, at 10:09 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



