
# Communism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the common communist ideological stream of Bolshevism developed by
Vladimir Lenin and subsequent adherant communist governments to Bolshevism,
see Bolshevik and Marxism-Leninism.

Part of the Politics series on  
Communism  
Hammer-and-sickle symbol  
Basic concepts

Marxist philosophy  
Class struggle  
Proletarian internationalism  
Communist party  
Communist state  
Ideologies

Marxism Â· Leninism  
Trotskyism  
Maoism Â· Hoxhaism  
Deng Xiaoping Theory  
Juche  
Left communism  
Council communism Â· Titoism  
Castroism  
Anarchist communism  
Religious communism  
Christian communism  
Eurocommunism  
National communism  
Internationals

Communist League  
First International  
Second International  
Third International  
Cominform  
Fourth International  
ICMLPO (International Newsletter)  
ICMLPO (Unity & Struggle)  
People

Karl Marx Karl Marx  
Friedrich Engels Friedrich Engels  
Vladimir Lenin Vladimir Lenin  
Joseph Stalin Joseph Stalin  
Leon Trotsky Leon Trotsky  
Mao Zedong Mao Zedong  
Enver Hoxha Enver Hoxha  
Kim Il-Sung Kim Il-Sung  
Josip Broz Tito Josip Broz Tito  
This image is a candidate for speedy deletion. It may be deleted after Monday,
6 April 2009. Fidel Castro  
Che Guevara Che Guevara  
Ho Chi Minh  
Related topics

Anarchism Â· Anti-capitalism  
Anti-communism  
Communist state  
Communist symbolism  
Criticisms of communism  
Democratic centralism  
Dictatorship of the proletariat  
History of communism  
Left-wing politics  
Luxemburgism  
New Class Â· New Left  
Post-Communism  
Primitive communism  
Socialism Â· Stalinism  
Socialist economics  
Soviet Union  
Communism Portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Semi-protected

Communism is a socioeconomic structure and political ideology that promotes
the establishment of an egalitarian, classless, stateless society based on
common ownership and control of the means of production and property in
general.[1][2][3] Karl Marx posited that communism would be the final stage in
human society, which would be achieved through a proletarian revolution. "Pure
communism" in the Marxian sense refers to a classless, stateless and
oppression-free society where decisions on what to produce and what policies
to pursue are made democratically, allowing every member of society to
participate in the decision-making process in both the political and economic
spheres of life.

As a political ideology, communism is usually considered to be a branch of
socialism; a broad group of economic and political philosophies that draw on
the various political and intellectual movements with origins in the work of
theorists of the Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution.[4] Communism
attempts to offer an alternative to the problems with the capitalist market
economy and the legacy of imperialism and nationalism. Marx states that the
only way to solve these problems is for the working class (proletariat), who
according to Marx are the main producers of wealth in society and are
exploited by the Capitalist-class (bourgeoisie), to replace the bourgeoisie as
the ruling class in order to establish a free society, without class or racial
divisions.[2] The dominant forms of communism, such as Leninism, Stalinism,
Maoism and Trotskyism are based on Marxism, but non-Marxist versions of
communism (such as Christian communism and anarcho-communism) also exist.

Karl Marx never provided a detailed description as to how communism would
function as an economic system, but it is understood that a communist economy
would consist of common ownership of the means of production, culminating in
the negation of the concept of private ownership of capital, which referred to
the means of production in Marxian terminology. Unlike socialism, which is
compatible with a market economy, a communist economy consists of local or
communal democratic planning.

In modern usage, communism is often used to refer to Bolshevism or Marxism-
Leninism.

## Contents

  * 1 Terminology
  * 2 Marxist schools of communism
    * 2.1 Marxism
    * 2.2 Marxism-Leninism
    * 2.3 Stalinism
    * 2.4 Trotskyism
    * 2.5 Maoism
    * 2.6 Hoxhaism
    * 2.7 Titoism
    * 2.8 Eurocommunism
    * 2.9 Council communism
    * 2.10 Juche
  * 3 Non-Marxist schools
    * 3.1 Anarcho-communism
    * 3.2 Christian communism
  * 4 History
    * 4.1 Early communism
    * 4.2 Growth of modern communism
    * 4.3 Cold War years
    * 4.4 Fear of communism
    * 4.5 After the collapse of the Soviet Union
  * 5 Criticism of communism
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
    * 7.1 Notes
    * 7.2 Further reading
  * 8 External links

  
## Terminology

In the schema of historical materialism, communism is the idea of a free
society with no division or alienation, where mankind is free from oppression
and scarcity. A communist society would have no governments, countries, or
class divisions. In Marxist theory, the dictatorship of the proletariat is the
intermediate system between capitalism and communism, when the government is
in the process of changing the means of ownership from privatism, to
collective ownership.[5] In political science, the term "communism" is
sometimes used to refer to communist states, a form of government in which the
state operates under a one-party system and declares allegiance to Marxism-
Leninism or a derivative thereof.

## Marxist schools of communism

> "To build communism it is necessary, simultaneous with the new material
foundations, to build the new man and woman."

> â Che Guevara, Marxist revolutionary [6]

Self-identified communists hold a variety of views, including Marxism-
Leninism, Trotskyism, council communism, Luxemburgism, anarchist communism,
Christian communism, and various currents of left communism. However, the
offshoots of the Marxist-Leninist interpretations of Marxism are the most
well-known of these and have been a driving force in international relations
during most of the 20th century.[2]

### Marxism

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Communist Manifesto.

Main article: Marxism

Like other socialists, Marx and Engels sought an end to capitalism and the
systems which they perceived to be responsible for the exploitation of
workers. But whereas earlier socialists often favored longer-term social
reform, Marx and Engels believed that popular revolution was all but
inevitable, and the only path to the socialist state.[7]

According to the Marxist argument for communism, the main characteristic of
human life in class society is alienation; and communism is desirable because
it entails the full realization of human freedom.[8] Marx here follows Georg
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel in conceiving freedom not merely as an absence of
restraints but as action with content.[9] According to Marx, Communism's
outlook on freedom was based on an agent, obstacle, and goal. The agent is the
common/working people; the obstacles are class divisions, economic
inequalities, unequal life-chances, and false consciousness; and the goal is
the fulfillment of human needs including satisfying work, and fair share of
the product.[10][11] They believed that communism allowed people to do what
they want, but also put humans in such conditions and such relations with one
another that they would not wish to exploit, or have any need to. Whereas for
Hegel the unfolding of this ethical life in history is mainly driven by the
realm of ideas, for Marx, communism emerged from material forces, particularly
the development of the means of production.[9]

Marxism holds that a process of class conflict and revolutionary struggle will
result in victory for the proletariat and the establishment of a communist
society in which private ownership is abolished over time and the means of
production and subsistence belong to the community. Marx himself wrote little
about life under communism, giving only the most general indication as to what
constituted a communist society. It is clear that it entails abundance in
which there is little limit to the projects that humans may
undertake.[citation needed] In the popular slogan that was adopted by the
communist movement, communism was a world in which each gave according to
their abilities, and received according to their needs. The German Ideology
(1845) was one of Marx's few writings to elaborate on the communist future:

> "In communist society, where nobody has one exclusive sphere of activity but
each can become accomplished in any branch he wishes, society regulates the
general production and thus makes it possible for me to do one thing today and
another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle
in the evening, criticise after dinner, just as I have a mind, without ever
becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or critic."[12]

Marx's lasting vision was to add this vision to a theory of how society was
moving in a law-governed way toward communism, and, with some tension, a
political theory that explained why revolutionary activity was required to
bring it about.[9]

In the late 19th century, the terms "socialism" and "communism" were often
used interchangeably. However, Marx and Engels argued that communism would not
emerge from capitalism in a fully developed state, but would pass through a
"first phase" in which most productive property was owned in common, but with
some class differences remaining. The "first phase" would eventually evolve
into a "higher phase" in which class differences were eliminated, and a state
was no longer needed. Lenin frequently used the term "socialism" to refer to
Marx and Engels' supposed "first phase" of communism and used the term
"communism" interchangeably with Marx and Engels' "higher phase" of
communism.[3]

These later aspects, particularly as developed by Lenin, provided the
underpinning for the mobilizing features of 20th century Communist parties.
Later writers such as Louis Althusser and Nicos Poulantzas modified Marx's
vision by allotting a central place to the state in the development of such
societies, by arguing for a prolonged transition period of socialism prior to
the attainment of full communism.[citation needed]

### Marxism-Leninism

Main article: Marxism-Leninism

Marxism-Leninism is a version of socialism adopted by the Soviet Union and
most Communist Parties across the world today. It shaped the Soviet Union and
influenced Communist Parties worldwide. It was heralded as a possibility of
building communism via a massive program of industrialization and
collectivization. Historically, under the ideology of Marxism-Leninism the
rapid development of industry, and above all the victory of the Soviet Union
in the Second World War occurred alongside a third of the world being lead by
Marxist-Leninist inspired parties. Despite the fall of the Soviet Union and
Eastern Bloc countries, many communist Parties of the world today still lay
claim to uphold the Marxist-Leninist banner. Marxism-Leninism expands on
Marxists thoughts by bringing the theories to what Lenin and other Communists
considered, the age of capitalist imperialism, and a renewed focus on party
building, the development of a socialist state, and democratic centralism as
an organizational principle.

### Stalinism

Main article: Stalinism

"Stalinism" refers to the political system of the Soviet Union, and the
countries within the Soviet sphere of influence, during the leadership of
Joseph Stalin. The term usually defines the style of a government rather than
an ideology. The ideology was "Marxism-Leninism theory", reflecting that
Stalin himself was not a theoretician, in contrast to Marx and Lenin, and
prided himself on maintaining the legacy of Lenin as a founding father for the
Soviet Union and the future Socialist world. Stalinism is an interpretation of
their ideas, and a certain political regime claiming to apply those ideas in
ways fitting the changing needs of society, as with the transition from
"socialism at a snail's pace" in the mid-twenties to the rapid
industrialization of the Five-Year Plans.

The main contributions of Stalin to communist theory were:

  * The groundwork for the Soviet policy concerning nationalities, laid in Stalin's 1913 work Marxism and the National Question,[13] praised by Lenin.
  * Socialism in One Country,
  * The theory of aggravation of the class struggle along with the development of socialism, a theoretical base supporting the repression of political opponents as necessary.

### Trotskyism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Leon Trotsky reading The Militant.

Main article: Trotskyism

Trotsky and his supporters organized into the Left Opposition and their
platform became known as Trotskyism. Stalin eventually succeeded in gaining
control of the Soviet regime and Trotskyist attempts to remove Stalin from
power resulted in Trotsky's exile from the Soviet Union in 1929. During
Trotsky's exile, world communism fractured into two distinct branches:
Marxism-Leninism and Trotskyism.[2] Trotsky later founded the Fourth
International, a Trotskyist rival to the Comintern, in 1938.

Trotskyist ideas have continually found a modest echo among political
movements in some countries in Latin America and Asia, especially in
Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia and Sri Lanka. Many Trotskyist organizations are
also active in more stable, developed countries in North America and Western
Europe. Trotsky's politics differed sharply from those of Stalin and Mao, most
importantly in declaring the need for an international proletarian revolution
(rather than socialism in one country) and unwavering support for a true
dictatorship of the proletariat based on democratic principles.

However, as a whole, Trotsky's theories and attitudes were never accepted in
worldwide mainstream Communist circles after Trotsky's expulsion, either
within or outside of the Soviet bloc. This remained the case even after the
Secret Speech and subsequent events critics claim exposed the fallibility of
Stalin.

Some criticize Trotskyism as incapable of using concrete analysis on its
theories, rather resorting to phrases and abstract notions.[14][15][16]

### Maoism

<IMG>

<IMG>

This poster shows Mao Zedong as continuing the legacy set by former Communist
leaders.[17]

Main article: Maoism

Maoism is the Marxist-Leninist trend of Communism associated with Mao Zedong
and was mostly practiced within the People's Republic of China. Khrushchev's
reforms heightened ideological differences between the People's Republic of
China and the Soviet Union, which became increasingly apparent in the 1960s.
As the Sino-Soviet Split in the international Communist movement turned toward
open hostility, China portrayed itself as a leader of the underdeveloped world
against the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union.[citation
needed]

Parties and groups that supported the Communist Party of China (CPC) in their
criticism against the new Soviet leadership proclaimed themselves as 'anti-
revisionist' and denounced the CPSU and the parties aligned with it as
revisionist "capitalist-roaders." The Sino-Soviet Split resulted in divisions
amongst communist parties around the world. Notably, the Party of Labour of
Albania sided with the People's Republic of China. Effectively, the CPC under
Mao's leadership became the rallying forces of a parallel international
Communist tendency. The ideology of CPC, Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought
(generally referred to as 'Maoism'), was adopted by many of these
groups.[citation needed]

After Mao's death and his replacement by Deng Xiaoping, the international
Maoist movement diverged. One sector accepted the new leadership in China; a
second renounced the new leadership and reaffirmed their commitment to Mao's
legacy; and a third renounced Maoism altogether and aligned with
Albania.[citation needed]

### Hoxhaism

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

This poster shows Hoxha continuing the path set by Marx, Engels, Lenin and
Stalin.

Another variant of anti-revisionist Marxism-Leninism appeared after the
ideological row between the Communist Party of China and the Party of Labour
of Albania in 1978. The Albanians rallied a new separate international
tendency. This tendency would demarcate itself by a strict defense of the
legacy of Joseph Stalin and fierce criticism of virtually all other Communist
groupings as revisionism. Critical of the United States, Soviet Union, and
China, Enver Hoxha declared the latter two to be social-imperialist and
condemned the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia by withdrawing from the Warsaw
Pact in response. Hoxha declared Albania to be the world's only socialist
state after 1978. The Albanians were able to win over a large share of the
Maoists, mainly in Latin America such as the Popular Liberation Army, but also
had a significant international following in general. This tendency has
occasionally been labeled as 'Hoxhaism' after him.

After the fall of the Communist government in Albania, the pro-Albanian
parties are grouped around an international conference and the publication
'Unity and Struggle'.

### Titoism

Main article: Titoism

Elements of Titoism are characterized by policies and practices based on the
principle that in each country, the means of attaining ultimate communist
goals must be dictated by the conditions of that particular country, rather
than by a pattern set in another country. During Titoâs era, this
specifically meant that the communist goal should be pursued independently of
(and often in opposition to) the policies of the Soviet Union.

The term was originally meant as a pejorative, and was labeled by Moscow as a
heresy during the period of tensions between the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia
known as the Informbiro period from 1948 to 1955.

Unlike the rest of East Europe, which fell under Stalin's influence post-World
War II, Yugoslavia, due to the strong leadership of Marshal Tito and the fact
that the Yugoslav Partisans liberated Yugoslavia with only limited help from
the Red Army, remained independent from Moscow. It became the only country in
the Balkans to resist pressure from Moscow to join the Warsaw Pact and
remained "socialist, but independent" right up until the collapse of Soviet
socialism in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Throughout his time in office,
Tito prided himself on Yugoslavia's independence from Russia, with Yugoslavia
never accepting full membership of the Comecon and Tito's open rejection of
many aspects of Stalinism as the most obvious manifestations of this.

### Eurocommunism

Main article: Eurocommunism

Since the early 1970s, the term Eurocommunism was used to refer to moderate,
reformist Communist parties in western Europe. These parties did not support
the Soviet Union and denounced its policies. Such parties were politically
active and electorally significant in Italy (PCI), France (PCF), and Spain
(PCE).[3]

### Council communism

Main article: Council communism

Council communism is a far-left movement originating in Germany and the
Netherlands in the 1920s. Its primary organization was the Communist Workers
Party of Germany (KAPD). Council communism continues today as a theoretical
and activist position within both left-wing Marxism and libertarian socialism.

The central argument of council communism, in contrast to those of social
democracy and Leninist Communism, is that democratic workers' councils arising
in the factories and municipalities are the natural form of working class
organisation and governmental power. This view is opposed to both the
reformist and the Leninist ideologies, with their stress on, respectively,
parliaments and institutional government (i.e., by applying social reforms),
on the one hand, and vanguard parties and participative democratic centralism
on the other).

The core principle of council communism is that the government and the economy
should be managed by workers' councils composed of delegates elected at
workplaces and recallable at any moment. As such, council communists oppose
state-run authoritarian "State socialism"/"State capitalism". They also oppose
the idea of a "revolutionary party", since council communists believe that a
revolution led by a party will necessarily produce a party dictatorship.
Council communists support a worker's democracy, which they want to produce
through a federation of workers' councils. Council communism (and other types
of "anti-authoritarian and Anti-leninist Marxism" such as Autonomism) are
often viewed as being similar to Anarchism because they criticize Leninist
ideologies for being authoritarian and reject the idea of a vanguard party.

### Juche

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)  
Main article: Juche

In 1992, Juche replaced Marxism-Leninism in the revised North Korean
constitution as the official state ideology, this being a response to the
Sino-Soviet split. Juche was originally defined as a creative application of
Marxism-Leninism, but after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union (North
Koreaâs greatest economic benefactor), all reference to Marxism-Leninism was
dropped in the revised 1998 constitution. The establishment of the Songun
doctrine in the mid-1990s has formally designated the military, not the
proletariat or working class, as the main revolutionary force in North Korea.

According to Kim Jong-il's On the Juche Idea, the application of Juche in
state policy entails the following:

  1. The people must have independence (chajusong) in thought and politics, economic self-sufficiency, and self-reliance in defense.
  2. Policy must reflect the will and aspirations of the masses and employ them fully in revolution and construction.
  3. Methods of revolution and construction must be suitable to the situation of the country.
  4. The most important work of revolution and construction is molding people ideologically as communists and mobilizing them to constructive action.

## Non-Marxist schools

The dominant forms of communism, such as Leninism, Trotskyism and Maoism, are
based on Marxism, but non-Marxist versions of communism (such as Christian
communism and anarchist communism) also exist and are growing in importance
since the fall of the Soviet Union.

### Anarcho-communism

Main article: Anarcho-communism

Some of Marx's contemporaries espoused similar ideas, but differed in their
views of how to reach to a classless society. Following the split between
those associated with Marx and Mikhail Bakunin at the First International, the
anarchists formed the International Workers Association.[18] Anarchists argued
that capitalism and the state were inseparable and that one could not be
abolished without the other. Anarchist-communists such as Peter Kropotkin
theorized an immediate transition to one society with no classes. Anarcho-
syndicalism became one of the dominant forms of anarchist organization,
arguing that labor unions, as opposed to Communist parties, are the
organizations that can change society. Consequently, many anarchists have been
in opposition to Marxist communism to this day.[citation needed]

### Christian communism

Main article: Christian communism

Christian communism is a form of religious communism centered on Christianity.
It is a theological and political theory based upon the view that the
teachings of Jesus Christ urge Christians to support communism as the ideal
social system. Christian communists trace the origins of their practice to
teachings in the New Testament, such as this one from Acts of the Apostles at
chapter 2 and verses 42, 44, and 45:

> 42 And they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and in
fellowship [...] 44 And all that believed were together, and had all things in
common; 45 And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men,
as every man had need. (King James Version)

Christian communism can be seen as a radical form of Christian socialism.
Also, due to the fact that many Christian communists have formed independent
stateless communes in the past, there is also a link between Christian
communism and Christian anarchism. Christian communists may or may not agree
with various parts of Marxism.

Christian communists also share some of the political goals of Marxists, for
example replacing capitalism with socialism, which should in turn be followed
by communism at a later point in the future. However, Christian communists
sometimes disagree with Marxists (and particularly with Leninists) on the way
a socialist or communist society should be organized.

## History

Main article: History of communism

### Early communism

Further information: Primitive communism and Religious communism

Karl Heinrich Marx saw primitive communism as the original, hunter-gatherer
state of humankind from which it arose. For Marx, only after humanity was
capable of producing surplus, did private property develop.[citation needed]

In the history of Western thought, certain elements of the idea of a society
based on common ownership of property can be traced back to ancient times .[3]
Examples include the Spartacus slave revolt in Rome.[19] The fifth century
Mazdak movement in what is now Iran has been described as "communistic" for
challenging the enormous privileges of the noble classes and the clergy,
criticizing the institution of private property and for striving for an
egalitarian society.[20]

At one time or another, various small communist communities existed, generally
under the inspiration of Scripture.[21] In the medieval Christian church, for
example, some monastic communities and religious orders shared their land and
other property (see religious communism and Christian communism). These groups
often believed that concern with private property was a distraction from
religious service to God and neighbor.[3]

Communist thought has also been traced back to the work of 16th century
English writer Thomas More. In his treatise Utopia (1516), More portrayed a
society based on common ownership of property, whose rulers administered it
through the application of reason.[3] In the 17th century, communist thought
arguably surfaced again in England. In 17th century England, a Puritan
religious group known as the Diggers advocated the abolition of private
ownership of land.[citation needed] Eduard Bernstein, in his 1895 Cromwell and
Communism[22] argued that several groupings in the English Civil War,
especially the Diggers espoused clear communistic, agrarian ideals, and that
Oliver Cromwell's attitude to these groups was at best ambivalent and often
hostile.[23]

Criticism of the idea of private property continued into the Age of
Enlightenment of the 18th century, through such thinkers as Jean Jacques
Rousseau in France.[3] Later, following the upheaval of the French Revolution,
communism emerged as a political doctrine.[24] FranÃ§ois NoÃ«l Babeuf, in
particular, espoused the goals of common ownership of land and total economic
and political equality among citizens.[3]

Various social reformers in the early 19th century founded communities based
on common ownership. But unlike many previous communist communities, they
replaced the religious emphasis with a rational and philanthropic basis.[21]
Notable among them were Robert Owen, who founded New Harmony in Indiana
(1825), and Charles Fourier, whose followers organized other settlements in
the United States such as Brook Farm (1841â47).[21] Later in the 19th
century, Karl Marx described these social reformers as "utopian socialists" to
contrast them with his program of "scientific socialism" (a term coined by
Friedrich Engels). Other writers described by Marx as "utopian socialists"
included Saint-Simon.

In its modern form, communism grew out of the socialist movement of 19th
century Europe.[3] As the Industrial Revolution advanced, socialist critics
blamed capitalism for the misery of the proletariat â a new class of urban
factory workers who labored under often-hazardous conditions. Foremost among
these critics were the German philosopher Karl Marx and his associate
Friedrich Engels. In 1848, Marx and Engels offered a new definition of
communism and popularized the term in their famous pamphlet The Communist
Manifesto.[21] Engels, who lived in Manchester, observed the organization of
the Chartist movement (see History of British socialism), while Marx departed
from his university comrades to meet the proletariat in France and
Germany.[citation needed]

### Growth of modern communism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Vladimir Lenin, following his return to Petrograd.

Main article: History of Communism

In the late 19th century, Russian Marxism developed a distinct character. The
first major figure of Russian Marxism was Georgi Plekhanov. Underlying the
work of Plekhanov was the assumption that Russia, less urbanized and
industrialized than Western Europe, had many years to go before society would
be ready for proletarian revolution to occur, and a transitional period of a
bourgeois democratic regime would be required to replace Tsarism with a
socialist and later communist society. (EB)

In Russia, the 1917 October Revolution was the first time any party with an
avowedly Marxist orientation, in this case the Bolshevik Party, seized state
power. The assumption of state power by the Bolsheviks generated a great deal
of practical and theoretical debate within the Marxist movement. Marx
predicted that socialism and communism would be built upon foundations laid by
the most advanced capitalist development. Russia, however, was one of the
poorest countries in Europe with an enormous, largely illiterate peasantry and
a minority of industrial workers. Marx had explicitly stated that Russia might
be able to skip the stage of bourgeoisie capitalism.[25] Other socialists also
believed that a Russian revolution could be the precursor of workers'
revolutions in the West.

The moderate Mensheviks opposed Lenin's Bolshevik plan for socialist
revolution before capitalism was more fully developed. The Bolsheviks'
successful rise to power was based upon the slogans "peace, bread, and land"
and "All power to the Soviets", slogans which tapped the massive public desire
for an end to Russian involvement in the First World War, the peasants' demand
for land reform, and popular support for the Soviets.[citation needed]

The usage of the terms "communism" and "socialism" shifted after 1917, when
the Bolsheviks changed their name to the Communist Party and installed a
single party regime devoted to the implementation of socialist policies under
Leninism.[citation needed] The Second International had dissolved in 1916 over
national divisions, as the separate national parties that composed it did not
maintain a unified front against the war, instead generally supporting their
respective nation's role. Lenin thus created the Third International
(Comintern) in 1919 and sent the Twenty-one Conditions, which included
democratic centralism, to all European socialist parties willing to adhere. In
France, for example, the majority of the SFIO socialist party split in 1921 to
form the SFIC (French Section of the Communist International).[citation
needed] Henceforth, the term "Communism" was applied to the objective of the
parties founded under the umbrella of the Comintern. Their program called for
the uniting of workers of the world for revolution, which would be followed by
the establishment of a dictatorship of the proletariat as well as the
development of a socialist economy. Ultimately, if their program held, there
would develop a harmonious classless society, with the withering away of the
state.[citation needed]

<IMG>

<IMG>

A map of countries who declared themselves to be socialist states under the
Marxist-Leninist or Maoist definition (in other words, "communist states") at
some point in their history. The map uses present-day borders.

During the Russian Civil War (1918â1922), the Bolsheviks nationalized all
productive property and imposed a policy of war communism, which put factories
and railroads under strict government control, collected and rationed food,
and introduced some bourgeois management of industry. After three years of war
and the 1921 Kronstadt rebellion, Lenin declared the New Economic Policy (NEP)
in 1921, which was to give a "limited place for a limited time to capitalism."
The NEP lasted until 1928, when Joseph Stalin achieved party leadership, and
the introduction of the first Five Year Plan spelled the end of it. Following
the Russian Civil War, the Bolsheviks formed in 1922 the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (USSR), or Soviet Union, from the former Russian Empire.

Following Lenin's democratic centralism, the Communist parties were organized
on a hierarchical basis, with active cells of members as the broad base; they
were made up only of elite cadres approved by higher members of the party as
being reliable and completely subject to party discipline.[26]

After World War II, Communists consolidated power in Eastern Europe, and in
1949, the Communist Party of China (CPC) led by Mao Zedong established the
People's Republic of China, which would later follow its own ideological path
of Communist development.[citation needed] Cuba, North Korea, Vietnam, Laos,
Cambodia, Angola, and Mozambique were among the other countries in the Third
World that adopted or imposed a pro-Communist government at some point.
Although never formally unified as a single political entity, by the early
1980s almost one-third of the world's population lived in Communist states,
including the former Soviet Union and People's Republic of China. By
comparison, the British Empire had ruled up to one-quarter of the world's
population at its greatest extent.[27]

Communist states such as Soviet Union and China succeeded in becoming
industrial and technological powers, challenging the capitalists' powers in
the arms race and space race and military conflicts.

### Cold War years

<IMG>

<IMG>

USSR postage stamp depicting the communist state launching the first
artificial satellite Sputnik 1.

By virtue of the Soviet Union's victory in the Second World War in 1945, the
Soviet Army had occupied nations in both Eastern Europe and East Asia; as a
result, communism as a movement spread to many new countries. This expansion
of communism both in Europe and Asia gave rise to a few different branches of
its own, such as Maoism.[citation needed]

Communism had been vastly strengthened by the winning of many new nations into
the sphere of Soviet influence and strength in Eastern Europe. Governments
modeled on Soviet Communism took power with Soviet assistance in Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Poland, Hungary and Romania. A Communist
government was also created under Marshal Tito in Yugoslavia, but Tito's
independent policies led to the expulsion of Yugoslavia from the Cominform,
which had replaced the Comintern. Titoism, a new branch in the world communist
movement, was labeled deviationist. Albania also became an independent
Communist nation after World War II.[citation needed]

By 1950, the Chinese Communists held all of Mainland China, thus controlling
the most populous nation in the world. Other areas where rising Communist
strength provoked dissension and in some cases led to actual fighting through
conventional and guerrilla warfare include the Korean War, Laos, many nations
of the Middle East and Africa, and notably succeeded in the case of the
Vietnam War against the military power of the United States and its allies.
With varying degrees of success, Communists attempted to unite with
nationalist and socialist forces against what they saw as Western imperialism
in these poor countries.

### Fear of communism

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 1947 propaganda book published by the Catechetical Guild Educational Society
"warning of the dangers" of a Communist takeover.

Main article: Red Scare

With the exception of the Soviet Union's, China's and the Italian resistance
movement's great contribution in World War II, communism was seen as a rival,
and a threat to western democracies and capitalism for most of the twentieth
century.[3] This rivalry peaked during the Cold War, as the world's two
remaining superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, polarized the
world into two camps of nations (characterized in the West as "The Free World"
vs. "Behind the Iron Curtain"); supported the spread of their economic and
political systems (capitalism and democracy vs. communism); strengthened their
military power, developed new weapon systems and stockpiled nuclear weapons;
competed with each other in space exploration; and even fought each other
through proxy client nations.

Near the beginning of the Cold War, on February 9, 1950, Senator Joseph
McCarthy from Wisconsin accused 205 Americans working in the State Department
of being "card-carrying Communists".[28] The fear of communism in the U.S.
spurred aggressive investigations and the red-baiting, blacklisting, jailing
and deportation of people suspected of following Communist or other left-wing
ideology. Many famous actors and writers were put on a "blacklist" from 1950
to 1954, which meant they would not be hired and would be subject to public
disdain.[29]

### After the collapse of the Soviet Union

<IMG>

<IMG>

This map shows the states which today are officially run by a Communist party
alone: People's Republic of China, North Korea, Laos, Vietnam and Cuba.

In 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev became leader of the Soviet Union and relaxed
central control, in accordance with reform policies of glasnost (openness) and
perestroika (restructuring). The Soviet Union did not intervene as Poland,
East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, and Hungary all abandoned
Communist rule by 1990. In 1991, the Soviet Union itself dissolved.

By the beginning of the 21st century, states controlled by Communist parties
under a single-party system include the People's Republic of China, Cuba,
Laos, North Korea, and Vietnam. Communist parties, or their descendant
parties, remain politically important in many countries. President Vladimir
Voronin of Moldova is a member of the Party of Communists of the Republic of
Moldova, and President Dimitris Christofias of Cyprus is a member of the
Progressive Party of Working People, but the countries are not run under
single-party rule. In South Africa, the Communist Party is a partner in the
ANC-led government. In India, communists lead the governments of three states,
with a combined population of more than 115 million. In Nepal, communists hold
a majority in the parliament.[30]

The People's Republic of China has reassessed many aspects of the Maoist
legacy; and the People's Republic of China, Laos, Vietnam, and, to a far
lesser degree, Cuba have reduced state control of the economy in order to
stimulate growth. The People's Republic of China runs Special Economic Zones
dedicated to market-oriented enterprise, free from central government control.
Several other communist states have also attempted to implement market-based
reforms, including Vietnam.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A tableau in a communist rally in Kerala, India, of a young farmer and worker.

Theories within Marxism as to why communism in Eastern Europe was not achieved
after socialist revolutions pointed to such elements as the pressure of
external capitalist states, the relative backwardness of the societies in
which the revolutions occurred, and the emergence of a bureaucratic stratum or
class that arrested or diverted the transition press in its own interests.
(Scott and Marshall, 2005) Marxist critics of the Soviet Union, most notably
Trotsky, referred to the Soviet system, along with other Communist states, as
"degenerated" or "deformed workers' states", arguing that the Soviet system
fell far short of Marx's communist ideal and he claimed the working class was
politically dispossessed. The ruling stratum of the Soviet Union was held to
be a bureaucratic caste, but not a new ruling class, despite their political
control. Anarchists who adhere to Participatory economics claim that the
Soviet Union became dominated by powerful intellectual elites who in a
capitalist system crown the proletariatâs labor on behalf of the
bourgeoisie.

Non-Marxists, in contrast, have often applied the term to any society ruled by
a Communist Party and to any party aspiring to create a society similar to
such existing nation-states. In the social sciences, societies ruled by
Communist Parties are distinct for their single party control and their
socialist economic bases. While some social and political scientists applied
the concept of "totalitarianism" to these societies, others identified
possibilities for independent political activity within them,[31][32] and
stressed their continued evolution up to the point of the dissolution of the
Soviet Union and its allies in Eastern Europe during the late 1980s and early
1990s.[citation needed]

Today, Marxist revolutionaries are conducting armed insurgencies in India,
Philippines, Peru, Bangladesh, Iran, Turkey, and Colombia.

## Criticism of communism

Main article: Criticisms of communism

A diverse array of writers and political activists have published criticism of
communism, such as:

  * Soviet bloc dissidents Lech WaÅÄsa, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and VÃ¡clav Havel;
  * Social theorists Hannah Arendt, Raymond Aron, Ralf Dahrendorf, Seymour Martin Lipset, and Karl Wittfogel;
  * Economists Ludwig von Mises, Friedrich Hayek, and Milton Friedman;
  * Historians and social scientists Robert Conquest, StÃ©phane Courtois, Richard Pipes, and R. J. Rummel;
  * Anti-Stalinist leftists Ignazio Silone, George Orwell, Saul Alinsky, Richard Wright, Arthur Koestler, and Bernard-Henri Levy;
  * Russian-born novelist and philosopher Ayn Rand
  * Philosophers Leszek KoÅakowski and Karl Popper.

Part of this criticism is on the policies adopted by one-party states ruled by
Communist parties (known as "Communist states"). Critics are specially focused
on their economic performance compared to market based economies. Their human
rights records are thought to be responsible for the flight of refugees from
communist states, and are alleged[who?] to be responsible for famines, purges
and warfare resulting in deaths far in excess of previous empires, capitalist
or Axis regimes.

Some writers, such as Courtois, argue that the actions of Communist states
were the inevitable (though sometimes unintentional) result of Marxist
principles;[33] thus, these authors present the events occurring in those
countries, particularly under Stalin and Mao, as an argument against Marxism
itself. Some critics were former Marxists, such as Wittfogel , who applied
Marx's concept of "Oriental despotism" to Communist states such as the Soviet
Union,[34] and Silone, Wright, Koestler (among other writers) who contributed
essays to the book The God that Failed (the title refers not to the Christian
God but to Marxism)[35]

There have also been more direct criticisms of Marxism, such as criticisms of
the labor theory of value or Marx's predictions. Nevertheless, Communist
parties outside of the Warsaw Pact, such as the Communist parties in Western
Europe, Asia, Latin America, and Africa, differed greatly.

Economic criticisms of communal and/or government property are described under
criticisms of socialism.

## See also

  * Communism by country
  * Anti-communism
  * Communist state
  * Communization
  * Criticisms of communism
  * Dekulakization
  * Economic ideology
  * Human rights in the Soviet Union
  * Ideology
  * Post-Communism
  * Reeducation camp
  * The Communist Manifesto
  * The Museum of Communism in Poland

Organizations and people

  * Communist party
  * Friedrich Engels
  * Karl Marx
  * Kim Il-sung
  * Leon Trotsky
  * List of Communist parties
  * Mao Zedong
  * Rosa Luxemburg
  * Vladimir Lenin

Schools of communism

  * Anarchist communism
  * Council communism
  * De Leonism
  * Eurocommunism
  * Juche
  * Left communism
  * Leninism
  * Luxemburgism
  * Maoism
  * Marxism
  * Marxism-Leninism
  * Religious communism
  * Stalinism
  * Titoism
  * Trotskyism

  
## References

### Notes

  1. ^ Morris, William (in English). News from nowhere. http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1890/nowhere/index.htm. Retrieved on January 2008.
  2. ^ a b c d "Communism". The Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.). 2007. http://www.bartleby.com/65/co/communism.html.
  3. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Colton, Timothy J. (2007). "Communism". Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia. http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761572241/Communism.html.
  4. ^ "Socialism." Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia. Columbia University Press. 03 Feb. 2008.<reference.com http://www.reference.com/browse/columbia/socialis>.
  5. ^ "Critique of the Gotha Programme--IV". Critique of the Gotha Programme. http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/ch04.htm.
  6. ^ "Socialism and Man in Cuba" A letter to Carlos Quijano, editor of Marcha, a weekly published in Montevideo, Uruguay; published as "From Algiers, for Marcha: The Cuban Revolution Today" by Che Guevara on March 12, 1965
  7. ^ Colton, Timothy J. (2007). "Communism". Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia. http://encarta.msn.com/text_761572241___0/Communism.html.
  8. ^ Stephen Whitefield. "Communism." The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics. Ed. Iain McLean and Alistair McMillan. Oxford University Press, 2003.
  9. ^ a b c McLean and McMillan, 2003.
  10. ^ Ball and Dagger 118
  11. ^ Terence Ball and Richard Dagger. "Political Ideologies and the Democratic Ideal." Pearson Education, Inc.:2006.
  12. ^ Karl Marx, (1845). The German Ideology, Marx-Engels Institute, Moscow. ISBN 978-1-57392-258-6. Sources available at The German Ideology at www.marxists.org.
  13. ^ "Marxism and the National Question"
  14. ^ On Trotskyism
  15. ^ Swedish FRP on anti-Marxist-Leninist dogmas of Trotskyism
  16. ^ What's Your Line?
  17. ^ This poster has been jokingly referred to as "The History of Shaving" Stefan Landsberger's Chinese Propaganda Poster Pages-Ideological Foundations
  18. ^ Marshall, Peter. "Demanding the Impossible â A History of Anarchism" p. 9. Fontana Press, London, 1993 ISBN 978-0-00-686245-1
  19. ^ Historical Background for Spartacus
  20. ^ The Cambridge History of Iran Volume 3, The Seleucid, Parthian and Sasanian Period, edited by Ehsan Yarshater, Parts 1 and 2, p1019, Cambridge University Press (1983)
  21. ^ a b c d "Communism." EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica. 2006. EncyclopÃ¦dia Britannica Online.
  22. ^ Eduard Bernstein: Cromwell and Communism (1895)
  23. ^ Eduard Bernstein, (1895). Kommunistische und demokratisch-sozialistische StrÃ¶mungen wÃ¤hrend der englischen Revolution, J.H.W. Dietz, Stuttgart. OCLC 36367345 Sources available at Eduard Bernstein: Cromwell and Communism (1895) at www.marxists.org.
  24. ^ "Communism" A Dictionary of Sociology. John Scott and Gordon Marshall. Oxford University Press 2005. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press.
  25. ^ Marc Edelman, "Late Marx and the Russian road: Marx and the 'Peripheries of Capitalism'" - book reviews. Monthly Review, Dec., 1984. Late Marx and the Russian road: Marx and the "Peripheries of Capitalism." - book reviews Monthly Review Find Articles at BNET at www.findarticles.com.
  26. ^ Norman Davies. "Communism" The Oxford Companion to World War II. Ed. I. C. B. Dear and M. R. D. Foot. Oxford University Press, 2001.
  27. ^ Hildreth, Jeremy (2005-06-14). "The British Empire's Lessons for Our own". The Wall Street Journal. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB111870387824258558.html.
  28. ^ Adams, John G. (1983). Without Precedent. New York, N.Y.: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 285\. ISBN 0-393-01616-1.
  29. ^ Georgakas, Dan (1992). "The Hollywood Blacklist". Encyclopedia of the American Left. University of Illinois Press.
  30. ^ Nepal's election The Maoists triumph Economist.com
  31. ^ H. Gordon Skilling (April 1966). "Interest Groups and Communist Politics". World Politics 18 (3): 435â451. doi:10.2307/2009764. ï¿½UNIQ3ab34e171166e61b-HTMLCommentStrip7c7dfbc41ccbeb7000000002
  32. ^ J. Arch Getty (1985). Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party Reconsidered: 1933â1938. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-33570-6.
  33. ^ Nicolas Werth, Karel BartoÅ¡ek, Jean-Louis Panne, Jean-Louis Margolin, Andrzej Paczkowski, StÃ©phane Courtois, The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression, Harvard University Press, 1999, hardcover, 858 pages, ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2
  34. ^ Wittfogel, Karl Oriental Despotism, Vintage, 1981
  35. ^ Crossman, Richard, ed., The God That Failed. Harper & Bros, 1949

### Further reading

  * Reason in Revolt: Marxism and Modern Science By Alan Woods and Ted Grant
  * Forman, James D., "Communism from Marx's Manifesto to 20th century Reality", New York, Watts. 1972. ISBN 978-0-531-02571-0
  * Books on Communism, Socialism and Trotskyism
  * Furet, Francois, Furet, Deborah Kan (Translator), "The Passing of an Illusion: The Idea of Communism in the Twentieth Century", University of Chicago Press, 2000, ISBN 978-0-226-27341-9
  * Daniels, Robert Vincent, "A Documentary History of Communism and the World: From Revolution to Collapse", University Press of New England, 1994, ISBN 978-0-87451-678-4
  * Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels, "Communist Manifesto", (Mass Market Paperback - REPRINT), Signet Classics, 1998, ISBN 978-0-451-52710-3
  * Dirlik, Arif, "Origins of Chinese Communism", Oxford University Press, 1989, ISBN 978-0-19-505454-5
  * Beer, Max, "The General History of Socialism and Social Struggles Volumes 1 & 2", New York, Russel and Russel, Inc. 1957
  * Adami, Stefano, 'Communism', in Encyclopedia of Italian Literary Studies, ed. Gaetana Marrone - P.Puppa, Routledge, New York- London, 2006

## External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Communism  
<IMG>

Look up communism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

  * European Parliament resolution on European conscience and totalitarianism
  * In Defense of Marxism
  * Comprehensive list of the leftist parties of the world
  * Anarchy Archives Includes the works of anarchist communists.
  * Libertarian Communist Library
  * Marxists Internet Archive
  * Marxist.net
  * The Mu Particle in "Communism", a short etymological essay by Wu Ming.
  * Open Society Archives, one of the biggest history of communism and cold war archives in the world.
  * Islam and Communism

Links to related articles  
<IMG>

This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject.
WikiProject Philosophy or the Philosophy Portal may be able to help recruit
one. (March 2009)  
  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Political ideologies  
Anarchism Â· Christian democracy Â· Communism Â· Communitarianism Â·
Conservatism Â· Fascism Â· Feminism Â· Green politics Â· Liberalism Â·
Libertarianism Â· Nationalism Â· Social democracy Â· Socialism

<IMG> Politics portal  
List of political ideologies Â· List of political parties by ideology  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Communism  
Basic concepts

Marxist philosophy Â· Class Struggle Â· Proletarian internationalism Â·
Communist party  
Ideologies

Marxism Â· Leninism Â· Maoism Â· Juche Â· Trotskyism Â· Left communism Â·
Council communism Â· Anarchist communism Â· Religious communism Â·
Eurocommunism Â· National communism  
Internationals

Communist League Â· First International Â· Second International Â· Comintern
Â· Fourth International  
Key figures

Karl Marx Â· Friedrich Engels Â· Vladimir Lenin Â· Rosa Luxemburg Â· Joseph
Stalin Â· Leon Trotsky Â· Mao Zedong  
Related topics

Anarchism Â· Anti-capitalism Â· Anti-communism Â· Anti-Revisionism Â·
Communist state Â· Communist symbolism Â· Criticisms of communism Â·
Democratic centralism Â· Dictatorship of the proletariat Â· History of
communism Â· Left-wing politics Â· Luxemburgism Â· New Class Â· New Left Â·
Post-Communism Â· Primitive communism Â· Socialism Â· Stalinism Â· Socialist
economics Â· Titoism Â· Soviet Union  
Politics portal  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communism"

Categories: Communism | Economic ideologies | Political ideologies | Political
culture

Hidden categories: Articles that include images for deletion | Wikipedia
indefinitely semi-protected pages | All articles with unsourced statements |
Articles with unsourced statements since April 2008 | Articles needing
additional references from November 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since May 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since December 2008 | All
pages needing cleanup | Articles with specifically-marked weasel-worded
phrases since November 2008 | Philosophy articles needing expert attention |
Articles needing expert attention since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FÃ¸royskt
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * è´èª
  * æè¨
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LingÃ¡la
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Ù ØµØ±Ù
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Nouormand
  * Occitan
  * PlattdÃ¼Ã¼tsch
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * Seeltersk
  * Sesotho
  * Sicilianu
  * à·à·à¶à·à¶½
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * VÃ¨neto
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * ç²µèª
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 06:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



