
# Open University

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

    Open University is also the name of other institutions. See Distance education or the Open Universities category for a list.
The Open University  
<IMG>  
* * *  
Motto: Learn and Live  
Established: 1969  
Type: Public  
Chancellor: Lord Puttnam[1]  
Vice-Chancellor: Prof Brenda Gourley[2]  
Students: 168,850[3]  
Undergraduates: 151,385[3]  
Postgraduates: 17,465[3]  
Location: Milton Keynes (main campus) & regional centres, United Kingdom  
Campus: Distance learning  
Colours:  
Affiliations: University Alliance  
Association of Commonwealth Universities  
European Association of Distance Teaching Universities  
Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools  
Website: http://www.open.ac.uk/  
corporate logo  
The Open University (commonly Open University or OU, but officially the is
part of its name) is the UK's distance learning government-supported
university notable for having an open entry policy, i.e. students' previous
academic achievements are not taken into account for entry to most
undergraduate courses. It was established in 1969 and the first students
enrolled in January 1971.[4] The majority of students are based in the UK, but
its courses can be studied anywhere in the world.[5] The administration is
based at Walton Hall, Milton Keynes in Buckinghamshire, but has regional
centres in each of its thirteen regions around the UK. It also has offices in
other European countries. The University awards undergraduate and postgraduate
degrees, as well as non-degree qualifications such as diplomas and
certificates, or continuing education units.

With more than 180,000 students enrolled, including more than 25,000 students
studying overseas,[6] it is the largest academic institution in the UK by
student number, and qualifies as one of the world's largest universities.
Since it was founded, more than 3 million students have studied its courses.
It was rated top university in England and Wales for student satisfaction in
the 2005[7] and 2006[8] UK government national student satisfaction survey,
and second in the 2007 survey.[9]

## Contents

  * 1 Aims
  * 2 Foundation
  * 3 Students
  * 4 Staff
  * 5 Teaching methods
  * 6 Assessment methods
  * 7 Qualifications
    * 7.1 Undergraduate
      * 7.1.1 Degrees
      * 7.1.2 Other qualifications
    * 7.2 Postgraduate
  * 8 Academic divisions
    * 8.1 Faculties
    * 8.2 Business school
  * 9 Research
  * 10 Degree ceremonies
  * 11 Notable current and former academics
  * 12 Notable graduates
  * 13 In fiction
  * 14 See also
  * 15 References
  * 16 External links

  
## [edit] Aims

The OU aims to provide a university education for those wishing to pursue
higher education on a part-time or distance learning basis, including disabled
people, who are officially a priority group within the University. The British
Government asked the Open University to continue the work of the Council for
National Academic Awards (CNAA) when it was dissolved. The CNAA formerly
awarded degrees at the polytechnics which have since become universities.

## [edit] Foundation

The Open University was founded by the Labour government of Harold Wilson,
based on the vision of Michael Young (later Lord Young of Dartington).
Planning commenced in 1965 under Minister of State for Education Jennie Lee,
who led an advisory committee consisting of university vice-chancellors,
educationalists and broadcasters. The BBC's Assistant Director of Engineering
at the time, James Redmond had obtained most of his qualifications at night
school, and his natural enthusiasm for the project did much to overcome the
technical difficulties of using television to broadcast teaching programmes.

Walter Perry (later Lord Perry) was appointed the OU's first vice-chancellor
in January 1969, and its Foundation Secretary was Anastasios Christodoulou.
The election of the new Conservative government of Edward Heath in 1970 led to
budget cuts under Chancellor of the Exchequer Iain Macleod (who had earlier
called the idea of an Open University "blithering nonsense").[10] However the
OU accepted its first 25,000 students in 1971, adopting a radical open
admissions policy. At the time, the total "traditional" university population
in the UK was around 130,000.

Since its foundation, the OU has inspired the creation of many similar
institutions around the world.

## [edit] Students

People from all walks of life and all ages take advantage of the OU; for most
courses there are no entry requirements other than the ability to study at an
appropriate level, though most postgraduate courses require evidence of
previous study or equivalent life experience.

Approximately 70 percent of students are in full-time employment, often
working towards a first (or additional) degree or qualification to progress or
change their career, with over 50,000 being sponsored by their employer. The
University is also popular with those who cannot physically attend a
traditional university because they are disabled, abroad, in prison, serving
in the armed forces, or looking after family members. About 10,000 OU students
have disabilities.[6]

While most of those studying are mature students, the reduction in financial
support for those attending traditional universities has also led to an influx
of young undergraduates to the OU. In the 2003â2004 academic year, around 20
percent of undergraduates were under 25 years old,[11] up from 12.5 percent in
1996â1997 (the year before top-up fees were announced) and a small minority
are under 18. The OU works with some schools to introduce A Level students to
OU study.

Unlike other universities, where students register for a programme, at the OU
students register separately for individual modules (which may be 10, 15, 20,
30 or 60 CATS points, equivalent to 5, 7.5, 10, 15, or 30 ECTS credits), and
are known as 'courses' in the OU context. These courses may then be linked
into degree programmes.

The students' union is the Open University Students Association, usually
abbreviated to OUSA.

The University enrolled less than 50,000 students in the 1970-1971 academic
year, but it quickly exceeded that number by 1974-1975, and by 1987-1988
yearly enrollment had doubled to 100,000 students, reaching 200,000 by
2001-2002; cumulatively, the University has educated more than two million
students, 675,000 of which studied enough courses to achieve a qualification
after successful assessment.[12] As of the 2006-2007 academic year, there are
224,276 students and 6184 customers (who just buy the course materials but do
not enroll to the course to receive academic credits).[12] Most students come
from England (148,395), while others are from Scotland, Ireland, and the rest
of the European Union.[12] The majority of students (14,577) choose to
undertake social studies and biological and physical sciences (11 910), as
well as historical and philosophical studies; the least popular academic
fields in The Open University are mass communications and documentation (187
students) and creative arts and design (545 students).[12] The most popular
course for the 2006-2007 academic year was DD100 An introduction to the social
sciences (more than seven thousand students studied it in one academic year),
followed by A103 An introduction to the humanities, K100 Understanding health
and social care, M150 Data, computing and information, and DSE212 Exploring
psychology (slightly fewer than four thousand students).[12] More
undergraduate students are female than male, while there are slightly more
males than females taking postgraduate courses; and the majority of the
students are between 25 and 44 years old, the median age of new undergraduates
being 32.[12] 37,852 students receive financial help, and the typical cost for
UK students of a Bachelor's honours degree at the OU is between Â£3,150 and
Â£4,225 (EU and international students pay more as the University does not
receive government funding for them). After government support, the second
most important revenue stream to The Open University are academic fees paid by
the students, which in one academic year (2006-2007) total about Â£123
million.

## [edit] Staff

The majority of staff are Associate Lecturers as, as of the 2006-2007 academic
year, there are over eight thousand working for OU.[12] There are also 1218
salaried academic employees, 1654 others who are also academic-related, and
1847 support staff (including secretaries and technicians).[12]

Salaries are the main cost in The Open University's balance sheets, claiming
over 225 million GBP for only one academic year (2006-2007).[12]

## [edit] Teaching methods

The OU uses a variety of methods for distance learning, including written and
audio materials, the Internet, disc-based software and television programmes
on DVD. Course-based television broadcasts by the BBC, which started on 3
January 1971, ceased on 15 December 2006.[13] Materials are composed of
originally-authored work by in-house and external academic contributors, and
from third-party materials licensed for use by OU students. For most courses,
students are supported by tutors ("Associate Lecturers") who provide feedback
on their work and are generally available to them at face-to-face tutorials,
by telephone, and/or on the Internet. A number of short courses worth ten
points are now available that do not have an assigned tutor but offer an
online conferencing service (Internet Forum) where help and advice is offered
through conferencing "Moderators".

Some courses have mandatory day schools. These are day-long sessions which a
student must attend in order to pass the course. One example of such a course
is the K301 - Advanced Certificate in Health Promotion - which has two
mandatory day schools/workshops, focusing on communication skills, counselling
and practical issues related to health promotion. Nevertheless, it is possible
to seek excusal upon the basis of ill-health (or other extenuating
circumstances), and many courses have no mandatory face-to-face component.

Similarly, many courses have traditionally offered week long summer schools
offering an opportunity for students to remove themselves from the general
distractions of their life and focus on their study for a short time.

Over the past ten years the University has adopted a policy of separating
residential courses from distance-taught courses. Exemption from attendance at
residential schools, always as an Alternative Learning Experience (ALE), is
sometimes available for disabled students and others who find it impossible to
attend in person (See "Qualifications-Undergraduate" section.)

The OU now produces mainstream television and radio programming aimed at
bringing learning to a wider audience. Most of this programming, including
series such as Rough Science and "Battle of the Geeks", are broadcast at peak
times, while older programming is carried in the BBC Learning Zone. But in
2004 the OU announced it was to stop its late night programmes on BBC2, and
the last such programme was broadcast at 5.30am on 16 December 2006. The OU
now plans to focus on mainstream programmes.

Teaching at the OU has been rated as "excellent"[14] by the Quality Assurance
Agency for Higher Education. The English national survey of student
satisfaction has twice put the Open University in first place.

In October 2006 the OU joined the Open educational resources movement with the
launch of OpenLearn. A growing selection of current and past distance learning
course materials will be released for free access, including downloadable
versions for educators to modify (under the Creative Commons BY-NC-SA
licence), plus free collaborative learning-support tools.

The OU is researching the use of Second Life in teaching and learning, and has
2 islands in the virtual world. These islands are called CETLMent and
Schomebase.[15] CETLMent is on the main grid and is used by tutors for
specific exercises with groups of students. Schomebase is on the teen grid and
is used for exploring new teaching methods for school [16]

## [edit] Assessment methods

The Open University offers courses that are generally[17] assessed using an
equal weighting of examinations and coursework. The coursework component
normally takes the form of between two and six tutor marked assignments (TMAs)
and, occasionally, may also include up to six multiple-choice or "missing
word" 100-question computer marked assignments (CMAs). The examinable
component is usually a proctored three hour paper regardless of the course
size (although on some courses it can be up to three three-hour papers[18]),
but may also be an ECA (End of Course Assessment) which is similar to a TMA,
in that it is completed at home, but is regarded as an exam for grading
purposes. Course results are sometimes issued on a graded basis, consisting of
pass grades 1 (threshold 85%,a distinction), 2 (70-84%), 3 (55-69%) & 4
(40-54%), and fail (below 40%). This grade is calculated as the lower of the
overall continuous assessment score (OCAS) and overall examination score
(OES).

These grades can be weighted[19] according to their level, and combined to
calculate the classification of a degree. An undergraduate degree will weight
level 3 courses twice as much as level 2, and in postgraduate programmes all M
level courses are equally weighted.

## [edit] Qualifications

### [edit] Undergraduate

Open University courses have associated with them a number of Credit
Accumulation and Transfer Scheme (CATS) points - usually 30 or 60 - depending
on the quantity of the material in the course and a level (1, 2, 3, or 4)
corresponding to the complexity, with 120 points roughly equating to the year
of study for a full time student.

The OU offers a large number of undergraduate qualifications, including
certificates, diplomas, and Bachelors degrees, based on both level and
quantity of study. An OU undergraduate degree requires 300 (or 360 for
honours) CATS points.

Students generally do not undertake more than 60 points per year, meaning that
an undergraduate degree will take typically six years to complete. With the
exception of some degrees in fast moving areas (such as computing) there is
generally no limit on the time which a student may take. Students need special
permission to take more than 120 points (equivalent to full-time study) at any
time;[20] such permission is not usually granted.

Originally BA was the only undergraduate degree, and it was unnamed. The
modern OU grants both BA and BSc undergraduate degrees, and they may be named
(following a specified syllabus) or unnamed (constructed of courses chosen by
the student).

Many OU faculties have now introduced short courses worth ten points. Most of
these courses are taught online, and start at regular intervals throughout the
year. They typically provide an introduction to a broader subject over a
period of ten weeks, these are generally timed during vacations at
conventional universities in order to take advantage of their facilities. Some
science courses, which require only home study, are complemented by
residential courses, in order to allow the student to gain practical
laboratory experience in that field; typically, an award of degree or diploma
will require completion of both.

Different courses are run at different times of the year, but, typically, a 30
or 60 point course will run from February through to October. Assessment is by
both continual assessment (with, normally, between four and eight assignments
during the year) and, for most, a final examination or on some courses a major
assignment.

#### [edit] Degrees

As well as degrees in named subject, the Open University also grants "open"
Bachelor degrees where the syllabus is designed by the students by combining
any number of Open University courses up to 360 credits for an open honours
degree - the main restriction on which courses can be included is that there
must be at least 120 at level 3 and no more than 120 at level 1.

#### [edit] Other qualifications

The Open University grants undergraduate Certificates (abbreviated Cert)
typically awarded after 60 completed credits at Level 1 or Level 3 (where each
credit corresponds to roughly 10 hours of study, therefore 60 credits
represent about 600 hours of effort), Diplomas (abbreviated Dip) after 120
credits - typically 60 points at Level 2 and 60 points at Level 3, ordinary
Bachelor degrees (abbreviated BA, BSc, etc) after 300 credits, and Bachelor
degrees with honours, (abbreviated BA (Hons), BSc (Hons), etc) after 360
credits. Open University also awards Foundation degrees (abbreviated FdA,
FdSc, etc).

OU also offers a limited number of CertHE (120 CATS) and DipHE (240 CATS).

### [edit] Postgraduate

The Open University provides the opportunity to study for a PhD on a part time
distance, or a full time on site basis in a wide range of disciplines as well
as an EdD for professionals in education. The University also offers a range
of Master's levels courses such as the MBA and MPA, MSc, MA and MEd, and MRes,
as well as the professional PGCE qualification and a number of postgraduate
diplomas and certificates including innovative practice-based courses and
postgraduate computing qualifications for professionals. Postgraduate
certificates are awarded for 60 points of study on specified courses;
postgraduate diplomas are awarded for 120 points of study on specified
courses. The University offers "Advanced Diplomas" that involve 60 credits at
undergraduate level and 60 credits at postgraduate level - these are designed
as "bridges" between undergraduate and postgraduate study.

## [edit] Academic divisions

### [edit] Faculties

The University has Faculties of Arts, Education & Language Studies, Health &
Social Care, Law, Mathematics, Computing and Technology, Science, Social
Science, and a Business School. There is no School of Medicine. The new
Faculty of Mathematics, Computing and Technology (created from the former
Faculties of Mathematics and Computing and Faculty of Technology) was formed
on 1 October 2007.

### [edit] Business school

The OU Business School is the largest provider of MBAs in the UK, producing
more graduates than all the rest of the business schools in the UK put
together. Its courses are recognised by AMBA, EQUIS, AACSB, and CEL.

Although the majority of students at the Business School are in the UK, many
of the courses are also available throughout most of the world. Students study
via distance learning for a Certificate or Diploma in Management and MBA
programmes. A number of courses have compulsory residential school which
students must attend. The faculty also offers Honours and Foundation degrees
in Business Studies and Leadership & Management.

The first Diploma courses were developed from 1983; however the School did not
become a separate entity until 1988, when development of the first MBA courses
was started. The first MBA students were enrolled in 1989, and the School
almost immediately became the largest business school in Europe.

## [edit] Research

Like other UK universities, the OU actively engages in research. The OU's
Planetary and Space Sciences Research Institute has become particularly well
known to the public through its involvement in space missions. In October
2006, the Cassini-Huygens mission including 15 people from the OU received the
2006 "Laurels for Team Achievement Award" from the International Academy of
Astronautics (IAA). Cassini-Huygens' successful completion of its seven-year,
two billion-mile journey in January 2005 to Saturn ended with Huygens landing
farther away from Earth than any previous probe or craft in the history of
space exploration. The first instrument to touch Saturn's moon Titan was the
Surface Science Package containing nine sensors to investigate the physical
properties of Titan's surface. It was built by a team at the OU led by
Professor John Zarnecki.

The OU now employs over 500 people engaged in research in over 25 areas, and
there are over 1,200 research students. It spends approximately Â£20 million
each year on research, around Â£6 million from the Higher Education Funding
Council for England, the remainder from external funders.

The Open University also runs the Open Research Online (ORO) website.[21]

## [edit] Degree ceremonies

Unlike most UK universities, degree ceremonies at the Open University are not
the occasion on which degrees are formally conferred. This happens in absentia
at a joint meeting of the University's Council and Senate ahead of the
ceremony. The University's ceremonies â- or "Presentations of Graduates" â
occur during the long summer throughout Britain and Ireland, as well as one
ceremony in Versailles. These ceremonies are presided over by a senior
academic at Pro-Vice-Chancellor level or higher, and have the normal ritual
associated with a graduation ceremony, including academic dress, procession,
and mace.

## [edit] Notable current and former academics

<IMG>

<IMG>

Walton Hall, OU Campus

    See also: Category:Academics of the Open University
  * Jocelyn Bell Burnell \- Astronomer
  * Nigel Cross -Designer
  * Ruth Finnegan - Anthropologist
  * Brian Goodwin \- Biologist
  * Brenda Gourley \- Vice-chancellor
  * Stuart Hall \- Social Scientist
  * Wendy Hollway - Psychologist
  * Arthur Marwick \- Historian
  * Doreen Massey \- Social Scientist
  * Oliver Penrose \- Mathematician
  * Mike Pentz - Physicist
  * Colin Pillinger \- Planetary scientist
  * Steven Rose \- Biologist
  * Jonathan Silvertown - Biologist
  * Russell Stannard \- Physicist
  * Margaret Wetherell \- Discourse Analyst, Social Psychologist
  * Glenn White \- Astronomer
  * Robin Wilson \- Mathematician
  * Paul Sykes \- Heavyweight boxer and nototious violent criminal

## [edit] Notable graduates

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ireland Region office, Belfast, Northern Ireland

Main article: List of Open University people

The OU has over two million alumni from all walks of life, including:

  * Craig Brown, former Scotland football manager
  * Frank Hampson, creator of Dan Dare
  * Lenny Henry, entertainer[22]
  * Myra Hindley, serial killer[23]
  * Gerry Hughes, sailor, first single-handed crossing of the Atlantic by a deaf person
  * Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia[24]

## [edit] In fiction

The Open University has been featured in many film and television programmes.
The plot of Educating Rita surrounds the working class character aiming to
"improve" herself by studying English literature. She attends private
tutorials run by alcoholic lecturer Frank. The teaching methods are not an
accurate portrayal of contemporary teaching at the OU.

Television characters have also followed OU courses. These include Anne Bryce
in the BBC sit-com Ever Decreasing Circles, Yvonne Sparrow in Goodnight
Sweetheart, and Bulman, in the ITV spin-off from the series Strangers. Sheila
Grant (Sue Johnston) was accused of having an affair with her tutor in
Brookside. Onslow, a character from Keeping up Appearances, watches Open
University programming on television from time to time.

In Autumn 2006, Lenny Henry was a star in Slings and Arrows, a one-off BBC
television drama which he also wrote, about someone who falls in love while on
an OU English Literature course. (Henry has himself completed an OU degree in
English)[22]

In the 2006-7 TV series Life on Mars, Sam Tyler received messages from the
"real" world via Open University programmes late at night.

In the 2005 science fiction novel "Sunstorm", written by Arthur C. Clarke
(author of 2001: A Space Odyssey) and Stephen Baxter, the fictional Astronomer
Royal, called Siobhan McGorran, used to work for the Open University in Milton
Keynes.

  

## [edit] See also

  * Category:Academics of the Open University
  * List of Open University Alumni
  * Open2.net
  * Open University Press

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Open University (3 October 2006). The Lord Puttnam is appointed Chancellor of The Open University. Press release. http://www3.open.ac.uk/media/fullstory.aspx?id=9556. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  2. ^ "How the OU is organised: The Vice Chancellor". http://www.open.ac.uk/about/organise/. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  3. ^ a b c "Table 0a - All students by institution, mode of study, level of study, gender and domicile 2005/06" (Microsoft Excel spreadsheet). Higher Education Statistics Agency online statistics. http://www.hesa.ac.uk/dox/dataTables/studentsAndQualifiers/download/institution0506.xls. Retrieved on 2007-12-19.
  4. ^ "Brief history of the OU". http://www.open.ac.uk/about/ou/p3.shtml. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  5. ^ "Becoming a Student:Study outside the UK". http://www3.open.ac.uk/courses/about/p7.shtml.
  6. ^ a b "About the OU: The purpose of the OU". open.ac.uk. http://www.open.ac.uk/about/ou/. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  7. ^ "Students rate university courses". BBC News. 21 September 2005. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/4265802.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  8. ^ "Student satisfaction survey results". BBC News. 23 August 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/5277938.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  9. ^ The Open University highly rated for student satisfaction
  10. ^ "In 1969, when the idea of The Open University was announced, it was described as "blithering nonsense" by Iain Macleod MP."
  11. ^ "OU sees rise in younger students". BBC News. 2 August 2005. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/4738859.stm. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  12. ^ a b c d e f g h i About The Open University (PDF, 74 KiB), available via the Student Surveys, What happens to the survey results? webpage of The Open University's website. Accessed 2008 September 21, 01h19Z
  13. ^ Sesame - The news service reaching the Open University worldwide
  14. ^ OU ranks ninth in University League Table Sesame, July 2002
  15. ^ MUVEs in Teaching and Learning OU MUVE Wiki
  16. ^ Schome - The education system for the information age Schome Wiki
  17. ^ The University does offer some courses which are assessed purely through course work, but these are generally level one courses which do not contribute to honours or postgraduate courses.
  18. ^ The 60-point Accounting course has a three-hour paper half-way through the course, and two more three-hour papers at the end
  19. ^ Working out your class of honours
  20. ^ "OU regulations 8.5.2 stipulating limit on maximum concurrent courses" (PDF). http://www3.open.ac.uk/our-student-policies/pdf/studentregs.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  21. ^ Open Research Online, accessed 21 September 2008, 2h03Z.
  22. ^ a b "OU to feature in new TV drama" (Print and online). Sesame: p. 5\. Autumn 2006 Issue 231. http://www3.open.ac.uk/events/0/2006920_37060_o1.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-10-08.
  23. ^ "Obituary: Myra Hindley". BBC News. 15 November 2002. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/452614.stm. Retrieved on 2006-11-21.
  24. ^ "Biography: HE Meles Zenawi". http://www.ethioembassy.org.uk/Facts%20About%20Ethiopia/Biography%20Ato%20Meles%20Zenawi.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-21.

## [edit] External links

  * Open University UK website
  * COROUS â Corporate Open University Services
  * H2G2 Open University Information at the BBC
  * Video clip of BBC Open University programme circa 1982
  * Video clip of BBC Open University Maths programme (date unknown) featuring Robin Wilson (q.v.)

Coordinates: 52Â°01â²30â³N 0Â°42â²20â³Wï»¿ / ï»¿52.025Â°N 0.70556Â°Wï»¿ /
52.025; -0.70556

v â¢ d â¢ e

Universities in the United Kingdom  
England  
Anglia Ruskin Â· Aston Â· Bath Â· Bath Spa Â· Bedfordshire Â· Birmingham Â·
Birmingham City (Birmingham Conservatoire) Â· Bolton Â· Bournemouth Â·
Bradford Â· Brighton Â· Bristol Â· Brunel Â· Buckingham Â· Buckinghamshire New
Â· Cambridge Â· Canterbury Christ Church Â· Central Lancashire Â· Chester Â·
Chichester Â· City Â· Coventry Â· Cranfield Â· Creative Arts Â· Cumbria Â· De
Montfort Â· Derby Â· Durham Â· East Anglia Â· East London Â· Edge Hill Â·
Essex Â· Exeter Â· Gloucestershire Â· Greenwich Â· Hertfordshire Â·
Huddersfield Â· Hull Â· Imperial College Â· Keele Â· Kent Â· Kingston Â·
Lancaster Â· Leeds Â· Leeds Metropolitan Â· Leicester Â· Lincoln Â· Liverpool
Â· Liverpool Hope Â· Liverpool John Moores Â· London Metropolitan Â· London
South Bank Â· Loughborough Â· Manchester Â· Manchester Metropolitan Â·
Middlesex Â· Newcastle Â· Northampton Â· Northumbria Â· Nottingham Â·
Nottingham Trent Â· Oxford Â· Oxford Brookes Â· Plymouth Â· Portsmouth Â·
Reading Â· Roehampton Â· Royal College of Art Â· Salford Â· Sheffield Â·
Sheffield Hallam Â· Southampton Â· Southampton Solent Â· Staffordshire Â·
Sunderland Â· Surrey Â· Sussex Â· Teesside Â· Thames Valley Â· Warwick Â· UWE
Â· Westminster Â· Winchester Â· Wolverhampton Â· Worcester Â· York Â· York St.
John  
University of London  
Birkbeck Â· Central School of Speech and Drama Â· Courtauld Institute of Art
Â· Goldsmiths Â· Heythrop Â· Institute of Cancer Research Â· Institute of
Education Â· King's Â· London Business School Â· LSE Â· LSHTM Â· Queen Mary Â·
Royal Academy of Music Â· Royal Holloway Â· Royal Veterinary College Â· St
George's Â· SOAS Â· School of Pharmacy Â· UCL  
University of the Arts London  
Camberwell Â· CSM Â· Chelsea Â· LCC Â· LCF Â· Wimbledon  
Scotland  
Aberdeen Â· Abertay Â· Dundee Â· Edinburgh Â· Edinburgh Napier Â· Glasgow Â·
Glasgow Caledonian Â· Heriot-Watt Â· Queen Margaret Â· Robert Gordon Â· St
Andrews Â· Stirling Â· Strathclyde Â· West of Scotland  
Wales  
Aberystwyth Â· Bangor Â· Cardiff Â· Glamorgan Â· GlyndÅµr Â· Lampeter Â·
Newport Â· Swansea Â· Swansea Metropolitan Â· Trinity Â· UWIC Â· Wales  
Northern Ireland  
Queen's Â· Ulster  
Nonâgeographic  
Open University  
University colleges  
Birmingham Â· Bishop Grosseteste Â· Falmouth Â· Harper Adams Â· Irish Baptist
College Â· Marjon Â· Newman Â· Norwich Â· St. Mary's (Belfast) Â· St. Mary's
(Twickenham) Â· Stranmillis  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Universities in Northern Ireland  
Universities

Open University (OU) Â· Queens University Belfast (QUB) Â· University of
Ulster (UU)  
QUB University Colleges

St. Mary's University College Â· Stranmillis University College  
QUB Centres

Belfast Bible College Â· Edgehill Theological College Â· Irish Baptist College
Â· Magee College Â· Union Theological College  
UU Campuses

Belfast Â· Campus One Â· Coleraine Â· Jordanstown Â· Magee  
See also: Further Education Colleges in Northern Ireland Universities in: UK
(England Â· Scotland Â· Wales) Â· Republic of Ireland  
v â¢ d â¢ e

University Alliance  
Aberystwyth â¢ Bournemouth â¢ Bradford â¢ De Montfort â¢ Glamorgan â¢
Gloucestershire â¢ Hertfordshire â¢ Huddersfield â¢ Institute of Education
â¢ Kent â¢ Lincoln â¢ Liverpool John Moores â¢ Manchester Metropolitan â¢
Newport â¢ Northumbria â¢ Nottingham Trent â¢ Open â¢ Oxford Brookes â¢
Plymouth â¢ Portsmouth â¢ Salford â¢ Sheffield Hallam â¢ UWIC â¢ West of
England  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_University"

Categories: Open universities | Open University

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Gaeilge
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 29 March 2009, at 00:31.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



