
# AIDS

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see AIDS (disambiguation).

Semi-protected

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)  
Classification and external resources  
<IMG>  
The Red ribbon is a symbol for solidarity with HIV-positive people and those
living with AIDS.  
ICD-10 B24.  
ICD-9 042  
DiseasesDB 5938  
MedlinePlus 000594  
eMedicine emerg/253  
MeSH D000163  
List of abbreviations used in this article  

AIDS: Acquired immune deficiency syndrome  
HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus  
CD4+: CD4+ T helper cells  
CCR5: Chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 5  
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  
WHO: World Health Organization  
PCP: Pneumocystis pneumonia  
TB: Tuberculosis  
MTCT: Mother-to-child transmission  
HAART: Highly active antiretroviral therapy  
STI/STD: Sexually transmitted infection/disease  
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) is a disease of the human immune system caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).[1][2][3]

This condition progressively reduces the effectiveness of the immune system
and leaves individuals susceptible to opportunistic infections and tumors. HIV
is transmitted through direct contact of a mucous membrane or the bloodstream
with a bodily fluid containing HIV, such as blood, semen, vaginal fluid,
preseminal fluid, and breast milk.[4][5]

This transmission can involve anal, vaginal or oral sex, blood transfusion,
contaminated hypodermic needles, exchange between mother and baby during
pregnancy, childbirth, or breastfeeding, or other exposure to one of the above
bodily fluids.

AIDS is now a pandemic.[6] In 2007, an estimated 33.2 million people lived
with the disease worldwide, and it killed an estimated 2.1 million people,
including 330,000 children.[7] Over three-quarters of these deaths occurred in
sub-Saharan Africa,[7] retarding economic growth and destroying human
capital.[8]

Genetic research indicates that HIV originated in west-central Africa during
the late nineteenth or early twentieth century.[9][10] AIDS was first
recognized by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 1981 and
its cause, HIV, identified in the early 1980s.[11]

Although treatments for AIDS and HIV can slow the course of the disease, there
is currently no vaccine or cure. Antiretroviral treatment reduces both the
mortality and the morbidity of HIV infection, but these drugs are expensive
and routine access to antiretroviral medication is not available in all
countries.[12] Due to the difficulty in treating HIV infection, preventing
infection is a key aim in controlling the AIDS epidemic, with health
organizations promoting safe sex and needle-exchange programmes in attempts to
slow the spread of the virus.

## Contents

  * 1 Symptoms
    * 1.1 Pulmonary infections
    * 1.2 Gastrointestinal infections
    * 1.3 Neurological and psychiatric involvement
    * 1.4 Tumors and malignancies
    * 1.5 Other opportunistic infections
  * 2 Cause
    * 2.1 Sexual transmission
    * 2.2 Exposure to blood-borne pathogens
    * 2.3 Perinatal transmission
    * 2.4 Misconceptions
  * 3 Pathophysiology
    * 3.1 Cells affected
      * 3.1.1 The effect
      * 3.1.2 Molecular basis
  * 4 Diagnosis
    * 4.1 WHO disease staging system
    * 4.2 CDC classification system
    * 4.3 HIV test
  * 5 Prevention
    * 5.1 Sexual contact
    * 5.2 Exposure to infected body fluids
    * 5.3 Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT)
  * 6 Treatment
    * 6.1 Antiviral therapy
    * 6.2 Experimental and proposed treatments
    * 6.3 Alternative medicine
  * 7 Prognosis
  * 8 Epidemiology
  * 9 History
  * 10 Society and culture
    * 10.1 Stigma
    * 10.2 Economic impact
    * 10.3 AIDS denialism
    * 10.4 Active pursuit of HIV infection
  * 11 Notes and references
  * 12 Further reading
  * 13 External links

  
## Symptoms

<IMG>

<IMG>

A generalized graph of the relationship between HIV copies (viral load) and
CD4 counts over the average course of untreated HIV infection; any particular
individual's disease course may vary considerably.  CD4+ T Lymphocyte count
(cells/mmÂ³) HIV RNA copies per mL of plasma

The symptoms of AIDS are primarily the result of conditions that do not
normally develop in individuals with healthy immune systems. Most of these
conditions are infections caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites
that are normally controlled by the elements of the immune system that HIV
damages.

Opportunistic infections are common in people with AIDS.[13] HIV affects
nearly every organ system.

People with AIDS also have an increased risk of developing various cancers
such as Kaposi's sarcoma, cervical cancer and cancers of the immune system
known as lymphomas. Additionally, people with AIDS often have systemic
symptoms of infection like fevers, sweats (particularly at night), swollen
glands, chills, weakness, and weight loss.[14][15] The specific opportunistic
infections that AIDS patients develop depend in part on the prevalence of
these infections in the geographic area in which the patient lives.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Main symptoms of AIDS.

### Pulmonary infections

<IMG>

<IMG>

X-ray of Pneumocystis jirovecii caused pneumonia. There is increased white
(opacity) in the lower lungs on both sides, characteristic of Pneumocystis
pneumonia

Pneumocystis pneumonia (originally known as Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia,
and still abbreviated as PCP, which now stands for Pneumocystis pneumonia) is
relatively rare in healthy, immunocompetent people, but common among HIV-
infected individuals. It is caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii.

Before the advent of effective diagnosis, treatment and routine prophylaxis in
Western countries, it was a common immediate cause of death. In developing
countries, it is still one of the first indications of AIDS in untested
individuals, although it does not generally occur unless the CD4 count is less
than 200 cells per ÂµL of blood.[16]

Tuberculosis (TB) is unique among infections associated with HIV because it is
transmissible to immunocompetent people via the respiratory route, is easily
treatable once identified, may occur in early-stage HIV disease, and is
preventable with drug therapy. However, multidrug resistance is a potentially
serious problem.

Even though its incidence has declined because of the use of directly observed
therapy and other improved practices in Western countries, this is not the
case in developing countries where HIV is most prevalent. In early-stage HIV
infection (CD4 count >300 cells per ÂµL), TB typically presents as a pulmonary
disease. In advanced HIV infection, TB often presents atypically with
extrapulmonary (systemic) disease a common feature. Symptoms are usually
constitutional and are not localized to one particular site, often affecting
bone marrow, bone, urinary and gastrointestinal tracts, liver, regional lymph
nodes, and the central nervous system.[17]

### Gastrointestinal infections

Esophagitis is an inflammation of the lining of the lower end of the esophagus
(gullet or swallowing tube leading to the stomach). In HIV infected
individuals, this is normally due to fungal (candidiasis) or viral (herpes
simplex-1 or cytomegalovirus) infections. In rare cases, it could be due to
mycobacteria.[18]

Unexplained chronic diarrhea in HIV infection is due to many possible causes,
including common bacterial (Salmonella, Shigella, Listeria or Campylobacter)
and parasitic infections; and uncommon opportunistic infections such as
cryptosporidiosis, microsporidiosis, Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) and
viruses,[19] astrovirus, adenovirus, rotavirus and cytomegalovirus, (the
latter as a course of colitis).

In some cases, diarrhea may be a side effect of several drugs used to treat
HIV, or it may simply accompany HIV infection, particularly during primary HIV
infection. It may also be a side effect of antibiotics used to treat bacterial
causes of diarrhea (common for Clostridium difficile). In the later stages of
HIV infection, diarrhea is thought to be a reflection of changes in the way
the intestinal tract absorbs nutrients, and may be an important component of
HIV-related wasting.[20]

### Neurological and psychiatric involvement

HIV infection may lead to a variety of neuropsychiatric sequelae, either by
infection of the now susceptible nervous system by organisms, or as a direct
consequence of the illness itself.

Toxoplasmosis is a disease caused by the single-celled parasite called
Toxoplasma gondii; it usually infects the brain, causing toxoplasma
encephalitis, but it can also infect and cause disease in the eyes and
lungs.[21] Cryptococcal meningitis is an infection of the meninx (the membrane
covering the brain and spinal cord) by the fungus Cryptococcus neoformans. It
can cause fevers, headache, fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. Patients may also
develop seizures and confusion; left untreated, it can be lethal.

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a demyelinating disease,
in which the gradual destruction of the myelin sheath covering the axons of
nerve cells impairs the transmission of nerve impulses. It is caused by a
virus called JC virus which occurs in 70% of the population in latent form,
causing disease only when the immune system has been severely weakened, as is
the case for AIDS patients. It progresses rapidly, usually causing death
within months of diagnosis.[22]

AIDS dementia complex (ADC) is a metabolic encephalopathy induced by HIV
infection and fueled by immune activation of HIV infected brain macrophages
and microglia. These cells are productively infected by HIV and secrete
neurotoxins of both host and viral origin.[23] Specific neurological
impairments are manifested by cognitive, behavioral, and motor abnormalities
that occur after years of HIV infection and are associated with low CD4+ T
cell levels and high plasma viral loads.

Prevalence is 10â20% in Western countries[24] but only 1â2% of HIV
infections in India.[25][26] This difference is possibly due to the HIV
subtype in India. AIDS related mania is sometimes seen in patients with
advanced HIV illness; it presents with more irritability and cognitive
impairment and less euphoria than a manic episode associated with true bipolar
disorder. Unlike the latter condition, it may have a more chronic course. This
syndrome is less often seen with the advent of multi-drug therapy.

### Tumors and malignancies

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kaposi's sarcoma

Patients with HIV infection have substantially increased incidence of several
cancers. This is primarily due to co-infection with an oncogenic DNA virus,
especially Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
(KSHV), and human papillomavirus (HPV).[27][28]

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is the most common tumor in HIV-infected patients. The
appearance of this tumor in young homosexual men in 1981 was one of the first
signals of the AIDS epidemic. Caused by a gammaherpes virus called Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpes virus (KSHV), it often appears as purplish nodules
on the skin, but can affect other organs, especially the mouth,
gastrointestinal tract, and lungs.

High-grade B cell lymphomas such as Burkitt's lymphoma, Burkitt's-like
lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and primary central nervous
system lymphoma present more often in HIV-infected patients. These particular
cancers often foreshadow a poor prognosis. In some cases these lymphomas are
AIDS-defining. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or KSHV cause many of these lymphomas.

Cervical cancer in HIV-infected women is considered AIDS-defining. It is
caused by human papillomavirus (HPV).[29]

In addition to the AIDS-defining tumors listed above, HIV-infected patients
are at increased risk of certain other tumors, such as Hodgkin's disease and
anal and rectal carcinomas. However, the incidence of many common tumors, such
as breast cancer or colon cancer, does not increase in HIV-infected patients.
In areas where HAART is extensively used to treat AIDS, the incidence of many
AIDS-related malignancies has decreased, but at the same time malignant
cancers overall have become the most common cause of death of HIV-infected
patients.[30]

### Other opportunistic infections

AIDS patients often develop opportunistic infections that present with non-
specific symptoms, especially low-grade fevers and weight loss. These include
infection with Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare and cytomegalovirus (CMV).
CMV can cause colitis, as described above, and CMV retinitis can cause
blindness.

Penicilliosis due to Penicillium marneffei is now the third most common
opportunistic infection (after extrapulmonary tuberculosis and cryptococcosis)
in HIV-positive individuals within the endemic area of Southeast Asia.[31]

## Cause

For more details on this topic, see HIV.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Scanning electron micrograph of HIV-1, colored green, budding from a cultured
lymphocyte.

AIDS is the most severe acceleration of infection with HIV. HIV is a
retrovirus that primarily infects vital organs of the human immune system such
as CD4+ T cells (a subset of T cells), macrophages and dendritic cells. It
directly and indirectly destroys CD4+ T cells.[32]

Once HIV has killed so many CD4+ T cells that there are fewer than 200 of
these cells per microliter (ÂµL) of blood, cellular immunity is lost. Acute
HIV infection progresses over time to clinical latent HIV infection and then
to early symptomatic HIV infection and later to AIDS, which is identified
either on the basis of the amount of CD4+ T cells remaining in the blood,
and/or the presence of certain infections, as noted above.[33]

In the absence of antiretroviral therapy, the median time of progression from
HIV infection to AIDS is nine to ten years, and the median survival time after
developing AIDS is only 9.2 months.[34] However, the rate of clinical disease
progression varies widely between individuals, from two weeks up to 20 years.

Many factors affect the rate of progression. These include factors that
influence the body's ability to defend against HIV such as the infected
person's general immune function.[35][36] Older people have weaker immune
systems, and therefore have a greater risk of rapid disease progression than
younger people.

Poor access to health care and the existence of coexisting infections such as
tuberculosis also may predispose people to faster disease
progression.[34][37][38] The infected person's genetic inheritance plays an
important role and some people are resistant to certain strains of HIV. An
example of this is people with the homozygous CCR5-Î32 variation are
resistant to infection with certain strains of HIV.[39] HIV is genetically
variable and exists as different strains, which cause different rates of
clinical disease progression.[40][41][42]

### Sexual transmission

Sexual transmission occurs with the contact between sexual secretions of one
person with the rectal, genital or oral mucous membranes of another.
Unprotected receptive sexual acts are riskier than unprotected insertive
sexual acts, and the risk for transmitting HIV through unprotected anal
intercourse is greater than the risk from vaginal intercourse or oral sex.

However, oral sex is not entirely safe, as HIV can be transmitted through both
insertive and receptive oral sex.[43][44] Sexual assault greatly increases the
risk of HIV transmission as condoms are rarely employed and physical trauma to
the vagina occurs frequently, facilitating the transmission of HIV.[45]

Other sexually transmitted infections (STI) increase the risk of HIV
transmission and infection, because they cause the disruption of the normal
epithelial barrier by genital ulceration and/or microulceration; and by
accumulation of pools of HIV-susceptible or HIV-infected cells (lymphocytes
and macrophages) in semen and vaginal secretions. Epidemiological studies from
sub-Saharan Africa, Europe and North America suggest that genital ulcers, such
as those caused by syphilis and/or chancroid, increase the risk of becoming
infected with HIV by about fourfold. There is also a significant although
lesser increase in risk from STIs such as gonorrhea, chlamydia and
trichomoniasis, which all cause local accumulations of lymphocytes and
macrophages.[46]

Transmission of HIV depends on the infectiousness of the index case and the
susceptibility of the uninfected partner. Infectivity seems to vary during the
course of illness and is not constant between individuals. An undetectable
plasma viral load does not necessarily indicate a low viral load in the
seminal liquid or genital secretions.

However, each 10-fold increase in the level of HIV in the blood is associated
with an 81% increased rate of HIV transmission.[46][47] Women are more
susceptible to HIV-1 infection due to hormonal changes, vaginal microbial
ecology and physiology, and a higher prevalence of sexually transmitted
diseases.[48][49]

People who have been infected with one strain of HIV can still be infected
later on in their lives by other, more virulent strains.

Infection is unlikely in a single encounter. High rates of infection have been
linked to a pattern of overlapping long-term sexual relationships. This allows
the virus to quickly spread to multiple partners who in turn infect their
partners. A pattern of serial monogamy or occasional casual encounters is
associated with lower rates of infection.[50]

HIV spreads readily through heterosexual sex in Africa, but less so elsewhere.
One possibility being researched is that schistosomiasis, which affects up to
50 per cent of women in parts of Africa, damages the lining of the
vagina.[51][52]

### Exposure to blood-borne pathogens

<IMG>

<IMG>

CDC poster from 1989 highlighting the threat of AIDS associated with drug use

This transmission route is particularly relevant to intravenous drug users,
hemophiliacs and recipients of blood transfusions and blood products. Sharing
and reusing syringes contaminated with HIV-infected blood represents a major
risk for infection with HIV.

Needle sharing is the cause of one third of all new HIV-infections in North
America, China, and Eastern Europe. The risk of being infected with HIV from a
single prick with a needle that has been used on an HIV-infected person is
thought to be about 1 in 150 (see table above). Post-exposure prophylaxis with
anti-HIV drugs can further reduce this risk.[53]

This route can also affect people who give and receive tattoos and piercings.
Universal precautions are frequently not followed in both sub-Saharan Africa
and much of Asia because of both a shortage of supplies and inadequate
training.

The WHO estimates that approximately 2.5% of all HIV infections in sub-Saharan
Africa are transmitted through unsafe healthcare injections.[54] Because of
this, the United Nations General Assembly has urged the nations of the world
to implement precautions to prevent HIV transmission by health workers.[55]

The risk of transmitting HIV to blood transfusion recipients is extremely low
in developed countries where improved donor selection and HIV screening is
performed. However, according to the WHO, the overwhelming majority of the
world's population does not have access to safe blood and between 5% and 10%
of the world's HIV infections come from transfusion of infected blood and
blood products.[56]

### Perinatal transmission

The transmission of the virus from the mother to the child can occur in utero
during the last weeks of pregnancy and at childbirth. In the absence of
treatment, the transmission rate between a mother and her child during
pregnancy, labor and delivery is 25%.

However, when the mother takes antiretroviral therapy and gives birth by
caesarean section, the rate of transmission is just 1%.[57] The risk of
infection is influenced by the viral load of the mother at birth, with the
higher the viral load, the higher the risk. Breastfeeding also increases the
risk of transmission by about 4 %.[58]

### Misconceptions

Main article: HIV and AIDS misconceptions

A number of misconceptions have arisen surrounding HIV/AIDS. Three of the most
common are that AIDS can spread through casual contact, that sexual
intercourse with a virgin will cure AIDS, and that HIV can infect only
homosexual men and drug users. Other misconceptions are that any act of anal
intercourse between gay men can lead to AIDS infection, and that open
discussion of homosexuality and HIV in schools will lead to increased rates of
homosexuality and AIDS.[59]

## Pathophysiology

<IMG> This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.  
The pathophysiology of AIDS is complex, as is the case with all syndromes.[60]
Ultimately, HIV causes AIDS by depleting CD4+ T helper lymphocytes. This
weakens the immune system and allows opportunistic infections. T lymphocytes
are essential to the immune response and without them, the body cannot fight
infections or kill cancerous cells. The mechanism of CD4+ T cell depletion
differs in the acute and chronic phases.[61]

During the acute phase, HIV-induced cell lysis and killing of infected cells
by cytotoxic T cells accounts for CD4+ T cell depletion, although apoptosis
may also be a factor. During the chronic phase, the consequences of
generalized immune activation coupled with the gradual loss of the ability of
the immune system to generate new T cells appear to account for the slow
decline in CD4+ T cell numbers.

Although the symptoms of immune deficiency characteristic of AIDS do not
appear for years after a person is infected, the bulk of CD4+ T cell loss
occurs during the first weeks of infection, especially in the intestinal
mucosa, which harbors the majority of the lymphocytes found in the body.[62]
The reason for the preferential loss of mucosal CD4+ T cells is that a
majority of mucosal CD4+ T cells express the CCR5 coreceptor, whereas a small
fraction of CD4+ T cells in the bloodstream do so.[63]

HIV seeks out and destroys CCR5 expressing CD4+ cells during acute infection.
A vigorous immune response eventually controls the infection and initiates the
clinically latent phase. However, CD4+ T cells in mucosal tissues remain
depleted throughout the infection, although enough remain to initially ward
off life-threatening infections.

Continuous HIV replication results in a state of generalized immune activation
persisting throughout the chronic phase.[64] Immune activation, which is
reflected by the increased activation state of immune cells and release of
proinflammatory cytokines, results from the activity of several HIV gene
products and the immune response to ongoing HIV replication. Another cause is
the breakdown of the immune surveillance system of the mucosal barrier caused
by the depletion of mucosal CD4+ T cells during the acute phase of
disease.[65]

This results in the systemic exposure of the immune system to microbial
components of the gutâs normal flora, which in a healthy person is kept in
check by the mucosal immune system. The activation and proliferation of T
cells that results from immune activation provides fresh targets for HIV
infection. However, direct killing by HIV alone cannot account for the
observed depletion of CD4+ T cells since only 0.01-0.10% of CD4+ T cells in
the blood are infected.

A major cause of CD4+ T cell loss appears to result from their heightened
susceptibility to apoptosis when the immune system remains activated. Although
new T cells are continuously produced by the thymus to replace the ones lost,
the regenerative capacity of the thymus is slowly destroyed by direct
infection of its thymocytes by HIV. Eventually, the minimal number of CD4+ T
cells necessary to maintain a sufficient immune response is lost, leading to
AIDS

### Cells affected

The virus, entering through which ever route, acts primarily on the following
cells:[66]

  * Lymphoreticular system: 
    * CD4\+ T-Helper cells
    * CD4\+ Macrophages
    * CD4\+ Monocytes
    * B-lymphocytes
  * Certain endothelial cells
  * Central nervous system: 
    * Microglia of the nervous system
    * Astrocytes
    * Oligodendrocytes
    * Neurones \- indirectly by the action of cytokines and the gp-120

#### The effect

The virus has cytopathic effects but how it does it is still not quite clear.
It can remain inactive in these cells for long periods, though. This effect is
hypothesized to be due to the CD4-gp120 interaction.[66]

  * The most prominent effect of the HIV virus is its T-helper cell suppression and lysis. The cell is simply killed off or deranged to the point of being function-less (they do not respond to foreign antigens). The infected B-cells can not produce enough antibodies either. Thus the immune system collapses leading to the familiar AIDS complications, like infections and neoplasms (vide supra).
  * Infection of the cells of the CNS cause acute aseptic meningitis, subacute encephalitis, vacuolar myelopathy and peripheral neuropathy. Later it leads to even AIDS dementia complex.
  * The CD4-gp120 interaction (vide supra) is also permissive to other viruses like Cytomegalovirus, Hepatitis virus, Herpes simplex virus, etc. These viruses lead to further cell damage i.e. cytopathy.

#### Molecular basis

For details, see:

  * Structure and genome of HIV
  * HIV replication cycle
  * HIV tropism

## Diagnosis

The diagnosis of AIDS in a person infected with HIV is based on the presence
of certain signs or symptoms. Since June 5, 1981, many definitions have been
developed for epidemiological surveillance such as the Bangui definition and
the 1994 expanded World Health Organization AIDS case definition. However,
clinical staging of patients was not an intended use for these systems as they
are neither sensitive, nor specific. In developing countries, the World Health
Organization staging system for HIV infection and disease, using clinical and
laboratory data, is used and in developed countries, the Centers for Disease
Control (CDC) Classification System is used.

### WHO disease staging system

Main article: WHO Disease Staging System for HIV Infection and Disease

In 1990, the World Health Organization (WHO) grouped these infections and
conditions together by introducing a staging system for patients infected with
HIV-1.[67] An update took place in September 2005. Most of these conditions
are opportunistic infections that are easily treatable in healthy people.

  * Stage I: HIV infection is asymptomatic and not categorized as AIDS
  * Stage II: includes minor mucocutaneous manifestations and recurrent upper respiratory tract infections
  * Stage III: includes unexplained chronic diarrhea for longer than a month, severe bacterial infections and pulmonary tuberculosis
  * Stage IV: includes toxoplasmosis of the brain, candidiasis of the esophagus, trachea, bronchi or lungs and Kaposi's sarcoma; these diseases are indicators of AIDS.

### CDC classification system

Main article: CDC Classification System for HIV Infection

There are two main definitions for AIDS, both produced by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The older definition is to referring to
AIDS using the diseases that were associated with it, for example,
lymphadenopathy, the disease after which the discoverers of HIV originally
named the virus.[68][69] In 1993, the CDC expanded their definition of AIDS to
include all HIV positive people with a CD4+ T cell count below 200 per ÂµL of
blood or 14% of all lymphocytes.[70] The majority of new AIDS cases in
developed countries use either this definition or the pre-1993 CDC definition.
The AIDS diagnosis still stands even if, after treatment, the CD4+ T cell
count rises to above 200 per ÂµL of blood or other AIDS-defining illnesses are
cured.

### HIV test

Main article: HIV test

Many people are unaware that they are infected with HIV.[71] Less than 1% of
the sexually active urban population in Africa has been tested, and this
proportion is even lower in rural populations. Furthermore, only 0.5% of
pregnant women attending urban health facilities are counseled, tested or
receive their test results. Again, this proportion is even lower in rural
health facilities.[71] Therefore, donor blood and blood products used in
medicine and medical research are screened for HIV.

HIV tests are usually performed on venous blood. Many laboratories use fourth
generation screening tests which detect anti-HIV antibody (IgG and IgM) and
the HIV p24 antigen. The detection of HIV antibody or antigen in a patient
previously known to be negative is evidence of HIV infection. Individuals
whose first specimen indicates evidence of HIV infection will have a repeat
test on a second blood sample to confirm the results.

The window period (the time between initial infection and the development of
detectable antibodies against the infection) can vary since it can take 3â6
months to seroconvert and to test positive. Detection of the virus using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) during the window period is possible, and
evidence suggests that an infection may often be detected earlier than when
using a fourth generation EIA screening test.

Positive results obtained by PCR are confirmed by antibody tests.[72]
Routinely used HIV tests for infection in neonates, born to HIV-positive
mothers, have no value because of the presence of maternal antibody to HIV in
the child's blood. HIV infection can only be diagnosed by PCR, testing for HIV
pro-viral DNA in the children's lymphocytes.[73]

## Prevention

Estimated per act risk for acquisition  
of HIV by exposure route[74] Exposure Route Estimated infections  
per 10,000 exposures  
to an infected source  
Blood Transfusion 9,000[75]  
Childbirth 2,500[57]  
Needle-sharing injection drug use 67[76]  
Percutaneous needle stick 30[77]  
Receptive anal intercourse* 50[78][79]  
Insertive anal intercourse* 6.5[78][79]  
Receptive penile-vaginal intercourse* 10[78][79][80]  
Insertive penile-vaginal intercourse* 5[78][79]  
Receptive oral intercourse*Â§ 1[79]  
Insertive oral intercourse*Â§ 0.5[79]  
* assuming no condom use  
Â§ source refers to oral intercourse  
performed on a man  
The three main transmission routes of HIV are sexual contact, exposure to
infected body fluids or tissues, and from mother to fetus or child during
perinatal period. It is possible to find HIV in the saliva, tears, and urine
of infected individuals, but there are no recorded cases of infection by these
secretions, and the risk of infection is negligible.[81]

### Sexual contact

The majority of HIV infections are acquired through unprotected sexual
relations between partners, one of whom has HIV. The primary mode of HIV
infection worldwide is through sexual contact between members of the opposite
sex.[82][83][84]

During a sexual act, only male or female condoms can reduce the chances of
infection with HIV and other STDs and the chances of becoming pregnant. The
best evidence to date indicates that typical condom use reduces the risk of
heterosexual HIV transmission by approximately 80% over the long-term, though
the benefit is likely to be higher if condoms are used correctly on every
occasion.[85]

The male latex condom, if used correctly without oil-based lubricants, is the
single most effective available technology to reduce the sexual transmission
of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections. Manufacturers recommend that
oil-based lubricants such as petroleum jelly, butter, and lard not be used
with latex condoms, because they dissolve the latex, making the condoms
porous. If necessary, manufacturers recommend using water-based lubricants.

Oil-based lubricants can however be used with polyurethane condoms.[86]

The female condom is an alternative to the male condom and is made from
polyurethane, which allows it to be used in the presence of oil-based
lubricants. They are larger than male condoms and have a stiffened ring-shaped
opening, and are designed to be inserted into the vagina.

The female condom contains an inner ring, which keeps the condom in place
inside the vagina â inserting the female condom requires squeezing this
ring. However, at present availability of female condoms is very low and the
price remains prohibitive for many women.

Preliminary studies suggest that, where female condoms are available, overall
protected sexual acts increase relative to unprotected sexual acts, making
them an important HIV prevention strategy.[87]

Studies on couples where one partner is infected show that with consistent
condom use, HIV infection rates for the uninfected partner are below 1% per
year.[88] Prevention strategies are well-known in developed countries, but
epidemiological and behavioral studies in Europe and North America suggest
that a substantial minority of young people continue to engage in high-risk
practices despite HIV/AIDS knowledge, underestimating their own risk of
becoming infected with HIV.[89][90]

Randomized controlled trials have shown that male circumcision lowers the risk
of HIV infection among heterosexual men by up to 60%.[91] It is expected that
this procedure will be actively promoted in many of the countries affected by
HIV, although doing so will involve confronting a number of practical,
cultural and attitudinal issues.

Some experts fear that a lower perception of vulnerability among circumcised
men may result in more sexual risk-taking behavior, thus negating its
preventive effects.[92] However, one randomized controlled trial indicated
that adult male circumcision was not associated with increased HIV risk
behavior.[93]

### Exposure to infected body fluids

Health care workers can reduce exposure to HIV by employing precautions to
reduce the risk of exposure to contaminated blood. These precautions include
barriers such as gloves, masks, protective eyeware or shields, and gowns or
aprons which prevent exposure of the skin or mucous membranes to blood borne
pathogens. Frequent and thorough washing of the skin immediately after being
contaminated with blood or other bodily fluids can reduce the chance of
infection. Finally, sharp objects like needles, scalpels and glass, are
carefully disposed of to prevent needlestick injuries with contaminated
items.[94] Since intravenous drug use is an important factor in HIV
transmission in developed countries, harm reduction strategies such as needle-
exchange programmes are used in attempts to reduce the infections caused by
drug abuse.[95][96]

### Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT)

Current recommendations state that when replacement feeding is acceptable,
feasible, affordable, sustainable and safe, HIV-infected mothers should avoid
breast-feeding their infant. However, if this is not the case, exclusive
breast-feeding is recommended during the first months of life and discontinued
as soon as possible.[97] It should be noted that women may breastfeed other
children who are not their own; see wetnurse.

## Treatment

    See also HIV Treatment and Antiretroviral drug.
<IMG>

<IMG>

Abacavir â a nucleoside analog reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NARTI or
NRTI)

<IMG>

<IMG>

The chemical structure of Abacavir

There is currently no vaccine or cure for HIV or AIDS. The only known methods
of prevention are based on avoiding exposure to the virus or, failing that, an
antiretroviral treatment directly after a highly significant exposure, called
post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP).[98] PEP has a very demanding four week
schedule of dosage. It also has very unpleasant side effects including
diarrhea, malaise, nausea and fatigue.[99]

### Antiviral therapy

Current treatment for HIV infection consists of highly active antiretroviral
therapy, or HAART.[100] This has been highly beneficial to many HIV-infected
individuals since its introduction in 1996 when the protease inhibitor-based
HAART initially became available.[12] Current optimal HAART options consist of
combinations (or "cocktails") consisting of at least three drugs belonging to
at least two types, or "classes," of antiretroviral agents. Typical regimens
consist of two nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NARTIs or
NRTIs) plus either a protease inhibitor or a non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI). Because HIV disease progression in children
is more rapid than in adults, and laboratory parameters are less predictive of
risk for disease progression, particularly for young infants, treatment
recommendations are more aggressive for children than for adults.[101] In
developed countries where HAART is available, doctors assess the viral load,
rapidity in CD4 decline, and patient readiness while deciding when to
recommend initiating treatment.[102]

Standard goals of HAART include improvement in the patientâs quality of
life, reduction in complications, and reduction of HIV viremia below the limit
of detection, but it does not cure the patient of HIV nor does it prevent the
return, once treatment is stopped, of high blood levels of HIV, often HAART
resistant.[103][104] Moreover, it would take more than the lifetime of an
individual to be cleared of HIV infection using HAART.[105] Despite this, many
HIV-infected individuals have experienced remarkable improvements in their
general health and quality of life, which has led to the plummeting of HIV-
associated morbidity and mortality.[106][107][108] In the absence of HAART,
progression from HIV infection to AIDS occurs at a median of between nine to
ten years and the median survival time after developing AIDS is only 9.2
months.[34] HAART is thought to increase survival time by between 4 and 12
years.[109][110]

For some patients, which can be more than fifty percent of patients, HAART
achieves far less than optimal results, due to medication intolerance/side
effects, prior ineffective antiretroviral therapy and infection with a drug-
resistant strain of HIV. Non-adherence and non-persistence with therapy are
the major reasons why some people do not benefit from HAART.[111] The reasons
for non-adherence and non-persistence are varied. Major psychosocial issues
include poor access to medical care, inadequate social supports, psychiatric
disease and drug abuse. HAART regimens can also be complex and thus hard to
follow, with large numbers of pills taken frequently.[112][113][114] Side
effects can also deter people from persisting with HAART, these include
lipodystrophy, dyslipidaemia, diarrhoea, insulin resistance, an increase in
cardiovascular risks and birth defects.[115] Anti-retroviral drugs are
expensive, and the majority of the world's infected individuals do not have
access to medications and treatments for HIV and AIDS.

### Experimental and proposed treatments

It has been postulated that only a vaccine can halt the pandemic because a
vaccine would possibly cost less, thus being affordable for developing
countries, and would not require daily treatments. However, even after almost
30 years of research, HIV-1 remains a difficult target for a vaccine.[116]

Research to improve current treatments includes decreasing side effects of
current drugs, further simplifying drug regimens to improve adherence, and
determining the best sequence of regimens to manage drug resistance. A number
of studies have shown that measures to prevent opportunistic infections can be
beneficial when treating patients with HIV infection or AIDS. Vaccination
against hepatitis A and B is advised for patients who are not infected with
these viruses and are at risk of becoming infected.[117] Patients with
substantial immunosuppression are also advised to receive prophylactic therapy
for Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP), and many patients may benefit from
prophylactic therapy for toxoplasmosis and Cryptococcus meningitis as
well.[99]

Researchers have discovered an abzyme that can destroy the protein gp120 CD4
binding site. This protein is common to all HIV variants as it is the
attachment point for B lymphocytes and subsequent compromising of the immune
system.[118]

In Berlin, Germany, a 42-year-old leukemia patient infected with HIV for more
than a decade was given an experimental transplant of bone marrow with cells
that contained an unusual natural variant of the CCR5 cell-surface receptor.
This CCR5-Î32 variant has been shown to make some cells from people who are
born with it resistant to infection with some strains of HIV. Almost two years
after the transplant, and even after the patient reportedly stopped taking
antiretroviral medications, HIV has not been detected in the patient's blood.
[119]

### Alternative medicine

Various forms of alternative medicine have been used to treat symptoms or
alter the course of the disease.[120] Current studies indicate that
alternative medicine therapies have little effect on the mortality or
morbidity of the disease, but may improve the quality of life of individuals
with AIDS. The psychological benefits of these therapies are the most
important use.[120] Acupuncture has been used to alleviate some symptoms with
no success and cannot cure the HIV infection.[121] Several randomized clinical
trials testing the effect of herbal medicines have shown that there is no
evidence that these herbs have any effect on the progression of the disease,
but may instead produce serious side-effects.[122]

Morbidity and mortality among HIV-infected adults with adequate dietary
nutritional intake is unaffected by multivitamin supplementation. A large
Tanzanian trial in immunologically- and nutritionally-compromised pregnant and
lactating women showed a number of benefits to daily multivitamin
supplementation for both mothers and children.[123] Dietary intake of
micronutrients at RDA levels by HIV-infected adults is recommended by the
World Health Organization.[124] There is some evidence that vitamin A
supplementation in children reduces mortality and improves growth.[123] Daily
doses of selenium can suppress HIV viral burden with an associated improvement
of the CD4 count. Selenium can be used as an adjunct therapy to standard
antiviral treatments, but cannot itself reduce mortality and morbidity.[125]

## Prognosis

Without treatment, the net median survival time after infection with HIV is
estimated to be 9 to 11 years, depending on the HIV subtype,[7] and the median
survival rate after diagnosis of AIDS in resource-limited settings where
treatment is not available ranges between 6 and 19 months, depending on the
study.[126] In areas where it is widely available, the development of HAART as
effective therapy for HIV infection and AIDS reduced the death rate from this
disease by 80%, and raised the life expectancy for a newly diagnosed HIV-
infected person to about 20 years.[127]

As new treatments continue to be developed and because HIV continues to evolve
resistance to treatments, estimates of survival time are likely to continue to
change. Without antiretroviral therapy, death normally occurs within a
year.[34] Most patients die from opportunistic infections or malignancies
associated with the progressive failure of the immune system.[128] The rate of
clinical disease progression varies widely between individuals and has been
shown to be affected by many factors such as host susceptibility and immune
function[35][36][39] health care and co-infections,[34][128] as well as which
particular strain of the virus is involved.[41][129][130]

## Epidemiology

Main article: AIDS pandemic

<IMG>

This article may need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect
recent events or newly available information, and remove this template when
finished. Please see the talk page for more information.  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Estimated prevalence of HIV among young adults (15-49) per country at the end
of 2005

The AIDS pandemic can also be seen as several epidemics of separate subtypes;
the major factors in its spread are sexual transmission and vertical
transmission from mother to child at birth and through breast milk.[6] Despite
recent, improved access to antiretroviral treatment and care in many regions
of the world, the AIDS pandemic claimed an estimated 2.1 million (range
1.9â2.4 million) lives in 2007 of which an estimated 330,000 were children
under 15 years.[7] Globally, an estimated 33.2 million people lived with HIV
in 2007, including 2.5 million children. An estimated 2.5 million (range
1.8â4.1 million) people were newly infected in 2007, including 420,000
children.[7]

Sub-Saharan Africa remains by far the worst affected region. In 2007 it
contained an estimated 68% of all people living with AIDS and 76% of all AIDS
deaths, with 1.7 million new infections bringing the number of people living
with HIV to 22.5 million, and with 11.4 million AIDS orphans living in the
region. Unlike other regions, most people living with HIV in sub-Saharan
Africa in 2007 (61%) were women. Adult prevalence in 2007 was an estimated
5.0%, and AIDS continued to be the single largest cause of mortality in this
region.[7] South Africa has the largest population of HIV patients in the
world, followed by Nigeria and India.[131] South & South East Asia are second
worst affected; in 2007 this region contained an estimated 18% of all people
living with AIDS, and an estimated 300,000 deaths from AIDS.[7] India has an
estimated 2.5 million infections and an estimated adult prevalence of
0.36%.[7] Life expectancy has fallen dramatically in the worst-affected
countries; for example, in 2006 it was estimated that it had dropped from 65
to 35 years in Botswana.[6]

## History

Main article: Origin of AIDS

AIDS was first reported June 5, 1981, when the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention recorded a cluster of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
(now still classified as PCP but known to be caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii)
in five homosexual men in Los Angeles.[132] In the beginning, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) did not have an official name for the
disease, often referring to it by way of the diseases that were associated
with it, for example, lymphadenopathy, the disease after which the discoverers
of HIV originally named the virus.[68][69] They also used Kaposi's Sarcoma and
Opportunistic Infections, the name by which a task force had been set up in
1981.[133] In the general press, the term GRID, which stood for Gay-related
immune deficiency, had been coined.[134] The CDC, in search of a name, and
looking at the infected communities coined âthe 4H disease,â as it seemed
to single out Haitians, homosexuals, hemophiliacs, and heroin users.[135]
However, after determining that AIDS was not isolated to the homosexual
community,[133] the term GRID became misleading and AIDS was introduced at a
meeting in July 1982.[136] By September 1982 the CDC started using the name
AIDS, and properly defined the illness.[137]

A more controversial theory known as the OPV AIDS hypothesis suggests that the
AIDS epidemic was inadvertently started in the late 1950s in the Belgian Congo
by Hilary Koprowski's research into a poliomyelitis vaccine.[138][139]
According to scientific consensus, this scenario is not supported by the
available evidence.[140][141][142]

A recent study states that HIV probably moved from Africa to Haiti and then
entered the United States around 1969.[143]

## Society and culture

### Stigma

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ryan White became a poster child for HIV after being expelled from school
because of his infection.

AIDS stigma exists around the world in a variety of ways, including ostracism,
rejection, discrimination and avoidance of HIV infected people; compulsory HIV
testing without prior consent or protection of confidentiality; violence
against HIV infected individuals or people who are perceived to be infected
with HIV; and the quarantine of HIV infected individuals.[144] Stigma-related
violence or the fear of violence prevents many people from seeking HIV
testing, returning for their results, or securing treatment, possibly turning
what could be a manageable chronic illness into a death sentence and
perpetuating the spread of HIV.[145]

AIDS stigma has been further divided into the following three categories:

  * Instrumental AIDS stigmaâa reflection of the fear and apprehension that are likely to be associated with any deadly and transmissible illness.[146]
  * Symbolic AIDS stigmaâthe use of HIV/AIDS to express attitudes toward the social groups or lifestyles perceived to be associated with the disease.[146]
  * Courtesy AIDS stigmaâstigmatization of people connected to the issue of HIV/AIDS or HIV- positive people.[147]

Often, AIDS stigma is expressed in conjunction with one or more other stigmas,
particularly those associated with homosexuality, bisexuality, promiscuity,
prostitution, and intravenous drug use.

In many developed countries, there is an association between AIDS and
homosexuality or bisexuality, and this association is correlated with higher
levels of sexual prejudice such as anti-homosexual attitudes.[148] There is
also a perceived association between AIDS and all male-male sexual behavior,
including sex between uninfected men.[146]

### Economic impact

Main article: Economic impact of AIDS

<IMG>

<IMG>

Changes in life expectancy in some hard-hit African countries.  Botswana
Zimbabwe Kenya South Africa Uganda

HIV and AIDS affects economic growth by reducing the availability of human
capital.[8] Without proper nutrition, health care and medicine that is
available in developed countries, large numbers of people suffer and die from
AIDS-related complications. They will not only be unable to work, but will
also require significant medical care. The forecast is that this will likely
cause a collapse of economies and societies in countries with a significant
AIDS population. In some heavily infected areas, the epidemic has left behind
many orphans cared for by elderly grandparents.[149]

The increased mortality in this region will result in a smaller skilled
population and labor force. This smaller labor force will be predominantly
young people, with reduced knowledge and work experience leading to reduced
productivity. An increase in workersâ time off to look after sick family
members or for sick leave will also lower productivity. Increased mortality
will also weaken the mechanisms that generate human capital and investment in
people, through loss of income and the death of parents. By killing off mainly
young adults, AIDS seriously weakens the taxable population, reducing the
resources available for public expenditures such as education and health
services not related to AIDS resulting in increasing pressure for the state's
finances and slower growth of the economy. This results in a slower growth of
the tax base, an effect that will be reinforced if there are growing
expenditures on treating the sick, training (to replace sick workers), sick
pay and caring for AIDS orphans. This is especially true if the sharp increase
in adult mortality shifts the responsibility and blame from the family to the
government in caring for these orphans.[149]

On the level of the household, AIDS results in both the loss of income and
increased spending on healthcare by the household. The income effects of this
lead to spending reduction as well as a substitution effect away from
education and towards healthcare and funeral spending. A study in CÃ´te
d'Ivoire showed that households with an HIV/AIDS patient spent twice as much
on medical expenses as other households.[150]

### AIDS denialism

Main article: AIDS denialism

A small number of activists question the connection between HIV and AIDS,[151]
the existence of HIV,[152] or the validity of current treatment methods (even
going so far as to claim that the drug therapy itself was the cause of AIDS
deaths). Though these claims have been examined and thoroughly rejected by the
scientific community,[153] they continue to be promulgated through the
Internet[154] and have had a significant political impact. In South Africa,
former President Thabo Mbeki's embrace of AIDS denialism resulted in an
ineffective governmental response to the AIDS epidemic that has been blamed
for hundreds of thousands of AIDS-related deaths.[155][156]

### Active pursuit of HIV infection

Main article: Bugchasing and giftgiving

A subculture of homosexual men desire and actively pursue HIV infection by
seeking partners who are HIV-positive and voluntarily having unprotected
intercourse with them. In slang terms, those who seek infection are called
bugchasers and those who infect them are called giftgivers.[157] This
phenomenon should be distinguished from barebacking, which is the preference
for unprotected intercourse without the active desire for HIV infection.

The exact extent of practice remains largely unknown. Not all those who self-
identify as part of this subculture are actually intent on spreading HIV.[158]
Some bugchasers try to connect with giftgivers via the Internet.[159] Other
bugchasers organize and participate in "bug parties" or "conversion parties,"
sex parties where HIV positive and negative men engage in unprotected sex, in
hopes of acquiring HIV ("getting the gift").[160]

## Notes and references

  1. ^ Sepkowitz KA (June 2001). "AIDS--the first 20 years". N. Engl. J. Med. 344 (23): 1764â72. PMID 11396444. http://openurl.ebscohost.com/linksvc/linking.aspx?genre=article&sid=PubMed&issn=0028-4793&title=N%20Engl%20J%20Med&volume=344&issue=23&spage=1764&atitle=AIDS--the%20first%2020%20years.&aulast=Sepkowitz&date=2001.
  2. ^ Weiss RA (May 1993). "How does HIV cause AIDS?". Science (journal) 260 (5112): 1273â9. PMID 8493571.
  3. ^ Cecil, Russell (1988). Textbook of Medicine. Philadelphia: Saunders. pp. 1523, 1799. ISBN 0721618480.
  4. ^ Divisions of HIV/AIDS Prevention (2003). "HIV and Its Transmission". Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/HIV/pubs/facts/transmission.htm. Retrieved on 2006-05-23.
  5. ^ San Francisco AIDS Foundation (2006-04-14). "How HIV is spread". http://www.sfaf.org/aids101/transmission.html. Retrieved on 2006-05-23.
  6. ^ a b c Kallings LO (2008). "The first postmodern pandemic: 25 years of HIV/AIDS". J Intern Med 263 (3): 218â43. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2796.2007.01910.x. PMID 18205765. http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2007.01910.x.
  7. ^ a b c d e f g h UNAIDS, WHO (December 2007). "2007 AIDS epidemic update" (PDF). http://data.unaids.org/pub/EPISlides/2007/2007_epiupdate_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-12.
  8. ^ a b Bell C, Devarajan S, Gersbach H (2003) (PDF). The long-run economic costs of AIDS: theory and an application to South Africa. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3152. http://www1.worldbank.org/hiv_aids/docs/BeDeGe_BP_total2.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-04-28.
  9. ^ Gao F, Bailes E, Robertson DL, et al (1999). "Origin of HIV-1 in the Chimpanzee Pan troglodytes troglodytes". Nature 397 (6718): 436â441. doi:10.1038/17130. PMID 9989410.
  10. ^ Worobey M, Gemmel M, Teuwen DE, et al (October 2008). "Direct evidence of extensive diversity of HIV-1 in Kinshasa by 1960". Nature 455 (7213): 661â4. doi:10.1038/nature07390. PMID 18833279. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v455/n7213/full/nature07390.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-31.
  11. ^ Gallo RC (2006). "A reflection on HIV/AIDS research after 25 years". Retrovirology 3: 72. doi:10.1186/1742-4690-3-72. PMID 17054781. http://www.retrovirology.com/content/3//72.
  12. ^ a b Palella FJ Jr, Delaney KM, Moorman AC, et al (1998). "Declining morbidity and mortality among patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection. HIV Outpatient Study Investigators". N. Engl. J. Med 338 (13): 853â860. PMID 9516219.
  13. ^ Holmes CB, Losina E, Walensky RP, Yazdanpanah Y, Freedberg KA (2003). "Review of human immunodeficiency virus type 1-related opportunistic infections in sub-Saharan Africa". Clin. Infect. Dis. 36 (5): 656â662. PMID 12594648.
  14. ^ Guss DA (1994). "The acquired immune deficiency syndrome: an overview for the emergency physician, Part 1". J. Emerg. Med. 12 (3): 375â384. PMID 8040596.
  15. ^ Guss DA (1994). "The acquired immune deficiency syndrome: an overview for the emergency physician, Part 2". J. Emerg. Med. 12 (4): 491â497. PMID 7963396.
  16. ^ Feldman C (2005). "Pneumonia associated with HIV infection". Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. 18 (2): 165â170. PMID 15735422.
  17. ^ Decker CF, Lazarus A (2000). "Tuberculosis and HIV infection. How to safely treat both disorders concurrently". Postgrad Med. 108 (2): 57â60, 65â68. PMID 10951746.
  18. ^ Zaidi SA, Cervia JS (2002). "Diagnosis and management of infectious esophagitis associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection". J. Int. Assoc. Physicians AIDS Care (Chic Ill) 1 (2): 53â62. PMID 12942677.
  19. ^ Pollok RC (2001). "Viruses causing diarrhoea in AIDS". Novartis Found. Symp. 238: 276â83; discussion 283â8. PMID 11444032.
  20. ^ Guerrant RL, Hughes JM, Lima NL, Crane J (1990). "Diarrhea in developed and developing countries: magnitude, special settings, and etiologies". Rev. Infect. Dis. 12 (Suppl 1): S41âS50. PMID 2406855.
  21. ^ Luft BJ, Chua A (2000). "Central Nervous System Toxoplasmosis in HIV Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Therapy". Curr. Infect. Dis. Rep. 2 (4): 358â362. PMID 11095878.
  22. ^ Sadler M, Nelson MR (1997). "Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in HIV". Int. J. STD AIDS 8 (6): 351â357. PMID 9179644.
  23. ^ Gray F, Adle-Biassette H, ChrÃ©tien F, Lorin de la Grandmaison G, Force G, Keohane C (2001). "Neuropathology and neurodegeneration in human immunodeficiency virus infection. Pathogenesis of HIV-induced lesions of the brain, correlations with HIV-associated disorders and modifications according to treatments". Clin. Neuropathol. 20 (4): 146â155. PMID 11495003.
  24. ^ Grant I, Sacktor H, McArthur J (2005). "HIV neurocognitive disorders". in H. E. Gendelman, I. Grant, I. Everall, S. A. Lipton, and S. Swindells. (ed.) (PDF). The Neurology of AIDS (2nd ed.). London, UK: Oxford University Press. pp. 357â373. ISBN 0-19-852610-5.
  25. ^ Satishchandra P, Nalini A, Gourie-Devi M, et al (2000). "Profile of neurologic disorders associated with HIV/AIDS from Bangalore, South India (1989â1996)". Indian J. Med. Res. 11: 14â23. PMID 10793489.
  26. ^ Wadia RS, Pujari SN, Kothari S, Udhar M, Kulkarni S, Bhagat S, Nanivadekar A (2001). "Neurological manifestations of HIV disease". J. Assoc. Physicians India 49: 343â348. PMID 11291974.
  27. ^ Boshoff C, Weiss R (2002). "AIDS-related malignancies". Nat. Rev. Cancer 2 (5): 373â382. PMID 12044013.
  28. ^ Yarchoan R, Tosatom G, Littlem RF (2005). "Therapy insight: AIDS-related malignancies â the influence of antiviral therapy on pathogenesis and management". Nat. Clin. Pract. Oncol. 2 (8): 406â415. PMID 16130937.
  29. ^ Palefsky J (2007). "Human papillomavirus infection in HIV-infected persons". Top HIV Med 15 (4): 130â3. PMID 17720998.
  30. ^ Bonnet F, Lewden C, May T, et al (2004). "Malignancy-related causes of death in human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy". Cancer 101 (2): 317â324. PMID 15241829.
  31. ^ Skoulidis F, Morgan MS, MacLeod KM (2004). "Penicillium marneffei: a pathogen on our doorstep?". J. R. Soc. Med. 97 (2): 394â396. PMID 15286196.
  32. ^ Alimonti JB, Ball TB, Fowke KR (2003). "Mechanisms of CD4+ T lymphocyte cell death in human immunodeficiency virus infection and AIDS.". J. Gen. Virol. 84 (7): 1649â1661. doi:10.1099/vir.0.19110-0. PMID 12810858.
  33. ^ An Atlas of Differential Diagnosis in HIV Disease, Second Edition. CRC Press-Parthenon Publishers. 2003. pp. 22â27. ISBN 1-84214-026-4.
  34. ^ a b c d e Morgan D, Mahe C, Mayanja B, Okongo JM, Lubega R, Whitworth JA (2002). "HIV-1 infection in rural Africa: is there a difference in median time to AIDS and survival compared with that in industrialized countries?". AIDS 16 (4): 597â632. PMID 11873003.
  35. ^ a b Clerici M, Balotta C, Meroni L, et al (1996). "Type 1 cytokine production and low prevalence of viral isolation correlate with long-term non progression in HIV infection". AIDS Res. Hum. Retroviruses. 12 (11): 1053â1061. PMID 8827221.
  36. ^ a b Morgan D, Mahe C, Mayanja B, Whitworth JA (2002). "Progression to symptomatic disease in people infected with HIV-1 in rural Uganda: prospective cohort study". BMJ 324 (7331): 193â196. doi:10.1136/bmj.324.7331.193. PMID 11809639.
  37. ^ Gendelman HE, Phelps W, Feigenbaum L, et al (1986). "Transactivation of the human immunodeficiency virus long terminal repeat sequences by DNA viruses". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 83 (24): 9759â9763. PMID 2432602.
  38. ^ Bentwich Z, Kalinkovich, A, Weisman Z (1995). "Immune activation is a dominant factor in the pathogenesis of African AIDS.". Immunol. Today 16 (4): 187â191. PMID 7734046.
  39. ^ a b Tang J, Kaslow RA (2003). "The impact of host genetics on HIV infection and disease progression in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy". AIDS 17 (Suppl 4): S51âS60. PMID 15080180.
  40. ^ QuiÃ±ones-Mateu ME, Mas A, Lain de Lera T, Soriano V, Alcami J, Lederman MM, Domingo E (1998). "LTR and tat variability of HIV-1 isolates from patients with divergent rates of disease progression". Virus Research 57 (1): 11â20. PMID 9833881.
  41. ^ a b Campbell GR, Pasquier E, Watkins J, et al (2004). "The glutamine-rich region of the HIV-1 Tat protein is involved in T-cell apoptosis". J. Biol. Chem. 279 (46): 48197â48204. doi:10.1074/jbc.M406195200. PMID 15331610.
  42. ^ Kaleebu P, French N, Mahe C, et al (2002). "Effect of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) type 1 envelope subtypes A and D on disease progression in a large cohort of HIV-1-positive persons in Uganda". J. Infect. Dis. 185 (9): 1244â1250. PMID 12001041.
  43. ^ Rothenberg RB, Scarlett M, del Rio C, Reznik D, O'Daniels C (1998). "Oral transmission of HIV". AIDS 12 (16): 2095â2105. PMID 9833850.
  44. ^ Mastro TD, de Vincenzi I (1996). "Probabilities of sexual HIV-1 transmission". AIDS 10 (Suppl A): S75âS82. PMID 8883613.
  45. ^ Koenig MA, Zablotska I, Lutalo T, Nalugoda F, Wagman J, Gray R (2004). "Coerced first intercourse and reproductive health among adolescent women in Rakai, Uganda". Int Fam Plan Perspect 30 (4): 156â63. doi:10.1363/ifpp.30.156.04. PMID 15590381.
  46. ^ a b Laga M, Nzila N, Goeman J (1991). "The interrelationship of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV infection: implications for the control of both epidemics in Africa". AIDS 5 (Suppl 1): S55âS63. PMID 1669925.
  47. ^ Tovanabutra S, Robison V, Wongtrakul J, et al (2002). "Male viral load and heterosexual transmission of HIV-1 subtype E in northern Thailand". J. Acquir. Immune. Defic. Syndr. 29 (3): 275â283. PMID 11873077.
  48. ^ Sagar M, Lavreys L, Baeten JM, et al (2004). "Identification of modifiable factors that affect the genetic diversity of the transmitted HIV-1 population". AIDS 18 (4): 615â619. PMID 15090766.
  49. ^ Lavreys L, Baeten JM, Martin HL, et al (March 2004). "Hormonal contraception and risk of HIV-1 acquisition: results of a 10-year prospective study". AIDS 18 (4): 695â7. PMID 15090778.
  50. ^ Epstein, Helen (2007). The invisible cure: Africa, the West, and the fight against AIDS. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. ISBN 0-374-28152-1.
  51. ^ Parasitic worms may boost African HIV rates
  52. ^ AgnÃ¨s-Laurence Chenine, Ela Shai-Kobiler, Lisa N. Steele, Helena Ong, Peter Augostini, Ruijiang Song, Sandra J. Lee, Patrick Autissier, Ruth M. Ruprecht, W. Evan Secor Acute Schistosoma mansoni Infection Increases Susceptibility to Systemic SHIV Clade C Infection in Rhesus Macaques after Mucosal Virus Exposure PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0000265
  53. ^ Fan H (2005). Fan, H., Conner, R. F. and Villarreal, L. P. eds. ed. AIDS: science and society (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett Publishers. ISBN 0-7637-0086-X.
  54. ^ "WHO, UNAIDS Reaffirm HIV as a Sexually Transmitted Disease". WHO. 2003-03-17. http://64.233.179.104/search?q=cache:adH68_6JGG8J:tokyo.usembassy.gov//e/p/tp-20030317a3.html+site:tokyo.usembassy.gov+HIV+healthcare+injection&hl=en&gl=us&ct=clnk&cd=1. Retrieved on 2006-01-17.
  55. ^ "Financial Resources Required to Achieve, Universal Access to HIV Prevention, Treatment Care and Support" (PDF). UNAIDS. http://data.unaids.org/pub/Report/2007/20070925_advocacy_grne2_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-04-11.
  56. ^ "Blood safety....for too few". WHO. 2001. http://www.who.int/inf-pr-2000/en/pr2000-25.html. Retrieved on 2006-01-17.
  57. ^ a b Coovadia H (2004). "Antiretroviral agentsâhow best to protect infants from HIV and save their mothers from AIDS". N. Engl. J. Med. 351 (3): 289â292. PMID 15247337.
  58. ^ Coovadia HM, Bland RM (2007). "Preserving breastfeeding practice through the HIV pandemic". Trop. Med. Int. Health. 12 (9): 1116â1133. PMID 17714431.
  59. ^ Blechner MJ (1997). Hope and mortality: psychodynamic approaches to AIDS and HIV. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press. ISBN 0-88163-223-6.
  60. ^ Guss DA (1994). "The acquired immune deficiency syndrome: an overview for the emergency physician, Part 1". J Emerg Med 12 (3): 375â84. PMID 8040596.
  61. ^ Hel Z, McGhee JR, Mestecky J (June 2006). "HIV infection: first battle decides the war". Trends Immunol. 27 (6): 274â81. doi:10.1016/j.it.2006.04.007. PMID 16679064.
  62. ^ Mehandru S, Poles MA, Tenner-Racz K, Horowitz A, Hurley A, Hogan C, Boden D, Racz P, Markowitz M (September 2004). "Primary HIV-1 infection is associated with preferential depletion of CD4+ T lymphocytes from effector sites in the gastrointestinal tract". J. Exp. Med. 200 (6): 761â70. doi:10.1084/jem.20041196. PMID 15365095.
  63. ^ Brenchley JM, Schacker TW, Ruff LE, Price DA, Taylor JH, Beilman GJ, Nguyen PL, Khoruts A, Larson M, Haase AT, Douek DC (September 2004). "CD4+ T cell depletion during all stages of HIV disease occurs predominantly in the gastrointestinal tract". J. Exp. Med. 200 (6): 749â59. doi:10.1084/jem.20040874. PMID 15365096.
  64. ^ Appay V, Sauce D (January 2008). "Immune activation and inflammation in HIV-1 infection: causes and consequences". J. Pathol. 214 (2): 231â41. doi:10.1002/path.2276. PMID 18161758.
  65. ^ Brenchley JM, Price DA, Schacker TW, Asher TE, Silvestri G, Rao S, Kazzaz Z, Bornstein E, Lambotte O, Altmann D, Blazar BR, Rodriguez B, Teixeira-Johnson L, Landay A, Martin JN, Hecht FM, Picker LJ, Lederman MM, Deeks SG, Douek DC (December 2006). "Microbial translocation is a cause of systemic immune activation in chronic HIV infection". Nat. Med. 12 (12): 1365â71. doi:10.1038/nm1511. PMID 17115046.
  66. ^ a b Textbook of Pathology by Harsh Mohan, ISBN 81-8061-368-2
  67. ^ World Health Organization (1990). "Interim proposal for a WHO staging system for HIV infection and disease". WHO Wkly Epidem. Rec. 65 (29): 221â228. PMID 1974812.
  68. ^ a b Centers for Disease Control (CDC) (1982). "Persistent, generalized lymphadenopathy among homosexual males.". MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 31 (19): 249â251. PMID 6808340.
  69. ^ a b BarrÃ©-Sinoussi F, Chermann JC, Rey F, et al (1983). "Isolation of a T-lymphotropic retrovirus from a patient at risk for acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)". Science 220 (4599): 868â871. doi:10.1126/science.6189183. PMID 6189183.
  70. ^ "1993 Revised Classification System for HIV Infection and Expanded Surveillance Case Definition for AIDS Among Adolescents and Adults". CDC. 1992. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00018871.htm. Retrieved on 2006-02-09.
  71. ^ a b Kumaranayake L, Watts C (2001). "Resource allocation and priority setting of HIV/AIDS interventions: addressing the generalized epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa". J. Int. Dev. 13 (4): 451â466. doi:10.1002/jid.798.
  72. ^ Weber B (2006). "Screening of HIV infection: role of molecular and immunological assays". Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 6 (3): 399â411. doi:10.1586/14737159.6.3.399. PMID 16706742.
  73. ^ TÃ³th FD, BÃ¡csi A, Beck Z, SzabÃ³ J (2001). "Vertical transmission of human immunodeficiency virus". Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung 48 (3-4): 413â27. doi:10.1556/AMicr.48.2001.3-4.10. PMID 11791341.
  74. ^ Smith DK, Grohskopf LA, Black RJ, et al (2005). "Antiretroviral Postexposure Prophylaxis After Sexual, Injection-Drug Use, or Other Nonoccupational Exposure to HIV in the United States". MMWR 54 (RR02): 1â20. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5402a1.htm#tab1. Retrieved on 2009-03-31.
  75. ^ Donegan E, Stuart M, Niland JC, et al (1990). "Infection with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) among recipients of antibody-positive blood donations". Ann. Intern. Med. 113 (10): 733â739. PMID 2240875.
  76. ^ Kaplan EH, Heimer R (1995). "HIV incidence among New Haven needle exchange participants: updated estimates from syringe tracking and testing data". J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. Hum. Retrovirol. 10 (2): 175â176. PMID 7552482.
  77. ^ Bell DM (1997). "Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection in healthcare workers: an overview.". Am. J. Med. 102 (5B): 9â15. PMID 9845490.
  78. ^ a b c d European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV (1992). "Comparison of female to male and male to female transmission of HIV in 563 stable couples". BMJ. 304 (6830): 809â813. PMID 1392708.
  79. ^ a b c d e f Varghese B, Maher JE, Peterman TA, Branson BM,Steketee RW (2002). "Reducing the risk of sexual HIV transmission: quantifying the per-act risk for HIV on the basis of choice of partner, sex act, and condom use". Sex. Transm. Dis. 29 (1): 38â43. PMID 11773877.
  80. ^ Leynaert B, Downs AM, de Vincenzi I (1998). "Heterosexual transmission of human immunodeficiency virus: variability of infectivity throughout the course of infection. European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV". Am. J. Epidemiol. 148 (1): 88â96. PMID 9663408.
  81. ^ "Facts about AIDS & HIV". avert.org. http://www.avert.org/aids.htm. Retrieved on 2007-11-30.
  82. ^ Johnson AM, Laga M (1988). "Heterosexual transmission of HIV". AIDS 2 (suppl. 1): S49-S56. PMID 3130121.
  83. ^ N'Galy B, Ryder RW (1988). "Epidemiology of HIV infection in Africa". Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes 1 (6): 551-558. PMID 3225742.
  84. ^ Deschamps MM, Pape JW, Hafner A, Johnson WD Jr. (1996). "Heterosexual transmission of HIV in Haiti". Annals of Internal Medicine 125 (4): 324â330. PMID 8678397.
  85. ^ Cayley WE Jr. (2004). "Effectiveness of condoms in reducing heterosexual transmission of HIV". Am. Fam. Physician 70 (7): 1268â1269. PMID 15508535.
  86. ^ "Module 5/Guidelines for Educators" (Microsoft Word). Durex. http://www.durex.com/cm/assets/SexEdDownloads/Module_5_condoms.doc. Retrieved on 2006-04-17. [dead link]
  87. ^ PATH (2006). "The female condom: significant potential for STI and pregnancy prevention". Outlook 22 (2).
  88. ^ "Condom Facts and Figures". WHO. August 2003. http://www.wpro.who.int/media_centre/fact_sheets/fs_200308_Condoms.htm. Retrieved on 2006-01-17.
  89. ^ Patel VL, Yoskowitz NA, Kaufman DR, Shortliffe EH (2008). "Discerning patterns of human immunodeficiency virus risk in healthy young adults". Am J Med 121 (4): 758â764. PMID 18724961.
  90. ^ Dias SF, Matos MG, Goncalves, A. C. (2005). "Preventing HIV transmission in adolescents: an analysis of the Portuguese data from the Health Behaviour School-aged Children study and focus groups". Eur. J. Public Health 15 (3): 300â304. PMID 15941747.
  91. ^ Weiss HA (February 2007). "Male circumcision as a preventive measure against HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases". Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. 20 (1): 66â72. doi:10.1097/QCO.0b013e328011ab73. PMID 17197884.
  92. ^ Eaton LA, Kalichman S (December 2007). "Risk compensation in HIV prevention: implications for vaccines, microbicides, and other biomedical HIV prevention technologies". Curr HIV/AIDS Rep 4 (4): 165â72. doi:10.1007/s11904-007-0024-7. PMID 18366947.
  93. ^ Mattson, C.L.; R.T. Campbell, R.C. Bailey, K. Agot, J.O. Ndinya-Achola, S. Moses (June 18 2008). "Risk compensation is not associated with male circumcision in Kisumu, Kenya: a multi-faceted assessment of men enrolled in a randomized controlled trial". PLoS One 3 (6): e2443. PMID 18560581.
  94. ^ "Recommendations for Prevention of HIV Transmission in Health-Care Settings". http://www.cdc.gov/MMWR/PREVIEW/MMWRHTML/00023587.htm. Retrieved on 2008-04-28.
  95. ^ Kerr T, Kimber J, Debeck K, Wood E (December 2007). "The role of safer injection facilities in the response to HIV/AIDS among injection drug users". Curr HIV/AIDS Rep 4 (4): 158â64. doi:10.1007/s11904-007-0023-8. PMID 18366946.
  96. ^ Wodak A, Cooney A (2006). "Do needle syringe programs reduce HIV infection among injecting drug users: a comprehensive review of the international evidence". Subst Use Misuse 41 (6-7): 777â813. doi:10.1080/10826080600669579. PMID 16809167.
  97. ^ WHO HIV and Infant Feeding Technical Consultation (2006). "Consensus statement" (PDF). http://www.who.int/hiv/mediacentre/Infantfeedingconsensusstatement.pf.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-12.
  98. ^ Hamlyn E, Easterbrook P (August 2007). "Occupational exposure to HIV and the use of post-exposure prophylaxis". Occup Med (Lond) 57 (5): 329â36. doi:10.1093/occmed/kqm046. PMID 17656498.
  99. ^ a b "A Pocket Guide to Adult HIV/AIDS Treatment February 2006 edition". Department of Health and Human Services. February 2006. http://hab.hrsa.gov/tools/HIVpocketguide/PktGPEP.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-01.
  100. ^ "A Pocket Guide to Adult HIV/AIDS Treatment February 2006 edition". Department of Health and Human Services. February 2006. http://hab.hrsa.gov/tools/HIVpocketguide/PktGARTtables.htm. Retrieved on 2006-09-01.
  101. ^ "Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in Pediatric HIV Infection" (PDF). Department of Health and Human Services Working Group on Antiretroviral Therapy and Medical Management of HIV-Infected Children. 2005-11-03. http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/PediatricGuidelines_PDA.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-01-17.
  102. ^ "Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents" (PDF). Department of Health and Human Services Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. 2005-10-06. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-01-17.
  103. ^ Martinez-Picado J, DePasquale MP, Kartsonis N, et al (2000). "Antiretroviral resistance during successful therapy of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97 (20): 10948â10953. PMID 11005867.
  104. ^ Dybul M, Fauci AS, Bartlett JG, Kaplan JE, Pau AK; Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV. (2002). "Guidelines for using antiretroviral agents among HIV-infected adults and adolescents". Ann. Intern. Med. 137 (5 Pt 2): 381â433. PMID 12617573.
  105. ^ Blankson JN, Persaud D, Siliciano RF (2002). "The challenge of viral reservoirs in HIV-1 infection". Annu. Rev. Med. 53: 557â593. PMID 11818490.
  106. ^ Palella FJ, Delaney KM, Moorman AC, Loveless MO, Fuhrer J, Satten GA, Aschman DJ, Holmberg SD (1998). "Declining morbidity and mortality among patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection". N. Engl. J. Med. 338 (13): 853â860. PMID 9516219.
  107. ^ Wood E, Hogg RS, Yip B, Harrigan PR, O'Shaughnessy MV, Montaner JS (2003). "Is there a baseline CD4 cell count that precludes a survival response to modern antiretroviral therapy?". AIDS 17 (5): 711â720. PMID 12646794.
  108. ^ Chene G, Sterne JA, May M, Costagliola D, Ledergerber B, Phillips AN, Dabis F, Lundgren J, D'Arminio Monforte A, de Wolf F, Hogg R, Reiss P, Justice A, Leport C, Staszewski S, Gill J, Fatkenheuer G, Egger ME and the Antiretroviral Therapy Cohort Collaboration (2003). "Prognostic importance of initial response in HIV-1 infected patients starting potent antiretroviral therapy: analysis of prospective studies". Lancet 362 (9385): 679â686. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14229-8. PMID 12957089.
  109. ^ King JT, Justice AC, Roberts MS, Chang CH, Fusco JS and the CHORUS Program Team (2003). "Long-Term HIV/AIDS Survival Estimation in the Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy Era". Medical Decision Making 23 (1): 9â20. PMID 12583451.
  110. ^ Tassie JM, Grabar S, Lancar R, Deloumeaux J, Bentata M, Costagliola D and the Clinical Epidemiology Group from the French Hospital Database on HIV (2002). "Time to AIDS from 1992 to 1999 in HIV-1-infected subjects with known date of infection". Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes 30 (1): 81â7. PMID 12048367.
  111. ^ Becker SL, Dezii CM, Burtcel B, Kawabata H, Hodder S. (2002). "Young HIV-infected adults are at greater risk for medication nonadherence". MedGenMed. 4 (3): 21. PMID 12466764.
  112. ^ Nieuwkerk P, Sprangers M, Burger D, Hoetelmans RM, Hugen PW, Danner SA, van Der Ende ME, Schneider MM, Schrey G, Meenhorst PL, Sprenger HG, Kauffmann RH, Jambroes M, Chesney MA, de Wolf F, Lange JM and the ATHENA Project (2001). "Limited Patient Adherence to Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy for HIV-1 Infection in an Observational Cohort Study". Arch. Intern. Med. 161 (16): 1962â1968. PMID 11525698.
  113. ^ Kleeberger C, Phair J, Strathdee S, Detels R, Kingsley L, Jacobson LP (2001). "Determinants of Heterogeneous Adherence to HIV-Antiretroviral Therapies in the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study". J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 26 (1): 82â92. PMID 11176272.
  114. ^ Heath KV, Singer J, O'Shaughnessy MV, Montaner JS, Hogg RS (2002). "Intentional Nonadherence Due to Adverse Symptoms Associated With Antiretroviral Therapy". J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 31 (2): 211â217. PMID 12394800.
  115. ^ Burgoyne RW, Tan DH (March 2008). "Prolongation and quality of life for HIV-infected adults treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART): a balancing act". J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 61 (3): 469â73. doi:10.1093/jac/dkm499. PMID 18174196. http://jac.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=18174196.
  116. ^ Karlsson Hedestam GB, Fouchier RA, Phogat S, Burton DR, Sodroski J, Wyatt RT (February 2008). "The challenges of eliciting neutralizing antibodies to HIV-1 and to influenza virus". Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6 (2): 143â55. doi:10.1038/nrmicro1819. PMID 18197170.
  117. ^ Laurence J (2006). "Hepatitis A and B virus immunization in HIV-infected persons". AIDS Reader 16 (1): 15â17. PMID 16433468.
  118. ^ Planque S, Nishiyama Y, Taguchi H, Salas M, Hanson C, Paul S (June 2008). "Catalytic antibodies to HIV: Physiological role and potential clinical utility". Autoimmun Rev 7 (6): 473â9. doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2008.04.002. PMID 18558365.
  119. ^ "A Doctor, a Mutation and a Potential Cure for AIDS: A Bone Marrow Transplant to Treat a Leukemia Patient Also Gives Him Virus-Resistant Cells; Many Thanks, Sample 61". Wall Street Journal. November 2008. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB122602394113507555.html. Retrieved on 2008-11-12.
  120. ^ a b Power R, Gore-Felton C, Vosvick M, Israelski DM, Spiegel D (June 2002). "HIV: effectiveness of complementary and alternative medicine". Prim. Care 29 (2): 361â78. PMID 12391716.
  121. ^ Nicholas PK, Kemppainen JK, Canaval GE, et al (February 2007). "Symptom management and self-care for peripheral neuropathy in HIV/AIDS". AIDS Care 19 (2): 179â89. doi:10.1080/09540120600971083. PMID 17364396. http://www.informaworld.com/openurl?genre=article&doi=10.1080/09540120600971083&magic=pubmed. Retrieved on 2008-04-28.
  122. ^ Liu JP, Manheimer E, Yang M (2005). "Herbal medicines for treating HIV infection and AIDS". Cochrane Database Syst Rev (3): CD003937. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003937.pub2. PMID 16034917.
  123. ^ a b Irlam JH, Visser ME, Rollins N, Siegfried N (2005). "Micronutrient supplementation in children and adults with HIV infection". Cochrane Database Syst Rev (4): CD003650. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003650.pub2. PMID 16235333.
  124. ^ World Health Organization (2003-05). Nutrient requirements for people living with HIV/AIDS: Report of a technical consultation. Geneva. http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/Content_nutrient_requirements.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-31.
  125. ^ Hurwitz BE, Klaus JR, Llabre MM, et al (January 2007). "Suppression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 viral load with selenium supplementation: a randomized controlled trial". Arch. Intern. Med. 167 (2): 148â54. doi:10.1001/archinte.167.2.148. PMID 17242315.
  126. ^ Zwahlen M, Egger M (2006) (PDF). Progression and mortality of untreated HIV-positive individuals living in resource-limited settings: update of literature review and evidence synthesis. UNAIDS Obligation HQ/05/422204. http://data.unaids.org/pub/Periodical/2006/zwahlen_unaids_hq_05_422204_2007_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-19.
  127. ^ Knoll B, Lassmann B, Temesgen Z (2007). "Current status of HIV infection: a review for non-HIV-treating physicians". Int J Dermatol 46 (12): 1219â28. doi:10.1111/j.1365-4632.2007.03520.x. PMID 18173512.
  128. ^ a b Lawn SD (2004). "AIDS in Africa: the impact of coinfections on the pathogenesis of HIV-1 infection". J. Infect. Dis. 48 (1): 1â12. PMID 14667787.
  129. ^ Campbell GR, Watkins JD, Esquieu D, Pasquier E, Loret EP, Spector SA (2005). "The C terminus of HIV-1 Tat modulates the extent of CD178-mediated apoptosis of T cells". J. Biol. Chem. 280 (46): 38376â39382. PMID 16155003.
  130. ^ Senkaali D, Muwonge R, Morgan D, Yirrell D, Whitworth J, Kaleebu P (2005). "The relationship between HIV type 1 disease progression and V3 serotype in a rural Ugandan cohort". AIDS Res. Hum. Retroviruses. 20 (9): 932â937. PMID 15585080.
  131. ^ McNeil DG Jr (2007-11-20). "U.N. agency to say it overstated extent of H.I.V. cases by millions". New York Times. http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C01EEDF103BF933A15752C1A9619C8B63. Retrieved on 2008-03-18.
  132. ^ Gottlieb MS (2006). "Pneumocystis pneumonia--Los Angeles. 1981". Am J Public Health 96 (6): 980â1; discussion 982â3. PMID 16714472. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/june_5.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-31.
  133. ^ a b Centers for Disease Control (CDC) (1982). "Opportunistic infections and Kaposi's sarcoma among Haitians in the United States". MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 31 (26): 353â354; 360â361. PMID 6811853.
  134. ^ Altman LK (1982-05-11). "New homosexual disorder worries officials". The New York Times.
  135. ^ "Making Headway Under Hellacious Circumstances" (PDF). American Association for the Advancement of Science. 2006-07-28. http://www.scienceonline.org/cgi/reprint/313/5786/470b.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-06-23.
  136. ^ Kher U (1982-07-27). "A Name for the Plague". Time. http://www.time.com/time/80days/820727.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-10.
  137. ^ Centers for Disease Control (CDC) (1982). "Update on acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)âUnited States.". MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 31 (37): 507â508; 513â514. PMID 6815471.
  138. ^ Curtis T (1992). "The origin of AIDS". Rolling Stone (626): pp. 54â59, 61, 106, 108. http://www.uow.edu.au/arts/sts/bmartin/dissent/documents/AIDS/Curtis92.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-10.
  139. ^ Hooper E (1999). The River : A Journey to the Source of HIV and AIDS (1st ed.). Boston, MA: Little Brown & Co. pp. 1â1070. ISBN 0-316-37261-7.
  140. ^ Worobey M, Santiago ML, Keele BF, et al (2004). "Origin of AIDS: contaminated polio vaccine theory refuted". Nature 428 (6985): 820. doi:10.1038/428820a. PMID 15103367.
  141. ^ Berry N, Jenkins A, Martin J, et al (2005). "Mitochondrial DNA and retroviral RNA analyses of archival oral polio vaccine (OPV CHAT) materials: evidence of macaque nuclear sequences confirms substrate identity". Vaccine 23: 1639â1648. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.10.038. PMID 15705467.
  142. ^ "Oral Polio Vaccine and HIV / AIDS: Questions and Answers". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2004-03-23. http://www.cdc.gov/nip/vacsafe/concerns/aids/poliovac-hiv-aids-qa.htm. Retrieved on 2006-11-20.
  143. ^ Gilbert MT, Rambaut A, Wlasiuk G, Spira TJ, Pitchenik AE, Worobey M (2007). "The emergence of HIV/AIDS in the Americas and beyond". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104 (47): 18566â70. doi:10.1073/pnas.0705329104. PMID 17978186.
  144. ^ "The impact of AIDS on people and societies" (PDF). 2006 Report on the global AIDS epidemic. UNAIDS. 2006.
  145. ^ Ogden J, Nyblade L (2005). "Common at its core: HIV-related stigma across contexts" (PDF). International Center for Research on Women. http://www.icrw.org/docs/2005_report_stigma_synthesis.pdf. Retrieved on 2007-02-15.
  146. ^ a b c Herek GM, Capitanio JP (1999). "AIDS Stigma and sexual prejudice" (PDF). American Behavioral Scientist 42 (7): 1130-1147. doi:10.1177/0002764299042007006. http://psychology.ucdavis.edu/rainbow/html/abs99_sp.pdf. Retrieved on 2006-03-27.
  147. ^ Snyder M, Omoto AM, Crain AL (1999). "Punished for their good deeds: stigmatization for AIDS volunteers". American Behavioral Scientist 42 (7): 1175â1192. doi:10.1177/0002764299042007009.
  148. ^ Herek GM, Capitanio JP, Widaman KF (2002). "HIV-related stigma and knowledge in the United States: prevalence and trends, 1991-1999" (PDF). Am J Public Health 92 (3): 371â7. PMID 11867313. http://psychology.ucdavis.edu/rainbow/html/ajph2002.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-10.
  149. ^ a b Greener R (2002). "AIDS and macroeconomic impact". in S, Forsyth (ed.). State of The Art: AIDS and Economics. IAEN. pp. 49â55.
  150. ^ Over M (1992) (PDF). The macroeconomic impact of AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa, Population and Human Resources Department. The World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/aidsecon/macro.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
  151. ^ Duesberg PH (1988). "HIV is not the cause of AIDS". Science 241 (4865): 514, 517. doi:10.1126/science.3399880. PMID 3399880.
  152. ^ Papadopulos-Eleopulos E, Turner VF, Papadimitriou J, et al (2004). "A critique of the Montagnier evidence for the HIV/AIDS hypothesis". Med Hypotheses 63 (4): 597â601. doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2004.03.025. PMID 15325002.
  153. ^ For evidence of the scientific consensus that HIV is the cause of AIDS, see (for example): 
    * "The Evidence That HIV Causes AIDS". National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. 2003. http://www.niaid.nih.gov/Factsheets/evidhiv.htm. Retrieved on 2008-12-20.
    * , (2000). "The Durban Declaration". Nature 406 (6791): 15â6. doi:10.1038/35017662. PMID 10894520. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v406/n6791/full/406015a0.html. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
    * Cohen J (1994). "The Duesberg Phenomenon: A Berkeley virologist and his supporters continue to argue that HIV is not the cause of AIDS. A 3-month investigation by Science evaluates their claims." (PDF). Science 266 (5191): 1642â1649. http://www.sciencemag.org/feature/data/cohen/266-5191-1642a.pdf. Retrieved on 2009-03-31.
    * "HIV/AIDS Connection: Resource and links". National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. http://www3.niaid.nih.gov/topics/HIVAIDS/Understanding/connectionResources.htm. Retrieved on 2009-03-31.
    * O'Brien SJ, Goedert JJ (1996). "HIV causes AIDS: Koch's postulates fulfilled". Curr. Opin. Immunol. 8 (5): 613â8. PMID 8902385.
    * GalÃ©a P, Chermann JC (1998). "HIV as the cause of AIDS and associated diseases". Genetica 104 (2): 133â42. PMID 10220906.
  154. ^ Smith TC, Novella SP (2007). "HIV denial in the Internet era". PLoS Med. 4 (8): e256. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040256. PMID 17713982.
  155. ^ Chigwedere P, Seage GR, Gruskin S, Lee TH, Essex M (October 2008). "Estimating the Lost Benefits of Antiretroviral Drug Use in South Africa". Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes (1999). doi:10.1097/QAI.0b013e31818a6cd5. PMID 18931626. Lay summary.
  156. ^ Baleta A (2003). "S Africa's AIDS activists accuse government of murder". Lancet 361 (9363): 1105. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12909-1. PMID 12672319.
  157. ^ Moskowitz DA, Roloff ME (2007). "The existence of a bug chasing subculture". Cult Health Sex 9 (4): 347â57. doi:10.1080/13691050600976296. PMID 17612955.
  158. ^ Grov C, Parsons JT (December 2006). "Bug chasing and gift giving: the potential for HIV transmission among barebackers on the internet". AIDS Educ Prev 18 (6): 490â503. doi:10.1521/aeap.2006.18.6.490. PMID 17166076.
  159. ^ Graydon M (2007). "Don't bother to wrap it: online Giftgiver and Bugchaser newsgroups, the social impact of gift exchanges and the 'carnivalesque'". Cult Health Sex 9 (3): 277â92. doi:10.1080/13691050601124649. PMID 17457731.
  160. ^ Dean, T., 2008. "Breeding Culture: barebacking, Bugchasing, Giftgiving". The Massachusetts Review, Vol. 49(1), pp. 80-94.

## Further reading

  * "2007 AIDS epidemic update" (PDF). UNAIDS. http://data.unaids.org/pub/EPISlides/2007/2007_epiupdate_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  * "UNAIDS Annual Report â Making the money work" (PDF). UNAIDS. http://data.unaids.org/pub/Report/2007/2006_unaids_annual_report_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  * "Financial Resources Required to Achieve, Universal Access to HIV Prevention, Treatment Care and Support" (PDF). UNAIDS. http://data.unaids.org/pub/Report/2007/20070925_advocacy_grne2_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  * "Practical Guidelines for Intensifying HIV Prevention" (PDF). UNAIDS. http://data.unaids.org/pub/Manual/2007/20070306_prevention_guidelines_towards_universal_access_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  * "Antiretroviral Formulations" (PDF). US Department of Health and Human Services. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/AntiretroviralFormulations_FS_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  * "Approved Medications to Treat HIV Infection" (PDF). US Department of Health and Human Services. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/ApprovedMedstoTreatHIV_FS_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.
  * "The HIV Life Cycle" (PDF). US Department of Health and Human Services. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/HIVLifeCycle_FS_en.pdf. Retrieved on 2008-03-21.

## External links

Listen to this article (info/dl)  

Play sound

Spoken Wikipedia

This audio file was created from a revision dated 2006-06-12, and does not
reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

More spoken articles

This is a spoken version of the article. Click here to listen.

Find more about AIDS on Wikipedia's sister projects: <IMG> Definitions from
Wiktionary  

<IMG> Textbooks from Wikibooks  
<IMG> Quotations from Wikiquote  
<IMG> Source texts from Wikisource  
<IMG> Images and media from Commons  
<IMG> News stories from Wikinews  

<IMG> Learning resources from Wikiversity

  * HIV/AIDS at the Open Directory Project
  * AIDSinfo \- HIV/AIDS Treatment Information, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
  * UNAIDS: The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
  * Portal to all Federal HIV/AIDS information \- Office of HIV/AIDS Policy

v â¢ d â¢ e

HIV/AIDS topics  
HIV

HIV Â· Structure and genome of HIV Â· Subtypes of HIV Â· Safe sex Â· HIV test
Â· CDC Classification System for HIV Infection Â· HIV disease progression
rates Â· HIV vaccine Â· WHO Disease Staging System for HIV Infection and
Disease (Children) / (Teens / Adults)  Â· Antiretroviral drug Â· HIV Drug
Resistance Database Â· Circumcision and HIV  
Conditions

AIDS dementia complex Â· Tuberculosis coinfection Â· HIV-associated
nephropathy Â· HIV-associated lipodystrophy  
History

Origin of AIDS Â· AIDS pandemic Â· AIDS Museum Â· AIDS timeline  
Culture

International AIDS Conference Â· International AIDS Society Â· World AIDS Day
Â· Treatment Action Campaign Â· Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) Â· President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) Â· NAMES
Project AIDS Memorial Quilt Â· HIV and AIDS misconceptions Â· List of HIV-
positive people Â· People With AIDS Self-Empowerment Movement Â·
HIVâpositive fictional characters Â· AIDS advocacy  
Denialism

Duesberg hypothesis Â· Group for the Scientific Reappraisal of the HIV-AIDS
Hypothesis  
AIDS pandemic by region / country  
Africa

South Africa Â· Uganda  
North America

United States  
Asia

China (PRC) Â· India Â· Japan Â· Myanmar (Burma) Â· Pakistan Â· Taiwan (ROC)  
Caribbean  
Eastern Europe  
Central Asia

Russia  
Western Europe  
Oceania

Australia Â· New Zealand Â· Papua New Guinea  
List of countries by HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate Â· List of HIV/AIDS cases
and deaths registered by region  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Infectious diseases Â· Viral diseases (A80-B34, 042-079)  
Oncovirus

DNA virus: HBV (Hepatocellular carcinoma) Â· HPV (Cervical cancer) Â· Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (Kaposi's sarcoma) Â· Epstein-Barr virus
(Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Burkitt's lymphoma) Â· MCPyV (Merkel cell cancer)
Â· SV40  
RNA virus: HCV (Hepatocellular carcinoma) Â· HTLV-I (Adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma)  
Immune disorders

RNA virus: HIV (AIDS)  
Central nervous system

Encephalitis/  
meningitis

DNA virus: JCV (Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy)  
RNA virus: MeV (Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis) Â· LCV (Lymphocytic
choriomeningitis) Â· Arbovirus encephalitis Â· Orthomyxoviridae (probable)
(Encephalitis lethargica) Â· RV (Rabies)  
Myelitis

RNA virus: Poliovirus (Poliomyelitis, Post-polio syndrome) Â· HTLV-I (Tropical
spastic paraparesis)  
Eye

DNA virus: Cytomegalovirus (Cytomegalovirus retinitis)  
Cardiovascular

CBV (Pericarditis, Myocarditis)  
Respiratory system/  
acute viral nasopharyngitis/  
viral pneumonia

DNA virus

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV infection/Infectious mononucleosis) Â· Cytomegalovirus  
RNA virus

IV: SARS coronavirus (Severe acute respiratory syndrome)  

V, Orthomyxoviridae: Influenzavirus A/B/C (Influenza/Avian influenza)

V, Paramyxovirus: Human parainfluenza viruses (Parainfluenza) Â· RSV Â· hMPV  
Digestive system

Oropharynx

MuV (Mumps)  
Gastroenteritis/  
diarrhea

DNA virus: Adenovirus (Adenovirus infection)  
RNA virus: Rotavirus Â· Norovirus Â· Astrovirus Â· Coronavirus  
Hepatitis

DNA virus: HBV (B)  
RNA virus: CBV Â· HAV (A) Â· HCV (C) Â· HDV (D) Â· HEV (E) Â· HGV (G)  
Pancreatitis

RNA virus: CBV  
Skin and mucous membrane  
lesions, including exanthem

DNA virus

Herpesviridae

HSV (Herpes simplex, Herpetic whitlow) Â· VZV (Chickenpox, Herpes zoster) Â·
Human herpesvirus 6/Roseolovirus (Exanthema subitum) Â· KSHV (Kaposi's
sarcoma) Â· Herpes B Virus  
Poxviridae

Variola (Smallpox) Â· MoxV (Monkeypox) Â· CV (Cowpox) Â· VV (Vaccinia) Â· MCV
(Molluscum contagiosum)  
Other

HPV (Wart/Plantar wart) Â· Parvovirus B19 (Erythema infectiosum,
Reticulocytopenia)  
RNA virus

MeV (Measles) Â· Rubella virus (Rubella, Congenital rubella syndrome)  
picornavirus: CAV (Hand, foot and mouth disease, Herpangina) Â· FMDV (Foot-
and-mouth disease)  
Urogenital

BK virus Â· MuV (Mumps)  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Sexually transmitted diseases and infections (STD/STI) (primarily A50-A64,
090-099)  
Bacterial

Chancroid (Haemophilus ducreyi) Â· Chlamydia/Lymphogranuloma venereum
(Chlamydia trachomatis) Â· Donovanosis or Granuloma Inguinale (Klebsiella
granulomatis) Â· Gonorrhea (Neisseria gonorrhoeae) Â· Syphilis (Treponema
pallidum) Â· Ureaplasma infection (Ureaplasma urealyticum)  
Protozoal

Trichomoniasis (Trichomonas vaginalis)  
Parasitic

Crab louse/crabs Â· Scabies  
Viral

AIDS (HIV-1/HIV-2) Â· Cervical cancer & Genital warts (condyloma) (Human
papillomavirus (HPV)) Â· Hepatitis B (Hepatitis B virus) Â· Herpes simplex
(HSV1/HSV2) Â· Molluscum contagiosum (MCV)  
General  
inflammation

female: Cervicitis Â· Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)

male: Epididymitis Â· Prostatitis

either: Proctitis Â· Urethritis/Non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU)  
Other

Ectopic pregnancy Â· Premature birth Â· Infertility Â· Reactive arthritis  
sià¶à¶©à·à·à·

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AIDS"

Categories: Spoken articles | Sexually transmitted diseases and infections |
Acronyms | AIDS origin hypotheses | HIV/AIDS | Immune system disorders |
Immunodeficiency | Infectious diseases | Medical disasters | Microbiology |
Pandemics | Syndromes | Viral diseases | Virology

Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links | Articles with dead
external links since March 2009 | Wikipedia semi-protected pages | Cleanup
from April 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | Wikipedia articles in need of
updating

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * á áá­á
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Bamanankan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÐµÐ»Ð°ÑÑÑÐºÐ°Ñ (ÑÐ°ÑÐ°ÑÐºÐµÐ²ÑÑÐ°)
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * chiTumbuka
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¬ÞÞ¨ÞÞ¦ÞÞ°
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FÃ¸royskt
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Furlan
  * Gaeilge
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * è´èª
  * GÄ©kÅ©yÅ©
  * àªà«àªàª°àª¾àª¤à«
  * íêµ­ì´
  * ÕÕ¡ÕµÕ¥ÖÕ¥Õ¶
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * à²à²¨à³à²¨à²¡
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Kiswahili
  * Kongo
  * KreyÃ²l ayisyen
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * àº¥àº²àº§
  * Latina
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * LingÃ¡la
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Malti
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * ÐÐ¾Ð½Ð³Ð¾Ð»
  * Nederlands
  * à¤¨à¥à¤ªà¤¾à¤² à¤­à¤¾à¤·à¤¾
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * O'zbek
  * Ù¾ÚØªÙ
  * áá¶áá¶ááááá
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Runa Simi
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Sicilianu
  * à·à·à¶à·à¶½
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * TatarÃ§a/Ð¢Ð°ÑÐ°ÑÑÐ°
  * à°¤à±à°²à±à°à±
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * Tshivenda
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Ø§Ø±Ø¯Ù
  * VÃ¨neto
  * å´è¯­
  * ××Ö´×××©
  * YorÃ¹bÃ¡
  * ç²µèª
  * Å½emaitÄÅ¡ka
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 22:25.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



