
# Chihuahua (dog)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the breed of dog the Chihuahua. For the Mexican state,
see Chihuahua (state). For the state capital, see Chihuahua, Chihuahua. For
other uses, see Chihuahua (disambiguation).

Chihuahua <IMG>  
Country of origin Mexico

Life Span 15-18 years  
Traits  
Classification & standards  
FCI Group 9 Section 6 #218 standard  
AKC Toy standard  
ANKC Group 1 (Toys) Smooth Stds  
Long standard  
CKC Group 5 - Toys Smooth Stds  
Long standard  
KC (UK) Toy Smooth Stds  
Long standard  
NZKC Toy Smooth Stds  
Long standard  
UKC Companion Breeds standard  
The Chihuahua-pronounciation.ogg Chihuahua (helpÂ·info) (Spanish:
ChihuahueÃ±o) is the smallest breed of dog in the world and is named after the
state of Chihuahua in Mexico.

## Contents

  * 1 Description
    * 1.1 Standards
    * 1.2 Coat
    * 1.3 Colors
  * 2 Health Disorders
  * 3 History
  * 4 Clubs
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links
  * 8 References

  
## [edit] Description

### [edit] Standards

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chihuahuas, such as this one in the New York City Subway, are popular amongst
urban residents with smaller homes.

Breed standards for this dog do not generally specify a height, only a weight
and a description of their overall proportions. As a result, height varies
more than within many other breeds. Generally, the height ranges between 6 and
10 inches (15 to 25 cm) at the withers. However, some dogs grow as tall as 12
to 15 inches (30 to 35 cm). Both British and American breed standards state
that a Chihuahua must not weigh more than 6.0 lb (2.7 kg).[1], however the
British standard also states that a weight of 2-4 lb (1-1.8 kg) is preferred
and that if two dogs are equally good in type, the more diminutive or smaller
is preferred. The FÃ©dÃ©ration Cynologique Internationale (FCI) standard calls
for dogs ideally between 1.5 and 3.0 kg (3.3 to 6.6 lb), although smaller ones
are acceptable in the show ring.[2] However, pet-quality Chihuahuas (that is,
those bred or purchased as companions rather than show dogs) can, and do,
range above these weights, to 10 pounds (4.5 kg), or even more if they have
large bone structures or are allowed to become overweight. This does not mean,
however, that they are not purebred Chihuahuas, it only means that they do not
meet the requirements to enter a conformation show. Oversize Chihuahuas are
seen in some of the best, and worst, bloodlines. Typically the breed standard
for both the long and short coat chihuahua will be identical except for the
description of the coat. The two basic body types of purebred Chihuahuas are
Apple headed or Deer headed. Characteristics of an Apple headed Chihuahua are
short noses, an apple shaped head, and close- set eyes. On the other hand,
Deer headed Chihuahuas have an elongated nose that resembles a Doberman
Pinschers. Most importantly, Deer headed Chihuahuas do not have a head shaped
like an apple although they both have the same chance of being teacup or
miniature.

### [edit] Coat

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Chihuahua puppy.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A tricolor Chihuahua

<IMG>

<IMG>

A long-haired Chihuahua

The Kennel Club (UK) and American Kennel Club (USA) only recognize two
varieties of Chihuahua: the long-coat and the smooth-coat, also referred to as
short-haired.[1] They are genetically the same breed, although you will never
find both in the same litter (unless the parents were different types to each
other) and in many kennel clubs, including the KC and AKC, they are judged in
separate categories. The term smooth-coat does not mean that the hair is
necessarily smooth, as the hair can range from having a velvet touch to a
whiskery feeling. Long-haired Chihuahuas are actually smoother to the touch,
having soft, fine guard hairs and a downy undercoat, which gives them their
fluffy appearance. Unlike many long-haired breeds, short-haired Chihuahuas
require no trimming and minimal grooming. Contrary to popular belief, the
long-haired breed also typically sheds less than their short-haired
counterparts. It may take up to two or more years before a full long-haired
coat develops.

### [edit] Colors

The AKC Chihuahua standard lists under color: "Any color-Solid, marked or
splashed".[1] This allows for all colors from solid blacks to solid whites,
spotted, or a variety of other colors and patterns. A few examples are Fawn,
Red, Cream, Chocolate, Blue, and Black. However the UK Kennel Club decided in
May 2007 not to register puppies with Merle coloration due to the health risks
associated with the gene responsible, and in December of that year formally
amended the Breed Standard to say "Any colour or mixture of colours but never
merle (dapple)."[3] Other countries' Kennel Clubs such as Canada and Australia
have also disqualified Merle. However, in May 2008 the Chihuahua Club of
America voted that merles will not be disqualified in the United States and
they are fully registrable and able to compete in all AKC events.

Patterns, all with or without white markings, include:

Sable

  * Irish spotting
  * Piebald spotting
  * Extreme white spotting
  * Brindle
  * Masks
  * Merle
  * Tan points

Classifying Chihuahua colors can be complicated due to the large number of
possibilities. Examples would be a blue brindle or a chocolate and tan. Colors
and patterns can combine and affect each other, resulting in a very high
degree of variation. That said, the classic Chihuahua color remains fawn. No
color or pattern is considered more valuable than the others, although blue is
considered rare. Chihuahuas are not well-suited as small children's pets
because of their size, temperament, and tendency to bite when frightened. It
is recommended that children be school aged or older before adding a Chihuahua
to one's home. Also, many Chihuahuas focus their devotion on one person,
becoming overly jealous of that person's human relationships. This can be
mitigated through socialization. Chihuahuas also tend to have a "clannish"
nature, often preferring the companionship of other Chihuahuas over other
dogs.[4]

## [edit] Health Disorders

<IMG>

<IMG>

Overfeeding a Chihuahua can be a grave danger to the tiny dog's health,
shortening its life and leading to diabetes.[5]

This breed requires expert veterinary attention in areas such as birthing and
dental care. Chihuahuas are also prone to some genetic anomalies, often
neurological ones, such as epilepsy and seizure disorders.

Chihuahuas, and other toy breeds, are also prone to the sometimes painful
disease, hydrocephalus. It is often diagnosed by the puppy having an
abnormally large head during the first several months of life, but other
symptoms are more noticeable (since "a large head" is such a broad
description). Chihuahua puppies exhibiting hydrocephalus usually have patchy
skull platelets rather than a solid bone, and typically are lethargic and do
not grow at the same pace as their siblings. A true case of hydrocephalus can
be diagnosed by a veterinarian, though the prognosis is grim.

Chihuahuas have moleras, or a soft spot in their skulls, and they are the only
breed of dog to be born with an incomplete skull. The molera does fill in with
age, but great care needs to be taken during the first six months until the
skull is fully formed. Many veterinarians are not familiar with Chihuahuas as
a breed, and mistakenly confuse a molera with hydrocephalus. The Chihuahua
Club of America has issued a statement regarding this often deadly
misdiagnosis. [6]

Chihuahuas can also be at risk for hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar. This is
especially dangerous for puppies. Left unattended, hypoglycemia can lead to
coma. Chihuahuas are also prone to eye infections due to their large, round,
protruding eyes and their relatively low ground clearance. Chihuahuas also
have a tendency to tremble but this is not a health issue, rather it takes
place when the dog is stressed or excited. One reason for this may be because
small dogs have a higher metabolism than larger dogs and therefore dissipate
heat faster. Although figures often vary, as with any breed, the average
lifespan for a Chihuahua is approximately 8 to 22 years of age.

Chihuahuas are sometimes picky eaters, and care must be taken to provide them
with adequate nutrition. At the same time, care must be exercised not to
overfeed this tiny breed. Overweight Chihuahuas are prone to joint injuries,
tracheal collapse, chronic bronchitis, and shortened life span.

## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Black and tan chihuahua

The developmental history of the Chihuahua is very difficult to trace and is
based largely on speculation and theory, however through folklore, legend and
archeological finds, there is sufficient evidence to prove that it is without
doubt an ancient breed originating from Pre-Columbian Mexico, and it is
believed to predate any other breed of dog in the Americas. The most common
theory and most likely is that Chihuahuas are descended from the Techichi, a
companion dog favoured by the Toltecs and that the modern dog developed
through breeding with miniaturised Chinese dogs brought to the Americas by the
Spanish Conquistadors.

Historical records of the Techichi, which were thought to hunt in packs, can
only be traced as far back as the ninth century but it is highly likely that
this is the Chihuahua's native Mexican ancestor. Evidence of this is that the
remains of dogs closely resembling, but slightly larger than the average
Chihuahua have been found in such places as the Great Pyramid of Cholula,
which dates back to the 2nd century BC and predates the 16th century. There is
also evidence to suggest that the Techichi may also predate the Mayans. After
the Toltecs were conquered by the Aztecs, it is believed that this early
ancestor of the Chihuahua was adopted as a symbol of the upper classes and it
has been suggested that they were used in religious ceremonies for the
absolution of sins and to guide the spirits of the dead. In terms of size, the
present day Chihuahua is much smaller than its ancestors, a change thought to
be due to the introduction of miniaturized Chinese dogs, such as the Chinese
Crested Dog, into South America by the Spanish.

A progenitor of the breed was reputedly found in 1850 in old ruins near Casas
Grandes in the Mexican state of Chihuahua from which the breed gets its
name.[7] The state borders with Texas, Arizona and New Mexico where Chihuahuas
first rose to prominence and were further developed in the United States.
Since that time, the Chihuahua has remained consistently popular as a breed,
particularly in America when the breed was first recognized by the American
Kennel Club in 1904.

The Chihuahua has also become part of a popular crossbreed in the United
States in the Chihuachshund, which is a pairing of a Chihuahua and a
Dachshund. There is also an unusual crossbreed called the Chihueagle, a
pairing of the Chihuahua and the Beagle.

Genetic tests place the Chihuahua with other modern breeds originating in the
1800s.[8]

## [edit] Clubs

<IMG>

<IMG>

A long-haired Chihuahua.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A short haired chihuahua.

The American Kennel Club registered its first Chihuahua in 1905.[7]

Chihuahuas breed clubs often inform the public about the breed, host
competitions, and other activities. For example, the Chihuahua Club of
America, formed in 1923[9], and the British Chihuahua Club, formed in 1947[4],
provide these services.

## [edit] See also

  * Companion dog
  * Companion Dog Group
  * Toy Group
  * Dogs in Mesoamerica
  * Chihuachshund or Chiweenie (crossbred with Dachshund)
  * Pompchy (crossbred with Pomeranian)

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c American Kennel Club Chihuahua page, retrieved on July 29, 2007.
  2. ^ FCI Chihuahua PDF Document
  3. ^ Kennel Club breed standard
  4. ^ a b About Chihuahuas, British Chihuahua Club, retrieved on July 29, 2007.
  5. ^ Pet Health 101 - Chihuahua, retrieved on July 29, 2007
  6. ^ Molera Statement
  7. ^ a b Chihuahuas: facts and information, Tenna Perry, ESortment.com, 2002, retrieved on July 29, 2007, although most artifacts relating to its existence are found around Mexico City.
  8. ^ [|Ostrander, Elaine A.] (September-October 2007). "Genetics and the Shape of Dogs; Studying the new sequence of the canine genome shows how tiny genetic changes can create enormous variation within a single species". American Scientist (online). www.americanscientist.org. seven pages. http://www.americanscientist.org/issues/feature/2007/5/genetics-and-the-shape-of-dogs. Retrieved on 08/09 2008.
  9. ^ Chihuahua Club of America

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Chihuahua (dog)  
  * Chihuahua links at the Open Directory Project
  * Ruins where the dog was discovered in Casas Grandes
  * Chihuahua Lovers - information, photographs, and links
  * Chihuahua People - Large chihuahua community

## [edit] References

v â¢ d â¢ e

Toy dogs  
Affenpinscher Â· Australian Silky Terrier Â· Bichon FrisÃ© Â· Bolognese Â·
Boston Terrier Â· Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Â· Chihuahua Â· Chinese
Crested Dog Â· Coton de Tulear Â· English Toy Terrier Â· Griffon Bruxellois Â·
Havanese Â· Italian Greyhound Â· Japanese Chin Â· King Charles Spaniel Â·
LÃ¶wchen Â· Maltese Â· Miniature Pinscher Â· Miniature Poodle Â· Miniature
Schnauzer Â· Papillon Â· Pekingese Â· Pomeranian Â· Pug Â· Russkiy Toy Â· Shih
Tzu Â· Toy Manchester Terrier Â· Toy Poodle Â· Yorkshire Terrier  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chihuahua_(dog)"

Categories: Dog breeds | Toy dogs | Companion dogs | Latin American dogs

Hidden categories: Articles containing Spanish language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Cebuano
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Basa Jawa
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * NÄhuatl
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 21:17.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



