
# Svalbard Global Seed Vault

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Coordinates: 78Â°14â²23â³N 15Â°29â²43â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿78.23972Â°N
15.49528Â°Eï»¿ / 78.23972; 15.49528

<IMG>

<IMG>

Logo

<IMG>

<IMG>

Rendered visualisation of the Seed Vault

<IMG>

<IMG>

Design of the Seed Vault as of early 2007

The Svalbard Global Seed Vault (Norwegian: Svalbard globale frÃ¸hvelv) is a
secure seedbank located on the Norwegian island of Spitsbergen near the town
of Longyearbyen in the remote Arctic Svalbard archipelago.[1] The facility was
established to preserve a wide variety of plant seeds from locations worldwide
in an underground cavern. The Seed Vault holds duplicate samples, or "spare"
copies, of seeds held in genebanks worldwide. The Seed Vault will provide
insurance against the loss of seeds in genebanks, as well as a refuge for
seeds in the case of large scale regional or global crises. The island of
Spitsbergen is about 1,120 kilometres (700 mi) from the North Pole. The Seed
Vault is managed under terms spelled out in a tripartite agreement between the
Norwegian government, the Global Crop Diversity Trust (GCDT) and the Nordic
Genetic Resource Center (previously named the Nordic Gene Bank, a cooperative
effort of the Nordic countries under the Nordic Council of Ministers).

Construction of the Seed Vault, which cost approximately 45 million Norwegian
Kroner (9 million USD),[2] was funded entirely by the Government of Norway.[2]
Storage of seeds in the Seed Vault is free of charge. Operational costs will
be paid by Norway and the Global Crop Diversity Trust.[2] The primary funding
of the Trust came from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, United Kingdom,
Norway, Australia, Switzerland, and Sweden, though funding has been received
from a wide variety of sources including four developing countries: Brazil,
Colombia, Ethiopia, and India.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Construction
  * 3 Mission
  * 4 Access to seeds
  * 5 Global Crop Diversity Trust
  * 6 First anniversary deposits
  * 7 Other events
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Video
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] History

The Nordic Gene Bank has stored a backup of Nordic plant germplasm as frozen
seeds in an abandoned coal mine at Svalbard since 1984. The Nordic Gene Bank
(NGB) has deposited more than 10,000 seed samples of more than 2,000 cultivars
of 300 different species over the years. In addition, seed samples from
southern Africa (SADC) have been safely duplicated with the Nordic collection
for some years. Both the Nordic and African collections are expected to be
transferred to the Svalbard Global Seed Vault in the future. Since January 1,
2008 the Nordic Gene Bank is an integrated part of the newly formed Nordic
Genetic Resource Center (NORDGEN).

<IMG>

<IMG>

The entrance to the Vault.

## [edit] Construction

The prime ministers of Norway, Sweden, Finland, Denmark, and Iceland
participated in a ceremonial "laying of the first stone" on 19 June 2006.

The seedbank is constructed 120 metres (390 ft) inside a sandstone mountain at
Svalbard on Spitsbergen Island.[4] The bank employs a number of robust
security systems. Seeds are packaged in special four-ply packets and heat
sealed to exclude moisture. The facility is managed by the Nordic Genetic
Resource Center, though there are no permanent staff on-site.

Spitsbergen was considered ideal due to its lack of tectonic activity and its
permafrost, which will aid preservation. The location 130 metres (430 ft)
above sea level will ensure that the site remains dry even if the icecaps
melt.[4] Locally mined coal provides power for refrigeration units that
further cool the seeds to the internationally-recommended standard â18 Â°C
(â0 Â°F).[5] Even if the equipment fails, at least several weeks will elapse
before the temperature rises to the â3 Â°C (30 Â°F) of the surrounding
sandstone bedrock.[1]

Prior to construction, a feasibility study determined that the vault could
preserve seeds from most major food crops for hundreds of years. Some seeds,
including those of important grains, could survive far longer, possibly
thousands of years.

The Svalbard Global Seed Vault opened officially on February 26, 2008.[6]
Approximately 1.5 million distinct seed samples of agricultural crops are
thought to exist. The variety and volume of seeds stored will depend on the
number of countries participating â the facility has a capacity to conserve
4.5 million. The first seeds arrived in January 2008.[7] Five percent of the
seeds in the Vault, about 18,000 samples with 500 seeds each, come from the
Centre for Genetic Resources of the Netherlands (CGN), part of Wageningen
University, Netherlands.[8]

## [edit] Mission

The Svalbard Global Seed Vault's mission is to provide a safety net against
accidental loss of diversity in traditional genebanks. While the popular press
has emphasized its possible utility in the event of a major regional or global
catastrophe, it will certainly be more frequently accessed when genebanks lose
samples due to mismanagement, accident, equipment failures, funding cuts and
natural disasters. Such events occur with some regularity. In recent years,
some national genebanks have also been destroyed by war and civil strife.
There are some 1,400 crop diversity collections around the world, but many are
in politically unstable or environmentally threatened nations.

## [edit] Access to seeds

The seed samples stored in the Seed Vault are copies of samples stored in the
depositing genebanks. Researchers, plant breeders and other groups wishing to
access seed samples cannot do so through the Seed Vault; instead they must
request samples from the depositing genebanks. The samples stored in the
genebanks will, in most cases, be accessible in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture,[9] approved by 118 countries/Parties.[10][11]

The Seed Vault functions like a safety deposit box in a bank. The bank owns
the building and the depositor owns the contents of his or her box. The
Government of Norway owns the facility and the depositing genebanks own the
seeds they send. The deposit of samples in Svalbard does not constitute a
legal transfer of genetic resources. In genebank terminology this is called a
"black box" arrangement. Each depositor signs a Deposit Agreement with
NORDGEN, acting on behalf of Norway. The Agreement makes clear that Norway
does not claim ownership over the deposited samples and that ownership remains
with the depositor, who has the sole right of access to those materials in the
Seed Vault. No one has access to anyone elseâs seeds from the Seed
Vault.[11][12] For a list of depositors to the Svalbard Global Seed Vault, see
the Seed Vault online database managed by NORDGEN.[13]

## [edit] Global Crop Diversity Trust

The Global Crop Diversity Trust (GCDT) has played a key role in the planning
of the Seed Vault and is coordinating shipments of seed samples to the Vault
in conjunction with the Nordic Genetic Resource Center. The Trust will provide
most of the annual operating costs for the facility, and has set aside
endowment funds to do so, while the Norwegian government will finance upkeep
of the structure itself. With support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
and other donors, the GCDT is assisting selected genebanks in developing
countries as well as the international agricultural research centers in
packaging and shipping seeds to the Seed Vault. An International Advisory
Council is being established to provide guidance and advice. It will include
representatives from the FAO, the CGIAR, the International Treaty on Plant
Genetic Resources and other institutions.

## [edit] First anniversary deposits

As part of the vault's one year anniversary, more than 90,000 food crop seed
samples were placed into storage, bringing the total number of seed samples to
400,000.[14] Among the new seeds includes 32 varieties of potatoes from
Ireland's national gene banks and 20,000 new samples from the U.S.
Agricultural Research Service.[15] Other seed samples came from Canada and
Switzerland, as well as international seed researchers from Colombia, Mexico
and Syria.[16] This 4-tonne (3.9 LT; 4.4 ST) shipment brought the total number
of seeds stored in the vault to over 20 million.[14] The vault now contains
samples from one-third of the world's most important food crop varieties. Also
part of the anniversary, experts on food production and climate change met for
a three-day conference in Longyearbyen.[17]

## [edit] Other events

  * Japanese sculptor Mitsuaki Tanabe presented to Svalbard Global Seed Vault a sculpture named The seed 2009 â Momi in Situ conservation [18].
  * Svalbard Global Seed Vault ranked #6 on Time's Best Inventions Of 2008[19].

## [edit] See also

  * Vavilov Center
  * Survivalism
  * Frozen Seed, the science fiction action movie.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Charles, Daniel (2006-06-23). "A 'Forever' Seed Bank Takes Root in the Arctic". Science 312: pp. 1730â1731. doi:10.1126/science.312.5781.1730b. PMID 16794050.
  2. ^ a b c "Svalbard Global Seed Vault: Frequently Asked Questions". Royal Norwegian Ministry of Agriculture and Food.
  3. ^ "Donors". Global Crop Distribution Trust.
  4. ^ a b Modern Marvels: Deep Freeze. The History Channel.
  5. ^ "From safety in permafrost to optimal conditions". Regjeringen.no. 2008-05-20. http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/lmd/campain/svalbard-global-seed-vault/news/svalbard-global-seed-vault-from-safety-i.html?id=512006&epslanguage=EN-GB. Retrieved on 2008-07-18.
  6. ^ "'Doomsday' seed vault opens in Arctic". boston.com/Associated Press. 26 February 2008. http://www.boston.com/news/world/europe/articles/2008/02/26/doomsday_seed_vault_opens_in_arctic/.
  7. ^ "'Doomsday' seeds arrive in Norway". BBC News Online. 31 January 2008. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7217821.stm.
  8. ^ Aarden, Marieke (2008-02-26). "Opslag met miljarden zaden, voor tijden van oorlog". de Volkskrant. p. 6.
  9. ^ francisco lopez. "International Treaty on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture". Planttreaty.org. http://www.planttreaty.org. Retrieved on 2009-03-02.
  10. ^ International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources. List of Contracting Parties. http://www.planttreaty.org/members_en.htm
  11. ^ a b Fowler C. 2008. "The Svalbard Global Seed Vault: Securing the Future of Global Agriculture" Published online at http://www.croptrust.org/main/arctic.php?itemid=211
  12. ^ Royal Norwegian Ministry of Agriculture and Food. Svalbard Global Seed Vault. Management and Operations. http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/lmd/campain/svalbard-global-seed-vault/management-and-operations.html?id=462223
  13. ^ "Svalbard Global Seed Vault, SGSV, data portal". Nordgen.org. 2009-02-24. http://www.nordgen.org/sgsv/index.php?app=data_unit&unit=sgsv_by_depositor&PHPSESSID=3b1td0arodcnhufcvf6p5mv8h7. Retrieved on 2009-03-02.
  14. ^ a b Walsh, Bryan (2009-02-27). "The Planet's Ultimate Backup Plan: Svalbard". Time. http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,1882288,00.html. Retrieved on 2009-03-01.
  15. ^ "ARS ships more seeds to genebank facility in Norway". High Plains Journal. 2009-02-25. http://www.hpj.com/archives/2009/mar09/mar2/ARSshipsmoreseedstogenebank.cfm?title=ARS%20ships%20more%20seeds%20to%20genebank%20facility%20in%20Norway. Retrieved on 2009-03-01.
  16. ^ Young, Linda (2009-02-26). "Global Seed Vault Marks First Anniversary; 20 Million Seeds From One-Third Of Earth's Food Crops Now Stored In Case Of Disaster". All Headline News. http://www.allheadlinenews.com/articles/7014225215. Retrieved on 2009-03-01.
  17. ^ "More seeds for 'doomsday vault'". BBC News. 2009-02-26. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/7912543.stm. Retrieved on 2009-02-27.
  18. ^ Japanese wild rice in Svalbard (Norway - the official site in Japan)
  19. ^ 6\. The Global Seed Vault - TIME's Best Inventions of 2008 - TIME

## [edit] Video

  * Diverseeds Video: Svalbard and Seedvault

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikinews has related news: Seeds placed in Norwegian vault as
agricultural 'insurance policy'  
  * Svalbard Global Seed Vault (home page)
  * Near Arctic, Seed Vault Is a Fort Knox of Food (New York Times, 29 February 2008)
  * Faults in the vault: not everyone is celebrating Svalbard
  * See Inside the Svalbard Global Seed Vault (Interactive Feature)
  * Svalbard Global Seed Vault
  * IITA's African seed collection first in Norway, 31 January 2008
  * Global Crop Diversity Trust
  * "'Doomsday' seed bank to be built". BBC News Online. 12 January 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/4605398.stm.
  * "Work begins on Arctic seed vault". BBC News Online. 19 June 2006. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/5094450.stm.
  * "'Doomsday' vault design unveiled". BBC News Online. 9 February 2007. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/6335899.stm.
  * "Doomsday vault begins deep freeze". BBC News Online. 16 November 2007. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/7097052.stm.
  * "Banking on Catastrophe". The Walrus. November 2006. http://www.walrusmagazine.com/articles/2006.11-field-notes-seed-vault/.
  * "The World's Agricultural Legacy Gets A Safe Home". Washington Post. 2006-06-19. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/06/18/AR2006061800950.html. Retrieved on 2006-06-19.
  * The Nordic Genetic Resource Center (NORDGEN)
  * The Nordic Gene Bank (NGB)
  * Bazilchuk, Nancy. 2006. Itâs in the vault: World's largest seed bank housed in Norwayâs permafrost. Conservation in Practice 7(4):38â39.
  * Filipino farmer honored in 'Noah's Ark' opening

v â¢ d â¢ e

Svalbard  
General

Flora Â· Governor Â· History Â· Languages Â· Politics Â· Treaty Â· .sj  
Settlements

Barentsburg Â· Grumant Â· Longyearbyen Â· Ny-Ã lesund Â· Pyramiden Â·
Smeerenburg Â· Sveagruva  
Islands

BarentsÃ¸ya Â· Bear Island Â· DanskÃ¸ya Â· EdgeÃ¸ya Â· Hopen Â· Kong Karls
Land Â· KongsÃ¸ya Â· KvitÃ¸ya Â· LÃ¥gÃ¸ya Â· Nordaustlandet Â· Spitsbergen Â·
SvenskÃ¸ya Â· TusenÃ¸yane Â· WilhelmÃ¸ya Â· Ytre NorskÃ¸ya  
Fjords

Bellsund Â· Hornsund Â· Isfjorden Â· Kongsfjorden Â· Van Mijenfjorden Â·
Wijdefjorden Â· Woodfjorden  
National parks

Forlandet National Park Â· NordenskiÃ¶ld Land Â· Nordre Isfjorden Land Â·
Northwest Spitsbergen Â· Sassen-BÃ¼nsow Land Â· SÃ¸r-Spitsbergen  
Landmarks

Newtontoppen Â· Olav V Land  
Companies

Arktikugol Â· BjÃ¸rnÃ¸en Â· Kings Bay Â· Store Norske  
Research

Arctic Yellow River Station Â· Norwegian Polar Institute Â· Polish Polar
Station Â· Seed Vault Â· Undersea Cable Â· University Centre  
Airports

Longyearbyen Â· Ny-Ã lesund Â· Svea  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Svalbard_Global_Seed_Vault"

Categories: Svalbard | Nuclear warfare | Disaster preparedness in Norway |
Futurology | Conservation | Gene banks | Arctic research | Seeds

Hidden categories: Articles containing Norwegian language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ZeÃªuws
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 16:08.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



