
# Colossal Squid

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Colossal Squid  
A drawing of a Colossal Squid.  

A drawing of a Colossal Squid.  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Animalia  
  
Phylum: Mollusca  
  
Class: Cephalopoda  
  
Order: Teuthida  
  
Family: Cranchiidae  
  
Subfamily: Taoniinae  
  
Genus: Mesonychoteuthis  
Robson, 1925  
Species: M. hamiltoni  
  
Binomial name  
Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni  
Robson, 1925  
The Colossal Squid (Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni, from Greek mesos (middle),
onyx (claw), and teuthis (squid)), sometimes called the Antarctic or Giant
Cranch Squid, is believed to be the largest squid species. It is the only
known member of the genus Mesonychoteuthis. Though it is known from only a few
specimens, current estimates put its maximum size at 12â14 metres (39â46
feet) long, based on analysis of smaller and immature specimens, making it the
largest known invertebrate.

## Contents

  * 1 Morphology
  * 2 Distribution
  * 3 Ecology and life history
  * 4 Timeline
    * 4.1 Largest known specimen
      * 4.1.1 Defrosting and dissection, April-May 2008
      * 4.1.2 Exhibition
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 External links

  
## Morphology

Unlike the giant squid, whose arm and tentacles only have suckers lined with
small teeth, the Colossal Squid's arms and tentacles are also equipped with
sharp hooks: some swiveling, others three-pointed.[1] Its body is wider and
stouter, and therefore heavier, than that of the giant squid. Colossal Squids
are believed to have a longer mantle than giant squids, although their
tentacles are shorter.

The squid exhibits abyssal gigantism. The beak of Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni
is the largest known of any squid, exceeding that of Architeuthis (giant
squid) in size and robustness. The Colossal Squid also has the largest eyes
documented in the animal kingdom.[2]

## Distribution

The squid's known range extends thousands of miles northward from Antarctica
to southern South America, southern South Africa, and the southern tip of New
Zealand, making it primarily an inhabitant of the entire circumantarctic
Southern Ocean.

## Ecology and life history

While little is known about the life of this creature, it is believed to hunt
prey such as chaetognatha, large fish like the Patagonian toothfish and other
squid in the deep ocean using bioluminescence. Based on capture depths of a
few specimens, as well as beaks found in sperm whale stomachs, the adult squid
ranges at least to a depth of 2200 metres, while juveniles can go as deep as
1000 metres. It is believed to be sexually dimorphic, with mature females
generally being much larger than mature males, as is common in many species of
invertebrates.

The squid's method of reproduction has not been observed, although some data
on their reproduction can be inferred from anatomy. Since males lack an organ
called a hectocotylus (a tentacle used in other cephalopods to transfer a
spermatophore to the female), they probably use a penis instead, which would
be used to directly implant sperm into females.

Many sperm whales carry scars on their backs believed to be caused by the
hooks of Colossal Squid. Colossal Squid are a major prey item for Antarctic
sperm whales feeding in the Southern Ocean; 14% of the squid beaks found in
the stomachs of these sperm whales are those of the Colossal Squid, which
indicates that Colossal Squid make up 77% of the biomass consumed by these
whales.[3] Many other animals also feed on this squid, including the beaked
whales (such as the bottlenose whales), pilot whale, southern elephant seal,
Patagonian toothfish, Pacific sleeper shark, and albatross (e.g., the
Wandering and Sooty albatrosses). However, beaks from mature adults have only
been recovered from those animals large enough to take such prey (i.e., the
sperm whale and Pacific sleeper shark), while the remaining predators are
limited to eating juveniles or young adults.[4]

## Timeline

Main article: List of Colossal Squid specimens and sightings

<IMG>

<IMG>

Complete specimen caught in 2003.

  * 1925 â Species was first discovered in the form of two tentacles found in the stomach of a sperm whale.[5]
  * 1981 â A Russian trawler in the Ross Sea, off the coast of Antarctica, caught a large squid with a total length of 4 metres (13 ft), which was later identified as an immature female of Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni.[6]
  * 2003 â A complete specimen of a subadult female (photo at right) was found near the surface with a total length of 6 m (20 ft) and a mantle length of 2.5 m (8 ft).[7]
  * 2005 â A specimen was captured at a depth of 1625 m while taking a toothfish from a longline off South Georgia Island. Although the mantle was not brought aboard, the mantle length was estimated at over 2.5 m, and the tentacles measured 230 cm. The animal is thought to have weighed between 150 and 200 kg.[8]
  * 2007 â The largest recorded specimen was captured by a New Zealand fishing boat off Antarctica. It was initially estimated to measure 10 m (33 ft) in length and weigh 450 kg (992 lb). The squid was taken back to New Zealand for scientific study.[9] A study on the specimen later showed that its actual weight was 495 kg (1,091 lb), but that it only measured 4.2 m (14 ft) in total length as a result of the tentacles shrinking post mortem.[10]

### Largest known specimen

See also: Cephalopod size

<IMG>

<IMG>

This specimen, caught in early 2007, is the largest cephalopod ever recorded.

On February 22, 2007, it was announced by authorities in New Zealand that the
largest known Colossal Squid had been captured. The specimen weighed 495 kg
(1,091 lb) and was initially estimated to measure 10 m (33 ft) in total
length. Fishermen on the vessel San Aspiring, owned by the Sanford seafood
company, caught the animal in the freezing Antarctic waters of the Ross Sea.
It was brought to the surface as it fed on an Antarctic toothfish that had
been caught off a long line. It would not let go of its prey and could not be
removed from the line by the fishermen, so they decided to catch it instead.
They managed to envelop it in a net, hauled it aboard and froze it. The
specimen eclipsed the previous largest find in 2003 by about 195 kilograms
(430 lb),[11][12] although it is still considerably smaller than some
estimates have predicted. The specimen was frozen in a cubic metre of water
and transported to the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, New Zealand's
national museum.[13][14] Scientists at the museum were considering using a
giant microwave to defrost the squid because defrosting the squid at room
temperatures would take days and it would be likely for the outside to rot
while the core remains frozen.[15] However, they later opted for the more
conventional approach of thawing the specimen in a bath of salt water.[16][17]
After thawing, the squid measured only 4.2 m (14 ft) in total length, with the
tentacles having shrunk significantly.[10] Although initially thought to be a
male, closer inspection of the specimen showed it to be a female.[18]

#### Defrosting and dissection, April-May 2008

Thawing and dissection of the specimen took place at the Museum of New Zealand
Te Papa Tongarewa[16] under the direction of technician Mark Fenwick, Dutch
marine biologist and toxicologist Olaf Blaauw, AUT biologist Dr Steve O'Shea,
Dr Tsunemi Kubodera, and AUT biologist Kat Bolstad.

Parts of the specimen have been examined:

  * The beak is considerably smaller than some found in the stomachs of sperm whales,[19][20] suggesting there are Colossal Squid much larger than this one.[19][20]
  * The eye is 27 cm (10.63 in) wide, with a lens 12 cm across. This is the largest eye of any known animal.[2] These measurements are of the partly collapsed specimen: when living the eye was probably 30[18] to 40 cm (12 to 16 in) across.[21]
  * Inspection of the specimen with an endoscope revealed ovaries containing thousands of eggs.[18]

#### Exhibition

<IMG>

<IMG>

Display in Te Papa Museum Wellington, New Zealand

The Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa is displaying this specimen in an
exhibition which opened on December 13, 2008.[22]. A website on the squid
specimen is also available.

## References

  1. ^ Te Papa: Hooks and Suckers
  2. ^ a b Scientists focus on colossal squid's eyes Radio New Zealand.
  3. ^ Clarke, M.R. (1980). "Cephalopoda in the diet of sperm whales of the southern hemisphere and their bearing on sperm whale biology". Discovery Reports 37: 1-324.
  4. ^ Cherel, Y. & G. Duhamel 2004. Antarctic jaws: cephalopod prey of sharks in Kerguelen waters.PDF (531 KiB) Deep-Sea Res I 51: 17-31.
  5. ^ Robson, G.C. 1925. On Mesonychoteuthis, a new genus of oegopsid, Cephalopoda. Annals and Magazine of Natural History, Series 9, 16: 272â277.
  6. ^ Ellis, R. 1998. The Search for the Giant Squid. The Lyons Press.
  7. ^ Kim Griggs "Super squid surfaces in Antarctic". BBC News, April 2, 2003.
  8. ^ "Very Rare Giant Squid Caught Alive" South Georgia Newsletter
  9. ^ "NZ fishermen pull monster squid from Antarctic deep", BBC
  10. ^ a b Atkinson, K. 2008. Size matters on 'squid row' (+photos, video). The New Zealand Herald, May 1, 2008.
  11. ^ "NZ's colossal squid to be microwaved" The New Zealand Herald
  12. ^ "New giant squid predator found". http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3370019.stm. Retrieved on 14 February 2007.
  13. ^ "Colossal squid may be headed for the oven in New Zealand", Associated Press (International Herald Tribune), March 22, 2007.
  14. ^ Kim Griggs, "Colossal squid's headache for science", BBC News, March 15, 2007.
  15. ^ Record Giant Squid Put on Ice
  16. ^ a b Te Papa's Specimen: The Thawing and Examination
  17. ^ Richard Black "Colossal squid out of the freezer". BBC News, April 26, 2008.
  18. ^ a b c Richard Black "Colossal squid's big eye revealed". BBC News, April 30, 2008.
  19. ^ a b Thawing colossal squid continues to reveal information Radio New Zealand.
  20. ^ a b Massive squid may be just a babe The Star, South Africa.
  21. ^ World's biggest squid reveals 'beach ball' eyes AFP, via Google.
  22. ^ Te Papa's Blog entry. 5 September 2008

## Further reading

  * (Russian) Klumov, S.K. & V.L. Yukhov 1975. Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni Robson, 1925 (Cephalopoda, Oegopsida). Antarktika Doklady Komission 14: 159â189. [English translation: TT 81-59176, Al Ahram Center for Scientific Translations]
  * McSweeny, E.S. 1970. Description of the juvenile form of the Antarctic squid Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni Robson. Malacologia 10: 323â332.
  * Rodhouse, P.G. & M.R. Clarke 1985. Growth and distribution of young Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni Robson (Mollusca: Cephalopoda): an Antarctic squid. Vie Milieu 35(3â4): 223â230.

## External links

Sister project Wikispecies has information related to: Mesonychoteuthis
hamiltoni  
  * CephBase: Colossal Squid
  * Tree of Life web project: Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni
  * Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa (Te Papa) Colossal Squid Specimen Information
  * TONMO.com: Giant Squid and Colossal Squid Fact Sheet
  * New Zealand Herald: Fishermen haul in world's biggest squid
  * National Geographic News: Colossal Squid Caught off Antarctica
  * National Geographic News: Colossal Squid Revealed in First In-Depth Look
  * USA Today: Colossal Squid Caught in Antarctic Waters
  * BBC: Super squid surfaces in Antarctic
  * MarineBio: Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colossal_Squid"

Categories: Squid | Bioluminescent organisms | Megafauna

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * View source
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 March 2009, at 11:49.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



