
# Dachau concentration camp

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

American troops guard the main entrance to Dachau just after liberation.

The Holocaust  
Early elements  
Racial policy Â· Nazi eugenics Â· Nuremberg Laws Â· Euthanasia program Â·
Concentration camps (list)  
Jews  
Jews in Nazi Germany (1933â1939)  
Pogroms: Kristallnacht Â· Bucharest Â· Dorohoi Â· IaÅi Â· Kaunas Â· Jedwabne
Â· Lviv  
Ghettos: Åachwa Â· ÅÃ³dÅº Â· LwÃ³w Â· KrakÃ³w Â· Budapest Â· Theresienstadt
Â· Kovno Â· Vilna Â· Warsaw  
Einsatzgruppen: Babi Yar Â· Rumbula Â· Ponary Â· Odessa Â· Erntefest Â· Ninth
Fort  
Final Solution: Wannsee Â· Operation Reinhard Â· Holocaust trains  
Concentration camps:  
Auschwitz-Birkenau Â· BeÅÅ¼ec Â· CheÅmno Â· Majdanek Â· SobibÃ³r Â·
Treblinka Â· Bogdanovka Â· Jasenovac Â· Kaiserwald Â· Maly Trostenets Â·
Mauthausen Â· SajmiÅ¡te Â· Sachsenhausen Â· Uckermark

Resistance: Jewish partisans Â· Ghetto uprisings (Warsaw Â· BiaÅystok)  
End of World War II: Death marches Â· Berihah Â· Surviving Remnant  
Other victims  
Romani people Â· Homosexuals Â· Disabled individuals Â· Slavs in Eastern
Europe Â· Poles Â· Soviet POWs Â· Jehovah's Witnesses Â· Serbs  
Responsible parties  
Nazi Germany: Adolf Hitler Â· Heinrich Himmler Â· Ernst Kaltenbrunner Â·
Reinhard Heydrich Â· Adolf Eichmann Â· Rudolf HÃ¶Ã Â· Nazi Party Â·
Schutzstaffel Â· Gestapo Â· Sturmabteilung

Collaborators

Aftermath: Nuremberg Trials Â· Denazification Â· Reparations Agreement  
between Israel and West Germany  
Lists  
Survivors Â· Victims Â· Rescuers  
Resources  
The Destruction of the European Jews Functionalism versus intentionalism  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Dachau was a Nazi German concentration camp, and the first one opened in
Germany, located on the grounds of an abandoned munitions factory near the
medieval town of Dachau, about 16 km (10 miles) northwest of Munich in the
state of Bavaria which is located in southern Germany.

Opened in March 1933[1], it was the first regular concentration camp
established by the coalition government of National Socialist (Nazi) NSDAP
party and the German Nationalist People's party (dissolved on 6 July 1933).
Heinrich Himmler, Chief of Police of Munich, officially described the camp as
"the first concentration camp for political prisoners."[2]

Dachau served as a prototype and model for the other Nazi concentration camps
that followed. Almost every community in Germany had members taken away to
these camps, and as early as 1935 there were jingles warning:

    "Dear God, make me dumb, that I may not to Dachau come."[3]
Its basic organization, camp layout as well as the plan for the buildings were
developed by Kommandant Theodor Eicke and were applied to all later camps. He
had a separate secure camp near the command center, which consisted of living
quarters, administration, and army camps. Eicke himself became the chief
inspector for all concentration camps, responsible for molding the others
according to his model.[4]

In total, over 200,000 prisoners from more than 30 countries were housed in
Dachau of whom two-thirds were political prisoners and nearly one-third were
Jews.[5] 25,613 prisoners are believed to have died in the camp and almost
another 10,000 in its subcamps,[6] primarily from disease, malnutrition and
suicide. In early 1945, there was a typhus epidemic in the camp followed by an
evacuation, in which large numbers of the weaker prisoners died.

Together with the much larger Auschwitz, Dachau has come to symbolize the Nazi
concentration camps to many people. Konzentrationslager (KZ) Dachau holds a
significant place in public memory because it was the second camp to be
liberated by British or American forces. Therefore, it was one of the first
places where the West was exposed to the reality of Nazi brutality through
firsthand journalist accounts and through newsreels.[7]

## Contents

  * 1 Organization
    * 1.1 Satellite Camps / Sub Camps
    * 1.2 Commanders
      * 1.2.1 Other staff
  * 2 Liberation
    * 2.1 Satellite camps
    * 2.2 Execution of camp guards
  * 3 Post-liberation Easter at Dachau
  * 4 After liberation
  * 5 The memorial site
  * 6 Notable prisoners of Dachau
    * 6.1 Jewish political prisoners
    * 6.2 Resistance fighters
    * 6.3 Clergy
    * 6.4 Politicians
      * 6.4.1 Communists
    * 6.5 Writers
    * 6.6 Royalty
    * 6.7 Others
  * 7 Gallery
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Organization

<IMG>

<IMG>

Crematorium in operation

<IMG>

<IMG>

Aerial photo of the camp

<IMG>

<IMG>

The main gate at Dachau where prisoners walked through marked with the
sentence Arbeit macht frei

In April 1933 several Jewish Prisoners were killed in KZ Dachau [8]

The camp was divided into two sections: the camp area and the crematorium. The
camp area consisted of 32 barracks, including one for clergy imprisoned for
opposing the Nazi regime and one reserved for medical experiments. The
courtyard between the prison and the central kitchen was used for the summary
execution of prisoners. The camp was surrounded by an electrified barbed-wire
gate, a ditch, and a wall with seven guard towers.[4]

In early 1937, the SS, using prisoner labor, initiated construction of a large
complex of buildings on the grounds of the original camp. Prisoners were
forced to do this work, starting with the destruction of the old munitions
factory, under terrible conditions. The construction was officially completed
in mid-August 1938 and the camp remained essentially unchanged and in
operation until 1945. Dachau thus was the longest running concentration camp
of the Third Reich. The area in Dachau included other SS facilities beside the
concentration campâa leader school of the economic and civil service, the
medical school of the SS, etc. The KZ at that time was called a "protective
custody camp," and occupied less than half of the area of the entire complex.

Dachau also served as the central camp for Christian religious prisoners.
According to records of the Roman Catholic Church, at least 3,000 preachers,
deacons, priests, and bishops were imprisoned there.[9]

In August 1944 a women's camp opened inside Dachau. Its first shipment of
women came from Auschwitz Birkenau. Only 19 women guards served at Dachau,
most of them until liberation.[10] Sources show the names of sixteen of the
nineteen women guarding the camp; Fanny Baur, Leopoldine Bittermann, Ernestine
Brenner, Anna Buck, Rosa Dolaschko, Maria Eder, Rosa Grassmann, Betty
Hanneschaleger, Ruth Elfriede Hildner, Josefa Keller, Berta Kimplinger,
Lieselotte Klaudat, Theresia Kopp, Rosalie Leimboeck, and Thea Miesl. Women
guards were also staffed at the Augsburg Michelwerke, Burgau, Kaufering,
Muhldorf, and Munich Agfa Camera Werke subcamps. In mid-April 1945 many female
subcamps at Kaufering, Augsburg and Munich closed, and the SS women stationed
at Dachau. It is reported that female SS guards gave prisoners guns before
liberation to save them from postwar prosecution.

In the last months of the war, the conditions at Dachau became even worse. As
Allied forces advanced toward Germany, the Germans began to move prisoners in
concentration camps near the front to more centrally located camps. They hoped
to prevent the liberation of large numbers of prisoners. Transports from the
evacuated camps arrived continuously at Dachau. After days of travel with
little or no food or water, the prisoners arrived weak and exhausted, often
near death. Typhus epidemics became a serious problem as a result of
overcrowding, poor sanitary conditions, insufficient provisions, and the
weakened state of the prisoners.

Owing to continual new transportations from the front, the camp was constantly
overcrowded and the hygiene conditions were beneath human dignity. Starting
from the end of 1944 up to the day of liberation, 15,000 people died, about
half of all victims in KZ Dachau. Five hundred Soviet POWs were executed by
firing squad.

On 24 April, 1945 about 140 prominent inmates, such as Leon Blum, Martin
NiemÃ¶ller and Franz Halder, were transferred to Tyrol, where the SS left the
prisoners behind. They were liberated by the Fifth U.S. Army on May 5, 1945 in
Niederdorf, Italy[11].

On 27 April, 1945 Victor Maurer, delegate of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, was allowed to enter camps and distribute food. In the evening
of the same day a prisoner transport arrived from Buchenwald. Only 800
survivors were brought from the original 4,480 to 4,800 prisoners in transit.
Over 2,300 corpses were left lying in and around the train. The last regular
commander of the KZ, ObersturmbannfÃ¼hrer Eduard Weiter, had fled on 26 April.
He probably followed ObersturmbannfÃ¼hrer Martin Gottfried Weiss, who had led
the camp from September 1942 until November 1943.

On 28 April, 1945, the day before the surrender, Camp Commandant Martin
Gottfried Weiss had left the Dachau camp, along with most of the regular
guards and administrators in the camp. On that same day, Victor Maurer, a
representative of the Red Cross, had tried to persuade UntersturmfÃ¼hrer
Johannes Otto, the adjutant of Commandant Weiss, not to abandon the camp, but
to leave guards posted to keep the prisoners inside until the Americans
arrived. Maurer feared that the prisoners would escape en masse and spread the
active typhus fever epidemic. Lt. Otto declined to remain and fled.

### [edit] Satellite Camps / Sub Camps

By 1944, Dachau had many satellite camps separate from the main camp, mostly
to produce armaments. [12] A website has been created at kaufering.com about
the eleven "Kaufering" camps, but states there were as many as 200 "Sub
camps". [13] There is also a site, survivors-landsberg.com for an association
of survivors of the camps. See also the wikipedia page, Kaufering
concentration camp

### [edit] Commanders

  * SS-StandartenfÃ¼hrer Hilmar WÃ¤ckerle (22 March 1933 - 26 June 1933)
  * SS-GruppenfÃ¼hrer Theodor Eicke (26 June 1933 - 4 July 1934)
  * SS-OberfÃ¼hrer Alexander Reiner (4 July 1934 - 22 October 1934)
  * SS-BrigadefÃ¼hrer Berthold Maack (22 October 1934 - 12 January 1935)
  * SS-OberfÃ¼hrer Heinrich Deubel (12 January 1935 - 31 March 1936)
  * SS-OberfÃ¼hrer Hans Loritz (31 March 1936 - 7 January 1939)
  * SS-HauptsturmfÃ¼hrer Alex Piorkowski (7 January 1939 - 2 January 1942)
  * SS-ObersturmbannfÃ¼hrer Martin WeiÃ (3 January 1942 - 30 September 1943)
  * SS-HauptsturmfÃ¼hrer Wilhelm Weiter (30 September 1943 - 26 April 1945)
  * SS-ObersturmbannfÃ¼hrer Martin WeiÃ (26 April 1945 - 28 April 1945)
  * SS-UntersturmfÃ¼hrer Johannes Otto (28 April 1945 - 28 April 1945)
  * SS-SturmscharfÃ¼hrer Heinrich Wicker (28 April 1945 - 29 April 1945)

#### [edit] Other staff

  * Adolf Eichmann (29 January 1934 - October 1934)[14] (Eichmann claimed that his unit had nothing to do with the concentration camp)[15]
  * Rudolf Hoess (1934 - 1938) [16]

## [edit] Liberation

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bodies in the Dachau death train

On 29 April 1945 the watchtowers of the Dachau camp remained occupied and a
white flag was hoisted. Red Cross representative Maurer persuaded SS-
SturmscharfÃ¼hrer Heinrich Wicker, an officer in the SS-TotenkopfverbÃ¤nde, to
accompany him to the main gate of the complex to surrender the camp formally.

Late in the afternoon of 29 April 1945 KZ Dachau was surrendered to the
American Army by SS-SturmscharfÃ¼hrer Heinrich Wicker.[17] A vivid description
of the surrender appears in Brig. Gen. Henning Linden's official "Report on
Surrender of Dachau Concentration Camp":

> As we moved down along the west side of the concentration camp and
approached the southwest corner, three people approached down the road under a
flag of truce. We met these people about 75 yards north of the southwest
entrance to the camp. These three people were a Swiss Red Cross representative
and two SS troopers who said they were the camp commander and assistant camp
commander and that they had come into the camp on the night of the 28th to
take over from the regular camp personnel for the purpose of turning the camp
over to the advancing Americans. The Swiss Red Cross representative acted as
interpreter and stated that there were about 100 SS guards in the camp who had
their arms stacked except for the people in the tower. He said he had given
instructions that there would be no shots fired and it would take about 50 men
to relieve the guards, as there were 42,000 half-crazed prisoners of war in
the camp, many of them typhus infected. He asked if I were an officer of the
American army, to which I replied, "Yes, I am Assistant Division Commander of
the 42d Division and will accept the surrender of the camp in the name of the
Rainbow Division for the American army."

However, though the official surrender was presented to the commander of the
42nd Division, the 45th Division had arrived the day previous according to the
official account by Lt. Col. Felix L. Sparks:

> In the original order which I received to secure the camp, I was informed
that our first battalion would relieve me at the camp in order that my task
force could continue the attack into Munich. Late that afternoon, Company C
arrived by truck and established various security posts. I then started moving
Company I out of the camp in order to resume the attack into Munich with a
full task force. Before I could again assemble the task force, I received an
order that the tank battalion, less one company, was to be relieved of
attachment to my task force. The 180th Infantry was encountering strong
resistance in its sector, and the tanks were needed there. Sometime later, I
received another order informing me that our first battalion would lead the
attack into Munich the next day and that I was to relieve Company C at the
concentration camp. I then dispatched Company L to relieve Company C. This
relief was completed by about 10:00 p.m. that night.

The foregoing narrative includes all of the rifle companies which were in the
Dachau concentration camp on the day of liberation, those being companies C, I
and L. With these rifle companies were attachments from companies D and M,
along with forward observer parties from the 158th Field Artillery. Small
elements of other units were also there, namely a small patrol from the
regimental I&R Platoon which was with Company I, and some personnel from the
first and third battalion headquarters. There were some troops from the 42nd
Infantry Division somewhere in the vicinity. Earlier that morning, Company I
had reported that they were being fired upon by troops of the 42nd Division.
This information was relayed to regimental headquarters with a request that
the 42nd Division be informed that we were both on the same side."[18]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Tablet dedicated to the 42nd Division.

General Dwight D. Eisenhower, issued a communique over the capture of Dachau
concentration "Our forces liberated and mopped up the infamous concentration
camp at Dachau. Approximately 32,000 prisoners were liberated; 300 SS camp
guards were quickly neutralized."[19]

A tablet at the camp commemorates the liberation of Dachau by the 42nd
Infantry Division of the U.S. Seventh Army on 29 April 1945. Others claim that
the first forces to enter the main camp were a battalion of the 157th Infantry
Regiment of the 45th Infantry Division commanded by Felix L. Sparks. There is
an on-going disagreement as to which division, the 42nd or the 45th, actually
liberated Dachau because they seem to have approached by different routes and
by the American Army's definition, anyone arriving at such a camp within 48
hours was a liberator.[20] General Patton visited the Buchenwald camp after it
was liberated, but not Dachau.

The Americans found approximately 32,000 prisoners, crammed 1,600 to each of
20 barracks, which had been designed to house 250 people each.

### [edit] Satellite camps

<IMG>

<IMG>

Prisoners' barracks in 1945

One of the most ironic coincidences in the liberation of the sub-camps
surrounding Dachau, occuring on the same day as the main camp's surrender on
April 29, occurred when the advance scouts of the US Army's 522nd Field
Artillery Battalion, a Nisei-manned segregated Japanese-American Allied
military unit, liberated the 3,000 prisoners of the "Kaufering IV Hurlach"
slave labor camp, an especially ironic coincidence because of the internment
of relatives of Japanese ancestry, of the US Army's Nisei troops during the
war.[21]

Perisco describes an OSS team (code name LUXE) leading Army Intelligence to a
"Camp IV" on April 29. "they found the camp afire and a stack of some four
hundred bodies burning . . . American soldiers then went into Landsberg and
rounded up all the male civilians they could find and marched them out to the
camp. The former commandant was forced to lie amidst a pile of corpses. The
male population of Landsberg was then ordered to walk by, and ordered to spit
on the commandant as they passed. The commandant was then turned over to a
group of liberated camp survivors" [22]

### [edit] Execution of camp guards

<IMG>

<IMG>

Moments after American soldiers executed SS troops in the coalyard at Dachau.

The American troops were so horrified by conditions at the camp that a few
shot some of the camp guards after they had surrendered in what is called the
Dachau massacre. The number massacred is disputed as some Germans were killed
in combat, some were killed while attempting to surrender, and others were
killed after their surrender was accepted. Felix L. Sparks, the commander of a
battalion that captured the camp, has stated:

> The total number of German guards killed at Dachau during that day most
certainly does not exceed fifty, with thirty probably being a more accurate
figure. The regimental records [of the 57th Infantry Regiment] for that date
indicate that over a thousand German prisoners were brought to the regimental
collecting point. Since my task force was leading the regimental attack,
almost all the prisoners were taken by the task force, including several
hundred from Dachau.[23]

The "[American Army] Investigation of Alleged Mistreatment of German Guards at
Dachau" found that about 15 Germans were killed (with another 4 or 5 wounded)
after their surrender had been accepted. Two other reports collated years
after the incident put the figure between 122 and 520 Germans killed after
their surrender had been accepted.[24]

As a result of the American Army investigation court-martial charges were
drawn up against Sparks and several other men under his command, but as
General Patton, the recently appointed military governor of Bavaria, chose to
dismiss the charges so the witnesses to the massacre were never cross examined
in court and no one was found guilty.[23]

The U.S. troops also forced citizens of the local community to come to the
camp, observe the conditions, and help clean the facilities. Many local
residents were shocked about the experience and claimed no knowledge of the
camp's activities[citation needed].

## [edit] Post-liberation Easter at Dachau

<IMG>

<IMG>

Liberated Dachau camp prisoners cheer U.S. troops

A few days after the liberation of the camp was the day of Pascha, Orthodox
Easter. In a cell block used by Catholic priests to say daily Mass, several
Greek, Serbian, and Russian priests and one Serbian deacon, wearing makeshift
vestments made from towels of the SS guard, gathered with several hundred
Greek, Serbian and Russian prisoners to celebrate the Paschal Matins and
Liturgy. A prisoner named Rahr described the scene:

> In the entire history of the Orthodox Church there has probably never been
an Easter service like the one at Dachau in 1945. Greek and Serbian priests
together with a Serbian deacon adorned the make-shift 'vestments' over their
blue and gray-striped prisoners' uniforms. Then they began to chant, changing
from Greek to Slavonic, and then back again to Greek. The Easter Canon, the
Easter Sticherasâeverything was recited from memory. The GospelâIn the
beginning was the Wordâalso from memory. And finally, the Homily of Saint
Johnâalso from memory. A young Greek monk from the Holy Mountain stood up in
front of us and recited it with such infectious enthusiasm that we shall never
forget him as long as we live. Saint John Chrysostomos himself seemed to speak
through him to us and to the rest of the world as well!

<IMG>

<IMG>

Cheering crowds of liberated survivors.

There is a Russian Orthodox chapel at the camp today, and it is well known for
its exquisite icon of Christ leading the prisoners out of the camp gates.

The U.S. 7th Army's version of the events of the Dachau Liberation are
available in Report of Operations of the Seventh United States Army, Vol. 3,
page 382.

## [edit] After liberation

After liberation, the camp was used by the US Army as an internment camp. It
was also the site of the Dachau Trials, a site chosen for its symbolism. In
1948 the Bavarian government established housing for refugees on the site, and
this remained for many years.[25] Dachau is depicted as the setting for The
Twilight Zone episode Deaths-Head Revisited in which a former Nazi captain
revisits the place he once worked in and the ghosts of the men who died there.

## [edit] The memorial site

<IMG>

<IMG>

Memorial at the camp in 1997

Between 1945 and 1948 when the camp was handed over to the Bavarian
authorities, many accused war criminals and members of the SS were imprisoned
at the camp.

Owing to the severe refugee crisis mainly caused by the expulsions, the camp
was from late 1948 used to house 2000 Germans from Czechoslovakia (mainly from
the Sudetenland). This settlement was called Dachau-East, and remained until
the mid 60's.[26] During this time, former prisoners banded together to erect
a memorial on the site of the camp, finding it unbelievable that there were
still people (refugees) living in the former camp.

The display, which was reworked in 2003, takes the visitor through the path of
new arrivals to the camp. Special presentations of some of the notable
prisoners are also provided. Two of the barracks have been rebuilt and one
shows a cross-section of the entire history of the camp, since the original
barracks had to be torn down due to their poor condition when the memorial was
built. The other 32 barracks are indicated by concrete foundations.

The memorial includes four chapels for the various religions represented among
the prisoners.

The local government resisted designating the complete site a memorial. The
former SS barracks adjacent to the camp are now occupied by the Bavarian
Bereitschaftspolizei (rapid response police unit).[27]

## [edit] Notable prisoners of Dachau

<IMG>

<IMG>

The commemorative mass grave dedicated to the unknown dead at Dachau

### [edit] Jewish political prisoners

  * Bruno Bettelheim, imprisoned in 1938, freed in 1939; left Germany
  * David Ludwig Bloch, painter, arrested in November 1938 in connection with Kristallnacht
  * Jakob Ehrlich, Member of Vienna's City Council (Rat der Stadt Wien), died in Dachau 17 May 1938
  * Viktor Frankl, neurologist and psychiatrist from Vienna, Austria
  * Alfred Gruenebaum, father of the prominent US obstetrician Amos Grunebaum
  * The mother and father of Rush frontman Geddy Lee
  * Hans Litten anti-Nazi lawyer, died in 1938 by apparent suicide
  * Aaron Miller, rabbi, chazzan, mohel
  * Benzion Miller, born at the camp, son of Aaron*
  * Moshe Sanbar, Governor of the Bank of Israel
  * Vladek Spiegelman, a survivor whose story was portrayed in the book Maus by son Art Spiegelman

### [edit] Resistance fighters

  * Yolande Beekman, Special Operations Executive Agent, murdered 13 September 1944
  * Georges Charpak, who in 1992 received the Nobel Prize in Physics
  * Madeleine Damerment, Special Operations Executive Agent, murdered 13 September 1944
  * Georg Elser, who tried to assassinate Hitler in 1939, murdered April 9, 1945
  * Arthur Haulot
  * Franc Karo, partisan
  * Noor Inayat Khan, the George's Cross awardee of Indian origin who served as a clandestine radio operator for the Special Operations Executive in Paris, murdered 13 September 1944 when she and her SOE colleagues were shot in the back of the head and cremated
  * Kurt Nehrling, murdered in 1943
  * Eliane Plewman, Special Operations Executive Agent, murdered 13 September 1944
  * Enzo Sereni, parachuted into Nazi-occupied Italy, captured by the Germans and executed in November 1944

### [edit] Clergy

Dachau had a special "priest block." Of the 2720 priests (among them 2579
Catholic) held in Dachau, 1034 did not survive the camp. The majority were
Polish (1780), of whom 868 died in Dachau.

  * a number of the 108 Martyrs of World War Two:
  * Father Jean Bernard (1907-1994), Catholic priest from Luxembourg who was imprisoned from May, 1941 to August, 1942. He wrote the book Pfarrerblock 25487 about his experiences in Dachau; it was recently translated into English (translation Priestblock 25487: A Memoir of Dachau ISBN 978-0972598170). The movie "The Ninth Day" is based on his diary.
  * Blessed Titus Brandsma, Dutch Carmelite priest and professor of philosophy, died 26 July 1942
  * Norbert Äapek (1870-1942) founder of the Unitarian Church in the Czech Republic
  * Anton FrÃ¤nznick, in Dachau since 1942, died 27 January 1944
  * Blessed Stefan Wincenty Frelichowski Catholic priest, died 23 February 1945
  * Blessed Stefan Grelewski, Catholic priest, prisoner No. 25281, starved to death in Dachau on 9 May 1941
  * Hilary PaweÅ Januszewski
  * Joseph Kentenich, founder of the Schoenstatt Movement, spent three and a half years in Dachau
  * Hermanus Knoop, Pastor of the Reformed (Gereformeerd) Church of Rotterdam-Delfshaven, arrested 19 November 1941 for praying for "bringing politics to the pulpit"
  * Blessed MichaÅ Kozal
  * Adam Kozlowiecki, Polish Cardinal
  * Max Lackmann, Lutheran pastor and founder of League for Evangelical-Catholic Reunion.
  * Blessed Karl Leisner, in Dachau since 14 December 1941, freed 4 May 1945, but died on 12 August from the tuberculosis contracted in the camp
  * Martin NiemÃ¶ller, imprisoned in 1941, freed 4 May 1945
  * Hermann Scheipers
  * Richard Schneider, in Dachau since 22 November 1940, freed 29 March 1945
  * Aloys Scholze, died 1 September 1942
  * Nikolai VelimiroviÄ (1880-1956), Serbian bishop and an influential theological writer, On 14 December 1944 he was sent to Dachau, together with Serbian Patriarch Gavrilo
  * Lawrence Wnuk
  * Nanne Zwiep, Pastor of the Dutch Reformed Church in Enschede, spoke out from the pulpit against Nazis and their treatment of Dutch Citizens and anti-Semitism, arrested 20 April 1942, died in Dachau of exhaustion and malnutrition 24 November 1942

### [edit] Politicians

<IMG>

<IMG>

Never again written in several languages

  * Jan Buzek, murdered in November 1940
  * Leopold Figl, arrested 1938, released 8 May 1943
  * Alois Hundhammer, arrested 21 June 1933, freed 6 July 1933
  * Hjalmar Schacht, arrested 1944, released April 1945
  * Kurt Schumacher, in Dachau since July 1935, sent to FlossenbÃ¼rg concentration camp in 1939, returned to Dachau in 1940, released due to extreme illness 16 March 1943
  * Kurt Schuschnigg, the last fascist chancellor of Austria before the Austrian Nazi Party was installed by Hitler, shortly before the Anschluss
  * Stefan StarzyÅski, the President of Warsaw, probably murdered in Dachau in 1943

#### [edit] Communists

  * Alfred Andersch, held 6 months in 1933
  * Hans Beimler, imprisoned but escaped. Died in the Spanish Civil War.
  * Emil Carlebach (Jewish), in Dachau since 1937, sent to Buchenwald concentration camp in 1938
  * Nando Gherghetta (Italian-Istrian), from 1943
  * Alfred Haag, In Dachau from 1935 to 1939, when moved to Mauthausen
  * Adolf Maislinger
  * Oskar MÃ¼ller, in Dachau from 1939, freed 1945
  * Nikolaos Zachariadis (Greek), from November 1941 to May 1945

### [edit] Writers

  * Fran Albreht, Slovenian poet
  * Robert Antelme, French writer
  * Raoul Auernheimer, writer, in Dachau 4 months
  * Tadeusz Borowski, writer, survived, but committed suicide in 1951
  * Adolf Fierla, Polish poet
  * Viktor Frankl, an Austrian psychiatrist and writer
  * Fritz Gerlich, a German journalist
  * StanisÅaw Grzesiuk, Polish writer, poet and singer, Varsavianist, in Dachau since 4 April 1940, later transferred to Mauthausen-Gusen complex
  * Heinrich Eduard Jacob, German writer, in Dachau 6 months in 1938, transferred to Buchenwald
  * Stefan Kieniewicz, Polish historian
  * JuÅ¡ Kozak, Slovenian playwright
  * Gustaw Morcinek, Polish writer
  * Boris Pahor, Slovenian writer
  * Karol Piegza, Polish writer, teacher and folklorist
  * Gustaw Przeczek, Polish writer and teacher
  * Franz Roh, German art critic and art historian, for a few months in 1933
  * Jura Soyfer, writer, in Dachau 6 months in 1938, transferred to Buchenwald
  * Adam Wawrosz, Polish poet and writer
  * Stanislaw Wygodzki, Polish writer
  * Stevo Å½igon (number: 61185), Serbian actor, theatre director, and writer, in Dachau from December 1943 to May 1945

### [edit] Royalty

  * Antonia, Crown Princess of Bavaria
  * Albrecht, Duke of Bavaria
  * Franz, Duke of Bavaria
  * Prince Max, Duke in Bavaria
  * Maximilian, Duke of Hohenberg
  * Prince Ernst von Hohenberg
  * Princess Sophie of Hohenberg
  * Prince Xavier de Bourbon-Parma

### [edit] Others

  * Charles Delestraint, French General and leader of French resistance. Executed by Gestapo in 1945
  * Elly Gotz, Lithuanian born engineer and executive, now living in Canada doing public speaking to raise awareness about modern day genocides happening in places such as Darfur. She was born in Kovno (now Kaunas), Lithuania in 1902.
  * Franz Halder, former Chief of Army General Staff
  * Boris Kobe, Slovenian architect
  * Zoran MuÅ¡iÄ, Slovenian painter
  * BoÅ¾o Pengov, Slovenian sculptor
  * Ernest Peterlin, Slovenian military officer
  * Fritz Thyssen, businessman and early supporter of Hitler, later an opponent
  * Bogislaw von Bonin, Wehrmacht officer, opponent
  * Stevo Å½igon, a famous Serbian actor, theatre director, and writer. His prisoner number was 61185

## [edit] Gallery

<IMG>

The camp courtyard

<IMG>

Memorial to the victims of Dachau (October 2007)

<IMG>

Sign on the gravel road leading to the entrance

<IMG>

New crematorium (October 2007)  
<IMG>

Original crematorium (October 2007)

<IMG>

Crematorium at Dachau

<IMG>

The sign outside the building Crematorium says in German: "Think about how we
died here"

<IMG>

Protestant Church of Reconciliation (June 2005)  
<IMG>

Catholic Mortal Agony of Christ chapel (June 2005)

<IMG>

Jewish Memorial (June 2005)

<IMG>

Tower (June 2005)

<IMG>

Marker where barracks building #9 stood (June 2005)  
<IMG>

View of roll-call area from one of the buildings (June 2005)

<IMG>

Prisoner bunks (June 2005)

<IMG>

Prisoner bunks (June 2005)

<IMG>

Triple bunks in the barracks  
<IMG>

Prisoner sinks (June 2005)

<IMG>

Prisoner bathroom (June 2005)

<IMG>

The entrance and the northern part of the bunker (September 2007)

<IMG>

The hallway inside the bunker (September 2007)  
## [edit] See also

  * Dachau Trials
  * List of Nazi-German concentration camps
  * List of subcamps of Dachau
  * Karl von Eberstein

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The Dachau Gas Chambers: Photograph 2 - MÃ¼nchner Neueste Nachrichten (The Munich Latest News), March 21, 1933
  2. ^ http://www.mazal.org/archive/DACHPHO/Dach02.htm Translation: The Munich Chief of Police, Himmler, has issued the following press announcement: On Wednesday the first concentration camp is to be opened in Dachau with an accommodation for 5000 persons. All Communists andâwhere necessaryâReichsbanner and Social Democratic functionaries who endanger state security are to be concentrated here, as in the long run it is not possible to keep individual functionaries in the state prisons without overburdening these prisons, and on the other hand these people cannot be released because attempts have shown that they persist in their efforts to agitate and organise as soon as they are released.
  3. ^ Morris Janowitz "German Reactions to Nazi Atrocities", 1946, (JSTOR)
  4. ^ a b United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. "The Holocaust." Holocaust Encyclopedia. http://www.ushmm.org/wlc/article.php?lang=en&ModuleId=10005214
  5. ^ "Dachau - The First Concentration Camp". Archived from the original on 2006-01-04. http://web.archive.org/web/20060104080413/http://www.fatherryan.org/holocaust/dachau/subindex.htm.
  6. ^ That Was Dachau 1933 - 1945 by Stanislav ZÃ¡meÄnÃ­k Page 377 and 379
  7. ^ Among the most famous inmates of the Dachau concentration camp were Hans Litten, Fred Rabinowitz (a.k.a. Fred Roberts), Stefan Starzynski, the composer BlaÅ¾ ArniÄ and Alfred Gruenebaum, the father of a prominent U.S. obstetrician, Amos Grunebaum.
  8. ^ "Shoah Jewish Victiums-first 1933 and last 1945". 10 December 2008. http://forum.axishistory.com/viewtopic.php?f=6&t=146870. Retrieved on 17 March 2009.
  9. ^ Particularly notable among the Christian residents are Karl Leisner (Catholic priest ordained while in the camp, beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1996) and Martin NiemÃ¶ller (Protestant theologian and Nazi resistance leader).
  10. ^ THE CAMP WOMEN, The Female Auxiliaries who Assisted the SS in Running the Nazi Concentration Camp System by Daniel Patrick Brown.
  11. ^ georg-elser-arbeitskreis.de (German)
  12. ^ "Dachau". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. http://www.ushmm.org/wlc/article.php?lang=en&ModuleId=10005214. Retrieved on 2009-2-2.
  13. ^ "Kaufering Overview". http://www.kaufering.com/overview.html. Retrieved on 2009-2-2.
  14. ^ "people/e/eichmann.adolf/transcripts/Sessions/Session-013-04". transcript from the 1961 Eichmann trial. Shofar FTP archive and the Nizkor project. http://www.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi/people/e/eichmann.adolf/transcripts/ftp.py?people/e/eichmann.adolf/transcripts/Sessions/Session-013-04. Retrieved on 2009-2-2.
  15. ^ "people/e/eichmann.adolf/transcripts/Sessions/Session-075-05". transcript from the 1961 Eichmann trial. Shofar FTP archive and the Nizkor project. http://www.nizkor.org/ftp.cgi/people/e/eichmann.adolf/transcripts/ftp.py?people/e/eichmann.adolf/transcripts/Sessions/Session-075-05. Retrieved on 2009-2-2.
  16. ^ "The Trial of German Major War Criminals, transcript from Day 108, 15 April 1946". the Nizkor Project. http://www.nizkor.org/hweb/imt/tgmwc/tgmwc-11/tgmwc-11-108-01.shtml. Retrieved on 2009-2-2.
  17. ^ 2nd Lt. Heinrich Wicker, the man who surrendered the Dachau concentration camp, 29 April 1945
  18. ^ http://www.scrapbookpages.com/Dachauscrapbook/DachauLiberation/LiberationDay3.html
  19. ^ Staff, quoting Abram Sachar on The Liberation of Dachau, Nizkor Project.
  20. ^ Albert Panebianco (ed). Dachau its liberation 57th Infantry Association, Felix L. Sparks, Secretary 15 June 1989. (backup site) Cites a letter by James R. Bird to Joseph I. Lieberman
  21. ^ "CENTRAL EUROPE CAMPAIGN - (522nd FIELD ARTILLERY BATTALION)". http://www.goforbroke.org/history/history_historical_campaigns_central.asp. Retrieved on 2009-03-17.
  22. ^ Joseph E Persico (1979). Piercing the Reich. Viking Press. p. 306.
  23. ^ a b Albert Panebianco (ed). Dachau its liberation 57th Infantry Association, Felix L. Sparks, Secretary 15 June 1989. (backup site)
  24. ^ Staff. A review of Col. Howard A. Buechner's account of execution of Waffen-SS soldiers during the liberation of Dachau, Scrapbookpages.com, 28 July 2006
  25. ^ Dachau Concentration Camp Memorial Site (pedagogical information) (German)
  26. ^ Legacies of Dachau: The Uses and Abuses of a Concentration Camp, 1933-2001 Harold Marcuse
  27. ^ Sven Felix Kellerhoff (2002-10-21). "Neue Museumskonzepte fÃ¼r die Konzentrationslager" (in German). WELT ONLINE (Axel Springer AG). http://www.welt.de/print-welt/article417276/Neue_Museumskonzepte_fuer_die_Konzentrationslager.html. Retrieved on 2008-06-02. ". . . die SS-Kasernen neben dem KZ Dachau wurden zuerst (bis 1974) von der US-Armee bezogen. Seither nutzt sie die VI. Bayerische Bereitschaftspolizei. (. . . the SS barracks adjacent to the Dachau concentration camp were at first occupied by the US Army (until 1974) . Since then they have been used by the Sixth Rapid Response Unit of the Bavarian Police.)"

  * Buechner, Howard A., DachauâThe Hour of the Avenger, Thunderbird Press, Â©1986, paperback, 159 pages, ISBN 0-913159-04-2, first published in 1986. LC Control Number: 87181873.
  * Kozal, Czesli W. Memoir of Fr. Czesli W. (Chester) Kozal, O.M.I. / translated from the Polish original by Paul Ischler. Private printing, Missionary Oblates of Mary Immaculate, 2004, 175 pp. LC Control Number: 2004400050
  * Marcuse, Harold, Legacies of Dachau: The Uses and Abuses of a Concentration Camp, 1933-2001, 600 pages, Cambridge University Press, 2001. more information
  * The Fighting Forty-Fifth: the Combat Report of an Infantry Division, compiled and edited by Lt. Col. Leo V. Bishop, Maj. Frank J. Glasgow, and Maj. George A. Fisher. Copyright 1946 by the 45th Infantry Division, printed by Army & Navy Publishing Co., Baton Rouge, LA. LC Control Number: 49051541.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Dachau concentration
camp  
  * Dachau Concentration Camp Memorial Site Official Page
  * Dachau 67 page comprehensive report prepared by the 7th Army in 1945
  * Dachau Concentration Camp Memorial Site Links, essays and documents by Professor Harold Marcuse, author of Legacies of Dachau, a comprehensive history of the camp and memorial site
  * scrapbookpages.com offers a richly illustrated, historically comprehensive overview of the camp
  * Communists to be interned in Dachau, The Guardian, March 21, 1933 contemporaneous report on the opening of the camp
  * Interior and exterior images of the Dachau camp
  * Events of the Dachau Camp's liberation on April 29th, 1945 at humanitas international
  * "The Souls are All Aflame." An account of the Paschal services in Dachau in 1945
  * Memorial to those who suffered at the eleven Kaufering subcamps of Dachau and to the US 12th Armored Division (a personal website)
  * Biography of survivor Abram Enzel (personal website by his son)
  * Gallery with pictures from Dachau Collection of BW pictures from the Dachau concentration camp (2005) - The pictures belong today to the Yad Vashem Museum in Israel.

Coordinates: 48Â°16â²13â³N 11Â°28â²05â³Eï»¿ / ï»¿48.27028Â°N
11.46806Â°Eï»¿ / 48.27028; 11.46806

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dachau_concentration_camp"

Categories: Buildings and structures in Bavaria | Dachau concentration camp |
Visitor attractions in Munich

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * à¤®à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 22:07.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



