
# Feminism

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Feminists" redirects here. For a list of feminists, see List of feminists.

<IMG>

<IMG>

International Women's Day rally in Dhaka, Bangladesh, organized by the
National Women Workers Trade Union Centre on March 8, 2005.

Part of a series on  
Feminism  
Concepts

Feminist movement  
Feminist theory  
Women's rights  
Gender equality Â· Economics  
Theology Â· Sexology  
Art Â· Literary crit Â· Film theory  
Pro-feminism Â· Antifeminism  
History

History of feminism  
History of women  
Feminist history  
Waves

First Â· Second Â· Third  
Women's suffrage

Timeline Â· Suffragettes  
Canada  
New Zealand  
United Kingdom  
United States  
Subtypes

Amazon Â· Anarchist Â· Black  
Chicana Â· Christian Â· Cultural  
Difference Â· Eco Â· Equity  
Equality Â· Fat Â· Gender  
Global Â· Individualist Â· Islamic  
Jewish Â· Lesbian Â· Liberal  
Marxist Â· Material Â· New Â· Postcolonial  
Postmodern Â· Pro-life Â· Radical  
Separatist Â· Sex-positive  
Socialist Â· Spiritual  
Third world Â· Trans  
Womanism  
By country

Feminism in China Â· Egypt Â· France Â· Indonesia  
India Â· Iran Â· Japan Â· Nepal  
Nicaragua Â· Poland  
United Kingdom Â· United States  
Lists

Topics  
Feminists  
Literature  
Portal:Feminism Feminism portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
Feminism is the belief that women should have equal political, social, sexual,
intellectual and economic rights to men. It involves various movements,
theories, and philosophies, all concerned with issues of gender difference,
that advocate equality for women and that campaign for women's rights and
interests.[1][2][3][4][5] According to some, the history of feminism can be
divided into three waves.[4][6] The first wave was in the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, the second was in the 1960s and 1970s, and the third
extends from the 1990s to the present.[7] Feminist theory emerged from these
feminist movements.[8][9] It is manifest in a variety of disciplines such as
feminist geography, feminist history and feminist literary criticism.

Feminism has altered predominant perspectives in a wide range of areas within
Western society, ranging from culture to law. Feminist activists have
campaigned for women's legal rights (rights of contract, property rights,
voting rights); for women's right to bodily integrity and autonomy, for
abortion rights, and for reproductive rights (including access to
contraception and quality prenatal care); for protection from domestic
violence, sexual harassment and rape;[1][10] for workplace rights, including
maternity leave and equal pay; and against other forms of
discrimination.[11][12][13]

During much of its history, most feminist movements and theories had leaders
who were predominantly middle-class white women from Western Europe and North
America.[14][15][16] However, at least since Sojourner Truth's 1851 speech to
American feminists, women of other races have proposed alternative
feminisms.[15] This trend accelerated in the 1960s with the Civil Rights
movement in the United States and the collapse of European colonialism in
Africa, the Caribbean, parts of Latin America and Southeast Asia. Since that
time, women in former European colonies and the Third World have proposed
"Post-colonial" and "Third World" feminisms.[16] Some Postcolonial feminists,
such as Chandra Talpade Mohanty, are critical of Western feminism for being
ethnocentric.[17] Black feminists, such as Angela Davis and Alice Walker,
share this view.[14]

Since the 1980s, standpoint feminists have argued that feminism should examine
how women's experience of inequality relates to that of racism, homophobia,
classism and colonization.[15][18] In the late 1980s and 1990s postmodern
feminists argued that gender roles are socially constructed,[19][20][21] and
that it is impossible to generalize women's experiences across cultures and
histories.[22]

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 First wave
    * 1.2 Second wave
      * 1.2.1 Women's Liberation in the USA
      * 1.2.2 The Feminine Mystique
    * 1.3 Third wave
    * 1.4 Post-feminism
    * 1.5 French feminism
  * 2 Theoretical schools
  * 3 Movements and ideologies
    * 3.1 Socialist and Marxist feminisms
    * 3.2 Radical feminism
    * 3.3 Liberal feminism
    * 3.4 Black feminism
    * 3.5 Postcolonial feminism and third-world feminism
    * 3.6 Multiracial feminism
    * 3.7 Libertarian feminism
    * 3.8 Post-structural and postmodern feminism
    * 3.9 Ecofeminism
  * 4 Society
    * 4.1 Civil rights
    * 4.2 Language
    * 4.3 Heterosexual relationships
    * 4.4 Religion
  * 5 Architecture
  * 6 Culture
    * 6.1 Women's writing
      * 6.1.1 Feminist science fiction
    * 6.2 Riot grrrl movement
  * 7 Pornography
    * 7.1 Anti-pornography movement
    * 7.2 Sex-positive movement
  * 8 Relationship to political movements
    * 8.1 Socialism
    * 8.2 Fascism
  * 9 Scientific discourse
    * 9.1 Biology of gender
    * 9.2 Evolutionary biology
  * 10 Men and feminism
  * 11 Pro-feminism
  * 12 Anti-feminism
  * 13 See also
  * 14 References
  * 15 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 1932 Soviet poster for International Women's Day.

Main article: History of feminism

See also: Protofeminist

Feminists and scholars have divided the movement's history into three "waves".
The first wave refers mainly to women's suffrage movements of the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries (mainly concerned with women's right to vote).
The second wave refers to the ideas and actions associated with the women's
liberation movement beginning in the 1960s (which campaigned for legal and
social equality for women). The third wave refers to a continuation of, and a
reaction to, the perceived failures of, second-wave feminism, beginning in the
1990s.[7]

### [edit] First wave

Main article: First-wave feminism

First-wave feminism refers to a period of feminist activity during the
nineteenth century and early twentieth century in the United Kingdom and the
United States. Originally it focused on the promotion of equal contract and
property rights for women and the opposition to chattel marriage and ownership
of married women (and their children) by their husbands. However, by the end
of the nineteenth century, activism focused primarily on gaining political
power, particularly the right of women's suffrage. Yet, feminists such as
Voltairine de Cleyre and Margaret Sanger were still active in campaigning for
women's sexual, reproductive, and economic rights at this time.[23]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Louise Weiss along with other Parisian suffragettes in 1935. The newspaper
headline reads "THE FRENCHWOMAN MUST VOTE."

In Britain the Suffragettes, and possibly more effectively, the Suffragists
campaigned for the women's vote. In 1918 the Representation of the People Act
1918 was passed granting the vote to women over the age of 30 who owned
houses. In 1928 this was extended to all women over twenty-one.[24] In the
United States leaders of this movement included Lucretia Mott, Elizabeth Cady
Stanton, and Susan B. Anthony, who each campaigned for the abolition of
slavery prior to championing women's right to vote and strongly influenced by
Quaker thought. Other important leaders include Lucy Stone, Olympia Brown, and
Helen Pitts. American first-wave feminism involved a wide range of women, some
belonging to conservative Christian groups (such as Frances Willard and the
Woman's Christian Temperance Union), others resembling the diversity and
radicalism of much of second-wave feminism (such as Matilda Joslyn Gage and
the National Woman Suffrage Association). In the United States first-wave
feminism is considered to have ended with the passage of the Nineteenth
Amendment to the United States Constitution (1919), granting women the right
to vote in all states.The term first wave, was coined retrospectively after
the term second-wave feminism began to be used to describe a newer feminist
movement that focused as much on fighting social and cultural inequalities as
political inequalities.[23][25][26][27][28]

The first wave of feminists, in contrast to the second wave, was hostile to
abortion. [29] [30]

### [edit] Second wave

Main article: Second-wave feminism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Original paperback cover from Betty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique (1963)

Second-wave feminism refers to a period of feminist activity beginning in the
early 1960s and lasting through the late 1980s. The scholar Imelda Whelehan
suggests that the second wave was a continuation of the earlier phase of
feminism involving the suffragettes in the UK and USA.[31] Second-wave
feminism has continued to exist since that time and coexists with what is
termed third-wave feminism. The scholar Estelle Freedman compares first and
second-wave feminism saying that the first wave focused on rights such as
suffrage, whereas the second wave was largely concerned with other issues of
equality, such as ending discrimination.[23]

The feminist activist and author Carol Hanisch coined the slogan "The Personal
is Political" which became synonymous with the second wave.[10][32] Second-
wave feminists saw women's cultural and political inequalities as inextricably
linked and encouraged women to understand aspects of their personal lives as
deeply politicized and as reflecting sexist power structures.

#### [edit] Women's Liberation in the USA

The phrase "Womenâs Liberation" was first used in the United States in 1964
and first appeared in print in 1966.[33][34] By 1968, although the term
Womenâs Liberation Front appeared in the magazine Ramparts, it was starting
to refer to the whole womenâs movement.[35] Bra-burning also became
associated with the movement, though the actual prevalence of bra-burning is
debatable.[36] One of the most vocal critics of the women's liberation
movement has been the African American feminist and intellectual Gloria Jean
Watkins (who uses the pseudonym "bell hooks") who argues that this movement
glossed over race and class and thus failed to address "the issues that
divided women". She highlighted the lack of minority voices in the women's
movement in her book Feminist theory from margin to center (1984).[37]

#### [edit] The Feminine Mystique

Main article: The Feminine Mystique

Betty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique (1963) criticized the idea that women
could only find fulfillment through childrearing and homemaking. According to
Friedan's obituary in the The New York Times, The Feminine Mystique âignited
the contemporary women's movement in 1963 and as a result permanently
transformed the social fabric of the United States and countries around the
worldâ and âis widely regarded as one of the most influential nonfiction
books of the 20th century.â[38] In the book Friedan hypothesizes that women
are victims of a false belief system that requires them to find identity and
meaning in their lives through their husbands and children. Such a system
causes women to completely lose their identity in that of their family.
Friedan specifically locates this system among post-World War II middle-class
suburban communities. At the same time, America's post-war economic boom had
led to the development of new technologies that were supposed to make
household work less difficult, but that often had the result of making women's
work less meaningful and valuable.[39]

### [edit] Third wave

Main article: Third-wave feminism

Third-wave feminism began in the early 1990s, arising as a response to
perceived failures of the second wave and also as a response to the backlash
against initiatives and movements created by the second wave. Third-wave
feminism seeks to challenge or avoid what it deems the second wave's
essentialist definitions of femininity, which (according to them) over-
emphasize the experiences of upper middle-class white women.

A post-structuralist interpretation of gender and sexuality is central to much
of the third wave's ideology. Third-wave feminists often focus on "micro-
politics" and challenge the second wave's paradigm as to what is, or is not,
good for females.[23][40][41][42] The third wave has its origins in the
mid-1980s. Feminist leaders rooted in the second wave like Gloria Anzaldua,
bell hooks, Chela Sandoval, Cherrie Moraga, Audre Lorde, Maxine Hong Kingston,
and many other black feminists, sought to negotiate a space within feminist
thought for consideration of race-related subjectivities.[14][41][43]

Third-wave feminism also contains internal debates between difference
feminists such as the psychologist Carol Gilligan (who believes that there are
important differences between the sexes) and those who believe that there are
no inherent differences between the sexes and contend that gender roles are
due to social conditioning.[44]

### [edit] Post-feminism

For more details on this topic, see Third-wave_feminism#Post-feminism.

Post-feminism describes a range of viewpoints reacting to feminism. While not
being "anti-feminist", post-feminists believe that women have achieved second
wave goals while being critical of third wave feminist goals. The term was
first used in the 1980s to describe a backlash against second-wave feminism.
It is now a label for a wide range of theories that take critical approaches
to previous feminist discourses and includes challenges to the second wave's
ideas.[45] Other post-feminists say that feminism is no longer relevant to
today's society.[46] Amelia Jones has written that the post-feminist texts
which emerged in the 1980s and 1990s portrayed second-wave feminism as a
monolithic entity and criticized it using generalizations.[47]

One of the earliest uses of the term was in Susan Bolotin's 1982 article
"Voices of the Post-Feminist Generation," published in New York Times
Magazine. This article was based on a number of interviews with women who
largely agreed with the goals of feminism, but did not identify as
feminists.[48]

Some contemporary feminists, such as Katha Pollitt or Nadine Strossen,
consider feminism to hold simply that "women are people". Views that separate
the sexes rather than unite them are considered by these writers to be sexist
rather than feminist.[49][50]

In her book Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women, Susan Faludi
argues that a backlash against second wave feminism in the 1980s has
successfully re-defined feminism through its terms. She argues that it
constructed the women's liberation movement as the source of many of the
problems alleged to be plaguing women in the late 1980s. She also argues that
many of these problems are illusory, constructed by the media without reliable
evidence. According to her, this type of backlash is a historical trend,
recurring when it appears that women have made substantial gains in their
efforts to obtain equal rights.[51]

Angela McRobbie argues that adding the prefix post to feminism undermines the
strides that feminism has made in achieving equality for everyone, including
women. Post-feminism gives the impression that equality has been achieved and
that feminists can now focus on something else entirely. McRobbie believes
that post-feminism is most clearly seen on so-called feminist media products,
such as Bridget Jones's Diary, Sex and the City, and Ally McBeal. Female
characters like Bridget Jones and Carrie Bradshaw claim to be liberated and
clearly enjoy their sexuality, but what they are constantly searching for is
the one man who will make everything worthwhile. [52]

### [edit] French feminism

French feminism refers to a branch of feminist thinking from a group of
feminists in France from the 1970s to the 1990s. French feminism, compared to
Anglophone feminism, is distinguished by an approach which is more
philosophical and literary. Its writings tend to be effusive and metaphorical
being less concerned with political doctrine and generally focused on theories
of "the body".[53] The term includes writers who are not French, but who have
worked substantially in France and the French tradition[54] such as Julia
Kristeva and Bracha Ettinger.

The French author and philosopher Simone de Beauvoir wrote novels; monographs
on philosophy, politics, and social issues; essays, biographies, and an
autobiography. She is now best known for her metaphysical novels, including
She Came to Stay and The Mandarins, and for her 1949 treatise The Second Sex,
a detailed analysis of women's oppression and a foundational tract of
contemporary feminism. It sets out a feminist existentialism which prescribes
a moral revolution. As an existentialist, she accepted Jean-Paul Sartre's
precept that existence precedes essence; hence "one is not born a woman, but
becomes one". Her analysis focuses on the social construction of Woman as the
Other, this de Beauvoir identifies as fundamental to women's oppression.[19]
She argues that women have historically been considered deviant and abnormal,
and contends that even Mary Wollstonecraft considered men to be the ideal
toward which women should aspire. De Beauvoir argues that for feminism to move
forward, this attitude must be set aside.[19]

In the 1970s French feminists approached feminism with the concept of
Ã©criture fÃ©minine (which translates as female, or feminine writing).[45]
Helene Cixous argues that writing and philosophy are phallocentric and along
with other French feminists such as Luce Irigaray emphasize "writing from the
body" as a subversive exercise.[45] The work of the feminist psychoanalyst and
philosopher, Julia Kristeva, has influenced feminist theory in general and
feminist literary criticism in particular. From the 1980s onwards the work of
the artist and psychoanalyst Bracha Ettinger has influenced literary
criticism, art history and film theory.[55], [56]. However, as the scholar
Elizabeth Wright points out, "none of these French feminists align themselves
with the feminist movement as it appeared in the Anglophone world".[45][57]

## [edit] Theoretical schools

Main article: Feminist theory

Feminist theory is an extension of feminism into theoretical or philosophical
fields. It encompasses work in a variety of disciplines, including
anthropology, sociology, economics, women's studies, literary
criticism,[58][59] art history,[60] psychoanalysis[61] and philosophy.[62][63]
Feminist theory aims to understand gender inequality and focuses on gender
politics, power relations, and sexuality. While providing a critique of these
social and political relations, much of feminist theory also focuses on the
promotion of women's rights and interests. Themes explored in feminist theory
include discrimination, stereotyping, objectification (especially sexual
objectification), oppression, and patriarchy.[8][9]

The American literary critic and feminist Elaine Showalter describes the
phased development of feminist theory. The first she calls "feminist
critique", in which the feminist reader examines the ideologies behind
literary phenomena. The second Showalter calls "gynocriticism", in which the
"woman is producer of textual meaning" including "the psychodynamics of female
creativity; linguistics and the problem of a female language; the trajectory
of the individual or collective female literary career and literary history".
The last phase she calls "gender theory", in which the "ideological
inscription and the literary effects of the sex/gender system" are
explored".[64] This model has been criticized by the scholar Toril Moi who
sees it as an essentialist and deterministic model for female subjectivity and
for failing to account for the situation of women outside the West.[53]

## [edit] Movements and ideologies

Several submovements of feminist ideology have developed over the years; some
of the major subtypes are listed below. These movements often overlap, and
some feminists identify themselves with several types of feminist thought.

### [edit] Socialist and Marxist feminisms

Main articles: Socialist feminism and Marxist Feminism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Clara Zetkin and Rosa Luxemburg, 1910

Socialist feminism connects the oppression of women to Marxist ideas about
exploitation, oppression and labor. Socialist feminists see women as being
held down as a result of their unequal standing in both the workplace and the
domestic sphere.[65] Prostitution, domestic work, childcare, and marriage are
all seen by socialist feminists as ways in which women are exploited by a
patriarchal system which devalues women and the substantial work that they do.
Socialist feminists focus their energies on broad change that affects society
as a whole, rather than on an individual basis. They see the need to work
alongside not just men, but all other groups, as they see the oppression of
women as a part of a larger pattern that affects everyone involved in the
capitalist system.[66]

Marx felt that when class oppression was overcome, gender oppression would
vanish as well.[67] According to some socialist feminists, this view of gender
oppression as a sub-class of class oppression is naive and much of the work of
socialist feminists has gone towards separating gender phenomena from class
phenomena. Some contributors to socialist feminism have criticized these
traditional Marxist ideas for being largely silent on gender oppression except
to subsume it underneath broader class oppression.[68] Other socialist
feminists, notably two long-lived American organizations Radical Women and the
Freedom Socialist Party, point to the classic Marxist writings of Frederick
Engels and August Bebel as a powerful explanation of the link between gender
oppression and class exploitation.[69][70]

In the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century both Clara Zetkin
and Eleanor Marx were against the demonization of men and supported a
proletarian revolution that would overcome as many male-female inequalities as
possible.[71] As their movement already had the most radical demands of
women's equality, most Marxist leaders including Clara Zetkin[72][73] and
Alexandra Kollontai [74][75] counterposed Marxism against feminism, rather
than trying to combine them.

See also: Gender roles in Eastern Europe after Communism

### [edit] Radical feminism

Main article: Radical feminism

Related terms:  
Anti-pornography feminism,  
Cultural feminism,  
Lesbian feminism,  
Separatist feminism,  
Sex-positive feminism  
Radical feminism considers the male controlled capitalist hierarchy, which it
describes as sexist, as the defining feature of womenâs oppression. Radical
feminists believe that women can free themselves only when they have done away
with what they consider an inherently oppressive and dominating patriarchal
system. Radical feminists feel that there is a male-based authority and power
structure and that it is responsible for oppression and inequality, and that
as long as the system and its values are in place, society will not be able to
be reformed in any significant way. Some radical feminists see no alternatives
other than the total uprooting and reconstruction of society in order to
achieve their goals.[10]

Over time a number of sub-types of Radical feminism have emerged, such as
Cultural feminism, Separatist feminism and Anti-pornography feminism. Cultural
feminism is the ideology of a "female nature" or "female essence" that
attempts to revalidate what they consider undervalued female attributes.[76]
It emphasizes the difference between women and men but considers that
difference to be psychological, and to be culturally constructed rather than
biologically innate.[77] Its critics assert that because it is based on an
essentialist view of the differences between women and men and advocates
independence and institution building, it has led feminists to retreat from
politics to âlife-styleâ[78] Once such critic, Alice Echols (a feminist
historian and cultural theorist), credits Redstockings member Brooke Williams
with introducing the term cultural feminism in 1975 to describe the
depoliticisation of radical feminism.[78]

Separatist feminism is a form of radical feminism that does not support
heterosexual relationships. Its proponents argue that the sexual disparities
between men and women are unresolvable. Separatist feminists generally do not
feel that men can make positive contributions to the feminist movement and
that even well-intentioned men replicate patriarchal dynamics.[79] Author
Marilyn Frye describes separatist feminism as "separation of various sorts or
modes from men and from institutions, relationships, roles and activities that
are male-defined, male-dominated, and operating for the benefit of males and
the maintenance of male privilege â this separation being initiated or
maintained, at will, by women".[80]

### [edit] Liberal feminism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Betty Friedan in 1960

Main article: Liberal feminism

Liberal feminism asserts the equality of men and women through political and
legal reform. It is an individualistic form of feminism, which focuses on
womenâs ability to show and maintain their equality through their own
actions and choices. Liberal feminism uses the personal interactions between
men and women as the place from which to transform society. According to
liberal feminists, all women are capable of asserting their ability to achieve
equality, therefore it is possible for change to happen without altering the
structure of society. Issues important to liberal feminists include
reproductive and abortion rights, sexual harassment, voting, education, "equal
pay for equal work", affordable childcare, affordable health care, and
bringing to light the frequency of sexual and domestic violence against
women.[81]

### [edit] Black feminism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Angela Davis speaking at the University of Alberta on 28 March 2006

Main articles: Black feminism and Womanism

Black feminism argues that sexism, class oppression, and racism are
inextricably bound together.[82] Forms of feminism that strive to overcome
sexism and class oppression but ignore race can discriminate against many
people, including women, through racial bias. The Combahee River Collective
argued in 1974 that the liberation of black women entails freedom for all
people, since it would require the end of racism, sexism, and class
oppression.[83] One of the theories that evolved out of this movement was
Alice Walker's Womanism. It emerged after the early feminist movements that
were led specifically by white women who advocated social changes such as
womanâs suffrage. These movements were largely white middle-class movements
and had generally ignored oppression based on racism and classism. Alice
Walker and other Womanists pointed out that black women experienced a
different and more intense kind of oppression from that of white women.[14]

Angela Davis was one of the first people who articulated an argument centered
around the intersection of race, gender, and class in her book, Women, Race,
and Class.[84] Kimberle Crenshaw, a prominent feminist law theorist, gave the
idea the name Intersectionality while discussing identity politics in her
essay, "Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics and Violence
Against Women of Color".

### [edit] Postcolonial feminism and third-world feminism

Main article: Postcolonial feminism

Related terms:  
Orientalism,  
Postcolonialism,  
Transnational feminism  
Postcolonial feminists argue that oppression relating to the colonial
experience, particularly racial, class, and ethnic oppression, has
marginalized women in postcolonial societies. They challenge the assumption
that gender oppression is the primary force of patriarchy. Postcolonial
feminists object to portrayals of women of non-Western societies as passive
and voiceless victims and the portrayal of Western women as modern, educated
and empowered.[85]

Postcolonial feminism emerged from the gendered history of colonialism:
colonial powers often imposed Western norms on colonized regions. In the 1940s
and 1950s, after the formation of the United Nations, former colonies were
monitored by the West for what was considered "social progress". The status of
women in the developing world has been monitored by organizations such as the
United Nations and as a result traditional practices and roles taken up by
womenâsometimes seen as distasteful by Western standardsâcould be
considered a form of rebellion against colonial oppression.[86] Postcolonial
feminists today struggle to fight gender oppression within their own cultural
models of society rather than through those imposed by the Western
colonizers.[87]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Taslima Nasrin: author, physician, and feminist human rights activist

Postcolonial feminism is critical of Western forms of feminism, notably
radical feminism and liberal feminism and their universalization of female
experience. Postcolonial feminists argue that cultures impacted by colonialism
are often vastly different and should be treated as such. Colonial oppression
may result in the glorification of pre-colonial culture, which, in cultures
with traditions of power stratification along gender lines, could mean the
acceptance of, or refusal to deal with, inherent issues of gender
inequality.[88] Postcolonial feminists can be described as feminists who have
reacted against both universalizing tendencies in Western feminist thought and
a lack of attention to gender issues in mainstream postcolonial thought.[89]

Third-world feminism has been described as a group of feminist theories
developed by feminists who acquired their views and took part in feminist
politics in so-called third-world countries.[16] Although women from the third
world have been engaged in the feminist movement, Chandra Talpade Mohanty and
Sarojini Sahoo criticize Western feminism on the grounds that it is
ethnocentric and does not take into account the unique experiences of women
from third-world countries or the existence of feminisms indigenous to third-
world countries. According to Chandra Talpade Mohanty, women in the third
world feel that Western feminism bases its understanding of women on "internal
racism, classism and homophobia".[17] This discourse is strongly related to
African feminism and postcolonial feminism. Its development is also associated
with concepts such as black feminism, womanism,[14][90][91] "Africana
womanism",[92] "motherism",[93] "Stiwanism",[94] "negofeminism",[95] chicana
feminism, and "femalism".

### [edit] Multiracial feminism

Main article: Chicana feminism

Multiracial feminism (also known as âwomen of colorâ feminism) offers a
standpoint theory and analysis of the lives and experiences of women of
color.[96] The theory emerged in the 1990s and was developed by Dr. Maxine
Baca Zinn, a Chicana feminist and Dr. Bonnie Thornton Dill, a sociology expert
on African American women and family.[96][97]

### [edit] Libertarian feminism

According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "Classical liberal or
libertarian feminism conceives of freedom as freedom from coercive
interference. It holds that women, as well as men, have a right to such
freedom due to their status as self-owners."[98]

There are several categories under the theory of libertarian feminism, or
kinds of feminism that are linked to libertarian ideologies. Anarcha-feminism
(also called anarchist feminism or anarcho-feminism) combines feminist and
anarchist beliefs, embodying classical libertarianism rather than contemporary
conservative libertarianism. Anarcha-feminists view patriarchy as a
manifestation of hierarchy, believing that the fight against patriarchy is an
essential part of the class struggle and the anarchist struggle against the
state.[99] Anarcha-feminists such as Susan Brown see the anarchist struggle as
a necessary component of the feminist struggle. In Brown's words, "anarchism
is a political philosophy that opposes all relationships of power, it is
inherently feminist".[100] Recently, Wendy McElroy has defined a position
(which she labels "ifeminism" or "individualist feminism") that combines
feminism with anarcho-capitalism or contemporary conservative libertarianism,
arguing that a pro-capitalist, anti-state position is compatible with an
emphasis on equal rights and empowerment for women.[101] Individualist
anarchist-feminism has grown from the US-based individualist anarchism
movement.[102]

Individualist feminism is typically defined as a feminism in opposition to
what writers such as Wendy McElroy and Christina Hoff Sommers term, political
or gender feminism.[103][104][105] However, there are some differences within
the discussion of individualist feminism. While some individualist feminists
like McElroy oppose government interference into the choices women make with
their bodies because such interference creates a coercive hierarchy (such as
patriarchy),[106][107] other feminists such as Christina Hoff Sommers hold
that feminism's political role is simply to ensure that everyone's, including
women's, right against coercive interference is respected.[98] Sommers is
described as a "socially conservative equity feminist" by the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy,[98] and she has argued that women should
voluntarily commit to traditional gender roles.[108] Critics have called her
an anti-feminist[109][110]

### [edit] Post-structural and postmodern feminism

For more details on this topic, see Postmodern feminism.

Post-structural feminism, also referred to as French feminism, uses the
insights of various epistemological movements, including psychoanalysis,
linguistics, political theory (Marxist and post-Marxist theory), race theory,
literary theory, and other intellectual currents for feminist concerns.[111]
Many post-structural feminists maintain that difference is one of the most
powerful tools that females possess in their struggle with patriarchal
domination, and that to equate the feminist movement only with equality is to
deny women a plethora of options because equality is still defined from the
masculine or patriarchal perspective.[111][112]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Judith Butler at a lecture at the University of Hamburg.

Postmodern feminism is an approach to feminist theory that incorporates
postmodern and post-structuralist theory. The largest departure from other
branches of feminism is the argument that gender is constructed through
language.[20] The most notable proponent of this argument is Judith Butler. In
her 1990 book, Gender Trouble, she draws on and critiques the work of Simone
de Beauvoir, Michel Foucault and Jacques Lacan. Butler criticizes the
distinction drawn by previous feminisms between biological sex and socially
constructed gender. She says that this does not allow for a sufficient
criticism of essentialism. For Butler "woman" is a debatable category,
complicated by class, ethnicity, sexuality, and other facets of identity. She
suggests that gender is performative. This argument leads to the conclusion
that there is no single cause for women's subordination and no single approach
towards dealing with the issue.[20]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Donna Haraway, author of A Cyborg Manifesto, with her dog Cayenne

In A Cyborg Manifesto Donna Haraway criticizes traditional notions of
feminism, particularly its emphasis on identity, rather than affinity. She
uses the metaphor of a cyborg in order to construct a postmodern feminism that
moves beyond dualisms and the limitations of traditional gender, feminism, and
politics.[113] Haraway's cyborg is an attempt to break away from Oedipal
narratives and Christian origin-myths like Genesis. She writes: "The cyborg
does not dream of community on the model of the organic family, this time
without the oedipal project. The cyborg would not recognize the Garden of
Eden; it is not made of mud and cannot dream of returning to dust."[113]

A major branch in postmodern feminist thought has emerged from the
contemporary psychoanalytic French feminism. Other postmodern feminist works
highlight stereotypical gender roles, only to portray them as parodies of the
original beliefs. The history of feminism is not important in these
writingsâonly what is going to be done about it. The history is dismissed
and used to depict how ridiculous past beliefs were. Modern feminist theory
has been extensively criticized as being predominantly, though not
exclusively, associated with Western middle class academia. Mary Joe Frug, a
postmodernist feminist, criticized mainstream feminism as being too narrowly
focused and inattentive to related issues of race and class.[114]

See also: French feminism, Deconstruction, Poststructuralism, and
Postmodernism

### [edit] Ecofeminism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Janet Biehl is one of the premier authors on social ecology

Main article: Ecofeminism

Ecofeminism links ecology with feminism. Ecofeminists see the domination of
women as stemming from the same ideologies that bring about the domination of
the environment. Patriarchal systems, where men own and control the land, are
seen as responsible for the oppression of women and destruction of the natural
environment. Ecofeminists argue that the men in power control the land, and
therefore they are able to exploit it for their own profit and success.
Ecofeminists argue that in this situation, women are exploited by men in power
for their own profit, success, and pleasure. Ecofeminists argue that women and
the environment are both exploited as passive pawns in the race to domination.
Ecofeminists argue that those people in power are able to take advantage of
them distinctly because they are seen as passive and rather helpless.
Ecofeminism connects the exploitation and domination of women with that of the
environment. As a way of repairing social and ecological injustices,
ecofeminists feel that women must work towards creating a healthy environment
and ending the destruction of the lands that most women rely on to provide for
their families.[115]

Ecofeminism argues that there is a connection between women and nature that
comes from their shared history of oppression by a patriarchal Western
society. Vandana Shiva claims that women have a special connection to the
environment through their daily interactions with it that has been ignored.
She says that "women in subsistence economies, producing and reproducing
wealth in partnership with nature, have been experts in their own right of
holistic and ecological knowledge of natureâs processes. But these
alternative modes of knowing, which are oriented to the social benefits and
sustenance needs are not recognized by the capitalist reductionist paradigm,
because it fails to perceive the interconnectedness of nature, or the
connection of womenâs lives, work and knowledge with the creation of
wealth.â[116]

However, feminist and social ecologist Janet Biehl has criticized ecofeminism
for focusing too much on a mystical connection between women and nature and
not enough on the actual conditions of women.[117]

See also: Environmentalism

## [edit] Society

For more details on this topic, see Feminist movement.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Woman Suffrage Headquarters, Cleveland, 1912

The feminist movement has effected change in Western society, including
women's suffrage; greater access to education; more nearly equitable pay with
men; the right to initiate divorce proceedings and "no fault" divorce; and the
right of women to make individual decisions regarding pregnancy (including
access to contraceptives and abortion); and the right to own property.[12][13]

### [edit] Civil rights

Main article: Women's rights

From the 1960s on the women's liberation movement campaigned for women's
rights, including the same pay as men, equal rights in law, and the freedom to
plan their families. Their efforts were met with mixed results.[118] Issues
commonly associated with notions of women's rights include, though are not
limited to: the right to bodily integrity and autonomy; to vote (universal
suffrage); to hold public office; to work; to fair wages or equal pay; to own
property; to education; to serve in the military; to enter into legal
contracts; and to have marital, parental and religious rights.[119]

In the UK a public groundswell of opinion in favour of legal equality gained
pace[when?], partly through the extensive employment of women in men's
traditional roles during both world wars. By the 1960s the legislative process
was being readied, tracing through MP Willie Hamilton's select committee
report, his Equal Pay For Equal Work Bill, the creation of a Sex
Discrimination Board, Lady Sear's draft sex anti-discrimination bill, a
government Green Paper of 1973, until 1975 when the first British Sex
Discrimination Act, an Equal Pay Act, and an Equal Opportunities Commission
came into force.[120][121] With encouragement from the UK government, the
other countries of the EEC soon followed suit with an agreement to ensure that
discrimination laws would be phased out across the European Community.

In the USA, the US National Organization for Women (NOW) was created in 1966
with the purpose of bringing about equality for all women. NOW was one
important group that fought for the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA). This
amendment stated that âequality of rights under the law shall not be denied
or abridged by the United States or any state on account of sex.â[122] But
there was disagreement on how the proposed amendment would be understood.
Supporters believed it would guarantee women equal treatment. But critics
feared it might deny women the right be financially supported by their
husbands. The amendment died in 1982 because not enough states had ratified
it. ERAs have been included in subsequent Congresses, but have still failed to
be ratified.[123]

In the final three decades of the 20th century, Western women knew a new
freedom through birth control, which enabled women to plan their adult lives,
often making way for both career and family. The movement had been started in
the 1910s by US pioneering social reformer Margaret Sanger and in the UK and
internationally by Marie Stopes.[124]

The United Nations Human Development Report 2004 estimated that when both paid
employment and unpaid household tasks are accounted for, on average women work
more than men. In rural areas of selected developing countries women performed
an average of 20% more work than men, or an additional 102 minutes per day. In
the OECD countries surveyed, on average women performed 5% more work than men,
or 20 minutes per day.[125] At the UN's Pan Pacific Southeast Asia Women's
Association 21st International Conference in 2001 it was stated that "in the
world as a whole, women comprise 51% of the population, do 66% of the work,
receive 10% of the income and own less than one percent of the property".[126]

### [edit] Language

For more details on this topic, see Gender-neutral language in English.

Gender-neutral language is a description of language usages which are aimed at
minimizing assumptions regarding the biological sex of human referents. The
advocacy of gender-neutral language reflects, at least, two different agendas:
one aims to clarify the inclusion of both sexes or genders (gender-inclusive
language); the other proposes that gender, as a category, is rarely worth
marking in language (gender-neutral language). Gender-neutral language is
sometimes described as non-sexist language by advocates and politically-
correct language by opponents.[127]

### [edit] Heterosexual relationships

The increased entry of women into the workplace beginning in the twentieth
century has affected gender roles and the division of labor within households.
Sociologist Arlie Russell Hochschild in The Second Shift and The Time Bind
presents evidence that in two-career couples, men and women, on average, spend
about equal amounts of time working, but women still spend more time on
housework.[128][129] Feminist writer Cathy Young responds to Hochschild's
assertions by arguing that in some cases, women may prevent the equal
participation of men in housework and parenting.[130]

Feminist criticisms of men's contributions to child care and domestic labor in
the Western middle class are typically centered around the idea that it is
unfair for women to be expected to perform more than half of a household's
domestic work and child care when both members of the relationship also work
outside the home. Several studies provide statistical evidence that the
financial income of married men does not affect their rate of attending to
household duties.[131][132]

In Dubious Conceptions, Kristin Luker discusses the effect of feminism on
teenage women's choices to bear children, both in and out of wedlock. She says
that as childbearing out of wedlock has become more socially acceptable, young
women, especially poor young women, while not bearing children at a higher
rate than in the 1950s, now see less of a reason to get married before having
a child. Her explanation for this is that the economic prospects for poor men
are slim, hence poor women have a low chance of finding a husband who will be
able to provide reliable financial support.[133]

Although research suggests that to an extent, both women and men perceive
feminism to be in conflict with romance, studies of undergraduates and older
adults have shown that feminism has positive impacts on relationship health
for women and sexual satisfaction for men, and found no support for negative
stereotypes of feminists.[134]

### [edit] Religion

For more details on this topic, see Feminist theology.

See also: God and gender

Related terms:  
Christian feminism,  
Difference feminism,  
New feminism,  
Islamic feminism,  
Jewish feminism  
Wiccan feminism  
Feminist theology is a movement that reconsiders the traditions, practices,
scriptures, and theologies of religions from a feminist perspective. Some of
the goals of feminist theology include increasing the role of women among the
clergy and religious authorities, reinterpreting male-dominated imagery and
language about God, determining women's place in relation to career and
motherhood, and studying images of women in the religion's sacred texts.[135]

Christian feminism is a branch of feminist theology which seeks to interpret
and understand Christianity in light of the equality of women and men. Because
this equality has been historically ignored, Christian feminists believe their
contributions are necessary for a complete understanding of Christianity.
While there is no standard set of beliefs among Christian feminists, most
agree that God does not discriminate on the basis of biologically-determined
characteristics such as sex. Their major issues are the ordination of women,
male dominance in Christian marriage, and claims of moral deficiency and
inferiority of abilities of women compared to men. They also are concerned
with the balance of parenting between mothers and fathers and the overall
treatment of women in the church.[136][137]

Islamic feminism is concerned with the role of women in Islam and aims for the
full equality of all Muslims, regardless of gender, in public and private
life. Islamic feminists advocate women's rights, gender equality, and social
justice grounded in an Islamic framework. Although rooted in Islam, the
movement's pioneers have also utilized secular and Western feminist discourses
and recognize the role of Islamic feminism as part of an integrated global
feminist movement.[138] Advocates of the movement seek to highlight the deeply
rooted teachings of equality in the Quran and encourage a questioning of the
patriarchal interpretation of Islamic teaching through the Quran, hadith
(sayings of Muhammad), and sharia (law) towards the creation of a more equal
and just society.[139]

Jewish feminism is a movement that seeks to improve the religious, legal, and
social status of women within Judaism and to open up new opportunities for
religious experience and leadership for Jewish women. Feminist movements, with
varying approaches and successes, have opened up within all major branches of
Judaism. In its modern form, the movement can be traced to the early 1970s in
the United States. According to Judith Plaskow, who has focused on feminism in
Reform Judaism, the main issues for early Jewish feminists in these movements
were the exclusion from the all-male prayer group or minyan, the exemption
from positive time-bound mitzvot, and women's inability to function as
witnesses and to initiate divorce.[140]

The Dianic Wicca or Wiccan feminism is a female focused, Goddess-centered
Wiccan sect; also known as a feminist religion that teaches witchcraft as
every womanâs right. It is also one sect of the many practiced in
Wicca.[141]

## [edit] Architecture

Gender-based inquiries into and conceptualization of architecture have also
come about in the past fifteen years or so. Piyush Mathur coined the term
"archigenderic" in his 1998 article in the British journal Women's Writing.
Claiming that "architectural planning has an inextricable link with the
defining and regulation of gender roles, responsibilities, rights, and
limitations," Mathur came up with that term "to explore...the meaning of
'architecture" in terms of gender" and "to explore the meaning of "gender" in
terms of architecture" (p. 71).

## [edit] Culture

See also: Women's cinema and Women's music

### [edit] Women's writing

<IMG>

<IMG>

Virginia Woolf

For more details on Women's literature written in English, see Women's writing
in English.

Women's writing came to exist as a separate category of scholarly interest
relatively recently. In the West, second-wave feminism prompted a general
reevaluation of women's historical contributions, and various academic sub-
disciplines, such as Women's history (or herstory) and women's writing,
developed in response to the belief that women's lives and contributions have
been underrepresented as areas of scholarly interest.[142] Virginia Balisn et
al. characterize the growth in interest since 1970 in women's writing as
"powerful".[142] Much of this early period of feminist literary scholarship
was given over to the rediscovery and reclamation of texts written by women.
Studies such as Dale Spender's Mothers of the Novel (1986) and Jane Spencer's
The Rise of the Woman Novelist (1986) were ground-breaking in their insistence
that women have always been writing. Commensurate with this growth in
scholarly interest, various presses began the task of reissuing long-out-of-
print texts. Virago Press began to publish its large list of nineteenth and
early-twentieth-century novels in 1975 and became one of the first commercial
presses to join in the project of reclamation. In the 1980s Pandora Press,
responsible for publishing Spender's study, issued a companion line of
eighteenth-century novels written by women.[143] More recently, Broadview
Press has begun to issue eighteenth- and nineteenth-century works, many
hitherto out of print and the University of Kentucky has a series of
republications of early women's novels. There has been commensurate growth in
the area of biographical dictionaries of women writers due to a perception,
according to one editor, that "most of our women are not represented in the
'standard' reference books in the field".[142]

Another early pioneer of Feminist writing is Charlotte Perkins Gilman, whose
most notable work was The Yellow Wallpaper. [144]

#### [edit] Feminist science fiction

Main article: Feminist science fiction

In the 1960s the genre of science fiction combined its sensationalism with
political and technological critiques of society. With the advent of feminism,
questioning womenâs roles became fair game to this "subversive, mind
expanding genre".[145] Two early texts are Ursula K. Le Guin's The Left Hand
of Darkness (1969) and Joanna Russ' The Female Man (1970). They serve to
highlight the socially constructed nature of gender roles by creating utopias
that do away with gender.[146] Both authors were also pioneers in feminist
criticism of science fiction in the 1960s and 70s, in essays collected in The
Language of the Night (Le Guin, 1979) and How To Suppress Women's Writing
(Russ, 1983). Another major work of feminist science fiction has been[147]
Kindred by Octavia Butler.

### [edit] Riot grrrl movement

<IMG>

<IMG>

Kathleen Hanna was the lead singer of Bikini Kill, a riot grrrl music band
formed in 1990.

Main article: Riot Grrrl

Riot grrrl (or riot grrl) is an underground feminist punk movement that
started in the 1990s and is often associated with third-wave feminism (it is
sometimes seen as its starting point). It was Grounded in the DIY philosophy
of punk values. Riot grrls took an anti-corporate stance of self-sufficiency
and self-reliance.[148] Riot grrrl's emphasis on universal female identity and
separatism often appears more closely allied with second-wave feminism than
with the third wave.[149] Riot grrrl bands often address issues such as rape,
domestic abuse, sexuality, and female empowerment. Some bands associated with
the movement are: Bikini Kill, Bratmobile, Excuse 17, Free Kitten, Heavens To
Betsy, Huggy Bear, L7, and Team Dresch. In addition to a music scene, riot
grrrl is also a subculture; zines, the DIY ethic, art, political action, and
activism are part of the movement. Riot grrrls hold meetings, start chapters,
and support and organize women in music.[150]

The riot grrrl movement sprang out of Olympia, Washington and Washington, D.C.
in the early 1990s. It sought to give women the power to control their voices
and artistic expressions.[148] Riot grrrls took a growling double or triple r,
placing it in the word girl as a way to take back the derogatory use of the
term .[148]

The Riot Grrrlâs links to social and political issues are where the
beginnings of third-wave feminism can be seen. The music and zine writings are
strong examples of "cultural politics in action, with strong women giving
voice to important social issues though an empowered, a female oriented
community, many people link the emergence of the third-wave feminism to this
time".[148] The movement encouraged and made "adolescent girlsâ standpoints
central," allowing them to express themselves fully.[151]  

## [edit] Pornography

For more details on this topic, see Feminist sex wars.

The "Feminist Sex Wars" is a term for the acrimonious debates within the
feminist movement in the late 1970s through the 1980s around the issues of
feminism, sexuality, sexual representation, pornography, sadomasochism, the
role of transwomen in the lesbian community, and other sexual issues. The
debate pitted anti-pornography feminism against sex-positive feminism, and
parts of the feminist movement were deeply divided by these
debates.[152][153][154][155][156]

#### [edit] Anti-pornography movement

For more details on this topic, see Anti-pornography#Feminist objections.

Anti-pornography feminists, such as Catharine MacKinnon, Andrea Dworkin, Robin
Morgan and Dorchen Leidholdt, put pornography at the center of a feminist
explanation of women's oppression.[157]

Some feminists, such as Diana Russell, Andrea Dworkin, Catharine MacKinnon,
Susan Brownmiller, Dorchen Leidholdt, Ariel Levy, and Robin Morgan, argue that
pornography is degrading to women, and complicit in violence against women
both in its production (where, they charge, abuse and exploitation of women
performing in pornography is rampant) and in its consumption (where, they
charge, pornography eroticizes the domination, humiliation, and coercion of
women, and reinforces sexual and cultural attitudes that are complicit in rape
and sexual harassment).[158]

Beginning in the late 1970s, anti-pornography radical feminists formed
organizations such as Women Against Pornography that provided educational
events, including slide-shows, speeches, and guided tours of the sex industry
in Times Square, in order to raise awareness of the content of pornography and
the sexual subculture in pornography shops and live sex shows.[159] Andrea
Dworkin and Robin Morgan began articulating a vehemently anti-porn stance
based in radical feminism beginning in 1974, and anti-porn feminist groups,
such as Women Against Pornography and similar organizations, became highly
active in various US cities during the late 1970s.[158]

See also: Women Against Pornography and Women Against Violence in Pornography
and Media

#### [edit] Sex-positive movement

Main article: Sex-positive feminism

Sex-positive feminism is a movement that was formed in order to address issues
of women's sexual pleasure, freedom of expression, sex work, and inclusive
gender identities. Ellen Willis' 1981 essay, "Lust Horizons: Is the Women's
Movement Pro-Sex?" is the origin of the term, "pro-sex feminism"; the more
commonly-used variant, "sex positive feminism" arose soon after.[160]

Although some sex-positive feminists, such as Betty Dodson, were active in the
early 1970s, much of sex-positive feminism largely began in the late 1970s and
1980s as a response to the increasing emphasis in radical feminism on anti-
pornography activism, and to the ideas of anti-pornography feminists like
Robin Morgan, Andrea Dworkin, and Catharine MacKinnon, who argued that sexual
expressions such as pornography, sadomasochism, transexualism, and other
"male" modes of sexuality are a central cause of women's oppression.[10][101]

Sex-positive feminists are also strongly opposed to radical feminist calls for
legislation against pornography, a strategy they decried as censorship, and
something that could, they argued, be used by social conservatives to censor
the sexual expression of women, gay people, and other sexual minorities. The
initial period of intense debate and acrimony between sex-positive and anti-
pornography feminists during the early 1980s is often referred to as the
Feminist Sex Wars. Other sex-positive feminists became involved not in
opposition to other feminists, but in direct response to what they saw as
patriarchal control of sexuality.[citation needed]

Since the 1990s, other feminists such as Patricia Petersen, have argued that
pornography may serve an important function for women - reduce the likelihood
that they will be raped or victims of other forms of sex crimes.[citation
needed]

See also: Samois

## [edit] Relationship to political movements

### [edit] Socialism

Main article: The left and feminism

Since the early twentieth century some feminists have allied with socialism.
In 1907 there was an International Conference of Socialist Women in Stuttgart
where suffrage was described as a tool of class struggle. Clara Zetkin of the
Social Democratic Party of Germany called for women's suffrage to build a
"socialist order, the only one that allows for a radical solution to the
women's question".[161][162][163][164]

In Britain, the women's movement was allied with the Labour party. In America,
Betty Friedan emerged from a radical background to take command of the
organized movement. Radical Women, founded in 1967 in Seattle is the oldest
(and still active) socialist feminist organization in the U.S.[165] During the
Spanish Civil War, Dolores IbÃ¡rruri (La Pasionaria) led the Communist Party
of Spain. Although she supported equal rights for women, she opposed women
fighting on the front and clashed with the anarcho-feminist Mujeres
Libres.[166]

Revolutions in Latin America brought changes in women's status in countries
such as Nicaragua where Feminist ideology during the Sandinista Revolution was
largely responsible for improvements in the quality of life for women but fell
short of achieving a social and ideological change.[167]

See also: Post-Communism Gender Roles in Eastern Europe and Role of women in
Nicaraguan Revolution

### [edit] Fascism

Scholars have argued that Nazi Germany and the other fascist states of the
1930s and 1940s illustrates the disastrous consequences for society of a state
ideology that, in glorifying women, becomes anti-feminist.[168] In Germany
after the rise of Nazism in 1933, there was a rapid dissolution of the
political rights and economic opportunities that feminists had fought for
during the prewar period and to some extent during the 1920s. In Franco's
Spain, the right wing Catholic conservatives undid the work of feminists
during the Republic. Fascist society was hierarchical with an emphasis and
idealization of virility, with women maintaining a largely subordinate
position to men.[164]

## [edit] Scientific discourse

Some feminists are critical of traditional scientific discourse, arguing that
the field has historically been biased towards a masculine perspective.[11]
Evelyn Fox Keller argues that the rhetoric of science reflects a masculine
perspective, and she questions the idea of scientific objectivity.

Many feminist scholars rely on qualitative research methods that emphasize
womenâs subjective, individual experiences. According to communication
scholars Thomas R. Lindlof and Bryan C. Taylor, incorporating a feminist
approach to qualitative research involves treating research participants as
equals who are just as much an authority as the researcher. Objectivity is
eschewed in favor of open self-reflexivity and the agenda of helping women.
Also part of the feminist research agenda is uncovering ways that power
inequities are created and/or reinforced in society and/or in scientific and
academic institutions. Lindlof and Taylor also explain that a feminist
approach to research often involves nontraditional forms of presentation.
.[164]

  
Primatologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy notes the prevalence of masculine-coined
stereotypes and theories, such as the non-sexual female, despite "the
accumulation of abundant openly available evidence contradicting it".[169]
Some natural and social scientists have examined feminist ideas using
scientific methods.

### [edit] Biology of gender

Related terms:  
Biology of gender  
Modern feminist science is based on the view that many differences between the
sexes are based on socially constructed gender identities rather than on
biological sex differences. For example, Anne Fausto-Sterling's book Myths of
Gender explores the assumptions embodied in scientific research that purports
to support a biologically essentialist view of gender.[170] Her second book,
Sexing the Body discussed the alleged possibility of more than two true
biological sexes. This possibility only exists in yet-unknown extraterrestrial
biospheres, as no ratios of true gametes to polar cells other than 4:0 and 1:3
(male and female, respectively) are produced on Earth. However, in The Female
Brain, Louann Brizendine argues that brain differences between the sexes are a
biological reality with significant implications for sex-specific functional
differences.[171] Steven Rhoads' book Taking Sex Differences Seriously
illustrates sex-dependent differences across a wide scope.[172]

Carol Tavris, in The Mismeasure of Woman, uses psychology and sociology to
critique theories that use biological reductionism to explain differences
between men and women. She argues rather than using evidence of innate gender
difference there is an over-changing hypothesis to justify inequality and
perpetuate stereotypes.[173]

### [edit] Evolutionary biology

Related terms:  
Evolutionary biology  
Sarah Kemberâdrawing from numerous areas such as evolutionary biology,
sociobiology, artificial intelligence, and cybernetics in development with a
new evolutionismâdiscusses the biologization of technology. She notes how
feminists and sociologists have become suspect of evolutionary psychology,
particularly inasmuch as sociobiology is subjected to complexity in order to
strengthen sexual difference as immutable through pre-existing cultural value
judgments about human nature and natural selection. Where feminist theory is
criticized for its "false beliefs about human nature," Kember then argues in
conclusion that "feminism is in the interesting position of needing to do more
biology and evolutionary theory in order not to simply oppose their renewed
hegemony, but in order to understand the conditions that make this possible,
and to have a say in the construction of new ideas and artefacts."[174]

## [edit] Men and feminism

Main article: Men and feminism

<IMG>

<IMG>

Anti-suffragists in 1911

The relationship between men and feminism has been complex. Men have taken
part in significant responses to feminism in each 'wave' of the movement.
There have been positive and negative reactions and responses, depending on
the individual man and the social context of the time.[175] These responses
have varied from pro-feminism to masculism to anti-feminism.[176][177][178] In
the twenty-first century new reactions to feminist ideologies have emerged
including a generation of male scholars involved in gender studies,[179][180]
and also men's rights activists who promote male equality (including equal
treatment in family, divorce and anti-discrimination law).[181]. Historically
a number of men have engaged with feminism. Philosopher Jeremy Bentham
demanded equal rights for women in the eighteenth century. In 1866,
philosopher John Stuart Mill (author of "The Subjection of Women") presented a
womenâs petition to the British parliament; and supported an amendment to
the 1867 Reform Bill. Others have lobbied and campaigned against feminism.
Today, academics like Michael Flood, Michael Messner and Michael Kimmel are
involved with men's studies and pro-feminism.[179][181][182][183][184]

A number of feminist writers maintain that identifying as a feminist is the
strongest stand men can take in the struggle against sexism. They have argued
that men should be allowed, or even be encouraged, to participate in the
feminist movement.[185][37] Other female feminists argue that men cannot be
feminists simply because they are not women. They maintain that men are
granted inherent privileges that prevent them from identifying with feminist
struggles, thus making it impossible for them to identify with feminists.[186]
Fidelma Ashe has approached the issue of male feminism by arguing that
traditional feminist views of male experience and of "men doing feminism" have
been monolithic.[187][188] She explores the multiple political discourses and
practices of pro-feminist politics, and evaluates each strand through an
interrogation based upon its effect on feminist politics.[187][188]

## [edit] Pro-feminism

Main article: Pro-feminism

Pro-feminism is the support of feminism without implying that the supporter is
a member of the feminist movement. The term is most often used in reference to
men who are actively supportive of feminism and of efforts to bring about
gender equality. The activities of pro-feminist men's groups include anti-
violence work with boys and young men in schools, offering sexual harassment
workshops in workplaces, running community education campaigns, and counseling
male perpetrators of violence. Pro-feminist men also are involved in men's
health, activism against pornography including anti-pornography legislation,
men's studies, and the development of gender equity curricula in schools. This
work is sometimes in collaboration with feminists and women's services, such
as domestic violence and rape crisis centers. Some activists of both genders
will not refer to men as "feminists" at all, and will refer to all pro-
feminist men as "pro-feminists".[175][179]

## [edit] Anti-feminism

Main article: Anti-feminism

Anti-feminism is opposition to feminism in some or all of its forms.[189]
Writers such as Camille Paglia, Christina Hoff Sommers, Jean Bethke Elshtain
and Elizabeth Fox-Genovese have been labeled "anti-feminists" by other
feminists.[190][191] Daphne Patai and Noretta Koertge argue that in this way
the term "anti-feminist" is used to silence academic debate about
feminism.[192] Paul Nathanson and Katherine K. Young's books Spreading
Misandry and Legalizing Misandry explore what they argue is feminist-inspired
misandry.[193] Christina Hoff-Sommers argues feminist misandry leads directly
to misogyny by what she calls "establishment feminists" against (the majority
of) women who love men in Who Stole Feminism: How Women Have Betrayed
Women.[104] "Marriage rights" advocates criticize feminists like Sheila Cronan
who take the view that marriage constitutes slavery for women, and that
freedom for women cannot be won without the abolition of marriage.[194]

## [edit] See also

  * Womanism
  * Africana womanism
  * Antifeminism
  * Equal pay for women
  * Equal Rights Amendment
  * Feminist therapy
  * Human trafficking
  * Lactivism
  * Lesbian feminism
  * List of feminist literature
  * Masculism
  * Men's Rights
  * Misogyny
  * Protofeminist
  * Separatist feminism
  * Sex/gender distinction
  * Social criticism
  * Women's Environment & Development Organization

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b Cornell, Drucilla (1998). At the heart of freedom: feminism, sex, and equality. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-02896-5.
  2. ^ Humm, Maggie (1992). Modern feminisms: Political, Literary, Cultural. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-08072-7.
  3. ^ Collins Dictionary and Thesaurus. London: Collins. 2006. ISBN 0-00-722405-2.
  4. ^ a b Humm, Maggie (1990). The dictionary of feminist theory. Columbus: Ohio State University Press. pp. 278\. ISBN 0-8142-0506-2.
  5. ^ Agnes, Michael (2007). Webster's New World College Dictionary. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-7645-7125-7.
  6. ^ Walker, Rebecca (1992), "Becoming the Third Wave", Ms (January/February, 1992): 39â41
  7. ^ a b Krolokke, Charlotte; Anne Scott Sorensen (2005). "Three Waves of Feminism: From Suffragettes to Grrls". Gender Communication Theories and Analyses:From Silence to Performance. Sage. pp. 24\. ISBN 0761929185.
  8. ^ a b Chodorow, Nancy (1989). Feminism and psychoanalytic theory. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-05116-2.
  9. ^ a b Gilligan, Carol (1977-00-00), "'In a Different Voice: Women's Conceptions of Self and Morality'", Harvard Educational Review 47 (4): 481â517, http://eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/custom/portlets/recordDetails/detailmini.jsp?_nfpb=true&_&ERICExtSearch_SearchValue_0=EJ174986&ERICExtSearch_SearchType_0=no&accno=EJ174986, retrieved on 2008-06-08 (1977)
  10. ^ a b c d Echols, Alice (1989). Daring to be bad: radical feminism in America, 1967-1975. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. pp. 416\. ISBN 0-8166-1787-2.
  11. ^ a b Price, Janet; Shildrick, Margrit (1999). Feminist theory and the body: a reader. New York: Routledge. pp. 487\. ISBN 0-415-92566-5.
  12. ^ a b Butler, Judith (March 1992). "Feminism in Any Other Name". Differences 6 (2-3): 30.
  13. ^ a b Messer-Davidow, Ellen (2002). Disciplining feminism: from social activism to academic discourse. Durham N.C.: Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-2843-7.
  14. ^ a b c d e Walker, Alice (1983). In search of our mothers' gardens: womanist prose. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 397\. ISBN 0-15-144525-7.
  15. ^ a b c Hill Collins, P. (2000): Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empowerment (New York: Routledge)
  16. ^ a b c Narayan, Uma (1997). Dislocating cultures: identities, traditions, and Third-World feminism. New York: Routledge. pp. 0415914183\. ISBN 0-415-91418-3.
  17. ^ a b Mohanty, Chandra Talpade (1991). "Introduction". in Mohanty, Chandra Talpade; Russo, Ann; Torres, Lourdes. Third World women and the politics of feminism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. pp. 49\. ISBN 0-253-20632-4.
  18. ^ Harding, Sandra (2004). The feminist standpoint theory reader: intellectual and political controversies. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-94501-1.
  19. ^ a b c Beauvoir, Simone de; Parshley, H. M. (1997). The second sex. London: Vintage. ISBN 978-0-09-974421-4.
  20. ^ a b c Butler, Judith (1999). Gender trouble: feminism and the subversion of identity. New York: Routledge. ISBN 9780415924993.
  21. ^ West, Candace; Zimmerman, Don H. (June, 1987), "Doing Gender", Gender and Society 1 (2): 26, doi:10.1177/0891243287001002002, http://gas.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/1/2/125
  22. ^ Benhabib, Seyla (1995), "From Identity Politics to Social Feminism: A Plea for the Nineties", Philosophy of Education 1 (2): 14
  23. ^ a b c d Freedman, Estelle B. (2003). No Turning Back : The History of Feminism and the Future of Women. Ballantine Books. pp. 464\. ISBN 0-345-45053-1.
  24. ^ Phillips, Melanie (2004). The ascent of woman: a history of the suffragette movement and the ideas behind it. London: Abacus. ISBN 978-0-349-11660-0.
  25. ^ DuBois, Ellen Carol (1997). Harriot Stanton Blatch and the winning of woman suffrage. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-06562-0.
  26. ^ Flexner, Eleanor, Century of Struggle: The Woman's Rights Movement in the United States (The Belknap Press, 1996), ISBN 9780674106539
  27. ^ Wheeler, Marjorie W. (1995). One woman, one vote: rediscovering the woman suffrage movement. Troutdale, OR: NewSage Press. ISBN 978-0-939165-26-0.
  28. ^ Stevens, Doris; O'Hare, Carol (1995). Jailed for freedom: American women win the vote. Troutdale, OR: NewSage Press. ISBN 978-0-939165-25-2.
  29. ^ Elizabeth Cady Stanton (October 16, 1873) in a letter to Julia Ward Howe recorded in Howe's diary at Harvard University Library: âwhen we consider that women are treated as property, it is degrading to women that we should treat our children as property to be disposed of as we see fitâ-.
  30. ^ "Anthony,Susan B.(August 8, 1869) The Revolution: "All the articles on this subject that I have read have been from men. They denounce women as alone guilty, and never include man in any plans for the remedy. . . Guilty? Yes. No matter what the motive, love of ease, or a desire to save from suffering the unborn innocent, the woman is awfully guilty who commits the deed [abortion]. It will burden her conscience in life, it will burden her soul in death; But oh, thrice guilty is he who drove her to the desperation which impelled her to the crime!"
  31. ^ Whelehan, Imelda (1995). Modern feminist thought: from the second wave to "post-feminism". Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-0621-4.
  32. ^ Hanisch, Carol (2006-01-01). "Hanisch, New Intro to "The Personal is Political" - Second Wave and Beyond". The Personal Is Political. http://scholar.alexanderstreet.com/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=2259. Retrieved on 2008-06-08.
  33. ^ Sarachild, Kathie (1978). "Consciousness-Raising: A Radical Weapon". in Sarachild, K.. Feminist Revolution. Hanisch, C., Levine, F., Leon, B., Price, C.. New York: Random House. pp. 6\. ISBN 0394408217. .
  34. ^ Mitchell, Juliet (1966), "Women: The longest revolution", New Left review (Nov-Dec): 26
  35. ^ Hinckle, Warren; Marianne Hinckle (1968), "Women Powe", Ramparts (February): 8
  36. ^ Freeman, Jo (1975). The politics of women's liberation: a case study of an emerging social movement and its relation to the policy process. New York: McKay. pp. 268\. ISBN 0-582-28009-5.
  37. ^ a b Hooks, Bell (2000). Feminist theory: from margin to center. Cambridge, MA: South End Press. ISBN 0-89608-614-3.
  38. ^ Fox, Margalit (February 5, 2006), "Betty Friedan, Who Ignited Cause in 'Feminine Mystique,' Dies at 85'", New York times
  39. ^ Friedan, Betty. Feminine Mystique. W W Norton & Co Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-08436-1.
  40. ^ Henry, Astrid (2004). Not my mother's sister: generational conflict and third-wave feminism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-21713-4.
  41. ^ a b Gillis, Stacy; Howie, Gillian; Munford, Rebecca (2007). Third wave feminism: a critical exploration. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-52174-2.
  42. ^ Faludi, Susan (1992). Backlash: the undeclared war against women. London: Vintage. ISBN 978-0-09-922271-2.
  43. ^ Leslie, Heywood; Drake, Jennifer (1997). Third wave agenda: being feminist, doing feminism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-3005-4.
  44. ^ Gilligan, Carol (1993). In a different voice: psychological theory and women's development. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. pp. 184\. ISBN 0-674-44544-9.
  45. ^ a b c d Wright, Elizabeth (2000). Lacan and Postfeminism (Postmodern Encounters). Totem Books. ISBN 978-1-84046-182-9.
  46. ^ Modleski, Tania (1991). Feminism without women: culture and criticism in a "postfeminist" age. New York: Routledge. pp. 188\. ISBN 0-415-90416-1.
  47. ^ Jones, Amelia. âPostfeminism, Feminist Pleasures, and Embodied Theories of Art,â in New Feminist Criticism: Art, Identity, Action, ed. by Joana Frueh, Cassandra L. Langer and Arlene Raven. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. 16-41, 20.
  48. ^ Rosen, Ruth (2001). The world split open: how the modern women's movement changed America. New York, N.Y.: Penguin. pp. 444\. ISBN 0-14-009719-8.
  49. ^ Pollitt, Katha (1995). Reasonable creatures: essays on women and feminism. New York: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-679-76278-2.
  50. ^ Strossen, Nadine (1995). Defending pornography: free speech, sex, and the fight for women's rights. New York, N.Y.: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-19749-4.
  51. ^ Faludi, Susan (1991). Backlash: the undeclared war against American women. New York: Crown. pp. 552\. ISBN 0-517-57698-8.
  52. ^ McRobbie, Angela (2004). Post-feminism and popular culture. Feminist Media Studies,4:3,255 â 264.
  53. ^ a b Moi, T. (1987). French feminist thought: a reader. Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-631-14973-6.
  54. ^ Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty (1981), "French Feminism in an International Frame", Yale French Studies, Feminist Readings: French Texts/American Contexts (Yale University Press) (62): 154â184, ISSN 00440078, http://www.jstor.org/pss/2929898, retrieved on 2008-06-08
  55. ^ Vanda Zajko and Miriam Leonard (eds.), 'Laughing with Medusa'. Oxford University Press, 2006. 87-117. ISBN0-19-927438-X
  56. ^ Carol Armstrong and Catherine de Zegher, 'Women Artists as the Millennium'. Cambridge Massachusetts: October Books, MIT Press, 2006. 35-83. ISBN 978-0-262-01226-3
  57. ^ Kristeva, Julia; Moi, Toril (1986). The Kristeva reader. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 328\. ISBN 0-231-06325-3.
  58. ^ Zajko, Vanda; Leonard, Miriam (2006). Laughing with Medusa: classical myth and feminist thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 445\. ISBN 0-19-927438-X.
  59. ^ Howe, Mica; Aguiar, Sarah Appleton (2001). He said, she says: an RSVP to the male text. Madison N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. pp. 292\. ISBN 0-8386-3915-1.
  60. ^ Griselda Pollock, Encounters in the Virtual Feminist Museum: Time, Space and the Archive. Routledge, 2007.
  61. ^ Ettinger, Bracha; Judith Butler, Brian Massumi, Griselda Pollock (2006). The matrixial borderspace. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. pp. 245\. ISBN 0-8166-3587-0.
  62. ^ Brabeck, M. and Brown, L. (With Christian, L., Espin, O., Hare-Mustin, R., Kaplan, A., Kaschak, E., Miller, D., Phillips, E., Ferns, T., and Van Ormer, A.). (1997). Feminist theory and psychological practice. In J. Worell and N. Johnson (Eds.) Shaping the future of feminist psychology: Education, research, and practice) (pp.15-35). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
  63. ^ Florence, Penny; Foster, Nicola (2001). Differential aesthetics: art practices, philosophy and feminist understandings. Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate. pp. 360\. ISBN 0-7546-1493-X.
  64. ^ Showalter, Elaine (1985). The New feminist criticism: essays on women, literature, and theory. New York: Pantheon. ISBN 978-0-394-72647-2.
  65. ^ "Monstrous Domesticity by Faith Wilding". http://www.feministezine.com/feminist/domesticity.html. Retrieved on May 31 2007.
  66. ^ Ehrenreich, Barbara. "What is Socialist Feminism" WIN Magazine, 1976
  67. ^ Marx, Karl, Capital translated by B. Fowkes (Penguin Classics, 1990), ISBN 9780140445688
  68. ^ Connolly, Clara; Lynne Segal, Michele Barrett, Beatrix Campbell, Anne Phillips, Angela Weir, Elizabeth Wilson (Summer 1986). "Feminism and Class Politics: A Round-Table Discussion". Feminist Review (Socialist-Feminism: Out of the Blue): 17.
  69. ^ Engels, Friedrich (1972). The origin of the family, private property, and the state, in the light of the researches of Lewis H. Morgan. New York: International Publishers. ISBN 978-0-85315-260-6.
  70. ^ Bebel, August. Woman Under Socialism. University Press of the Pacific. ISBN 978-1-4102-1564-2.
  71. ^ Stokes, John (2000). Eleanor Marx (1855-1898): life, work, contacts. Aldershot: Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-7546-0113-5.
  72. ^ Zetkin, Clara On a Bourgeois Feminist Petition 1895
  73. ^ Zetkin, Clara Lenin on the Womenâs Question
  74. ^ Kollontai, Alexandra The Social Basis of the Woman Question 1909
  75. ^ Kollontai, Alexandra Women Workers Struggle For Their Rights 1919
  76. ^ Alcoff, Linda (Spring, 1998). "Cultural Feminism Versus Post-Structuralism: the Identity Crisis in Feminist Theory". Signs (The University of Chicago Press) 13 (3): 32. doi:10.1086/494426. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0097-9740%28198821%2913%3A3%3C405%3ACFVPTI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V.
  77. ^ Kramarae, Cheris; Spender, Dale (2000). Routledge international encyclopedia of women: global women's issues and knowledge. New York: Routledge. pp. 746\. ISBN :0415920906.
  78. ^ a b Taylor, Verta (Autumn, 1993). "# Women's Culture and Lesbian Feminist Activism: A Reconsideration of Cultural Feminism". Signs (The University of Chicago Press) 19 (1): 30. doi:10.1086/494861. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0097-9740%28199323%2919%3A1%3C32%3AWCALFA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D.
  79. ^ Hoagland, Sarah (1997). Lesbian Ethics. Venice, CA: LE publications.
  80. ^ Frye, Marilyn (1997). "Some Reflections on Separatism and Power". in Meyers, Diana T.. Feminist social thought: a reader. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-91537-6.
  81. ^ hooks, bell. "Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center" Cambridge, MA: South End Press 1984
  82. ^ "Defining Black Feminist Thought". http://www.feministezine.com/feminist/modern/Defining-Black-Feminist-Thought.html. Retrieved on May 31 2007.
  83. ^ "Combahee River Collective: A Black Feminist Statement - 1974". http://www.feministezine.com/feminist/modern/Black-Feminist-Statement.html. Retrieved on May 31 2007.
  84. ^ "List of Books written by Black Feminists". http://www.feministezine.com/feminist/blackwomen.html. Retrieved on May 31 2007.
  85. ^ Mills, S. (1998). "Postcolonial Feminist Theory". in Jackson, Stevi. Contemporary feminist theories. Jones, Jackie. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 0-7486-0689-0.
  86. ^ Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. "Under Western Eyes". Feminist Review (Autumn, 1988): 27.
  87. ^ Bulbeck, Chilla (1998). Re-orienting western feminisms: women's diversity in a postcolonial world. Cambridge Cambridgeshire: Cambridge University Press. pp. 282\. ISBN 0-521-58975-4.
  88. ^ Greenwald, A: "Postcolonial Feminism in Anthills of the Savannah", 2002
  89. ^ Mills, S (1998): "Postcolonial Feminist Theory" page 98 in S. Jackson and J. Jones eds., Contemporary Feminist Theories (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press) pp.98-112
  90. ^ Ogunyemi, C. O. (1985). "Womanism: The Dynamics of the Black Female Novel in English". Signs 1 (1): 17.
  91. ^ Kolawole, Mary Ebun Modupe (1997). Womanism and African consciousness. Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press. pp. 216\. ISBN 0-86543-540-5.
  92. ^ Hudson-Weems, Clenora (1994). Africana womanism: reclaiming ourselves. Troy, Mich.: Bedford Publishers. pp. 158\. ISBN 0-911557-11-3.
  93. ^ Obianuju Acholonu, Catherine (1995). Motherism: The Afrocentric Alternative to Feminism. Afa Publ.. pp. 144\. ISBN 9783199714.
  94. ^ Ogundipe-Leslie, Molara (1994). Re-creating Ourselves: African Women & Critical Transformations. Africa World Press. pp. 262\. ISBN 0865434123. )
  95. ^ Nnaemeka, O. (1970). "Feminism, Rebellious Women, and Cultural Boundaries". Research in African Literatures.
  96. ^ a b Baca Zinn, Maxine; Bonnie Thornton Dill (2002). "Theorizing Difference from Multiracial Feminism.". in Carole R. McCann & Seung-Kyung Kim. Feminist Theory Reader: Local and Global Perspectives. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0415931525.
  97. ^ Zinn, Maxine Baca;; Dill, Bonnie Thornton (1994). Women of Color in U.S. Society (Women in the Political Economy). Temple University Press. ISBN 978-1-56639-106-1.
  98. ^ a b c Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
  99. ^ Dunbar-Ortiz, Roxanne. Quiet Rumours. AK Press. ISBN 978-1-902593-40-1.
  100. ^ Brown, Susan (1990). "Beyond Feminism: Anarchism and Human Freedom". in Roussopoulos, Dimitrios I.. The Anarchist papers, 3. Montreal: Black Rose Books. ISBN 0-921689-53-5.
  101. ^ a b "XXX: A Woman's Right to Pornography". http://www.wendymcelroy.com/xxx. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
  102. ^ Greenway, Judy (2000). "Feminism: Anarchist". in Kramarae, Cheris. Routledge international encyclopedia of women: global women's issues and knowledge. Spender, Dale. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-92088-4.
  103. ^ McElroy, Wendy (2002). Liberty for Women: Freedom and Feminism in the 21st century. Ivan R. Dee, Publisher. ISBN 978-1-56663-435-9.
  104. ^ a b Sommers, Christina Hoff (1995). Who stole feminism?: how women have betrayed women. New York: Simon & Schuster. pp. 320\. ISBN 0-684-80156-6.
  105. ^ "Mary Wollstonecraft by Wendy McElroy". http://www.fff.org/freedom/fd0602f.asp.
  106. ^ "ifeminists.net". http://www.ifeminists.net/introduction/. Retrieved on 2007-08-22.
  107. ^ McElroy, Wendy, ed (2002). Liberty for Women: Freedom and Feminism in the 21st century. Ivan R. Dee, Publisher. ISBN 978-1-56663-435-9.
  108. ^ Dwight Furrow, Moral Soundings: Readings on the Crisis of Values in Contemporary Life, Rowman & Littlefield, 2004 ISBN 0742533700, 9780742533707
  109. ^ Female Anti-Feminism for Fame and Profit by Jennifer Pozner
  110. ^ LaFramboise, LaFramboise (1996). by Donna LaFramboise The Princess at the Window: A New Gender Morality. Toronto, Canada: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-025690-3. http://adamjones.freeservers.com/donna.htm by Donna LaFramboise. Retrieved on 2006-10-19. "Over the past few years, a growing number of women have written books critical of mainstream feminism. Among them [...] Christina Hoff Sommers."
  111. ^ a b Barbara Johnson (2002). The Feminist Difference: Literature, Psychoanalysis, Race and Gender. Harvard University Press. pp. 224\. ISBN 0674001915.
  112. ^ Irigaray, Luce (1999). "When Our Lips Speak Together". in Price, Janet. Feminist theory and the body: a reader. Shildrick, Margrit. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-92566-5.
  113. ^ a b Harraway, Donna (1991). "Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century". Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York: Routledge. pp. 32\. ISBN 1853431389. http://www.stanford.edu/dept/HPS/Haraway/CyborgManifesto.html.
  114. ^ Frug, Mary Joe (March 1992). "Postmodern Feminist Legal Manifesto (An Unfinished Draft)". Harvard Law Review 105: 30.
  115. ^ MacGregor, Sherilyn (2006). Beyond mothering earth: ecological citizenship and the politics of care. Vancouver: UBC Press. pp. 286\. ISBN 0-7748-1201-X.
  116. ^ Shiva, Vandana (1988). Staying alive: women, ecology and development. London: Zed Books. ISBN 978-0-86232-823-8.
  117. ^ Biehl, Janet (1991). Rethinking eco-feminist politics. Boston, MA: South End Press. ISBN 978-0-89608-392-9.
  118. ^ "FROM SUFFRAGE TO WOMEN'S LIBERATION: FEMINISM IN TWENTIETH CENTURY AMERICA by Jo Freeman". http://www.jofreeman.com/feminism/suffrage.htm.
  119. ^ Lockwood, Bert B. (2006). Women's Rights: A Human Rights Quarterly Reader. The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-8374-3.
  120. ^ The Guardian, 29 December 1975
  121. ^ The Times, 29 December 29 1975 "Sex discrimination in advertising banned"
  122. ^ "The National Organization for Women's 1966 Statement of Purpose". http://www.now.org/history/purpos66.html.
  123. ^ "National Organization for Women: Definition and Much More from Answers.com". http://www.answers.com/topic/national-organization-for-women?cat=biz-fin&nr=1.
  124. ^ "Margaret Sanger". http://www.u-s-history.com/pages/h1676.html.
  125. ^ "Section 28: Gender, Work Burden, and Time Allocation in United Nations Human Development Report 2004" (PDF). 233. http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/hdr04_complete.pdf.
  126. ^ "PPSEAWA International Bulletin - Pan Pacific Southeast Asia Women's Association 21st International Conference". http://www.ppseawa.org/Bulletin/01May/conference.html.
  127. ^ ""Gender Neutral Language." University of Saskatchewan Policies 2001". http://www.usask.ca/policies/2_03.htm. Retrieved on 2007-03-25.
  128. ^ Hochschild, Arlie Russell; Machung, Anne (2003). The second shift. New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-200292-6.
  129. ^ Hochschild, Arlie Russell (2001). The time bind: when work becomes home and home becomes work. New York: Henry Holt & Co.. ISBN 978-0-8050-6643-2.
  130. ^ Young, Cathy. "The mama lion at the gate". Salon.com. http://dir.salon.com/story/mwt/feature/2000/06/12/gatekeeping/index.html. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
  131. ^ South, Scott J.; Spitze, Gelnna (1994). "Housework in Marital and Nonmarital Households". American Sociological Review 59 (3): 327â348. doi:10.2307/2095937.
  132. ^ Fenstermaker Berk, Sarah; Shih, Anthony (1980). "Contributions to Household Labour: Comparing Wives' and Husbands' Reports". in Fenstermaker Berk, Sarah. Women and Household Labour. ISBN 0803912110.
  133. ^ Luker, Kristin (1996). Dubious conceptions: the politics of teenage pregnancy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-21703-9.
  134. ^ Rudman, Laurie A.; Phelan, Julie E. (December 2007). "The Interpersonal Power of Feminism: Is Feminism Good for Romantic Relationships?". Sex Roles 57 (11-12): 787. doi:10.1007/s11199-007-9319-9. http://www.springerlink.com/content/6163700x51t5r169/. Retrieved on 2008-07-08.
  135. ^ Bundesen, Lynne. The Feminine Spirit: Recapturing the Heart of Scripture. Jossey-Bass. ISBN 978-0-7879-8495-3.
  136. ^ Haddad, Mimi (Autumn 2006). "Egalitarian Pioneers: Betty Friedan or Catherine Booth?". Priscilla Papers 20 (4).
  137. ^ Anderson, Pamela Sue; Clack, Beverley (2004). Feminist philosophy of religion: critical readings. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-25749-2.
  138. ^ Catalonian Islamic Board (24th-27th October 2008). "II International Congress on Islamic Feminism". feminismeislamic.org. http://www.feminismeislamic.org/eng/index.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  139. ^ Badran, Margot (17 - 23 January 2002). "Al-Ahram Weekly: Islamic feminism: what's in a name?". http://weekly.ahram.org.eg/2002/569/cu1.htm. Retrieved on 2008-07-09.
  140. ^ Plaskow, Judith (2003). "Jewish Feminist Thought". in Frank, Daniel H.. History of Jewish philosophy. Leaman, Oliver. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-32469-6.
  141. ^ Raphael, Melissa (1999). "Chapter ^: Feminist Witchcraft". Introducing Thealogy: Discourse on the Goddess. Routledge. ISBN 1850759758.
  142. ^ a b c Blain, Virginia; Clements, Patricia; Grundy, Isobel (1990). The feminist companion to literature in English: women writers from the Middle Ages to the present. New Haven: Yale University Press. pp. 1231\. ISBN 0-300-04854-8.
  143. ^ Sandra M. Gilbert, "Paperbacks: From Our Mothers' Libraries: women who created the novel." New York Times, May 4, 1986.
  144. ^ Full Text of The Yellow Wallpaper, retrieved January 22, 2008.
  145. ^ Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter (1995). The Encyclopedia of science fiction. New York: St. Martin's Griffin. pp. 1386\. ISBN 0-312-13486-X.
  146. ^ Elyce Rae Helford, in Westfahl, Gary. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Greenwood Press, 2005: 290.
  147. ^ Sturgis, Susanna. Octavia E. Butler: June 22, 1947âFebruary 24, 2006: The Women's Review of Books, 23(3): 19 May 2006.
  148. ^ a b c d Rowe-Finkbeiner, Kristin (2004). The F-Word: Feminism In Jeopardy - Women, Politics and the Future. Seal Press. ISBN 1-58005-114-6.
  149. ^ Rosenberg, Jessica (Spring 1998). "Riot Grrrl: Revolutions from within". Signs 23 (Feminisms and Youth Cultures): 809. doi:10.1086/495289.
  150. ^ Schilt, Kristen (Spring 1998). ""A Little Too Ironic": The Appropriation and Packaging of Riot Grrrl Politics by Mainstream Female Musicians". Popular Music and Society 26.
  151. ^ Code, Lorraine (2004). Encyclopedia of Feminist Theories. London: Routledge. pp. 560\. ISBN 10415308852.
  152. ^ Duggan, Lisa; Hunter, Nan D. (1995). Sex wars: sexual dissent and political culture. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-91036-6.
  153. ^ Hansen, Karen Tranberg;; Philipson, Ilene J. (1990). Women, class, and the feminist imagination: a socialist-feminist reader. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. ISBN 0-87722-630-X.
  154. ^ Gerhard, Jane F. (2001). Desiring revolution: second-wave feminism and the rewriting of American sexual thought, 1920 to 1982. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-11204-1.
  155. ^ Leidholdt, Dorchen;; Raymond, Janice G (1990). The Sexual liberals and the attack on feminism. New York: Pergamon Press. ISBN 0-08-037457-3.
  156. ^ Vance, Carole S.. Pleasure and Danger: Exploring Female Sexuality. Thorsons Publishers. ISBN 0-04-440593-6.
  157. ^ McElroy, Wendy (1995). XXX: A Woman's Right to Pornography. New York: St. Martin's Press. pp. 243\. ISBN 0312136269.
  158. ^ a b Dworkin, Andrea (1989). Pornography: men possessing women. New York: Plume. pp. 300\. ISBN 0-452-26793-5.
  159. ^ Brownmiller, Susan (1999). In our time: memoir of a revolution. New York: Dial Press. pp. 360\. ISBN 0-385-31486-8.
  160. ^ Willis, Ellen (1981-06-01), "Lust Horizons: Is the Women's Movement Pro-Sex?", Village Voice (June 1981)
  161. ^ "Rossi, Elisabetta. L'emancipazione femminile in Russia prima e dopo la rivoluzione In difesa del marxismo Nr. 5". http://www.marxismo.net/idm/idm5/idm5.htm.
  162. ^ "The Emancipation of Women in Russia before and after the Russian Revolution In Defence of Marxism". http://www.marxist.com/emancipation-women-russia.htm.
  163. ^ Badia, Gilbert (1994). Zetkin. Femminista senza frontiere. University of Michigan.. pp. 320\. ISBN 8885378536.
  164. ^ a b c Duby, Georges; Perrot, Michelle; Pantel, Pauline, Schmitt (1994). A history of women in the West. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. pp. 600\. ISBN 0-674-40369-X.
  165. ^ The Radical Women manifesto: socialist feminist theory, program and organizational structure. Seattle, WA.: Red Letter Press. 2001. ISBN 0-932323-11-1.
  166. ^ IbÃ¡rruri, Dolores (1938). Speeches & Articles, 1936-1938: 1936-1938. University of Michigan.. pp. 263.
  167. ^ Parpart, Jane L.; Connelly, M. Patricia; Connelly, Patricia; Barriteau, V. Eudine; Barriteau, Eudine. Theoretical perspectives on gender and development. Ottawa, Canada : International Development Research Centre 2000.. pp. 215\. ISBN 0-88936-910-0.
  168. ^ Bridenthal, Renate; Grossmann, Atina; Kaplan, Marion A. (1984). When biology became destiny: women in Weimar and Nazi Germany. New York: Monthly Review Press. pp. 364\. ISBN 0-85345-642-9.
  169. ^ Blaffer Hrdy, Sarah. Infanticide: Comparative and Evolutionary Perspectives: Mother Nature: A History of Mothers, Infants and Natural Selection. Pantheon, 1999.
  170. ^ Fausto-Sterling, Anne (1992). Myths of gender: biological theories about women and men. New York, NY: BasicBooks. ISBN 0-465-04792-0.
  171. ^ Brizendine, Louann (2007). The Female Brain. Bantam Press. ISBN 9780593058077.
  172. ^ Rhoads, Steven E. (2004). Taking sex differences seriously. San Francisco, Calif.: Encounter Books. ISBN 978-1-893554-93-1.
  173. ^ Tavris, Carol. The Mismeasure of Woman: : Why Women Are Not the Better Sex, inferior or Opposite Sex. Simon & Schuster, 1992.
  174. ^ Kember, Sarah (Spring 1998). "Resisting the New Evolutionism". Women: a Cultural Review 12 (1): 8. doi:10.1080/09574040110034075.
  175. ^ a b Lingard, Bob;; Douglas, Peter (1999). Men engaging feminisms: pro-feminism, backlashes and schooling. Buckingham England: Open University Press. ISBN 978-0-335-19817-7.
  176. ^ Digby, Tom (1998). Men doing feminism. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-91625-7.
  177. ^ Farrell, Warren; Sterba, James P.. Does Feminism Discriminate against Men?: A Debate (Point/Counterpoint). Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-531283-6.
  178. ^ Porter, David (1992). Between men and feminism. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-06988-5.
  179. ^ a b c Michael S. Kimmel, âWhoâs Afraid of Men Doing Feminism?,â from Men Doing Feminism, Tom Digby, ed. New York: Routledge, 1993, 57-68
  180. ^ Schacht, Steven P.; Ewing, Doris W. (1998). Feminism and men: reconstructing gender relations. New York: New York University Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-8077-0.
  181. ^ a b Flood, Michael (7 July 2004). "Backlash: Angry men's movements". in Stacey Elin Rossi. The battle and backlash rage on: Why feminism cannot be obsolete. Philadelphia, PA: Xlibris Press. pp. 17\. ISBN 1-4134-5934-X.
  182. ^ Michael S. Kimmel, âIntroduction,â in Against the Tide: Pro-Feminist Men in the U.S., 1776-1990, A Documentary History. Boston: Beacon 1992, 1-51.
  183. ^ Messner, Michael A. (1992). Power at play: sports and the problem of masculinity. Boston: Beacon Press. ISBN 978-0-8070-4105-5.
  184. ^ Messner, Michael A. (2002). Taking the field: women, men, and sports. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-3449-1.
  185. ^ Harry Brod, âTo Be a Man, or Not to be a Man â That Is the Feminist Question,â in Men Doing Feminism, Tom Digby, ed. (NY: Routledge, 1993), 197-212.
  186. ^ Russ Ervin Funk, âThe Power of Naming: Why Men Canât Be Feminists,â in Feminista!: The Journal of Feminist Construction 1, no. 4.
  187. ^ a b Ashe, Fidelma (2004). The new politics of masculinity. London: Routledge. pp. 178\. ISBN 0-415-30275-7.
  188. ^ a b Ashe, Fidelma (Spring 1998). "Deconstructing the Experiential Bar". Men and Masculinities 7 (2): 187. doi:10.1177/1097184X03257524.
  189. ^ ""Anti-feminist." The Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. 1989". http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/entry/50009621/50009621se1.
  190. ^ Stacey, Judith (Summer 2000). "Is Academic Feminism an Oxymoron?". Signs 25 (Feminisms at a Millennium): 5.
  191. ^ Kamarck Minnich, Elizabeth (Spring 1998). "Review: 'Feminist Attacks on Feminisms: Patriarchy's Prodigal Daughters'". Feminist Studies 24 (1): 26.
  192. ^ Patai, Daphne; Noretta Koertge. Professing Feminism: Education and Indoctrination in Women's Studies. ISBN 0739104551.
  193. ^ Nathanson, Paul; Young, Katherine K. (2006). Legalizing misandry: from public shame to systematic discrimination against men. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press. ISBN 0-7735-2862-8.
  194. ^ Poloma M. M., Garland T. N. (1971). "The Married Professional Woman: A Study in the Tolerance of Domestication". Journal of Marriage and the Family 33 (3): 531â540. doi:10.2307/349850. http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-2445%28197108%2933%3A3%3C531%3ATMPWAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23.

Mathur, Piyush. "The Archigenderic Territories: Mansfield Park and A Handful
of Dust, Women's Writing 5:1,71-81. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09699089800200034

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Feminism  
Sister project Look up feminism in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Sister project Wikiversity has learning materials about Women's Studies  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Feminism  
  * FemINist INitiative Canadian effort at building a political party, archived at the Internet Archive
  * National Organization for Women United States
  * Sanctuary for Families
  * ROKS Swedish women's organization
  * Women's Forum Australia
  * International Women's Day is a slide show in English of the Brazilian Vinna Mara Fonseca
  * Feministing Third wave feminist blog
  * Feminist Housewives Third wave domestic feminist site
  * Gender Museum

  

Links to related articles  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Feminism  
Concepts

Movement Â· Theory Â· Film theory Â· Economics Â· Feminist sexology Â· Women's
rights Â· Gender equality Â· Pro-feminism Â· Anti-feminism  
History

Social

Women's history Â· Feminist history Â· History of feminism  
Suffrage

Women's suffrage Â· Timeline Â· New Zealand Â· United Kingdom Â· United States  
Waves

First Â· Second Â· Third  
Subtypes

Amazon Â· Anarchist Â· Black Â· Chicana Â· Christian Â· Cultural Â· Difference
Â· Eco Â· Equality Â· Equity Â· Fat Â· Gender Â· Global Â· Individualist Â·
Islamic Â· Jewish Â· Lesbian Â· Liberal Â· Marxist Â· Material Â· New Â·
Postcolonial Â· Postmodern Â· Pro-life Â· Radical Â· Religious Â· Separatist
Â· Sex-positive Â· Socialist Â· Third world Â· Transfeminism Â· Womanism Â·
French feminism  
By country

China Â· Egypt Â· France Â· Indonesia Â· Iran Â· Japan Â· Nepal Â· Nicaragua
Â· Poland Â· United Kingdom Â· United States  
Lists

Feminists Â· Literature Â· Topics  
Portal:Feminism Feminism portal  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Discrimination  
General forms  
Ageism Â· Racism Â· Reverse discrimination Â· Religious intolerance Â· Sexism
Â· Xenophobia  
Specific forms  
Social

Ableism Â· Adultism Â· Anti-homelessness Â· Biphobia Â· Classism Â· Elitism Â·
Gerontophobia Â· Heightism Â· Heterophobia Â· Heterosexism Â· Homophobia Â·
Homosexism Â· Monosexism Â· Lesbophobia Â· Lookism Â· Misandry Â· Misogyny Â·
Sizeism Â· Transphobia  
Against cultures

American Â· Arab Â· Armenian Â· Canadian Â· Catalan Â· Chinese Â· English Â·
European Â· French Â· German Â· Hispanic Â· Igbo Â· Indian Â· Iranian Â· Irish
Â· Italian Â· Japanese Â· Jewish Â· Korean Â· Malay Â· Mexican Â· Persian Â·
Polish Â· Portuguese Â· Quebec Â· Roma Â· Romanian Â· Russian Â· Scottish Â·
Serb Â· Spanish Â· Turkish Â· Ukrainian Â· Welsh  
Against religions

BahÃ¡'Ã­ Â· Catholicism Â· Christianity Â· Hinduism Â· Judaism Â· Mormonism Â·
Islam Â· Protestantism Â· New religious movements Â· Shi'a Islam  
Manifestations  
Blood libel Â· Ephebiphobia Â· Ethnic cleansing Â· Ethnocide Â· Gay bashing Â·
Gendercide Â· Genocide (examples) Â· Hate crime Â· Hate speech Â· Lynching Â·
Paternalism Â· Pogrom Â· Race war Â· Racial profiling Â· Religious persecution
Â· Slavery  
Movements  
Discriminatory

American Nazi Party Â· Aryanism Â· Grey Wolves Â· Hate groups Â· Kahanism Â·
Ku Klux Klan Â· Neo-Nazism Â· South African National Party Â· Supremacism Â·
Uyoku dantai  
Anti-discriminatory

Abolitionism Â· Autistic rights Â· Children's rights Â· Civil rights Â·
Disability rights (Inclusion) Â· Egalitarianism Â· Father's rights Â· Feminism
Â· LGBT rights Â· Masculism Â· Men's rights Â· Mother's rights Â· Women's
rights Â· Women's / Universal suffrage Â· Youth rights  
Policies  
Discriminatory

Apartheid Â· Internment Â· Race / Religion / Sex segregation Â· Redlining Â·
Numerus clausus Â· Ghetto benches  
Anti-discriminatory

Civil rights Â· Desegregation Â· Emancipation Â· Integration Â· Equal
opportunity Â· Gender equality  
Counter-discriminatory

Affirmative action Â· Forced busing Â· Racial quota Â· Reparation Â·
Reservation (India) Â· Employment equity (Canada)  
Law  
Discriminatory

Alien and Sedition Acts Â· Anti-homelessness legislation Â· Anti-immigration
Â· Anti-miscegenation Â· Apartheid laws Â· Criminal Tribes Act Â· Test Act Â·
Jim Crow laws Â· Ketuanan Melayu Â· Nuremberg Laws Â· Ethnocracy Â· Terra
nullius  
Anti-discriminatory

Anti-discrimination acts Â· Anti-discrimination law Â· 14th Amendment Â· Crime
of apartheid Â· CERD Â· CEDAW Â· Convention against Discrimination in
Education  
Other forms  
Androcentrism Â· Adultcentrism Â· Colorism Â· Cronyism Â· Economic Â·
Ethnocentrism Â· Gynocentrism Â· Linguicism Â· Nepotism Â· Triumphalism  
Related topics  
Afrocentrism Â· Bigotry Â· Diversity Â· Eugenics Â· Multiculturalism Â· Police
brutality Â· Political correctness Â· Prejudice Â· Racialism Â· Reverse
discrimination Â· Speciesism Â· Tolerance Â· Missing white woman syndrome Â·  
  

<IMG>

This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject.
WikiProject Philosophy or the Philosophy Portal may be able to help recruit
one. (March 2009)  
  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Political ideologies  
Anarchism Â· Christian democracy Â· Communism Â· Communitarianism Â·
Conservatism Â· Fascism Â· Feminism Â· Green politics Â· Liberalism Â·
Libertarianism Â· Nationalism Â· Social democracy Â· Socialism

<IMG> Politics portal  
List of political ideologies Â· List of political parties by ideology  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feminism"

Categories: Feminism | Civil rights and liberties | Sociological paradigms |
Sociological theories | Women's rights

Hidden categories: Vague or ambiguous time | All articles with unsourced
statements | Articles with unsourced statements since June 2008 | Articles
with unsourced statements since December 2008 | Philosophy articles needing
expert attention | Articles needing expert attention since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * GÃ idhlig
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * Interlingue
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡Ð°Ñ Ð° ÑÑÐ»Ð°
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à®¤à®®à®¿à®´à¯
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tagalog
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Walon
  * å´è¯­
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 20:22.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



