
# Gentrification

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide
view of the subject. Please improve this article or discuss the issue on the
talk page.  
<IMG>

<IMG>

During the mid-1960s in San Francisco, the bohemian center of the city shifted
from the old Beat enclave of North Beach to Haight-Ashbury as a response to
gentrification, becoming fully gentrified.[1] San Francisco bohemia and
gentrification has led on in other parts of the city like the Lower Haight,
the Mission District, and SoMa.[citation needed]

Gentrification, or urban gentrification, is the change in an urban area
associated with the movement of more affluent individuals into a lower-class
area.[2] The area experiences demographic shifts, including an increase in the
median income, a reduction in household size, and often a decline in the
proportion of racial minorities (if such minorities are present).[3] More
households with higher incomes result in increased real estate values with
higher associated rent, home prices, and property taxes. Industrial land use
can decline with redevelopment bringing more commercial and residential use.
Such changes often result in transformation of the neighborhood's character
and culture.[4]

Gentrification can result from urban reinvestment efforts by local governments
or neighborhood groups, which directs money to invest in deteriorating city
infrastructure, offer incentives for redevelopment, improve access to housing
loans for low-income mortgage seekers, assist lending to first-time home
purchasers, and improve rental properties.[5] These efforts have been linked
to reductions in local property crime rates, increased property prices,
increased revenue to local governments from property taxes and increased
tolerance of homosexuals.[6] Grassroots efforts for existing residents to
guide or oppose gentrification generates community activism.[7]

The process has a human cost to the neighborhood's lower-income residents. The
increases in rent often result in the dispersal of communities whose members
find that housing in the area is no longer affordable.[8] Additionally, the
increase in property taxes (due to increased property values) may sometimes
force or give incentive for homeowners to sell their homes and move to less
expensive neighborhoods.[9] While those who view gentrification positively
cite local reductions in a neighborhood's property crime rate, its critics
argue that overall crime rates have not actually been reduced, but merely
shifted to different lower-income neighborhoods.[10]

The concept of gentrification has received significant attention in a number
of academic disciplines, most notably urban geography and urban sociology.
Some academics argue that the concept has become so broad as to lose its
applicability. Others, however, contend that it has become the fundamental
idea for understanding market-driven urban class relations.[11]

## Contents

  * 1 Origin
  * 2 Causes
    * 2.1 Urban renewal
    * 2.2 Production-side theory
    * 2.3 Consumption-side theory
    * 2.4 Globalization
    * 2.5 Demographic shifts
  * 3 Role of social groups
    * 3.1 Artists, bohemians, hipsters
    * 3.2 Gay men
  * 4 Controlling gentrification
    * 4.1 Community organizing
    * 4.2 Direct action and sabotage
    * 4.3 Inclusionary zoning
    * 4.4 Zoning ordinances
    * 4.5 Community land trusts
    * 4.6 Rent control
  * 5 Promoting gentrification
    * 5.1 Positive aspects of gentrification
    * 5.2 Negative aspects of gentrification
  * 6 Case studies of gentrification
    * 6.1 Darien Street, Philadelphia
    * 6.2 Barnsbury, London
    * 6.3 Park Slope, New York City
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Notes
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Origin

The root of gentrification, gentry, derives from the Old French word genterise
(a variant of gentilise), meaning the people of noble birth.[12] Sociologist
Ruth Glass coined the term in 1964 to mean the influx of wealthier individuals
into cities or neighborhoods who replace working or lower-classes already
living there. She defined it by using London districts such as Islington as
her example:[13][14]

> One by one, many of the working class quarters of London have been invaded
by the middle-classesâupper and lower. Shabby, modest mews and
cottagesâtwo rooms up and two downâhave been taken over, when their leases
have expired, and have become elegant, expensive residences [...]. Once this
process of 'gentrification' starts in a district it goes on rapidly until all
or most of the original working-class occupiers are displaced and the whole
social character of the district is changed.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defines gentrification as
"transformation of neighborhoods from low value to high value."[15]
Gentrification and neighborhood revitalization are often the same process.[16]

## [edit] Causes

### [edit] Urban renewal

Increasingly, locations in city centers have attracted affluent post-baby
boomer professionals, recent college graduates, and/or their empty nester
parents. This New Urbanist movement may be more or less socially driven. If a
depressed urban area has a transportation hub, pedestrian accessibility and
social interaction, it may be considered more desirable than the sprawl and
car-dependent lifestyle of the average suburban community.[17]

### [edit] Production-side theory

Early explanations of gentrification saw a conflict between production-side
and consumption-side arguments. The production-side argument, which is
associated primarily with the work of geographer Neil Smith, explains
gentrification through economics and the relationships between flows of
capital and the production of urban space. Smith argued that low rents on the
urban periphery during the two decades after World War II led to a continuous
movement of capital toward the development of suburban areas. This caused a
"devaluation" of inner-city capital, resulting in the substantial abandonment
of inner-city properties in favour of those in the periphery, and a consequent
fall in the price of inner-city land relative to rising land prices in the
suburbs. From this, Smith put forth his rent-gap theory, which describes the
disparity between "the actual capitalized ground rent (land price) of a plot
of land given its present use and the potential ground rent that might be
gleaned under a 'higher and better' use".[18]

Smith believed that the rent-gap theory was the fundamental explanation for
the process of gentrification. He argued that when the rent-gap was wide
enough, developers, landlords, and other people with a vested interest in the
development of land would see the potential profit to be had in reinvesting in
inner-city properties and redeveloping them for new inhabitants. Such
redevelopment effectively closes the rent-gap and leads to higher rent,
mortgage and lease rates.

The de-industrialization of the inner-city is seen as a prerequisite,
precipitating a decline in the number of blue-collar jobs available for the
urban working class and thus a loss of investment capital available to
maintain the physical stock of urban neighborhoods. De-industrialization is
often coupled with the growth of a divided white collar employment sector, one
part of which is engaged in professional/managerial positions which follow the
spatial centralization of capital. This is a product of corporations requiring
spatial proximity to reduce decision-making time.

### [edit] Consumption-side theory

<IMG>

<IMG>

The North Loop neighborhood in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Known as the Warehouse
District, artist lofts, musician spaces, and eventual entrepreneurial
investment in the latter 20th century led to the conversion of most existing
warehouses into condominiums by the 2000s.[19] [20][21]

The consumption-side theory, on the other hand, has gained more force as an
explanation for gentrification.[22] Supporters of this argument generally view
the characteristics of gentrifiers themselves to be of greater importance in
the understanding of gentrification. The post-industrial city, as defined in
the Dictionary of Human Geography, is one with an "employment profile focused
on advanced servicesâ¦, [with a] profile that is materialized in a downtown
skyline of office towers, arts and leisure sites, and political institutions.
Its middle-class ambiance may be reflected in a distinctive politics charged
with a responsible social ethosâ¦the demand for more amenities, for greater
beauty and a better quality of life in the arrangement of our cities".[23]

David Ley has been one of the foremost thinkers in purporting this idea of a
city that is becoming more and more influenced by the emerging "new middle
class". Ley defines as a subset of this sector a "cultural new class", made up
of artists, cultural professionals, teachers, and other professionals outside
of the private sector.[24] And, although not particularly dwelt upon in
Leyâs articles, these are the first stage gentrifiers who prepare the way
for the embourgeoisment of the inner city (and, in effect, the more bourgeois
politics) that often follows themâbourgeois politics which often lead to
decreased funding for affordable housing, stricter laws dealing with the
homeless and other people affected negatively by their original displacement
by the creative class. This sentiment can also be found in Sharon Zukinâs
"second-wave" observations in the artistâs lofts in Manhattan, who, when her
building went "co-op" in 1979, "bade good-bye to the manufacturers, an artist,
and several residents who could not afford the market prices at which our
lofts were sold," residents who were replaced by lawyers and accountants,
retailers and investment bankers.[25] The process was repeated in Hell's
Kitchen, in midtown New York and home to John Jay College, and is now taking
place in Harlem, Washington Heights, Astoria and multiple areas of Brooklyn.
This same process can be seen still today, as "artists move into otherwise
undesirable buildings, usually make significant improvements to their spaces
and their surrounding areas. Everyone benefits from these tenuous and
uneasyâ¦arrangements. Then landlords, becoming aware that they are sitting on
gold mines, rush to cash in".[26]

Whereas Smith and other Marxists often take a structural approach in their
explanations of gentrification, Leyâs work instead frames gentrification as
a natural outgrowth of the rise of professional employment in the central
business district (CBD) and the predilection of the creative class to an
urbane urban lifestyle. Ley, when studying this class through case studies of
Canadian cities, concentrates instead on the diversity of this class,
especially the liberal ideas that often find voice in its politic. Leyâs
1980 article "Liberal Ideology and the Post-Industrial City" describes and
deconstructs the TEAM committeeâs strive to make Vancouver a "livable city".
Leyâs work, and that of Rose, Beauregard, Mullins, Moore, and others who
have built upon Leyâs theories arguing that "gentrifiers and their social
and cultural characteristics was of crucial importance for an understanding of
gentrification," has been criticized by Chris Hamnett as not going far enough,
and not incorporating the "supply of dwellings and the role of
developers/speculators in the process".[27]

### [edit] Globalization

A concept that has received much consideration is the idea of globalization
and the cityâs role in this new economic environment, where urban centers
are ranked by their ability to function in a climate where national borders
are becoming less and less important. Some academics have theoretically and
empirically studied the products of globalization such as de-industrialized
global cities and economic restructuring. John Friedman, who laid down a
hypothetical framework on which to build a study of global cities, used as one
of the components to his seven part theory the emergence of a bifurcated
service industry in major cities, which is composed of "one the one hand, a
high percentage of professionals specialized in control functions and, on the
other, a vast army of low-skilled workers engaged in â¦ personal services â¦
[that] cater to the privileged classes for those whose sake the world city
primarily exists".[28] That the last three components of his theory deals with
the increased immigration to fill this demand, the class and spatial
polarization that results from this, and the inability of the global city to
deal with these rapidly growing "social costs" is no mistake.[29] Friedman
places his vision of the global city squarely in a class context, a context
that has been expanded on by Sassen and others. This polarization inherent in
increasingly global cities can illuminate the theory that concerns itself
specifically with the causes of gentrification. Indeed, a 2006 analysis found
increased spatial polarization (segregation) by income across U.S.
metropolitan areas, with middle-income neighborhoods in decline relative to
low- and high-income areas.[30]

Gentrification cannot be separated from the economic climate in which it
occurs. The advent of the new economy outlined above has led to substantial
growth and centralization of high-level work in producer services: a "new
urban economic core of banking and service activities that comes to replace
the older, typically manufacturing oriented, core".[31] This new core sees
older, middle-class retailers "replaced by upmarket boutiques and restaurants
catering to new high-income urban elites".[32]

### [edit] Demographic shifts

<IMG>

This section is missing citations or needs footnotes. Please help add inline
citations to guard against copyright violations and factual inaccuracies.
(July 2007)  
Main article: Migration of the disadvantaged

Demographic changes associated with gentrification in addition to a
significant rise in average incomes in such neighborhoods include a decline in
the proportion of ethnic minorities, a reduction in the size of the
households, and the replacement of low-income families by singles and
childless couples.[citation needed] In American cities, the new, wealthier
demographic of the neighborhood can sometimes resemble the original populace
for which the neighborhood was constructed. In these cases, gentrification
represents the reversal of the white flight phenomenon.

The emergence of a "service sector" class, that is, a group of
peopleâgenerally between the ages of 25 and 45âwith a high disposable
income and post-graduate education with professions in fields such as law,
medicine, engineering, finance, media and the arts in the urban core that they
want to be close to, is one of the primary tenets of the consumption-side
theory of gentrification. This is not to be confused, however, with service
jobs such as being a janitor, day-laborer, housekeeper, nanny, or working in a
fast food business, which are also technically services, but require few
skills and little education, and get paid low wages. This emergence is partly
a manifestation of the shift in much of the Western world from a
manufacturing-based economy to a post-industrial, service-based economy.

Demographically speaking, Western cities are seeing a growing percentage of
25â45 year-olds in the inner-city (urban) core. Other demographic shifts are
occurring as well; there is a lessening of gendered divisions of labour, and
people are waiting longer to get married and have children (c.f., the Double
Income No Kids syndrome). Additionally, urban researchers are seeing an
increase in the number of single women professionals living alone in
gentrified areas.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gentrification in North Las Vegas, Nevada. New homes are shown in the center
of the image, flanked in the foreground by older homes occupied by
impoverished residents.

This also leads to the lack of affordable housing in these areas for residents
who are not in a high-income bracket, and leads to several generations of a
low-income family living in the same dwelling because youths, who would have
moved out upon graduating high-school, can't afford to live on their own
because the market only offers luxury condominiums. See the Freeter phenomena.

Gentrification, as an aspect of gender studies discourse, has not been studied
extensively, but researchers have discovered that women and gay men have had
at least some impact on the gentrifying process in older, inner-city
neighborhoods. Moreover, women are seen to be gentrifying in response to
different patriarchal structures; they are seen as being potentially forced by
oppressive class relations related to their gender into moving into the inner-
city, as opposed to deciding on moving there as a result of locational
preference. The breakdown of traditional gender roles as higher education
becomes more accessible to women has also contributed to the movement of
single women into the inner-city.

Gentrification usually increases property value in an area. This is a positive
development for city officials (by raising tax revenue, which is often
dependent on property values) and existing resident owner-occupiers.

Property owners can, however, feel the effects of gentrification through
increases in property taxes. Property taxes are typically based on a
percentage of a property's assessed value. As property values increase in a
given neighborhood, municipalities will typically reassess the values of
properties within gentrifying communities resulting in higher property taxes
for the neighborhood's long-term owners. Owners who do not wish to pay the tax
increases often sell or pass the increases on to tenants in the form of higher
rent.

Unfortunately this same rise in property value can be devastating to those in
lower income groups, who are more likely to rent and thus have little benefit
in rising property values. In areas without strong rent control, they are
often forced to move because they cannot afford the increased rent demanded by
their landlords. As a result, there tend to be very strongly opposed views on
gentrification, with some seeing it leading to healthier, more vibrant cities,
and others seeing it as destroying poor communities.

Recent research has also pointed to the negative effects that gentrification
can have on political participation. For example, a drop in voter turnout has
been observed in areas of American and Canadian cities which have experienced
gentrification.[33][34]

## [edit] Role of social groups

The urban middle-class typically does not begin to occupy new neighborhoods
all at once. In many cases, more economically marginal subgroups of "trend-
setters"âoften referred to in popular literature as "urban pioneers"[35]
although that term carries with it racist aspersions[36]âare the first to
arrive in gentrifying areas. Although these groups may not have high incomes,
their high educational or occupational status (i.e., high cultural capital)
qualify them as marginally bourgeois. In many cases, these individuals are
young and live in non-family households, and thus have a higher tolerance for
perceived urban ills (such as crime, poor-quality schools, lack of amenities
like shops and parks, and the presence of disadvantaged racial, ethnic, or
socioeconomic groups) that may dissuade middle-class families.

As the number of "trend-setters" grows, they create amenities valued by the
bourgeoisie, particularly service establishments such as new bars,
restaurants, and art galleries that serve the gentrifying group's demographic.
Residents with a similar outlook and greater amounts of capital may then
follow. This group, in turn, further adds amenities and investment to the
area, increases local property values, and paves the way for more risk-averse
investors and residents. The first newcomers, priced out of their newly
fashionable neighborhood, move on to adjacent areas, where the process often
begins anew. In this theory, the classic sector model of urban residential
successionâessentially that neighborhoods "trickle down" from one
socioeconomic group to another, with the wealthiest residents moving linearly
outward from the central business districtâworks in reverse, but the
"invasion-succession" process proceeds in a remarkably similar fashion.

Gentrification does not require these intermediary steps, but such a
succession greatly facilitates the process. In other instances, as with the
London Docklands and other CBD-adjacent urban renewal projects, or in
instances of comprehensive public housing redevelopment (as at Cabrini-Green
in Chicago), government and large developers can invade the area with
sufficient capital to attempt to skip the steps entirely. In still other
recent instances, a Community Development Corporation has been so successful
at stabilizing an urban neighborhood that it becomes desirable for the middle
class; examples include Roxbury, Massachusetts; Near South Side, Chicago; and
Harlem, New York City, and, in Europe Prenzlauer Berg, Berlin; Altona,
Hamburg; FerencvÃ¡ros, Budapest; Islington, London.

### [edit] Artists, bohemians, hipsters

<IMG>

<IMG>

Traditionally the largest African-American community in the U.S., Bedford-
Stuyvesant in New York City is now undergoing the rapid gentrification of
artists and bohemians.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Lower East Side of New York City is the most recent subject of
gentirification, driving out dozens of theaters and performance art
spaces[37].

The method by which an urban "artist colony" is transformed into an affluent
neighborhood has been well documented for many years. Artists and subcultural
students (later nicknamed "hipsters", but also including the hippies of
earlier years) often seek out devaluated urban neighborhoods for their low
prices, central location and for their sense of authenticity or "grit".[38] As
the bohemian character of the area grows, it appeals "not only to committed
participants but also to sporadic consumers";[39] eventually, those "sporadic"
consumers edge out the earlier arrivals. Christopher Mele described the
process with hippies in New York City's East Village in the 1960s:[40]

> By the early 1960s, the Beats' enclave of Greenwich Village had been...
commercialized by middle-class onlookers... Between 1964 and 1968, dozens of
specialty shops that catered to the hippies had opened along St. Mark's
Place... In addition to students and hippies, the neighborhood's
countercultural atmosphere attracted copywriters, editorial workers, fashion
designers, and commercial artists... Although the youthful movement criticized
middle-class values and lifestyles, its members, nonetheless, were of largely
middle-class origin living in one of the poorest working-class districts in
the city.

Through the 1960s and 1970s, lofts in SoHo were converted en masse to housing
for artists, hippies, (and their followers, the hipsters) and others.[41] As
those neighborhoods continued to escalate in price and social status, the
artists moved on to Park Slope, Brooklyn and Hoboken, New Jersey, and today to
Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Emerging areas where hipsters are being displaced to
run along the BMT Canarsie Line (L) and IND Crosstown Line (G) of the New York
City Subway system due in large part to their proximity to Williamsburg.
Similar gentrification patterns have been evident through the 1990s and 2000s
in the East Village and now the Lower East Side of New York City, driving out
dozens of theaters and performance art spaces such as Collective:Unconscious,
Surf Reality, House of Candles, Piano's (Theater), The Present Company.

Similar examples can be found in many cities around the world with large
numbers of jobs in media, fashion, and other creative trades.

### [edit] Gay men

Manuel Castells's seminal work on gay men as "gentrifiers" in San Francisco
has revealed a pattern replicated, to some degree, in other North American
cities, as "many [gays] were single men, did not have to raise a family, were
young, and connected to a relatively prosperous service economy" (Castells,
1983, p. 160). Many gay and lesbian people leave their towns and neighborhoods
of origin to start a new life and form a new community after coming out.

The PBS documentary Flag Wars[42] outlined the tension between an urban
African-American community in the old silk stocking district of Columbus,
Ohio, and the mainly white gays and lesbians moving in, who were accused of
gentrification and racism. The new residents, in turn, accused the existing
community residents of homophobia.

In 2006, a Washington, D.C. church congregation in the historically black
neighborhood of Shaw opposed the granting of a liquor license to a gay bar
that was about to open across the street.[43]

Real estate trends can push out poorer gay people, as in San Francisco's Polk
District; radical queer activists saw the value of an impoverished
neighborhood as a refuge for the economically, sexually and socially
marginalized, while others saw renovations and increased real estate values as
signs of improvement in the neighborhood.[44]

## [edit] Controlling gentrification

### [edit] Community organizing

In many cases, existing residents of gentrifying neighborhoods have organized
into grassroots groups to develop political and social strategies to retain
affordable housing in their communities. Many such organizations arose in the
1960s, particularly using tactics inspired by Saul Alinsky. Some, like the
Young Lords street gang active in Chicago's then-heavily Puerto Rican
neighborhood of Lincoln Park, used direct action techniques like sit-ins and
occupation of vacant land. In the Liberty City section of Miami, Florida, the
local organization Take Back the Land seized control over land and built
rustic dwellings for the homeless in a shantytown which became known as Umoja
Village. In many other neighborhoods, neighborhood institutions have founded
community development corporations to give the community an active role in
neighborhood development. In many cases, though, even a well-organized
community cannot muster enough resources to counter gentrification.

### [edit] Direct action and sabotage

When wealthy people move into working class or low income neighborhoods, class
conflicts can result. Vandalism and even arson attacks against the property of
new arrivals sometimes occurs. During the late 1990s, during the dot-com boom
gentrification of San Francisco's predominantly working class Mission
District, an effort called the 'Mission Yuppie Eradication Project' allegedly
engaged in various forms of widespread property destruction as part of a
strategy against gentrification. This drew a hostile response from the San
Francisco Police Department, from real estate interests, and from work-within-
the-system housing activists.[45]

### [edit] Inclusionary zoning

Gentrification often brings to the fore issues of housing affordability.[46]
Cities have responded to gentrification in different ways. Inclusionary zoning
is an increasingly popular method of stemming gentrification, employed by
cities, in an attempt to create affordable housing units in urban areas.
Through inclusionary zoning, developers are either required or provided with
incentives (such as higher build-outs) to develop a certain percentage of
affordable housing units. Because inclusionary zoning is relatively new
concept, there have been few studies regarding its effect on limiting
gentrification. In Los Angeles, inclusionary zoning seems to have accelerated
the pace of gentrification as older, lower rent buildings have been torn down
and replaced with higher rent buildings tempered by a small percentage of
"affordable housing"[47] resulting in a net loss of affordable units.

### [edit] Zoning ordinances

In addition to the gradual exclusion of poorer residents from gentrifying
neighborhoods, another detrimental aspect of gentrification can be the impact
on non-residential uses, such as entertainment and industrial uses with
effects contrary to the expectations of upmarket residents moving in. Often a
neighborhood will become popular because of its nightlife and live music
scene, or because of the presence of light industrial or arts and crafts
activities. But newer residents may complain about levels of noise from such
activities. Planning authorities then make noise mitigation or operational
requirements that can place severe limitations or financial burdens that force
such uses to move out. In New Zealand, this issue is referred to as reverse
sensitivity, and a novel approach has been developed whereby the land use
zones can be used to identify likely reverse sensitivity issues. The onus is
then placed on developers wishing to build projects in such areas to construct
dwellings in such a way to mitigate the impacts of new uses on existing
residents.

### [edit] Community land trusts

Since gentrification is exacerbated by speculation in land prices, removing
land from the open market can effectively keep property prices from rising and
thereby prevent displacement. The most common formal mechanism for doing so is
a community land trust; many inclusionary zoning ordinances are now written to
place the "inclusionary" units into a land trust. Many linguistically isolated
urban neighborhoods are able to keep out speculators informally, simply by not
advertising available properties on the open (primary language) market and
instead trading properties only by word of mouth.[citation needed]

### [edit] Rent control

In response to gentrification pressure, some cities pass rent control
ordinances. Rent control restricts the rent charged to tenants; this allows
existing tenants to remain in place, reduces resident turnover, reduces the
number of available apartments for newly arriving residents, and reduces
landlords' incentive to speculate on land values.

However, few rent control laws are able to achieve all of these aims. Since
the laws do not impact owner-occupied properties, a neighborhood's owner-
occupied units may still gentrify; southwestern Santa Monica, California and
eastern West Hollywood, California gentrified despite rent control, possibly
due to a shift toward owner occupancy.[48] There may develop black market for
housing, in which units are withdrawn from the market and made available only
upon payment of additional fees or bribes to landlords, undermining rent
control. Many rent control laws allow for "vacancy decontrol", which releases
an apartment from control upon tenant turnover; this results in a steady loss
of controlled units and can ultimately render rent control ineffective in
areas with high resident turnover. Vacancy decontrol encourages landlords to
find ways of shortening their residents' tenure, most aggressively through
landlord harassment. To strengthen its rent control laws, housing advocates in
New York City are attempting to repeal vacancy decontrol.

Massachusetts abolished rent control in 1994. Rents rose afterward, affecting
the pace of gentrification around Boston; however, the laws protected
relatively few apartments, and confounding factors like a strong economy were
already raising housing prices.[49]

## [edit] Promoting gentrification

Sharon Zukin refers to a somewhat contradictory "Artistic Mode of Production"
wherein patrician capitalists seek to increase the property values of (that
is, gentrify) urban space through the recruitment and retention of artists;
that is, by subtle or overt means of encouraging artists to occupy, say,
former industrial facilities.[50] This has become public policy in some
cities. In UK cities like Newcastle-upon-Tyne and Liverpool, the actions of
regional development agencies, in tandem with private speculators, have
attempted to artificially stimulate the process of gentrification. In Jackson,
Michigan, the city council has approved the redevelopment of a long-closed
19th century state prison by approving the construction of low rent housing
within its walls and making artists loft space available in adjacent abandoned
industrial buildings. Property developers have noticed that taking a building
they eventually wish to re-develop and offering it cheaply to artists for a
few years can impart a 'hip' feel to the surrounding area.

In the US, municipal governments tend to use tax incentives such as "tax
increment financing" (TIF), or â such as in the Paducah Artist Relocation
Program of Paducah, Kentucky â municipal governments will partner with non-
profit organizations and public-private partnership to offer to artists
subsidized home loans at a discounted interest rate if they move into
gentrifying neighborhoods. Under a TIF program, economic activity in a target
blighted area will be jump started with government spending, usually on
physical infrastructure. Property values, and therefore property tax revenues,
are then expected to rise. Under TIFs, all increased tax revenues, for a set
number of years, go to the TIF administration entity, and can only be spent on
additional improvements within the TIF district. Often TIF funds will be
provided as direct subsidies to private sector developers. Infrastructure
improvements, subsidies, and rising property values all combine to encourage
additional private sector investment.

### [edit] Positive aspects of gentrification

  * The original property owners profit from rising home prices.
  * When people own the home they live in, instead of rent, it creates greater stability for the local area. Poor residential areas in large cities tend to have a high turnover rate of tenants.
  * When an area is gentrified, the number of vacant houses is drastically reduced because of the increased demand for housing. Rising rents and property values make repairing abandoned buildings more profitable. This reduces crime by reducing the number of drug dealers and squatters.
  * With a greater number of people living in the area, there are greater amounts of currency being circulated locally. The increase in spending encourages further growth of both businesses and residential areas. These new local businesses may provide local jobs for the working class.
  * "High-school-educated blacks are more likely to stay in a gentrifying neighborhood than in a similar neighborhood that does not gentrify. They would also make larger than expected gains in income."[51]

### [edit] Negative aspects of gentrification

  * The cost of renting a residence in the area increases significantly, resulting in a displacement of local residents and in a reduction of affordable housing.
  * Families that cannot afford the increased price of housing in the gentrifying neighborhood may move to surrounding areas, which puts pressure on affordable housing supply across the region.
  * Some previous residents may be unable to obtain housing at a price that they can afford and thus become homeless.
  * Certain businesses catering to a particular segment of population may shut down once that population is displaced.
  * The increase in the property values of a neighborhood rarely increases the living standards of the low-income residents of the area.[52]
  * There can be tension between newer and older residents.

## [edit] Case studies of gentrification

### [edit] Darien Street, Philadelphia

There are several case studies done on areas undergoing gentrification.
Gentrification Amid Urban Decline: Strategies for America's Older Cities, by
Michael Lang, contains a story about Darien Street. This case study is done to
show the process and impacts of gentrification.

Darien Street is a small alley street in Bella Vista, a densely populated
neighborhood in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Most of the houses on the street
date back to 1885 and were built for artisans, or craftsmen, that lived in the
area. Darien Street was considered a âback street,â because it did not
(and still does not) connect to any main streets in the city, and it was not
even paved for most of its existence.

In its early days, Darien Street housed only Italian families. After World War
II however, there was talk of a crosstown expressway, and the Italian families
moved out. These low-rent homes then were inhabited by poor African American
families. By the early 1970s, Darien Street was at its lowest point, and the
houses were worth hardly anything. Many of the houses were abandoned, because
of broken heaters and caved-in roofs.[53] The houses on Darien Street were
very smallâabout 15 feet (4.6 m) wide and 15 feet (4.6 m) deep. Each home
was three stories tall, with one room on each floor. The largest yard is 8
feet (2.4 m) deep. Even with its decay, Darien Street held a unique charm with
European echoes. The houses all had some different features to give the street
more character. The street was also safe for children to play on, since there
were no passing cars. The nearness of all the homes made for a potentially
close-knit atmosphere. Darien Street was located just south of the center of
the city, giving it great location; it was also inexpensive and would not have
been hard to renovate.

Thus, the first home was rehabilitated in 1977; it was a corner home and was
sold to a school teacher. He completely redid the home and moved in. In the
next few years, mostly white middle-class men began to move into the abandoned
houses. In 1979, the first displacement occurred. Two years later, five of
seven families had been displaced. The two remaining families were renting
their homes, and they expected to be displaced soon.

Gentrification Amid Urban Decline went in to great detail about Darien Street,
but it was published in 1982, so that is where Darien Streetâs story
ends.[54] Lang gives statistics to show his final findings on Darien Street:
in five years, the street changed from seven black households and one white
household to two black households and eleven white households. The average
rent increased 488%âfrom $85 to $500 a month. Homes previously sold for
$5,000 were sold in 1981 for $35,000. Of the five black households displaced,
Lang informs his readers that three families found better houses within two
blocks, one family left the state, and one family moved five blocks away into
a public-housing project.

The benefits of the gentrification of Darien Street include increased tax flow
and improved housing. The drawback of gentrification was the worry of the
displaced.[55]

### [edit] Barnsbury, London

Barnsbury, about two miles north of the centre of London, was built around
1820 as a middle-class suburb, but after World War II people moved to the
suburbs. The upper and middle class wanted to get away from the working class,
and advancements in railroad technology allowed them to do so. When the war
ended there was a large demand for housing, and the Barnsbury area became a
place of cheap housing where most lived in shared accommodations. In the late
1950s and early 1960s, gentrifiers moving into the area had to finance
renovations with their own money, because banks rarely financed loans them for
the area they were moving into. But the main spark was caused by a bill named
The 1959 Housing Purchase and Housing Act, which allowed Â£100 million to be
used for investing and revitalizing old properties. As a direct result, the
main influx of people occurred between 1961 and 1975. According to the UK
Census, "[Between the years of 1961 and 1981,] owner-occupation increased from
7% to 19%, furnished rentals declined from 14 to 7% and unfurnished rentals
from 61% to 6%."[56]

### [edit] Park Slope, New York City

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2009)  
Park Slope, a neighborhood in Brooklyn located between Sunset Park and
Downtown Brooklyn, was built at the end of the nineteenth century for the
wealthy, who commuted to work over the newly built Brooklyn Bridge. In the
first decades of the twentieth century, the wealthy began moving further from
the city and the working class started moving in. When the Great Depression
hit in the 1930s, Park Slope became an area for the extremely poor and most
landlords let their properties slip into a state of disrepair. In the 1950s
and 1960s, the middle and upper classes moved even further away because of the
construction of highways and federal mortgage programs that were made
available. In 1966, the Park Slope Betterment Committee formed, and began
buying up houses and advertising them to people that they thought would be
interested. In the mid-1970s, the middle class began moving back to Park
Slope. By the mid-1980s, most houses had been gentrified, and by the mid-1990s
gentrification was overflowing into the surrounding areas. Park Slope is
currently one of the wealthiest neighborhoods in Brooklyn.[citation needed]

## [edit] See also

  * Black flight
  * Cingapura project
  * Migration of the disadvantaged
  * Planned shrinkage
  * Population mobility
  * Principles of Intelligent Urbanism
  * Redlining
  * Reverse sensitivity
  * Squatting
  * Terrace house
  * Urban renewal
  * Yuppie

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Laura Bly (Updated 6/8/2007 9:39 AM). "Show love for summer of '67 with a visit to San Francisco". USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/travel/destinations/2007-06-07-summer-of-love-san-francisco_N.htm.
  2. ^ Benjamin Grant (June 17, 2003). "What is Gentrification?". Public Broadcasting Service. http://www.pbs.org/pov/pov2003/flagwars/special_gentrification.html.
  3. ^ By Bob Lupton. "Everyday Life, Gentrification With Justice". by Faith magazine (Presbyterian Church of America). http://sites.silaspartners.com/partner/Article_Display_Page/0,,PTID323422%7CCHID664014%7CCIID2235910,00.html.
  4. ^ by Nicole Brydson (May 23, 2008). "Brooklyn, The Borough: A Case of Gentrification". The New York Observer. http://www.observer.com/2008/brooklyn-borough-16.
  5. ^ Fannie Mae Foundation
  6. ^ "Betsky, A (1997) Queer space : architecture and same-sex desire, New York : William Morrow & Co. (ISBN 0688143016)"
  7. ^ Heather Mac Donald (August 1993). "The New Community Activism". City Journal. http://www.city-journal.org/article01.php?aid=1452.
  8. ^ By Karin Pekarchik (June 11, 2001). "Alphabet City: The ABCs of Gentrification". Business Week. http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/01_24/b3736044.htm.
  9. ^ by Lesley Williams Reid and Robert M. Adelman, Georgia State University (April 2003). "The Double-edged Sword of Gentrification in Atlanta". American Sociological Association. http://www.asanet.org/footnotes/apr03/indexthree.html.
  10. ^ John Lawless (March 22, 2007). "City on a Hill: bi-weekly column on D.C. news and politics - Crimes solved by cops, not dollars". Georgetown Voice. http://www.georgetownvoice.com/2007-03-22/news/city-on-a-hill-bi-weekly-column-on-d-c-news-and-politics.
  11. ^ Shaw, Kate. "Gentrification: What It Is, Why It Is, and What Can Be Done about It". Geography Compass, Volume 2 Issue 5, Pages 1697 - 1728. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/121408673/abstract?SRETRY=0
  12. ^ Douglas Harper (2001). "Online Etymology Dictionary". http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=gentry. Retrieved on 2008-01-02.
  13. ^ Rowland Atkinson, Gary Bridge (2005). "Gentrification in a Global Context". http://books.google.com/books?id=zEs0nSHG8a4C&pg=PA4&lpg=PA4&dq=%22Once+this+process+of+'gentrification'+starts+in+a+district+it+goes+on+rapidly+until+all+or+most+of+the+original+working%22&source=web&ots=QT8fz_vDOK&sig=OqnuRx-JUYpTF0VgaQxHgbhnpAw&hl=en&sa=X&oi=book_result&resnum=2&ct=result.
  14. ^ Ruth Glass (1964). London: aspects of change. London: MacGibbon & Kee.
  15. ^ "Health Effects of Gentrification". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/HEALTHYPLACES/healthtopics/gentrification.htm.
  16. ^ Maureen & Paul Leanard Kennedy (April 2001). "Dealing with Neighborhood Change: A Primer on Gentrification and Policy Choices". The Brookings Institution Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy and PolicyLink. http://www.brookings.edu/reports/2001/04metropolitanpolicy.aspx.
  17. ^ Florida, Richard. The Creative Class, passim.
  18. ^ Smith, 1987b, p. 462.
  19. ^ by Chris Roberts (December 6, 2002). "Getting a handle on gentrification in Nordeast". Minnesota Public Radio. http://news.minnesota.publicradio.org/features/200212/06_robertsc_artsplan/.
  20. ^ by Adam Stone Contributing writer (Friday, August 13, 2004). "Home at loft, The Warehouse District is attracting many new condo and apartment dwellers". Minneapolis / St. Paul Business Journal. http://www.bizjournals.com/twincities/stories/2004/08/16/focus1.html.
  21. ^ "NE Mpls Arts District". Northeast Minneapolis Arts Association. February 03, 2008. http://www.art-a-whirl.org/webpage.php?webpage_name=Arts%20District.
  22. ^ Hamnett, 2000
  23. ^ Dictionary of Human Geography 616
  24. ^ Levy 1994, 56
  25. ^ Zukin 1989, xiv
  26. ^ Cash 2001, 39
  27. ^ Hamnett 1991, 186, 187
  28. ^ Friedman 1986, 322
  29. ^ Friedman 1986, 323-328
  30. ^ Booza et al 2006
  31. ^ Sassen 1995, 65
  32. ^ Sassen 1995, 66
  33. ^ (7 Knotts, Gibbs & Haspel, Moshe. âThe Impact of Gentrification and Voter Turnout.â Social Science Quarterly Vol 87, No. 1 (2006): pp 110 â 121
  34. ^ LeBlanc, Brian. "There goes the Neighbourhood - Gentrification and Voter Turnout." Undergraduate Thesis, Saint Mary's University (Canada, Nova Scotia), 2008
  35. ^ Smith 1996, 26
  36. ^ Smith 1996, 13
  37. ^ Salkin, Allen (June 3, 2007), "Lower East Side Is Under a Groove", The New York Times (The New York Times Company), http://www.nytimes.com/2007/06/03/fashion/03misrahi.html?scp=76&sq=collective%20unconscious&st=cse, retrieved on 2008-08-11
  38. ^ Lloyd, 89
  39. ^ Lloyd, 104
  40. ^ Mele, 159-169
  41. ^ Zukin 121-3
  42. ^ http://www.pbs.org/pov/pov2003/flagwars/
  43. ^ In Shaw, Pews vs. Bar Stools
  44. ^ SAN FRANCISCO / Polk Gulch cleanup angers some / Gentrification pushing out 'hookers, hustlers'
  45. ^ http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/chronicle/archive/1999/06/07/MN91476.DTL
  46. ^ Sara Gebhardt - Living With the Tensions of Gentrification - washingtonpost.com
  47. ^ http://www.laweekly.com/news/news/city-halls-density-hawks-are-changing-las-dna/18410
  48. ^ Ned Levine (2000). "Evaluation of Rent Control in California". http://www.nedlevine.com/nedlevine2.htm. Retrieved on 2009-02-04.
  49. ^ Peter Dreier (1997). "Rent Deregulation in California and Massachusetts: Politics, Policy, and Impacts - Part II". http://www.tenant.net/Alerts/Guide/papers/dreier/dreier2.html#anchor4305940. Retrieved on 2009-02-04.
  50. ^ Zukin 1989, 176
  51. ^ "Gentrification:Not Ousting the Poor?". http://www.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,1818255,00.html.
  52. ^ Giddens, Anthony, Duneier, Mitchell, Applebaum, Richard. 2007. Introduction to Sociology. Sixth Edition. New York: W.W. Norton and Company
  53. ^ Lang 17.
  54. ^ Lang 17â8.
  55. ^ Lang 18â9.
  56. ^ (Slater, Lees, Wyly 13).

## [edit] References

  * Booza, Jason, Cutsinger, Jackie, and Galster, George. "Where Did They Go? The Decline of Middle-Income Neighborhoods in Metropolitan America." Brookings Institution, July 28, 2006. [1]
  * Cash, Stephanie. âLandlords put a squeeze on Brooklyn artists.â Art in America v. 89 (3), pp. 39-40.
  * Castells, M. (1983) "Cultural identity, sexual liberation and urban structure: the gay community in San Francisco" in M. Castells, The City and the Grassroots: A Cross-Cultural Theory of Urban Social Movements (Edward Arnold, London) pp. 138â170.
  * Friedman, John. âThe world-city hypothesis.â From World Cities in a World-System, Paul L. Knox and Peter J. Taylor (eds), Cambridge UP, 1995, pp. 317-331. (originally published 1986)
  * Hamnett, Chris. âThe blind men and the elephant: the explanation of gentrification.â Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 1991, v. 16, pp. 173-189.
  * Hamnett, Chris. "Gentrifiers or lemmings? A response to Neil Smith.â Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 1992, v. 17, pp 116-119.
  * Knox, Paul L. âThe restless urban landscape: Economic and Sociocultural change and the transformation of metropolitan Washington, DC.â Annals of the Association of American Geographers 1991, v. 81, pp. 181-209.
  * Lang, Michael. Gentrification Amid Urban Decline. Massachusetts: Ballinger Publishing Company, 1982.
  * Ley, David. âAlternative explanations for inner-city gentrification: a Canadian assessment.â Annals of the Association of American Geographers 1986, v. 76, pp. 521-535.
  * Ley, David. âGentrification and the politics of the new middle class.â Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 1994, v. 12, pp. 53-74.
  * Ley, David. âReply: the rent-gap revisited.â Annals of the Association of the American Geographers 1987, v. 77, pp. 465-468.
  * Lloyd, Richard. Neo-Bohemia. Routledge, 2006. ISBN 0-415-95182-8
  * Maag, Christopher. "In Cincinnati, Life Breaths Anew in Riot-Scarred Area". New York Times.com 2006. 25 November 2006 <http://www.nytimes.com/2006/11/25/us/25cincy.html?em&ex=1164603600&en=dfab95c25ea61a91&ei=5087%0A>.
  * Mele, Christopher. Selling the Lower East Side. Univ of Minnesota, 2000. ISBN 0-8166-3182-4
  * Moore, Keith. "From redline to renaissance". Salon.com, August 2, 1999.
  * Over-the-Rhine neighborhood, Cincinnati, Ohio. Wikipedia.org 2006. 22 November 2006
  * Papayis, Marilyn Adler. âSex and the revanchist city: zoning out pornography in New York.â Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 2000, v. 18, pp. 341-353.
  * Rose, Demaris. âRethinking gentrification: beyond the uneven development of marxist theory.â Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 1984, v. 2, pp. 47-74.
  * Sassen, Saskia. âOn concentration and centrality in the global city.â From World Cities in a World-System, Paul L. Knox and Peter J. Taylor (eds), Cambridge UP, 1995 pp. 63-75.
  * Smith, N. (1987) "Gentrification and the rent-gap", Annals of the Association of American Geographers 77 (3) pp. 462â465.
  * Smith, N. (1996) The New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist City. (Routledge, London)
  * Zukin, Sharon. Loft Living. Rutgers UP, 1989. ISBN 0-8135-1389-8 (originally published 1982)

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or
guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate
external links.  
Sister project Look up gentrification in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
  * Neighbors Project
  * Urban Geographer Tom Slater, PhD
  * Understanding Gentrification from the City of Port Phillip (Victoria, Australia) website
  * Flag Wars \- documentary about Ohio gentrification in Columbus, detailing conflicts of race and homophobia
  * Selling the Lower East Side â official site for Christopher Mele's book, includes full text of Chapters 2â9.
  * South African shack dwellers' movement
  * The Cleansing of San Francisco, San Francisco Bay Guardian, October 7, 1998. - Series of articles on the gentrification of San Francisco during the dot com boom.
  * "I'm the enemy!" by Carol Lloyd, Salon.com, October 29, 1999.
  * "Defending the barrio" by Cassi Feldman, San Francisco Bay Guardian, October 18, 2000.
  * "Warning: Gentrification in Progress" by J.A. Lobbia, Village Voice, July 4, 2001.
  * "Gentrification: Artists and Yuppies Working Together" by Dan Knauss, Riverwest Currents, July 2002.
  * "The New Harlem" by Rivka Gewirtz Little, Village Voice, September 18, 2002.
  * "Loft Living" by Chanel Lee, Village Voice, November 13, 2002.
  * "Hipsters Defend Brooklyn" by Sarah Ferguson, Village Voice, April 3, 2005.
  * "After the Murmur" by Tim Kingston, San Francisco Bay Guardian, August 18, 2006.
  * "Hipster Invasion" by David Downs, East Bay Express, August 30, 2006. 
    * Responses to "Hipster Invasion"
  * "Interview with Neil Smith about gentrification in Berlin and state revanchism in Germany" October 20, 2007

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gentrification"

Categories: Real estate | Urban geography | Sociology | Urban studies and
planning terminology | Urban, rural, and regional economics | Regional science
| Affordable housing

Hidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope | All articles with
unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2008
| Articles with unsourced statements since July 2007 | Articles with unsourced
statements since March 2007 | Articles with unsourced statements since
February 2007 | Articles needing additional references from January 2009 |
Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009 | Wikipedia external
links cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 04:40.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



