
# Color printing

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Color separation" redirects here. For other uses, see Chroma key.

Color printing is the reproduction of an image or text in color (as opposed to
simpler black and white or monochrome printing).

While there are many techniques for reproducing images in color, specific
graphic processes and industrial equipment are used for mass reproduction of
color images on paper. In this sense, "color printing" involves reproduction
techniques suited for printing presses capable of thousands or millions of
impressions for publishing newspapers and magazines, brochures, cards, posters
and similar mass-market items.

In this type of industrial or commercial printing, the technique used to print
full-color images, such as color photographs, is referred to as four-color-
process printing, because four inks are used: three primary colors plus black.
The "subtractive" primary ink colors are cyan (a bright blue), magenta (a
vivid red-purple), and yellow; which are abbreviated as CMYK.

Two graphic techniques are required to prepare images for four-color printing.
In the "pre-press" stage, original images are translated into forms that can
be used on a printing press, through "color separation" and "screening" or
"halftoning." These steps make possible the creation of printing plates that
can transfer color impressions to paper on printing presses based on the
principles of lithography.

An emerging method of full-color printing is six-color process printing (for
example, Pantone's Hexachrome system) which adds orange and green to the
traditional CMYK inks for a larger and more vibrant gamut, or color range.
However, such alternate color systems still rely on color separation,
halftoning and lithography to produce printed images. Within the specialist
area of printed packaging, an emerging method of full-color printing is
another system, Chapter1, developed by design group LFH. Chapter1 can be
tailored to individual companies and was recently adopted by Unilever. It
involves the traditional process colors (cyan, magenta and yellow) plus three
additional colors chosen to best reproduce a particular companyâs range of
branded packaging.

Color printing can also involve as few as one color ink, or multiple color
inks which are not the primary colors. Using a limited number of color inks,
or specific color inks in addition to the primary colors, is referred to as
"spot color" printing. Generally, spot-color inks are specific formulations
that are designed to print alone, rather than to blend with other inks on the
paper to produce various hues and shades. The range of available spot color
inks, much like paint, is nearly unlimited, and much more varied than the
colors that can be produced by four-color-process printing. Spot-color inks
range from subtle pastels to intense fluorescents to reflective metallics.

Color printing involves a series of steps, or transformations, to generate a
quality color reproduction. The following sections focus on the steps used
when reproducing a color image in CMYK printing, along with some historical
perspective.

## Contents

  * 1 Color separation process
  * 2 Screening
  * 3 References
  * 4 See also
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Color separation process

The process of color separation starts by separating the original artwork into
red, green, and blue components (for example by a digital scanner). Before
digital imaging was developed, the traditional method of doing this was to
photograph the image three times, using a filter for each color. However this
is achieved, the desired result is three grayscale images, which represent the
red, green, and blue (RGB) components of the original image:  
The next step is to invert each of these separations. When a negative image of
the red component is produced, the resulting image represents the cyan
component of the image. Likewise, negatives are produced of the green and blue
components to produce magenta and yellow separations, respectively. This is
done because cyan, magenta, and yellow are subtractive primaries which each
represent two of the three additive primaries (RGB) after one additive primary
has been subtracted from white light.

  
Cyan, magenta, and yellow are the three main pigments used for color
reproduction. When these three colors are combined in printing, the result
should be a reasonable reproduction of the original, but in practice this is
not the case. Due to limitations in the ink pigments, the darker colors are
dirty and muddied. To resolve this, a black separation is also created, which
improves the shadow and contrast of the image. Numerous techniques exist to
derive this black separation from the original image; these include grey
component replacement, under color removal, and under color addition. This
printing technique is referred to as CMYK (the "K" being short for "key." In
this case, the key color is black).  
Today's digital printing methods do not have the restriction of a single color
space that traditional CMYK processes do. Many presses can print from files
that were ripped with images using either RGB or CMYK modes. The color
reproduction abilities of a particular color space can vary; the process of
obtaining accurate colors within a color model is called color matching.

## [edit] Screening

Inks used in color printing presses are semi-transparent and can be printed on
top of each other to produce different hues. For example, green results from
printing yellow and cyan inks on top of each other. However, a printing press
cannot vary the amount of ink applied except through "screening," a process
that represents lighter shades as tiny dots, rather than solid areas, of ink.
This is analogous to mixing white paint into a color to lighten it, except the
white is the paper itself. In process color printing, the screened image, or
halftone for each ink color is printed in succession. The screen grids are set
at different angles, and the dots therefore create tiny rosettes, which,
through a kind of optical illusion, appear to form a continuous-tone image.
You can view the halftone screens that create printed images under
magnification.  
Traditionally, halftone screens were generated by inked lines on two sheets of
glass that were cemented together at right angles. Each of the color
separation films were then exposed through these screens. The resulting high-
contrast image, once processed, had dots of varying diameter depending on the
amount of exposure that area received, which was modulated by the grayscale
separation film image.

The glass screens were made obsolete by high-contrast films where the halftone
dots were exposed with the separation film. This in turn was replaced by a
process where the halftones are electronically generated directly on the film
with a laser. Most recently, computer to plate (CTP) technology has allowed
printers to bypass the film portion of the process entirely. CTP images the
dots directly on the printing plate with a laser, saving money, increasing
quality (by reducing the repeated generations), reducing lead-times, and
saving the environment from toxic film-processing chemicals.

Screens with a "frequency" of 60 to 120 lines per inch (lpi) reproduce color
photographs in newspapers. The coarser the screen (lower frequency), the lower
the quality of the printed image. Highly absorbent newsprint requires a lower
screen frequency than less-absorbent coated paper stock used in magazines and
books, where screen frequencies of 133 to 200 lpi and higher are used.

The measure of how much an ink dot spreads and becomes larger on paper is
called dot gain. This phenomenon must be accounted for in photographic or
digital preparation of screened images. Dot gain is higher on more absorbent,
uncoated paper stock such as newsprint.

## [edit] References

  * Bruno, Michael H. (Ed.) (1995). Pocket Pal: A Graphic Arts Production Handbook (16th ed.). Memphis: International Paper
  * Hunt, R.W.G., The Reproduction of Color (1957, 1961, 1967, 1975) ISBN 0-85242-356-X
  * Yule, John A.C., Principles of Color Reproduction (1967, 2000) ISBN 0-88362-222-X
  * Morovic, J., Color Gamut Mapping (2008) ISBN 978-0-470-03032-5

## [edit] See also

  * Printing
  * Letterpress printing
  * Block printing
  * Flexography
  * Intaglio
  * Lithography
  * Offset printing
  * Rotogravure
  * Typography

## [edit] External links

  * Monitor Calibration (Written by: Mohamed Al-Dabbagh)
  * Color Separation Process (animations)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_printing"

Categories: Printing

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 26 March 2009, at 10:15 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



