
# Scrip

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the currency substitute. For a definition of the word
"scrip", see the Wiktionary entry scrip.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Modern use
    * 2.1 Community-issued scrip
    * 2.2 Gift certificates
      * 2.2.1 Scrip fundraising
    * 2.3 Online games
  * 3 Issues
  * 4 Military scrip
  * 5 Scrip bid
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
Scrip is any substitute for currency which is not legal tender and is often a
form of credit. Scrips were created as company payment of employees and also
as a means of payment in times where regular money is unavailable, such as
remote coal towns or occupied countries in war time. Other forms of scrip
include subway tokens, arcade tokens and tickets, and "points" on some
websites.

Scrips have gained historical importance and become a subject of study in
numismatics and exonumia due to their wide variety and recurring use.

## [edit] History

Company scrip was a credit against the accrued wages of employees. In the
United States, where everything in a mining or logging camp was run, created
and owned by a company, scrip provided the worker with credit when their wages
had been depleted. These remote locations were cash poor. Workers had very
little choice but to purchase meals and goods at a company store. In this way,
the company could place enormous markups on goods in a company store, making
workers completely dependent on the company, thus enforcing their "loyalty" to
the company. While scrip was a de facto form of currency, employees were
rarely paid in scrip. Additionally, while employees could exchange scrip for
cash, it was rarely done so at face value. Scrip in this context was valid
only within that area or town where it was issued. While store owners in
neighboring communities could accept the scrip as currency, they rarely
provided a 1 for 1 exchange. This was to avoid the risk of having
coins/currency that were worthless anywhere else.

When U.S. President Andrew Jackson issued his Specie Circular of 1836 due to
credit shortages, Virginia Scrip was accepted as payments for federal lands.

In nineteenth-century Western Canada, the federal government devised a system
of land grants called scrip. Notes in the form of money scrip (valued at $160
or $240) or land scrip, valued at 160 acres (0.65 km2) or 240 acres (0.97 km2)
were offered to the MÃ©tis people in exchange for their Aboriginal rights.[1]

During the Great Depression, many local governments were forced to pay
employees in scrip at the height of the crisis.[2].

Scrip as a de facto form of currency within the setting of the mining or
logging industry was discontinued around 1952.

Scrip is also related to the stock market where companies pay dividends in the
form of scrip rather than paying actual currency.[citation needed] It is also
a written document that acknowledges debt.

After World War 1 and the Second World War, scrip was used in Germany and
Austria; detailed accounts are in Notgeld.

Thought should also be given to 'chips'. Commonly used as currency with which
to gamble, the use of chips as company currency in the early 1800s in Devon,
England in Wheal Friendship [3]copper mine gave its name to a local village
and Inn. Chipshop and Chipshop Inn.

## [edit] Modern use

Scrip survives in modern times in various forms.

### [edit] Community-issued scrip

The use of locally-issued scrip accepted by multiple businesses within a
community has increased during the Late-2000s recession. Community-wide scrip
usage has begun or is on the rise in Ithaca, Detroit, The Berkshires,
Pittsboro, North Carolina and Lamar, Colorado.[4]

Thailand's township, Amphoe Kut Chum, once issued its own local scrip called
Bia Kut Chum: Bia is Thai for cowry shell, which was once used as small
change, and still so used in metaphorical expressions. To side-step
implications that the community intended their scrip as an unlawful substitute
for currency, it now issues exchange coupons called Boon Kut Chum.[5]

### [edit] Gift certificates

Scrip is now issued in the form of gift certificates (alternatively gift
vouchers), or gift cards. The two are essentially the same except that the
cards automate the checkout and accounting processes. Cards usually have a
barcode or magnetic strip, which can be processed through a standard
electronic credit card machine.

Cards do not have any value until they are sold, at which time the cashier
enters the amount which the customer wishes to put on the card. This amount is
rarely stored on the card but is instead noted in the store's database, which
is crosslinked to the card ID. The major exception is in many public transport
systems and library photocopiers, where a simplified system (with no network)
stores the value only on the card itself (a stored-value card). To thwart
counterfeiting, the data is encrypted, though not very strongly given the
relatively low amounts of money involved. The magstripe is also often placed
differently than on credit cards, so they cannot be read or written with
standard equipment.

#### [edit] Scrip fundraising

In the late 1980s, the term scrip evolved to include a fundraising method
popular with non-profit organizations like schools, bands and athletic groups.
With scrip fundraising, retailers offer the gift certificates and gift cards
to non-profit organizations at a discount. The non-profit organizations sell
the gift cards to member families at full face value. The families redeem the
gift cards at full face value, and the discount or rebate is retained by the
non-profit organization as revenue. Great Lakes Scrip Center, the nationâs
largest broker of scrip gift cards, reports that more than 3 million US
households and 13,000 non-profit organizations use scrip fundraising.

Gifts cards are increasingly being offered as consumer incentives at no cost
or for a substantial discount. For example, reward points given for the use of
credit cards can be exchanged for a variety of gift cards and some companies
will offer high value gift cards at a discount. Gift cards are readily
available at a discount using online trading services.

There are websites that allow users to trade, donate, buy and sell gift cards.
Sellers use these websites because the gift card is not to a store of their
liking, and buyers because this provides opportunities to buy these cards for
less than they are nominally worth at the business.

### [edit] Online games

    See also: Virtual economy
Many online games (MMORPGs) provide a type of virtual currency that can only
be earned within the game and/or be purchased with real legal tender from
outside the game. Typically this currency cannot be exchanged for real legal
tender after it has been acquired, but there are exceptions. Some games are
free, but sometimes players are required to donate currency in exchange for
additional items or gaming options, which can be traded among the gaming
community and used as currency or traded back for real money. The ability to
exchange real money for virtual currency or scrip and then back into real
money raises a great many new issues, some of which parallel traditional
issues with scrip and some of which are new.

While other online games may not provide scrip in the form of virtual currency
or may not redeem it for real legal tender, an active market in trading
virtual assets acquired in-game may still exist outside the game. In some
cases, this may involve payments in real legal tender (e.g., trading of in-
game assets on eBay). This, too, can be considered a modern form of scrip.

The amount of trade in these forms of online scrip can be very substantial,
although the very nature of scrip strongly constrains its influence to the
environment in which it was issued. Nevertheless, as the amount of trade grows
and its value in real-world currency increases, many new and unexplored
economic, legal, and policy questions arise.

## [edit] Issues

Unless the gift card is obtained at a discount (paying less than the actual
value of the card), some point out that trading real money for scrip is
unproductive as it then ties up that money until it is used, and usually it
may only be used at one store. Furthermore, not all gift cards issued are
redeemed. In 2006, the value of unredeemed gift cards has been estimated at
almost US$8 billion.[6]

VISA, MasterCard and American Express gift cards are initially funded by a
credit card or bank account, after which the funding account and gift card are
not connected to one another. Therefore, once the predetermined funds are
consumed, the card number expires. Gift card holders are thus able to make
riskier Internet purchases, without the fear of having to persuade a merchant
to stop pulling funds from them.

VISA and MasterCard also have re-loadable debit cards.

One disadvantage of gift scrip is that some gift card providers charge
"maintenance fees" on the cards, particularly if they are not used after a
certain period of time, or the card will expire after a given period of
time.[7] Some provinces and states in North America (e.g. California, Ontario,
Massachusetts, Washington) have enacted laws to eliminate non-use fees or
expirations,[8] but because the laws often only apply to single-merchant
cards[9] buyers have to review the gift card conditions prior to purchase to
determine exact restrictions and fees. [10] Additionally, if a retailer goes
bankrupt, gift cards can suddenly become worthless. Even if stores do not
close immediately, the company may stop accepting the cards[11]. This became a
significant issue during the Global financial crisis of 2008â2009, prompting
the Consumers Union to call upon the Federal Trade Commission to regulate the
issue[12].

## [edit] Military scrip

<IMG>

<IMG>

Examples of occupation and military scrip used on the British Channel Island
of Guernsey during the German Occupation (1940-45)

Military personnel deployed abroad (protective or occupation) are generally
paid in military scrip, which prevents legal tender from going into the black
market, plus it is an excellent way of keeping tabs on military payments and
spending. This type of scrip can be exchanged through the military for legal
tender upon return to the home nation. Military occupying powers have also
been known to issue occupation scrip for local civilian use as a means of
controlling the local economies.

## [edit] Scrip bid

Main article: Scrip bid

In Australia, the term "scrip bid" is used to describe a takeover offer where
shares are offered partly or wholly in place of cash. By receiving shares
instead of cash the realisation of the capital asset can be delayed to take
better advantage of capital loss offsets. Additionally, tax payers are only
taxed on half the capital gains tax if they hold the asset for more than 12
months.

## [edit] See also

  * Canadian Tire money
  * Chiemgauer
  * Disney dollar
  * Electronic money
  * Ithaca Hours
  * Local currency
  * Microsoft Points
  * Private currency
  * Scrip of Edo period Japan
  * SVM (company)
  * Spintria
  * Truck system

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Free Land!" in Moving Here, Staying Here: The Canadian Immigrant Experience at Library and Archives Canada
  2. ^ Chatters, Charles H. "Is Municipal Scrip a Panacea?" Public Management, March 1933
  3. ^ (http://crying-fox.com/mine01.htm)
  4. ^ Homegrown Stimulus
  5. ^ A Boon to Kut Chum archive
  6. ^ "Gift cards popular, unused", The Cincinnati Enquirer, December 2, 2007
  7. ^ "Gift cards may bear unwanted fees", Post-Gazette, February 11, 2007
  8. ^ "State Gift Card Consumer Protection Laws", Consumers Union, September 14, 2007
  9. ^ "Keeping the change", December 29, 2007Press Democrat
  10. ^ "Card games: Read the fine print on gift cards", Republican-American, November 4, 2007
  11. ^ But what happens when the store files for bankruptcy? Instead of a gift you may be stuck with a worthless piece of plastic. Earlier this year, when Sharper Image filed for Chapter 11, people holding its gift cards were told that they could not get their money back or use the card to make a purchase. 
    "Gift Cards: The gift that can stop giving", Defend Your Dollars, Consumers Union, September 12, 2008
  12. ^ [http://consumerist.com/5049097/ftc-protect-gift-card-holders-when-companies-go-bankrupt " FTC: Protect Gift Card Holders When Companies Go Bankrupt"], Consumerist, September 12, 2008

## [edit] External links

  * Journal of Economic Perspectives Article: The market for gift cards
  * Regional currencies in Germany - Local competition for the Euro?
  * Local Currencies: Catalysts for Sustainable Regional Economies
  * Sample of Coal Mining Scrip with history from Whitby, West Virginia
  * stamp scrip of WÃ¶rgl, Austria
  * The Gift-Card Economy. NYT Magazine.
  * Stamp Scrip: Money People Paid to Use Bruce Champ 04.01.2008

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrip"

Categories: Exonumia | Free economy

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 21 April 2009, at 10:58 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



