
# Green chemistry

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the concept of the environmentally friendly design of
chemical products and processes. For the journal, see Green Chemistry
(journal).

Green chemistry, also called sustainable chemistry, is a chemical philosophy
encouraging the design of products and processes that reduce or eliminate the
use and generation of hazardous substances. Whereas environmental chemistry is
the chemistry of the natural environment, and of pollutant chemicals in
nature, green chemistry seeks to reduce and prevent pollution at its source.
In 1990 the Pollution Prevention Act was passed in the United States. This act
helped create a modus operandi for dealing with pollution in an original and
innovative way. It aims to avoid problems before they happen.

Green chemistry is that branch of chemistry,which deals with the study of
design of products and processes that reduce or eliminate the use and
generation of hazardous substances.

As a chemical philosophy, green chemistry derives from organic chemistry,
inorganic chemistry, biochemistry, analytical chemistry, and even physical
chemistry. However, the philosophy of green chemistry tends to focus on
industrial applications. Click chemistry is often cited as a style of chemical
synthesis that is consistent with the goals of green chemistry. The focus is
on minimizing the hazard and maximizing the efficiency of any chemical choice.
It is distinct from environmental chemistry which focuses on chemical
phenomena in the environment.

In 2005 Ryoji Noyori identified three key developments in green chemistry: use
of supercritical carbon dioxide as green solvent, aqueous hydrogen peroxide
for clean oxidations and the use of hydrogen in asymmetric synthesis.[1]
Examples of applied green chemistry are supercritical water oxidation, on
water reactions and dry media reactions.

Bioengineering is also seen as a promising technique for achieving green
chemistry goals. A number of important process chemicals can be synthesized in
engineered organisms, such as shikimate, a Tamiflu precursor which is
fermented by Roche in bacteria.

## Contents

  * 1 Principles
  * 2 Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Awards
  * 3 Other awards
  * 4 Trends
  * 5 Laws
  * 6 Examples
    * 6.1 Supramolecular chemistry
  * 7 Reducing market barriers
  * 8 Education
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Principles

Paul Anastas, then of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and
John C. Warner developed 12 principles of green chemistry,[2] which help to
explain what the definition means in practice. The principles cover such
concepts as:

  * the design of processes to maximize the amount of raw material that ends up in the product;
  * the use of safe, environment-benign substances, including solvents, whenever possible;
  * the design of energy efficient processes;
  * the best form of waste disposal: do not create it in the first place.

The 12 principles are:

  1. Prevent waste: Design chemical syntheses to prevent waste, leaving no waste to treat or clean up.
  2. Design safer chemicals and products: Design chemical products to be fully effective, yet have little or no toxicity.
  3. Design less hazardous chemical syntheses: Design syntheses to use and generate substances with little or no toxicity to humans and the environment.
  4. Use renewable feedstock: Use raw materials and feedstock that are renewable rather than depleting. Renewable feedstock are often made from agricultural products or are the wastes of other processes; depleting feedstock are made from fossil fuels (petroleum, natural gas, or coal) or are mined.
  5. Use catalysts, not stoichiometric reagents: Minimize waste by using catalytic reactions. Catalysts are used in small amounts and can carry out a single reaction many times. They are preferable to stoichiometric reagents, which are used in excess and work only once.
  6. Avoid chemical derivatives: Avoid using blocking or protecting groups or any temporary modifications if possible. Derivatives use additional reagents and generate waste.
  7. Maximize atom economy: Design syntheses so that the final product contains the maximum proportion of the starting materials. There should be few, if any, wasted atoms.
  8. Use safer solvents and reaction conditions: Avoid using solvents, separation agents, or other auxiliary chemicals. If these chemicals are necessary, use innocuous chemicals. If a solvent is necessary, water is a good medium as well as certain eco-friendly solvents that do not contribute to smog formation or destroy the ozone.
  9. Increase energy efficiency: Run chemical reactions at ambient temperature and pressure whenever possible.
  10. Design chemicals and products to degrade after use: Design chemical products to break down to innocuous substances after use so that they do not accumulate in the environment.
  11. Analyze in real time to prevent pollution: Include in-process real-time monitoring and control during syntheses to minimize or eliminate the formation of byproducts.
  12. Minimize the potential for accidents: Design chemicals and their forms (solid, liquid, or gas) to minimize the potential for chemical accidents including explosions, fires, and releases to the environment.

## [edit] Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Awards

The Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Awards[3] began in 1995 as an
effort to recognize individuals and businesses for innovations in green
chemistry. Typically five awards are given each year, one in each of five
categories: Academic, Small Business, Greener Synthetic Pathways, Greener
Reaction Conditions, and Designing Greener Chemicals. Nominations are accepted
the prior year, and evaluated by an independent panel of chemists convened by
the American Chemical Society. Through 2006, a total of 57 technologies have
been recognized for the award, and over 1000 nominations have been submitted.

  * In 1996, Dow Chemical won the 1996 Greener Reaction Conditions award for their 100% carbon dioxide blowing agent for polystyrene foam production. Polystyrene foam is a common material used in packing and food transportation. Seven hundred million pounds are produced each year in the United States alone. Traditionally, CFC and other ozone-depleting chemicals were used in the production process of the foam sheets, presenting a serious environmental hazard. Flammable, explosive, and, in some cases toxic hydrocarbons have also been used as CFC replacements, but they present their own problems. Dow Chemical discovered that supercritical carbon dioxide works equally as well as a blowing agent, without the need for hazardous substances, allowing the polystyrene to be more easily recycled. The CO2 used in the process is reused from other industries, so the net carbon released from the process is zero.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lactide

  * In 2002, Cargill Dow (now NatureWorks) won the Greener Reaction Conditions Award for their improved polylactic acid polymerization process. Lactic acid is produced by fermenting corn and converted to lactide, the cyclic dimer ester of lactic acid using an efficient, tin-catalyzed cyclization. The L,L-lactide enantiomer is isolated by distillation and polymerized in the melt to make a crystallizable polymer, which has use in many applications including textiles and apparel, cutlery, and food packaging. Wal-Mart has announced that it is using/will use PLA for its produce packaging. The NatureWorks PLA process substitutes renewable materials for petroleum feedstocks, doesn't require the use of hazardous organic solvents typical in other PLA processes, and results in a high-quality polymer that is recyclable and compostable.

  * In 2003 Shaw Industries was recognized with the Designing Greener Chemicals Award for developing EcoWorx Carpet Tile. Historically, carpet tile backings have been manufactured using bitumen, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), or polyurethane (PU). While these backing systems have performed satisfactorily, there are several inherently negative attributes due to their feedstocks or their ability to be recycled. Shaw selected a combination of polyolefin resins as the base polymer of choice for EcoWorx due to the low toxicity of its feedstocks, superior adhesion properties, dimensional stability, and its ability to be recycled. The EcoWorx compound also had to be designed to be compatible with nylon carpet fiber. Although EcoWorx may be recovered from any fiber type, nylon-6 provides a significant advantage. Polyolefins are compatible with known nylon-6 depolymerization methods. PVC interferes with those processes. Nylon-6 chemistry is well-known and not addressed in first-generation production. From its inception, EcoWorx met all of the design criteria necessary to satisfy the needs of the marketplace from a performance, health, and environmental standpoint. Research indicated that separation of the fiber and backing through elutriation, grinding, and air separation proved to be the best way to recover the face and backing components, but an infrastructure for returning postconsumer EcoWorx to the elutriation process was necessary. Research also indicated that the postconsumer carpet tile had a positive economic value at the end of its useful life. EcoWorx is recognized by MBDC as a certified Cradle to Cradle design.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Trans and cis fatty acids

  * In 2005, Archer Daniels Midland (ADM) and Novozymes N.A. won the Greener Synthetic Pathways Award for their enzyme interesterification process. In response to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandated labeling of trans-fats on nutritional information by January 1, 2006, Novozymes and ADM worked together to develop a clean, enzymatic process for the interesterification of oils and fats by interchanging saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. The result is commercially viable products without trans-fats. In addition to the human health benefits of eliminating trans-fats, the process has reduced the use of toxic chemicals and water, prevents vast amounts of byproducts, and reduces the amount of fats and oils wasted.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Glycerine to propylene glycol

  * In 2006, Professor Galen J. Suppes, from the University of MissouriâColumbia, was awarded the Academic Award for his system of converting waste glycerin from biodiesel production to propylene glycol. Through the use of a copper-chromite catalyst, Professor Suppes was able to lower the required temperature of conversion while raising the efficiency of the distillation reaction. Propylene glycol produced in this way will be cheap enough to replace the more toxic ethylene glycol that is the primary ingredient in automobile antifreeze.

## [edit] Other awards

The Royal Australian Chemical Institute (RACI) presents Australiaâs Green
Chemistry Challenge Awards. This awards program is similar to that at the
United States Environmental Protection Agencyâ (EPA), although the Institute
has included a category for Green Chemistry education as well as Small
Business and Academic or Government.

The Canadian Green Chemistry Medal is an annual award given to an individual
or group for promotion and development of green chemistry in Canada and
internationally. The winner is presented with a citation recognizing the
achievements together with a sculpture.[4]

Green Chemistry activities in Italy center around an inter-university
consortium known as INCA. Beginning in 1999, the INCA has given three awards
annually to industry for applications of green chemistry. The winners receive
a plaque at the annual INCA meeting.[5]

In Japan, The Green & Sustainable Chemistry Network(GSCN), formed in 1999, is
an organization consisting of representatives from chemical manufacturers and
researchers. In 2001, the organization began an awards program. GSC Awards are
to be granted to individuals, groups or companies who greatly contributed to
green chemistry through their research, development and their
industrialization. The achievements are awarded by Ministers of related
government agencies.[6]

In the United Kingdom, the Crystal Faraday Partnership, a non-profit group
founded in 2001, awards businesses annually for incorporation of green
chemistry. The Green Chemical Technology Awards have been given by Crystal
Faraday since 2004; the awards were presented by the Royal Society of
Chemistry prior to that time. The award is given only to a single researcher
or business, while other notable entries are given recognition as well.[7]

The Nobel Prize Committee recognized the importance of green chemistry in 2005
by awarding Yves Chauvin, Robert H. Grubbs, and Richard R. Schrock the Nobel
Prize for Chemistry for "the development of the metathesis method in organic
synthesis." The Nobel Prize Committee states, "this represents a great step
forward for 'green chemistry', reducing potentially hazardous waste through
smarter production. Metathesis is an example of how important basic science
has been applied for the benefit of man, society and the environment."[8]

## [edit] Trends

Attempts are being made not only to quantify the greenness of a chemical
process but also to factor in other variables such as chemical yield, the
price of reaction components, safety in handling chemicals, hardware demands,
energy profile and ease of product workup and purification. In one
quantitative study,[9] the reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline receives 64
points out of 100 marking it as an acceptable synthesis overall whereas a
synthesis of an amide using HMDS is only described as adequate with a combined
32 points.

Green chemistry is increasingly seen as a powerful tool that researchers must
use to evaluate the environmental impact of nanotechnology.[10] As
nanomaterials are developed, the environmental and human health impacts of
both the products themselves and the processes to make them must be considered
to ensure their long-term economic viability.

## [edit] Laws

In 2007, Europe put into place the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation,
and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) program, which requires companies to
provide data showing that their products are safe. The US Toxic Substances
Control Act, passed in 1976, has no similar provisions.

On September 29, 2008 California approved two laws which encourage green
chemistry, launching the California Green Chemistry Initiative. The law
requires California's Department of Toxic Substances Control to prioritize
"chemicals of concern", and puts the burden of testing on the agency rather
than industry. The laws were criticized by Paul Anastas, who stated that the
laws did not go far enough in encouraging research, education, and industry
incentives.[11]

## [edit] Examples

### [edit] Supramolecular chemistry

Research is currently ongoing in the area of supramolecular chemistry to
develop reactions which can proceed in the solid state without the use of
solvents. The cycloaddition of trans-1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethylene is directed by
resorcinol in the solid state. This solid-state reaction proceeds in the
presence of UV light in 100% yield.[12]

<IMG>

Cycloaddition of trans-1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethylene

## [edit] Reducing market barriers

In March 2006, the University of California published a report by Dr. Michael
P. Wilson and colleagues, Daniel A. Chia and Bryan C. Ehlers, on potential
chemicals policy for the California Legislature entitled, Green Chemistry in
California: A Framework for Leadership in Chemicals Policy and Innovation
(http://coeh.berkeley.edu/news/06_wilson_policy.htm). The report finds that
long-standing weaknesses in the U.S. chemical management program, notably the
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) of 1976, have produced a chemicals market
in the U.S. that discounts the hazardous properties of chemicals relative to
their function, price, and performance. The report concludes that these market
conditions represent a key barrier to the scientific, technical, and
commercial success of green chemistry in the U.S., and that fundamental policy
changes are needed to correct these weaknesses.

## [edit] Education

In 2005, the University of Oregon's chemistry department unveiled the Greener
Education Materials, a database of green chemistry topics.[13]

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Chemistry portal  
<IMG> Sustainable development portal  
  * Bioremediation \- a technique that generally falls outside the scope of green chemistry
  * Green computing \- a similar initiative in the area of computing
  * Green Chemistry (journal) \- a journal published by the Royal Society of Chemistry
  * Sustainable engineering
  * Environmental Engineering Science
  * Green chemistry metrics

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Pursuing practical elegance in chemical synthesis Ryoji Noyori Chemical Communications, 2005, (14), 1807 - 1811 Abstract
  2. ^ "The 12 Principles of Green Chemistry". United States Environmental Protection Agency. http://www.epa.gov/greenchemistry/pubs/principles.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-31.
  3. ^ "The Presidential Green Chemistry Awards". United States Environmental Protection Agency. http://www.epa.gov/greenchemistry/pubs/pgcc/presgcc.html. Retrieved on 2006-07-31.
  4. ^ "Announcing the 2005 Canadian Green Chemistry Medal". RSC Publishing. http://www.rsc.org/Publishing/Journals/gc/News/Green.asp. Retrieved on 2006-08-04.
  5. ^ "Chemistry for the Environment". Interuniversity Consortium. http://www.incaweb.org/. Retrieved on 2007-02-15.
  6. ^ "Green & Sustainable Chemistry Network, Japan". Green & Sustainable Chemistry Network. http://www.gscn.net/aboutE/index.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-04.
  7. ^ "2005 Crystal Faraday Green Chemical Technology Awards". Green Chemistry Network. http://www.chemsoc.org/networks/gcn/awards.htm. Retrieved on 2006-08-04.
  8. ^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2005". The Nobel Foundation. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/2005/press.html. Retrieved on 2006-08-04.
  9. ^ EcoScale, a semi-quantitative tool to select an organic preparation based on economical and ecological parameters. Van Aken K, Strekowski L, Patiny L Beilstein Journal of Organic Chemistry, 2006 2:3 (3 March 2006 ) Article
  10. ^ Green nanotechnology
  11. ^ Renner R. (November 19, 2008). California launches nationâs first green chemistry program. Environmental Science & Technology.
  12. ^ L. R. MacGillivray, J. L. Reid and J. A. Ripmeester (2000). "Supramolecular Control of Reactivity in the Solid State Using Linear Molecular Templates". J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122 (32): 7817â7818. doi:10.1021/ja001239i.
  13. ^ EurekAlert. (2009). Thinking of turning your chemistry green? Consult GEMs. AAAS.

## [edit] External links

  * EPA Green Chemistry Program Website
  * American Chemical Society Green Chemistry Institute
  * California Department of Toxic Substances Control, Green Chemistry Initiative
  * University of California, Berkeley, Program in Green Chemistry and Chemicals Policy
  * Center for Green Chemistry and Green Engineering at Yale University
  * Green Chemistry Centre of Excellence at the University of York, UK
  * Center for Sustainable and Green Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark
  * Mediterranean Countries Green Chemistry Network
  * Next Generation Environmental Technologies Published by RAND
  * Green Chemistry at Tel Aviv University
  * Green Chemistry, Journal of the Royal Society of Chemistry

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Chemistry  
Analytical chemistry â¢ Biochemistry â¢ Bioinorganic chemistry â¢
Bioorganic chemistry â¢ Chemical biology â¢ Chemistry education â¢ Click
chemistry â¢ Cluster chemistry â¢ Computational chemistry â¢
Electrochemistry â¢ Environmental chemistry â¢ Green chemistry â¢ Inorganic
chemistry â¢ Materials science â¢ Medicinal chemistry â¢ Nuclear chemistry
â¢ Organic chemistry â¢ Organometallic chemistry â¢ Pharmacy â¢ Physical
chemistry â¢ Photochemistry â¢ Polymer chemistry â¢ Solid-state chemistry
â¢ Supramolecular chemistry â¢ Theoretical chemistry â¢ Thermochemistry â¢
Wet chemistry  
List of biomolecules â¢ List of inorganic compounds â¢ List of organic
compounds â¢ Periodic table  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_chemistry"

Categories: Environmental chemistry | Green chemistry | Chemistry

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * Svenska
  * ç²µèª
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 27 March 2009, at 09:56.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



