
# Musical notation

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2007)  
"Music markup" redirects here. For the XML application, see Music Markup
Language.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hand-written musical notation by J. S. Bach: beginning of the Prelude from the
Suite for Lute in G minor BWV 995 (transcription of Cello Suite No. 5, BWV
1011) BR Bruxelles II. 4805.

Music notation or musical notation is any system which represents aurally
perceived music, through the use of written symbols.

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 Ancient Greece
    * 1.2 Arab world
    * 1.3 Early Europe
  * 2 Modern notation
    * 2.1 Variations
  * 3 Notation in various countries
    * 3.1 India
    * 3.2 Russia
    * 3.3 China
    * 3.4 Japan
    * 3.5 Indonesia
  * 4 Other systems and practices
    * 4.1 Cipher notation
    * 4.2 SolfÃ¨ge
    * 4.3 Letter notation
    * 4.4 Tablature
    * 4.5 Klavar notation
    * 4.6 12-note non-equal temperament
    * 4.7 Chromatic staff notations
    * 4.8 Graphic notation
    * 4.9 Simplified Music Notation
    * 4.10 Parsons code
    * 4.11 Braille music
    * 4.12 Integer notation
    * 4.13 Turntablist transcription methodology
  * 5 Computer musical notation
  * 6 Perspectives of musical notation in composition and musical performance
  * 7 Patents
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 References
  * 11 Further reading
  * 12 External links

  
## [edit] History

The earliest form of musical notation can be found in a cuneiform tablet that
was created at Nippur in about 2000 B.C. The tablet represents fragmentary
instructions for performing music, that the music was composed in harmonies of
thirds, and that it was written using a diatonic scale.[1] A tablet from about
1250 B.C. shows a more developed form of notation.[2] Although the
interpretation of the notation system is still controversial, it is clear that
the notation indicates the names of strings on a lyre, the tuning of which is
described in other tablets.[3] Although they were fragmentary, these tablets
represent the earliest recorded melodies found anywhere in the world.[3]

### [edit] Ancient Greece

<IMG>

<IMG>

Photograph of the original stone at Delphi containing the second of the two
hymns to Apollo. The music notation is the line of occasional symbols above
the main, uninterrupted line of Greek lettering.

Ancient Greek musical notation was capable of representing pitch and note-
duration, and to a limited extent, harmony. It was in use from at least the
6th century BC until approximately the 4th century AD; several complete
compositions and fragments of compositions using this notation survive. The
notation consists of symbols placed above text syllables. An example of a
complete composition is the Seikilos epitaph, which has been variously dated
between the 2nd century BC to the 1st century AD. Three hymns by Mesomedes of
Crete exist in manuscript. The Delphic Hymns, dated to the 2nd century BC,
also use this notation, but they are not completely preserved. Ancient Greek
notation appears to have fallen out of use around the time of the Decline of
the Roman Empire.

### [edit] Arab world

Al-Kindi (801â873 AD) was the first great theoretician of Arabic music. He
proposed adding a fifth string to the 'ud and discussed the cosmological
connotations of music. He surpassed the achievement of the Greek musicians, in
using the alphabetical annotation for one eighth. He published fifteen
treatises on music theory, but only five have survived.[4] Al-Farabi, the
influential persian polymath, (872â950) wrote a notable book on music theory
entitled Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir (The Great Book of Music). His pure Arabian
tone system is still used in Arabic music.[5]

Arabic maqam is the system of melodic modes used in traditional Arabic music,
which is mainly melodic. The word maqam in Arabic means place, location or
rank. The Arabic maqam is a melody type. Each maqam is built on a scale, and
carries a tradition that defines its habitual phrases, important notes,
melodic development and modulation. Both compositions and improvisations in
traditional Arabic music are based on the maqam system. Maqams can be realized
with either vocal or instrumental music, and do not include a rhythmic
component.

A theory on the origins of the Western solfÃ¨ge musical notation suggests that
it may have had Arabic origins. It has been argued that the solfÃ¨ge syllables
(do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, ti) may have been derived from the syllables of the
Arabic solmization system Durr-i-Mufassal ("Separated Pearls") (dal, ra, mim,
fa, sad, lam). This origin theory was first proposed by Francis Meninski in
his Thesaurus Linguarum Orientalum (1680) and then by Jean Benjamin De Laborde
in his Essai sur la Musique Ancienne et Moderne (1780).[6][7]

### [edit] Early Europe

Scholar and music theorist Isidore of Seville, writing in the early 7th
century, remarked that it was impossible to notate music. By the middle of the
9th century, however, a form of notation began to develop in monasteries in
Europe for Gregorian chant, using symbols known as neumes; the earliest
surviving musical notation of this type is in the Musica disciplina of
Aurelian of RÃ©Ã´me, from about 850. There are scattered survivals from the
Iberian Peninsula before this time, of a type of notation known as Visigothic
neumes, but its few surviving fragments have not yet been deciphered.

The ancestors of modern symbolic music notation originated in the Roman
Catholic Church, as monks developed methods to put plainchant (sacred songs)
to paper. The earliest of these ancestral systems, from the 8th century, did
not originally utilise a staff, and used neum (or neuma or pneuma), a system
of dots and strokes that were placed above the text. Although capable of
expressing considerable musical complexity, they could not exactly express
pitch or time and served mainly as a reminder to one who already knew the
tune, rather than a means by which one who had never heard the tune could sing
it exactly at sight.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Early Music Notation

To address the issue of exact pitch, a staff was introduced consisting
originally of a single horizontal line, but this was progressively extended
until a system of four parallel, horizontal lines was standardized. The
vertical positions of each mark on the staff indicated which pitch or pitches
it represented (pitches were derived from a musical mode, or key). Although
the four-line staff has remained in use until the present day for plainchant,
for other types of music, staffs with differing numbers of lines have been
used at various times and places for various instruments. The modern five-line
staff was first adopted in France and became almost universal by the 16th
century (although the use of staffs with other numbers of lines was still
widespread well into the 17th century).

Because the neum system arose from the need to notate songs, exact timing was
initially not a particular issue because the music would generally follow the
natural rhythms of the Latin language. However, by the 10th century a system
of representing up to four note lengths had been developed. These lengths were
relative rather than absolute and depended on the duration of the neighbouring
notes. It was not until the 14th century that something like the present
system of fixed note lengths arose. Starting in the 15th century, vertical bar
lines were used to divide the staff into sections. These did not initially
divide the music into measures (bars) of equal length (as most music then
featured far fewer regular rhythmic patterns than in later periods), but
appear to have been introduced as an aid to the eye for "lining up" notes on
different staves that were to be played or sung at the same time. The use of
regular measures (bars) became commonplace by the end of the 17th century.

The founder of what is now considered the standard music stave was Guido
d'Arezzo, an Italian Benedictine monk who lived from 995â1050. His
revolutionary methodâcombining a four-line stave with the first form of
notes known as 'neumes'âwas the precursor to the five-line stave, which was
introduced in the 14th century and is still in use today. Guido D'Arezzo's
achievements paved the way for the modern form of written music, music books,
and the modern concept of a composer.

## [edit] Modern notation

<IMG>

<IMG>

An example of modern musical notation: Prelude, Op. 28, No. 7, by Frederic
Chopin

Modern music notation originated in European classical music and is now used
by musicians of many different genres throughout the world.

The system uses a five-line staff. Pitch is shown by placement of notes on the
staff (sometimes modified by accidentals), and duration is shown with
different note values and additional symbols such as dots and ties. Notation
is read from left to right, which makes setting music for right-to-left
scripts difficult.

A staff of written music generally begins with a clef, which indicates the
particular range of pitches encompassed by the staff. Notes representing a
pitch outside of the scope of the five line staff can be represented using
ledger lines, which provide a single note with additional lines and spaces.

Following the clef, the key signature on a staff indicates the key of the
piece by specifying certain notes to be flat or sharp throughout the piece,
unless otherwise indicated.

Following the key signature is the time signature. Measures (bars) divide the
piece into regular groupings of beats, and the time signatures specify those
groupings.

Directions to the player regarding matters such as tempo and dynamics are
added above or below the staff. For vocal music, lyrics are written. For short
pauses (breaths), retakes (looks like ') are added.

In music for ensembles, a "score" shows music for all players together[dubious
â discuss], while "parts" contain only the music played by an individual
musician. A score can be constructed (laboriously) from a complete set of
parts and vice versa.

### [edit] Variations

  * Percussion notation conventions are varied because of the wide range of percussion instruments. Percussion instruments are generally grouped into two categories: pitched and non-pitched. The notation of non-pitched percussion instruments is the more problematic and less standardized.
  * Figured bass notation originated in baroque basso continuo parts. It is also used extensively in accordion notation. The bass notes of the music are conventionally notated, along with numbers and other signs which determine the chords to be played. It does not, however, specify the exact pitches of the harmony, leaving that for the performer to improvise.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A lead sheet

  * A lead sheet specifies only the melody, lyrics and harmony, using one staff with chord symbols placed above and lyrics below. It is used to capture the essential elements of a popular song without specifying how the song should be arranged or performed.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A chord chart

  * A chord chart or "chart" contains little or no melodic information at all but provides detailed harmonic and rhythmic information, using slash notation and rhythmic notation. This is the most common kind of written music used by professional session musicians playing jazz or other forms of popular music and is intended primarily for the rhythm section (usually containing piano, guitar, bass and drums).
  * Simpler chord charts for songs may contain only the chord changes, placed above the lyrics where they occur. Such charts depend on prior knowledge of the melody, and are used as reminders in performance or informal group singing.
  * The shape note system is found in some church hymnals, sheet music, and song books, especially in the Southern United States. Instead of the customary elliptical note head, note heads of various shapes are used to show the position of the note on the major scale. Sacred Harp is one of the most popular tune books using shape notes.

## [edit] Notation in various countries

### [edit] India

<IMG>

<IMG>

Indian music, early 20th century

The Indian scholar and musical theorist Pingala (c. 200 BC), in his Chanda
Sutra, used marks indicating long and short syllables to indicate meters in
Sanskrit poetry.

In the notation of Indian rÄga, a solfege-like system called sargam is used.
As in Western solfege, there are names for the seven basic pitches of a major
scale (Shadja, Rishabh, Gandhar, Madhyam, Pancham, Dhaivat and Nishad, usually
shortened Sa Re Ga ma Pa Dha Ni). The tonic of any scale is named Sa, and the
dominant Pa. Sa is fixed in any scale, and Pa is fixed at a fifth above it (a
Pythagorean fifth rather than an equal-tempered fifth). These two notes are
known as achala swar ('fixed notes'). Each of the other five notes, Re, Ga,
ma, Dha and Ni, can take a 'regular' (shuddha) pitch, which is equivalent to
its pitch in a standard major scale (thus, shuddha Re, the second degree of
the scale, is a whole-step higher than Sa), or an altered pitch, either a
half-step above or half-step below the shuddha pitch. Re, Ga, Dha and Ni all
have altered partners that are a half-step lower (Komal-"flat") (thus, komal
Re is a half-step higher than Sa). Ma has an altered partner that is a half-
step higher (teevra-"sharp") (thus, tivra Ma is an augmented fourth above Sa).
Re, Ga, ma, Dha and Ni are called vikrut swar ('movable notes'). In the
written system of Indian notation devised by Ravi Shankar, the pitches are
represented by Western letters. Capital letters are used for the achala swar,
and for the higher variety of all the vikrut swar. Lowercase letters are used
for the lower variety of the vikrut swar.

Other systems exist for non-twelve-tone equal temperament and non-Western
music, such as the Indian svar lippi. New systems that remove handicaps in
existing systems are also being developed like Ome Swarlipi.

### [edit] Russia

Further information: Znamenny Chant

In ancient Byzantium and Russia, sacred music was notated with special 'hooks
and banners'.

### [edit] China

<IMG>

<IMG>

Chinese Qin notation, 1425

The earliest known examples of text referring to music in China are
inscriptions on musical instruments found in the Tomb of Marquis Ye of Zeng
(d. 433 B.C.E.). Sets of 41 chimestones and 65 bells bore lengthy inscriptions
concerning pitches, scales, and transposition. The bells still sound the
pitches that their inscriptions refer to. Although no notated musical
compositions were found, the inscriptions indicate that the system was
sufficiently advanced to allow for musical notation. Two systems of pitch
nomenclature existed, one for relative pitch and one for absolute pitch. For
relative pitch, a solmization system was used.[1]

The tablature of the guqin is unique and complex; the older form is composed
of written words describing how to play a melody step-by-step using the plain
language of the time, i.e. Descriptive Notation (Classical Chinese); the newer
form, composed of bits of Chinese characters put together to indicate the
method of play is called Prescriptive Notation. Rhythm is only vaguely
indicated in terms of phrasing. Tablatures for the qin are collected in what
is called qinpu.

The jianpu system of notation (probably an adaptation of a French Galin-Paris-
Cheve system) had gained widespread acceptance by 1900 C.E. In this system,
notes of the scale are numbered. For a typical Pentatonic scale, the numbers
1,2,3,5,6 would be used as notes and 0 as rests. Dots above or below a numeral
indicate the octave of the note it represents. Key signatures, barlines, and
time signatures are also employed. Many symbols from Western standard
notation, such as bar lines, time signatures, accidentals, tie and slur, and
the expression markings are also used. The number of dashes following a
numeral represents the number of crotchets (4th notes) by which the note
extends. The number of underlines is analogous to the number of flags or beams
on notes or rests in standard notation. In the present-day jianpu system, the
melody is notated alone or with chords. Harmonic and rhythmic elements are
left to the discretion of the performers.

### [edit] Japan

Further information: Shakuhachi musical notation

Japanese music is highly diversified, and therefore requires various systems
of notation. In Japanese shakuhachi music, for example, glissandos and timbres
are often more significant than distinct pitches, whereas taiko notation
focuses on discrete strokes.

### [edit] Indonesia

Main article: Music of Indonesia

Notation plays a relatively minor role in the oral traditions of Indonesia.
However, in Java and Bali, several systems were devised beginning at the end
of the 19th century, initially for archival purposes. Today the most
widespread are cipher notations ("not angka" in the broadest sense) in which
the pitches are represented with some subset of the numbers 1 to 7, with 1
corresponding to either highest note of a particular octave, as in Sundanese
gamelan, or lowest, as in the kepatihan notation of Javanese gamelan. Notes in
the ranges outside the central octave are represented with one or more dots
above or below the each number. For the most part, these cipher notations are
mainly used to notate the skeletal melody (the balungan) and vocal parts
(gerongan), although transcriptions of the elaborating instrument variations
are sometimes used for analysis and teaching. Drum parts are notated with a
system of symbols largely based on letters representing the vocables used to
learn and remember drumming patterns; these symbols are typically laid out in
a grid underneath the skeletal melody for a specific or generic piece. The
symbols used for drum notation (as well as the vocables represented) are
highly variable from place to place and performer to performer. In addition to
these current systems, two older notations used a kind of staff: the Solonese
script could capture the flexible rhythms of the pesinden with a squiggle on a
horizontal staff, while in Yogyakarta a ladder-like vertical staff allowed
notation of the balungan by dots and also included important drum strokes. In
Bali, there are a few books published of Gamelan gender wayang pieces,
employing alphabetical notation in the old Balinese script.

Composers and scholars both Indonesian and foreign have also mapped the
slendro and pelog tuning systems of gamelan onto the western staff, with and
without various symbols for microtones. The Dutch composer Ton de Leeuw also
invented a three line staff for his composition Gending. However, these
systems do not enjoy widespread use.

In the second half of the twentieth century, Indonesian musicians and scholars
extended cipher notation to other oral traditions, and a diatonic scale cipher
notation has become common for notating western-related genres (church hymns,
popular songs, and so forth). Unlike the cipher notation for gamelan music,
which uses a "fixed Do" (that is, 1 always corresponds to the same pitch,
within the natural variability of gamelan tuning), Indonesian diatonic cipher
notation is "moveable-Do" notation, so scores must indicate which pitch
corresponds to the number 1 (for example, "1=C."

## [edit] Other systems and practices

### [edit] Cipher notation

In many cultures, including Chinese (jianpu or gongche), Indonesian
(kepatihan), and Indian (sargam), the "sheet music" consists primarily of the
numbers, letters or native characters representing notes in order. Those
different systems are collectively known as cipher notations. The numbered
notation is an example, so are letter notation and SolfÃ¨ge if written in
musical sequence.

### [edit] SolfÃ¨ge

Main article: SolfÃ¨ge

SolfÃ¨ge is a way of assigning syllables to names of the musical scale. In
order, they are today: Do Re Mi Fa Sol La Ti Do' (for the octave). The classic
variation is: Do Re Mi Fa Sol La Si Do' . These functional names of the
musical notes were introduced by Guido of Arezzo (c.991 â after 1033) using
the beginning syllables of the first six musical lines of the Latin hymn Ut
queant laxis. The original sequence was Ut Re Mi Fa Sol La, where each verse
would start a note higher. "Ut" later became "Do". The equivalent syllables
used in Indian music are: Sa Ri Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni, while the 'bilinear music
notation' system offers a chromatic method: Li (Je) Ja (Bo) Baw Zu (Zer or
Fer) Fee (De) Da (Go) and Gaw. See also: solfÃ¨ge, sargam, KodÃ¡ly Hand Signs.
In China Qi is used instead of Ti (Qi for ä¸, Chinese 7).

Tonic sol-fa is a type of notation using the initial letters of solfÃ¨ge.

### [edit] Letter notation

Main article: Letter notation

The notes of the 12-tone scale can be written by their letter names AâG,
possibly with a trailing sharp or flat symbol, such as Aâ¯ or Bâ­. This is
the most common way of specifying a note in English speech or written text.

### [edit] Tablature

Main article: Tablature

Tablature was first used in the Renaissance for lute music. A staff is used,
but instead of pitch values, the fret or frets to be fingered are written
instead. Rhythm is written separately and durations are relative and indicated
by horizontal space between notes. In later periods, lute and guitar music was
written with standard notation. Tablature caught interest again in the late
20th century for popular guitar music and other fretted instruments, being
easy to transcribe and share over the internet in ASCII format. Websites like
OLGA.net (currently off-line pending legal disputes) have archives of text-
based popular music tablature.

### [edit] Klavar notation

Main article: Klavarskribo

Klavar notation (or "klavarskribo") is a chromatic system of notation geared
mainly towards keyboard instruments, which transposes the usual "graph" of
music. The pitches are indicated horizontally, with "staff" lines in twos and
threes like the keyboard, and the sequence of music is read vertically from
top to bottom. A considerable body of repertoire has been transcribed into
Klavar notation. Klavar notation eliminates the need of accidentals and key
signatures, and its advocates claim that this facilitates music-reading.

### [edit] 12-note non-equal temperament

Sometimes the pitches of music written in just intonation are notated with the
frequency ratios, while Ben Johnston has devised a system for representing
just intonation with traditional western notation and the addition of
accidentals which indicate the cents a pitch is to be lowered or raised.

### [edit] Chromatic staff notations

Over the past three centuries, hundreds of music notation systems have been
proposed as alternatives to traditional western music notation. Many of these
systems seek to improve upon traditional notation by using a "chromatic staff"
in which each of the 12 pitch classes has its own unique place on the staff.
Examples are the Ailler-Brennink notation, Tom Reed's Twinline notation, John
Keller's Express Stave, and JosÃ© A. Sotorrio's Bilinear Music Notation. These
notation systems do not require the use of standard key signatures,
accidentals, or clef signs. They also represent interval relationships more
consistently and accurately than traditional notation. The Music Notation
Project (formerly known as the Music Notation Modernization Association) has a
website with information on many of these notation systems.

### [edit] Graphic notation

Main article: Graphic notation (music)

The term 'graphic notation' refers to the contemporary use of non-traditional
symbols and text to convey information about the performance of a piece of
music. It is used for experimental music, which in many cases is difficult to
transcribe in standard notation. Practitioners include Christian Wolff, Earle
Brown, John Cage, Morton Feldman, Krzysztof Penderecki, Cornelius Cardew, and
Roger Reynolds. See Notations, edited by John Cage and Alison Knowles, ISBN
0-685-14864-5.

### [edit] Simplified Music Notation

Simplified Music Notation is an alternative form of musical notation designed
to make sight-reading easier. It is based on classical staff notation, but
sharps and flats are incorporated into the shape of the noteheads. Notes such
as double sharps and double flats are written at the pitch at which they are
actually played, but preceded by symbols called 'History Signs' to show that
they have been transposed. The notation was designed to help people who
struggle with sight-reading, including those who suffer from working memory
impairments, dyslexia and other learning difficulties.

### [edit] Parsons code

Main article: Parsons code

Parsons code is used to encode music so that it can be easily searched. This
style is designed to be used by individuals without any musical background.

### [edit] Braille music

Main article: Braille music

Braille music is a complete, well developed, and internationally accepted
musical notation system that has symbols and notational conventions quite
independent of print music notation. It is linear in nature, similar to a
printed language and different from the two-dimensional nature of standard
printed music notation. To a degree Braille music resembles musical markup
languages such as XML for Music or NIFF.

### [edit] Integer notation

In integer notation, or the integer model of pitch, all pitch classes and
intervals between pitch classes are designated using the numbers 0 through 11.
It is not used to notate music for performance, but is a common analytical and
compositional tool when working with chromatic music, including twelve-tone
technique, serial, or otherwise atonal music.

### [edit] Turntablist transcription methodology

Main article: Turntablist transcription methodology

## [edit] Computer musical notation

Beside notations developed for human readers and performers, there are also
many computer oriented representations of music designed to either be turned
into conventional notation, or read directly by the computer.

There are a great many software programs designed to produce musical notation.
These are called musical notation software, or sometimes Scorewriters. In
addition to this software, there are many file formats used to store musical
information that this software and other programs can convert into notation,
sound, or into some other usable form. In a sense, these file formats are a
"notation" for computers.

The most common musical file format is probably the MIDI file format, which
stores pitch and timing information about music (as well as velocity, volume,
pitch bend, and modulation) and can be used to control a MIDI instrument which
will produce the specified sound.

There are also hybrid formats, such as ABC notation, GNU LilyPond and
MusicXML, that are text files that can be read and edited by a capable human,
but can also be manipulated by the computer. One notable system is the NEUMES
standard, which is being used to form a computerized catalog of Medieval
plainchant that can be searched by melody, text, or any encoded aspect of the
music. Similarly, the Mutopia Project maintains a library of scores available
in such formats (though they are not searchable by content).

Finally there are notational forms that are not intended to be processed by
computer, but are nonetheless commonly used to transmit information via
computer, such as text file guitar tablature which has become extremely
popular following the growth of the World Wide Web.

## [edit] Perspectives of musical notation in composition and musical
performance

According to Richard Middleton (1990, p.104â6), and also Philip Tagg (1979,
p.28â32), musicology and to a degree European-influenced musical practice
suffer from a 'notational centricity'; a methodology slanted by the
characteristics of notation.

Notation-centric training induces particular forms of listening, and these
then tend to be applied to all sorts of music, appropriately or not.
Musicological methods tend to foreground those musical parameters which can be
easily notated...they tend to neglect or have difficulty with widened
parameters which are not easily notated. Examples include the unique vocal
style of Joni Mitchell and the String Quartets of Elliott Sharp. Because of
the limitations of conventional musical notation, many present-day composers
of various genres prefer to compose music which is either not notated, or
notated only through the computer language of digital recording.

A further perspective on musical notation is provided in the "Composer's Note"
from Fredrick Pritchard's "Brushed With Blue", Op. 55, pub. Effel
Publications, 2002.

    "The written language of music is at once indispensable yet hopelessly inadequate in conveying every detail of a musical concept. While musical scores are static, music itself is a living art, and as such requires the freedom to change, not only from bar to bar but from day to day and from year to year, the elements of experience and spontaneity unleashing the various potentials of a given work. The composer therefore entrusts the performer as co-creator of his art."
## [edit] Patents

<IMG>

<IMG>

Recent US patent 6987220 on a new color based musical notation scheme

In some countries, new musical notations can be patented. In the United
States, for example, about 90 patents have been issued on new notation
systems. The earliest patent, U.S. Patent 1,383 was published in 1839.

## [edit] See also

  * Modal notation
  * Mensural notation
  * Modern musical symbols
  * Music engraving
  * Guido of Arezzo, inventor of modern musical notation
  * Znamenny Chant
  * Time unit box system, a notation system useful for polyrhythms
  * Tongan music notation, a subset of standard music notation
  * Eye movement in music reading
  * Music OCR
  * History of music publishing
  * Scorewriter
  * List of scorewriters
  * Sheet music

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Kilmer 1986
  2. ^ Kilmer 1965
  3. ^ a b West 1994
  4. ^ Saoud, R.. "The Arab Contribution to the Music of the Western World" (PDF). FSTC. http://www.muslimheritage.com/uploads/Music2.pdf. Retrieved on 12 January 2007.
  5. ^ Habib Hassan Touma (1996), The Music of the Arabs, p. 170, trans. Laurie Schwartz, Portland, Oregon: Amadeus Press, ISBN 0-931340-88-8
  6. ^ (Farmer 1988, pp. 72â82)
  7. ^ Miller, Samuel D. (November 1973), "Guido d'Arezzo: Medieval Musician and Educator", Journal of Research in Music Education 21 (3): 239â45

## [edit] References

  * Middleton, Richard (1990/2002). Studying Popular Music. Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 0-335-15275-9.
  * Tagg, Philip (1979). Cited in Middleton, Richard (1990/2002). Studying Popular Music. Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 0-335-15275-9.
  * Albrecht Schneider: Music, sound, language, writing. Transcription and notation in comparative musicology and music ethnology, in: Zeitschrift fÃ¼r Semiotik, 1987, Volume: 9, Number: 3â4.
  * Sotorrio, JosÃ© A (1997). Bilinear Music Notation âA New Notation System for the Modern Musician, Spectral Music, ISBN 978-0-9548498-2-5.
  * Kilmer, Anne Draffkorn (1965). The Strings of Musical Instruments: their Names, Numbers, and Significance, Studies in Honor of Benno Landsberger = Assyriological Studies, xvi, 261â8
  * Kilmer, Anne Draffkorn (1986). Journal of Cuneiform Studies, xxxviii, 94â98
  * West, M. L., The Babylonian Musical Notation and the Hurrian Melodic Texts, Music & Letters, Vol. 75, No. 2. (May, 1994), pp. 161â179

## [edit] Further reading

  * Hall, Rachael (2005). Math for Poets and Drummers. Saint Joseph's University.
  * Read, Gardner (1978). Modern Rhythmic Notation. Victor Gollance Ltd.
  * Read, Gardner (1987). Source Book of Proposed Music Notation Reforms. Greenwood Press.
  * Stone, Kurt (1980). Music Notation in the Twentieth Century: A Practical Guidebook. W. W. Norton & Company.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikibooks has a book on the topic of

Music:Music Notation Systems  
Sister project Meta has related information at:

Music markup  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Musical notation  
  * Music Notation and Terminology by Karl Wilson Gehrkens
  * Contains a Guide to Byzantine Music Notation (neumes)
  * On-line activity that counts musical notes!
  * Glossary of U.S. and British English musical terms
  * Online lessons, including notation, aimed at students/teachers of the ABRSM music theory exams
  * A collection of interactive lessons and trainers that can be downloaded for offline use
  * Extremes of Conventional Musical Notation
  * Information on Stanford University Course on music representation. Links page shows examples of different notations
  * Abstracts on Musical Notation from Zeitschrift fÃ¼r Semiotik
  * Collection of lessons covering Rhythmic Musical Notation for drummers
  * Potato print â examples of musical symbols from the 16th and 17th century
  * The Music Notation Project â alternative music notation systems that use chromatic staves
  * Ensemble Kerylos, who has reconstructed ancient instruments and plays Ancient Greek melodies.
  * Simplified Music Notation website

v â¢ d â¢ e

Musical notation and development  
Staff

Bar & Bar line Â· Clef Â· Coda Â· Da Capo Â· Dal Segno Â· Key signature Â·
Ledger line Â· Musical mode Â· Musical scale Â· Rehearsal letter Â· Repeat
sign Â· Time signature Â· Transposition Â· Transposing instrument

G \(treble\) clef symbol  
Notes

Accidental (Flat Â· Natural Â· Sharp) Â· Dotted note Â· Grace note Â· Note
value (Beam Â· Note head Â· Stem) Â· Pitch Â· Rest Â· Letter notation  
Articulation

Dynamics Â· Ornament Â· Ossia Â· Portato Â· Accent Â· Legato Â· Tenuto Â·
Marcato Â· Staccato Â· Staccatissimo Â· Tie Â· Slur Â· Fermata  
Development

Exposition Â· Harmony Â· Melody Â· Motif Â· Recapitulation Â· Rhythm (Beat Â·
Meter Â· Tempo) Â· Theme Â· Tonality Â· Atonality  
Related

Chord chart Â· Figured bass Â· Graphic notation Â· Lead sheet Â· Eye music Â·
Modern musical symbols Â· Neume Â· Tablature  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Music  
History

Ancient Â· Medieval Â· Renaissance Â· Baroque Â· Classical period Â· Romantic
Â· 20th century Â· Contemporary

G \(treble\) clef symbol  
Composition

Composer Â· Form Â· Genre Â· Notation Â· Theory Â· Improvisation  
Education

Music history Â· Musicology Â· Ethnomusicology Â· Music cognition Â· Music
therapy Â· Music education  
Production

Musician Â· Lyrics Â· Song Â· Album (compilation Â· live Â· studio) Â· Record
label Â· Record producer  
Music around the world

World music Â· Latin American Â· Middle Eastern Â· African Â· Asian Â·
Polynesian  
Lists

Topics (basic) Â· Terminology Â· Musical forms Â· Instruments Â· Free music  
Other topics

Definition of music Â· Music and mathematics Â· Music and politics Â·
Aesthetics of music  
Category Â· Portal  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musical_notation"

Categories: Musical notation

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2007 |
All pages needing cleanup | Articles with disputed statements from November
2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 05:30.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



