
# Indian English

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(February 2008)  
<IMG>

This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject. Please
help recruit one or improve this article yourself. See the talk page for
details. Please consider using {{Expert-subject}} to associate this request
with a WikiProject. (March 2008)  
Indian English comprises several dialects or varieties of English spoken
primarily in India. These dialects evolved during and after the period when
Britain exercised colonial rule over India. English is the co-official
language of India, with about ninety million speakers, according to the 1991
Census of India, but fewer than a quarter of a million people call it their
first language.[1] With the exception of some families who communicate
primarily in English, as well as members of the relatively small Anglo-Indian
community (numbering less than half a million), speakers of Indian English use
it as a second or third language, after their indigenous Indian language(s),
such as Hindi, Urdu, Tamil, etc.[2]

Variations in the pronunciation of several phonemes are affected by habits
formed from pronouncing the regional tongues of the Indian subcontinent. The
greatest differences are between South Indian and North Indian varieties.
Several idiomatic forms, derived from Indian literary and vernacular language,
also have made their way into Indian English. Despite this diversity, there is
general homogeneity in syntax and vocabulary among the varieties of Indian
English.

## Contents

  * 1 Influences: British and American
  * 2 Indian English literature
  * 3 "An Indian English Grammar"
  * 4 Phonology of Indian English
    * 4.1 Vowels
    * 4.2 Consonants
    * 4.3 Spelling pronunciation
    * 4.4 Supra-segmental features
  * 5 Grammar, idioms and usage in Indian English
    * 5.1 Grammar quirks
  * 6 Idioms and popular words/phrases
    * 6.1 Addressing others
    * 6.2 Interjections and casual references
    * 6.3 Anomalous usage
    * 6.4 Colloquial and slang words used in Indian English
  * 7 Indian numbering system
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Bibliography
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Influences: British and American

The form of English that Indians and other people of the subcontinent are
taught in schools is essentially British English, thanks primarily to
historical and cultural links with Britain.[citation needed] A socially-
superior accent is deemed to be that of Received Pronunciation. However, even
during the time of the British Raj, before the partition of Pakistan and
Bangladesh, Indian English had established itself as an audibly distinct
dialect of the language with its own quirks and specific phrases. Indian
spellings typically follow British conventions.

After gaining independence in 1947, Indian English took on a divergent
evolution, and many phrases that other English speakers consider antiquated
are still popular in India. The legacy of the East India Company and its
practices still prevails in official correspondence in India. Official letters
include phrases such as "please do the needful," and "you will be intimated
shortly," which are directly lifted from East India Company correspondance
from the seventeenth century. Older British writers, such as Thomas Hardy and
P.G. Wodehouse, who made creative and comical use of now-obsolete forms of
colloquial language, might be surprised to hear the phrases and expressions
that they parodied still in everyday currency among speakers of Indian
English.[3] British writer, journalist, and wit, Malcolm Muggeridge once joked
that the last Englishman would be an Indian.[4]

Because of the growing influence of American culture in recent decades,
certain elements of American slang are now used by some Indians, especially
younger ones. American-English spellings are also widely prevalent in
scientific and technical publications, while British-English spellings are
used in other media.

## [edit] Indian English literature

Main article: Indian English literature

India has produced many notable writers in the English language, including
Paramahansa Yogananda, Sri Aurobindo, Jawaharlal Nehru, Mohandas Gandhi, Swami
Vivekananda, Rabindranath Tagore, R K Narayan, Ruskin Bond, Eknath Easwaran
and Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. More contemporary Indians, such as Vikram Seth
and Salman Rushdie, are acknowledged masters of English literary style.
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, a Kolkata-native, is a major figure in current
literary theory, and she is known for her rigorous and academic English prose.

Indian-English writers and English writers of Indian origin â notably,
Booker Prize-winners like Salman Rushdie, Arundhati Roy, Kiran Desai, and
Aravind Adiga, Booker Prize-shortlisted author Rohinton Mistry, Pulitzer
Prize-winner Jhumpa Lahiri, and Nobel-laureate V. S. Naipaul â have made
creative use of stereotypical Indian English in creating the characters in
their works.

## [edit] "An Indian English Grammar"

The role of English within the complex multilingual society of India is far
from straightforward: it is used across the country, but it may be a speaker's
first, second, or third language, and its features may depend heavily on the
regional origin of the speaker.

While Indian speakers of English use idioms peculiar to their homeland, often
literal translations of words and phrases from their native languages, only
standard British English is considered grammatically correct.

The distinct evolution of regional variations in contemporary usage has led to
terms such as Hinglish (Hindi \+ English), Kanglish (Kannada \+ English),
Telgish (Telugu \+ English), Tanglish (Tamil \+ English), and Minglish
(Marathi \+ English). Hinglish and other variations are popular in the field
of advertising. In this context, the aim of reaching a large cross-section of
society is fulfilled by such double-coding. Many words borrowed from Indian
languages find their way into the ostensibly-English media.

## [edit] Phonology of Indian English

Indian accents vary greatly. Some Indians speak English with an accent very
close to a pure British (Received Pronunciation) accent; others lean toward a
more 'vernacular', native-tinted, accent for their English speech.

### [edit] Vowels

Among the distinctive features of the vowel-sounds employed by some Indian
English speakers are:

  * Many Indian languages (with the exception of Western Hindi and Punjabi) do not natively possess a separate phoneme /Ã¦/ (as in <trap>). Thus, many speakers do not differentiate between the vowel sounds /É/ (as in "dress") and /Ã¦/ (as in <trap>), except in cases where a minimal pair such as <bed>/<bad> exists in the vocabulary of the speaker. Such a speaker might pronounce "tax" like the first syllable of "Texas".[5] Speakers ofMarathi, Bengali, and Sinhalese, which do differentiate /É/ and /Ã¦/, do not have difficulty making this distinction.

  * Chiefly in Punjab and Haryana states, the short [É] becomes lengthened and higher to long [eË], making <pen> sound like <paenn>.

  * When a long vowel is followed by "r", speakers of Indian English usually use a monophthong, instead of the diphthong used in almost all other accents. Thus "period" is pronounced [pirÉªÉd] instead of [pÉªÉÉ¹ÉªÉd].[5]

  * Indian English often uses strong vowels where other accents would have unstressed syllables or words. Thus "cottage" may be pronounced [kÉteÊ¤] rather than [kÉtÉÊ¤]. A word such as "was" in the phrase "I was going" will be pronounced [ÊÉz] or [Êas] in Indian English: in most other accents it would receive the unstressed realization [wÉz].[5] Another example is that many Indian English speakers often pronounce <the> as /dÌªiË/, irrespective of whether the definite article comes before a vowel or a consonant, or whether it is stressed or not. In native varieties of English, <the> is pronounced as [Ã°É] when it is unstressed and lies before a consonant, and as [Ã°iË] when it is before a vowel or when stressed even before a consonant.

  * Continuing the above point, the indefinite article <a> is often pronounced by many Indian English speakers as [eË], irrespective of whether it is stressed or unstressed. In native varieties of English, <a> is pronounced as [É] when unstressed and as [eÉª] when stressed.[citation needed]

  * The RP vowels /Ê/, /É/ and /ÉË/ might be realized as /É/ in Indian English.[6] Bengalis often pronounce all these vowels as a, including the <r>-colored versions of these vowels. Thus, <firm> may be pronounced the same as [farm].[citation needed]

  * General Indian English realizes /eÉª/ (as in <face>) and /oÊ/ (as in <goat>) as long monophthongs [eË], [oË].[6]

  * Many Indian English speakers do not make a clear distinction between /É/ and /ÉË/. (See cot-caught merger.)

  * Unlike British, but like General American English, some Indian speakers cannot pronounce the rounded /É/ or /ÉË/, and substitute /a/ instead. This makes <not> sound as [nat]. The phoneme /ÉË/, if used, is only semi-rounded at the lips.[citation needed]

  * Words such as <class>, <staff> and <last> would be pronounced with a back <a> as in British English but unlike American English, i.e., [klÉËs], [stÉËf] and [lÉËst] rather than American [klÃ¦Ës], [stÃ¦Ëf] and [lÃ¦Ëst].

### [edit] Consonants

Among the most distinctive features of consonants in Indian English are:

  * Standard Hindi and most other vernaculars (except, at least, Bengali) do not differentiate between /v/ (voiced labiodental fricative) and /w/ (voiced labiovelar approximant). Instead, many Indians use a frictionless labio-dental approximant [Ê] for words with either sound, possibly in free variation with [v] and/or [w]. So wet and vet are homophones.[5]

  * Because of the previous characteristic many Indians pronounce words such as <flower> as [flaË(r)] instead of [flaÊÉ(r)], and <our> as [aË(r)] instead of [aÊÉ(r)].

  * The voiceless plosives /p/, /t/, /k/ are always unaspirated in Indian English, whereas in RP, General American and most other English accents they are aspirated in word-initial or stressed syllables. Thus "pin" is pronounced [pÉªn] in Indian English but [pÊ°Éªn] in most other accents. In native Indian languages (except Tamil), the distinction between aspirated and unaspirated plosives is phonemic, and the English stops are equated with the unaspirated rather than the aspirated phonemes of the local languages.[7] The same is true of the voiceless postalveolar afficate /Ê§/.

  * The alveolar stops English /d/, /t/ are often retroflex [É], [Ê], especially in the South of India.[8] In Indian languages there are two entirely distinct sets of coronal plosives: one dental and the other retroflex. To the Indian ears, the English alveolar plosives sound more retroflex than dental. In the Devanagari script of Hindi, all alveolar plosives of English are transcribed as their retroflex counterparts. One good reason for this is that unlike most other native Indian languages, Hindi does not have true retroflex plosives (Tiwari, [1955] 2001). The so-called retroflexes in Hindi are actually articulated as apical post-alveolar plosives, sometimes even with a tendency to come down to the alveolar region. So a Hindi speaker normally cannot distinguish the difference between their own apical post-alveolar plosives and English's alveolar plosives. However, languages such as Tamil have true retroflex plosives, wherein the articulation is done with the tongue curved upwards and backwards at the roof of the mouth. This also causes (in parts of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh) the /s/ preceding alveolar /t/ to allophonically change to [ Ê ] (<stop> /stÉp/ â / ÊÊap/). Mostly in south India, some speakers allophonically further change the voiced retroflex plosive to voiced retroflex flap, and the nasal /n/ to a nasalized retroflex flap.

  * Many native languages of India (including Hindi) lack the voiced postalveolar fricative (/Ê/). Typically, /z/ or /dÊ/ is substituted, e.g. treasure /trÉ.zÉËr/,[8] and in the south Indian variants, with /Ê/ as in <"sh'"ore>, e.g. treasure /trÉ.ÊÉr/.

  * All major native languages of India lack the dental fricatives (/Î¸/ and /Ã°/; spelled with th). Usually, the aspirated voiceless dental plosive [tÌªÊ°] is substituted for /Î¸/ and the unaspirated voiced dental plosive [dÌª], or possibly the aspirated version [dÌªÊ±]. is substituted for /Ã°/.[9] For example, "thin" would be realized as [tÌªÊ°Éªn] instead of /Î¸Éªn/.

  * South Indians tend to curl the tongue (retroflex accentuation) more for /l/ and /n/.[citation needed]

  * Most Indian languages (except Urdu variety) lack the voiced alveolar fricative /z/. While they do have its nearest equivalent: the unvoiced /s/, strangely, it is not used in substitution. Instead, /z/ is substituted with the voiced palatal affricate (or postalveolar) /dÊ/, just as with a Korean accent. This makes words such as <zero> and <rosy> sound as [dÊiËro] and [roËdÊi:]. This replacement is equally true for Persian and Arabic loanwords into Hindi. The probable reason is the confusion created by the use of the devanagari grapheme < à¤ > (for /dÊ/) with a dot beneath it to represent the loaned /z/ (as < à¤à¤¼ >). This is common among people without formal English education.

  * Many Indians with lower exposure to English also may pronounce / f / as aspirated voiceless bilabial plosive [pÊ°]. Again note that in Hindi (devanagari) the loaned / f / from Persian and Arabic is written by putting a dot beneath the grapheme for native [pÊ°] < à¤« >: < à¤«à¤¼ >. This substitution is rarer than that for [z], and in fact in many Hindi-speaking areas /f/ is replacing /pÊ°/ even in its native words.[citation needed]

  * Inability to pronounce certain (especially word-initial) consonant clusters by people of rural backgrounds. This is usually dealt with by epenthesis. e.g., school /is.kuËl/.

  * Sometimes, Indian speakers interchange /s/ and /z/, especially when plurals are being formed. Whereas in international varieties of English, [s] is used for pluralization of a word ending in a voiceless consonant, [z] for that ending in a voiced consonant or vowel, and [É¨z] for that ending in a sibilant.

  * Again, in dialects like Bhojpuri, all instances of /Ê/ are spoken like [s], a phenomenon which is also apparent in their English. Exactly the opposite is seen for many Bengalis.[citation needed]

  * In case of the postalveolar affricates /tÊ/ /dÊ/, native languages like Hindi have corresponding affricates articulated from the palatal region, rather than postalveolar, and they have more of a stop component than fricative; this is reflected in their English.

  * While retaining /Å/ in the final position, Indian speakers usually include the [g] after it. Hence /riÅ.iÅ/ â /riÅ.giÅg/ (ringing).[citation needed]

  * Syllabic /l/, /m/ and /n/ are usually replaced by the VC clusters [Él], [Ém] and [Én] (as in button /buÊ.ÊÉn/), or if a high vowel precedes, by [il] (as in little /liÊ.Êil/). Syllable nuclei in words with the spelling er (a schwa in RP and an r-colored schwa in GA) are also replaced VC clusters. e.g., meter, /miËtÉ(É¹)/ â /miËÊÉr/.[citation needed]

  * Indian English uses clear [l] in all instances like Irish English whereas other varieties use clear [l] in syllable-initial positions and dark [l] (velarized-L) in coda and syllabic positions.

### [edit] Spelling pronunciation

A number of distinctive features of Indian English are due to "the vagaries of
English spelling".[9] Most Indian languages have a very phonetic pronunciation
with respect to their script, and unlike English, the spelling of a word is a
highly reliable guide to its modern pronunciation.

  * In words where the digraph <gh> represents a voiced velar plosive (/g/) in other accents, some Indian English speakers supply a murmured version [gÊ±], for example <ghost> [gÊ±oËst]. No other accent of English admits this voiced aspiration.[8]
  * Similarly, the digraph <wh> may be aspirated as [ÊÊ±] or [wÊ±], resulting in realizations such as <which> [ÊÊ±ÉªÊ§] found in no other English accent.[10]
  * In unstressed syllables, native English varieties will mostly use the schwa while Indian English would use the spelling vowel, making <sanity> sound as [sÃ¦.ni.ti] instead of [sÃ¦.nÉ.ti].[citation needed] Similarly, <above> and <ago> can be heard as [e.bÊv] and [e.go] instead of [É.bÊv] and [É.go].
  * English words ending in grapheme < a > almost always have the < a > being pronounced as schwa /É/ in native varieties (exceptions include words such as <spa>). But in Indian English, the ending < a > is pronounced as the long open central unrounded vowel /aË/ (as in <spa>) instead of schwa. So, <India> is pronounced as /Éªn.ÉÉª.aË/ instead of /Éªn.dÉª.É/, and <sofa> as /soË.faË/ instead of /soÊ.fÉ/.[citation needed]
  * The word "of" is usually pronounced with a /f/ instead of a /v/ as in most other accents.[9]
  * Use of [d] instead of [t] for the "-ed" ending of the past tense after voiceless consonants, for example "developed" may be [dÉÊlÉpd] instead of RP /dÉªvÉlÉpt/.[8]
  * Use of [s] instead of [z] for the "-s" ending of the plural after voiced consonants, for example <dogs> may be [dÉgs] instead of [dÉgz].[9]
  * Pronunciation of <house> as [hauz] in both the noun and the verb, instead of [haus] as noun and [hauz] as verb.
  * The digraph <tz> is pronounced as [tz] or [tdÊ] instead of [ts] (voicing may be assimilated in the stop too), making <Switzerland> sound like [svit.zÉr.lÃ¦nd] instead of [swit.sÉÉº.lÉnd].[citation needed]
  * In RP, /r/ occurs only before a vowel. But many speakers of Indian English use /r/ in almost all positions in words as dictated by the spellings.[9] The allophone used is a mild trill or a tap. Indian speakers do not typically use the retroflex approximant /É»/ for <r>, which is common for American English speakers.[citation needed]
  * All consonants are distinctly doubled (lengthened) in General Indian English wherever the spelling suggests so. e.g., <drilling> /dril.liÅg/.
  * <Here> is pronounced as [heÉ(r)] (like in <hair> and <hare>) instead of [hÉªÉ(r)].
  * English pronunciation of the grapheme < i > varies from [Éª] to [aÉª] depending upon the dialect or accent. Indian English will invariably use the British dialect for it. Thus, <tensile> would be pronounced as [tÉn.saÉªl] like the British, rather than [tÉn.sÉªl] like the American; <anti> would be pronounced as [Ã¦n.ti] like the British, rather than [Ã¦n.taÉª] like American.[citation needed]
  * English words borrowed from French are often given a French-influenced pronunciation, but in India, such words are sometimes pronounced according to the rules of English pronunciation. e.g., <bouquet /bu.kÉt/ or /bau kwÉt/ instead of [bu.keË] ;[citation needed] <entrÃ©e> as [Én.ÊriË] instead of [Én.tÌªreË].

### [edit] Supra-segmental features

Any of the native varieties of English is a stress-timed language, and word
stress is an important feature of Received Pronunciation. Indian native
languages are actually syllable-timed languages, like Latin and French.
Indian-English speakers usually speak with a syllabic rhythm.[11] Further, in
some Indian languages, stress is associated with a low pitch,[12] whereas in
most English dialects, stressed syllables are generally pronounced with a
higher pitch. Thus, when Indian speakers speak, they appear to put the stress
accents at the wrong syllables, or accentuate all the syllables of a long
English word. The Indian accent is a "sing-song" accent, a feature seen in a
few English dialects in Britain, such as Scouse and Welsh English.

Reference: Varshney, R.L., "An Introductory Textbook of Linguistics and
Phonetics", 15th Ed. (2005), Student Store, Bareilly.

## [edit] Grammar, idioms and usage in Indian English

Many of the unique grammar and usage in Indian English are related to direct
translations of common phrases in the Indian languages of Hindi and Tamil.

#### [edit] Grammar quirks

  * The progressive tense in stative verbs: I am understanding it. She is knowing the answer. Also, "I am working at XYZ Company" instead of "I work at XYZ Company". This is an influence of traditional Hindi grammar; it is more common in northern states.
  * Prepositions: pay attention on, discuss about, convey him my greetings. Most prepositions of English are direct mental translations of the approximate postpositions of Hindi, but the Hindi-speakers fail to note that there isn't always a one-to-one correspondence.
  * Tag questions: The use of "no?" as a general question tag, as in He's here, no? ('na' often replaces 'no': another influence of languages like Hindi, this time colloquial, common all across the North, West, and East; the South replaces it with the 'ah' sound, as in Ready, ah?, an influence of colloquial Tamil and Kannada.)
  * Use of the indefinite article a before words starting with vowels.
  * The pluperfect perfect tense used in verbs where International English speakers would use the past simple. I had gone for I went.
  * Use of would instead of will as in "I would be going to New York this weekend".
  * Use of do the needful as in "do whatever needs to be done"
  * Use of the words but or only as intensifiers such as in: "I was just joking but." or "It was she only who cooked this rice." Or even "I didn't go only" to mean "I didn't end up going after all." (Influenced by Hindi syntax.)
  * Adding "U" to all english words e.g. LeftU for left, BusU for Bus; especially people from South Indian states mainly Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh have the habit of when speaking Tamil and Kannada and Telugu respectively
  * Anglicisation of Indian words especially in Chennai by adding "ify" to a local Tamil word.
  * Use of yaar, machaa, abey, arey in an English conversation between Indians, mainly by people of native Hindi-speaking origin; 'ra', 'da', 'machaa' is more frequently used in the South.
  * Idiomatic English for quantification in use of preposition "of", as in "There is so much of happiness in being honest."
  * Use of "open" and "close" instead of switch/turn on/off, as in "Open the air conditioner" instead of "Turn on the air conditioner", and "Open your shirt" for "Take off your shirt." This construction is also found in Quebec English and also among Arab speakers of English etc.
  * Use of "y'all" for "you all" or "all of you", as used in Southern American English, especially by Anglo-Indians. However, unlike Southern American usage, it is only used is a subject or object in a sentence, never to address a group of people.
  * Swapping around the meanings of "slow" and "soft" as in "I shall speak slower for you" meaning "I will speak softly" and "Make the fan softer" to mean "Make the fan go slower."
  * Creation of rhyming double-words (rhyming reduplication) to denote generality of idea or act, a 'totality' of the word's denotation, as in "No more ice-cream-fice-cream for you!", "Let's go have some chai-vai (tea, "tea and stuff")." or "There's a lot of this fighting-witing going on in the neighborhood." (Prevalent mainly in Hindi- and Punjabi-speaking states.)
  * Use of "baazi"/"baaji" or "-giri" for the same purpose, as in "business-baazi" or "cheating-giri." (Also prevalent mainly in Hindi-speaking states.)
  * Use of word "wala" to denote occupation or 'doing of/involvement in doing' something, as in "The taxi-wala overcharged me.", "The grocery-wala sells fresh fruit." or "He's a real music-wala: his CD collection is huge."
  * Use of the word maane (Bengali) , "Yani" (Urdu) and matlab (Hindi/Urdu) to mean, loosely, "meaning" ("What I mean is..."), as in "The problem with your idea, maane, what I feel is missing, is ki it does not address the problem of overstaffing." or "Your explanation, matlab, your feeble attempt at one, was sorely lacking in cohesiveness."
  * Use of the word "since" instead of "for" in conjunction with periods of time, as in "I have been working since four years" instead of "I have been working for four years" or "I have been working since four years ago". This usage is more common among speakers of North Indian languages such as Hindi where the words for both "since" and "for" are the same.
  * Confusion, especially among North Indians, between the use of till and since, as in "Till you haven't finished your homework, you will not get dinner." Till and until are also used for as long as as in "I will never forget that until I am alive." These are directly traceable to Hindi grammar.
  * Use of "Can you drop me?" and "We will drop her first" instead of "Can you drop me off?" and "We will drop her off first"
  * Omission of the definite article: e.g. "Let's go to city" instead of "Let's go to the city"
  * Usage of "out of hundred" instead of per cent: "He got hundred out of hundred" instead of "He got a hundred" or "He got one hundred per cent".
  * Use of "the same" instead of "it", as in "I heard that you have written a document on .... Could you send me the same?"
  * Use of "or what?", a translation of Hindi kya, at the end of a sentence. Kya is also encountered in Indian English.
  * Skipping of verbs, as used in Hindi in the beginning of the sentence as in "What I did?", instead of "What did I do?"
  * Use of "told" instead of "said". An example would be "Ravi told he is going home" instead of "Ravi said he is going home" or "Ravi told me he is going home". This error is more prevalent in south india.

## [edit] Idioms and popular words/phrases

  * First-class \- indicates high-quality material, used to describe many things - lodging, cars, food, drink, people.
  * B.A. - fail \- used in matrimonial ads to describe someone who did not pass the final examinations but was admitted to college and did take college classes, as opposed to someone who did not go to college. 'Higher Secondary (fail)' and 'M.A. (fail)' are similar.
  * B.A. - pass \- used as the opposite to the above
  * Gone for a six \- to mean something got ruined. (Origins linked to game of Cricket)
  * Eve teasing \- 'Sexual harassment'
  * Convented \- 'A girl educated well in Christian convent-style school'
  * I got a firing/I was fired by him \- 'I got yelled at by him'
  * Sharma sir is not here \- same as Sharma-ji is not here, a respectful address. No knighthood suffix.
  * I will make a move now \- means 'I'm leaving', not 'making a move on someone'.
  * Where are you put up? means 'Where do you live'?. Heard often in S.India.
  * Where do you stay? is the same as 'Where do you live?' or 'Where's your house?'
  * Shift \- to move as in "I shifted my things from my old apartment to my new one".
  * I don't take meat/milk/whatever \- 'I don't eat meat/ drink milk' etc
  * She is innocently divorced or divorced (innocent)\- part of matrimonial advertising terminology, it means the marriage was not consummated..
  * Wheatish complexion \- Seen in matrimonial ads. Means 'not dark skinned, tending toward light'
  * "What is [your] good name?" to mean "What is your full name?" is a carryover from the Hindi expression "Shubh-naam" (literally meaning "auspicious name") or the Urdu "ism-e shariif" (meaning "noble name"). This is similar to the way Japanese refer to the other person's name with an honorific "O-" prefix, as in "O-namae" instead of the simple "namae" when referring to their own name. Such a questioner wants to know the person's formal or legal given name that may appear on a passport, as opposed to the pet name they would be called by close friends and family.
  * "Out of station" to mean "out of town". This phrase has its origins in the posting of army officers to particular 'stations' during the days of the East India Company.
  * "Join duty" to mean "reporting to work for the first time". "Rejoin duty" is to come back to work after a vacation.
  * "Tell me": used when answering the phone, meaning "How can I help you?"
  * "order for food" instead of "order food", as in "Let's order for sandwiches".
  * "pass out" is meant to graduate, as in "I passed out of the university in 1995."
  * "go for a toss" means to end prematurely or unexpectedly, as in "my plans went for a toss when it started raining heavily." This phrase has origins in cricket, where to go for a toss as means to be dismissed on the first ball.
  * "on the anvil" is used often in the Indian press to mean something is about to appear or happen. For example, a headline might read "New roads on the anvil".
  * "tight slap" to mean "hard slap".
  * Timepass \- 'Doing something for leisure but with no intention or target/satisfaction' For example, "Hows the movie?" reply - "Just timepass man... nothing great about it."
  * Divorce (with the emphasis on the i as in pronouncing the word eye) same meaning but different pronunciation

#### [edit] Addressing others

  * Referring to elders, strangers or anyone meriting respect as "'jee'"/"'ji'" (Hindi: à¤à¥ used as a suffix) as in "Please call a taxi for Gupta-ji" (North, West and East India)
  * Use of prefixes "Shree"/"Shri" (Devanagari: à¤¶à¥à¤°à¥ meaning Mister) or "Shreemati"/"Shrimati" (Devanagari: à¤¶à¥à¤°à¥à¤®à¤¤à¥ meaning Ms/Mrs): Shri Ravi Shankar or Shreemati Das Gupta.
  * As with Shree/Shreemati, use of suffixes "Saahib/SÄhab" (Mr) and "Begum" (Mrs)(Urdu) as in "Welcome to India, Smith-saahib." or "Begum Sahib would like some tea."
  * Use of "Mr" and "Mrs" as common nouns for wife/husband. For example, "Jyoti's Mr stopped by yesterday" or "My Mrs is not feeling well" (this use of "Mrs." or "missus" is also used in the UK.
  * Use of "Ms" (also Mr, Mrs) with first name. For example, Swathi Ashok Kumar might be addressed as "Ms Swathi" instead of "Ms Kumar". This is the only possible correct usage in South India, especially in Tamil Nadu, where most people don't use a surname.
  * Use of the English words 'uncle' and 'aunty' as suffixes when addressing people such as distant relatives, neighbours, acquaintances, even total strangers (like shopkeepers) who are significantly older than oneself. E.g., "Hello, Swathi aunty!" In fact, in Indian culture, children or teenagers addressing their friend's parents as Mr Patel or Mrs Patel (etc.) is considered unacceptable, perhaps even offensiveâa substitution of Sir/Ma'am is also not suitable, except for teachers. On the contrary, if a person is really one's uncle or aunt, he/she will usually not be addressed as "uncle"/"auntie",[citation needed] but with the name of the relation in the vernacular Indian language, even while conversing in English.[citation needed] For example, if a woman is one's mother's sister, she would not be addressed (by a Hindi speaker) as "auntie" but as Mausi (Hindi: à¤®à¥à¤¸à¥) (by a Kannada speaker as Chikkamma Kannada: à² à²¤à³à²¤à³). It is interesting to observe that calling one's friends' parents auntie and uncle was also very common in Great Britain in the 1960s and 70s but is much rarer today.
  * Use of Respected Sir while starting a formal letter instead of Dear Sir. Again, such letters are ended with non-standard greetings, such as "Yours respectfully", or "Yours obediently", rather than the standard "Yours sincerely/faithfully/truly".
  * Use of "Baba" ('father' in some languages, but colloquially meaning 'buddy') while referring to any person, such as "No Baba, just try and understand, I cannot come today".
  * the phrase 'the concerned person' is widely used in oral Indian English.
  * Use of the word "sir" in common dialogue (this is VERY common in Tamil Nadu) where "sir" sounds much like "saar": Ex- "Call a cab for Venkata-saar".

#### [edit] Interjections and casual references

  * Casual use of words yaar (Hindi: à¤¯à¤¾à¤° meaning - friend, buddy, dude, man, mate), bhai (Hindi: à¤­à¤¾à¤ meaning - brother) and bhaiyya (Hindi: à¤­à¤à¤¯à¤¾ meaning - elder brother) much as with the American English 'man' or 'dude', as in " Arey! C'mon, yaar! Don't be such a killjoy!", "Long time no see, bhai." or "Ay, bhaiyya! Over here!" Yaar is the equivalent of mate in Australian and British English. The word boss is also sometimes used in this way, among friends but also to male strangers, as in "How much to go to the train station, boss?", or "Good to see you, boss."
  * Informal and sometimes coarse assignations of familial relationships to friends. For example, alliyan in Kerala, machan in Chennai, mama in Hyderabad literally meaning uncle and sala (Hindi: à¤¸à¤¾à¤²à¤¾) in Mumbai literally mean brother-in-law, but are informally used by the youth to refer to each other. Targeted at a stranger, such words may take a derogatory meaning (like "sleeping with your sister").
  * Use of interjections Arey!(Hindi: à¤ à¤°à¥) and acchha! (Hindi: à¤ à¤à¥à¤à¤¾) to express a wide range of emotions, usually positive though occasionally not, as in "Arey! What a good job you did!", "Accha, so that's your plan." or "Arey, what bad luck, yaar!"
  * Use of the word "chal" (Hindi: à¤à¤² - Imperative of the verb "to walk") to mean the interjection "Ok", as in "Chal, I gotta go now" at the end of a phone call
  * Use of oof! or "oh fo!" (Hindi: à¤à¤«à¤¼ - an interjection in Hindi) to show distress or frustration, as in "Oof! The baby's crying again!"
  * Use of "Wah" (Hindi: à¤µà¤¾à¤¹) to express admiration, especially in musical settings, as in "Wah! Wah! You play the sitar so well!"
  * Use of "just" and "simply" in a seemingly arbitrary manner in southern India, especially Kerala. e.g. Q:"Why did you do it?" A:"Simply!" or "Just I was telling to [sic] him.
  * "Lady's finger" means "Okra" (as in some other English-speaking countries). "Brinjal" means eggplant or aubergine.
  * "Hill Station" means mountain resort.
  * "Hotel" means "restaurant" (as well as specifically "big hotel") in India: "I ate in the hotel". "Lodge" is used to refer to small hotels. Sometimes "Lodge" refers to a place where you stay (in rooms) and "Hotel" refers to a place where you eat.
  * "stepney" or "stepaney" refers to a car's spare tyre.
  * "specs" means spectacles or glasses (as in colloquial UK English).
  * "cent per cent" means "100 per cent" as in "He got cent per cent in maths."
  * "centum" is also frequently used to refer to 100.
  * Overuse of the word "Please" as an interjection, often over-stressing the vowel. This could stem from "please" being implied within the verb conjugation in Hindi, causing speakers to overcompensate for its absence in English.
  * Use of the verb "sit" in place of "located" e.g. "Where are you sitting?" for "Where are you located? (for one's location in a school or office but not home)"
  * Use of "chumma chumma" (Tamil: à®à¯à®®à¯à®® means simply) at the beginning of a sentence. (eg. chumma chumma dont talk)
  * Unnecessary repetition of a word to stress on the general idea. Used mostly with words like Yes, No, Right, Ok etc. (e.g. A: Did you finish reading the book ? B: Yes yes !!)

#### [edit] Anomalous usage

  * Insertion of "as" in describing a designation, where it would be omitted in Standard English: "Mahatma Gandhi is called as father of the nation." "Bangalore is termed as Silicon Valley of India." "Yogurt is called as curd in Indian English."
  * Substitution of "one" in place of the indefinite article "a": "Let me tell you one story." This is because in Indian languages, the numeric word for one (e.g. Hindi à¤à¤ ek) is also used as the indefinite article.
  * "Kindly" used to mean "please": "Kindly disregard the previous message".
  * "Paining" used when "hurting" would be more common in Standard American and British: "My head is paining."
  * "Cover" to mean envelope or shopping bag in South India. For example, "Put the documents in a cover and post it", and "Put the vegetables in a separate cover". In Western India, especially Maharashtra, a shopping bag is called as a `Carry Bag'.
  * "Today morning" (afternoon, evening, etc.) instead of "this morning." ("I met with him today morning."). Similarly, "yesterday night" instead of "last night".
  * "Pattice" is used for a singular vegetable or meat patty or plural patties.
  * The verb "revert" used to mean "reply to" and the noun to mean a "reply" ("Why have you not reverted my letter?" meaning "Why have you not replied to my letter?")
  * The word "marriage" used to mean "wedding." ("I am attending my cousin's marriage next month.")
  * Treatment of the phrase "I don't think so" as a unit, as in "I don't think so I can do that" instead of "I don't think I can do that."
  * The word non-veg (short for non-vegetarian) is used to mean food which contains flesh of any mammal, fish, bird, shellfish, etc or even eggs. Fish, seafood, and eggs are not treated as categories separate from "meat," especially when the question of vegetarianism is at issue (milk and its products are always considered vegetarian). E.g., "We are having non-veg today for dinner", whereas the native varieties of English would have: "We are having meat today for dinner".
  * The word "mutton" is used to mean goat meat instead of sheep meat (and sometimes in a broader, euphemistic sense to mean any red meat, i.e., not poultry or fish).
  * The word "hero" is used to mean a male protagonist in a story, especially in a motion picture. The protagonist need not have any specifically heroic characteristics. More significantly, "hero" is used to mean a movie actor who is often cast in the role of the protagonist. Thus, "Look at Vik; he looks like a hero," meaning "he is as handsome as a movie star."
  * "Music director" is used to mean a music composer for movies.
  * The word "dialogue" means "a line of dialogue" in a movie. ("That was a great dialogue!" means "That was a great line!") "Dialogues" is used to mean "screenplay." In motion picture credits, the person who might in other countries be credited as the screenwriter in India is often credited with the term "dialogues." (Note the usage of British spelling).
  * The word "damn" used as an intensifier, especially a negative one, far more frequently and with far more emphatic effect, than in international English, as in "That was a damn good meal".
  * The word "healthy" as a euphamism for fat people, in North India and in general as in "His build is on the healthy side" to refer to a overweight person.
  * The word "dress" (noun) is used to refer to clothes for men, women, and children alike: "She bought a new dress for her son", whereas in international varieties of English a dress is a women's outer clothing with a bodice and a skirt as a single garment. The usage of dress as clothes does exist in international varieties but only in very rare occasions and in relevant context., e.g. schooldress. Young girls in India invariably wear a dress, which is called a frock by the Indians.
  * "Full Shirt" is used for "Full Sleeves" and "Half Shirt" for "Half Sleeves" or "Short Sleeves". Similarly full-pant means trousers and half-pant means shorts.
  * "Shirtings and suitings" used for the process of making such garments and also to refer to shops specializing in men's formal/business wear.
  * saloon [sÃ¦.'luËn] instead of salon, as in "I will visit the hair saloon."
  * "Bath" and "bathe" are also used interchangeably.
  * Usage of the word Mohammadans instead of proper Muslims by many Hindus.
  * The use of "also" in place of "too" or "as well"; as in "I also need a blanket" instead of "I too need a blanket" or "He was late also" instead of "He was late as well"
  * Intensifying adjectives by doubling them. This is a common feature of most Indian languages. For example: "She has curly-curly hair"; "You are showing your hairy-hairy legs"; "We went to different-different places in the city in search of a good hotel; "You will get used to the humidity slowly-slowly"; "Don't worry about small-small things" to mean very insignificant issues.
  * Use of "reduce" to mean "lose weight" as in "I need to reduce.!"
  * Use of "this side" and "that side" instead of "here" and "there." "Bring it this side." "We went that side."
  * Use of "engagement" to mean not just an agreement between two people to marry, but a formal, public ceremony (often accompanied by a party) where the engagement is formalized with a ring and/or other local rituals. Indians will not speak of a couple as being "engaged," until after the engagement ceremony has been performed. Similar to the use of term "marriage," a person may say "I am going to attend my cousin's engagement next month." Afterwards, the betrothed is referred to as one's "would-be" wife or husband. In this case, "would be" is used to mean "will be" in contrast with the standard and American and British connotation of "wants to be (but will not be)."
  * The word "marry" used to mean "arrange or organize a wedding for," as in "I will be marrying my daughter next month", meaning: "I will be hosting/organizing my daughter's wedding next month."
  * "Graduation" used exclusively to mean completion of a bachelor's degree: "I did my graduation at Presidency College" ("I earned my bachelor's degree at Presidency College."), whereas in the United States it refers to completion of Highschool, Master's or PhD as well.
  * Word order following who, what, where, when, why, or how with clauses is anomalous. In standard American and British English, the following are correct

    "Where are you going?"
    "Tell me where you are going"
    In Indian English, however, a speaker will tend to choose one or the other word order pattern and apply it universally, thus:
    "Where are you going?" and "Tell me where are you going.", or
    "Where you are going?" and "Tell me where you are going."
  * "Metro" to mean large city (i.e. 'metros such as Delhi and Chennai') This is a shortening of the term Metropolis. This can be confusing for Europeans, who tend to use the word to describe underground urban rail networks. However, following the popularity of the Delhi Metro, the word Metro now tends to be used to describe both the metropolis and the underground rail network.
  * Use of the word "shift" to indicate "move" (oneself with belongings to a different house or city), as in "When are you shifting?" (instead of "When are you moving?").
  * Use of "blood pressure" or "BP" to refer particularly to high blood pressure, as in "I have BP!" to mean "I have high BP or hypertension".
  * Lifting the phone (picking up the phone).
  * "Yoghurt" is called as curd or Dahi (Hindi: à¤¦à¤¹à¥) in Indian English, whereas in native varieties of English, curd is sour coagulated milk which is precursor to cheese.

Words unique to (i.e. not generally well-known outside South Asia) and/or
popular in India include those in the following by no means exhaustive list:

  * batchmate or batch-mate (Not classmate, but a schoolmate of the same grade)
  * "eggitarian" for a person who is eats vegetarian food, milk and eggs but not meat.
  * compass box for pencil box
  * cousin-brother (male first cousin) & cousin-sister (female first cousin); used conversely is one's own brother/sister (of one's parent, as opposed to uncle or aunt; English brother/sister): most Indians live in extended families and many do not differentiate even nominally between cousins and direct siblings.
  * Curd used instead of yoghurt.
  * Dicky/dickey the boot/trunk of a car
  * foot overbridge (bridge meant for pedestrians)
  * Funda (fundamentals) as in "I cant understand the funda behind this chemistry formula."
  * godown (warehouse)
  * godman somewhat pejorative word for a person who claims to be divine or who claims to have supernatural powers
  * gully to mean a narrow lane or alley (from the Hindi word "gali" meaning the same).
  * Himalayan blunder (grave mistake)
  * mugging or mugging up (studying hard or memorising, and having nothing to do with street crime).
  * nose-screw (woman's nose-ring)
  * ragging for fagging(UK)/hazing(US).
  * In tension for being concerned or nervous
  * tiffin for lunch box. The word is also commonly used to mean a between-meal snack.
  * upgradation (commonly used in business communication instead of 'upgrade')
  * uptil used for or "up until".
  * co-brother indicates relationship between two men who married sisters, as in "He is my co-brother" (commonly used in South India)
  * Some Indians consider "baby" as applicable only to a female infant. A male infant would be called a "baba" [baËbaË] (in Hindi [i]-ending nouns are usually feminine and [a]-ending ones usually masculine.)

### [edit] Colloquial and slang words used in Indian English

The words below are not generally used in formal Indian English. These are
mainly used by the younger generation and may not be used or understood by
older English speakers in India.

  * arbit (a slang term and short for arbitrary. Can be used to mean "vague", "random" or "bad". e.g.: "What an arbit ending that movie had!" Used primarily by college students in the metros.
  * fundu or fundoo \- great. Someone who has good fundas is fundu. 'Fundu grub' means great food. The word sometimes surfaces more publicly as in this ad for chips: 'Five fundu flavours', probably aimed at the young, college-going market
  * enthu, a short form for 'enthusiasm' or 'enthusiastic'. For example, 'He has a lot of enthu'.
  * despo, a short form for 'desperate'.
  * senti, a short form for 'sentimental'.
  * n \- Many (He takes n troubles to stay neat).
  * "Deadly", "hi-fi", "sexy" are used in idiomatic ways as adjectives. Deadly means intense, "hi-fi" stylish or beyond the perception of the average person and "sexy" excellent or extremely cool. Examples are "That movie was deadly, yaar; what an action scene!", "Your shoes are hi-fi. Where'd you get them?" and "That's a sexy car, man!"
  * bond \- used for in a variety of ways to refer to a dexterous or talented person. Examples are "... you are a bond yaar" and "he is a bond". Possibly originated from the character of James Bond
  * "Propose", to ask a person of the opposite sex if he/she is interested in him. Unlike Western usage, it does not imply marriage, instead it means asking someone out.
  * ..freaking out \- used (loosely) in place of "..having a good time", as in We are all going to the club tonight to freak out or it can also mean being worried about something, as in I am freaking out thinking about the exams
  * solid \- used in the context of some strong emphasis, often as a stand-alone term.

## [edit] Indian numbering system

Main article: Indian numbering system

The Indian numbering system is primarily used for counting in Indian English.
Lakh and Crores are used as every day terms. While the term hundred thousand
is hardly used, numbers like million, and billion are used to denote infinite
quantities. For numbers greater than ten crore, it is common to use lakh and
crore repeatedly or in combination, saying 1 lakh crore for 1012.

## [edit] See also

  * Hinglish
  * Indian English literature
  * Regional accents of English
  * Regional differences and dialects in Indian English
  * Indian numbering system
  * Languages with official status in India
  * Republic of India
  * Sri Lankan English

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Census of India's eCensusIndia, Issue 10, 2003, pp 8-10, (Feature: Languages of West Bengal in Census and Surveys, Bilingualism and Trilingualism). 1991 statistic.
  2. ^ Wells, p. 624
  3. ^ [1] Shashi Tharoor on P G Wodehouse in India
  4. ^ PICO IYER English in India: Still All the Raj The New York Times on the web.
  5. ^ a b c d Wells, p. 627
  6. ^ a b Wells, p. 626
  7. ^ Wells, pp. 627-628
  8. ^ a b c d Wells, p. 62
  9. ^ a b c d e Wells, p. 629
  10. ^ Wells, p. 630
  11. ^ Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language (Cambridge University Press, 1995), page 360
  12. ^ http://www.linguistics.uiuc.edu/sala25/verma.htm "Onset of Rising Pitch in Focused Words in Hindi: an Experimental Study"

## [edit] Bibliography

  * Wells, J C (1982). Accents of English 3: Beyond the British Isles. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521285410.

## [edit] External links

  * English in India
  * "Linguistic and Social Characteristics of Indian English" by James Baldridge : A rather thorough analysis of Indian language published by the "Language In India" magazine.
  * On the future of Indian English, by Gurcharan Das.
  * An exploration into linguistic majority-minority relations in India, by B. Mallikarjun.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Dialects and accents of English by continent  
Africa

Cameroon Â· Liberian Â· Malawian Â· Namibian Â· South African Â· Ugandan  
Asia

Burmese Â· Hong Kong Â· Indian (regional/occupational dialects) Â· Malaysian
(Manglish) Â· Pakistani Â· Philippine Â· Singaporean (Singlish) Â· Sri Lankan  
Europe

British Isles

British English Â· Black British Â· Brummie Â· Channel Island Â· Cockney Â·
Cumbrian Â· East Anglian Â· East Midlands Â· Estuary Â· Geordie Â· Highland Â·
Irish Â· Kentish Â· Lancashire Â· Mackem Â· Manc Â· Manx Â· Mid Ulster Â·
Multicultural London Â· Norfolk Â· Northern Â· Received Pronunciation Â·
Scottish Â· Scouse Â· Southern Â· West Midlands Â· Welsh Â· West Country Â·
Yorkshire  
Other

Gibraltarian (Llanito) Â· Malta (Maltenglish)  
North  
America

United States

African American Vernacular Â· Appalachian Â· Baltimorese Â· Boston Â·
Buffalonian Â· Cajun Â· California Â· Chicano Â· General American Â· Hudson
Valley Â· Inland Northern American Â· Midland Â· New England Â· New Jersey Â·
New York City Â· North Central American Â· Northeast Pennsylvania Â· Pacific
Northwest Â· Pennsylvania Dutch English Â· Philadelphia Â· Pittsburgh Â·
Southern American Â· Tidewater Â· Western Â· Yat Â· Yooper  
Canada

Cape Breton Â· Lunenburg Â· Maritimer Â· Newfoundland Â· Ottawa Valley Twang
Â· Quebec Â· West/Central Canadian  
Caribbean

Bahamian Â· Jamaican  
Other

Belize Â· Bermudian  
South America

Falkland Islands Â· Guyana Â· Trinidadian  
Oceania

Australian (Australian Aboriginal Â· Torres Strait) Â· New Zealand  
Related

Basic Â· International Â· Engrish Â· English language in England Â· Globish Â·
Pidgin Â· Mid-Atlantic Â· Plain Â· Simplified Â· Special Â· Standard Â·
American and British English differences Â· E-Prime  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_English"

Categories: Languages of India | Indian English

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since February
2008 | All articles that may contain original research | Articles needing
expert attention since March 2008 | Uncategorized articles needing expert
attention | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced
statements since January 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since April
2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since September 2007 | Articles with
unsourced statements since December 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Simple English
  * Suomi

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 11:38 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



