
# Russian mat

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Mat (Russian: Ð¼Ð°Ñ, Ð¼Ð°ÑÐµÑÑÐ¸ÌÐ½Ð°, Ð¼Ð°ÌÑÐµÑÐ½ÑÐ¹ ÑÐ·ÑÌÐº) is
a Russian patois language, based on the use of specific generally unprintable
obscene words. Russian mat makes it possible to have a conversation (although
not always insulting, but always emotional) using mainly obscene words, which
is what sets Russian mat apart from the obscenities of most languages. Russian
mat is an indispensable attribute of most groups consisting solely of males,
recently getting into the female-only groups, and the practices of mat
speaking in the mixed groups are to be reduced to the last twenty or thirty
years. [1] . Use of Russian mat in a public place constitutes a form of
disorderly conduct, punishable under article 20.1.1 of the Offences Code of
Russia, however the chances to be punished for the common use of mat in public
are virtually zero.

## Contents

  * 1 Background
  * 2 Key words
  * 3 Further vocabulary
  * 4 Classical poetry with mat
  * 5 See also
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 External links

  
## [edit] Background

The origins of mat are lost in the mists of time. Russian anthropologists
think that it evolved from ancient myth and magical beliefs. However, they
offer divergent interpretations of the basic formula.[2] It is commonly
believed that the name mat derives from matâ² (Russian Ð¼Ð°ÑÑ, "mother,"
where the prime represents the soft sign) The term might rather come from a
word meaning "loud yell," which is now used in only a few expressions such as
Ð±Ð»Ð°Ð³Ð¸Ð¼ Ð¼Ð°ÑÐ¾Ð¼. The use of mat is widespread, especially in the army,
the criminal world, and many other all-male milieus. The basic formula of mat,
in its most common variant, is: YOB TVOYU MAT' (ÐÐ± ÑÐ²Ð¾Ñ Ð¼Ð°ÑÑ)
(fucked your mother), with the familiar "ty" form implying contempt (as
opposed to the more grammatically and socially proper use of "vy", similar to
the distinction between the French "tu" and "vous"). In this variant the
subject of the sentence is omitted, but there is also an expanded variant in
which it is made explicit: PYOS YOB TVOYU MAT' ("[A] [male dog] fucked your
mother").[3] Mikhailin points also to the social influence of the criminal
milieu through the labor camps, where criminals were favored and allowed to
dominate the "political" prisoners. Thus thieves' (blatnoi) customs, aesthetic
standards, and jargon (of which mat is a significant part) penetrated the law-
abiding population, especially the male adolescent subcultures of city
courtyards. That mat belongs to the ancient layers of the Russian language
(the first written mat words date to Middle Ages[citation needed]). It was
first introduced into literature in the 18th century by the poet Ivan Barkov,
whose poetry, combining lofty lyrics with brutally obscene words, may be
regarded as a forerunner of Russian literary parody.

## [edit] Key words

The key elements of mat are:

  * khuy (Russian Ru-Khuy.ogg Ñ ÑÐ¹ (helpÂ·info)) â penis, or for equivalent colloquial effect, cock
    * from PIE *ks-u-, related to khvoya (Russian Ñ Ð²Ð¾Ñ, meaning pine needles), attributed to Pederson, 1908.[1] [2]
    * from PIE *hau-, related to khvost (Russian Ñ Ð²Ð¾ÑÑ, meaning tail), attributed to Merlingen, 1955 [3]
    * other controversial etymologic hypotheses appear every now and again: [4]
      * from Mongolian hui, meaning sheath, scabbard. This was the etymology endorsed by the Soviet government and attributed to Maxim Gorky, who claimed it was a loan word, imposed during Mongol yoke.
      * from Latin huic (lit. "for that", used on prescriptions for genital diseases) via rederivation, similar to Russian zont from Dutch zondeck. Old Russian "ud/uda" (from PIE root *ud- meaning "up, out") became taboo in mid-18th century, requiring the euphemisms khui and kher. [5] [6] [7]
      * from the second-person singular imperative form of the Ukrainian khovati Ñ Ð¾Ð²Ð°ÑÐ¸, meaning hide, stash. Commonly regarded as a joke etymology.
  * pizda (Russian Ru-Pizda.ogg Ð¿Ð¸Ð·Ð´Ð°Ì (helpÂ·info)) â (Romanian pizda) cunt
    * from PIE *pizda ("vulva"), cf Lithuanian "pizda" and Albanian "pidh"; from Latin pesd, perd to let air through, to crepitate.
  * yebatâ² (Russian Ru-Yebat.ogg ÐµÐ±Ð°ÌÑÑ (helpÂ·info)) â to fuck
    * from PIE *eibati ("to fuck"), cf Old High German "eiba" and Sanskrit "yabhati"; From ancient Russian, "poYat'" means just to touch someone.
  * blyadâ² (Russian Ð±Ð»ÑÐ´Ñ) â whore is simply a re-transcription of yet normative "Bludnica" (the wandering woman) 
    * from PIE root cognate with English "blind"; the word was not banned from literary use at the time of Avvakum, who used it to describe various heresies and various expressions based on these terms. Also, the 15th century merchant-traveler Afanasii Nikitin used it simply as "concubine," without any obscene connotations.

The stems can be combined in many ways to generate a rather large range of new
words based on them through the use of prefixes and suffixes. The first volume
of the "Large Mat Dictionary" (Ð±Ð¾Ð»ÑÑÐ¾Ð¹ ÑÐ»Ð¾Ð²Ð°ÑÑ Ð¼Ð°ÑÐ°) treats
only expressions with the word khuy, numbering over 500 entries.[citation
needed]

A detailed article by Victor Erofeyev (translated by Andrew Bromfeld)
analyzing the history, overtones, and sociology of mat appeared in the 15
September 2003 issue of The New Yorker.

## [edit] Further vocabulary

Additionally, the following words are considered almost as offensive, and can
also be regarded as mat:

  * yelda (ÐµÐ»Ð´Ð°Ì) â "big penis";
  * gondon (Ð³Ð¾Ð½Ð´Ð¾ÌÐ½), derived from "condom", but it is a tabooed word and may be used figuratively;
  * kher (Ñ ÐµÑ) "penis"; somewhat less offensive than "khuy"; the actual meanings of kher is the old Russian name of the letter "X" Kha, which became strongly associated with the actual "khuy" (cf. the term "F-word" in English). Interestingly enough, the old word "pokherit'" which used to mean "to cross out," "to delete", now tends to be contaminated with the relatively new meaning of "kher" (i.e., obscene "penis"), thus achieving an obscene meaning, also.
  * manda (Ð¼Ð°Ð½Ð´Ð°Ì) â "vagina";
  * mudak (Ð¼ÑÐ´Ð°ÌÐº) â "smart ass", "git". Another often-used derivative is mudilo (Ð¼ÑÐ´Ð¸ÌÐ»Ð¾) which only bears an abstract offensive meaning and is somewhat equal to "motherfucker." Sometimes, mudak and mudilo are used as equivalents of "moron," e.g. ÐÐ°ÑÑ - Ð¿Ð¾Ð»Ð½ÑÐ¹ Ð¼ÑÐ´Ð¸Ð»Ð¾, ÐµÐ¼Ñ Ð¶ÐµÐ½Ð° Ð¸Ð·Ð¼ÐµÐ½ÑÐµÑ, Ð° Ð¾Ð½ ÑÐ°Ð´ÑÐµÑÑÑ. \- Vasya is a complete moron: his wife cheats on him, but he's still glad.
  * mudi (mudya) (Ð¼ÑÌÐ´Ð¸, Ð¼ÑÐ´Ñ) â "testicles". Rarely used and considered old-fashioned.
  * pidoras (Ð¿Ð¸Ð´Ð¾ÑÐ°ÌÑ), a bastardization of pederast, meaning a male homosexual in Russian. The condensed forms pidor (Ð¿Ð¸ÌÐ´Ð¾Ñ), "pedrila" (Ð¿ÐµÐ´ÑÐ¸ÌÐ»Ð°) are also used. More often than not (though not necessarily), refers to a passive pederast. Often used as a general term like "asshole" or "motherfucker";
  * sraka (ÑÑÐ°ÌÐºÐ°) â "anus," "butt," "asshole", from the verb srat' (ÑÑÐ°ÑÑ) - to make shit.
  * zalupa (Ð·Ð°Ð»ÑÌÐ¿Ð°) means "penis head" (from old Russian "lupit'" - here, "to peel off" (like "lupit' jajtso" - "to peel off egg shell"); therefore, this is "what you can see when the foreskin is pulled back or removed").
  * drochit' (Ð´ÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸ÌÑÑ) â "to masturbate" (oneself or someone). drochit'sya' (Ð´ÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸ÑÑÑÑ) - "to masturbate" (oneself). From Old Russian Ð´ÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸ÑÐ¸ (to pet, to pamper)

The following words are considered vulgar and often used in mat expressions,
but are not regarded as mat on its own:

  * zhopa (Ð¶Ð¾ÌÐ¿Ð°), zadnica (Ð·Ð°ÌÐ´Ð½Ð¸ÑÐ°) - ass, arse, butt
  * govno (Ð³Ð¾Ð²Ð½Ð¾Ì) â shit. Cognate to Sanskrit guvÃ¡ti ("(he) defecates") and Avestan gÅ«Ê®a- ("shit"), from PIE. Note: this and it's synonym der'mo (Ð´ÐµÑÑÐ¼Ð¾Ì) are used as exclamations the way that "Shit!" is used in English. "Blya!" (derived from "blyad'") is also used.
  * khren (Ñ ÑÐµÐ½) - literally "horse-radish", but some may think that it is the mildest euphemism for "khuy"; khren, also means an unpleasant man, and khren' (Ñ ÑÐµÐ½Ñ) is a milder term similar to bullshit, somewhat like crap, used in very similar fashion, both in exclamations and to indicate disbelief or disrespect
  * srat' (ÑÑÐ°ÑÑ) â "to shit"
  * ssat' (ÑÑÐ°ÑÑ) â "to piss"
  * perd'et' (Ð¿ÐµÑÐ´ÐµÌÑÑ) â "to fart"
  * trakhat' (ÑÑÐ°ÌÑ Ð°ÑÑ) â an euphemism for "to fuck"; literally "to hit"
  * suka (ÑÑÌÐºÐ°) â bitch (the same original meaning: female dog)

## [edit] Classical poetry with mat

Mikhail Lermontov ("A Holiday in Peterhof" \- "ÐÐµÑÐµÑÐ³Ð¾ÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
Ð¿ÑÐ°Ð·Ð´Ð½Ð¸Ðº", 1834)

    And so, I will not pay you
    However, if you are a simple blyad'
    You should consider it an honour
    To be acquainted with the cadet's khuy!
    Russian:
    ÐÑÐ°Ðº, ÑÐµÐ±Ðµ Ð½Ðµ Ð·Ð°Ð¿Ð»Ð°ÑÑ Ñ:
    ÐÐ¾ ÐµÑÐ»Ð¸ ÑÑ Ð¿ÑÐ¾ÑÑÐ°Ñ Ð±Ð»ÑÐ´Ñ,
    Ð¢Ð¾ Ð·Ð½Ð°Ð¹: Ð·Ð° ÑÐµÑÑÑ Ð´Ð¾Ð»Ð¶Ð½Ð° ÑÑÐ¸ÑÐ°ÑÑ
    ÐÐ½Ð°ÐºÐ¾Ð¼ÑÑÐ²Ð¾ ÑÐ½ÐºÐµÑÑÐºÐ¾Ð³Ð¾ Ñ ÑÑ!
Ivan Barkov ("Luka Mudischev", prologue; actually, this work was probably
written at some time in the mid 19th century, but was ascribed to Ivan Barkov,
an equally obscene poet who lived in the 18th century [4])

    Oh you, men' wives, or widows fair,
    Or maids with 'cherry' there intact!
    Let me tell you some humble fact
    About fucking out there.
    Make fucking fair and accurate,
    The rarer fuck means fortunate -
    The Holy God shall save all ya
    From some disorderly ebnya.
    As uncontrollable-kind passion,
    Leads only to disaster's ashen,
    And satisfied you won't be right
    With usual yelda-bearing knight.
    Russian:
    Ð Ð²Ñ, Ð·Ð°Ð¼ÑÐ¶Ð½Ð¸Ðµ, Ð¾ Ð²Ð´Ð¾Ð²Ñ,
    Ð Ð´ÐµÐ²ÐºÐ¸ Ñ ÑÐµÐ»ÐºÐ¾Ð¹ Ð½Ð°Ð¾ÑÐ»ÐµÑ!
    ÐÐ¾Ð·Ð²Ð¾Ð»ÑÑÐµ Ð¼Ð½Ðµ Ð²Ð°Ð¼ Ð½Ð°Ð¿ÐµÑÐµÐ´
    Ð¡ÐºÐ°Ð·Ð°ÑÑ Ð¾ ÐµÐ±Ð»Ðµ Ð´Ð²Ð°-ÑÑÐ¸ ÑÐ»Ð¾Ð²Ð°.
    ÐÐ±Ð¸ÑÐµÑÑ Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð»ÐºÐ¾Ð¼, Ð°ÐºÐºÑÑÐ°ÑÐ½Ð¾,
    Ð§ÐµÐ¼ ÑÐµÐ¶Ðµ ÐµÐ±Ð»Ñ, ÑÐµÐ¼ Ð¿ÑÐ¸ÑÑÐ½ÐµÐ¹,
    Ð Ð±Ð¾Ð¶Ðµ Ð²Ð°Ñ Ð¾Ð±Ð¾ÑÐ¾Ð½Ð¸
    ÐÑ Ð±ÐµÑÐ¿Ð¾ÑÑÐ´Ð¾ÑÐ½Ð¾Ð¹ ÐµÐ±Ð½Ð¸!
    ÐÑ Ð½ÐµÐ¾Ð±ÑÐ·Ð´Ð°Ð½Ð½Ð¾Ð¹ ÑÐ¾Ð¹ ÑÑÑÐ°ÑÑÐ¸
    ÐÐ¾Ð¹Ð´ÑÑ Ð¸ Ð³Ð¾ÑÐµ Ð¸ Ð½Ð°Ð¿Ð°ÑÑÐ¸,
    Ð Ð½Ðµ Ð½Ð°ÑÑÑÐ¸Ñ Ð²Ð°Ñ ÑÐ¾Ð³Ð´Ð°
    ÐÐ±ÑÐºÐ½Ð¾Ð²ÐµÐ½Ð½Ð°Ñ ÐµÐ»Ð´Ð°.
## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Russian mat  
  * Russian joke: Taboo vocabulary
  * Russian proverbs
  * Russian humour
  * Russian jokes
  * Ivan Barkov
  * Leningrad, a Russian ska/punk band famous for its vulgar lyrics
  * Russian slang vocabulary

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Vadim Mikhailin, Russkii mat kak muzhskoi obstsennyi kod: problema proiskhozhdeniia i evoliutsiia statusa (Russian Mat as a Male Obscene Code: The Problem of Origin and Evolution of Status) (Saratov, 2003)
  2. ^ http://www.pipss.org/document93.html|Vadim Mikhailin, Russian Army Mat as a Code System Controlling Behaviour in the Russian army
  3. ^ http://www.cdi.org/russia/johnson/8513.cfm#2 Mat JRL RESEARCH & ANALYTICAL SUPPLEMENT ~ JRL 8290 Issue No. 28 â¢ December 2004
  4. ^ http://barkoviana.narod.ru/luka_preface.html ÐÑÐºÐ° ÐÑÐ´Ð¸ÑÐµÐ²Â» â Ð¸ÑÑÐ¾ÑÐ¸Ñ Ð¸ Ð¼Ð¸ÑÐ¾Ð»Ð¾Ð³Ð¸Ñ ÑÐ°ÑÑ Ð¾Ð¶Ð¸Ðµ Ð·Ð°Ð±Ð»ÑÐ¶Ð´ÐµÐ½Ð¸Ñ "Luka Mudischev" - The History and Mythology:Widespread Misconceptions (in Russian) accessed Aug 8, 2008

## [edit] External links

  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹ Ð¼Ð°Ñ Ñ ÐÐ»ÐµÐºÑÐµÐµÐ¼ ÐÐ»ÑÑÐµÑÐ¾Ð¼-Ð¡Ð°ÑÐ½Ð¾ \- The online version of the Dictionary of Russian mat by Alexei Plutser-Sarno (Russian)
  * Russian slang explained in English, French and German
  * Cited portions of a The New Yorker article.
  * Russian Army use of mat

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_mat"

Categories: Russian slang | Sexual slang | Profanity | Profanity by language

Hidden categories: Articles containing Russian language text | All articles
with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements since August
2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since January 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 12:01 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



