
# Notetaking

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A mind map connects ideas together visually

Notetaking is the practice of writing pieces of information, often in an
informal or unstructured manner. One major specific type of notetaking is the
practice of writing in shorthand, which can allow large amounts of information
to be put on paper very quickly. Notes are frequently written in notebooks,
though any available piece of paper can suffice in many circumstancesâsome
people are especially fond of Post-It notes, for instance. Notetaking is an
important skill for students, especially at the college level. Many different
forms are used to structure information and make it easier to find later.
Computers, particularly tablet PCs and personal digital assistants (PDAs) are
beginning to see wide use as notetaking devices.

Professional Notetakers provide access to information for people who cannot
take their own notes, in particular Deaf and hard of hearing people. Manual
notetaking requires pen and paper and Electronic Notetaking (or Computer-
Assisted Notetaking) requires laptops with special notetaking software.
Professional Notetakers most frequently work in colleges and universities but
also in workplace meetings, appointments, conferences, and training sessions.
They are usually educated to degree level. In the UK they are increasingly
expected to have a professional notetaking qualification, such as that offered
by the Council for the Advancement of Communication with Deaf People (CACDP).

## Contents

  * 1 Systems
    * 1.1 Cornell Notes
    * 1.2 Charting
    * 1.3 Outlining
    * 1.4 Mapping
    * 1.5 Sentence method
    * 1.6 SQ3R
  * 2 Electronic notetaking methods
  * 3 See also
  * 4 External links

  
## [edit] Systems

### [edit] Cornell Notes

When using the Cornell note-taking system a column of white space is left to
the left side of the notes that are written as they come up. Questions or key
words based on the notes are written in the white space after the session has
ended. The Cornell method requires no rewriting and yet results in systematic
notes.

### [edit] Charting

Charting is creating a graph with symbols, or table with rows and columns.
Graphs and flow-charts are useful for documenting a process or event. Tables
are useful for facts and values

### [edit] Outlining

While notes can be written freely, many people structure their writing in an
outline. A common system consists of headings that use Roman numerals, letters
of the alphabet, and the common Arabic numeral system at different levels. A
typical structure would be:

    I. First main topic 
    A. Subtopic 
    1\. Detail
    2\. Detail
    B. Subtopic
    II. Second main topic 
    A. Subtopic
However, this sort of structure has limitations in written form since it is
difficult to go back and insert more information. Adaptive systems are used
for paper-and-pen insertions, such as using the back side of the preceding
page in a spiral to note insertions. It is possible to simply leave large
spaces in between. (See Category:Outliners for more about application software
that supports outlining.)

### [edit] Mapping

Here, ideas are written in a tree structure, with lines connecting them
together. Mind maps are commonly drawn with a central point, purpose or goal
in the center of the page and then branching outward to identify all the ideas
connected to that goal. Colors, small graphics and symbols are often used to
help to visualize the information more easily. This notetaking method is most
common among visual learners and is a core practice of many accelerated
learning techniques. It is also used for planning and writing essays.

### [edit] Sentence method

Every new thought is written as a new line. Speed is the most desirable
attribute of this method because not much thought about formatting is needed
to form the layout and create enough space for more notes. Also, you must
number each new thought.

### [edit] SQ3R

SQ3R is a method for taking notes from written material, though it might be
better classed as method of reading and gaining understanding. Material is
skimmed to produce a list of headings, that are then converted into questions.
These questions are then considered whilst the text is read to provide
motivation for what is being covered. Notes are written under sections headed
by the questions as each of the material's sections is read. One then makes a
summary from memory, and reviews the notes.

## [edit] Electronic notetaking methods

The growing ubiquity of laptops in universities and colleges has led to a rise
in electronic notetaking. Many students write their notes in word processors.
Online word processor applications are receiving growing attention by students
who can forward notes using email or otherwise make use of collaborative
features in these applications.

Online notetaking has created problems for teachers who must balance
educational freedom with copyright and intellectual property concerns
regarding course content.[citations needed]

## [edit] See also

  * b:Note Taking
  * Comparison of notetaking software
  * Category:Notetaking software

## [edit] External links

  * Taking notes on philosophical texts by Peter Suber.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notetaking"

Categories: Writing | Notes taking | Educational psychology

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 15 May 2009, at 11:10 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



