
# Welding

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Featured article

Welding is a fabrication or sculptural process that joins materials, usually
metals or thermoplastics, by causing coalescence. This is often done by
melting the workpieces and adding a filler material to form a pool of molten
material (the weld pool) that cools to become a strong joint, with pressure
sometimes used in conjunction with heat, or by itself, to produce the weld.
This is in contrast with soldering and brazing, which involve melting a lower-
melting-point material between the workpieces to form a bond between them,
without melting the workpieces.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gas metal arc welding

Many different energy sources can be used for welding, including a gas flame,
an electric arc, a laser, an electron beam, friction, and ultrasound. While
often an industrial process, welding can be done in many different
environments, including open air, under water and in outer space. Regardless
of location, however, welding remains dangerous, and precautions must be taken
to avoid burns, electric shock, eye damage, poisonous fumes, and overexposure
to ultraviolet light.

Until the end of the 19th century, the only welding process was forge welding,
which blacksmiths had used for centuries to join metals by heating and
pounding them. Arc welding and oxyfuel welding were among the first processes
to develop late in the century, and resistance welding followed soon after.
Welding technology advanced quickly during the early 20th century as World War
I and World War II drove the demand for reliable and inexpensive joining
methods. Following the wars, several modern welding techniques were developed,
including manual methods like shielded metal arc welding, now one of the most
popular welding methods, as well as semi-automatic and automatic processes
such as gas metal arc welding, submerged arc welding, flux-cored arc welding
and electroslag welding. Developments continued with the invention of laser
beam welding and electron beam welding in the latter half of the century.
Today, the science continues to advance. Robot welding is becoming more
commonplace in industrial settings, and researchers continue to develop new
welding methods and gain greater understanding of weld quality and properties.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Processes
    * 2.1 Arc
      * 2.1.1 Power supplies
      * 2.1.2 Processes
    * 2.2 Gas
    * 2.3 Resistance
    * 2.4 Energy beam
    * 2.5 Solid-state
  * 3 Geometry
  * 4 Quality
    * 4.1 Heat-affected zone
    * 4.2 Distortion and cracking
    * 4.3 Weldability
      * 4.3.1 Steels
      * 4.3.2 Aluminum
  * 5 Unusual conditions
  * 6 Safety issues
  * 7 Costs and trends
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Notes
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

The iron pillar of Delhi

The history of joining metals goes back several millennia, with the earliest
examples of welding from the Bronze Age and the Iron Age in Europe and the
Middle East. Herodotus in Book I (25) of the Histories written in c 440 BC
states "... a salver of welded iron - the most remarkable of all the offerings
at Delphi. It was the work of Glaucus of Chios, the inventor of the art of
welding."[1] Welding was used in the construction of the iron pillar in Delhi,
India, erected about 310 AD and weighing 5.4 metric tons.[2]

The Middle Ages brought advances in forge welding, in which blacksmiths
pounded heated metal repeatedly until bonding occurred. In 1540, Vannoccio
Biringuccio published De la pirotechnia, which includes descriptions of the
forging operation. Renaissance craftsmen were skilled in the process, and the
industry continued to grow during the following centuries.[3] Welding,
however, was transformed during the 19th centuryâin 1800, Sir Humphry Davy
discovered the electric arc, and advances in arc welding continued with the
invention of metal electrodes in the late 1800s by a Russian, Nikolai
Slavyanov, and an American, C. L. Coffin, even as carbon arc welding, which
used a carbon electrode, gained popularity. Around 1900, A. P. Strohmenger
released a coated metal electrode in Britain, which gave a more stable arc,
and in 1919, alternating current welding was invented by C. J. Holslag but did
not become popular for another decade.[4]

Resistance welding was also developed during the final decades of the 19th
century, with the first patents going to Elihu Thomson in 1885, who produced
further advances over the next 15 years. Thermite welding was invented in
1893, and around that time another process, oxyfuel welding, became well
established. Acetylene was discovered in 1836 by Edmund Davy, but its use was
not practical in welding until about 1900, when a suitable blowtorch was
developed.[5] At first, oxyfuel welding was one of the more popular welding
methods due to its portability and relatively low cost. As the 20th century
progressed, however, it fell out of favor for industrial applications. It was
largely replaced with arc welding, as metal coverings (known as flux) for the
electrode that stabilize the arc and shield the base material from impurities
continued to be developed.[6]

World War I caused a major surge in the use of welding processes, with the
various military powers attempting to determine which of the several new
welding processes would be best. The British primarily used arc welding, even
constructing a ship, the Fulagar, with an entirely welded hull. Arc welding
was first applied to aircraft during the war as well, as some German airplane
fuselages were constructed using the process.[7] Also noteworthy is the first
welded road bridge in the world, designed by Stefan BryÅa of the Warsaw
University of Technology in 1927, and built across the river SÅudwia Maurzyce
near Åowicz, Poland in 1929.[8]

During the 1920s, major advances were made in welding technology, including
the introduction of automatic welding in 1920, in which electrode wire was fed
continuously. Shielding gas became a subject receiving much attention, as
scientists attempted to protect welds from the effects of oxygen and nitrogen
in the atmosphere. Porosity and brittleness were the primary problems, and the
solutions that developed included the use of hydrogen, argon, and helium as
welding atmospheres.[9] During the following decade, further advances allowed
for the welding of reactive metals like aluminum and magnesium. This in
conjunction with developments in automatic welding, alternating current, and
fluxes fed a major expansion of arc welding during the 1930s and then during
World War II.[10]

During the middle of the century, many new welding methods were invented. 1930
saw the release of stud welding, which soon became popular in shipbuilding and
construction. Submerged arc welding was invented the same year and continues
to be popular today. Gas tungsten arc welding, after decades of development,
was finally perfected in 1941, and gas metal arc welding followed in 1948,
allowing for fast welding of non-ferrous materials but requiring expensive
shielding gases. Shielded metal arc welding was developed during the 1950s,
using a flux coated consumable electrode, and it quickly became the most
popular metal arc welding process. In 1957, the flux-cored arc welding process
debuted, in which the self-shielded wire electrode could be used with
automatic equipment, resulting in greatly increased welding speeds, and that
same year, plasma arc welding was invented. Electroslag welding was introduced
in 1958, and it was followed by its cousin, electrogas welding, in 1961.[11]

Other recent developments in welding include the 1958 breakthrough of electron
beam welding, making deep and narrow welding possible through the concentrated
heat source. Following the invention of the laser in 1960, laser beam welding
debuted several decades later, and has proved to be especially useful in high-
speed, automated welding. Both of these processes, however, continue to be
quite expensive due the high cost of the necessary equipment, and this has
limited their applications.[12]

## [edit] Processes

### [edit] Arc

Main article: Arc welding

These processes use a welding power supply to create and maintain an electric
arc between an electrode and the base material to melt metals at the welding
point. They can use either direct (DC) or alternating (AC) current, and
consumable or non-consumable electrodes. The welding region is sometimes
protected by some type of inert or semi-inert gas, known as a shielding gas,
and filler material is sometimes used as well.

#### [edit] Power supplies

To supply the electrical energy necessary for arc welding processes, a number
of different power supplies can be used. The most common welding power
supplies are constant current power supplies and constant voltage power
supplies. In arc welding, the length of the arc is directly related to the
voltage, and the amount of heat input is related to the current. Constant
current power supplies are most often used for manual welding processes such
as gas tungsten arc welding and shielded metal arc welding, because they
maintain a relatively constant current even as the voltage varies. This is
important because in manual welding, it can be difficult to hold the electrode
perfectly steady, and as a result, the arc length and thus voltage tend to
fluctuate. Constant voltage power supplies hold the voltage constant and vary
the current, and as a result, are most often used for automated welding
processes such as gas metal arc welding, flux cored arc welding, and submerged
arc welding. In these processes, arc length is kept constant, since any
fluctuation in the distance between the wire and the base material is quickly
rectified by a large change in current. For example, if the wire and the base
material get too close, the current will rapidly increase, which in turn
causes the heat to increase and the tip of the wire to melt, returning it to
its original separation distance.[13]

The type of current used in arc welding also plays an important role in
welding. Consumable electrode processes such as shielded metal arc welding and
gas metal arc welding generally use direct current, but the electrode can be
charged either positively or negatively. In welding, the positively charged
anode will have a greater heat concentration, and as a result, changing the
polarity of the electrode has an impact on weld properties. If the electrode
is positively charged, the base metal will be hotter, increasing weld
penetration and welding speed. Alternatively, a negatively charged electrode
results in more shallow welds.[14] Nonconsumable electrode processes, such as
gas tungsten arc welding, can use either type of direct current, as well as
alternating current. However, with direct current, because the electrode only
creates the arc and does not provide filler material, a positively charged
electrode causes shallow welds, while a negatively charged electrode makes
deeper welds.[15] Alternating current rapidly moves between these two,
resulting in medium-penetration welds. One disadvantage of AC, the fact that
the arc must be re-ignited after every zero crossing, has been addressed with
the invention of special power units that produce a square wave pattern
instead of the normal sine wave, making rapid zero crossings possible and
minimizing the effects of the problem.[16]

#### [edit] Processes

<IMG>

<IMG>

Shielded metal arc welding

One of the most common types of arc welding is shielded metal arc welding
(SMAW), which is also known as manual metal arc welding (MMA) or stick
welding. Electric current is used to strike an arc between the base material
and consumable electrode rod, which is made of steel and is covered with a
flux that protects the weld area from oxidation and contamination by producing
CO2 gas during the welding process. The electrode core itself acts as filler
material, making a separate filler unnecessary.

The process is versatile and can be performed with relatively inexpensive
equipment, making it well suited to shop jobs and field work.[17] An operator
can become reasonably proficient with a modest amount of training and can
achieve mastery with experience. Weld times are rather slow, since the
consumable electrodes must be frequently replaced and because slag, the
residue from the flux, must be chipped away after welding.[18] Furthermore,
the process is generally limited to welding ferrous materials, though special
electrodes have made possible the welding of cast iron, nickel, aluminium,
copper, and other metals. Inexperienced operators may find it difficult to
make good out-of-position welds with this process.

Gas metal arc welding (GMAW), also known as metal inert gas or MIG welding, is
a semi-automatic or automatic process that uses a continuous wire feed as an
electrode and an inert or semi-inert gas mixture to protect the weld from
contamination. As with SMAW, reasonable operator proficiency can be achieved
with modest training. Since the electrode is continuous, welding speeds are
greater for GMAW than for SMAW. Also, the smaller arc size compared to the
shielded metal arc welding process makes it easier to make out-of-position
welds (e.g., overhead joints, as would be welded underneath a structure).

The equipment required to perform the GMAW process is more complex and
expensive than that required for SMAW, and requires a more complex setup
procedure. Therefore, GMAW is less portable and versatile, and due to the use
of a separate shielding gas, is not particularly suitable for outdoor work.
However, owing to the higher average rate at which welds can be completed,
GMAW is well suited to production welding. The process can be applied to a
wide variety of metals, both ferrous and non-ferrous.[19]

A related process, flux-cored arc welding (FCAW), uses similar equipment but
uses wire consisting of a steel electrode surrounding a powder fill material.
This cored wire is more expensive than the standard solid wire and can
generate fumes and/or slag, but it permits even higher welding speed and
greater metal penetration.[20]

Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW), or tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding (also
sometimes erroneously referred to as heliarc welding), is a manual welding
process that uses a nonconsumable tungsten electrode, an inert or semi-inert
gas mixture, and a separate filler material. Especially useful for welding
thin materials, this method is characterized by a stable arc and high quality
welds, but it requires significant operator skill and can only be accomplished
at relatively low speeds.

GTAW can be used on nearly all weldable metals, though it is most often
applied to stainless steel and light metals. It is often used when quality
welds are extremely important, such as in bicycle, aircraft and naval
applications.[21] A related process, plasma arc welding, also uses a tungsten
electrode but uses plasma gas to make the arc. The arc is more concentrated
than the GTAW arc, making transverse control more critical and thus generally
restricting the technique to a mechanized process. Because of its stable
current, the method can be used on a wider range of material thicknesses than
can the GTAW process, and furthermore, it is much faster. It can be applied to
all of the same materials as GTAW except magnesium, and automated welding of
stainless steel is one important application of the process. A variation of
the process is plasma cutting, an efficient steel cutting process.[22]

Submerged arc welding (SAW) is a high-productivity welding method in which the
arc is struck beneath a covering layer of flux. This increases arc quality,
since contaminants in the atmosphere are blocked by the flux. The slag that
forms on the weld generally comes off by itself, and combined with the use of
a continuous wire feed, the weld deposition rate is high. Working conditions
are much improved over other arc welding processes, since the flux hides the
arc and almost no smoke is produced. The process is commonly used in industry,
especially for large products and in the manufacture of welded pressure
vessels.[23] Other arc welding processes include atomic hydrogen welding,
carbon arc welding, electroslag welding, electrogas welding, and stud arc
welding.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Gas welding a steel armature using the oxy-acetylene process.

### [edit] Gas

The most common gas welding process is oxyfuel welding, also known as
oxyacetylene welding. It is one of the oldest and most versatile welding
processes, but in recent years it has become less popular in industrial
applications. It is still widely used for welding pipes and tubes, as well as
repair work. It is also frequently well-suited, and favored, for fabricating
some types of metal-based artwork. Oxyfuel equipment is versatile, lending
itself not only to some sorts of iron or steel welding but also to brazing,
braze-welding, metal heating (for bending and forming), and also oxyfuel
cutting.

The equipment is relatively inexpensive and simple, generally employing the
combustion of acetylene in oxygen to produce a welding flame temperature of
about 3100 Â°C. The flame, since it is less concentrated than an electric arc,
causes slower weld cooling, which can lead to greater residual stresses and
weld distortion, though it eases the welding of high alloy steels. A similar
process, generally called oxyfuel cutting, is used to cut metals.[6] Other gas
welding methods, such as air acetylene welding, oxygen hydrogen welding, and
pressure gas welding are quite similar, generally differing only in the type
of gases used. A water torch is sometimes used for precision welding of small
items such as jewelry. Gas welding is also used in plastic welding, though the
heated substance is air, and the temperatures are much lower.

### [edit] Resistance

Resistance welding involves the generation of heat by passing current through
the resistance caused by the contact between two or more metal surfaces. Small
pools of molten metal are formed at the weld area as high current
(1000â100,000 A) is passed through the metal. In general, resistance welding
methods are efficient and cause little pollution, but their applications are
somewhat limited and the equipment cost can be high.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Spot welder

Spot welding is a popular resistance welding method used to join overlapping
metal sheets of up to 3 mm thick. Two electrodes are simultaneously used to
clamp the metal sheets together and to pass current through the sheets. The
advantages of the method include efficient energy use, limited workpiece
deformation, high production rates, easy automation, and no required filler
materials. Weld strength is significantly lower than with other welding
methods, making the process suitable for only certain applications. It is used
extensively in the automotive industryâordinary cars can have several
thousand spot welds made by industrial robots. A specialized process, called
shot welding, can be used to spot weld stainless steel.

Like spot welding, seam welding relies on two electrodes to apply pressure and
current to join metal sheets. However, instead of pointed electrodes, wheel-
shaped electrodes roll along and often feed the workpiece, making it possible
to make long continuous welds. In the past, this process was used in the
manufacture of beverage cans, but now its uses are more limited. Other
resistance welding methods include flash welding, projection welding, and
upset welding.[24]

### [edit] Energy beam

Energy beam welding methods, namely laser beam welding and electron beam
welding, are relatively new processes that have become quite popular in high
production applications. The two processes are quite similar, differing most
notably in their source of power. Laser beam welding employs a highly focused
laser beam, while electron beam welding is done in a vacuum and uses an
electron beam. Both have a very high energy density, making deep weld
penetration possible and minimizing the size of the weld area. Both processes
are extremely fast, and are easily automated, making them highly productive.
The primary disadvantages are their very high equipment costs (though these
are decreasing) and a susceptibility to thermal cracking. Developments in this
area include laser-hybrid welding, which uses principles from both laser beam
welding and arc welding for even better weld properties.[25]

### [edit] Solid-state

Like the first welding process, forge welding, some modern welding methods do
not involve the melting of the materials being joined. One of the most
popular, ultrasonic welding, is used to connect thin sheets or wires made of
metal or thermoplastic by vibrating them at high frequency and under high
pressure. The equipment and methods involved are similar to that of resistance
welding, but instead of electric current, vibration provides energy input.
Welding metals with this process does not involve melting the materials;
instead, the weld is formed by introducing mechanical vibrations horizontally
under pressure. When welding plastics, the materials should have similar
melting temperatures, and the vibrations are introduced vertically. Ultrasonic
welding is commonly used for making electrical connections out of aluminum or
copper, and it is also a very common polymer welding process.

Another common process, explosion welding, involves the joining of materials
by pushing them together under extremely high pressure. The energy from the
impact plasticizes the materials, forming a weld, even though only a limited
amount of heat is generated. The process is commonly used for welding
dissimilar materials, such as the welding of aluminum with steel in ship hulls
or compound plates. Other solid-state welding processes include co-extrusion
welding, cold welding, diffusion welding, friction welding (including friction
stir welding), high frequency welding, hot pressure welding, induction
welding, and roll welding.[26]

## [edit] Geometry

<IMG>

<IMG>

Common welding joint types â (1) Square butt joint, (2) Single-V preparation
joint, (3) Lap joint, (4) T-joint.

Welds can be geometrically prepared in many different ways. The five basic
types of weld joints are the butt joint, lap joint, corner joint, edge joint,
and T-joint. Other variations exist as wellâfor example, double-V
preparation joints are characterized by the two pieces of material each
tapering to a single center point at one-half their height. Single-U and
double-U preparation joints are also fairly commonâinstead of having
straight edges like the single-V and double-V preparation joints, they are
curved, forming the shape of a U. Lap joints are also commonly more than two
pieces thickâdepending on the process used and the thickness of the
material, many pieces can be welded together in a lap joint geometry.[27]

Often, particular joint designs are used exclusively or almost exclusively by
certain welding processes. For example, resistance spot welding, laser beam
welding, and electron beam welding are most frequently performed on lap
joints. However, some welding methods, like shielded metal arc welding, are
extremely versatile and can weld virtually any type of joint. Additionally,
some processes can be used to make multipass welds, in which one weld is
allowed to cool, and then another weld is performed on top of it. This allows
for the welding of thick sections arranged in a single-V preparation joint,
for example.[28]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The cross-section of a welded butt joint, with the darkest gray representing
the weld or fusion zone, the medium gray the heat-affected zone, and the
lightest gray the base material.

After welding, a number of distinct regions can be identified in the weld
area. The weld itself is called the fusion zoneâmore specifically, it is
where the filler metal was laid during the welding process. The properties of
the fusion zone depend primarily on the filler metal used, and its
compatibility with the base materials. It is surrounded by the heat-affected
zone, the area that had its microstructure and properties altered by the weld.
These properties depend on the base material's behavior when subjected to
heat. The metal in this area is often weaker than both the base material and
the fusion zone, and is also where residual stresses are found.[29]

## [edit] Quality

Most often, the major metric used for judging the quality of a weld is its
strength and the strength of the material around it. Many distinct factors
influence this, including the welding method, the amount and concentration of
energy input, the base material, the filler material, the flux material, the
design of the joint, and the interactions between all these factors. To test
the quality of a weld, either destructive or nondestructive testing methods
are commonly used to verify that welds are defect-free, have acceptable levels
of residual stresses and distortion, and have acceptable heat-affected zone
(HAZ) properties. Welding codes and specifications exist to guide welders in
proper welding technique and in how to judge the quality of welds.

### [edit] Heat-affected zone

<IMG>

<IMG>

The blue area results from oxidation at a corresponding temperature of 600 Â°F
(316 Â°C). This is an accurate way to identify temperature, but does not
represent the HAZ width. The HAZ is the narrow area that immediately surrounds
the welded base metal.

The effects of welding on the material surrounding the weld can be
detrimentalâdepending on the materials used and the heat input of the
welding process used, the HAZ can be of varying size and strength. The thermal
diffusivity of the base material plays a large roleâif the diffusivity is
high, the material cooling rate is high and the HAZ is relatively small.
Conversely, a low diffusivity leads to slower cooling and a larger HAZ. The
amount of heat injected by the welding process plays an important role as
well, as processes like oxyacetylene welding have an unconcentrated heat input
and increase the size of the HAZ. Processes like laser beam welding give a
highly concentrated, limited amount of heat, resulting in a small HAZ. Arc
welding falls between these two extremes, with the individual processes
varying somewhat in heat input.[30][31] To calculate the heat input for arc
welding procedures, the following formula can be used:

    Q = \\left\(\\frac{V \\times I \\times 60}{S \\times 1000} \\right\) \\times
\\mathit{Efficiency}

where Q = heat input (kJ/mm), V = voltage (V), I = current (A), and S =
welding speed (mm/min). The efficiency is dependent on the welding process
used, with shielded metal arc welding having a value of 0.75, gas metal arc
welding and submerged arc welding, 0.9, and gas tungsten arc welding, 0.8.[32]

### [edit] Distortion and cracking

Welding methods that involve the melting of metal at the site of the joint
necessarily are prone to shrinkage as the heated metal cools. Shrinkage, in
turn, can introduce residual stresses and both longitudinal and rotational
distortion. Distortion can pose a major problem, since the final product is
not the desired shape. To alleviate rotational distortion, the workpieces can
be offset, so that the welding results in a correctly shaped piece.[33] Other
methods of limiting distortion, such as clamping the workpieces in place,
cause the buildup of residual stress in the heat-affected zone of the base
material. These stresses can reduce the strength of the base material, and can
lead to catastrophic failure through cold cracking, as in the case of several
of the Liberty ships. Cold cracking is limited to steels, and is associated
with the formation of martensite as the weld cools. The cracking occurs in the
heat-affected zone of the base material. To reduce the amount of distortion
and residual stresses, the amount of heat input should be limited, and the
welding sequence used should not be from one end directly to the other, but
rather in segments. The other type of cracking, hot cracking or solidification
cracking, can occur with all metals, and happens in the fusion zone of a weld.
To diminish the probability of this type of cracking, excess material
restraint should be avoided, and a proper filler material should be
utilized.[34]

### [edit] Weldability

The quality of a weld is also dependent on the combination of materials used
for the base material and the filler material. Not all metals are suitable for
welding, and not all filler metals work well with acceptable base materials.

#### [edit] Steels

The weldability of steels is inversely proportional to a property known as the
hardenability of the steel, which measures the probability of forming
martensite during welding or heat treatment. The hardenability of steel
depends on its chemical composition, with greater quantities of carbon and
other alloying elements resulting in a higher hardenability and thus a lower
weldability. In order to be able to judge alloys made up of many distinct
materials, a measure known as the equivalent carbon content is used to compare
the relative weldabilities of different alloys by comparing their properties
to a plain carbon steel. The effect on weldability of elements like chromium
and vanadium, while not as great as carbon, is more significant than that of
copper and nickel, for example. As the equivalent carbon content rises, the
weldability of the alloy decreases.[35] The disadvantage to using plain carbon
and low-alloy steels is their lower strengthâthere is a trade-off between
material strength and weldability. High strength, low-alloy steels were
developed especially for welding applications during the 1970s, and these
generally easy to weld materials have good strength, making them ideal for
many welding applications.[36]

Stainless steels, because of their high chromium content, tend to behave
differently with respect to weldability than other steels. Austenitic grades
of stainless steels tend to be the most weldable, but they are especially
susceptible to distortion due to their high coefficient of thermal expansion.
Some alloys of this type are prone to cracking and reduced corrosion
resistance as well. Hot cracking is possible if the amount of ferrite in the
weld is not controlledâto alleviate the problem, an electrode is used that
deposits a weld metal containing a small amount of ferrite. Other types of
stainless steels, such as ferritic and martensitic stainless steels, are not
as easily welded, and must often be preheated and welded with special
electrodes.[37]

#### [edit] Aluminum

The weldability of aluminum alloys varies significantly, depending on the
chemical composition of the alloy used. Aluminum alloys are susceptible to hot
cracking, and to combat the problem, welders increase the welding speed to
lower the heat input. Preheating reduces the temperature gradient across the
weld zone and thus helps reduce hot cracking, but it can reduce the mechanical
properties of the base material and should not be used when the base material
is restrained. The design of the joint can be changed as well, and a more
compatible filler alloy can be selected to decrease the likelihood of hot
cracking. Aluminum alloys should also be cleaned prior to welding, with the
goal of removing all oxides, oils, and loose particles from the surface to be
welded. This is especially important because of an aluminum weld's
susceptibility to porosity due to hydrogen and dross due to oxygen.[38]

## [edit] Unusual conditions

<IMG>

<IMG>

Underwater welding

While many welding applications are done in controlled environments such as
factories and repair shops, some welding processes are commonly used in a wide
variety of conditions, such as open air, underwater, and vacuums (such as
space). In open-air applications, such as construction and outdoors repair,
shielded metal arc welding is the most common process. Processes that employ
inert gases to protect the weld cannot be readily used in such situations,
because unpredictable atmospheric movements can result in a faulty weld.
Shielded metal arc welding is also often used in underwater welding in the
construction and repair of ships, offshore platforms, and pipelines, but
others, such as flux cored arc welding and gas tungsten arc welding, are also
common. Welding in space is also possibleâit was first attempted in 1969 by
Russian cosmonauts, when they performed experiments to test shielded metal arc
welding, plasma arc welding, and electron beam welding in a depressurized
environment. Further testing of these methods was done in the following
decades, and today researchers continue to develop methods for using other
welding processes in space, such as laser beam welding, resistance welding,
and friction welding. Advances in these areas could prove indispensable for
projects like the construction of the International Space Station, which will
likely rely heavily on welding for joining in space the parts that were
manufactured on Earth.[39]

## [edit] Safety issues

<IMG>

<IMG>

Arc welding with a welding helmet, gloves, and other protective clothing.

Welding, without the proper precautions, can be a dangerous and unhealthy
practice. However, with the use of new technology and proper protection, risks
of injury and death associated with welding can be greatly reduced. Because
many common welding procedures involve an open electric arc or flame, the risk
of burns is significant. To prevent them, welders wear personal protective
equipment in the form of heavy leather gloves and protective long sleeve
jackets to avoid exposure to extreme heat and flames. Additionally, the
brightness of the weld area leads to a condition called arc eye in which
ultraviolet light causes inflammation of the cornea and can burn the retinas
of the eyes. Goggles and welding helmets with dark face plates are worn to
prevent this exposure, and in recent years, new helmet models have been
produced that feature a face plate that self-darkens upon exposure to high
amounts of UV light. To protect bystanders, translucent welding curtains often
surround the welding area. These curtains, made of a polyvinyl chloride
plastic film, shield nearby workers from exposure to the UV light from the
electric arc, but should not be used to replace the filter glass used in
helmets.[40]

Welders are also often exposed to dangerous gases and particulate matter.
Processes like flux-cored arc welding and shielded metal arc welding produce
smoke containing particles of various types of oxides, which in some cases can
lead to medical conditions like metal fume fever. The size of the particles in
question tends to influence the toxicity of the fumes, with smaller particles
presenting a greater danger. Additionally, many processes produce fumes and
various gases, most commonly carbon dioxide, ozone and heavy metals, that can
prove dangerous without proper ventilation and training. Furthermore, because
the use of compressed gases and flames in many welding processes poses an
explosion and fire risk, some common precautions include limiting the amount
of oxygen in the air, keeping combustible materials away from the
workplace,[41] or making use of a positive pressure enclosure. Welding fume
extractors are often used to remove the fume from the source and filter the
fumes through a HEPA filter.

## [edit] Costs and trends

<IMG>

<IMG>

Arc welding with industrial robots (KUKA)

As an industrial process, the cost of welding plays a crucial role in
manufacturing decisions. Many different variables affect the total cost,
including equipment cost, labor cost, material cost, and energy cost.
Depending on the process, equipment cost can vary, from inexpensive for
methods like shielded metal arc welding and oxyfuel welding, to extremely
expensive for methods like laser beam welding and electron beam welding.
Because of their high cost, they are only used in high production operations.
Similarly, because automation and robots increase equipment costs, they are
only implemented when high production is necessary. Labor cost depends on the
deposition rate (the rate of welding), the hourly wage, and the total
operation time, including both time welding and handling the part. The cost of
materials includes the cost of the base and filler material, and the cost of
shielding gases. Finally, energy cost depends on arc time and welding power
demand.

For manual welding methods, labor costs generally make up the vast majority of
the total cost. As a result, many cost-savings measures are focused on
minimizing the operation time. To do this, welding procedures with high
deposition rates can be selected, and weld parameters can be fine-tuned to
increase welding speed. Also, removal of welding spatters generated during
welding process is highly labor intensive and time consuming. Implementation
of Welding Anti Spatter & Flux which is safe and non-polluting is considered
as a welcome change in cost cutting and weld joint quality improvement
measures.[42] Mechanization and automation are often implemented to reduce
labor costs, but this frequently increases the cost of equipment and creates
additional setup time. Material costs tend to increase when special properties
are necessary, and energy costs normally do not amount to more than several
percent of the total welding cost.[43]

In recent years, in order to minimize labor costs in high production
manufacturing, industrial welding has become increasingly more automated, most
notably with the use of robots in resistance spot welding (especially in the
automotive industry) and in arc welding. In robot welding, mechanized devices
both hold the material and perform the weld,[44] and at first, spot welding
was its most common application. But robotic arc welding has been increasing
in popularity as technology has advanced. Other key areas of research and
development include the welding of dissimilar materials (such as steel and
aluminum, for example) and new welding processes, such as friction stir,
magnetic pulse, conductive heat seam, and laser-hybrid welding. Furthermore,
progress is desired in making more specialized methods like laser beam welding
practical for more applications, such as in the aerospace and automotive
industries. Researchers also hope to better understand the often unpredictable
properties of welds, especially microstructure, residual stresses, and a
weld's tendency to crack or deform.[45]

## [edit] See also

  * Cruciform joint
  * welded sculpture

## [edit] References

  * ASM International (2003). Trends in Welding Research. Materials Park, Ohio: ASM International. ISBN 0-87170-780-2.
  * Blunt, Jane; Nigel C. Balchin (2002). Health and Safety in Welding and Allied Processes. Cambridge: Woodhead. ISBN 1-85573-538-5.
  * Cary, Howard B; Scott C. Helzer (2005). Modern Welding Technology. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education. ISBN 0-13-113029-3.
  * Hicks, John (1999). Welded Joint Design. New York: Industrial Press. ISBN 0-8311-3130-6.
  * Kalpakjian, Serope; Steven R. Schmid (2001). Manufacturing Engineering and Technology. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-201-36131-0.
  * Lincoln Electric (1994). The Procedure Handbook of Arc Welding. Cleveland: Lincoln Electric. ISBN 99949-25-82-2.
  * Weman, Klas (2003). Welding processes handbook. New York, NY: CRC Press LLC. ISBN 0-8493-1773-8.

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Aubury de Selincourt (translator) Penguin Classics
  2. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 4
  3. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 1.1-1
  4. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 5â6
  5. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 6
  6. ^ a b Weman, p 26
  7. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 1.1-5
  8. ^ Sapp, Mark E. (February 22, 2008). "Welding Timeline 1900-1950". WeldingHistory.org. http://www.weldinghistory.org/whistoryfolder/welding/wh_1900-1950.html. Retrieved on 2008-04-29.
  9. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 7
  10. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 1.1-6
  11. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 9
  12. ^ Lincoln Electric, 1.1-10
  13. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 246â49
  14. ^ Kalpakjian and Schmid, p 780
  15. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 5.4-5
  16. ^ Weman, p 16
  17. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 103
  18. ^ Weman, p 63
  19. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 5.4-3
  20. ^ Weman, p 53
  21. ^ Weman, p 31
  22. ^ Weman, p 37â38
  23. ^ Weman, p 68
  24. ^ Weman, p 80â84
  25. ^ Weman, p 95â101
  26. ^ Weman, p 89â90
  27. ^ Hicks, p 52â55
  28. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 19, 103, 206
  29. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 401â04
  30. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 6.1-5â6.1-6
  31. ^ Kalpakjian and Schmid, p 821â22
  32. ^ Weman, p 5
  33. ^ Weman, p 7â8
  34. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 404â05
  35. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 6.1-1
  36. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 6.1-14â6.1-19
  37. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 7.1-9â7.1-13
  38. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 9.1-1â9.1-6
  39. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 677â83
  40. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 42, 49â51
  41. ^ Cary and Helzer, p 52â62.
  42. ^ Novel Surface Treatments, SpatFree 113 - Silicone free, Non-toxic, Non-flammable , Non-polluting Welding Anti Spatter & Flux. http://www.novelindia.com/Welding_Anti_Spatter.htm
  43. ^ Weman, p 184â89
  44. ^ Lincoln Electric, p 4.5-1
  45. ^ ASM International, "Welding Research Trends in the United States", p 995â1005

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Welding  
  * The Welding Institute
  * The American Welding Society
  * Canadian Welding Association
  * The Wisconsin Center for Space Automation and Robotics
  * Edison Welding Institute

v â¢ d â¢ e

<IMG> Metalworking \- Welding  
Arc welding

Atomic hydrogen Â· Gas metal (MIG/MAG) Â· Flux-cored Â· Gas tungsten (TIG) Â·
Plasma Â· Shielded metal (MMA) Â· Submerged arc  
Other processes

Electrogas Â· Electron beam Â· Electroslag Â· Forge Â· Friction Â· Friction
stir Â· Friction stud Â· Laser beam Â· Laser-hybrid Â· Oxyfuel Â· Resistance
Â· Spot Â· Ultrasonic Â·  
Equipment

Power supply Â· Electrode Â· Filler metal Â· Shielding gas Â· Robot Â· Helmet  
Related features

Heat-affected zone Â· Weldability Â· Residual stress Â· Arc eye  
Related areas

Brazing Â· Soldering Â· Fabrication Â· Casting Â· Machining Â· Metallurgy Â·
Jewelry  
Metalworking topics

Casting Â· CNC Â· Cutting tools Â· Drilling and threading Â· Fabrication Â·
Forging Â· Grinding Â· Jewellery Â· Lathe Â· Machining Â· Machine tools and
associated tooling Â· Measuring Â· Metalworking Â· Hand tools Â· Metallurgy Â·
Milling Â· NC Â· Occupations Â· Press tools Â· Pipe and tube bending Â·
Smithing Â· Turning Â· General terminology Â· Welding  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Welding"

Categories: Welding

Hidden categories: Featured articles

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Boarisch
  * Äesky
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * Magyar
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 14:08.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



