
# Complementary currency

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Merge arrow

It has been suggested that this article or section be merged into private
currency. (Discuss)  
<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (May 2008)  
Complementary currency (CC) is a currency which is meant to be used as a
complement to a national currency.[1] Complementary currency is sometimes
referred to as complementary community currency (CCC) or as community
currency. The term local currency, describing a complementary currency which
is limited to a single locality, is sometimes used interchangeably with
complementary currency. There are, however, some complementary currencies
which are regional or global, such as the WIR or Friendly Favors, or the
proposed Terra Currency.[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Types of complementary currencies
  * 2 Purposes
  * 3 Complementary Currencies
  * 4 Example of a fully funded CC
  * 5 Major CC Activists
  * 6 See also
  * 7 External links
    * 7.1 Complementary, local exchange software and systems design
    * 7.2 Examples of complementary currencies currently circulating
  * 8 References

  
## [edit] Types of complementary currencies

Complementary currencies describe a wide group of currencies or scrips
designed to be used in combination with standard currencies or other
complementary currencies. They can be valued and exchanged in relationship to
national currencies but also function as media of exchange on their own.
Complementary currencies lie outside the nationally defined legal realm of
Legal tender and are not used as such. Rate of exchange, scope of circulation
and use in combination with other currencies differs greatly between
complementary currency systems, as is the case with national currency systems.

Some complementary currencies incorporate value scales based on time or the
backing of real resources (gold, oil, services, etc). A Time-based currency is
valued by the time required to perform a service in hours, notwithstanding the
potential market value of the service.

Some complementary currencies take advantage of demurrage fees, an intentional
devaluation of the currency over time, like negative interest. This stimulates
market exchanges in the devaluating currency, propagates new participation in
the currency system and forces the storage of wealth (hoarding) ability
usually reserved for currency into more permanent and better value holding
tools like (property, improvement, education, technology, health, etc) all of
which are sheltered from the currency based demurrage fees.

Other experimental complementary currencies use high interest fees to promote
heavy competition between participants, and the removal of wealth from long
term wealth holding structures (natural/material wealth, property, etc) to aid
in the process of rapid industriaization, mass production, automation and
competitive innovation.

Monetary speculation and gambling are usually outside the design parameters of
complementary currencies. Complementary currencies are often intentionally
restricted in their regional spread, time of validity or sector of use and may
require a membership of participating individuals or points of acceptance.

## [edit] Purposes

Complementary currencies are often designed intentionally to address specific
issues or problems. Most complementary currencies have multiple purposes
and/or are intended to address multiple issues. They are very useful for
communities that do not have access to financial capital, and can be useful
for adjusting peoples' spending behavior.[3] The 2006 Annual Report of the
Worldwide Database of Complementary Currency Systems presented a survey of 150
complementary currency systems in which 94 respondents said that "all reasons"
were selected, among cooperation, micro/small/medium enterprise development,
activating the local market, reducing the need for national currency, and
community development.[4]

In the current economic climate, some local money projects can also be
promoted as

  * low carbon, by encouraging localisation of trade and relationships
  * lifeboat currencies
  * encouraging use of under-used resources
  * recognising the informal economy

## [edit] Complementary Currencies

It is important to understand that there is evidence that, beginning in the
1960s, the first advocates of complementary currencies, especially in Canada,
did not think of CC as working contra to our national currencies. This is why
certain leaders of this movement were careful to use the term 'complementary'.
They used it to emphasize the importance of working in cooperation with
governments and the tax system, businesses, unions, associations, charities,
the banks and all forms of democratic capitalism--as partners in the above-
ground economy.

## [edit] Example of a fully funded CC

For example, The Toronto dollar system, is a system which is fully funded by
Canadian dollars. In other words, the system is backed by Canadian dollars.
Participating merchants are free to exchange the Toronto dollars for Canadian
dollars. While the system will work better when more and more of the CC is
kept in circulation, no one needs to feel trapped by the system.

In addition to being supported by any number of social activists, including
philosophers, clergy, artists, etc., it is fully supported by a growing number
of political leaders, past and present, including, over the years, several
mayors of Toronto. For details, check out: http://www.torontodollar.com

## [edit] Major CC Activists

Some major CC activists are Professor Bernard Lietaer [1] and British
enconomist, Hazel Henderson, [2]. Lietaer has argued that the world's national
currencies are inadequate for the world's business needs, citing how 87
countries have experienced major currency crashes over a 20 year period, and
arguing for complementary currencies as a way to protect against these
problems.[5] Lietaer has also spoken at an IRTA conference about barter.[6]

## [edit] See also

  * Alternative currency
  * Currency competition
  * Bernard Lietaer
  * Margrit Kennedy
  * Calgary Dollars
  * Chiemgauer
  * Digital gold currency
  * Private currency
  * Sectoral currency
  * Silvio Gesell
  * Terra
  * WIR Bank
  * Time Banking

## [edit] External links

  * Appropriate Economics Local Exchange Systems in Africa, Asia, and Latin America
  * ccSyndicator Collaborative IT Committee for Complementary Currencies
  * Community Forge is a non-profit offering currency enabled web sites to communities
  * Complementary Currency Resource Center Resource Center for Complementary Currencies
  * Local and Interest-Free or Alternative Currencies, Social Credit and Microcredit Detailed Links to more Complementary Currency Sites
  * Living Economies Complementary Currency Resources and Link Directory
  * Systemfehler.de Digital Library of Complementary Currency and Alternative Economics Literature
  * transaction.net Simple and clear explanations of various Complementary currencies
  * Yootles A complementary currency being developed at Yahoo!
  * Multilingual Complementary Currency Library
  * Value For People Community Currency, Time Banking and Co-Production specialists
  * Online Laboratory on Complementary Currencies JAPAN
  * Community Currency Online Magazine

### [edit] Complementary, local exchange software and systems design

  * Cyclos Web based complementary currency system build on Java technologies
  * Community Exchange System Global complementary currency system
  * Marketplace module for Drupal Social Networking software for community currencies
  * Fourth Corner Exchange Trading network and php/mySQL application for LETS

### [edit] Examples of complementary currencies currently circulating

  * Worldwide Database of Complementary Currency Systems
  * [3]
  * Amsterdam Noppes
  * The Outer Courtyard
  * Community Exchange System (CES) International
  * Chiemgauer
  * EarthE Money
  * Ithaca Hours
  * Sterntaler
  * Rheingold Regio
  * Slovakia LETS
  * GÃ¶teborg LETS
  * Falmouth LETS
  * New Moray LETS
  * LETS in Cornwall & the SW of the UK
  * Sel de terre system France
  * Golden Bay HANDS New Zealand
  * Here Now Korea
  * Mexico
  * North Carolina Plenty
  * Swiss WIR

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Robert Costanza et al., "Complementary Currencies as a Method to Improve Local Sustainable Economic Welfare", University of Vermont, Draft, Dec. 12th, 2003.
  2. ^ B. Rietaer, "Global Complementally Currency: Making Money Sustainable", Environmental Research Quarterly, Vol. 125, pp. 53-59, 2002.
  3. ^ Jeremy Faludi, "Complementary Currency: For Bootstrapping, But Not For Everything", Worldchanging, Oct. 4th, 2005.
  4. ^ S. DeMeulenaere, "2006 Annual Report of the Worldwide Database of Complementary Currency Systems", International Journal of Community Currency Research, Vol. 11, pp. 23-35, 2007.
  5. ^ "Bernard Lietaer Urges the Growth of New Currency", Bank Technology News, Jul. 1st, 2004.
  6. ^ "Barter and Cashless Trading Summit to Promote Collaboration of International Reciprocal Trade: IRTAs 26th Annual Conference Is The First of Its Kind", PRWEB, Jul. 22nd, 2005.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complementary_currency"

Categories: Community currencies

Hidden categories: All articles to be merged | Articles to be merged since May
2008 | Cleanup from May 2008 | All pages needing cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 18:23.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



