
# Fallout shelter

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

A sign pointing to an old fallout shelter in New York City.

Nuclear weapons  
One of the first nuclear bombs.  
History  
Warfare  
Arms race  
Design  
Testing  
Effects  
Delivery  
Espionage  
Proliferation  
Arsenals  
Terrorism  
Civil defense  
Nuclear-armed states  
United States Â· Russia  
Â· United Kingdom Â· France  
China Â· India Â· Israel  
Pakistan Â· North Korea Â·  
South Africa  
This box: view â¢ talk â¢ edit  
A fallout shelter is an enclosed space specially designed to protect occupants
from radioactive debris or fallout resulting from a nuclear explosion. Many
such shelters were constructed as civil defence measures during the Cold War.

After a nuclear explosion, matter vaporized in the resulting fireball is
exposed to neutrons from the explosion, absorbs them, and becomes radioactive.
When this material condenses in the cloud, it forms dust and light sandy
material that resembles ground pumice. The fallout emits both beta particles
and gamma rays. Much of this highly radioactive material then falls to earth,
subjecting anything within the line of sight to radiation, a significant
hazard. A fallout shelter is designed to allow its occupants to minimize
exposure to harmful fallout until radioactivity has decayed to a safer level.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Details of shelter construction
    * 2.1 Shielding
    * 2.2 Climate control
    * 2.3 Locations
    * 2.4 Contents
  * 3 Usage
  * 4 Protection offered by the solid walls and roof of a structure
    * 4.1 No shielding
    * 4.2 10 cm concrete shielding
    * 4.3 20 and 30 cm concrete shielding
  * 5 Other matters and simple improvements
    * 5.1 Measures to lower the beta dose
    * 5.2 Measures to lower the gamma dose rate
  * 6 Different types of radiation emitted by fallout
  * 7 Weapons fallout
  * 8 Pop culture
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ideal American fallout shelter from around 1957.

During the Cold War many countries built fallout shelters for high-ranking
government officials and crucial military facilities. Plans were made,
however, to use existing buildings with sturdy below-ground-level basements as
makeshift fallout shelters. These buildings were usually placarded with the
yellow and black trefoil sign as shown in the top of this article. The initial
blast of a nuclear attack might have rendered these basements either buried
under many tons of rubble and thus impossible to leave, or removed their upper
framework, thus leaving the basements unprotected.

In the U.S. in September 1961 the Federal Government started the Community
Fallout Shelter Program.[1][2] (A letter from President Kennedy advising the
use of fallout shelters appeared in the September, 1961 issue of Life
magazine.)[3]

Switzerland built an extensive network of fallout shelters (mainly through
extra hardening of government buildings such as schools) of a scale to protect
and feed the entire population for two years after a nuclear attack. This
nation has the highest ratio of shelter space to national population of any
country. All these shelters are capable of withstanding nuclear fallout and
biological or chemical (NBC) attacks but the blast-proof requirement varies
depending on the size of the building. The largest buildings usually have
dedicated shelters tunneled into solid rock. Similar projects have been
undertaken in Finland, which requires all buildings with area over 600 mÂ² to
have an NBC shelter, and Norway, which requires all buildings with an area
over 1000 mÂ² to have a shelter.[4]

The former Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc countries often designed their
underground mass-transit and subway tunnels to serve as bomb and fallout
shelters in the event of an attack.

Interest in fallout shelters has largely dropped, as the perceived threat of
global nuclear war reduced after the end of the Cold War. In Switzerland, most
residential shelters are no longer stocked with the food and water required
for prolonged habitation and a large number have been converted by the owners
to other uses (e.g. wine cellars, ski rooms, gyms). However, a renewed
interest has been seen since 2001. These shelters also provide a safe haven
from natural disasters such as tornadoes and hurricanes, although Switzerland
is rarely subject to such natural phenomena.

## [edit] Details of shelter construction

<IMG>

<IMG>

Door to a light fallout shelter

### [edit] Shielding

A basic fallout shelter consists of shields that reduce gamma ray exposure by
a factor of 1000. The required shielding can be accomplished with 10 times the
amount of any quantity of material capable of cutting gamma ray effects in
half. Shields that reduce gamma ray intensity by 50% (1/2) include 1 cm (0.4
inch) of lead, 6 cm (2.4 inches) of concrete, 9 cm (3.6 inches) of packed dirt
or 150 m (500 ft) of air. When multiple thicknesses are built, the shielding
multiplies. Thus, a practical fallout shield is ten halving-thicknesses of
packed dirt, reducing gamma rays by 1024 times (210).

Usually, an expedient purpose-built fallout shelter is a trench, with a strong
roof buried by ~1 m (3 ft) of dirt. The two ends of the trench have ramps or
entrances at right angles to the trench, so that gamma rays cannot enter (they
can travel only in straight lines). To make the overburden waterproof (in case
of rain), a plastic sheet should be buried a few inches below the surface and
held down with rocks or bricks.

### [edit] Climate control

Dry earth is a reasonably good thermal insulator, and over several weeks of
habitation, a shelter will become too hot for comfort. The simplest form of
effective fan to cool a shelter is a wide, heavy frame with flaps that swings
in the shelter's doorway and can be swung from hinges on the ceiling. The
flaps open in one direction and close in the other, pumping air. Attach a
rope, and take turns swinging it. (This is a Kearny Air Pump, or KAP, named
after the inventor.)

<IMG>

<IMG>

Fallout shelter sign on a school dormitory in Mission, South Dakota

Unfiltered air is safe, since the most dangerous fallout has the consistency
of sand or finely ground pumice. Such large particles are not easily ingested
into the soft tissues of the body, so extensive filters are not required. Any
exposure to fine dust is far less hazardous than exposure to the gamma from
the fallout outside the shelter. Dust fine enough to pass the entrance will
probably pass through the shelter.

### [edit] Locations

Effective public shelters can be the middle floors of some tall buildings or
parking structures, or below ground level in most buildings with more than 10
floors. The thickness of the upper floors must form an effective shield, and
the windows of the sheltered area must not view fallout-covered ground that is
closer than 1.5 km (1 mi).

### [edit] Contents

A battery-powered radio is very helpful to get reports of fallout patterns and
clearance. In many countries (including the U.S.) civilian radio stations have
emergency generators with enough fuel to operate for extended periods without
commercial electricity.

It is possible to construct an electrometer-type radiation meter called the
Kearny Fallout Meter from plans with just a coffee can or pail, gypsum board,
monofilament fishing line, and aluminum foil. Plans are in the reference
"Nuclear War Survival Skills" by Cresson Kearny.

## [edit] Usage

Inhabitants should plan to remain sheltered for at least two weeks, then work
outside for gradually increasing amounts of time, to four hours a day at three
weeks. The normal work is to sweep or wash fallout into shallow trenches to
decontaminate the area. They should sleep in a shelter for several months.
Evacuation at three weeks is recommended by official authorities.

If available, inhabitants should take potassium iodide at the rate of 130
mg/day per adult (65 mg/day per child) as an additional measure to protect the
human thyroid gland from the uptake of dangerous radioactive iodine, a
component of most fallout and reactor waste. (For more info, including
storage, and use of an inexpensive saturated solution, see potassium iodide).

## [edit] Protection offered by the solid walls and roof of a structure

<IMG>

<IMG>

The contributions made by the different isotopes to the dose (in air) caused
in the contaminated area in the time shortly after the accident with 30 cm of
concrete shielding. [5]

<IMG>

<IMG>

The contributions made by the different isotopes to the dose (in air) caused
in the contaminated area in the time shortly after the accident. [5]  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The contributions made by the different isotopes to the dose (in air) caused
in the contaminated area in the time shortly after the accident with 10 cm of
concrete shielding. [5]  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The protection factor provided by 10 cm of concrete shielding where the source
is the idealised Chernobyl fallout. [5]  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The contributions made by the different isotopes to the dose (in air) caused
in the contaminated area in the time shortly after the accident with 20 cm of
concrete shielding. [5]  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The protection factor provided by 20 cm of concrete shielding where the source
is the idealised Chernobyl fallout. [5]  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The protection factor provided by 30 cm of concrete shielding where the source
is the idealised Chernobyl fallout. [5]  
The fallout from either a weapon or an accident is a complex mixture of many
radioisotopes. For weapons fallout the photon energy is assumed to be the same
as the gamma rays from 60Co. Data collected after the Chernobyl accident can
serve in a simulation of fallout shelter efficacy, reconstructing the
contribution of different radioisotopes to the radiation dose over time. The
simulation detailed below assumes that no chemical separation occurred during
the transport of radioactivity to the site where the fallout fell (this in
real life is not true), and that no decontamination or removal of fallout
(e.g. weathering) occurs.

### [edit] No shielding

Using the data for the source term (radioactive release) from Chernobyl, and
other literature data it is possible to estimate how much protection a wall of
concrete will offer in the event of a Chernobyl like accident. These
calculations are for a room with no windows or doors. The radioactive dust on
the roof, and the windows and doors will make the estimation of the protection
factor more difficult.

### [edit] 10 cm concrete shielding

These graphs show that thicker walls increase the protection factor. The
protection factor is the ratio of the dose rate suffered by a person inside
the shelter divided by the dose rate in the open. The protection factor
changes as a function of time. This is because some of the short-lived
isotopes such as 95Zr and 95Nb generate very high energy gamma photons, while
the longer lived 137Cs have a lower photon energy.

As the wall is made thicker the average gamma photon energy for those photons
which pass through the wall becomes higher. So each additional layer of
concrete has a smaller effect on the dose rate.

### [edit] 20 and 30 cm concrete shielding

(Refer to charts, at right) As the shield becomes thicker the very high photon
energy emitters such as 140Ba/140La and 95Zr/95Nb become more and more
important.

## [edit] Other matters and simple improvements

In the long term it is important to consider the protection which is offered
by a person's home in the months and years after an event such as the
Chernobyl accident. While the person's home may not be a purpose-made shelter,
it can be thought of as a shelter if any action is taken to improve the degree
of protection.

### [edit] Measures to lower the beta dose

The main threat from beta emitters is from a hot particle which is in contact
or close to the skin of the person. Also a swallowed or inhaled hot particle
could cause beta burns. As it is important to avoid bringing hot particles
into the shelter, one option is to remove one's outer clothing on entry..

### [edit] Measures to lower the gamma dose rate

The gamma dose rate due to the contamination brought into the shelter on the
clothing of a person is likely to be small compared to gamma radiation that
penetrates through the walls of the shelter. The following measures can be
taken to reduce the amount of gamma radiation entering the shelter:

  * Roofs and gutters should be cleaned to lower the dose rate in the house.

  * The top inch of soil in the area near the house should be either removed or dug up and mixed with the deeper layers of soil. This reduces the dose rate as the gamma photons have to pass through the soil before they can irradiate a person.

  * Nearby roads can be rinsed and washed down to remove dust and debris; the contaminated materials would collect in the sewers and gutters for easier disposal. In Kiev after the Chernobyl accident a program of road washing was used to control the spread of radioactivity.

  * Windows can be bricked up, or the sill raised to reduce the hole in the shielding formed by the wall.

  * Gaps in the shielding can be blocked using water cans, such as bottles of water. While water only has a density which is one tenth that of lead, it is still able to absorb gamma rays.

  * Earth can be heaped up against the exposed walls of the building, this forces the gamma rays to pass through a thicker layer of shielding before entering the house.

  * Nearby trees can be removed to reduce the dose due to fallout which is on the branches and leaves. It has been suggested by the US government that a fallout shelter should not be dug close to trees for this reason.

## [edit] Different types of radiation emitted by fallout

Alpha

In the vast majority of accidents and in all atomic bombs the threat due to
beta and gamma emitters is far greater than that posed by the small amount of
alpha emitters in the fallout. Alpha radiation can be very harmful, but only
if radioactive materials are ingested or inhaled. Alpha particles can be
blocked easily by a sheet of paper.

Beta

It is likely that even a light structure will give good protection against
most beta emitters, but small particles of fallout can cause localised
radiation injuries known as beta burns. It is thought that if a person
entering a fallout shelter was to change their footwear and leave their outer
clothing outside the main area then the persons inside will be protected from
these beta burns. Beta rays are more penetrating than alpha rays, but internal
exposure will tend to do less damage because the LET is lower.

Three centimeters of aluminum can block the beta emissions from even a high
energy beta emitter such as 90Sr, while a lower energy beta emitter such as
tritium or 14C will be stopped by thinner objects.

Gamma

These are not charged particles but electromagnetic rays, and are thus more
able to pass through objects and may pose a great threat to a person in a
fallout shelter. Most of the design of a fallout shelter is intended to
protect against gamma rays. The rays' intensity can be reduced by dense
materials such as lead, steel, concrete or packed earth.

## [edit] Weapons fallout

The bulk of the radioactivity in nuclear accident fallout is more long-lived
than that in weapons fallout. A good table of the nuclides such as that
provided by the Korean Atomic Energy Research Institute includes the fission
yields of the different nuclides. From this data it is possible to calculate
the isotopic mixture in the fallout (due to fission products in bomb fallout).
The mixture of radioisotopes present in used power reactor fuel can be more
complex because neutron activation of fission products is possible, a good
example of this is the caesium isotopic signature. In terms of activity
(becquerels or curies), the activity in a power reactor fuel one hour after
shutdown tends to be more long lived because the majority of the short lived
fission products will have had time to decay.

For example, some fissile material is used in a bomb, and that in 1012
fissions an equal number of 131I and 137Cs atoms are formed. Because the 131I
has such a short half life when compared with the 137Cs, the activity ratio of
131I to 137Cs will be very much in favour of the 131I one hour after the
fission event.

If, on the other hand, a lump of fuel in a power reactor undergoes 1012
fissions, which will generate a given amount of 131I, if the reactor was run
at a constant power for one year then the majority of the 131I will have had
time to decay. However the vast majority of the 137Cs atoms will not have had
time to decay. So the 131I to 137Cs ratio is more in favour of 137Cs than the
mixture formed.

## [edit] Pop culture

In popular culture, fallout shelters feature prominently in the Robert A.
Heinlein novel Farnham's Freehold (Heinlein built a fairly extensive shelter
near his home in Colorado Springs in 1963)[6], Pulling Through by Dean Ing, A
Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller and the David Brin novel Earth. The
idealized fallout shelter can be seen in the motion picture Blast from the
Past.

The Twilight Zone episode The Shelter, from a Rod Serling script, deals with
the consequences of actually using a shelter.

In book 11 of the Cirque Du Freak book series, Darren and Harkat must go into
an alternate world. They then find a fallout shelter with post cards on the
refrigerator from the late 1940's and realized that they had gone back in
time.

In the Fallout series of video games, fallout shelter vaults, are supposed to
safely house their 1000 inhabitants from nuclear war.

## [edit] See also

  * Blast shelter
  * Bomb shelter
  * Bunker
  * Collective protection
  * Command center
  * Continuity of government
  * Diefenbunker
  * Fallout Protection
  * Fission product
  * Survivalism
  * Retreat (survivalism)
  * Survival Under Atomic Attack
  * Urban exploration
  * Sonnenberg Tunnel

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Civil Defense Museum-Community Shelter Tours Main Page". www.civildefensemuseum.com. http://www.civildefensemuseum.com/cdmuseum2/commun.html. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.
  2. ^ "FALLOUT FEVER: Civil Defense shelters dotted area cities during the Cold War - My Web Times". mywebtimes.com. http://mywebtimes.com/archives/ottawa/display.php?id=366305. Retrieved on 2008-09-14.
  3. ^ DOE.gov
  4. ^ [1]
  5. ^ a b c d e f g Note that this image was drawn using data from the OECD report and the second edition of The Radiochemical Manual
  6. ^ site: Robert A. Heinlein - Archives - PM 6/52 Article

## [edit] External links

  * Nuclear fallout decontamination device. (www.greeneyetech.com)

  * Fallout exposure based on size of bomb and distance from explosion. (www.bomb-shelter.net)

  * Bomb Shelter Questions and Answers (www.undergroundbombshelter.com)

  * Arabs put nuclear bunkers in grounds of their houses (UK)

  * Oregon Institute of Science and MedicineThis website offers the entire online version of Nuclear War Survival Skills with full graphics and web navigation, created with the permission of the author Cresson Kearny. This manual has proven technical info on expedient fallout shelter, shelter habitation, and assorted shelter system needs that can be created from common household items. OISM also offers free downloads of other civil defense and shelter information as well.

  * SurvivalRing Hosts hundreds of freely downloadable PDF files including dozens of authentic fallout shelter plans, fallout shelter regulations, fallout technological data, and cold war related fallout shelter defense data.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fallout_shelter"

Categories: Civil defense | Cold War | Nuclear warfare | Radioactivity |
Radiobiology | Rooms | Subterranea | Shelters | Survivalism

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 13 April 2009, at 19:58 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



