
# Phytoremediation

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Sister project Look up phytoremediation in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
Phytoremediation describes the treatment of environmental problems
(bioremediation) through the use of plants which mitigate the environmental
problem without the need to excavate the contaminant material and dispose of
it elsewhere.

The word's etymology comes from the Greek ÏÏ ÏÎ¿ (phyto) = plant, and Latin
Â« remedium Â» = restoring balance, or remediation. Phytoremediation consists
in mitigating pollutant concentrations in contaminated soils, water or air
with plants able to contain, degrade or eliminate metals, pesticides,
solvents, explosives, crude oil and its derivatives, and various other
contaminants, from the media that contain them.

## Contents

  * 1 Application
  * 2 Advantages and limitations
  * 3 Various phytoremediation processes
    * 3.1 Phytoextraction
    * 3.2 Phytostabilization
    * 3.3 Phytotransformation
  * 4 The role of genetics
  * 5 Hyperaccumulators and biotic interactions
  * 6 Table of hyperaccumulators
  * 7 References
  * 8 See also
  * 9 External links
  * 10 Bibliography

  
## [edit] Application

Phytoremidiation may be applied wherever the soil or static water environment
has become polluted or is suffering ongoing chronic pollution. Examples where
phytoremidation has been used successfully include the restoration of
abandoned metal-mine workings, reducing the impact of sites where PCBs have
been dumped during manufacturer and mitigation of on-going coal mine
discharges.

It is a clean, efficient, inexpensive and non-environmentally disruptive
method, as opposed to processes that require excavation of soil. The
definitive textbook on phytoremediation was published in 2003 with
contributed, peer reviewed articles from all major research groups involved in
phytoremediation research (Phytoremediation: Transformation and Control of
Contaminants, edited by Steven C. McCutcheon and Jerald L. Schnoor).

## [edit] Advantages and limitations

  * Advantages: 
    * the cost of the phytoremediation is lower than that of traditional processes both in situ and ex situ
    * the plants can be easily monitored
    * the possibility of the recovery and re-use of valuable metals (by companies specializing in âphytominingâ)
    * it is the least harmful method because it uses naturally occurring organisms and preserves the natural state of the environment.

  * Limitations: 
    * phytoremediation is limited to the surface area and depth occupied by the roots.
    * slow growth and low biomass require a long-term commitment
    * with plant-based systems of remediation, it is not possible to completely to prevent the leaching of contaminants into the groundwater (without the complete removal of the contaminated ground which in itself does not resolve the problem of contamination)
    * the survival of the plants is affected by the toxicity of the contaminated land and the general condition of the soil.
    * possible bio-accumulation of contaminants which then pass into the food chain, from primary level consumers upwards.

  

## [edit] Various phytoremediation processes

A range of processes mediated by plants or algae are useful in treating
environmental problems:

  * Phytoextraction \- uptake and concentration of substances from the environment into the plant biomass.
  * Phytostabilization \- reducing the mobility of substances in the environment, for example by limiting the leaching of substances from the soil.
  * Phytotransformation \- chemical modification of environmental substances as a direct result of plant metabolism, often resulting in their inactivation, degradation (phytodegradation) or immobilization (phytostabilization).
  * Phytostimulation \- enhancement of soil microbial activity for the degradation of contaminants, typically by organisms that associate with roots. This process is also known as rhizosphere degradation.
  * Phytovolatilization \- removal of substances from soil or water with release into the air, sometimes as a result of phytotransformation to more volatile and / or less polluting substances.
  * Rhizofiltration \- filtering water through a mass of roots to remove toxic substances or excess nutrients. The pollutants remain absorbed in or adsorbed to the roots.

### [edit] Phytoextraction

Phytoextraction (or phytoaccumulation) uses plants or algae to remove
contaminants from soils, sediments or water into harvestable plant biomass.
Phytoextraction has been growing rapidly in popularity world-wide for the last
twenty years or so. Generally this process has been tried more often for
extracting heavy metals than for organics. At the time of disposal
contaminants are typically concentrated in the much smaller volume of the
plant matter than in the initially contaminated soil or sediment. 'Mining with
plants', or phytomining, is also being experimented with.

The plants absorb contaminants through the root system and store them in the
root biomass and/or transport them up into the stems and/or leaves. A living
plant may continue to absorb contaminants until it is harvested. After harvest
a lower level of the contaminant will remain in the soil, so the
growth/harvest cycle must usually be repeated through several crops to achieve
a significant cleanup. After the process, the cleaned soil can support other
vegetation.

Two versions of phytoextraction:

  * natural hyper-accumulation, where plants naturally take up the contaminants in soil unassisted, and
  * induced or assisted hyper-accumulation, in which a conditioning fluid containing a chelator or another agent is added to soil to increase metal solubility or mobilization so that the plants can absorb them more easily. In many cases natural hyperaccumulators are metallophyte plants that can tolerate and incorporate high levels of toxic metals.

Examples of phytoextraction from soils (see also 'Table of
hyperaccumulators'):

  * Arsenic, using the Sunflower (Helianthus annuus), or the Chinese Brake fern ("Pteris spp"], a hyperaccumulator. Chinese Brake fern stores arsenic in its leaves.
  * Cadmium and zinc, using Alpine pennycress (Thlaspi caerulescens), a hyperaccumulator of these metals at levels that would be toxic to many plants. On the other hand, the presence of copper seems to impair its growth (see table for reference).
  * Lead, using Indian Mustard (Brassica juncea), Ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia), Hemp Dogbane (Apocynum cannabinum), or Poplar trees, which sequester lead in its biomass.
  * Salt-tolerant (moderately halophytic) barley and/or sugar beets are commonly used for the extraction of Sodium chloride (common salt) to reclaim fields that were previously flooded by sea water.
  * Uranium, using sunflowers, as used after the Chernobyl accident.
  * Mercury, selenium and organic pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) have been removed from soils by transgenic plants containing genes for bacterial enzymes[1].

### [edit] Phytostabilization

Phytostabilization focuses on long-term stabilization and containment of the
pollutant. For example, the plant's presence can reduce wind erosion, or the
plant's roots can prevent water erosion, immobilize the pollutants by
adsorption or accumulation, and provide a zone around the roots where the
pollutant can precipitate and stabilize. Unlike phytoextraction,
phytostabilization mainly focuses on sequestering pollutants in soil near the
roots but not in plant tissues. Pollutants become less bioavailable and
livestock, wildlife, and human exposure is reduced. An example application of
this sort is using a vegetative cap to stabilize and contain mine tailings.[2]

### [edit] Phytotransformation

In the case of organic pollutants, such as pesticides, explosives, solvents,
industrial chemicals, and other xenobiotic substances, certain plants, such as
Cannas, render these substances non-toxic by their metabolism. In other cases,
microorganisms living in association with plant roots may metabolize these
substances in soil or water. These complex and recalcitrant compounds cannot
be broken down to basic molecules (water, carbondioxide etc) by plant
molecules, and hence the term phytotransformation represents a change in
chemical structure without complete breakdown of the compound. The term "Green
Liver Model" [1] is used to describe phytotransformation, as plants behave
analogously to the human liver when dealing with these xenobiotic
compounds(foreign compound/pollutant). After uptake of the xenobiotics, plant
enzymes increase the polarity of the xenobiotics by adding functional groups
such as hydroxyl groups (-OH).

This is known as Phase I metabolism, similar to the way that the human liver
increases the polarity of drugs and foreign compounds (Drug Metabolism. Whilst
in the human liver, enzymes such as Cytochrome P450s are responsible for the
initial reactions. In plants, enzymes such as nitroreductases carry out the
same role.

In the second stage of phytotransformation, known as Phase II metabolism,
plant biomolecules such as glucose and amino acids are added to the polarized
xenobiotic to further increase the polarity (known as conjugation). This is
again similar to the processes occurring in the human pancreas where
glucuronidation (addition of glucose molecules by the UGT (e.g. UGT1A1) class
of enzymes) and glutathione addition reactions occur on reactive centres of
the xenobiotic.

Phase I and II reactions serve to increase the polarity and reduce the
toxicity of the compounds, although many exceptions to the rule are seen. The
increased polarity also allows for easy transport of the xenobiotic along
aqueous channels.

In the final stage of phytotransformation (Phase III metabolism), a
sequestration of the xenobiotic occurs within the plant. The xenobiotics
polymerize in a lignin-like manner and develop a complex structure which is
sequestered in the plant. This ensures that the xenobiotic is safely stored,
and does not affect the functioning of the plant. However, preliminary studies
have shown that these plants can be toxic to small animals (such as snails)
and hence plants involved in phytotransformation may need to be maintained in
a closed enclosure.

Hence, the plants reduce toxicity (with exceptions) and sequester the
xenobiotics in phytotransformation. Trinitrotoluene phytotransformation has
been extensively researched and a transformation pathway has been proposed
[3].

## [edit] The role of genetics

Breeding programs and genetic engineering are powerful methods for enhancing
natural phytoremediation capabilities, or for introducing new capabilities
into plants. Genes for phytoremediation may originate from a micro-organism or
may be transferred from one plant to another variety better adapted to the
environmental conditions at the cleanup site. For example, genes encoding a
nitroreductase from a bacterium were inserted into tobacco and showed faster
removal of TNT and enhanced resistance to the toxic effects of TNT [4].
Researchers have also discovered a mechanism in plants that allows them to
grow even when the pollution concentration in the soil is lethal for non-
treated plants. Some natural, biodegradable compunds, such as exogenous
polyamines, allow the plants to tolerate concentrations of pollutants 500
times higher than untreated plants, and to absorb more pollutants.

## [edit] Hyperaccumulators and biotic interactions

A plant is said to be a hyperaccumulator if it can concentrate the pollutants
in a minimum percentage which varies according to the pollutant involved (for
example: more than 1000 mg/kg of dry weight for nickel, copper, cobalt,
chromium or lead; or more than 10,000 mg/kg for zinc or manganese.[5] This
capacity for accumulation is due to hypertolerance, or phytotolerance: the
result of adaptative evolution from the plants to hostile environments through
many generations. A number of interactions may be affected by metal
hyperaccumulation, including protection, interferences with neighbour plants
of different species, mutualism (including mycorrhizae, pollen and seed
dispersal),commensalism and biofilm.

## [edit] Table of hyperaccumulators

  * Hyperaccumulators table â 1 : Al, Ag, As, Be, Cr, Cu, Mn, Hg, Mo, Naphtalene, Pb, Pd, Pt, Se, Zn
  * Hyperaccumulators table â 2 : Nickel
  * Hyperaccumulators table â 3 : Radionuclides (Cd, Cs, Co, Pu, Ra, Sr, U), Hydrocarbures, Organic Solvents.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Meagher, RB (2000). "Phytoremediation of toxic elemental and organic pollutants". Current Opinion In Plant Biology 3 (2): 153â162. doi:10.1016/S1369-5266(99)00054-0. PMID 10712958.
  2. ^ Mendez MO, Maier RM (2008). "Phytostabilization of mine tailings in arid and semiarid environmentsâan emerging remediation technology". Environ Health Perspect 116 (3): 278â83. doi:10.1289/ehp.10608. http://www.ehponline.org/members/2007/10608/10608.html.
  3. ^ Murali Subramanian, David J. Oliver, and Jacqueline V. Shanks. TNT Phytotransformation Pathway Characteristics in Arabidopsis: Role of Aromatic Hydroxylamines. Biotechnol. Prog., 22 (1), 208 -216, 2006.
  4. ^ Hannink N, Rosser SJ, French CE, Basran A, Murray JA, Nicklin S, Bruce NC. Phytodetoxification of TNT by transgenic plants expressing a bacterial nitroreductase. 1: Nat Biotechnol. 2001 Dec;19(12):1168-72.
  5. ^ A.J.M. Baker, R.R. Brooks. Terrestrial higher plants which hyperaccumulate metallic elements â A review of their distribution, ecology and phytochemistry. Biorecovery (1989), 1:81â126

## [edit] See also

  * Biodegradation
  * Bioremediation
  * John Todd \- cofounder of the New Alchemy Institute

## [edit] External links

  * What is Phytoremediation? A good overview.
  * International Journal of Phytoremediation \- devoted to the publication of current laboratory and field research describing the use of plant systems to remediate contaminated environments.
  * Using Plants To Clean Up Soils \- from Agricultural Research magazine
  * Phytoremediation website hosted by the Missouri Botanical Garden \- Review Articles, Conferences, Phytoremediation Links, Research Sponsors, Books and Journals, and Recent Research.

## [edit] Bibliography

  * âPhytoremediation Websiteâ - Includes reviews, conference announcements, lists of companies doing phytoremediation, and bibliographies.
  * âAn Overview of Phytoremediation of Lead and Mercuryâ June 6 2000. The Hazardous Waste Clean-Up Information Web Site.
  * âEnhanced phytoextraction of arsenic from contaminated soil using sunflowerâ September 22 2004. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
  * âGetting the lead outâ, June 1995. Vegetarian Times.
  * âPhytoextractionâ, February 2000. Brookhaven National Laboratory 2000.
  * âPhytoextraction of Metals from Contaminated Soilâ April 18, 2001. M.M. Lasat
  * July 2002. Donald Bren School of Environment Science & Management.
  * âPhytoremediationâ October 1997. Department of Civil Environmental Engineering.
  * âPhytoremediationâ June 2001, Todd Zynda.
  * âPhytoremediation of Lead in Residential Soils in Dorchester, MAâ May, 2002. Amy Donovan Palmer, Boston Public Health Commission.
  * âTechnology Profile: Phytoextractionâ 1997. Environmental Business Association.
  * âThe role of EDTA in lead transport and accumulation by Indian mustardâ June 1998.

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phytoremediation"

Categories: Botany | Pollution control technologies

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Magyar
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 25 March 2009, at 20:12.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



