
# Astrolabe

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For other uses, see Astrolabe (disambiguation).

<IMG>

<IMG>

A 16th century astrolabe, showing a tulip rete and rule.

An astrolabe is a historical astronomical instrument used by classical
astronomers, navigators, and astrologers. Its many uses include locating and
predicting the positions of the Sun, Moon, planets, and stars; determining
local time given local latitude and vice-versa; surveying; and triangulation.

In the medieval Islamic world, they were used primarily for astronomical
studies, as well as in other areas as diverse as astrology, navigation,
surveying, timekeeping, Salah prayers, and Qibla. Astrologers of the European
nations used astrolabes to construct horoscopes.

There is often confusion between the astrolabe and the mariner's astrolabe.
While the astrolabe could be useful for determining latitude on land, it was
an awkward instrument for use on the heaving deck of a ship or in wind. The
mariner's astrolabe was developed to address these issues.

## Contents

  * 1 A Brief History
    * 1.1 Astrolabes and clocks
  * 2 Construction
  * 3 See also
  * 4 Notes
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] A Brief History

File:Ms1186 astrolabe.jpan astrolab is a franco perazzo g

Three Capetian French scholars consulting an astrolabe, ca. AD 1200

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Persian (Iranian) astrolabe from 1208

<IMG>

<IMG>

The spherical astrolabe from medieval Islamic astronomy.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A Treatise on the astrolabe by Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, Isfahan 1505

An early rudimentary astrolabe was invented in the Hellenistic world in either
the first or second centuries BC and is often attributed to Hipparchus. A
marriage of the planisphere and dioptra, the astrolabe was effectively an
analog calculator capable of working out several different kinds of problems
in spherical astronomy. Theon of Alexandria wrote a detailed treatise on the
astrolabe, and Lewis (2001) argues that Ptolemy used an astrolabe to make the
astronomical observations recorded in the Tetrabiblos.[1]

Brass astrolabes (Arabic: Ø§Ø³Ø·Ø±ÙØ§Ø¨ asterlab, ostorlabâ) were developed
in the medieval Islamic world, chiefly as an aid to navigation and as a way of
finding the qibla, the direction of Mecca. The first person credited with
building the astrolabe in the Islamic world is reportedly the eighth century
mathematician, Muhammad al-Fazari.[2] The mathematical background was
established by the Arab astronomer, Muhammad ibn JÄbir al-HarrÄnÄ« al-
BattÄnÄ« (Albatenius), in his treatise Kitab az-Zij (ca. 920 AD), which was
translated into Latin by Plato Tiburtinus (De Motu Stellarum). The earliest
surviving astrolabe is dated AH 315 (927/8 AD). In the Islamic world,
astrolabes were used to find the times of sunrise and the rising of fixed
stars, to help schedule morning prayers (salat). In the 10th century, al-Sufi
first described over 1,000 different uses of an astrolabe, in areas as diverse
as astronomy, astrology, horoscopes, navigation, surveying, timekeeping,
prayer, Salah, Qibla, etc.[3]

AbÅ« IshÄq IbrÄhÄ«m al-ZarqÄlÄ« (Arzachel) of Al-Andalus constructed the
first universal astrolabe instrument which, unlike its predecessors, did not
depend on the latitude of the observer, and could be used from anywhere on the
Earth. This instrument became known in Europe as the "Saphaea". The astrolabe
was introduced to other parts of Europe via Al-Andalus in the 11th century.[4]
Early Christian recipients of Arab astronomy included Gerbert of Aurillac and
Hermannus Contractus.

The spherical astrolabe, a variation of both the astrolabe and the armillary
sphere, was invented during the Middle Ages by astronomers and inventors in
the Islamic world.[5] The earliest description of the spherical astrolabe
dates back to Al-Nayrizi (fl. 892-902). In the 12th century, Sharaf al-DÄ«n
al-TÅ«sÄ« invented the linear astrolabe, sometimes called the "staff of al-
Tusi", which was "a simple wooden rod with graduated markings but without
sights. It was furnished with a plumb line and a double chord for making
angular measurements and bore a perforated pointer."[6] The first geared
mechanical astrolabe was later invented by Abi Bakr of Isfahan in 1235.[7]

Peter of Maricourt in the last half of the thirteenth century also wrote a
treatise on the construction and use of a universal astrolabe (Nova compositio
astrolabii particularis). However, given the complicated nature of the
instrument, it is highly unlikely that any were actually constructed; at least
none survive.

The English author Geoffrey Chaucer (ca. 1343â1400) compiled a treatise on
the astrolabe for his son, mainly based on Messahalla. The same source was
translated by the French astronomer and astrologer Pelerin de Prusse and
others. The first printed book on the astrolabe was Composition and Use of
Astrolabe by Cristannus de Prachaticz, also using Messahalla, but relatively
original.

In 1370, the first Indian treatise on the astrolabe was written by the Jain
astronomer Mahendra Suri.[8]

The first known European metal astrolabe was developed in the fifteenth
century by Rabbi Abraham Zacuto in Lisbon. Metal astrolabes improved on the
accuracy of their wooden precursors. In the fifteenth century, the French
instrument-maker Jean Fusoris (ca. 1365â1436) also started selling
astrolabes in his shop in Paris, along with portable sundials and other
popular scientific gadgets of the day.

In the 16th century, Johannes StÃ¶ffler published Elucidatio fabricae ususque
astrolabii, a manual of the construction and use of the astrolabe. Four
identical 16th century astrolabes made by Georg Hartmann provide some of the
earliest evidence for batch production by division of labor.

### [edit] Astrolabes and clocks

At first mechanical astronomical clocks were influenced by the astrolabe; in
many ways they could be seen as clockwork astrolabes designed to produce a
continual display of the current position of the sun, stars, and planets. Ibn
al-Shatir constructed the earliest astrolabic clock in the early 14th
century.[9] At around the same time, Richard of Wallingford's clock (c. 1330)
consisted essentially of a star map rotating behind a fixed rete, similar to
that of an astrolabe.[10]

Many astronomical clocks, such as the famous clock at Prague, use an
astrolabe-style display, adopting a stereographic projection (see below) of
the ecliptic plane.

In 1985 Swiss watchmaker Dr. Ludwig Oechslin designed and built an astrolabe
wristwatch in conjunction with Ulysse Nardin.

## [edit] Construction

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Hartmann astrolabe in Yale's collection. This beautiful instrument shows
its rete and rule.

An astrolabe consists of a hollow disk, called the mater (mother), which is
deep enough to hold one or more flat plates called tympans, or climates. A
tympan is made for a specific latitude and is engraved with a stereographic
projection of circular lines of equal azimuth and altitude representing the
portion of the celestial sphere which is above the local horizon. The rim of
the mater is typically graduated into hours of time, or degrees of arc, or
both. Above the mater and tympan, the rete, a framework bearing a projection
of the ecliptic plane and several pointers indicating the positions of the
brightest stars, is free to rotate. Some astrolabes have a narrow rule or
label which rotates over the rete, and may be marked with a scale of
declinations.

The rete, representing the sky, has the function of a star chart. When it is
rotated, the stars and the ecliptic move over the projection of the
coordinates on the tympan. A complete rotation represents the passage of one
day. The astrolabe is therefore a predecessor of the modern planisphere.

On the back of the mater there will often be engraved a number of scales which
are useful in the astrolabe's various applications; these will vary from
designer to designer, but might include curves for time conversions, a
calendar for converting the day of the month to the sun's position on the
ecliptic, trigonometric scales, and a graduation of 360 degrees around the
back edge. The alidade is attached to the back face. An alidade can be seen in
the lower right illustration of the Persion astrolabe above. When the
astrolabe is held vertically, the alidade can be rotated and a star sighted
along its length, so that the star's altitude in degrees can be read ("taken")
from the graduated edge of the astrolabe; hence "astro" = star + "labe" = to
take.

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Astrolabe  
  * Antikythera mechanism
  * Armillary sphere
  * Astrarium
  * Astronomical clock
  * Cosmolabe
  * Equatorium
  * Islamic astronomy
  * Orrery
  * Planetarium
  * Prague Orloj
  * Sextant (astronomical)
  * Sharafeddin Tusi, the inventor of the linear astrolabe
  * Torquetum

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Evans (1998:155) "The astrolabe was in fact an invention of the ancient Greeks."  
Krebs & Krebs (2003:56) "It is generally accepted that Greek astrologers, in
either the first or second centuries BC, invented the astrolabe, an instrument
that measures the altitude of stars and planets above the horizon. Some
historians attribute its invention to Hipparchus"

  2. ^ Richard Nelson Frye: Golden Age of Persia. p. 163
  3. ^ Dr. Emily Winterburn (National Maritime Museum), Using an Astrolabe, Foundation for Science Technology and Civilisation, 2005.
  4. ^ M. T. Houtsma and E. van Donzel (1993), E. J. Brill's First Encyclopaedia of Islam, Brill Publishers, ISBN 9004082654
  5. ^ Emilie Savage-Smith (1993). "Book Reviews", Journal of Islamic Studies 4 (2), p. 296-299. 
> "There is no evidence for the Hellenistic origin of the spherical astrolabe,
but rather evidence so far available suggests that it may have been an early
but distinctly Islamic development with no Greek antecedents."

  6. ^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Sharaf al-Din al-Muzaffar al-Tusi", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive
  7. ^ Silvio A. Bedini, Francis R. Maddison (1966). "Mechanical Universe: The Astrarium of Giovanni de' Dondi", Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 56 (5), p. 1-69.
  8. ^ Glick et al., eds. (2005). Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia. Routledge. pp. 464\. ISBN 0415969301.
  9. ^ David A. King (1983). "The Astronomy of the Mamluks", Isis 74 (4), p. 531-555 [545-546].
  10. ^ John David North, "God's Clockmaker: Richard of Wallingford and the Invention of Time", Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005, ISBN 978-1852854515

## [edit] References

  * Evans, James (1998), The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0195095391 .

  * Alessandro Gunella and John Lamprey, Stoeffler's Elucidatio (translation of Elucidatio fabricae ususque astrolabii into English). Published by John Lamprey, 2007. lamprey@frii.com

  * Krebs, Robert E.; Krebs, Carolyn A. (2003), Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions, and Discoveries of the Ancient World, Greenwood Press .

  * Lewis, M. J. T. (2001), Surveying Instruments of Greece and Rome, Cambridge University Press .

  * John North. God's Clockmaker, Richard of Wallingford and the invention of time. Hambledon and London, 2005.

  * Critical edition of Pelerin de Prusse on the Astrolabe (translation of Practique de Astralabe). Editors Edgar Laird, Robert Fischer. Binghamton, New York, 1995, in Medieval & Renaissance Texts & Studies. ISBN 0-86698-132-2

  * King, Henry Geared to the Stars: the evolution of planetariums, orreries, and astronomical clocks University of Toronto Press, 1978

## [edit] External links

  * The Astrolabe
  * Keith's Astrolabe, a software astrolabe simulator and tutorial written in Java
  * A working model of the Dr. Ludwig Oechslin's Astrolabium Galileo Galilei watch
  * Ulysse Nardin Astrolabium Galilei Galileo: A Detailed Explanation
  * Fully illustrated online catalogue of world's largest collection of astrolabes
  * Gerbert d'Aurillac's use of the Astrolabe at Convergence

v â¢ d â¢ e

Islamic astronomy  
Astronomers

Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi Â· AbÅ« al-WafÄ' al-BÅ«zjÄnÄ« Â· AbÅ« IshÄq IbrÄhÄ«m
al-ZarqÄlÄ« Â· AbÅ« Ja'far al-KhÄzin Â· Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi Â· Abu Nasr
Mansur Â· AbÅ« RayhÄn al-BÄ«rÅ«nÄ« Â· AbÅ« Sahl al-QÅ«hÄ« Â· Ahmed ibn Yusuf
Â· Al-Birjandi Â· Al-Ghazali Â· Al-HajjÄj ibn YÅ«suf ibn Matar Â· Al-Khazini
Â· Al-Kindi Â· Al-Mahani Â· Al-Nayrizi Â· Al-Saghani Â· Al-Sijzi Â· Ali
KuÅÃ§u Â· Avicenna Â· BanÅ« MÅ«sÄ Â· Brethren of Purity Â· Ibn al-Banna al-
Marrakushi Â· Ibn al-Haytham Â· Ibn al-Shatir Â· Ibn YahyÄ al-MaghribÄ« al-
Samaw'al Â· Ibn Yunus Â· Ibrahim ibn Sinan Â· Ja'far al-Sadiq Â· JamshÄ«d al-
KÄshÄ« Â· KamÄl al-DÄ«n al-FÄrisÄ« Â· Kushyar ibn Labban Â· Muhammad ibn
JÄbir al-HarrÄnÄ« al-BattÄnÄ« Â· Muhammad ibn MÅ«sÄ al-KhwÄrizmÄ« Â·
Muhyi al-DÄ«n al-MaghribÄ« Â· NasÄ«r al-DÄ«n al-TÅ«sÄ« Â· Omar KhayyÃ¡m Â·
QÄá¸Ä« ZÄda al-RÅ«mÄ« Â· Shams al-DÄ«n AbÅ« Abd AllÄh al-KhalÄ«lÄ« Â·
Shams al-DÄ«n al-SamarqandÄ« Â· Sharaf al-DÄ«n al-TÅ«sÄ« Â· Sinan ibn Thabit
Â· Taqi al-Din Â· ThÄbit ibn Qurra Â· Ulugh Beg Â· Zakariya al-Qazwini  
Works

'Aja'ib al-makhluqat wa-ghara'ib al-mawjudat Â· Almanac Â· Arabic star names
Â· Book of Optics Â· Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Â· Star chart Â·
Tabula Rogeriana Â· The Book of Healing Â· Zij (Astronomical catalog Â· Book
of Fixed Stars Â· Star catalogue Â· Tables of Toledo Â· Trigonometry table Â·
Zij-i Ilkhani Â· Zij-i-Sultani)  
Instruments

Alidade Â· Analog computer Â· Aperture Â· Armillary sphere Â· Astrolabe Â·
Astronomical clock Â· Celestial globe Â· Compass Â· Compass dial Â· Compass
rose Â· Dioptra Â· Equatorial ring Â· Equitorium Â· Globe Â· Graph paper Â·
Magnifying glass Â· Mural instrument Â· Navigational astrolabe Â· Nebula Â·
Planisphere Â· Quadrant Â· Sextant Â· Spherical astrolabe Â· Sundial Â·
Telescope Â· Triquetrum  
Concepts

Almucantar Â· Apogee Â· Astrophysics Â· Azimuth Â· Celestial mechanics Â·
Celestial spheres Â· Circular orbit Â· Deferent and epicycle Â· Earth's
rotation Â· Eccentricity Â· Ecliptic Â· Elliptic orbit Â· Equant Â· Galaxy Â·
Geocentrism Â· Gravitational potential energy Â· Gravity Â· Heliocentrism Â·
Inertia Â· Islamic astrology Â· Moonlight Â· Obliquity Â· Parallax Â·
Precession Â· Qibla Â· Specific gravity Â· Spherical Earth Â· Starlight Â·
Sublunary sphere Â· Sunlight Â· Supernova Â· Temporal finitism Â· Trepidation
Â· Triangulation Â· Tusi-couple  
Centers

Al-Azhar University Â· House of Knowledge Â· House of Wisdom Â· Istanbul
observatory of Taqi al-Din Â· Observatory Â· Madrasah Â· Maragheh observatory
Â· Research institute Â· University of Al-Karaouine  
Influences

Babylonian astronomy Â· Hellenistic astronomy Â· Indian astronomy  
Influenced

Byzantine astronomy Â· Chinese astronomy Â· European astronomy Â· Indian
astronomy  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Greek astronomy  
Astronomers

Acoreus Â· Aglaonike Â· Agrippa Â· Anaximander Â· Andronicus Â· Apollonius Â·
Aratus Â· Aristarchus Â· Aristillus Â· Attalus Â· Autolycus Â· Bion Â·
Callippus Â· Cleomedes Â· Cleostratus Â· Conon Â· Eratosthenes Â· Euctemon Â·
Eudoxus Â· Geminus Â· Heraclides Â· Hicetas Â· Hipparchus Â· Hippocrates of
Chios Â· Hypsicles Â· Menelaus Â· Meton Â· Oenopides Â· Philip of Opus Â·
Philolaus Â· Posidonius Â· Ptolemy Â· Pytheas Â· Seleucus Â· Sosigenes of
Alexandria Â· Sosigenes the Peripatetic Â· Strabo Â· Thales Â· Theodosius Â·
Theon of Alexandria Â· Theon of Smyrna Â· Timocharis  
Works

Almagest Â· On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) Â· On the Sizes and Distances
(Aristarchus) Â· On the Heavens (Aristotle)  
Instruments

Antikythera mechanism Â· Armillary sphere Â· Astrolabe Â· Dioptra Â·
Equatorial ring Â· Gnomon Â· Mural quadrant Â· Triquetrum  
Concepts

Callippic cycle Â· Celestial spheres Â· Circle of latitude Â· Counter-Earth Â·
Deferent and epicycle Â· Equant Â· Geocentrism Â· Heliocentrism Â· Hipparchic
cycle Â· Metonic cycle Â· Octaeteris Â· Solstice Â· Spherical Earth Â·
Sublunary sphere Â· Zodiac  
Influences

Babylonian astronomy Â· Egyptian astronomy  
Influenced

European astronomy Â· Indian astronomy Â· Islamic astronomy  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astrolabe"

Categories: Ancient Greek astronomy | History of astronomy | History of
astrology | Astrometry | Astronomical instruments | Navigational equipment |
Mechanical calculators | Scientific equipment | Historical scientific
instruments | Analog computers

Hidden categories: Articles containing Arabic language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Asturianu
  * AzÉrbaycan
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 April 2009, at 04:21.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



