
# Polysemy

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Polysemy ([pÉËlÉªsÉmi] or [ËpÉliËsiËmi])[1][2](from the Greek: ÏÎ¿Î»Ï
-, poly-, "many" and Ïá¿Î¼Î±, sÃªma, "sign") is the capacity for a sign
(e.g. a word, phrase, etc.) or signs to have multiple meanings (sememes), i.e.
a large semantic field. This is a pivotal concept within social sciences, such
as media studies and linguistics.

Sister project Look up polysemy in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
## Contents

  * 1 Polysemes
    * 1.1 Examples
  * 2 Related ideas
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
    * 4.1 Further reading

  
## [edit] Polysemes

Sister project Look up polyseme in  
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
A polyseme is a word or phrase with multiple, related meanings. A word is
judged to be polysemous if it has two senses of the word whose meanings are
related. Since the vague concept of relatedness is the test for polysemy,
judgments of polysemy can be very difficult to make. Because applying pre-
existing words to new situations is a natural process of language change,
looking at words' etymology is helpful in determining polysemy but not the
only solution; as words become lost in etymology, what once was a useful
distinction of meaning may no longer be so. Some apparently unrelated words
share a common historical origin, however, so etymology is not an infallible
test for polysemy, and dictionary writers also often defer to speakers'
intuitions to judge polysemy in cases where it contradicts etymology. English
has many words which are polysemous. For example the verb "to get" can mean
"take" (I'll get the drinks), "become" (she got scared), "have" (I've got
three dollars), "understand" (I get it) etc.

A closely related term is metonym, in which a word with one original meaning
is used to refer to something else connected to it.

There are several tests for polysemy, but one of them is zeugma: if one word
seems to exhibit zeugma when applied in different contexts, it is likely that
the contexts bring out different polysemes of the same word. If the two senses
of the same word do not seem to fit, yet seem related, then it is likely that
they are polysemous. The fact that this test again depends on speakers'
judgments about relatedness, however, means that this test for polysemy is not
infallible, but is rather merely a helpful conceptual aid.

The difference between homonyms and polysemes is subtle. Lexicographers define
polysemes within a single dictionary lemma, numbering different meanings,
while homonyms are treated in separate lemmata. Semantic shift can separate a
polysemous word into separate homonyms. For example, check as in "bank check"
(or Cheque) , check in chess, and check meaning "verification" are considered
homonyms, while they originated as a single word derived from chess in the
14th century.

For Dick Hebdige[1] polysemy means that, "each text is seen to generate a
potentially infinite range of meanings," making, according to Richard
Middleton,[2] "any homology, out of the most heterogeneous materials,
possible. The idea of signifying practice â texts not as communicating or
expressing a pre-existing meaning but as 'positioning subjects' within a
process of semiosis â changes the whole basis of creating social meaning".

One group of polysemes are those in which a word meaning an activity, perhaps
derived from a verb, acquires the meanings of those engaged in the activity,
or perhaps the results of the activity, or the time or place in which the
activity occurs or has occurred. Sometimes only one of those meanings is
intended, depending on context, and sometimes multiple meanings are intended
at the same time. Other types are derivations from one of the other meanings
that leads to a verb or activity.

### [edit] Examples

  * Mole

  1. a small burrowing mammal
  2. consequently, there are several different entities called moles (see the Mole disambiguation page). Although these refer to different things, their names derive from 1. :e.g. A Mole burrows for information hoping to go undetected.

  * Bank

  1. a financial institution
  2. the building where a financial institution offers services
  3. a synonym for 'rely upon' (e.g. "I'm your friend, you can bank on me"). It is different, but related, as it derives from the theme of security initiated by 1

    However: a river bank is a homonym to 1 and 2, as they do not share etymologies. It is a completely different meaning. River bed, though, is polysemous with the beds on which people sleep.
  * Book

  1. a bound collection of pages
  2. a text reproduced and distributed (thus, someone who has read the same text on a computer has read the same book as someone who had the actual paper volume)

  * Milk 
    * The verb milk (e.g. "he's milking it for all he can get") derives from the process of obtaining milk.

  * Wood

  1. a piece of a tree
  2. a geographical area with many trees

Main article: List of polysemes

## [edit] Related ideas

A lexical conception of polysemy was developed by B. T. S. Atkins, in the form
of lexical implication rules[3]. These are rules that describe how words, in
one lexical context, can then be used, in a different form, in a related
context. A crude example of such a rule is the pastoral idea of "verbizing
one's nouns": that certain nouns, used in certain contexts, can be converted
into a verb, conveying a related meaning.

Another clarification of polysemy is the idea of predicate transfer[4] \-- the
reassignment of a property to an object which would not otherwise inherently
have that property. Thus, the expression "I am parked out back" conveys the
meaning of "parked" from "car" to the property of "I possess a car". This
avoids incorrect polysemous interpretations of "parked": that "people can be
parked", or that "I am pretending to be a car", or that "I am something which
can be parked". This is supported by the morphology: "We are parked out back"
does not mean that there are multiple cars; rather, that there are multiple
passengers (having the property of being in possession of a car).

## [edit] See also

  * Homograph
  * Idiom
  * Metonymy
  * Polyvalent
  * Multivalent
  * Pun
  * Heterosemy
  * Semantic change
  * Twilight language

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Hebdige, D (1979). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. New York: Metheun.
  2. ^ Middleton, Richard (1990/2002). Studying Popular Music. Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 0-335-15275-9.
  3. ^ Nicholas Ostler, B.T.S. Atkins "Predictable Meaning Shift: Some Linguistic Properties of Lexical Implication Rules" (1991) Proceedings of the First SIGLEX Workshop on Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Representation, Springer-Verlag.
  4. ^ G. Nunberg, "Transfers of Meaning", Journal of Semantics, 1995 - Oxford Univ Press

### [edit] Further reading

  * O'Sullivan, et al. (1994) Key Concepts in Communication and Cultural Studies. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-06173-3
  * Jamet, Denis (Ed.) (2008) "Polysemy", 1st issue of Lexis, E-Journal in English Lexicology: http://screcherche.univ-lyon3.fr/lexis/article.php?id_article=50

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polysemy"

Categories: Semantics | Lexical semantics | Psycholinguistics

Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek language text | Articles
containing non-English language text

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Euskara
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Ido
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 March 2009, at 16:50.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



