
# Chroma key

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the progressive rock band, see Chroma Key.

"Bluescreen" redirects here. For the error screen, see Blue Screen of Death.

"Green screen" redirects here. For the type of computer display, see Green
screen display.

<IMG>

<IMG>

An actor in front of a green screen and the final result

Chroma key is a technique for mixing two images or frames together, in which a
color (or a small color range) from one image is removed (or made
transparent), revealing another image behind it. This technique is also
referred to as color keying, colour-separation overlay (CSO; primarily by the
BBC[1]), greenscreen, and bluescreen. It is commonly used for weather forecast
broadcasts, wherein the presenter appears to be standing in front of a large
map, but in the studio it is actually a large blue or green background. The
meteorologist stands in front of a bluescreen, and then different weather maps
are added on those parts in the image where the color is blue. If the
meteorologist himself wears blue clothes, his clothes will become replaced
with the background video. This also works for greenscreens, since blue and
green are considered the colors least like skin tone. This technique is also
used in the entertainment industry, the iconic theatre shots in Mystery
Science Theater 3000, for example.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 The process
  * 3 Clothing
  * 4 Background
  * 5 Even lighting
  * 6 Programming
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] History

Prior to the introduction of digital compositing, the process was a complex
and time consuming one known as "travelling matte". The blue screen and
traveling matte method were developed in the 1930s at RKO Radio Pictures and
other studios, and were used to create special effects for The Thief of Bagdad
(1940). At RKO, Linwood Dunn used travelling matte to create "wipes" â where
there were transitions like a windshield wiper in films such as Flying Down to
Rio (1933).

The credit for development of the bluescreen is given to Larry Butler, who won
the Academy Award for special effects for The Thief of Bagdad. He had invented
the blue screen and traveling matte technique in order to achieve the visual
effects which were unprecedented in 1940. He was also the first special
effects man to have created these effects in Technicolor, which was in its
infancy at the time.

In 1950, Warner Brothers employee and ex-Kodak researcher Arthur Widmer began
working on an ultra violet traveling matte process. He also began developing
bluescreen techniques: one of the first films to use them was the 1958
adaptation of the Ernest Hemingway novella, The Old Man and the Sea, starring
Spencer Tracy.[2]

The background footage was shot first and the actor or model was filmed
against a bluescreen carrying out their actions. To simply place the
foreground shot over the background shot would create a ghostly image over a
blue-tinged background. The actor or model must be separated from the
background and placed into a specially-made "hole" in the background footage.
The bluescreen shot was first rephotographed through a blue filter so that
only the background is exposed. A special film is used that creates a black
and white negative image â a black background with a subject-shaped hole in
the middle. This is called a 'female matte'. The bluescreen shot was then
rephotographed again, this time through a red and green filter so that only
the foreground image was cast on film, creating a black silhouette on an
unexposed (clear) background. This is called a 'male matte'.

The background image is then rephotographed through the male matte, and the
shot rephotographed through the female matte. An optical printer with two
projectors, a film camera and a 'beam splitter' combines the images together
one frame at a time. This part of the process must be very carefully
controlled to ensure the absence of 'black lines'. During the 1980s,
minicomputers were used to control the optical printer. For The Empire Strikes
Back, Richard Edlund created a 'quad optical printer' that accelerated the
process considerably and saved money. He received a special Academy Award for
his innovation.

One drawback to the traditional traveling matte is that the cameras shooting
the images to be composited can't be easily synchronized. For decades, such
matte shots had to be done "locked-down" so that neither the matted subject
nor the background could shift their camera perspective at all. Later,
computer-timed motion control cameras alleviated this problem, as both the
foreground and background could be filmed with the same camera moves.

Petro Vlahos was awarded an Academy Award for his development of these
techniques. His technique exploits the fact that most objects in real-world
scenes have a color whose blue color component is similar in intensity to
their green color component. Zbig Rybczynski also contributed to bluescreen
technology.

For Star Trek: The Next Generation, an ultraviolet light matting process was
proposed by Don Lee of CIS and developed by Gary Hutzel and the staff of Image
G. This involved a fluorescent orange backdrop which made it easier to
generate a holdout matte, thus allowing the effects team to produce effects in
a quarter of the time needed for other methods.[3]

Some films make heavy use of chroma key to add backgrounds that are
constructed entirely using computer-generated imagery (CGI). Performances from
different takes can even be composited together, which allows actors to be
filmed separately and then placed together in the same scene. Chroma key
allows performers to appear to be in any location without even leaving the
studio.

Computer development also made it easier to incorporate motion into composited
shots, even when using handheld cameras. Reference-points can now be placed
onto the colored background (usually as a painted grid, X's marked with tape,
or equally spaced tennis balls attached to the wall). In post-production, a
computer can use the references to adjust the position of the background,
making it match the movement of the foreground perfectly. Modern advances in
software and computational power have even eliminated the need to use grids or
tracking marks â the software analyzes the relative motion of colored pixels
against other colored pixels and solves the 'motion' to create a camera motion
algorithm which can be used in compositing software to match the motion of
composited elements to a moving background plate.

Weathermen often use a field monitor to the side of the screen to see where
they are putting their hands. A newer technique is to project a faint image
onto the screen.

## [edit] The process

The principal subject is filmed or photographed against a background
consisting of a single color or a relatively narrow range of colors, usually
blue or green because these colors are considered to be the furthest away from
skin tone. The portions of the video which match the preselected color are
replaced by the alternate background video. This process is commonly known as
"keying", "keying out" or simply a "key".

Green is currently used as a backdrop more than any other color because image
sensors in cameras are most sensitive to green. Therefore the green camera
channel contains the least "noise" and can produce the cleanest
key/matte/mask. Additionally, less light is needed to illuminate green because
of the higher sensitivity to green in the image sensors.[4] Blue was used
before digital keying became commonplace because it was necessary for the
optical process, but it needed more illumination than green. Bright green has
also become favored as a blue background may match a subject's eye color.

In analog color TV, color is represented by the phase of the chroma subcarrier
relative to a reference oscillator. Chroma key is achieved by comparing the
phase of the video to the phase corresponding to the preselected color. In-
phase portions of the video are replaced by the alternate background video.

In digital color TV, color is represented by three numbers (red, green, blue).
Chroma key is achieved by a simple numerical comparison between the video and
the preselected color. If the color at a particular point on the screen
matches (either exactly, or in a range), then the video at that point is
replaced by the alternate background video.

## [edit] Clothing

A chroma key subject must not wear clothing similar in color to the chroma key
color(s) (unless intentional), because the clothing may be replaced with the
background video. An example of intentional use of this is when an actor wears
a blue covering over a part of his body to make it invisible in the final
shot. This technique can be used to achieve an effect similar to that used in
the Harry Potter films to create the effect of an invisibility cloak.[5]

## [edit] Background

Blue is generally used for both weather maps and special effects because it is
complementary to human skin tone. The use of blue is also tied to the fact
that the blue emulsion layer of film has the finest crystals and thus good
detail and minimal grain (in comparison to the red and green layers of the
emulsion.) In the digital world, however green has become the favored color
because digital cameras retain more detail in the green channel and it
requires less light than blue. Green not only has a higher luminance value
than blue but also in early digital formats the green channel was sampled
twice as often as the blue, making it easier to work with. The choice of color
is up to the effects artists and the needs of the specific shot. In the past
decade, the use of green has become dominant in film special effects. Also,
the green background is favored over blue for outdoors filming where the blue
sky might appear in the frame and could accidentally be replaced in the
process. Although green and blue are the most common, any color can be used.
Red is usually avoided due to its prevalence in normal human skin pigments,
but can be often used for objects and scenes which do not involve people.

Occasionally, a magenta background is used, as in some software applications
where the magenta or fuchsia key value #FF00FF is sometimes referred to as
"magic pink".[6]

With better imaging and hardware, many companies are avoiding the confusion
often experienced by weather presenters, who must otherwise watch themselves
on a monitor to see the image shown behind them, by lightly projecting a copy
of the background image onto the blue/green screen. This allows the presenter
to accurately point and look at the map without referring to monitors.

A newer technique is to use a retroreflective curtain in the background, along
with a ring of bright LEDs around the camera lens. This requires no light to
shine on the background other than the LEDs, which use an extremely small
amount of power and space unlike big stage lights, and require no rigging.
This advance was made possible by the invention of practical blue LEDs in the
1990s, which also allow for emerald green LEDs.

There is also a form of color keying that uses light spectrum invisible to
human eye. Called Thermo-Key, it uses infrared as the key color, which would
not be replaced by background image during postprocessing.[7][8]

## [edit] Even lighting

The biggest challenge when setting up a bluescreen or greenscreen is even
lighting and the avoidance of shadow, because it is best to have as narrow a
color range as possible being replaced. A shadow would present itself as a
darker color to the camera and might not register for replacement. This can
sometimes be seen in low-budget or live broadcasts where the errors cannot be
manually repaired. The material being used affects the quality and ease of
having it evenly lit. Materials which are shiny will be far less successful
than those that are not. A shiny surface will have areas that reflect the
lights making them appear pale, while other areas may be darkened. A matte
surface will diffuse the reflected light and have a more even color range. In
order to get the cleanest key from shooting greenscreen it is necessary to
create a value difference between the subject and the greenscreen. In order to
differentiate the subject and screen a two-stop difference can be used, either
by making the greenscreen two stops higher than the subject or vice versa.

## [edit] Programming

<IMG>

Please help improve this article or section by expanding it. Further
information might be found on the talk page. (August 2008)  
There are several different quality- and speed-optimized techniques for
implementing color keying in software.[9]

In most versions, a function f(r,g,b)->a is applied to every pixel in the
image. a <= 0 means the pixel is the green screen, a >= 1 means the pixel is
in the foreground object. Values between 0 and 1 indicate a pixel that is
partially covered by the foreground object. A usable green screen example,
which matches how chroma key was done on an optical printer, is
f(r,g,b)->K0*b-K1*g+K2 (K0..2 are user-adjustable constants, 1 is a good
initial guess for all of them).

Often the software does screen spill removal from the colors as well as figure
out the alpha. This may be a separate function g(r,g,b)->(r,g,b), a very
simple green screen example is g(r,g,b)->(r,min(g,b),b). Or f is changed to
return (r,g,b,a) all at once, this is useful if part of the calculation is
shared.

Most keyers use far more complicated functions. A popular approach is to
describe a closed 3D surface in RGB space and determine the signed distance
the point (r,g,b) is from this surface, or to find the distance the point
(r,g,b) is between two closed nested surfaces. It is also very common for f()
to depend on more than just the current pixel's color, it may also use the x,y
position, the values of nearby pixels, the value from reference images, and
values from user-drawn masks.

A different class of algorithm tries to figure out a 2D path that separates
the foreground from the background. This path can be the output, or the image
can be drawn by filling the path with alpha=1 as a final step. An example of
such an algorithm is the use of active contour. Most research in recent years
has been into these algorithms.

## [edit] See also

  * Compositing
  * Federal Standard 1037C
  * Drew Carey's Green Screen Show
  * Film production
  * Front projection effect
  * Matte (filmmaking)
  * Primatte chromakey technology
  * Optical printer
  * Rear projection effect
  * Reverse bluescreen
  * SchÃ¼fftan process
  * Signal processing
  * Sodium vapor process
  * Video
  * Virtual set

## [edit] References

  1. ^ "Glossary: Post Production". The Production Guide. http://www.theproductionguide.co.uk/glos_post_prod.aspx. Retrieved on 2009-01-21.
  2. ^ "Illusions Take Home First Oscars". CRI English. 2005-02-14. http://en.chinabroadcast.cn/2246/2005-2-14/90@206385.htm. Retrieved on 2009-01-21.
  3. ^ Sternbach, Rick; Okuda, Michael (1991). Star Trek: The Next Generation Technical Manual. Pocket Books. p. 13\. ISBN 0-671-70427-3.
  4. ^ http://www.destudiodublin.com/Facilities/Greenscreen-deStudio.htm
  5. ^ Creating an invisible cape in After Effects
  6. ^ "So you wanna make a theme?". skinyourscreen.com articles. http://www.skinyourscreen.com/site/Articles/so-you-wanna-make-a-theme. Retrieved on 2008-08-23.
  7. ^ "What is Thermo-Key?". University of Tokyo. http://www.hc.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp/project/thermo-key/. Retrieved on 2009-01-21.
  8. ^ Yasuda, K.; Naemura, T.; Harashima, H.. "Thermo-key: human region segmentation from video". IEEE. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=1255805. Retrieved on 2009-01-21.
  9. ^ Ashihkmin, Michael. "High Quality Chroma Key". http://bmrc.berkeley.edu/courseware/cs294-3/fall97/projects/ashikhmin/.

## [edit] External links

  * How to build a mobile green/blue screen
  * Building a Chroma Key on a low budget (Google Knol)
  * How Blue Screens Work

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chroma_key"

Categories: Film and video technology

Hidden categories: Articles to be expanded since August 2008 | All articles to
be expanded

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 31 March 2009, at 13:59.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



