
# Internationalized domain name

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Example of Arabic IDN

<IMG>

<IMG>

Example of Greek IDN

<IMG>

<IMG>

Example of Hebrew IDN

An internationalized domain name (IDN) is an Internet domain name that
contains one or more non-ASCII characters. Such domain names could contain
letters with diacritics, as required by many non-English languages, or
characters from non-Latin scripts such as Arabic, Hebrew, Chinese or Hindi.
However, the standard for domain names does not allow such characters, and
much work has gone into finding a way to internationalize domain names into a
standard ASCII format, thereby preserving the stability of the domain name
system.

IDN has, by the standards of the Internet, a long history; it was originally
proposed in 1996 (by M. DÃ¼rst) and implemented in 1998 (by James Seng under
the guidance of T.W.Tan). After much debate and many competing proposals, a
system called Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA [1]) was
adopted as the chosen standard, and has been rolled out in several top level
domains.

In IDNA, the term internationalized domain name means specifically any domain
name consisting only of labels to which the IDNA ToASCII algorithm can be
successfully applied. (For the meaning of 'label' and 'ToASCII', see the
section ToASCII and ToUnicode below.) In March 2008, the IETF formed a new IDN
Working Group to update[2] the current IDNA protocol.

## Contents

  * 1 Internationalizing domain names in applications
  * 2 ToASCII and ToUnicode
  * 3 Example of IDNA encoding
  * 4 ASCII Spoofing and squatting concerns
  * 5 History of IDN
  * 6 Top-Level Domains known to accept IDN registration
  * 7 Non-IDNA or non-ICANN registries that support non-ASCII domain names
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Internationalizing domain names in applications

Internationalizing Domain Names in Applications (IDNA) is a mechanism defined
in 2003 for handling internationalized domain names containing non-ASCII
characters. While much of the Domain Name System can technically support non-
ASCII characters, applications such as e-mail and web browsers restrict domain
names to what can be used as a hostname. Rather than redesigning the existing
DNS infrastructure, it was decided that non-ASCII domain names should be
converted to a suitable ASCII-based form by web browsers and other user
applications; IDNA specifies how this conversion is to be done.

IDNA was designed for maximum backward compatibility with the existing DNS
system, which was designed for use with names using only a subset of the ASCII
character set.

An IDNA-enabled application is able to convert between the restricted-ASCII
and non-ASCII representations of a domain, using the ASCII form in cases where
it is needed (such as for DNS lookup), but being able to present the more
readable non-ASCII form to users. Applications that do not support IDNA will
not be able to handle domain names with non-ASCII characters, but will still
be able to access such domains if given the (usually rather cryptic) ASCII
equivalent.

ICANN issued guidelines for the use of IDNA in June 2003, and it was already
possible to register .jp domains using this system in July 2003 and .info[3]
domains in March 2004. Several other top-level domain registries started
accepting registrations in 2004 and 2005. IDN Guidelines were first created[4]
in June 2003, and have been updated[5] to respond to phishing concerns in
November 2005. An ICANN working group focused on country code domain names at
the top level was formed in November 2007[6] and promoted jointly by the
country code supporting organization and the Governmental Advisory Committee.

Mozilla 1.4, Netscape 7.1, Opera 7.11 and Safari are among the first
applications to support IDNA. A browser plugin is available for Internet
Explorer 6 to provide IDN support. Internet Explorer 7.0[7] and Windows
Vista's URL APIs provide native support for IDN.

## [edit] ToASCII and ToUnicode

The conversions between ASCII and non-ASCII forms of a domain name are
accomplished by algorithms called ToASCII and ToUnicode. These algorithms are
not applied to the domain name as a whole, but rather to individual labels.
For example, if the domain name is www.example.com, then the labels are www,
example, and com, and ToASCII or ToUnicode would be applied to each of these
three separately.

The details of these two algorithms are complex, and are specified in the RFCs
linked at the end of this article. The following gives an overview of their
behaviour.

ToASCII leaves unchanged any ASCII label, but will fail if the label is
unsuitable for DNS. If given a label containing at least one non-ASCII
character, ToASCII will apply the Nameprep algorithm (which converts the label
to lowercase and performs other normalization) and will then translate the
result to ASCII using Punycode before prepending the 4-character string
"xn--". This 4-character string is called the ACE prefix, where ACE means
ASCII Compatible Encoding, and is used to distinguish Punycode-encoded labels
from ordinary ASCII labels. Note that the ToASCII algorithm can fail in a
number of ways; for example, the final string could exceed the 63-character
limit for the DNS. A label on which ToASCII fails cannot be used in an
internationalized domain name.

ToUnicode reverses the action of ToASCII, stripping off the ACE prefix and
applying the Punycode decode algorithm. It does not reverse the Nameprep
processing, since that is merely a normalization and is by nature
irreversible. Unlike ToASCII, ToUnicode always succeeds, because it simply
returns the original string if decoding would fail. In particular, this means
that ToUnicode has no effect on a string that does not begin with the ACE
prefix.

## [edit] Example of IDNA encoding

Main article: Punycode

As an example of how IDNA works, suppose the domain to be encoded is
BÃ¼cher.ch (âBÃ¼cherâ is German for âbooksâ, and .ch is the country
domain for Switzerland). This has two labels, BÃ¼cher and ch. The second label
is pure ASCII, and so is left unchanged. The first label is processed by
Nameprep to give bÃ¼cher, and then by Punycode to give bcher-kva, and then has
xn-- prepended to give xn--bcher-kva. The final domain suitable for use with
the DNS is therefore xn--bcher-kva.ch.

## [edit] ASCII Spoofing and squatting concerns

Main article: IDN homograph attack

Because IDN allows websites to use full Unicode names, it also makes it much
easier to create a spoofed web site that looks exactly like another, including
domain name and security certificate, but in fact is controlled by someone
attempting to steal private information. These spoofing attacks potentially
open users up to phishing attacks.

These attacks are not due to technical deficiencies in either the Unicode or
IDNA specifications, but because different characters in different languages
can look the same, depending on the font used. For example, Unicode character
U+0430, Cyrillic small letter a ("Ð°"), can look identical to Unicode
character U+0061, Latin small letter a, ("a") which is the lowercase "a" used
in English. Characters that look alike in this way may be termed homonyms,
homographs, or (less ambiguously) homoglyphs.

Although a computer may display visually identical or very similar glyphs for
two different characters, these differences are still significant to the
computer when locating web sites or validating certificates. The user assumes
a one-to-one correspondence between the visual appearance of a name and the
named entity, but when two names appear identical, this correspondence breaks
down.

By contrast, with the old set of a to z, 0 to 9, and the hyphen, there is
little in the way of homographs. I (in a sans-serif font), l and 1 and 0 and O
are the closest, and the combination "rn" looks similar to "m" in some fonts;
however, most fonts make a noticeable visible distinction between them. In
addition, "vv" looks similar to "w". Still, this means even in the worst case
a site like Google would still only need to register a few names to protect
against the homograph attacks.

On December 2001, two Israeli researchers, Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Alex
Gontmakher, published a paper titled "The Homograph Attack",[8] an attack that
used Unicode URLs to spoof a website URL. To prove the feasibility of this
kind of attack, the researchers successfully registered a variant of the
domain name "Microsoft.com" which incorporated Russian language characters.

In general, this kind of attack is known as a homograph spoofing attack. This
problem was anticipated before IDN was introduced, and guidelines were issued
to registries to try and avoid or reduce the problem â for example,
recommending that registries only accept the Latin alphabet and that of their
own country, not all of Unicode. Unfortunately this advice was not followed by
those in control of a number of major TLDs.

On February 7, 2005, Slashdot reported that this exploit was disclosed at the
hacker conference Shmoocon with an example available at
http://www.shmoo.com/idn/. On browsers supporting IDNA, the URL
"http://www.pÐ°ypal.com/" (where the first a is replaced by a Cyrillic Ð°)
appears to lead to paypal.com but instead led to a spoofed PayPal web site
that said "Meeow."

Internet Explorer 7 imposes restrictions on displaying non-ASCII domain names
based on a user-defined list of allowed languages and provide an anti-phishing
filter that checks suspicious Web sites against a remote database of known
phishing sites.

Since Internet Explorer prior to version 7 does not support IDNs, it is not
vulnerable to this kind of attack. However, older versions of Internet
Explorer can be made IDN-compatible by browser plug-ins some of which are
vulnerable to the spoofing attacks.

On February 17, 2005, Mozilla developers announced that they would ship their
next versions of their software with IDN support still enabled, but showing
the punycode URLs instead, thus thwarting any attacks exploiting similarities
between ASCII and non-ASCII letters (but not necessarily, for example, between
Cyrillic and Greek letters, unless the user knows which Punycode URL
corresponds to their chosen IDN URL) while still allowing people to access
websites on an IDN domain. This is a change from the earlier plans to disable
IDN entirely for the time being. [1]

Since then, both Mozilla and Opera have now announced that they will be using
per-domain whitelists to selectively switch on IDN display for domain run by
registries which are taking appropriate anti-spoofing precautions[2]. (See the
article on homograph spoofing attacks for more details). As of September 9,
2005, the most recent version of Mozilla Firefox as well as the most recent
Internet Explorer displays the spoofed Paypal URL as "http://www.xn--
pypal-4ve.com/", unsightly but clearly different from the actual paypal.com.
By contrast, the (non-existent) "http://www.xn--pypal-4ve.org" will display in
the Firefox address bar as http://www.pÐ°ypal.org, as this form of domain is
prohibited from registration at the Afilias registry level and therefore does
not pose the same risk.

Safari's approach is to render problematic character sets as punycode. This
can be changed by altering the settings in Mac OS X's system files[9].

## [edit] History of IDN

  * 12/1996: Martin DÃ¼rst's original Internet Draft proposing UTF5 (the first incarnation of what is known today as ACE) - UTF-5 was first defined by Martin DÃ¼rst at the University of ZÃ¼rich in [3][4][5]
  * 03/1998: Early Research on IDN at National University of Singapore (NUS), Center for Internet Research (formerly Internet Research and Development Unit - IRDU) led by Prof. Tan Tin Wee (IDN Project team - Lim Juay Kwang and Leong Kok Yong) and subsequently continued under a team at Bioinformatrix Pte. Ltd. (BIX Pte. Ltd.) - an NUS spin-off company led by Prof. S. Subbiah.
  * 07/1998: Geneva INET'98 conference with a BoF discussion on iDNS and APNG General Meeting and Working Group meeting.
  * 07/1998: Asia Pacific Networking Group (APNG, now still in existence [6] and distinct from a gathering known as APSTAR [7]) iDNS Working Group formed. [8]
  * 10/1998: James Seng was recruited to lead further IDN development at BIX Pte. Ltd. by Prof. S. Subbiah.
  * 02/1999: iDNS Testbed launched by BIX Pte. Ltd. under the auspices of APNG with participation from CNNIC, JPNIC, KRNIC, TWNIC, THNIC, HKNIC and SGNIC led by James Seng [9]
  * 02/1999: Presentation of Report on IDN at Joint APNG-APTLD meeting, at APRICOT'99
  * 03/1999: Endorsement of the IDN Report at APNG General Meeting 1 March 1999.
  * 06/1999: Grant application by APNG jointly with the Centre for Internet Research (CIR), National University of Singapore, to the International Development Research Center (IDRC), a Canadian Government funded international organisation to work on IDN for IPv6. This APNG Project was funded under the Pan Asia R&D Grant administered on behalf of IDRC by the Canadian Committee on Occupational Health and Safety (CCOHS). Principal Investigator: Tan Tin Wee of National University of Singapore. [10]
  * 07/1999 Tout, Walid R. (WALID Inc.) Filed IDNA patent application number US1999000358043 Method and system for internationalizing domain names. Published 2001-01-30 [11]
  * 07/1999: [12]; Renewed 2000 [13] Internet Draft on UTF5 by James Seng, Martin DÃ¼rst and Tan Tin Wee.
  * 08/1999: APTLD and APNG forms a working group to look into IDN issues chaired by Kilnam Chon. [14]
  * 10/1999: BIX Pte. Ltd. and National University of Singapore together with New York Venture Capital investors, General Atlantic Partners, spun-off the IDN effort into 2 new Singapore companies - i-DNS.net International Inc. and i-Email.net Pte. Ltd. that created the first commercial implementation of an IDN Solution for both domain names and IDN email addresses respectively.
  * 11/1999: IETF IDN Birds-of-Feather in Washington was initiated by i-DNS.net at the request of IETF officials.
  * 12/1999: i-DNS.net InternationalPte. Ltd. launched the first commercial IDN. It was in Taiwan and in Chinese characters under the top-level IDN TLD ".gongsi" (meaning loosely ".com") with endorsement by the Minister of Communications of Taiwan and some major Taiwanese ISPs with reports of over 200 000 names sold in a week in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, China, Australia and USA.
  * Late 1999: Kilnam Chon initiates Task Force on IDNS which led to formation of MINC, the Multilingual Internet Names Consortium. [15]
  * 01/2000: IETF IDN Working Group formed chaired by James Seng and Marc Blanchet
  * 01/2000: The second ever commercial IDN launch was IDN TLDs in the Tamil Language, corresponding to .com, .net, .org, and .edu. These were launched in India with IT Ministry support by i-DNS.net International.
  * 02/2000: Multilingual Internet Names Consortium(MINC) Proposal BoF at IETF Adelaide. [16]
  * 03/2000: APRICOT 2000 Multilingual DNS session [17]
  * 04/2000: WALID Inc. (with IDNA patent pending application 6182148) started Registration & Resolving Multilingual Domain Names.
  * 05/2000: Interoperability Testing WG, MINC meeting. San Francisco, chaired by Bill Manning and Y.Yoneya 12 May 2000. [18]
  * 06/2000: Inaugural Launch of the Multilingual Internet Names Consortium (MINC) in Seoul [19] to drive the collaborative roll-out of IDN starting from the Asia Pacific. [20]
  * 07/2000: Joint Engineering TaskForce (JET) initiated in Yokohama to study technical issues led by JPNIC (K.Konishi)
  * 07/2000: Official Formation of CDNC Chinese Domain Name Consortium to resolve issues related to and to deploy Han Character domain names, founded by CNNIC, TWNIC, HKNIC and MONIC in May 2000. [21] [22]
  * 03/2001: ICANN Board IDN Working Group formed
  * 07/2001: Japanese Domain Name Association : JDNA Launch Ceremony (July 13, 2001) in Tokyo, Japan.
  * 07/2001: Urdu Internet Names System (July 28, 2001) in Islamabad, Pakistan, Organised Jointly by SDNP and MINC. [23]
  * 07/2001: Presentation on IDN to the Committee Meeting of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Academies USA (JULY 11-13, 2001) at University of California School of Information Management and Systems, Berkeley, CA. [24]
  * 08/2001: MINC presentation and outreach at the Asia Pacific Advanced Network annual conference, Penang, Malaysia 20 August 2001
  * 10/2001: Joint MINC-CDNC Meeting in Beijing 18-20 October 2001
  * 11/2001: ICANN IDN Committee formed
  * 12/2001: Joint ITU-WIPO Symposium on Multilingual Domain Names organised in association with MINC, 6-7 Dec 2001, International Conference Center, Geneva.
  * 01/2003: Free implementation of StringPrep, Punycode, and IDNA release in GNU Libidn.
  * 03/2003: Publication of RFC 3454, RFC 3490, RFC 3491 and RFC 3492
  * 06/2003: Publication of ICANN IDN Guidelines for registries Adopted by .cn, .info, .jp, .org, and .tw registries.
  * 05/2004: Publication of RFC 3743, Joint Engineering Team (JET) Guidelines for Internationalized Domain Names (IDN) Registration and Administration for Chinese, Japanese, and Korean
  * 03/2005: First Study Group 17 of ITU-T meeting on Internationalized Domain Names [25]
  * 05/2005: .IN ccTLD (India) creates expert IDN Working Group to create solutions for 22 official languages
  * 04/2006: ITU Study Group 17 meeting in Korea gave final approval to the Question on Internationalized Domain Names [26]
  * 06/2006: Workshop on IDN at ICANN meeting at Marrakech, Morocco
  * 11/2006: ICANN GNSO IDN Working Group created to discuss policy implications of IDN TLDs. Ram Mohan elected Chair of the IDN Working Group.[citation needed]
  * 12/2006: ICANN meeting at SÃ£o Paulo discusses status of lab tests of IDNs within the root.
  * 01/2007: Tamil and Malayalam variant table work completed by India's C-DAC and Afilias
  * 03/2007: ICANN GNSO IDN Working Group completes work, Ram Mohan presents report at ICANN Lisboa meeting.[10]
  * 10/2007: Eleven IDNA top-level domains were added to the root nameservers in order to evaluate the use of IDNA at the top level of the DNS.[11][12]
  * 01/2008: ICANN: Successful Evaluations of .test IDN TLDs [13]
  * 04/2008: IETF IDNAbis WG chaired by Vint Cerf continues the work to update IDNA [14]
  * 06/2008: ICANN board votes to develop final fast-track implementation proposal for a limited number of IDN ccTLDS. [15]
  * 10/2008: ICANN Seeks Interest in IDN ccTLD Fast-Track Process [16]

## [edit] Top-Level Domains known to accept IDN registration

  * .ar: Starting in 2009. See FAQ
  * .ac: see details
  * .ae
  * .at: see details
  * .bd
  * .biz NeuLevel/NeuStar supports Chinese, Danish, Finnish, German, Hungarian, Icelandic, Japanese, Korean, Latvian, Lithuanian, Polish, Portuguese, Norwegian, Spanish, Swedish IDN in .biz: see details
  * .br (May 9, 2005) for Portuguese(Brazilian) names: see details
  * .cat (February 14, 2006) for Catalan names: see details
  * .com see details
  * .ch (March 1, 2004)
  * .cl (September 21, 2005): see details
  * .cn: see details
  * .de (March 1, 2004): see details
  * .dk (January 1, 2004), (Ã¦, Ã¸, Ã¥, Ã¶, Ã¤, Ã¼, & Ã©): see details
  * .es (October 2, 2007), (Ã¡, Ã , Ã©, Ã¨, Ã­, Ã¯, Ã³, Ã², Ãº, Ã¼, Ã±, Ã§, lÂ·l): see details
  * .fi (September 1, 2005): see details
  * .gr (July 4, 2005) for Greek names: see details
  * .hk (March 8, 2007) for Chinese characters: see details
  * .hu
  * .id Indonesia
  * .info (March 19, 2003): see details
  * .io: see details
  * .ir: see details
  * .is (July 1, 2004): see details
  * .jp (July 2003), for Japanese characters (Kanji, hiragana & katakana)
  * .kr (August 2003), for Korean characters
  * .li (March 1, 2004)
  * .lt (March 30, 2003), (Ä , Ä, Ä, Ä, Ä¯, Å¡, Å³, Å«, Å¾): see details
  * .lv (2004): see details
  * .museum (January 20, 2004): see details
  * .mn Mongolian
  * .net: see details
  * .no (February 9, 2004): see details
  * .nu: see details
  * .org (January 18, 2005): see details
  * .pe (December 8, 2007): see details
  * .pl (September 11, 2003): see details
  * .pt (July 1, 2005) for Portuguese characters
  * .se (October 2003), for Swedish characters, summer 2007 also for Finnish, MeÃ¤nkieli, Romani, Sami, and Yiddish: see details
  * .sh: see details
  * .su (April 28, 2008[update]) see details
  * .tm: see details
  * .tr (November 14, 2006: see details
  * .tw Traditional Chinese characters: see details
  * .vn Vietnamese: see details
  * .ws

## [edit] Non-IDNA or non-ICANN registries that support non-ASCII domain names

There are other registries that support non-ASCII domain names. The company
ThaiURL.com in Thailand supports .com registrations via its own modified DNS,
ThaiURL. Because these companies, and other organizations that offer modified
DNS systems, do not subject themselves to ICANN's control, they must be
regarded as alternate DNS roots. Domains registered with them will therefore
not be supported by most Internet Service Providers, and as a result most
users will not be able to look up such domains without manually configuring
their computers to use the alternate DNS.

## [edit] See also

  * Unicode
  * Nameprep
  * Punycode
  * Internationalized Resource Identifier

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Faltstrom, Hoffman, Costello, 'IDN in Applications', IDNA, Internet Engineering Task Force, 2003
  2. ^ John Klensin (2008). "Internationalized Domain Names in Applications (IDNA): Protocol". IETF IDNAbis WG. http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-idnabis-protocol.
  3. ^ Mohan, Ram, German IDN, [ http://www.afilias.info/register/idn/DE-INFO_IDN_Language_Table-v1-1.pdf German Language Table], March 2003
  4. ^ Dam, Mohan, Karp, Kane & Hotta, IDN Guidelines 1.0, ICANN, June 2003
  5. ^ Karp, Mohan, Dam, Kane, Hotta, El Bashir, IDN Guidelines 2.0, ICANN, November 2005
  6. ^ Jesdanun, Anick (Associated Press) (2 November 2007). "Group on Non-English Domains Formed". http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/wireStory?id=3813334. Retrieved on 2007-11-02.
  7. ^ What's New in Internet Explorer 7
  8. ^ Evgeniy Gabrilovich and Alex Gontmakher, The Homograph Attack, Communications of the ACM, 45(2):128, February 2002
  9. ^ "About Safari International Domain Name support". http://docs.info.apple.com/article.html?artnum=301116. Retrieved on 2008-08-07.
  10. ^ Mohan, Ram, GNSO IDN Working Group, Outcomes Report (PDF), ICANN
  11. ^ On Its Way: One of the Biggest Changes to the Internet
  12. ^ My Name, My Language, My Internet: IDN Test Goes Live
  13. ^ Successful Evaluations of .test IDN TLDs
  14. ^ IDNAbis overview (2008)
  15. ^ ICANN - Paris/IDN CCTLD discussion - Wiki
  16. ^ ICANN Seeks Interest in IDN ccTLD Fast-Track Process

## [edit] External links

  * RFC 3454 (Stringprep)
  * RFC 3490 (IDNA)
  * RFC 3491 (Nameprep)
  * RFC 3492 (Punycode)
  * ICANN Guidelines for the Implementation of Internationalized Domain Names v2.0
  * ICANN Guidelines for the Implementation of Internationalized Domain Names v1.0
  * IANA Repository of TLD IDN Practices
  * GNU Libidn, an implementation of the Stringprep, Punycode and IDNA specifications.
  * IDN TLD evaluation gateway
  * IANA e-mails explaining the final choice of ACE prefix
  * Unicode Technical Report #36 - Security Considerations for the Implementation of Unicode and Related Technology
  * ICANN Internationalized Domain Names.
  * IDN Language Table Registry

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internationalized_domain_name"

Categories: Domain name system

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since May 2008 | Articles containing potentially dated
statements from 2008 | All articles containing potentially dated statements

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Ãslenska
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * íêµ­ì´
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 21:08.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



