
# Eames Lounge Chair

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Eames Lounge Chair and ottoman

The Eames Lounge Chair and ottoman, correctly titled Eames Lounge (670) and
Ottoman (671), were released in 1956 after years of development by designers
Charles and Ray Eames for the Herman Miller furniture company. It was the
first chair the Eames designed for a high-end market. These furnishings are
made of molded plywood and leather. Examples of these furnishings are part of
the permanent collection of New York's Museum of Modern Art.

## Contents

  * 1 Design
  * 2 Used market
  * 3 See also
  * 4 Further Reading
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Design

The chair is composed of three curved plywood shells. In modern production the
shells are made up of seven thin layers of wood veneer glued together and
shaped under heat and pressure. This differentiates the newer chairs from the
"original" (vintage) chairs which used Brazilian rosewood veneers and were
constructed of five layers of plywood. Also differentiating the very earliest
sets from newer sets were rubber spacers between the aluminum spines and the
wood panels first used in the earliest production models and then hard plastic
washers used in later versions. In the earlier sets, the zipper around the
cushions may have been brown or black as well, and in newer sets the zippers
are black. The shells and the seat cushions are essentially the same shape:
composed of two curved forms interlocking to form a solid mass. The chair back
and headrest are identical in proportion, as are the seat and the Ottoman.

The Eames constantly made use of new materials. The couple's first plywood
chairâthe Eames Lounge Chair Wood (LCW)âmade use of a heavy rubber washer
glued to the backrest of the chair and screwed to the lumbar support. These
washers, which have come to be called 'shock mounts', allow the backrest to
flex slightly. This technology was brought back in the 670 Lounge chair. The
backrest and headrest are screwed together by a pair of aluminum supports.
This unit is suspended on the seat via two connection points in the armrests.
The armrests are screwed to shock mounts on the interior of the backrest
shell, allowing the backrest and headrest to flex when the chair is in use.
This is part of the chair's unusual design, as well as one of its biggest
flaws. The rubber washers are solidly glued to the plywood shells, but have
been known to tear free when excessive weight is applied, or when the rubber
becomes old and brittle.

Other creative uses of materials include the seat cushions - which eschew
standard stapled or nailed upholstery. Instead the cushions are sewn with a
zipper around the outer edge that connects them to a stiff plastic backing.
The backing affixes to the plywood shells with a series of hidden clips and
rings. This design, along with the hidden shock mounts in the armrest allow
the outside veneer of the chair to be unmarred by screws or bolts. The chair
has a low seat which is permanently fixed at a recline. The seat of the chair
swivels on a cast aluminum base, with glides that are threaded so that the
chair may remain level.

It first appeared on the Arlene Francis 'Home" show broadcast on the NBC
television network in the USA in 1956. The chair has become iconic with Modern
style design although when it was first made Ray Eames remarked in a letter to
Charles that the chair looked "comfortable and un-designy" (sic). Charles's
vision was for a chair with "the warm, receptive look of a well-used first
baseman's mitt". Immediately following the dÃ©but Herman Miller launched an
advertising campaign that highlighted the versatility of the chair. Print ads
depicted the 670 in a Victorian parlor, occupied by a grandmother shelling
peas on the front porch of an American Gothic style house, and in the middle
of a sunny field of hay. One notable advertisement was produced by the Eames
for Herman Miller warning consumers against imitations and knockoffs.

Since its introduction, the chair has been in continuous production by Herman
Miller in America. Later, Vitra began producing the chair for the European
market. Immediately following its release other furniture companies began to
copy the chair's design. Some copies were direct knockoffs, while others were
merely 'influenced' by the design. Most notably Plycraft Company, now defunct,
issued dozens of chairs that directly mimicked or were in-the-style-of the
Eames 670. More recently the Chinese market, as well as other European
companies, have begun making direct copy knockoffs. However, Herman Miller and
Vitra remain the only two companies to produce these chairs with the Eames
name attached.

The Eames Lounge Chair appeals to people for several reasons. It is a classic
design that has been in production continuously since its creation. In
addition to the style, it is also very comfortable, a combination not always
found in high design. Additionally, some people find it desirable purely for
reasons of conspicuous consumptionâthe chair with Ottoman retail for around
$3,200 or more, depending on the selection of veneer and leather (leathers by
Edelman, recently offered by Herman Miller, add considerably to the cost). In
part the appeal of the chair comes from its comfort. The Eames focused first
on usability in their designs.

## [edit] Used market

There is a decent used market for these chairs. Some collectors are willing to
pay high prices for earlier chairs made with Brazilian Rosewood veneer, which
is no longer available. In 2006, to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the
chair, Herman Miller released models using a sustainable Palisander Rosewood
veneer. Prices for original rosewood chairs have recently reached as much as
US$7,000 in auction.

## [edit] See also

  * Eames Lounge Chair Wood (LCW)

## [edit] Further Reading

Martin Eidelberg, Thomas Hine, Pat Kirkham: The Eames Lounge Chair: An Icon of
Modern Design. Merrell Holberton 2006, ISBN 978-1858943022.

## [edit] External links

  * Herman Miller product page
  * Introduction video for the Eames Lounge Chair
  * Fan/Resource site dedicated to the Eames Chair
  * Official Eames Office site featuring information on vintage Eames chairs for collectors and scholars
  * Herman Miller Eases Chair 3D Model

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eames_Lounge_Chair"

Categories: Chairs

Hidden categories: Articles lacking sources from January 2008 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 15 April 2009, at 03:18 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



