
# Everclear (alcohol)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

This article is about the alcoholic beverage. For the musical group, see
Everclear (band).

Everclear <IMG>  
Type Neutral grain spirit  
Manufacturer Luxco  
Country of origin United States  
Alcohol by volume 95% or 75.5%  
Proof 190 or 151  
Color Colorless  
Flavour Neutral, contains no flavoring  
Everclear is a brand of neutral grain spirit that is available at
concentrations of 75.5% alcohol (151 proof) and 95% alcohol (190 proof),[1] in
contrast to hard liquors such as rum and vodka, which typically contain
40%â60% alcohol (80â120 proof).

Since 95.6% ethanol and 4.4% water form an azeotrope (meaning that simple
distillation cannot remove any of the remaining water), 191-proof spirits are
the maximum proof that is available from the distilled beverage industry. As
Everclear is a neutral grain spirit, it is relatively low in congeners.

Everclear is manufactured by Luxco (formerly the David Sherman Company).[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Availability in market areas
  * 2 Uses
  * 3 Everclear in popular culture
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
## [edit] Availability in market areas

Because of its high alcohol content, Everclear is illegal, unavailable, or
hard to find in many areas.

It is illegal to sell the 190-proof variety in some states of the United
States, namely California, Hawaii, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota,[3] Nevada,
New York, New Hampshire, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Washington, and West
Virginia. In California and in some other states, the 151-proof variety may be
sold.

In Canada, it is sold in Alberta but not in Saskatchewan, Manitoba and most
other provinces.

## [edit] Uses

Everclear is commonly added to a variety of other drinks, such as soft drinks,
energy drinks, fruit juice, and iced tea. It is used in some cocktails[4] and
sometimes in place of vodka or rum in Jello shots. It is used to make Apple
Pie Punch.[5]

Everclear is also used in cooking because alcohol extracts flavors
exceptionally well. It can be used to make homemade liqueurs, such as
limoncello.

Everclear can be used to âcutâ (i.e., adulterate) other spirits,
particularly clear spirits such as gin and vodka, without reducing their
proof. When 190-proof Everclear is mixed with an equal amount of distilled
water, a 95-proof mixture is obtained, which is the average proof of most
spirits â because most spirits have 80 to 110 proof. The diluted Everclear
is then mixed with a more expensive liquor, which increases the liquorâs
volume without greatly changing its alcohol content. Of course, its taste will
be impaired.

## [edit] Everclear in popular culture

Everclear is featured in Minnesota humorist Garrison Keillorâs novel Lake
Wobegon Days. In one scene, a housewife throws her husbandâs cup of coffee
onto a kitchen fire to douse it, whereupon the coffee bursts into flame. She
later finds a bottle of Everclear labeled âDONâT THROW OUTâ under the
kitchen sink, and correctly surmises that her husband had put a shot of it in
his coffee. In real life, a shot of Everclear in a cup of coffee would not
âburst into flameâ; the flash point of this mixture would be far too high.

A song called âThe Everclear Songâ was written by Mike Ethan Messick and
performed by him on his album Bootleggerâs Turn. It was covered by Roger
Creager on his album Having Fun All Wrong.

In the 2001 musical film Hedwig and the Angry Inch , Tommy Gnosis asks Hedwig
if she is drunk.  She replies, âIâm not drunk; Iâm enjoying a little
rainwater and Everclear.â [6]

## [edit] See also

  * Distilled beverage
  * Golden Grain Alcohol
  * Neutral grain spirit
  * Vodka

## [edit] References

  1. ^ luxco.com (brands)
  2. ^ luxco.com (company)
  3. ^ 340A.506, Minnesota Statutes 2007
  4. ^ Cocktails with Everclear
  5. ^ Apple Pie Punch receipe
  6. ^ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZdSotkOhpso At 3 min 5 sec.

## [edit] External links

  * Luxco website
  * More Information

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everclear_(alcohol)"

Categories: Distilled beverages | Neutral grain spirits

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * FranÃ§ais

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 12 May 2009, at 19:25 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



