
# Microprocessor

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Microprocessor Die of an Intel 80486DX2 microprocessor \(actual size:
12Ã6.75 mm\) in its packaging Date invented Late 1960s/Early 1970s (see
article for explanation)  
Connects to Printed circuit boards via sockets, soldering, or other methods.  
Architectures PowerPC, x86, x86-64, and many others (see below, and article)  
Common manufacturers AMD, Analog Devices, Atmel, Cypress, Fairchild, Fujitsu,
Hitachi, IBM, Infineon, Intel, Intersil, ITT, Maxim, Microchip, Mitsubishi,
Mostek, Motorola, National, NEC, NXP (Philips), OKI, Renesas, Samsung, Sharp,
Siemens, Signetics, STM, Synertek, Texas, Toshiba, TSMC, UMC, Winbond, Zilog,
and others.  
A microprocessor incorporates most or all of the functions of a central
processing unit (CPU) on a single integrated circuit (IC). [1] The first
microprocessors emerged in the early 1970s and were used for electronic
calculators, using Binary-coded decimal (BCD) arithmetic on 4-bit words. Other
embedded uses of 4- and 8-bit microprocessors, such as terminals, printers,
various kinds of automation etc, followed rather quickly. Affordable 8-bit
microprocessors with 16-bit addressing also led to the first general purpose
microcomputers in the mid-1970s.

Computer processors were for a long period constructed out of small and
medium-scale ICs containing the equivalent of a few to a few hundred
transistors. The integration of the whole CPU onto a single VLSI chip
therefore greatly reduced the cost of processing capacity. From their humble
beginnings, continued increases in microprocessor capacity have rendered other
forms of computers almost completely obsolete (see history of computing
hardware), with one or more microprocessor as processing element in everything
from the smallest embedded systems and handheld devices to the largest
mainframes and supercomputers.

Since the early 1970s, the increase in capacity of microprocessors has been
known to generally follow Moore's Law, which suggests that the complexity of
an integrated circuit, with respect to minimum component cost, doubles every
two years.[2] In the late 1990s, and in the high performance microprocessor
segment, heat generation (TDP), due to switching losses, static current
leakage, and other factors, emerged as a leading developmental constraint[3].

  

## Contents

  * 1 History
    * 1.1 First types
    * 1.2 Notable 8-bit designs
    * 1.3 16-bit designs
    * 1.4 32-bit designs
    * 1.5 64-bit designs in personal computers
    * 1.6 Multicore designs
    * 1.7 RISC
  * 2 Special-purpose designs
  * 3 Market statistics
  * 4 Architectures
  * 5 See also
    * 5.1 Major designers
  * 6 Notes
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links
    * 8.1 General
    * 8.2 Historical documents

  
## [edit] History

Main article: History of general purpose CPUs

### [edit] First types

<IMG>

<IMG>

The 4004 with cover removed (left) and as actually used (right).

Three projects arguably delivered a complete microprocessor at about the same
time, namely Intel's 4004, the Texas Instruments (TI) TMS 1000, and Garrett
AiResearch's Central Air Data Computer (CADC).

In 1968, Garrett AiResearch, with designer Ray Holt and Steve Geller, were
invited to produce a digital computer to compete with electromechanical
systems then under development for the main flight control computer in the US
Navy's new F-14 Tomcat fighter. The design was complete by 1970, and used a
MOS-based chipset as the core CPU. The design was significantly (approximately
20 times) smaller and much more reliable than the mechanical systems it
competed against, and was used in all of the early Tomcat models. This system
contained a "a 20-bit, pipelined, parallel multi-microprocessor". However, the
system was considered so advanced that the Navy refused to allow publication
of the design until 1997. For this reason the CADC, and the MP944 chipset it
used, are fairly unknown even today. (see First Microprocessor Chip Set.) TI
developed the 4-bit TMS 1000, and stressed pre-programmed embedded
applications, introducing a version called the TMS1802NC on September 17,
1971, which implemented a calculator on a chip. The Intel chip was the 4-bit
4004, released on November 15, 1971, developed by Federico Faggin and Marcian
Hoff, the manager of the designing team was Leslie L. VadÃ¡sz.

TI filed for the patent on the microprocessor. Gary Boone was awarded U.S.
Patent 3,757,306 for the single-chip microprocessor architecture on September
4, 1973. It may never be known which company actually had the first working
microprocessor running on the lab bench. In both 1971 and 1976, Intel and TI
entered into broad patent cross-licensing agreements, with Intel paying
royalties to TI for the microprocessor patent. A nice history of these events
is contained in court documentation from a legal dispute between Cyrix and
Intel, with TI as intervenor and owner of the microprocessor patent.

Interestingly, a third party (Gilbert Hyatt) was awarded a patent which might
cover the "microprocessor". See a webpage claiming an invention pre-dating
both TI and Intel, describing a "microcontroller". According to a rebuttal and
a commentary, the patent was later invalidated, but not before substantial
royalties were paid out.

A computer-on-a-chip is a variation of a microprocessor which combines the
microprocessor core (CPU), some memory, and I/O (input/output) lines, all on
one chip. The computer-on-a-chip patent, called the "microcomputer patent" at
the time, U.S. Patent 4,074,351 , was awarded to Gary Boone and Michael J.
Cochran of TI. Aside from this patent, the standard meaning of microcomputer
is a computer using one or more microprocessors as its CPU(s), while the
concept defined in the patent is perhaps more akin to a microcontroller.

According to A History of Modern Computing, (MIT Press), pp. 220â21, Intel
entered into a contract with Computer Terminals Corporation, later called
Datapoint, of San Antonio TX, for a chip for a terminal they were designing.
Datapoint later decided to use the chip, and Intel marketed it as the 8008 in
April, 1972. This was the world's first 8-bit microprocessor. It was the basis
for the famous "Mark-8" computer kit advertised in the magazine Radio-
Electronics in 1974. The 8008 and its successor, the world-famous 8080, opened
up the microprocessor component marketplace.

### [edit] Notable 8-bit designs

The 4004 was later followed in 1972 by the 8008, the world's first 8-bit
microprocessor. These processors are the precursors to the very successful
Intel 8080 (1974), Zilog Z80 (1976), and derivative Intel 8-bit processors.
The competing Motorola 6800 was released August 1974 and the similar MOS
Technology 6502 in 1975 (designed largely by the same people). The 6502
rivaled the Z80 in popularity during the 1980s.

A low overall cost, small packaging, simple computer bus requirements, and
sometimes circuitry otherwise provided by external hardware (the Z80 had a
built in memory refresh) allowed the home computer "revolution" to accelerate
sharply in the early 1980s, eventually delivering such inexpensive machines as
the Sinclair ZX-81, which sold for US$99.

The Western Design Center, Inc. (WDC) introduced the CMOS 65C02 in 1982 and
licensed the design to several firms. It became the core of the Apple IIc and
IIe personal computers, medical implantable grade pacemakers and
defibrilators, automotive, industrial and consumer devices. WDC pioneered the
licensing of microprocessor technology which was later followed by ARM and
other microprocessor Intellectual Property (IP) providers in the 1990âs.

Motorola introduced the MC6809 in 1978, an ambitious and thought through 8-bit
design source compatible with the 6800 and implemented using purely hard-wired
logic. (Subsequent 16-bit microprocessors typically used microcode to some
extent, as design requirements were getting too complex for hard-wired logic
only.)

Another early 8-bit microprocessor was the Signetics 2650, which enjoyed a
brief surge of interest due to its innovative and powerful instruction set
architecture.

A seminal microprocessor in the world of spaceflight was RCA's RCA 1802 (aka
CDP1802, RCA COSMAC) (introduced in 1976) which was used in NASA's Voyager and
Viking spaceprobes of the 1970s, and onboard the Galileo probe to Jupiter
(launched 1989, arrived 1995). RCA COSMAC was the first to implement C-MOS
technology. The CDP1802 was used because it could be run at very low power,
and because its production process (Silicon on Sapphire) ensured much better
protection against cosmic radiation and electrostatic discharges than that of
any other processor of the era. Thus, the 1802 is said to be the first
radiation-hardened microprocessor.

The RCA 1802 had what is called a static design, meaning that the clock
frequency could be made arbitrarily low, even to 0 Hz, a total stop condition.
This let the Voyager/Viking/Galileo spacecraft use minimum electric power for
long uneventful stretches of a voyage. Timers and/or sensors would
awaken/improve the performance of the processor in time for important tasks,
such as navigation updates, attitude control, data acquisition, and radio
communication.

### [edit] 16-bit designs

The first multi-chip 16-bit microprocessor was the National Semiconductor
IMP-16, introduced in early 1973. An 8-bit version of the chipset was
introduced in 1974 as the IMP-8. During the same year, National introduced the
first 16-bit single-chip microprocessor, the National Semiconductor PACE,
which was later followed by an NMOS version, the INS8900.

Other early multi-chip 16-bit microprocessors include one used by Digital
Equipment Corporation (DEC) in the LSI-11 OEM board set and the packaged PDP
11/03 minicomputer, and the Fairchild Semiconductor MicroFlame 9440, both of
which were introduced in the 1975 to 1976 timeframe.

The first single-chip 16-bit microprocessor was TI's TMS 9900, which was also
compatible with their TI-990 line of minicomputers. The 9900 was used in the
TI 990/4 minicomputer, the TI-99/4A home computer, and the TM990 line of OEM
microcomputer boards. The chip was packaged in a large ceramic 64-pin DIP
package, while most 8-bit microprocessors such as the Intel 8080 used the more
common, smaller, and less expensive plastic 40-pin DIP. A follow-on chip, the
TMS 9980, was designed to compete with the Intel 8080, had the full TI 990
16-bit instruction set, used a plastic 40-pin package, moved data 8 bits at a
time, but could only address 16 KB. A third chip, the TMS 9995, was a new
design. The family later expanded to include the 99105 and 99110.

The Western Design Center, Inc. (WDC) introduced the CMOS 65816 16-bit upgrade
of the WDC CMOS 65C02 in 1984. The 65816 16-bit microprocessor was the core of
the Apple IIgs and later the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, making it
one of the most popular 16-bit designs of all time.

Intel followed a different path, having no minicomputers to emulate, and
instead "upsized" their 8080 design into the 16-bit Intel 8086, the first
member of the x86 family which powers most modern PC type computers. Intel
introduced the 8086 as a cost effective way of porting software from the 8080
lines, and succeeded in winning much business on that premise. The 8088, a
version of the 8086 that used an external 8-bit data bus, was the
microprocessor in the first IBM PC, the model 5150. Following up their 8086
and 8088, Intel released the 80186, 80286 and, in 1985, the 32-bit 80386,
cementing their PC market dominance with the processor family's backwards
compatibility.

The integrated microprocessor memory management unit (MMU) was developed by
Childs et al. of Intel, and awarded US patent number 4,442,484.

### [edit] 32-bit designs

<IMG>

<IMG>

Upper interconnect layers on an Intel 80486DX2 die.

16-bit designs were in the markets only briefly when full 32-bit
implementations started to appear.

The most significant of the 32-bit designs is the MC68000, introduced in 1979.
The 68K, as it was widely known, had 32-bit registers but used 16-bit internal
data paths, and a 16-bit external data bus to reduce pin count, and supported
only 24-bit addresses. Motorola generally described it as a 16-bit processor,
though it clearly has 32-bit architecture. The combination of high
performance, large (16 megabytes (2^24)) memory space and fairly low costs
made it the most popular CPU design of its class. The Apple Lisa and Macintosh
designs made use of the 68000, as did a host of other designs in the
mid-1980s, including the Atari ST and Commodore Amiga.

The world's first single-chip fully-32-bit microprocessor, with 32-bit data
paths, 32-bit buses, and 32-bit addresses, was the AT&T Bell Labs BELLMAC-32A,
with first samples in 1980, and general production in 1982 (See this
bibliographic reference and this general reference). After the divestiture of
AT&T in 1984, it was renamed the WE 32000 (WE for Western Electric), and had
two follow-on generations, the WE 32100 and WE 32200. These microprocessors
were used in the AT&T 3B5 and 3B15 minicomputers; in the 3B2, the world's
first desktop supermicrocomputer; in the "Companion", the world's first 32-bit
laptop computer; and in "Alexander", the world's first book-sized
supermicrocomputer, featuring ROM-pack memory cartridges similar to today's
gaming consoles. All these systems ran the UNIX System V operating system.

Intel's first 32-bit microprocessor was the iAPX 432, which was introduced in
1981 but was not a commercial success. It had an advanced capability-based
object-oriented architecture, but poor performance compared to other competing
architectures such as the Motorola 68000.

Motorola's success with the 68000 led to the MC68010, which added virtual
memory support. The MC68020, introduced in 1985 added full 32-bit data and
address busses. The 68020 became hugely popular in the Unix supermicrocomputer
market, and many small companies (e.g., Altos, Charles River Data Systems)
produced desktop-size systems. The MC68030 was introduced next, improving upon
the previous design by integrating the MMU into the chip. The continued
success led to the MC68040, which included an FPU for better math performance.
A 68050 failed to achieve its performance goals and was not released, and the
follow-up MC68060 was released into a market saturated by much faster RISC
designs. The 68K family faded from the desktop in the early 1990s.

Other large companies designed the 68020 and follow-ons into embedded
equipment. At one point, there were more 68020s in embedded equipment than
there were Intel Pentiums in PCs (See this webpage for this embedded usage
information). The ColdFire processor cores are derivatives of the venerable
68020.

During this time (early to mid 1980s), National Semiconductor introduced a
very similar 16-bit pinout, 32-bit internal microprocessor called the NS 16032
(later renamed 32016), the full 32-bit version named the NS 32032, and a line
of 32-bit industrial OEM microcomputers. By the mid-1980s, Sequent introduced
the first symmetric multiprocessor (SMP) server-class computer using the NS
32032. This was one of the design's few wins, and it disappeared in the late
1980s.

The MIPS R2000 (1984) and R3000 (1989) were highly successful 32-bit RISC
microprocessors. They were used in high-end workstations and servers by SGI,
among others.

Other designs included the interesting Zilog Z8000, which arrived too late to
market to stand a chance and disappeared quickly.

In the late 1980s, "microprocessor wars" started killing off some of the
microprocessors. Apparently, with only one major design win, Sequent, the NS
32032 just faded out of existence, and Sequent switched to Intel
microprocessors.

From 1985 to 2003, the 32-bit x86 architectures became increasingly dominant
in desktop, laptop, and server markets, and these microprocessors became
faster and more capable. Intel had licensed early versions of the architecture
to other companies, but declined to license the Pentium, so AMD and Cyrix
built later versions of the architecture based on their own designs. During
this span, these processors increased in complexity (transistor count) and
capability (instructions/second) by at least 3 orders of magnitude. Intel's
Pentium line is probably the most famous and recognizable 32-bit processor
model, at least with the public at large.

### [edit] 64-bit designs in personal computers

While 64-bit microprocessor designs have been in use in several markets since
the early 1990s, the early 2000s saw the introduction of 64-bit microchips
targeted at the PC market.

With AMD's introduction of a 64-bit architecture backwards-compatible with
x86, x86-64 (now called AMD64), in September 2003, followed by Intel's near
fully compatible 64-bit extensions (first called IA-32e or EM64T, later
renamed Intel 64), the 64-bit desktop era began. Both versions can run 32-bit
legacy applications without any performance penalty as well as new 64-bit
software. With operating systems Windows XP x64, Windows Vista x64, Linux, BSD
and Mac OS X that run 64-bit native, the software is also geared to fully
utilize the capabilities of such processors. The move to 64 bits is more than
just an increase in register size from the IA-32 as it also doubles the number
of general-purpose registers.

The move to 64 bits by PowerPC processors had been intended since the
processors' design in the early 90s and was not a major cause of
incompatibility. Existing integer registers are extended as are all related
data pathways, but, as was the case with IA-32, both floating point and vector
units had been operating at or above 64 bits for several years. Unlike what
happened when IA-32 was extended to x86-64, no new general purpose registers
were added in 64-bit PowerPC, so any performance gained when using the 64-bit
mode for applications making no use of the larger address space is minimal.

### [edit] Multicore designs

<IMG>

<IMG>

AMD Athlon 64 X2 3600 Dual core processor

Main article: Multi-core (computing)

A different approach to improving a computer's performance is to add extra
processors, as in symmetric multiprocessing designs which have been popular in
servers and workstations since the early 1990s. Keeping up with Moore's Law is
becoming increasingly challenging as chip-making technologies approach the
physical limits of the technology.

In response, the microprocessor manufacturers look for other ways to improve
performance, in order to hold on to the momentum of constant upgrades in the
market.

A multi-core processor is simply a single chip containing more than one
microprocessor core, effectively multiplying the potential performance with
the number of cores (as long as the operating system and software is designed
to take advantage of more than one processor). Some components, such as bus
interface and second level cache, may be shared between cores. Because the
cores are physically very close they interface at much faster clock rates
compared to discrete multiprocessor systems, improving overall system
performance.

In 2005, the first mass-market dual-core processors were announced and as of
2007 dual-core processors are widely used in servers, workstations and PCs
while quad-core processors are now available for high-end applications in both
the home and professional environments.

Sun Microsystems has released the Niagara and Niagara 2 chips, both of which
feature an eight-core design. The Niagara 2 supports more threads and operates
at 1.6 GHz.

High-end Intel Xeon processors that are on the LGA771 socket are DP (dual
processor) capable, as well as the new Intel Core 2 Extreme QX9775 also used
in the Mac Pro by Apple and the Intel Skulltrail motherboard.

### [edit] RISC

In the mid-1980s to early-1990s, a crop of new high-performance RISC (reduced
instruction set computer) microprocessors appeared, influenced by discrete
RISC-like CPU designs such as the IBM 801 and others. RISC microprocessors
were initially used in special purpose machines and Unix workstations, but
then gained wide acceptance in other roles.

The first commercial microprocessor design was released by MIPS Technologies,
the 32-bit R2000 (the R1000 was not released). The R3000 made the design truly
practical, and the R4000 introduced the world's first 64-bit design. Competing
projects would result in the IBM POWER and Sun SPARC systems, respectively.
Soon every major vendor was releasing a RISC design, including the AT&T CRISP,
AMD 29000, Intel i860 and Intel i960, Motorola 88000, DEC Alpha and the HP-PA.

Market forces have "weeded out" many of these designs, with almost no desktop
or laptop RISC processors and with the SPARC being used in Sun designs only.
MIPS is primarily used in embedded systems, notably in Cisco routers. The rest
of the original crop of designs have disappeared. Other companies have
attacked niches in the market, notably ARM, originally intended for home
computer use but since focussed on the embedded processor market. Today RISC
designs based on the MIPS, ARM or PowerPC is used in the majority of embedded
32-bit devices, although not in the large quantities in which embedded 8-bit
devices are produced (whether CISC or RISC).

As of 2007, two 64-bit RISC architectures are still produced in volume for
non-embedded applications: SPARC and Power Architecture. The RISC-like Itanium
is produced in smaller quantities. The vast majority of 64-bit microprocessors
are now x86-64 CISC designs from AMD and Intel.

## [edit] Special-purpose designs

Though the term "microprocessor" has traditionally referred to a single- or
multi-chip CPU or system-on-a-chip (SoC), several types of specialized
processing devices have followed from the technology. The most common examples
are microcontrollers, digital signal processors (DSP) and graphics processing
units (GPU). Many examples of these are either not programmable, or have
limited programming facilities. For example, in general GPUs through the 1990s
were mostly non-programmable and have only recently gained limited facilities
like programmable vertex shaders. There is no universal consensus on what
defines a "microprocessor", but it is usually safe to assume that the term
refers to a general-purpose CPU of some sort and not a special-purpose
processor unless specifically noted.

## [edit] Market statistics

In 2003, about $44 billion (USD) worth of microprocessors were manufactured
and sold. [3] Although about half of that money was spent on CPUs used in
desktop or laptop personal computers, those count for only about 0.2% of all
CPUs sold.

Silicon Valley has an old saying: "The first chip costs a million dollars; the
second one costs a nickel." In other words, most of the cost is in the design
and the manufacturing setup: once manufacturing is underway, it costs almost
nothing.[citation needed]

About 55% of all CPUs sold in the world are 8-bit microcontrollers. Over 2
billion 8-bit microcontrollers were sold in 1997. [4]

Less than 10% of all the CPUs sold in the world are 32-bit or more. Of all the
32-bit CPUs sold, about 2% are used in desktop or laptop personal computers.
Most microprocessors are used in embedded control applications such as
household appliances, automobiles, and computer peripherals. "Taken as a
whole, the average price for a microprocessor, microcontroller, or DSP is just
over $6." [5]

## [edit] Architectures

  * 65xx
    * MOS Technology 6502
    * Western Design Center 65xx
  * ARM family
  * Altera Nios, Nios II
  * Atmel AVR architecture (purely microcontrollers)
  * EISC
  * RCA 1802 (aka RCA COSMAC, CDP1802)
  * DEC Alpha
  * IBM POWER
  * Intel
    * 4004, 4040
    * 8080, 8085
    * 8048, 8051
    * iAPX 432
    * i860, i960
    * Itanium
  * LatticeMico32
  * M32R architecture
  * MIPS architecture
  * Motorola
    * Motorola 6800
    * Motorola 6809
    * Motorola 68000 family, ColdFire
    * Motorola G3, G4, G5
  * NSC 320xx
  * NSC CompactRISC
  * OpenCores OpenRISC architecture
  * PA-RISC family
  * National Semiconductor SC/MP ("scamp")
  * Signetics 2650
  * SPARC
  * SuperH family
  * Tensilica Xtensa
  * Transmeta Crusoe, Efficeon (VLIW architectures, IA-32 32-bit Intel x86 emulator)
  * INMOS Transputer
  * x86 architecture
    * Intel 8086, 8088, 80186, 80188 (16-bit real mode-only x86 architecture)
    * Intel 80286 (16-bit real mode and protected mode x86 architecture)
    * IA-32 32-bit x86 architecture
    * x86-64 64-bit x86 architecture
  * XAP processor from Cambridge Consultants
  * Xilinx MicroBlaze
  * XMOS
    * XCore XS1-G4
  * Zilog
    * Z80, Z180, eZ80
    * Z8, eZ8
    * and others

  
## [edit] See also

  * Addressing mode
  * Arithmetic and logical unit
  * Central processing unit
  * CISC / RISC
  * Clock rate
  * Computer architecture
  * Computer bus
  * Computer engineering
  * Digital signal processor
  * List of microprocessors
  * Microprocessor Chronology
  * CPU cooling
  * CPU core voltage
  * CPU design
  * CPU locking
  * CPU power consumption
  * Firmware
  * Floating point unit
  * Front side bus
  * Instruction pipeline
  * Instruction set
  * Microarchitecture
  * Microcode
  * Microcontroller
  * Microprocessor Chronicles (documentary film)
  * Motherboard
  * Pipeline
  * Scratchpad RAM
  * Soft processor
  * Superscalar
  * Superpipelined
  * Wait state

### [edit] Major designers

In 2007, the companies with the largest share of the microprocessor controller
market were[4]

  * Renesas Technology (21 percent)
  * Freescale Semiconductor (12 percent share)
  * NEC (10 percent)
  * Infineon (6 percent)
  * Microchip (6 percent)
  * Fujitsu (5 percent)
  * Matsushita (5 percent)
  * STMicroelectronics (5 percent)
  * Samsung (4 percent), and
  * Texas Instruments Semiconductors (4 percent)

Other microprocessor design companies include:

  * Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)
  * AMCC
  * ARM Holdings
  * CPU Tech
  * IBM Microelectronics
  * Intel
  * MIPS Technologies
  * Sun Microsystems
  * VIA Technologies
  * Western Design Center

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ Adam Osborne, An Introduction to Microcomputers Volume 1 Basic Concepts,2nd Edition, Osborne-McGraw Hill, Berkely California, 1980, ISBN 0-931988-34-9 pg1-1
  2. ^ Although originally calculated as a doubling every year,[1] Moore later refined the period to two years.[2] It is often incorrectly quoted as a doubling of transistors every 18 months.
  3. ^ Hodgin, Rick (2007-12-03). "Six fold reduction in semiconductor power loss, a faster, lower heat process technology". TG Daily (TG Publishing network). http://www.tgdaily.com/content/view/35094/113/. Retrieved on 2007-12-03.
  4. ^ "Renesas seeks control of controller arena" by Mark LaPedus 2008

## [edit] References

  * Ak Ray & KM Bhurchandi , "Advanced Microprocessors and Peripherals on Architecture Programming and Interfacing" published in India by Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikiversity has learning materials about Introduction to
Computers/Processor  
Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Microprocessors  
### [edit] General

  * Great Microprocessors of the Past and Present â By John Bayko
  * Microprocessor history â Hosted by IBM
  * Microprocessor instruction set cards â By Jonathan Bowen
  * CPU-Collection â An extensive archive of photographs and information, with hundreds of microprocessors from 1974 to the present day
  * CPU-World â Extensive CPU/MCU/FPU data
  * Gecko's CPU Library â The Gecko's CPU/FPU collection from 4004 to today: hundreds pages of pictures and informations about processors, packages, sockets, etc.
  * HowStuffWorks "How Microprocessors Work"
  * IC Die Photography â A gallery of CPU die photographs

### [edit] Historical documents

  * TMS1802NC calculator chip press release â Texas Instruments, September 17, 1971
  * 1973: TI Receives first patent on Single-Chip Microprocessor
  * TI Awarded Basic Microcomputer Patent â TI, February 17, 1978 ("microcomputer" to be understood as a single-chip computer; a simple ÂµC)
  * Important discoveries in microprocessors during 2004 â Hosted by IBM
  * Pico and General Instrument's Single Chip Calculator processor Possibly pre-dating Intel and TI.
  * 1974 speculation on the possible applications of the microprocessor

v â¢ d â¢ e

CPU technologies  
Architecture

ISA : CISC Â· EDGE Â· EPIC Â· MISC Â· OISC Â· RISC Â· VLIW Â· ZISC Â· Harvard
architecture Â· Von Neumann architecture Â· 8-bit Â· 32-bit Â· 64-bit Â·
128-bit  
Parallelism

Pipeline

Instruction pipelining Â· In-Order & Out-of-Order execution Â· Register
renaming Â· Speculative execution  
Level

Bit Â· Instruction Â· Superscalar Â· Data Â· Task  
Threads

Multithreading Â· Simultaneous multithreading Â· Hyperthreading Â·
Superthreading  
Flynn's taxonomy

SISD Â· SIMD Â· MISD Â· MIMD  
Types

Digital signal processor Â· Microcontroller Â· System-on-a-chip Â· Vector
processor  
Components

Arithmetic logic unit (ALU) Â· Barrel shifter Â· Floating-point unit (FPU) Â·
Backside bus Â· Multiplexer Â· Demultiplexer Â· Registers Â· Memory management
unit (MMU) Â· Translation lookaside buffer (TLB) Â· Cache Â· register file Â·
microcode Â· control unit Â· CPU clock  
Power management

APM Â· ACPI (states) Â· Dynamic frequency scaling Â· Dynamic voltage scaling
Â· Clock gating  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microprocessor"

Categories: Digital electronics | Microcomputers | Microprocessors |
Communication engineering

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since September 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * AragonÃ©s
  * Brezhoneg
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * KurdÃ® / ÙÙØ±Ø¯Û
  * Latina
  * LietuviÅ³
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * Ð¢Ð¾Ò·Ð¸ÐºÓ£
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 05:41 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



