
# Serious game

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article is written like a personal reflection or essay and may require
cleanup. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style.
(December 2007)  
<IMG>  
Part of a series on:  
Video game industry  
Activities/Jobs

  * Game art / Game artist
  * Game design / Game designer
  * Game development / Game developer
  * Game modification
  * Game producer
  * Game programming / Game programmer
  * Game publisher
  * Game studies
  * Game testing / Game tester
  * Game journalism
  * Level design / Level designer

  
Types

  * Adult game
  * Casual game
  * Non-game
    * Interactive art
    * Interactive movie
  * Nonviolent video game
  * Serious game
    * Advergame
    * Art game
    * Edugame
    * Exergame
    * Militainment
  * Traditional game

  
Topics

  * DRM
  * EULA
  * Outsourcing
  * Software license

  
Lists

  * List of indie game developers
  * List of video game companies
  * List of video game industry people
  * List of video game publishers

  
v â¢ d â¢ e  
A serious game is a term used to refer to a software or hardware application
developed with game technology and game design principles for a primary
purpose other than pure entertainment. The Serious adjective is generally
apended to refer to products used by industries like defense, education,
scientific exploration, health care, emergency management, city planning,
engineering, religion, and politics.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Development
    * 2.1 Advantages
  * 3 Classifications and Subsets of Serious Games
  * 4 Examples
  * 5 Notable developers
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 External links

  
## [edit] Overview

The term "serious game" was actually used long before the introduction of
computer and electronic devices into entertainment. Clark Abt discussed the
idea and used the term in his 1977 book entitled "Serious Games" published by
Viking Press. In that book, his references were primarily to the use of board
and card games. But he gave a useful general definition which is still
applicable in the computer age - âReduced to its formal essence, a game is
an activity among two or more independent decision-makers seeking to achieve
their objectives in some limiting context. A more conventional definition
would say that a game is a context with rules among adversaries trying to win
objectives. We are concerned with serious games in the sense that these games
have an explicit and carefully thought-out educational purpose and are not
intended to be played primarily for amusement.â

Mike Zyda provided a very useful update and logical approach to the term in
his 2005 article in IEEE Computer entitled, "From visual simulation to virtual
reality to games". His definition begins with "game" and proceeds from there:

  * Game: âa physical or mental contest, played according to specific rules, with the goal of amusing or rewarding the participant.â

  * Video Game: âa mental contest, played with a computer according to certain rules for amusement, recreation, or winning a stake.â

  * Serious Game: âa mental contest, played with a computer in accordance with specific rules that uses entertainment to further government or corporate training, education, health, public policy, and strategic communication objectives.â

Long before the term "serious game" came into wide use with the Serious Games
Initiative in 2002, games were being made for non-entertainment purposes. The
continued failure of the edutainment space to prove profitable, plus the
growing technical abilities of games to provide realistic settings, led to a
re-examination of the concept of serious games in the late 1990s. During this
time, a number of scholars began to examine the utility of games for other
purposes, contributed to the growing interest in applying games to new
purposes. Additionally, the ability of games to contribute to training
expanded at the same time with the development of multi-player gaming. In
2002, the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington D.C.
launched a "Serious Games Initiative" to encourage the development of games
that address policy and management issues. More focused sub-groups began to
appear in 2004, including Games for Change which focuses on social issues and
social change, and Games for Health which addresses health care applications.

There is no single definition of serious games, though they are generally held
to be games used for training, advertising, simulation, or education.
Alternate definitions include the application of games concepts, technologies
and ideas to non-entertainment applications. This can also include specific
hardware for video games, such as exergaming.

Serious games include and are more than those intended for an audience outside
of primary or secondary education. Serious games can be of any genre, use any
game technology, and be developed for any platform. Some may consider them a
kind of edutainment; however, the mainstay of the community are resistant to
this term.

A serious game may be a simulation which has the look and feel of a game, but
corresponds to non-game events or processes, including business operations and
military operations (even though many popular entertainment games depicted
business and military operations). The games are made to provide an engaging,
self-reinforcing context in which to motivate and educate the players. Other
purposes for such games include marketing and advertisement. The largest users
(unsubstantiated by business intelligence) of SGs appear to be the US
government and medical professionals.[citation needed] Other commercial
sectors are actively pursuing development of these types of tools as well.

## [edit] Development

The concept of using games for education dates back before the days of
computers, but the first serious game is often considered to be Army
Battlezone, an abortive project headed by Atari in 1980, designed to use the
Battlezone tank game for military training. In recent years, the US government
and military have periodically looked towards game developers to create low-
cost simulations that are both accurate and engaging. Game developer's
experience with gameplay and game design made them prime candidates for
developing these types of simulations which cost millions of dollars less than
traditional simulations, which often require special hardware or complete
facilities to use.

Outside of the government, there is substantial interest in games for
education, professional training, healthcare, advertising and public policy.
For example, games from websites such as Newsgaming.com are "very political
games groups made outside the corporate game system" that are "raising issues
through media but using the distinct properties of games to engage people from
a fresh perspective," says Henry Jenkins, the director of MIT's comparative
media studies program. Such games, he said, constitute a "radical fictional
work."1 Michigan State University offers a Serious Games MA, a Master of Arts
graduate program and graduate certificate in serious game design.[1]

### [edit] Advantages

Video and computer game developers are accustomed to developing games quickly
and are adept at creating games that simulateâto varying
degreesâfunctional entities such as radar and combat vehicles. Using
existing infrastructure, game developers can create games that simulate
battles, processes and events at a fraction of the cost of traditional
government contractors.

Traditional simulators usually cost millions of dollars not only to develop,
but also to deploy, and generally require the procurement of specialized
hardware. The costs of media for serious games is very low. Instead of volumes
of media or computers for high-end simulators, SGs require nothing more than a
DVD or even a single CD-ROM, exactly like traditional computer and video games
require. Deploying these to the field requires nothing more than dropping them
in the mail or accessing a dedicated web site.

Finally, while SGs are meant to train or otherwise educate users, they often
hope to be engaging. Game developers are experienced at making games fun and
engaging as their livelihood depends on it. In the course of simulating events
and processes, developers automatically inject entertainment and playability
in their applications.

## [edit] Classifications and Subsets of Serious Games

The classification of Serious Games is something that is yet to solidify,
there are however a number of terms in reasonably common use for inclusion
here.

  * Advergames
  * Edutainment
  * Games-Based Learning \- These games have defined learning outcomes. Generally they are designed in order to balance the subject matter with the gameplay and the ability of the player to retain and apply said subject matter to the real world.[1]
  * Edumarket Games \- When a serious game combines several aspects (such as advergaming and edutainment aspects or persuasive and news aspects), the application is an Edumarket game. For example, Food-Force combines news, persuasive and edutainment goals.
  * News Games \- Journalistic games that report on recent events or deliver an editorial comment. Examples include September 12th [2]
  * Simulations or Simulation Games
  * Persuasive Games \- these games are used as persuasion technology
  * Organizational-dynamic games
  * Games for Health, such as games for medical training, games for health education, games for psychological therapy, or games for cognitive or psysical rehabilitation uses.
  * Art Games \- games used to express artistic ideas or art produced through the medium of video games

Additionally Julian Alvarez and Olivier Rampnoux (from the European Center for
Childrenâs Products, University of Poitiers) have attempted to classify
Serious Games in 5 main categories: Advergaming, Edutainment, Edumarket game,
Diverted game and Simulation game. (Alvarez J., Rampnoux O., Serious Game:
Just a question of posture?, in Artificial & Ambient Intelligence, AISB'07,
Newcastle, UK, April 2007, p.420 to 423)

## [edit] Examples

  * CyberCIEGE (Microsoft Windows): Computer network security sim game developed by the Naval Postgraduate School. Players protect assets while enabling "users" to achieve their goals.
  * Darfur is Dying (Internet) An online game by mtvU that simulates life in a Darfur refugee camp.
  * DARWARS Ambush! Convoy Simulator developed as part of DARPA's DARWARS project, designed to create low-cost experiential training systems
  * Microsoft Flight Simulator developed as a comprehensive simulation of civil aviation. Notably one of the few flight simulation games that does not concentrate on simulation of aerial warfare.
  * Food Force (Mac/Windows) Humanitarian video game. The UN's World Food Programme designed this virtual world of food airdrops over crisis zones and trucks struggling up difficult roads under rebel threat with emergency food supplies.
  * Global Conflict: Palestine (Mac/Windows): A 3D-adventure/rpg-game. You are given the role of a reporter in Jerusalem, and have to write articles for your paper.
  * Harpoon (Mac/Windows): Entertainment version was "dual use" from 1989 forward. Professional version Harpoon 3 Professional created in 2002 with help from Australian Defense Department, updated in 2006.
  * Peacemaker (Mac/PC, $20) A commercial game simulation of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict designed to promote "dialog and understanding among Israelis, Palestinians and interested people around the world".
  * Re-Mission (Microsoft Windows): 3-D Shooter to help improve the lives of young persons living with cancer.
  * Ship Simulator (Microsoft Windows): a simulator which simulates maneuvering various ships in different environments, although without the effects of wind and current.
  * Simport (Mac/Windows): A simulation game in which players learn about the intricacies involved in construction large infrastructural projects, like a major sea port.
  * Steel Beasts Professional: Tank simulator, developed by eSim Games, and used by several armies around the world.
  * Tactical Language & Culture Training System (Microsoft Windows): Computer-based learning system that lets people quickly acquire functional knowledge of foreign languages and cultures. Current titles include Iraqi Arabic, Pashto and French.
  * VBS1 & VBS2 Training tool for the USMC and other military forces around the world. Developed by BIA, and based on the game engine used in Operation Flashpoint and Armed Assault.
  * X-Plane (Linux/Mac/Windows): a comprehensive civil aviation simulator. An FAA approved version exists which enables low cost flight training.

## [edit] Notable developers

  * Archimage, Houston-based design firm that specializes in games for health production with titles including Escape From Diab, Nanoswarm: Invasion From Inner Space and Playnormous.
  * BBN, defense contractor working on the DARWARS project.
  * Bohemia Interactive Australia, Australian developer of the VBS-Series military simulations.
  * BreakAway Games, developers of 24 Blue, Incident Commander[2], A Force More Powerful, mosbe[3], Pulse!! and other serious games
  * Cyberlore Studios
  * Destineer
  * DESQ, a UK based serious games developer, specializing in learning games for CD ROM and online platforms, in particular role-playing learning games.
  * Information in Place, Inc. (IIPI), developers of serious games for public and private organizations.
  * Red Redemption, the UK-based developer of Climate Challenge.
  * Sumo Digital, One of Europe's leading console game developers, with an internal Serious Games division.
  * TPLD, developers of SG applications and platforms, predominantly for educational and business use.
  * TruSim, one of the UK's leading serious games developers. A division of Blitz Games Studios.
  * Tygron, Dutch developer of Simport and other serious games.
  * Virtual Heroes, Inc., developers of Serious Games training applications Adaptive Thinking and Leadership (ATL) and Future Soldier Training System (FSTS)
  * Virtway, developers of Fire Fighters Coordination Training Tool, and other tools to assist learning through gaming.
  * VSTEP, one of the Europe's leading serious games developers. Dutch developer of Ship Simulator-series and other serious games.
  * Will Interactive, Serious Game developers based out of the United States. They feature live action games in a variety of fields, including military, health care, and youth education. (FSTS)
  * E-Semble is Europeâs leading developer of serious games for the safety and security sector.

## [edit] See also

  * Business simulation game
  * Business game
  * Brain fitness
  * Global warming game
  * Innovation game
  * Interactive Digital Technology

## [edit] References

  1. ^ The book 'Digital Game-Based Learning' by Marc Prensky was the first major publication to define the term, The Official Site of the book 'Digital Game-Based Learning' by Marc Prensky
  2. ^ Gonzalo Frasca of newsgaming.com which denounces the use of violence to resolve the problem of terrorism.

  * Abt, C. (1970). Serious Games. New York: The Viking Press.

  * Zyda, M. (September 2005). "From visual simulation to virtual reality to games". IEEE Computer.

## [edit] External links

  * Virtual Battlespace 2 Website, Developed by Bohemia Interactive Australia
  * Overview of military simulations, Military Training Technology magazine, Dec 2007
  * "Games get down to business" by Graham F. Scott - Special to The Globe and Mail Update (May 2007)
  * "Game Impact Theory: The Five Forces That are Driving the Adoption of Game Technologies within Multiple Established Industries" by Roger Smith (US) in Games and Society (February 2007)
  * "Serious Games: Getting Serious About Digital Games in Learning" article focused on serious games in corporations, by John A. Purdy in Corporate University XChange Journal (2007 Issue 1)
  * "Technology Disruption in the Simulation Industry" by Roger Smith (US) in Journal of Defense Modeling and Simulation (January 2006)
  * "Serious Gaming" by Bob Stone (UK) in Defence Management Journal (Issue 31; December 2005)
  * "Applications in Defence" by Bob Stone (UK) in Defence Management Journal (Issue 32; March 2006)
  * "The Future of Defence Simulation" by Bob Stone (UK) in ETS News
  * "The Twitchspeed Generation" by Bob Stone (UK) in ETS News
  * "Proof of Learning: Assessment in Serious Games" from Gamasutra.com
  * "Video Games are Serious Business" Wired.com talks with Serb student-resistance leader and developer BreakAway Games about the upcoming game A Force More Powerful.
  * "Let the games begin", serious games article on WashingtonTechnology.com
  * "In case of emergency, play video game"
  * "Navy Video Game Targets Future Sailors"
  * "Spot On: Games get political" by Tom Leupold.
  * "Games4Learning" The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill: Games4Learning - a university-wide initiative to include games in the University's curriculum.
  * "Gamers Spark Military Revolution", Ottawa Citizen interviews John Nicol, CEO of Acron Capability Engineering, about Serious Games.
  * "Serious Games Showcase and Challenge", A competitive event to highlight the progress of serious games and provide stimulus for future growth.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Video game genres  
Action

Beat 'em up Â· Fighting game Â· Platform game Â· Shooter game (First-person
shooter Â· Light gun shooter Â· Shoot 'em up Â· Tactical shooter Â· Third-
person shooter)  
Action-adventure

Stealth game Â· Survival horror  
Adventure

Dating sim Â· Graphic adventure game (Escape the room) Â· Interactive fiction
Â· Interactive movie Â· Visual novel  
Role-playing

Action role-playing game Â· Computer role-playing game Â· Console role-playing
game Â· MMORPG Â· MUD Â· Roguelike Â· Tactical role-playing game  
Simulation

Construction and management simulation (Business Â· City Â· God Â· Government)
Â· Life simulation (Pet Â· Social)  
Strategy

4X game Â· Artillery game Â· Real-time strategy (Tower defense) Â· Real-time
tactics Â· Turn-based strategy Â· Turn-based tactics Â· Wargame  
Vehicle simulation

Flight simulator (Combat flight simulator) Â· Racing game (Sim racing) Â·
Space flight simulator Â· Submarine simulator Â· Train simulator Â· Vehicular
combat game  
Other genres

Adult game/Eroge Â· Advergame Â· Art game Â· Christian game Â· Edugame Â·
Exergame Â· Music game Â· Non-game Â· Party game Â· Programming game Â· Puzzle
game (Hidden object game) Â· Serious game Â· Sports game Â· Traditional game  
Related concepts

Audio game Â· Casual game Â· Minigame Â· Online game (Browser game Â· MMOG)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serious_game"

Categories: Educational video games | Video game types

Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing style editing from December 2007
| All articles needing style editing | All articles with unsourced statements
| Articles with unsourced statements since February 2007

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 14 April 2009, at 12:54 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



