
# Playfair cipher

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2009)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

The Playfair system was invented by Charles Wheatstone, who first described it
in 1854.

The Playfair cipher or Playfair square is a manual symmetric encryption
technique and was the first literal digraph substitution cipher. The scheme
was invented in 1854 by Charles Wheatstone, but bears the name of Lord
Playfair who promoted the use of the cipher.

The technique encrypts pairs of letters (digraphs), instead of single letters
as in the simple substitution cipher and rather more complex VigenÃ¨re cipher
systems then in use. The Playfair is thus significantly harder to break since
the frequency analysis used for simple substitution ciphers does not work with
it. Frequency analysis can still be undertaken, but on the 600[1] possible
digraphs rather than the 26 possible monographs. The frequency analysis of
digraphs is possible, but considerably more difficult â and it generally
requires a much larger ciphertext in order to be useful.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Using Playfair
  * 3 Example
  * 4 Clarification with pictures
  * 5 Playfair cryptanalysis
  * 6 The Playfair cipher in modern crosswords
  * 7 In popular culture
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Lord Playfair, who heavily promoted its use.

Despite its invention by Wheatstone, it became known as the Playfair cipher
after Lord Playfair, who heavily promoted its use. The first recorded
description of the Playfair cipher was in a document signed by Wheatstone on
26 March 1854.

It was rejected by the British Foreign Office when it was developed because of
its perceived complexity. When Wheatstone offered to demonstrate that three
out of four boys in a nearby school could learn to use it in 15 minutes, the
Under Secretary of the Foreign Office responded, "That is very possible, but
you could never teach it to attachÃ©s."

It was used for tactical purposes by British forces in the Second Boer War and
in World War I and for the same purpose by the Australians and Germans during
World War II. This was because Playfair is reasonably fast to use and requires
no special equipment. A typical scenario for Playfair use would be to protect
important but non-critical secrets during actual combat. By the time the enemy
cryptanalysts could break the message, the information was useless to them.

Playfair is no longer used by military forces because of the advent of digital
encryption devices. Playfair is now regarded as insecure for any purpose
because modern computers could easily break the cipher within seconds.

The first published solution of the Playfair cipher was described in a 19-page
pamphlet by Lieutenant Joseph O. Mauborgne, published in 1914.

## [edit] Using Playfair

The Playfair cipher uses a 5 by 5 table containing a key word or phrase.
Memorization of the keyword and 4 simple rules was all that was required to
create the 5 by 5 table and use the cipher.

To generate the key table, one would first fill in the spaces in the table
with the letters of the keyword (dropping any duplicate letters), then fill
the remaining spaces with the rest of the letters of the alphabet in order
(usually omitting "Q" to reduce the alphabet to fit, other versions put both
"I" and "J" in the same space). The key can be written in the top rows of the
table, from left to right, or in some other pattern, such as a spiral
beginning in the upper-left-hand corner and ending in the center. The keyword
together with the conventions for filling in the 5 by 5 table constitute the
cipher key.

To encrypt a message, one would break the message into digraphs (groups of 2
letters) such that, for example, "HelloWorld" becomes "HE LL OW OR LD", and
map them out on the key table. The two letters of the digraph look like the
corners of a rectangle in the key table. Note the relative position of the
corners of this rectangle. Then apply the following 4 rules, in order, to each
pair of letters in the plaintext:

  * If both letters are the same (or only one letter is left), add an "X" after the first letter. Encrypt the new pair and continue. Some variants of Playfair use "Q" instead of "X", but any uncommon monograph will do.
  * If the letters appear on the same row of your table, replace them with the letters to their immediate right respectively (wrapping around to the left side of the row if a letter in the original pair was on the right side of the row).
  * If the letters appear on the same column of your table, replace them with the letters immediately below respectively (wrapping around to the top side of the column if a letter in the original pair was on the bottom side of the column).
  * If the letters are not on the same row or column, replace them with the letters on the same row respectively but at the other pair of corners of the rectangle defined by the original pair. The order is important â the first encrypted letter of the pair is the one that lies on the same row as the first plaintext letter.

To decrypt, use the inverse of these 4 rules (dropping any extra "X"s (or
"Q"s) that don't make sense in the final message when you finish).

## [edit] Example

Using "playfair example" as the key, the table becomes:

    
    P L A Y F
    I R E X M
    B C D G H
    J K N O S
    T U V W Z
    
Encrypting the message "Hide the gold in the tree stump":

    
    HI DE TH EG OL DI NT HE TR EX ES TU MP
                                ^
    
  1. The pair HI forms a rectangle, replace it with BM
  2. The pair DE is in a column, replace it with ND
  3. The pair TH forms a rectangle, replace it with ZB
  4. The pair EG forms a rectangle, replace it with XD
  5. The pair OL forms a rectangle, replace it with KY
  6. The pair DI forms a rectangle, replace it with BE
  7. The pair NT forms a rectangle, replace it with JV
  8. The pair HE forms a rectangle, replace it with DM
  9. The pair TR forms a rectangle, replace it with UI
  10. The pair EX (X inserted to split EE) is in a row, replace it with XM
  11. The pair ES forms a rectangle, replace it with MN
  12. The pair TU is in a row, replace it with UV
  13. The pair MP forms a rectangle, replace it with IF

    
    BM ND ZB XD KY BE JV DM UI XM MN UV IF
    
Thus the message "Hide the gold in the tree stump" becomes
"BMNDZBXDKYBEJVDMUIXMMNUVIF".

## [edit] Clarification with pictures

Assume one wants to encrypt the digraph OR. There are three general cases:

1)

    
    * * * * *
    * O Y R Z
    * * * * *
    * * * * *
    * * * * *
    
Hence, OR -> YZ

2)

    
    * * O * *
    * * B * *
    * * * * *
    * * R * *
    * * Y * *
    
Hence, OR -> BY

3)

    
    Z * * O *
    * * * * *
    * * * * *
    R * * X *
    * * * * *
    
Hence, OR -> ZX  
## [edit] Playfair cryptanalysis

Like most pre-modern era ciphers, the Playfair cipher can be easily cracked if
there is enough text. Obtaining the key is relatively straightforward if both
plaintext and ciphertext are known. When only the ciphertext is known, brute
force cryptanalysis of the cipher involves searching through the key space for
matches between the frequency of occurrence of digrams (pairs of letters) and
the known frequency of occurrence of digrams in the assumed language of the
original message.

Cryptanalysis of Playfair is similar to that of four-square and two-square
ciphers, though the relative simplicity of the Playfair system makes
identifying candidate plaintext strings easier. Most notably, a Playfair
digraph and its reverse (e.g. AB and BA) will decrypt to the same letter
pattern in the plaintext (e.g. RE and ER). In English, there are many words
which contain these reversed digraphs such as REceivER and DEpartED.
Identifying nearby reversed digraphs in the ciphertext and matching the
pattern to a list of known plaintext words containing the pattern is an easy
way to generate possible plaintext strings with which to begin constructing
the key.

A different approach to tackling a Playfair cipher is the shotgun hill
climbing method. This starts with a random square of letters. Then minor
changes are introduced (i.e. switching letters, rows, or reflecting the entire
square) to see if the candidate plaintext is more like standard plaintext than
before the change (perhaps by comparing the digraphs to a known frequency
chart). If the new square is deemed to be an improvement, then it is adopted
and then further mutated to find an even better candidate. Eventually, the
plaintext or something very close is found to achieve a maximal score by
whatever grading method is chosen. This is obviously beyond the range of
typical human patience, but computers can adopt this algorithm to crack
Playfair ciphers with a relatively small amount of text.

Another aspect of Playfair that separates it from four-square and two-square
ciphers is the fact that it will never contain a double-letter digraph, e.g.
EE. If there are no double letter digraphs in the ciphertext and the length of
the message is long enough to make this statistically significant, it is very
likely that the method of encryption is Playfair.

A good tutorial on reconstructing the key for a Playfair cipher can be found
in chapter 7, "Solution to Polygraphic Substitution Systems," of Field Manual
34-40-2, produced by the United States Army.

A detailed cryptanalysis of Playfair is undertaken in chapter 28 of Dorothy L.
Sayers' mystery novel Have His Carcase. In this story, a Playfair message is
demonstrated to be cryptographically weak as the detective is able to solve
for the entire key making only a few guesses as to the formatting of the
message (in this case, that the message starts with the name of a city and
then a date). Sayers' book includes a detailed description of the mechanics of
Playfair encryption as well as a step-by-step account of manual cryptanalysis.

The German Army, Air Force and Police used the Double Playfair system as a
medium-grade cipher in WWII, but as they had broken the cipher early in WWI,
they adapted it by introducing a second square from which the second letter of
each bigram was selected, and dispensed with the keyword, placing the letters
in random order. But with the German fondness for âpro formaâ messages,
they were broken at Bletchley Park. Messages were preceded by a sequential
number, and numbers were spelt out. As the German numbers 1 (eins) to twelve
(zwÃ¶lf) contain all but eight of the letters in the Double Playfair squares,
pro forma traffic was relatively easy to break (Smith, page 74-75)

## [edit] The Playfair cipher in modern crosswords

Advanced thematic cryptic crosswords like The Listener Crossword (published in
the Saturday edition of The Times (UK) newspaper) often incorporate Playfair
ciphers. Normally between 4 and 6 answers have to be entered into the grid in
code, and the Playfair keyphrase is thematically significant to the final
solution. The cipher lends itself well to crossword puzzles, because the
plaintext is found by solving one set of clues, while the ciphertext is found
by solving others. Solvers can then construct the key table by pairing the
digraphs (it is sometimes possible to guess the keyword, but never necessary).
The Playfair cipher is more difficult and more rewarding to decrypt than
monoalphabetic ciphers, and easier to explain and use than other
polyalphabetic ciphers.

Use of the Playfair cipher is generally explained as part of the preamble to
the crossword. This levels the playing field for those solvers who have not
come across the cipher previously. But the way the cipher is used is always
the same. The 25-letter alphabet used always contains Q and has I and J
coinciding. The key table is always filled row by row.

## [edit] In popular culture

  * The novel Have His Carcase by Dorothy L. Sayers gives a blow-by-blow account of the cracking of a Playfair cipher.

  * In the film National Treasure: Book of Secrets, a treasure hunt clue is encoded as Playfair cipher.

## [edit] See also

  * Topics in cryptography

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ No duplicate letters are allowed, and one letter is omitted (Q) or combined (I/J), so the calculation is 600 = 25Ã24.

## [edit] References

  * Smith, Michael Station X: The Codebreakers of Bletchley Park (1998, Channel 4 Books/Macmillan, London) ISBN 0 7522 2189 2

## [edit] External links

  * Online encrypting and decrypting Playfair with JavaScript
  * Extract from some lecture notes on ciphers â Digraphic Ciphers: Playfair

v â¢ d â¢ e

Classical cryptography  
Ciphers: ADFGVX | Affine | Alberti | Atbash | Autokey | Bifid | Book | Caesar
| Four-square | Great | Hill | Keyword | Nihilist | Permutation | Pigpen |
Playfair | Polyalphabetic | Polybius | Rail Fence | Reihenschieber |
Reservehandverfahren | ROT13 | Running key | Scytale | Smithy code | Solitaire
| Straddling checkerboard | Substitution | Tap Code | Transposition | Trifid |
Two-square | VIC cipher | VigenÃ¨re  
Cryptanalysis: Frequency analysis | Index of coincidence | Kasiski examination  
Misc: Cryptogram | Bacon | Scytale | Straddling checkerboard | Tabula recta  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Cryptography  
History of cryptography Â· Cryptanalysis Â· Cryptography portal Â· Topics in
cryptography  
Symmetric-key algorithm Â· Block cipher Â· Stream cipher Â· Public-key
cryptography Â· Cryptographic hash function Â· Message authentication code Â·
Random numbers Â· Steganography  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Playfair_cipher"

Categories: Classical ciphers | English inventions

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 6 April 2009, at 20:39.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



