
# Server (computing)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008)  
<IMG>

This article is in need of attention from an expert on the subject.
WikiProject Computer Science or the Computer Science Portal may be able to
help recruit one. (November 2008)  
<IMG>

This article may need to be rewritten entirely to comply with Wikipedia's
quality standards. You can help. The discussion page may contain suggestions.
(November 2008)  
Server Computer <IMG>  
The inside/front of a rack-mount server  
Common manufacturers IBM  
Sun Microsystems  
HP  
Apple Inc.  
Intel  
Dell  
Fujitsu Siemens  
A Server is a computer that provides services used by other computers. For
example a web server serves up web pages.[1] The term can also refer to the
software that causes a given computer to behave as a server, such as the
Apache HTTP Server.

Services can be supplied centrally by the use of a server; in other cases all
the machines on a network have the same status with no dedicated server, and
services are supplied peer-to-peer.

## Contents

  * 1 Usage in information technology
    * 1.1 In hardware
    * 1.2 In software
  * 2 Server hardware
  * 3 Server operating systems
  * 4 Servers on the Internet
  * 5 Servers in daily life
  * 6 References

  
## [edit] Usage in information technology

### [edit] In hardware

A server is a computer that has been set aside to run a specific server
application. For example, when the software Apache HTTP Server is used as the
web server for a company's website, the computer running Apache is also called
the web server. Server applications can be divided among server computers over
an extreme range, depending upon the workload.

Server is also used as a designation for computer models intended for use in
running server applications under heavy workloads, also called operating units
often unattended and for an extended period of time. While any workstation
computer is capable of acting as a server, a server computer usually has
special features intended to make it more suitable. These features can include
a faster CPU, faster and more plentiful RAM, and larger hard drives. More
obvious distinctions include redundancy in power supplies, network
connections, and storage devices as well as the modular design of so-called
Blade servers often used in server farms.

A server appliance refers to network-connected computer appliances or
"appliance hardware" that provide specific, dedicated applications to a
network. Use of the term appliance indicates the marriage of software and
hardware in a single system that is not heavily customizable such as Google
Search Appliance. Such appliances are expected to work out-of-the-box with
little customization and sometimes remain the sole property of the company
that produced them. The simplest appliances include switches, routers,
gateways, and print servers.

### [edit] In software

Server used as an adjective, as in server operating system, refers to the
product's ability to handle multiple requests, and is said to be "server-
grade". A server operating system is intended or better enabled to run server
applications. The differences between the server and workstation versions of a
product can vary from the removal of an arbitrary software limits due to
licensing, as in the case of Windows 2000, or the addition of bundled
applications as in Mac OS X Server.

## [edit] Server hardware

<IMG>

<IMG>

A server rack seen from the rear

Hardware requirements for servers vary, depending on the server application.
Absolute CPU speed is not usually as critical to a server as it is to a
desktop machine. Servers' duties to provide service to many users over a
network lead to different requirements like fast network connections and high
I/O throughput. Since servers are usually accessed over a network they may run
in headless mode without a monitor or input device. Processes which are not
needed for the server's function are not used. Many servers do not have a
graphical user interface (GUI) as it is unnecessary and consumes resources
that could be allocated elsewhere. Similarly, audio and USB interfaces may be
omitted.

Servers often run for long periods without interruption and availability must
often be very high, making hardware reliability and durability extremely
important. Although servers can be built from commodity computer parts,
mission-critical servers use specialized hardware with low failure rates in
order to maximize uptime. For example, servers may incorporate faster, higher-
capacity hard drives, larger computer fans or water cooling to help remove
heat, and uninterruptible power supplies that ensure the servers continue to
function in the event of a power failure. These components offer higher
performance and reliability at a correspondingly higher price. Hardware
redundancyâinstalling more than one instance of modules such as power
supplies and hard disks arranged so that if one fails another is automatically
availableâis widely used. ECC memory devices which detect and correct errors
are used; non-ECC memory can cause data corruption.

Servers are often rack-mounted and situated in server rooms for convenience
and to restrict physical access for security.

Many servers take a long time for the hardware to start up and load the
operating system. Servers often do extensive preboot memory testing and
verification and startup of remote management services. The hard drive
controllers then start up banks of drives sequentially, rather than all at
once, so as not to overload the power supply with startup surges, and
afterwards they initiate RAID system prechecks for correct operation of
redundancy. It is not uncommon for a machine to take several minutes to start
up, but it may not need restarting for months or years.

## [edit] Server operating systems

Some popular operating systems for servers â such as FreeBSD, Solaris, and
Linux â are derived from or are similar to UNIX. UNIX was originally a
minicomputer operating system, and as servers gradually replaced traditional
minicomputers, UNIX was a logical and efficient choice of operating system for
the servers. UNIX-based operating systems, many of which are free in both
senses, are popular.

Server-oriented operating systems tend to have certain features in common that
make them more suitable for the server environment, such as

  * GUI not available or optional,
  * ability to reconfigure and update both hardware and software to some extent without restart,
  * advanced backup facilities to permit regular and frequent online backups of critical data,
  * transparent data transfer between different volumes or devices,
  * flexible and advanced networking capabilities,
  * automation capabilities such as daemons in UNIX and services in Windows, and
  * tight system security, with advanced user, resource, data, and memory protection.

Server-oriented operating systems can in many cases interact with hardware
sensors to detect conditions such as overheating, processor and disk failure,
and consequently alert an operator and/or take remedial measures itself.

Because servers must supply a restricted range of services to perhaps many
users while a desktop computer must carry out a wide range of functions
required by its user, the requirements of an operating system for a server are
different from those of a desktop machine. While it is possible for an
operating system to make a machine both provide services and respond quickly
to the requirements of a user, it is usual to use different operating systems
on servers and desktop machines. Some operating systems are supplied in both
server and desktop versions with similar user interface.

The desktop versions of the Windows and Mac OS X operating systems are
deployed on a minority of servers, as are some proprietary mainframe operating
systems, such as z/OS. The dominant operating systems among servers are UNIX-
based and open source kernel distributions.[citation needed]

The rise of the microprocessor-based server was facilitated by the development
of Unix to run on the x86 microprocessor architecture. The Microsoft Windows
family of operating systems also runs on x86 hardware, and since Windows NT
have been available in versions suitable for server use.

While the role of server and desktop operating systems remains distinct,
improvements in the reliability of both hardware and operating systems have
blurred the distinction between the two classes. Today, many desktop and
server operating systems share similar code bases, differing mostly in
configuration. The shift towards web applications and middleware platforms has
also lessened the demand for specialist application servers.

## [edit] Servers on the Internet

Almost the entire structure of the Internet is based upon a client-server
model. High-level root nameservers, DNS servers, and routers direct the
traffic on the internet. There are millions of servers connected to the
Internet, running continuously throughout the world.

Among the many services provided by Internet servers are:

  * the World Wide Web,
  * the Domain Name System,
  * e-mail,
  * FTP file transfer,
  * instant messaging,
  * voice communication,
  * streaming audio and video, and
  * online gaming.

Virtually every action taken by an ordinary Internet user requires one or more
interactions with one or more servers.

There are also technologies that operate on an inter-server level. Other
services do not use dedicated servers; for example peer-to-peer file sharing,
some implementations of telephony (e.g., Skype), and supplying television
programs to several users (e.g., Kontiki).

## [edit] Servers in daily life

Any computer or device serving out applications or services can technically be
called a server. In an office or enterprise environment, the network server is
easy to identify. A DSL/Cable modem router qualifies as a server because it
provides a computer with application services like IP address assignment (via
DHCP) and NAT, which is the firewall that helps protect a computer from
external threats.[citation needed] iTunes software implements a music server
to stream music between computers. Many home users create shared folders and
printers. Another example are the many servers for such hosting online games
such as Everquest, World of Warcraft, Counter-Strike and EVE-Online.

## [edit] References

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Servers  
  1. ^ http://cplus.about.com/od/glossar1/g/serverdefn.htm

v â¢ d â¢ e

Computer sizes  
Larger

Super Â· Minisuper Â· Mainframe Â· Mini Â· Supermini Â· Server

Cray-2  
Micro

Personal Â· Workstation Â· Home Â· Desktop Â· SFF (Nettop) Â· Plug  
Mobile

Portable / Desktop replacement computer Â· Laptop Â· Subnotebook Â· Tablet
(Ultra-Mobile PC) Â· Portable / Mobile data terminal Â· Electronic organizer
Â· E-book reader Â· Pocket computer Â· Handheld game console Â· Wearable
computer  
PDAs / IAs

Handheld PC Â· Pocket PC Â· Smartphone Â· PMPs Â· DAPs  
Calculators

Programmable Graphing  
Other

Single-board computer Â· Wireless sensor network Â· Microcontroller Â·
Smartdust Â· Nanocomputer  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Server_(computing)"

Categories: Computer Science articles needing expert attention | Servers

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2008 |
Articles needing expert attention since November 2008 | Wikipedia articles
needing rewrite | All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since June 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements
since November 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Alemannisch
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * ÎÎ»Î»Î·Î½Î¹ÎºÎ¬
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Interlingua
  * ÐÑÐ¾Ð½Ð°Ñ
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * á¥áá áá£áá
  * ÒÐ°Ð·Ð°ÒÑÐ°
  * LatvieÅ¡u
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English
  * SlovenÄina
  * SlovenÅ¡Äina
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * Tiáº¿ng Viá»t
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 7 April 2009, at 12:46 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



