
# Aeroponics

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may be too long to comfortably read and navigate. Please consider
splitting content into sub-articles and using this article for a summary of
the key points of the subject.  
<IMG>

Close-up of lettuce and wheat grown in an aeroponic (air-culture) apparatus,
NASA1998

Aeroponics is the process of growing plants in an air or mist environment
without the use of soil or an aggregate medium. Aeroponic culture differs from
both hydroponics and in-vitro (Plant tissue culture) growing. Unlike
hydroponics, which uses water as a growing medium and essential minerals to
sustain plant growth, aeroponics is conducted without a growing medium.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Basic Principles of Aeroponics
    * 2.1 Methods
    * 2.2 Ecological advantages
    * 2.3 Apparatus
    * 2.4 How Aeroponics Works
    * 2.5 Aeroponic propagation (cloning)
    * 2.6 Air-rooted transplants
    * 2.7 Aeroponic seed germination
    * 2.8 True aeroponics
    * 2.9 Benefits of air (oxygen)
    * 2.10 Other benefits of air (CO2)
    * 2.11 Natural disease-free cultivation
    * 2.12 Water/nutrient hydro-atomization
    * 2.13 Advanced materials
    * 2.14 Nutrient uptake
    * 2.15 Terminology
  * 3 Types of aeroponics
    * 3.1 Low-pressure units
    * 3.2 High-pressure devices
    * 3.3 Commercial systems
  * 4 History of aeroponics
    * 4.1 Early lab research
    * 4.2 Commercialization
    * 4.3 Aeroponically grown food
  * 5 NASA aeroponic history
    * 5.1 Space plants
    * 5.2 Biocontrols in space
    * 5.3 Aeroponics for space & Earth
    * 5.4 NASA inflatable aeroponics
    * 5.5 Mission to Mars
  * 6 Benefits of Aeroponics for Earth & Space
    * 6.1 Less Nutrient Solution Throughput
    * 6.2 More control of plant environment
    * 6.3 Improved nutrient feeding
    * 6.4 More user-friendly
    * 6.5 More cost effective
    * 6.6 Pathogen Control & Disease Prevention
    * 6.7 Use of seed stocks
  * 7 21st century aeroponics
    * 7.1 Contemporary aeroponics
    * 7.2 Aeroponic bio-pharming
    * 7.3 Large scale integration of aeroponics
    * 7.4 NASA aeroponic links
  * 8 In popular culture
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 Technical links

  
## [edit] History

The word aeroponic is derived from the Greek meanings of 'aero' (air) and
'ponic' (labour). Aeroponic growth refers to growth achieved in an air
culture. For example, in tropical climates orchids develop and grow freely in
trees .[2] Laboratory research on air culture growing utilizing vapors began
in the mid-1940s. Today aeroponics is used in agriculture around the globe.[3]

## [edit] Basic Principles of Aeroponics

The basic principle of aeroponic growing is to grow plants in a closed or
semi-closed environment by spraying the plant's roots with a nutrient rich
solution. Ideally, the environment is kept free from pests and disease so that
the plants may grow healthier and quicker than plants grown in a medium.
However, since most aeroponic environments are not perfectly closed off to the
outside, pests and disease may still cause a threat. These conditions advance
plant development, health, growth, flowering and fruiting for any given plant
species and cultivars. Oxygen in the rhizosphere (root zone) is necessary for
healthy plant growth. As aeroponics is conducted in air combined with micro-
droplets of water, almost any plant can grow to maturity in air with a
plentiful supply of oxygen, water and nutrients.

Some growers favor aeroponic systems over other methods of hydroponics because
the increased aeration of nutrient solution delivers more oxygen to plant
roots, stimulating growth and helping to prevent pathogen formation.[1]

### [edit] Methods

Aeroponics refers to the method of growing crops with their roots suspended in
a misted nutrient solution.

<IMG>

Many types of plants can be grown aeroponically

Aeroponics is a form of hydroponic technique. Water is the sole nutrient
carrier and typically the method is not hybridized with geoponic technique;
although due to the sensitivity of root systems aeroponics is often combined
with conventional hydroponics which is used as an emergency 'crop saver'
-backup nutrition and water supply- if the aeroponic apparatus fails.

In an aeroponic system the plant's rootzone is suspended into an environment
where the roots protrude into an atomized nutrient solution; the leaves and
crown, often called the "canopy", extending above. The roots of the plant are
separated by the plant support structure. The lowest stem and root system are
sprayed or misted for short durations with a hydro-atomized pure
water/nutrient solution.[1]

One of the more singular aspects of aeroponic growing is the frequent omission
of media, whether organic or not, for anchoring the plant. Many times closed
cell foam is compressed around the lower stem and inserted into an opening in
the aeroponic chamber, which decreases labor and expense; for larger plants,
trellising is used to suspend the weight of vegetation and fruit.

### [edit] Ecological advantages

Aeroponic growing is considered to be safe and ecologically friendly for
producing natural, healthy plants and crops. The main ecological advantages of
aeroponics are the conservation of water and energy. When compared to
hydroponics, aeroponics offers lower water and energy inputs per sq meter of
growing area.[citation needed]

<IMG>

GTiâs Genesis Rooting System, achieved 1983

### [edit] Apparatus

The first commercially available aeroponic apparatus was manufactured and
marketed by GTi in 1983. It was known then as the Genesis Machine \- taken
from the movie Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan. The Genesis Machine was
marketed as the 'Genesis Rooting System'.

GTi's device incorporated an open-loop water driven apparatus, controlled by a
microchip, and delivered a hi-psi, hydro-atomized nutrient spray inside an
aeroponic chamber.

At the time, the achievement was revolutionary in terms of a developing
(artificial air culture) technology. The Genesis Machine simply connected to a
water faucet and an electrical outlet. [4]

### [edit] How Aeroponics Works

<IMG>

Animation of the world's first commercially available avaaeroponic apparatus
1983 - it was powered by tap water and a microchip

  

### [edit] Aeroponic propagation (cloning)

Aeroponic culturing revolutionized cloning (propagation from cutting) of
plants. Firstly, aeroponics allowed the whole process to be carried out in a
single, automated unit.

<IMG>

GTi's apparatus cut-away of vegetative cutting propagated aeroponically,
achieved 1983

Numerous plants which were previously considered difficult, or impossible, to
propagate from cuttings could now be replicated simply from a single stem
cutting. This was a major boon to green houses attempting to propagate
delicate hardwoods or cacti â plants normally propagated by seed due to the
likeliness of bacterial infection in cuttings.

Aeroponics has now largely surpassed hydroponics and tissue culture as means
for sterile propagation of plant species. With the Genesis Machine, or other
comparable aeroponics setup, any grower could clone plants. Due to the
automation of most parts of the process, plants could be cloned and grown by
the hundreds or even thousands. In short, cloning became easier because the
aeroponic apparatus initiated faster and cleaner root development through a
sterile, nutrient rich, highly oxygenated, and moist environment (Hughes,
1983).[1]

### [edit] Air-rooted transplants

Aeroponics significantly advanced tissue culture technology. It cloned plants
in less time and reduced numerous labor steps associated with tissue culture
techniques. Aeroponics could eliminate stage I and stage II plantings into
soil (the bane of all tissue culture growers).

<IMG>

Cloned aeroponics transplanted directly into soil â its air roots made it
all possible (1983)

Tissue culture plants must be planted in a sterile media (stage-I) and
expanded out for eventual transfer into sterile soil (stage-II). After they're
strong enough they are transplanted directly to field soil. Besides being
labor intensive, the entire process of tissue culture is prone to disease,
infection, and failure.

With the use of aeroponics growers cloned and transplanted air-rooted plants
directly into field soil. Aeroponic roots were not susceptible to wilting and
leaf loss, or loss due to transplant shock (something hydroponics can never
overcome). Because of their healthiness, air-rooted plants were less likely to
be infected with pathogens.[1]

The efforts by GTi ushered in a new era of artificial life support for plants
capable of growing naturally without the use of soil or hydroponics. GTi
received a patent for an all-plastic aeroponic method and apparatus,
controlled by a microprocessor in 1985.

Aeroponics became known as a time and cost saver. The economic factors of
aeroponicâs contributions to agriculture were taking shape.

### [edit] Aeroponic seed germination

<IMG>

GTi's Aeroponic Growing System greenhouse facility, achieved 1985

By 1985, GTi introduced second generation aeroponics hardware, known as the
'Genesis Growing System'. This second generation aeroponic apparatus was a
closed-loop system. It utilized recycled effluent precisely controlled by a
microprocessor. Aeroponics graduated to the capability of supporting seed
germination, thus making GTi's the world's first plant and harvest aeroponic
system.

Many of these open-loop unit and closed-loop aeroponic systems are still in
operation today.

In a true aeroponic apparatus the plant is totally suspended in air, giving
the plant access to 100% of the available oxygen in the air. This maximizes
the level of oxygen surrounding the stem and root system, accelerating and
promoting root growth within the plant. While there is a constant available
source of oxygen, the intermittent hydro-atomizing of a spray/mist of the
water-nutrient solution provides the necessary moisture and essential minerals
to keep plants turgid and alive.[1]

### [edit] True aeroponics

Air cultures optimize access to air for successful plant growth. Materials and
devices which hold and support the aeroponic grown plants must be devoid of
disease or pathogens . A distinction of a true aeroponic culture and apparatus
is that it provides plant support features that are monomial. Monomial contact
between a plant and support structure allows for 100% of the plant to be
entirely in air. Long-term aeroponic cultivation requires the root systems to
be free of constraints surrounding the stem and root systems. Physical contact
is minimized so that it does not hinder natural growth and root expansion or
access to pure water, air exchange and disease-free conditions.

<IMG>

Close-up of the first patented aeroponic plant support structure (1983). Its
unrestricted support of the plant allows for normal growth in the air/moisture
environment - still in use today

[1]

### [edit] Benefits of air (oxygen)

Clean air supplies oxygen which is an excellent purifier for plants and the
aeroponic environment. For natural growth to occur the plant must have
unrestricted access to air. Plants must be allowed to grow in a natural manner
for successful physiological development. The more confining the plant support
becomes, the greater incidence of increasing disease pressure of the plant and
the aeroponic system.[1]

Some researchers have used aeroponics to study the effects of root zone gas
composition on plant performance. Soffer and Burger [Soffer et al., 1988]
studied the effects of dissolved oxygen concentrations on the formation of
adventitious roots in what they termed âaero-hydroponics.â They utilized a
3-tier hydro and aero system, in which three separate zones were formed within
the root area. The ends of the roots were submerged in the nutrient reservoir,
while the middle of the root section received nutrient mist and the upper
portion was above the mist. Their results showed that dissolved O2 is
essential to root formation, but went on to show that for the three O2
concentrations tested, the number of roots and root length were always greater
in the central misted section than either the submersed section or the un-
misted section. Even at the lowest concentration, the misted section rooted
successfully.[1]

### [edit] Other benefits of air (CO2)

Plants in a true aeroponic apparatus have 100% access to the CO2
concentrations ranging from 450 ppm to 780 ppm for photosynthesis. At one mile
(1.6 km) above sea level the CO2 concentration in the air is 450 ppm during
daylight. At night the CO2 level will rise to 780 ppm. Lower elevations will
have higher levels. In any case, the air culture apparatus offers ability for
plants to have full access to all the available CO2 in the air for
photosynthesis.

Growing under lights during the evening allows aeroponics to benefit from the
natural occurrence.[1]

### [edit] Natural disease-free cultivation

Aeroponics can limit disease transmission since plant-to-plant contact is
reduced and each spray pulse can be sterile. In the case of soil, aggregate,
or other media, disease can spread throughout the growth media, infecting many
plants. In most greenhouses these solid media require sterilization after each
crop and, in many cases, they are simply discarded and replaced with fresh,
certified sterile media.[1]

A distinct advantage of aeroponic technology is that if a particular plant
does become diseased, it can be quickly removed from the plant support
structure without disrupting or infecting the other plants.

<IMG>

Basil grown from seed in an aeroponic system located inside a modern
greenhouse was first achieved 1986

Due to the disease-free environment that is unique to aeroponics, many plants
can grow at higher density (plants per sq meter) when compared to more
traditional forms of cultivation (hydroponics, soil and NFT). Commercial
aeroponic systems incorporate hardware features that accommodate the crops
expanding root systems.

Researcher du Toit, L.J., H.W. Kirby and W.L. Pedersen (1997). âEvaluation
of an Aeroponics System to Screen Maize Genotypes for Resistance to Fusarium
graminearum Seedling Blight.â These researchers describe aeroponics as a
"valuable, simple, and rapid method for preliminary screening of genotypes for
resistance to specific seedling blight or root rot.â [5]

The isolating nature of the aeroponic system allowed them to avoid the
complications encountered when studying these infections in soil culture.

### [edit] Water/nutrient hydro-atomization

Aeroponic equipment involves the use of sprayers, misters, foggers, or other
devices to create a fine mist of solution to deliver nutrients to plant roots.
Aeroponic systems are normally closed-looped systems providing macro and
micro-environments suitable to sustain a reliable, constant air culture.
Numerous inventions have been developed to facilitate aeroponic spraying and
misting.

<IMG>

Aeroponic hydro-atomized water/nutrient spray, 1996

The key to root development in an aeroponic environment is the size of the
water droplet. In commercial applications, a hydro-atomizing spray is employed
to cover large areas of roots utilizing air pressure misting.

A variation of the mist technique employs the use of ultrasonic nebulizers or
foggers to mist nutrient solutions in low-pressure aeroponic devices.

Water droplet size is crucial for sustaining aeroponic growth. Too large of a
water droplet means less oxygen is available to the root system. Too fine of a
water droplet, such as those generated by the ultra-sonic mister, produce
excessive root hair without developing a lateral root system for sustained
growth in an aeroponic system.[1]

Mineralization of the ultra-sonic traducers requires maintenance and potential
for component failure. This is also a shortcoming of metal spray jets and
misters. Restricted access to the water causes the plant to lose turgidity and
wilt.

### [edit] Advanced materials

NASA has funded research and development of new advanced materials to improve
aeroponic reliability and maintenance reduction. It also has determined that
high pressure hydro-atomized mist of 5-50 micrometres micro-droplets is
necessary for long-term aeroponic growing.

For long-term growing, the mist system must have significant pressure to force
the mist into the dense root system(s). Repeatability is the key to aeroponics
and includes the hydro-atomized droplet size. Degradation of the spray due to
mineralization of mist heads inhibits the delivery of the water nutrient
solution, leading to an environmental imbalance in the air culture
environment.

Special low-mass polymer materials were developed and are used to eliminate
mineralization in next generation hydro-atomizing misting and spray jets.

### [edit] Nutrient uptake

The discrete nature of interval and duration aeroponics allows the measurement
of nutrient uptake over time under varying conditions. Barak et al. used an
aeroponic system for non-destructive measurement of water and ion uptake rates
for cranberries (Barak, Smith et al. 1996). [6]

<IMG>

Close-up of roots grown from wheat seed using aeroponics, 1998

In their study, these researchers found that by measuring the concentrations
and volumes of input and efflux solutions, they could accurately calculate the
nutrient uptake rate (which was verified by comparing the results with
N-isotope measurements). After verification of their analytical method, Barak
et al. went on to generate additional data specific to the cranberry, such as
diurnal variation in nutrient uptake, correlation between ammonium uptake and
proton efflux, and the relationship between ion concentration and uptake. Work
such as this not only shows the promise of aeroponics as a research tool for
nutrient uptake, but also opens up possibilities for the monitoring of plant
health and optimization of crops grown in closed environments.[7]

### [edit] Terminology

Aeroponic growing refers to plants grown in an air culture that can develop
and grow in a normal and natural manner.[1]

Aeroponic growth refers to growth achieved in an air culture.

Aeroponic system refers to hardware and system components assembled to sustain
plants in an air culture.

Aeroponic greenhouse refers to a climate controlled glass or plastic structure
comprised of equipment to grow plants in air/mist environment.

Aeroponic conditions refers to air culture environmental parameters for
sustaining plant growth for a plant species.

Aeroponic roots refers to a root system grown in an air culture.

## [edit] Types of aeroponics

### [edit] Low-pressure units

In most low-pressure aeroponic gardens, the plant roots are suspended above a
reservoir of nutrient solution or inside a channel connected to a reservoir. A
low-pressure pump delivers nutrient solution via sprayer nozzles or by
ultrasonic transducers, which then drips or drains back into the reservoir. As
plants grow to maturity in these units they tend to suffer from dry sections
of the root systems, which prevent adequate nutrient uptake. These units,
because of cost, lack features to purify the nutrient solution, and adequately
remove incontinuities, debris, and unwanted pathogens. Such units are usually
suitable for bench top growing and demonstrating the principles of aeroponics.

### [edit] High-pressure devices

High-pressure aeroponic techniques, where the mist is generated by high-
pressure pump(s), are typically used in the cultivation of high value crops
and plant specimens that can offset the high setup costs associated with this
method of horticulture.

High-pressure aeroponics systems include technologies for air and water
purification, nutrient sterilization, low-mass polymers and pressurized
nutrient delivery systems.

### [edit] Commercial systems

Commercial aeroponic systems comprise hi-pressure device hardware and
biological systems. The biological systems matrix includes enhancements for
extended plant life and crop maturation.

Biological subsystems and hardware components include effluent controls
systems, disease prevention, pathogen resistance features, precision timing
and nutrient solution pressurization, heating and cooling sensors, thermal
control of solutions, efficient photon-flux light arrays, spectrum filtration
spanning, fail-safe sensors and protection, reduced maintenance & labor saving
features, and ergonomics and long-term reliability features.

Commercial aeroponic systems, like the hi-pressure devices, are used for the
cultivation of high value crops where multiple crop rotations are achieved on
an ongoing commercial basis 24/7.

Advanced commercial systems include data gathering, monitoring, analytical
feedback and Internet mode connections to various subsystems.[8]

## [edit] History of aeroponics

It was W. Carter in 1942 who first researched air culture growing and
described a method of growing plants in water vapor to facilitate examination
of roots.[9]

In 1944, L.J. Klotz was the first to discover vapor misted citrus plants in a
facilitated research of his studies of diseases of citrus and avocado roots.
In 1952, G.F. Trowel grew apple trees in a spray culture.[2]

It was F. W. Went in 1957 who first coined the air-growing process as
âaeroponicsâ, growing coffee plants and tomatoes with air-suspended roots
and applying a nutrient mist to the root section.[2]

### [edit] Early lab research

Soon after its development, aeroponics took hold as a valuable research tool.
Aeroponics offered researchers a noninvasive way to examine roots under
development. This new technology also allowed researchers a larger number and
a wider range of experimental parameters to use in their work.[2]

The ability to precisely control the root zone moisture levels and the amount
of water delivered makes aeroponics ideally suited for the study of water
stress. K. Hubick [Hubick et al., 1982] evaluated aeroponics as a means to
produce consistent, minimally water-stressed plants for use in drought or
flood physiology experiments.[10]

Aeroponics is the ideal tool for the study of root morphology. The absence of
aggregates offers researchers easy access to the entire, intact root structure
without the damage that can be caused by removal of roots from soils or
aggregates. Itâs been noted that aeroponics produces more normal root
systems than hydroponics.[11]

### [edit] Commercialization

Aeroponics eventually left the laboratories and entered into the commercial
cultivation arena. In 1966, commercial aeroponic pioneer, B. Briggs, succeeded
in inducing roots on hardwood cuttings by air-rooting. Briggs discovered that
air-rooted cuttings were tougher and more hardened than those formed in soil
and concluded that the basic principle of air-rooting is sound. He discovered
air-rooted trees could be transplanted to soil without suffering from
transplant shock or setback to normal growth. Transplant shock is normally
observed in hydroponic transplants.[12]

In Israel in 1982, L. Nir, developed a patent for an aeroponic apparatus using
comprised low pressure air to deliver a nutrient solution to suspended plants,
held by styrofoam, inside large metal containers.[13]

In the Summer of 1976 a British researcher - John Prewer - carried out a
series of aeroponic experiments near Newport, Isle of Wight, U.K. in which
lettuces (variety Tom Thumb) were grown from seed to maturity (ready for
cropping) in 22 days in polyethylene film tubes rigidised by pressureised air
supplied by ventilating fans. The equipment used to convert the water/nutrient
into fog droplets was supplied by Mee Industries of California USA. The system
employed is described in detail in UK patent No.1 600 477 (filed 12 November
1976 - Complete Specification published 14 October 1981 - title IMPROVEMENTS
IN AND RELATING TO THE PROPAGATION OF PLANTS). In 1977 in association with
John Prewer a commercial grower on the Isle of Wight - Kings Nurseries - used
a different design of aeroponics system using rigid tunnels (similar in height
and cross section to a gym vaulting horse) the sides and top of which were
made of heavy duty black polyethylene film stretched over timber frames. The
tunnels were periodically automatically filled with nutrient-containing water
fog. The polyethylene film was perforated with holes in which young strawberry
plants were inserted. The plants flourished and produced a heavy crop of
strawberries which were picked by the nursery's customers. The system proved
particularly popular with elderly customers who appreciated the cleanliness,
quality and flavour of the strawberries, and the fact they didn't have to
stoop when picking the fruit.

In 1983, R. Stoner filed a patent for the first microprocessor interface to
deliver tap water and nutrients into an enclosed aeroponic chamber made of
plastic. Stoner has gone on to develop numerous companies researching and
advancing aeroponic hardware, interfaces, biocontrols and components for
commercial aeroponic crop production.[2]

In 1985, Stoner's company, GTi, was the first company to manufacture, market
and apply large scale closed-loop aeroponic systems into greenhouses for
commercial crop production.

<IMG>

The first commercial aeroponic greenhouse for aeroponic food production - 1986

[14]

### [edit] Aeroponically grown food

In 1986 Stoner was the first person ever to market fresh aeroponically grown
food to a national grocery chain. He was interviewed on NPR and discussed the
importance of the water conservation features of aeroponics for both modern
agriculture and space.[3]

Stoner is considered the father of commercial aeroponics. Stoner's aeroponic
systems are in major developed countries around the world. His aeroponic
designs, technology and equipment are widely used at leading agricultural
universities worldwide and by commercial growers.[1]

## [edit] NASA aeroponic history

### [edit] Space plants

Plants were first taken into Earth's orbit in 1960 on two separate missions,
Sputnik 4 and Discover 17 (for a review of the first 30 years of plant growth
in space, see Halstead and Scott 1990.[15]

<IMG>

NASA life support GAP technology with untreated beans (left tube) and
biocontrol treated beans (right tube) returned from the Mir space station
aboard the space shuttle â September 1997

On the former mission, wheat, pea, maize, spring onion, and Nigella damascena
seeds were carried into space, and on the latter mission Chlorella pyrenoidosa
cells were brought into orbit.[3][16]

Plant experiments were later performed on a variety of Soviet, American, and
joint Soviet-American missions, including Biosatellite II, Skylab 3 and 4,
Apollo-Soyuz, Sputnik, Vostok, and Zond. Some of the earliest research results
showed the effect of low gravity on the orientation of roots and shoots
(Halstead and Scott 1990).[3]

Subsequent research went on to investigate the effect of low gravity on plants
at the organismic, cellular, and subcellular levels. At the organismic level,
for example, a variety of species, including pine, oat, mung bean, lettuce,
cress, and Arabidopsis, showed decreased seedling, root, and shoot growth in
low gravity, whereas lettuce grown on Cosmos showed the opposite effect of
growth in space (Halstead and Scott 1990). Mineral uptake seems also to be
affected in plants grown in space. For example, peas grown in space exhibited
increased levels of phosphorus and potassium and decreased levels of the
divalent cations calcium, magnesium, manganese, zinc, and iron (Halstead and
Scott 1990).[17]

### [edit] Biocontrols in space

In 1996, NASA sponsored Stonerâs research for a natural liquid biocontrol,
known then as ODC (organic disease control), that activates plants to grow
without the need for pesticides as a means to control pathogens in a closed-
loop culture system. ODC is derived from natural aquatic materials.[18]

By 1997, Stonerâs biocontrol experiments were conducted by NASA. BioServe
Space Technologiesâs GAP technology (miniature growth chambers) delivered
the ODC solution unto bean seeds. Triplicate ODC experiments were conducted in
GAPâs flown to the MIR by the space shuttle; at the Kennedy Space Center;
and at Colorado State University (J. Linden). All GAPS were housed in total
darkness to eliminate light as an experiment variable. The NASA experiment was
to study only the benefits of the biocontrol.[19]

NASA's experiments aboard the MIR space station and shuttle confirmed that ODC
elicited increased germination rate, better sprouting, increased growth and
natural plant disease mechanisms when applied to beans in an enclosed
environment. ODC is now a standard for pesticide-free aeroponic growing and
organic farming. Soil and hydroponics growers can benefit by incorporating ODC
into their planting techniques. ODC meets USDA NOP standards for organic
farms.[20]

### [edit] Aeroponics for space & Earth

In 1998, Stoner received NASA funding to develop a high performance aeroponic
system for earth and space. Stoner demonstrated that a dry bio-mass of lettuce
can be significantly increased with aeroponics. NASA made history by utilizing
numerous aeroponic advancements developed by Stoner.

Abstract: The purpose of the research conducted was to identify and
demonstrate technologies for high-performance plant growth in a variety of
gravitational environments. A low-gravity environment, for example, poses the
problems of effectively bringing water and other nutrients to the plants and
effecting recovery of effluents. Food production in the low-gravity
environment of space provides further challenges, such as minimization of
water use, water handling, and system weight. Food production on planetary
bodies such as the Moon or Mars also requires dealing with a hypogravity
environment. Because of the impacts to fluid dynamics in these various gravity
environments, the nutrient delivery system has been a major focus in plant
growth system optimization.

<IMG>

NASA aeroponic lettuce seed germination- Day 30

There are a number of methods currently utilized (both in low gravity and on
Earth) to deliver nutrients to plants. Substrate dependent methods include
traditional soil cultivation, zeoponics, agar, and nutrient-loaded ion
exchange resins. In addition to substrate dependent cultivation, many soilless
methods have been developed such as nutrient film technique, ebb and flow,
aeroponics, and many other variants. Many hydroponic systems can provide high
plant performance but nutrient solution throughput is high, necessitating
large water volumes and substantial recycling of solutions, and the control of
the solution in hypogravity conditions is difficult at best.

Aeroponics, with its use of a hydro-atomized spray to deliver nutrients,
minimizes water use, increases oxygenation of roots, and offers excellent
plant growth, while at the same time approaching or bettering the low nutrient
solution throughput of other systems developed to operate in low gravity.
Aeroponicsâ elimination of substrates and the need for large nutrient
stockpiles reduces the amount of waste materials to be processed by other life
support systems. Furthermore, the absence of substrates simplifies planting
and harvesting (providing opportunities for automation), decreases the volume
and weight of expendable materials, and eliminates a pathway for pathogen
transmission. These many advantages combined with the results of this research
that prove the viability of aeroponics in microgravity makes aeroponics a
logical choice for efficient food production in space.[1]

### [edit] NASA inflatable aeroponics

<IMG>

NASA low-mass Inflatable Aeroponics System (AIS) - achieved 1999

In 1999, Stoner, funded by NASA, developed an inflatable low-mass aeroponic
system (AIS) for space and earth for high performance food production.

Abstract: Aeroponics Internationalâs (AIâs) innovation is a self-
contained, self-supporting, inflatable aeroponic crop production unit with
integral environmental systems for the control and delivery of a nutrient/mist
to the roots. This inflatable aeroponic system addresses the needs of subtopic
08.03 Spacecraft Life Support Infrastructure and, in particular, water and
nutrient delivery systems technologies for food production. The inflatable
nature of our innovation makes it lightweight, allowing it to be deflated so
it takes up less volume during transportation and storage. It improves on
AIâs current aeroponic system design that uses rigid structures, which use
more expensive materials, manufacture processes, and transportation. As a
stationary aeroponic system, these existing high-mass units perform very well,
but transporting and storing them can be problematic.[14]

On Earth, these problems may hinder the economic feasibility of aeroponics for
commercial growers. However, such problems become insurmountable obstacles for
using these systems on long-duration space missions because of the high cost
of payload volume and mass during launch and transit.[14]

The NASA efforts lead to developments of numerous advanced materials for
aeroponics for earth and space.[14]

### [edit] Mission to Mars

NASA's long range plans indicate that a human visit to Mars will utilize
inflatable structures to house the spaceship crew on the Mars surface.
Planning is under way to incorporate inflatable greenhouse facilities for food
production.

NASA planning scenarios also reveal the Mars surface crew will spend 60% of
their time on Mars farming to sustain themselves. Aeroponics is considered the
agricultural system of choice because of its low water and power inputs and
high volume of food output per sq meter.

## [edit] Benefits of Aeroponics for Earth & Space

Aeroponics possesses many characteristics that make it an effective and
efficient means of growing plants.

### [edit] Less Nutrient Solution Throughput

<IMG>

NASA aeroponic lettuce seed germination- Day 3

Plants grown using aeroponics spend 99.98% of their time in air and 0.02% in
direct contact with hydro-atomized nutrient solution. The time spent without
water allows the roots to capture oxygen more efficiently. Furthermore, the
hydro-atomized mist also significantly contributes to the effective
oxygenation of the roots. For example, NFT has a nutrient throughput of 1
L/minute compared to aeroponicsâ throughput of 1.5 ml/minute.

The reduced volume of nutrient throughput results in reduced amounts of
nutrients required for plant development.

Another benefit of the reduced throughput, of major significance for space-
based use, is the reduction in water volume used. This reduction in water
volume throughput corresponds with a reduced buffer volume, both of which
significantly lighten the weight needed to maintain plant growth. In addition,
the volume of effluent from the plants is also reduced with aeroponics,
reducing the amount of water that needs to be treated before reuse.

<IMG>

NASA aeroponic lettuce seed germination- Day 12

The relatively low solution volumes used in aeroponics, coupled with the
minimal amount of time that the roots are exposed to the hydro-atomized mist,
minimizes root-to-root contact and spread of pathogens between plants.

### [edit] More control of plant environment

Aeroponics allows more control of the environment around the root zone, as,
unlike other plant growth systems, the plant roots are not constantly
surrounded by some medium (as, for example, with hydroponics, where the roots
are constantly immersed in water).

<IMG>

NASA aeroponic lettuce seed germination (close-up of root zone environment)-
Day 19

### [edit] Improved nutrient feeding

A variety of different nutrient solutions, for example, can be administered to
the root zone using aeroponics without needing to flush out any solution or
matrix in which the roots had previously been immersed. This elevated level of
control would be useful when researching the effect of a varied regimen of
nutrient application to the roots of a plant species of interest. In a similar
manner, aeroponics allows a greater range of growth conditions than other
nutrient delivery systems. The interval and duration of the nutrient spray,
for example, can be very finely attuned to the needs of a specific plant
species. The aerial tissue can be subjected to a completely different
environment from that of the roots.

### [edit] More user-friendly

The design of an aeroponic system allows ease of working with the plants. This
results from the separation of the plants from each other, and the fact that
the plants are suspended in air and the roots are not entrapped in any kind of
matrix. Consequently, the harvesting of individual plants is quite simple and
straightforward. Likewise, removal of any plant that may be infected with some
type of pathogen is easily accomplished without risk of uprooting or
contaminating nearby plants.

### [edit] More cost effective

Aeroponic systems are more cost effective than other systems. Because of the
reduced volume of solution throughput (discussed above), less water and less
nutrients are needed in the system at any given time compared to other
nutrient delivery systems. The need for substrates is also eliminated, as is
the need for many moving parts, resulting in lowered manufacturing cost and
reduced maintenance costs.

<IMG>

NASA aeroponic lettuce seed germination- Day 30

<IMG>

Close-up of aeroponically grown corn/roots inside an aeroponic (air-culture)
apparatus, 2005

### [edit] Pathogen Control & Disease Prevention

Plants are most susceptible to loss from pathogens during the first 21 days of
their life cycle. The aeroponic technology developed by the PI utilizes a
patented plant support structure that separates the plants from one another.
In a hydroponic or aggregate-based system, pathogen infections can easily
spread throughout the entire system due to the plantsâ common source of
water or medium. In the ideal aeroponic system pathogens can be reduced and
controlled by:

  * separating the plants - thus preventing the pathogen from spreading infection from one plant to another.
  * applying disinfectants and fungicides to the aerial and root zones individually,
  * applying the water/nutrient at intervals that are best suited for plant development and growth,
  * allowing the plant to expand without interference of restricting physical barriers,
  * reducing the per plant exposure to surfaces where pathogens can linger or proliferate.

### [edit] Use of seed stocks

With aeroponics, the deleterious effects of seed stocks that are infected with
pathogens can be minimized. As discussed above, this is due to the separation
of the plants and the lack of shared growth matrix. In addition, due to the
enclosed, controlled environment, aeroponics can be an ideal growth system in
which to grow seed stocks that are pathogen-free. The enclosing of the growth
chamber, in addition to the isolation of the plants from each other discussed
above, helps to both prevent initial contamination from pathogens introduced
from the external environment and minimize the spread from one plant to others
of any pathogens that may exist.

## [edit] 21st century aeroponics

Aeroponics is an improvement in artificial life support for non-damaging plant
support, seed germination, environmental control and rapid unrestricted growth
when compared with hydroponics and drip irrigation techniques that have been
used for decades by traditional agriculturalists.

<IMG>

Modern aeroponics allows high density companion planting of many food and
horticultural crops without the use of pesticides - due to unique discoveries
aboard the space shuttle

### [edit] Contemporary aeroponics

Contemporary aeroponic techniques have been researched at NASA's research and
commercialization center BioServe Space Technologieslocated on the campus of
the University of Colorado in Boulder, Colorado. Other research includes
enclosed loop system research at Ames Research Center, where scientists were
studying methods of growing food crops in low gravity situations for future
space colonization.

In 2000, Stoner was granted a patent for an organic disease control biocontrol
technology that allows for pesticide-free natural growing in an aeroponic
systems.

Stoner received a patent in 2001 for a novel aeroponic method and apparatus
utilizing a low pressure mist generated by centrifugal force utilizing a
rotating cylinder device. The rotating cylinder device distributes liquid
nutrient solution to the roots of plants by use of centrifugal force, thereby
eliminating the need for a high pressure and low pressure pump and nozzles,
including ultra-sonic misters. The geometrical shape of the enclosed root
growth chamber is such that it allows for fractionated droplets to ricochet in
multiple random directions thus completely surrounding the plant roots in
360.degree, in any plane.[3]

### [edit] Aeroponic bio-pharming

Aeroponic bio-pharming is used to grow pharmaceutical medicine inside of
plants. The technology allows for completed containment of allow effluents and
by-products of biopharma crops to remain inside a closed-loop facility.

<IMG>

Aeroponically grown biopharma corn, 2005

As recently as 2005, GMO research at South Dakota State University by Dr. Neil
Reese applied aeroponics to grow genetically modified corn.

According to Reese it is a historical feat to grow corn in an aeroponic
apparatus for bio-massing. The universityâs past attempts to grow all types
of corn using hydroponics ended in failure.

Using advanced aeroponics techniques to grow genetically modified corn Reese
harvested full ears of corn. All the while containing the corn pollen and
spent effluent water and preventing them from entering the environment.
Containment of these ecologically harmful by-products ensures the environment
remains safe from GMO contamination.

Reese says, aeroponics offers the ability to make bio-pharming economically
practical.[3]

### [edit] Large scale integration of aeroponics

In 2006, the Ag University of Hanoi Vietnam in joint efforts with Stoner
established the postgraduate doctoral program in aeroponics.

<IMG>

Aeroponic Graduate Program: Hanoi Agricultural University, Hanoi Vietnam

The university's Agrobiotech Research Center, under the direction of Dr. N.
Thach, is using aeroponic laboratories to advance Vietnam's minituber potato
production for certified seed potato production.

<IMG>

Aeroponic potato explants on day 3 after insertion in the aeroponic system at
the Hanoi Ag University, Hanoi Vietnam 2006

The historical significants for aeroponics - it's the first time a nation has
specifically called out for aeroponics to further an agricultural sector,
stimulate farm economic goals, meet increased demands, improve food quality
and increase production.

"We have shown that aeroponics, more than any other form of agricultural
technology, will significantly improve Vietnam's potato production. We have
very little tillable land, aeroponics makes complete economic sense to usâ,
attested Thach.

<IMG>

Aeroponic greenhouse for potato minituber product Hanoi Ag University, Hanoi
Vietnam - April 2006

Vietnam joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) in January 2007. The impact
of aeroponics in Vietnam will be felt at the farm level.

Aeroponic integration in Vietnam agriculture will begin by producing a low
cost certified disease-free organic minitubers. Which in turn will be supplied
to local farmers for their field plantings of seed potatoes and commercial
potatoes. Potato farmers will benefit from aeroponics because their seed
potatoes will be disease-free and grown without pesticides. Most importantly
for the Vietnamese farmer, it will lower their cost of operation and increase
their yields, says Thach.[3]

### [edit] NASA aeroponic links

  * "A High Performance, Gravity Insensitive, Enclosed Aeroponic System for Food Production in Space"
  * NASA Spinoff 2006
  * "Re-examining Aeroponics for Spaceflight Plant Growth"

## [edit] In popular culture

On the television series Star Trek: Voyager, the starship Voyager is fitted
with an aeroponics laboratory by the character Kes for growing herbs and
vegetables; the laboratory is occasionally featured as a setting in a number
of episodes. On the show, however, the process is referred to as "airponics".
[1]

## [edit] See also

  * Hydroponics

## [edit] References

  1. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Stoner, R.J. and J.M. Clawson (1997-1998). A High Performance, Gravity Insensitive, Enclosed Aeroponic System for Food Production in Space. Principal Investigator, NASA SBIR NAS10-98030.
  2. ^ a b c d e Stoner, R.J. (1983). Aeroponics Versus Bed and Hydroponic Propagation. Florists' Review Vol 1 173 (4477).
  3. ^ a b c d e f g NASA Spinoff (2006) Progressive Plant Growing Has Business Blooming. Environmental and Agricultural Resources NASA Spinoff 2006, pp68-72.
  4. ^ Stoner, R.J (1983). Rooting in Air. Greenhouse Grower Vol I No. 11
  5. ^ du Toit, L.J., H.W. Kirby and W.L. Pedersen (1997). Evaluation of an Aeroponics System to Screen Maize Genotypes for Resistance to Fusarium graminearum Seedling Blight. Plant Disease 81(2): 175-179.
  6. ^ Barak, P., J.D. Smith, A.R. Krueger and L.A. Peterson (1996). Measurement of short-term nutrient uptake rates in cranberry by aeroponics. Plant, Cell and Environment 19: 237-242.
  7. ^ Hoehn, A. (1998). Root Wetting Experiments aboard NASA's KC-135 Microgravity Simulator. BioServe Space Technologies.
  8. ^ Stoner, R.J. (1989). Aeroponic Taxus Growth Experiment., Internal Report, Hauser Chemical
  9. ^ Carter, W.A. (1942). A method of growing plants in water vapor to facilitate examination of roots. Phytopathology 732: 623-625.
  10. ^ Hubick, K.T., D.R. Drakeford and D.M. Reid (1982). A comparison of two techniques for growing minimally water-stressed plants. Canadian Journal of Botany 60: 219-223.
  11. ^ Coston, D.C., G.W. Krewer, R.C. Owing and E.G. Denny (1983). Air Rooting of Peach Semihardwood Cutting." HortScience 18(3): 323.
  12. ^ Briggs, B.A. (1966). An experiment in air-rooting. International Plant Propagators' Society.
  13. ^ Nir, I. (1982), Apparatus and Method for Plant growth in Aeroponic Conditions., Patent United States
  14. ^ a b c d Stoner, R.J. and J.M. Clawson (1999-2000). Low-mass, Inflatable Aeroponic System for High Performance Food Production. Principal Investigator, NASA SBIR NAS10-00017
  15. ^ T.W. Halstead and T.K. Scott (1990). Experiments of plants in space. In Fundamentals of space biology, M. Asashima and G.M. Malacinski (eds.), pp. 9-19. Springer-Verlag.
  16. ^ Dreschel, T.W., C.W. Carlson, H.W. Wells, K.F. Anderson, W.M. Knott and W. Munsey (1993). Physical Testing for the Microgravity Plant Nutrient Experiment. 1993 International Summer Meeting, Spokane, WA, American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
  17. ^ Tibbitts, T.W., W. Cao and R.M. Wheeler (1994). Growth of Potatoes for CELSS. NASA Contractor Report 177646.
  18. ^ Linden, J.C. and Stoner, R.J. (2005). Proprietary Elicitor Affects Seed Germination and Delays Fruit Senescence. Journal of Food, Agriculture & Environment (Oct'05).
  19. ^ Linden, J., Stoner, R., Knutson, K. Gardner-Hughes, C. (2000). Organic Disease Control Elicitors. Agro Food Industry Hi-Te (p12-1).
  20. ^ Linden, J.C. and Stoner R.J. (2005). Proprietary Elicitor Amends Potato Emergence and Yields. Potato Grower. April. pp. 34-35.

## [edit] Technical links

  * Aeroponics and Bio-pharming Research
  * NASA Official Web Site
  * NASA Web Site: Aeroponic Plants
  * NASA Web Site: Aeroponic High Performance Food Production
  * NASA Web Site: Low Mass Aeroponics
  * NASA Web Site: Success Stories
  * KNGU Radio Interview with Rick Stoner, Inventor and Entrepreneur, considered by many in agricultural and horticulture to be the Father of Aeroponics Real Audio Player required to listen - download free version

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aeroponics"

Categories: Agriculture | Horticulture and gardening

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Polski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 18 April 2009, at 02:15 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



