
# Anonymous remailer

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2008)  
An anonymous remailer is a server computer which receives messages with
embedded instructions on where to send them next, and which forwards them
without revealing where they originally came from. There are Cypherpunk
anonymous remailers, Mixmaster anonymous remailers, and nym servers, among
others which differ in how they work, in the policies they adopt, and in the
type of attack on anonymity of email they can (or are intended to) resist.
Remailing as discussed in this article applies to emails intended for
particular recipients, not the general public. Anonymity in the latter case is
more easily addressed by using any of several methods of anonymous
publication.

## Contents

  * 1 Types of remailers
  * 2 Traceable remailers
  * 3 Untraceable remailers
  * 4 Web based mailer
  * 5 Using a remailer
  * 6 Choosing a remailer
  * 7 Remailer statistics
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References

  
## [edit] Types of remailers

There are several strategies which contribute to making the e-mail so handled
(more, or less) anonymous. In general, different classes of anonymous
remailers differ with regard to the choices their designers/operators have
made. These choices can be influenced by the legal ramifications of operating
specific types of remailers.[1]

It must be understood that every data packet traveling on the Internet
contains the node addresses (as raw IP bit strings) of both the sending and
intended recipient nodes, and so no data packet can ever actually be anonymous
at this level. However, if the IP source address is false, there will be no
easy way to trace the originating node (and so the originating entity for the
packet). In addition, all standards-based email messages contain defined
fields in their headers in which the source and transmitting entities (and
Internet nodes as well) are required to be included. However, since most users
of email do not have very much technical expertise, the full headers are
usually suppressed by mail reading software. Thus, many users have never seen
one.

Some remailers change both types of address in messages they forward, and the
list of forwarding nodes in email messages as well, as the message passes
through; in effect, they substitute 'fake source addresses' for the originals.
The 'IP source address' for that packet may become that of the remailer server
itself, and within an email message (which is usually several packets), a
nominal 'user' on that server. Some remailers forward their anonymized email
to still other remailers, and only after several such hops is the email
actually delivered to the intended address.

There are, more or less, four types of remailers:

  * Pseudonymous remailers

A Pseudonymous remailer, simply takes away the email address of the sender,
gives a pseudonym to the sender and sends the message to the intended
recipient (that can be answered via that remailer).

  * Cypherpunk remailers, also called type I

A Cypherpunk remailer sends the message to the recipient stripping away the
sender address on it. You can not answer a message sent via a Cypherpunk
remailer. You can usually encrypt the message sent to the remailer, and the
remailer will decrypt it and send it to the recipient address hidden inside
the encrypted message. In addition, you can chain 2 or 3 remailers, so each
remailer can't know who is sending a message to whom. Cypherpunk remailers do
not keep logs of transactions.

  * Mixmaster remailers, also called type II

Mixmaster remailers require use of a program on your computer to write your
messages. Such programs are not supplied as a standard part of most operating
systems or mail management systems.

  * Mixminion remailers, also called type III

A Mixminion remailer attempts to address the following challenges in Mixmaster
remailers: replies, forward anonymity, replay prevention and key rotation,
exit policies, integrated directory servers, dummy traffic. They have been
implemented for the Linux and Windows platforms and are currently available.
Some implementations are open source.

## [edit] Traceable remailers

Some remailers establish an internal list of actual senders and invented names
such that a recipient can send mail to invented name AT some_remailer.net.
When receiving traffic addressed to this user, the server software consults
that list, and forwards the mail to the original sender, thus permitting
anonymous -- though traceable with access to the list -- two way
communication. The famous "penet.fi" remailer in Finland did just that for
several years. Unfortunately, because of the existence of such lists in this
type of remailing server, it is possible to break the anonymity by gaining
access to the list(s), by breaking into the computer, asking a court (or
merely the police in some places) to order that the anonymity be broken,
and/or bribing an attendant. This happened to penet.fi as a result of some
traffic passed through it about Scientology. The Church claimed copyright
infringement and sued penet.fi's operator. A court ordered the list be made
available. Penet's operator shut it down after destroying its records
(including the list) to retain identity confidentiality for its users; though
not before being forced to supply the court with the real email addresses of
two of its users.

More recent remailer designs use cryptography in an attempt to provide more or
less the same service, but without so much risk of loss of user
confidentiality. These are generally termed nym servers or pseudonymous
remailers. The degree to which they remain vulnerable to forced disclosure (by
courts or police) is and will remain unclear, since new statutes/regulations
and new cryptanalytic developments proceed apace. Multiple anonymous
forwarding among cooperating remailers in different jurisdictions may retain,
but cannot guarantee, anonymity against a determined attempt by one or more
governments, or civil litigators.

## [edit] Untraceable remailers

If users accept the loss of two-way interaction, identity anonymity can be
made more secure.

By not keeping any list of users and corresponding anonymizing labels for
them, a remailer can ensure that any message which has been forwarded leaves
no internal information behind which can later be used to break identity
confidentiality. However, while being handled, messages remain vulnerable
within the server (e.g., to Trojan software in a compromised server, to a
compromised server operator, or to mis-administration of the server), and
traffic analysis comparison of traffic into and out of such a server can
suggest quite a lot -- far more than almost any would credit.

The Mixmaster strategy is designed to defeat such attacks, or at least to
increase their cost (i.e., to 'attackers') beyond feasibility. If every
message is passed through several servers (ideally in different legal and
political jurisdictions), then attacks based in legal systems become
considerably more difficult, if only because of 'Clausewitzian' friction
amongst lawyers, courts, different statutes, organizational rivalries, legal
systems, etc. And, since many different servers and server operators are
involved, subversion of any (i.e., of either system or operator) becomes less
effective also since no one (most likely) will be able to subvert the entire
chain of remailers.

Random padding of messages, random delays before forwarding, and encryption of
forwarding information between forwarding remailers, increases the degree of
difficulty for attackers still further as message size and timing can be
largely eliminated as traffic analysis clues, and lack of easily readable
forwarding information renders ineffective simple automated traffic analysis
algorithms.

## [edit] Web based mailer

There are also web services that will let you send anonymous email messages.
These services do not provide the anonymity of real remailers, but they are
easier to use. When using a web based anonymous email or anonymous remailer
service you should first analyze the reputation of this service, since the
service stands in the middle between you and the email recipient.

## [edit] Using a remailer

If the object is identity anonymity, nothing sent via a remailer can ever
include identifying information in content available to an outside observer.
Thus, "From: anon(At)remailer.net Hey dude, send me that new comic to 123
Maple Street, Wherever, Country, Postal Code. Thanx" is evidently entirely
unsecure. Encrypting such a message with an adequately secure cryptosystem
would help, and some remailers are set up to do so. In general cleartext
messages are likely to include such information even if inadvertently, and
user anonymity when sending cleartext messages is accordingly likely to be
lost.

Less obviously, some software (eg, recent versions of Microsoft Office
components -- Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, etc) includes (ordinarily
invisible) identifying information in each formatted file it saves. The
information might be name / organization / email address (collected at
'product registration' and retained internally), or product copy serial
number, or computer ID (eg, CPU serial number, or interface hardware address
(eg, Ethernet MAC address, a unique in the world ID), or ... One software
program which claims to remove such information from files notes that there
are about 30 different kinds in Word format files. Those interested in
anonymity should limit themselves to plain text messages (ASCII text only)
produced by plain text editors (eg, vi, emacs, Notepad, ...) as they don't
include such hidden information. Alternatively, users should take great care
to inspect files (eg, text, images, sound files, ...) to ensure they contain
no identifying information. Note however, that even byte-by-byte inspection
will not necessarily uncover such information since it can be easily concealed
by encryption, steganography, or simple unfamiliarity.

Anonymity, once lost, can almost never be regained as those interested in
breaching it will often keep (and have often kept) records of such
discoveries. Such records have typically had very long lives, particularly if
those keeping them have long planning horizons (eg, governments, or groups
with social or political interests). For some opinions or speech, this may
have, or come to have, serious consequences.

## [edit] Choosing a remailer

Not all anonymous remailers are identical, even when all works as intended.
Close attention to operational standards and intent, locations, and
reliability records is needed before choosing one. Among the criteria which
should be considered are:

  * class (eg, two way vs one way, encrypted message content vs cleartext only, mixmaster style or one hop forwarding, ...)
  * location (eg, some offshore jurisdictions allow easier seizure of equipment, data, or operating records than do others) Geographical Mapping
  * history (eg, some operators maintain/administer their hardware and software in better condition than others; in particular, attention to security configuration issues)
  * security (eg, some operating systems have much worse security histories (and so likely futures) than others, even when properly configured, maintained, and administered)
  * operator (at worst, a remailer run by some infamous Secret Police Department will be less than desirable; less ominously, an operator may simply be consistently inattentive)
  * privacy and operating policies (eg, if stated, better than not; if stated, sensible, and observed, better still; however, recourse (legal or otherwise) has been almost never available against operators, software developers, operating system suppliers, ... in case of loss of anonymity and/or consequent damages regardless of operating policies, stated or observed)
  * software used (eg, some remailer software is widely used (and live tested), some is not)
  * record and reputation (eg, consult remailer statistics sites, and check around (Google search, news group postings, blogs, ...)

There is no way to ensure that any particular remailer server will never cause
problems for its users (eg, loss of identity confidentiality). A remailer
system not under one's own (expert level) control will always remain, to some
extent, unknown.

## [edit] Remailer statistics

In most cases, remailers are owned and operated by individuals, and are not as
stable as they might ideally be. In fact, remailers can, and have, gone down
without warning. It is therefore important to use up-to-date statistics when
choosing remailers.

## [edit] See also

  * Anonymity
  * Anonymous P2P
  * Data privacy
  * Identity theft
  * Mixminion
  * Onion routing
  * Penet remailer
  * Pseudonymous remailer
  * Traffic analysis
  * Winston Smith Project

## [edit] References

  1. ^ du Pont, George F. (2001) The Time Has Come for Limited Liability for Operators of True Anonymity Remailers in Cyberspace: An Examination of the Possibilities and Perils"Journal of Technology Law & Policy"

  * Remailer Vulnerabilities
  * Email Security, Bruce Schneier (ISBN 0-471-05318-X)
  * Computer Privacy Handbook, Andre Bacard (ISBN 1-56609-171-3)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anonymous_remailer"

Categories: Anonymous file sharing networks | Network-related software

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 02:50.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



