
# Gamelan

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

Music of Indonesia: Topics  
Gamelan  
Timeline and samples  
Genres Classical\- Kecak \- Kecapi suling \- Tembang sunda \- Pop \- Dangdut
\- Hip hop \- Kroncong \- Gambang kromong \- Gambus \- Jaipongan \- Langgam
jawa \- Pop Batak \- Pop Minang \- Pop Sunda \- Qasidah modern \- Rock \-
Tapanuli ogong \- Tembang jawa  
Gamelan Angklung \- Beleganjur \- Degung \- Gambang \- Gong gede \- Gong
kebyar \- Jegog \- Joged bumbung \- Salendro \- Selunding \- Semar pegulingan  
Regional scenes  
Bali \- Borneo \- Java \- Moluccan Islands \- Papua \- Sulawesi \- Sumatra \-
Sunda  
<IMG>

<IMG>

Javanese gamelan ensemble with two female sinden (choral singer) during
traditional Javanese wedding at Sasono Utomo, Taman Mini Indonesia Indah,
Jakarta, Indonesia

A gamelan is a musical ensemble from Indonesia, typically from the islands of
Bali or Java, featuring a variety of instruments such as metallophones,
xylophones, drums and gongs; bamboo flutes, bowed and plucked strings.
Vocalists may also be included.

  

The term refers more to the set of instruments than to the players of those
instruments. A gamelan is a set of instruments as a distinct entity, built and
tuned to stay together â instruments from different gamelan are generally
not interchangeable.

The word "gamelan" comes from the Javanese word "gamel", meaning to strike or
hammer, and the suffix "an", which makes the root a collective noun.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Varieties of gamelan ensembles
  * 3 Cultural context
  * 4 Tuning
  * 5 Notation
  * 6 Influence on Western music
  * 7 See also
  * 8 Further reading
    * 8.1 Balinese gamelan
    * 8.2 Javanese gamelan
  * 9 Footnotes
  * 10 External links
    * 10.1 Listening

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Musicians performing musical ensemble, probably the ancient form of gamelan,
bas-relief of Borobudur.

The gamelan predates the Hindu-Buddhist culture that dominated Indonesia in
its earliest records and instead represents a native art form. The instruments
developed into their current form during the Majapahit Empire.[1] In contrast
to the heavy Indian influence in other art forms, the only obvious Indian
influence in gamelan music is in the Javanese style of singing.[2]

In Javanese mythology, the gamelan was created by Shivam Malhotra in Saka era
167 (c. AD 230), the god who ruled as king of all Java from a palace on the
Maendra mountains in Medangkamulan (now Mount Lawu). He needed a signal to
summon the gods and thus invented the gong. For more complex messages, he
invented two other Gongs, thus forming the original gamelan set.[3]

In the palaces of Java are the oldest known ensembles, the Munggang and
Kodokngorek gamelans, apparently from the 12th century. These formed the basis
of a "loud style." A different, "soft style" developed out of the kemanak
tradition and is related to the traditions of singing Javanese poetry, in a
manner which is often believed to be similar to performance of modern bedhaya
dance. In the 17th century, these loud and soft styles mixed, and to a large
extent the variety of modern gamelan styles of Bali, Java, and Sunda resulted
from different ways of mixing these elements. Thus, despite the seeming
diversity of styles, many of the same theoretical concepts, instruments, and
techniques are shared between the styles.[4]

## [edit] Varieties of gamelan ensembles

See also: List of gamelan varieties

<IMG>

<IMG>

Sundanese Gamelan Degung.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The all-bamboo Gamelan jegog from Bali

<IMG>

<IMG>

Javanese gamelan played also in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

Varying forms of gamelan ensembles are distinguished by their collection of
instruments and use of voice, tunings, repertoire, style, and cultural
context. In general, no two gamelan ensembles are the same, and those that
arose in prestigious courts are often considered to have their own style.
Certain styles may also be shared by nearby ensembles, leading to a regional
style.

The varieties are generally grouped geographically, with the principal
division between the styles favored by the Balinese, Javanese, and Sundanese
peoples. Sundanese gamelan is often associated with Gamelan Degung, a
Sundanese musical ensemble that utilises a subset of modified gamelan
instruments with a particular mode of pelog scale. Balinese gamelan is often
associated with the virtuosity and rapid changes of tempo and dynamics of
Gamelan gong kebyar, its best-known style. Other popular Balinese styles
include Gamelan and kecak, also known as the "monkey chant." Javanese gamelan
was largely dominated by the courts of the 19th century central Javanese
rulers, each with its own style, but overall is known for a slower, more
meditative style than that of Bali.

Outside of the main core on Java and Bali, gamelans have spread through
migration and cultural interest, new styles sometimes resulting as well. Malay
gamelans are designed in ways that are similar to the Javanese gamelan except
they lack most of the elaborating instruments and are tuned in a near-
equidistant slendro, often using a western Bb or C as a tuning basis. Javanese
emigrants to Suriname play gamelan in a style close to that found in Central
Javanese villages. Gamelan is also related to the Filipino kulintang ensemble.
There is also a wide variety of gamelan in the West, including both
traditional and experimental ensembles.

## [edit] Cultural context

In Indonesia, gamelan usually accompanies dance wayang puppet performances, or
rituals or ceremonies. Typically players in the gamelan will be familiar with
dance moves and poetry, while dancers are able to play in the ensemble. In
wayang, the dalang (puppeteer) must have a thorough knowledge of gamelan, as
he gives the cues for the music. Gamelan can be performed by itself â in
"klenengan" style, or for radio broadcasts â but concerts in the Western
style are not traditional.[5]

Gamelan's role in rituals is so important that there is a Javanese saying that
"It's not official until the gong is hung."[6] Some performances are
associated with royalty, such as visits by the sultan of Yogyakarta. Certain
gamelans are associated with specific rituals, such as the Gamelan Sekaten,
which is used in celebration of Mawlid an-Nabi (Muhammad's birthday). In Bali,
almost all religious rituals include gamelan performance. Gamelan is also used
in the ceremonies of the Catholic church in Indonesia.[7] Certain pieces are
designated for starting and ending performances or ceremonies. When a
"leaving" piece (such as "Udan Mas") is begun, the audience will know that the
event is nearly finished and will begin to leave. Certain pieces are also
believed to possess magic powers, and can be used to ward off evil spirits.[6]

Gamelan is frequently played on the radio. For example, the Pura Pakualaman
gamelan performs live on the radio every Minggu Pon (a day in the 35-day cycle
of the Javanese calendar).[6] In major towns, the Radio Republik Indonesia
employs professional musicians and actors, and broadcast programs of a wide
variety of gamelan music and drama.[8]

In the court tradition of central Java, gamelan is often played in the
pendopo, an open pavilion with a cavernous, double-pitched roof, no side
walls, and a hard marble or tile floor. The instruments are placed on a
platform to one side, which allows the sound to reverberate in the roof space
and enhances the acoustics.[9]

In Bali, the Gamelan instruments are all kept together in the balai banjar, a
community meeting hall which has a large open space with a roof over top of it
with several open sides. The instruments are all kept here together because
they believe that all of the instruments belong to the community as a whole
and no one person has ownership over an instrument. Not only is this where the
instruments are stored, but this is also the practice space for the sekaha
(Gamelan orchestra). The open walls allow for the music to flow out into the
community where the rest of the people can enjoy it.

The sekaha is led by a single instructor whose job it is in the community to
lead this group and to come up with new songs. When they are working on a new
song, the instructor will lead the group in practice and help the group form
the new piece of music as they are practicing. When the instructor creates a
new song, he leaves enough open for interpretation that the group can
improvise and as a group they will be writing the music as they are practicing
it.

The Balinese Gamelan groups are constantly changing their music by taking
older pieces they know and mixing them together as well as trying new
variations on their music. Their music is always constantly changing because
they believe that music should grow and change; the only exception to this is
with their most sacred songs which they will not change. A single new piece of
music can take several months before it is completed.

Men and women usually perform in separate groups, with the exception of the
pesindhen, the female singer who performs with male groups.[8]

In the West, gamelan is often performed in a concert context, but may also
incorporate dance or wayang.

## [edit] Tuning

<IMG>

<IMG>

Celempung â Indonesian Embassy in Canberra.

The tuning and construction of a gamelan orchestra is a complex process.
Javanese gamelans use two tuning systems: slÃ©ndro and pÃ©log. There are other
tuning systems such as degung (exclusive to Sunda, or West Java), and madenda
(also known as diatonis, similar to a European natural minor scale). In
central Javanese gamelan, slÃ©ndro is a system with five notes to the diapason
(octave), fairly evenly spaced, while pÃ©log has seven notes to the octave,
with uneven intervals, usually played in five note subsets of the seven-tone
collection. This results in sound quite different from music played in a
western tuning system. Many gamelan orchestras will include instruments in
each tuning, but each individual instrument will only be able to play notes in
one. The precise tuning used differs from ensemble to ensemble, and give each
ensemble its own particular flavour. The intervals between notes in a scale
are very close to identical for different instruments within each gamelan, but
the intervals vary from one gamelan to the next.

Colin McPhee remarked, "Deviations in what is considered the same scale are so
large that one might with reason state that there are as many scales as there
are gamelans."[10] However, this view is contested by some teachers of
gamelan, and there have been efforts to combine multiple ensembles and tuning
structures into one gamelan to ease transportation at festival time. One such
ensemble is gamelan Manikasanti, which can play the repertoire of many
different ensembles.

Balinese gamelan instruments are commonly played in pairs which are tuned
slightly apart to produce interference beats, ideally at a consistent speed
for all pairs of notes in all registers. It is thought that this contributes
to the very "busy" and "shimmering" sound of gamelan ensembles. In the
religious ceremonies that contain gamelan, these interference beats are meant
to give the listener a feeling of a god's presence or a stepping stone to a
meditative state.

## [edit] Notation

Traditionally gamelan music is not notated and began as an oral tradition;
however, in the 19th century, the kratons of Yogyakarta and Surakarta
developed distinct notations for transcribing the reportoire. These were not
used to read the music, which was memorized, but to preserve pieces in the
court records. The Yogyanese notation is a checkerboard notation, which uses
six or seven vertical lines to represent notes of higher pitch in the balungan
(core melody), and horizontal lines which represent the series of beats, read
downward with time. The fourth vertical line and every fourth horizontal line
(completing a gatra) are darkened for legibility. Symbols on the left indicate
the colotomic structure of gongs and so forth, while specific drum features
are notated in symbols to the right. The Solonese notation reads horizontally,
like Western notation, but does not use barlines. Instead, note values and
rests are squiggled between the notes.[11]

Today this notation is relatively rare, and has been replaced by kepatihan
notation, which is a cipher system. Kepatihan notation developed around 1900
at the kepatihan in Surakarta. The pitches are numbered (see the articles on
the scales slendro and pÃ©log for an explanation of how), and are read across
with dots and lines indicating the register and time values. Like the palace
notations, however, they record only the balungan part, and to a large extent
what is heard relies on memorized patterns the performers call upon during
performance. However, teachers have also devised certain notations, generally
using kepatihan principles, for the cengkok (melodic patterns) of each
elaborating instrument. In ethnomusicological studies, transcriptions are
often made onto a Western staff, sometimes with unusual clefs.[12]

## [edit] Influence on Western music

The gamelan has been appreciated by several western composers of classical
music, most famously Claude Debussy who heard a Javanese gamelan play at the
Paris Exposition of 1889 (World's Fair). (The gamelan Debussy heard was in the
slendro scale and was played by Central Javanese musicians.[13]) Despite his
enthusiasm, direct citations of gamelan scales, melodies, rhythms, or ensemble
textures have not been located in any of Debussy's own compositions. However,
the equal-tempered whole tone scale appears in his music of this time and
afterward,[14] and a Javanese gamelan-like heterophonic texture is emulated on
occasion, particularly in "Pagodes", from Estampes (solo piano, 1903), in
which the great gong's cyclic punctuation is symbolized by a prominent perfect
fifth.

Direct homages to gamelan music are to be found in works for western
instruments by John Cage, particularly his prepared piano pieces, Colin
McPhee, Lou Harrison, BÃ©la BartÃ³k, Francis Poulenc, Olivier Messiaen,
Bronislaw Kaper and Benjamin Britten. In more recent times, American composers
such as Henry Brant, Steve Reich, Philip Glass, Dennis Murphy, Loren Nerell,
Michael Tenzer, Evan Ziporyn, Daniel James Wolf and Jody Diamond as well as
Australian composers such as Peter Sculthorpe, Andrew Schultz and Ross Edwards
have written several works with parts for gamelan instruments or full gamelan
ensembles. I Nyoman Windha is among contemporary Indonesian composers that
have written compositions using western instruments along with Gamelan.
Hungarian composer GyÃ¶rgy Ligeti wrote a piano Ã©tude called Galamb Borong
influenced by gamelan. American folk guitarist John Fahey included elements of
gamelan in many of his late-60s sound collages, and again in his 1997
collaboration with Cul de Sac, The Epiphany of Glenn Jones. The experimental
art-rock band King Crimson, while not using gamelan instruments, used
interlocking rhythmic paired guitars that were influenced by gamelan.[15]
Experimental pop groups The Residents, 23 Skidoo (whose 1984 album was even
titled Urban Gamelan), Mouse on Mars, His Name Is Alive, Xiu Xiu, Macha,
Saudade, and the Sun City Girls have used gamelan percussion. The gamelan has
also been used by British multi-instrumentalist Mike Oldfield at least three
times, "Woodhenge" (1979), "The Wind Chimes (Part II)" (1987) and "Nightshade"
(2005). Avant-garde performance band Melted Men uses Balinese gamelan
instruments as well as gamelan-influenced costumes and dance in their shows.

Recently, many Americans were first introduced to the sounds of gamelan by the
popular anime film Akira. Gamelan elements are used in this film to punctuate
several exciting fight scenes, as well as to symbolize the emerging psychic
powers of the tragic hero, Tetsuo. The gamelan in the film's score was
performed by the members of the Japanese musical collective Geinoh
Yamashirogumi. Gamelan and kecak are also used in the soundtrack to the video
games Secret of Mana and Sonic Unleashed. The musical soundtrack for the Sci
Fi Channel series Battlestar Galactica features extensive use of the gamelan,
particularly in the 3rd season[16] , as do the Alexandre Desplat'a scores for
Girl With A Pearl Earring and The Golden Compass.

Loops of gamelan music are ubiquitous in electronic music. An early example is
the Texas band Drain's album Offspeed and In There, which contains two tracks
where trip-hop beats are matched with gamelan loops from Java and Bali and
recent popular examples include The Prodigy's song Hot Ride, or
EXEC_PAJA/.#Orica extracting, a song sung by Haruka Shimotsuki as part of the
Ar tonelico: Melody of Elemia soundtracks.

## [edit] See also

Sister project Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Gamelan  
  * Kulintang
  * Music of Indonesia
  * Legong: Dance of the Virgins
  * Gamelan outside Indonesia

## [edit] Further reading

### [edit] Balinese gamelan

  * Balinese Music (1991) by Michael Tenzer, ISBN 0-945971-30-3. Included is an excellent sampler CD of Balinese Music.
  * Gamelan Gong Kebyar: The Art of Twentieth-Century Balinese Music (2000) by Michael Tenzer, ISBN 0-226-79281-1 and ISBN 0-226-79283-8.
  * Music in Bali (1966) by Colin McPhee. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
  * Music in Bali: Experiencing Music, Expressing Culture (2007) by Lisa Gold, Oxford University Press, New York, ISBN 0-195-14149-0 (paper)

### [edit] Javanese gamelan

  * Gamelan: Cultural Interaction and Musical Development in Central Java (1995) by Sumarsam, ISBN 0-226-78010-4 (cloth) 0226780112 (paper)
  * Music in Central Java: Experiencing Music, Expressing Culture (2007) by Benjamin Brinner, Oxford University Press, New York, ISBN 0-195-14737-5 (paper)
  * Music in Java: History Its Theory and Its Technique (1949) edited by Jaap Kunst, ISBN 90-247-1519-9. An appendix of this book includes some statistical data on intervals in scales used by gamelans.
  * A Gamelan Manual: A Player's Guide to the Central Javanese Gamelan (2005) by Richard Pickvance, Jaman Mas Books, London, ISBN 0-9550295-0-3

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ The Embassy of the Republic of Indonesia, Bulletin for National Museum of Canada (Ottawa: April 1961), p. 2, cited in Donald A. Lentz. The Gamelan Music of Java and Bali: An Artistic Anomaly Complementary to Primary Tonal Theoretical Systems. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1965. Page 5.
  2. ^ Lentz, 5.
  3. ^ R.T. Warsodiningrat, Serat Weda Pradangga. Cited in Roth, A. R. New Compositions for Javanese Gamelan. University of Durham, Doctoral Thesis, 1986. Page 4.
  4. ^ Roth, 4â8
  5. ^ Broughton, Simon, et al., eds. World Music: The Rough Guide. London: The Rough Guides, 1994. ISBN 1858280176. Page 419â420
  6. ^ a b c Broughton, 420
  7. ^ Lindsay, 45
  8. ^ a b Broughton, 421.
  9. ^ Roth, 17
  10. ^ Colin McPhee, Music in Bali. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1966.
  11. ^ Lindsay, Jennifer. Javanese Gamelan. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979. Pp. 27â28. ISBN 0195804139
  12. ^ For example, in Sorrell, Neil. A Guide to the Gamelan. United Kingdom: Faber and Faber, 1990.
  13. ^ Neil Sorrell. A Guide to the Gamelan. London: Faber and Faber, 2000. Pages 2â7 discuss the incident, about which much remains uncertain. In particular, it is unknown whether they played the Cirebonese instruments that the Paris Conservatoire received in 1887, which would be substantially different from their ordinary set, or if they brought their own set.
  14. ^ Ibid. Although the five notes of the slendro set are closest in pitch to a pentatonic scale, this scale would have been familiar from other folk sources, as it is a common scale worldwide. It is the equally tempered whole-tone scale that is more analogous of the exotic slendro scale.
  15. ^ http://www.progressiveears.com/frippbook/ch09.htm
  16. ^ SoundtrackNet 2/28/07 article

## [edit] External links

<IMG>

This article's external links may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or
guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate
external links. (March 2009)  
  * Walter Spies studied the gamelan music and invented a way to transcribe the gamelan music to paper.
  * Introduction to Gamelan Music by Qehn, Javanese only.
  * American Gamelan Institute
  * Yogyakarta Gamelan Festival
  * Javanese gamelan notation â a huge collection maintained by Barry Drummond (in PDF format)
  * Javanese gamelan notation â prepared by Vi King Lim
  * GamelanWiki.org Gamelan-related wiki
  * Balinese and Javanese Gamelan
  * Bali & Beyond
  * http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/gamelan

### [edit] Listening

  * Gongcast â Webcast of gamelan recordings
  * Play a gamelan instrument online (saron, slentem, bonang, kempuls)
  * Another virtual gamelan. Allows to play, and "program" (sequencer like) gamelans. Text is in French.
  * The Virtual Javanese Gamelan play and compose Javanese music using this free download
  * A collection of recent recordings of Central Javanese gamelan with extensive musical excerpts
  * Balinese Gamelan of Munduk Village

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamelan"

Categories: Gamelan | Musical groups | Javanese culture

Hidden categories: Wikipedia external links cleanup

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * BÃ¢n-lÃ¢m-gÃº
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * CatalÃ 
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * EstremeÃ±u
  * FranÃ§ais
  * à¤¹à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Ãslenska
  * Italiano
  * Basa Jawa
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * à¤¨à¥à¤ªà¤¾à¤² à¤­à¤¾à¤·à¤¾
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * SlovenÄina
  * Srpskohrvatski / Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¾Ñ ÑÐ²Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 28 March 2009, at 14:27.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



