
# Cursive

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may contain original research or unverified claims. Please
improve the article by adding references. See the talk page for details.
(March 2008)  
    For the rock band, see Cursive (band).
<IMG>

<IMG>

An example of a cursive alphabet â lower case and upper case.

Cursive is any style of handwriting that is designed for writing notes and
letters quickly by hand. In the Arabic, Latin, and Cyrillic writing systems,
the letters in a word are connected, making a word one single complex stroke.
In fact, the word comes from the Latin cursivus, meaning "flowing".[1]

In The UK, the phrase "joined-up writing" or "joint writing" is far more
commonly used, while the term "running writing" or "handwriting" is most
commonly used in Australia. Cursive is also commonly known as simply
"handwriting" in Canada and New Zealand. Cursive is considered distinct from
the so-called "printing" or "block letter" style of handwriting, in which the
letters of a word are unconnected, and from "print-writing", which is a cross
between cursive and printing, with some unconnected letters and some
connected. In the Hebrew cursive and Roman cursive, the letters are not
connected.

## Contents

  * 1 Cursive Arabic
  * 2 Cursive English
  * 3 Cursive Hebrew
  * 4 Cursive Roman
  * 5 Cursive Greek
  * 6 Cursive Russian
  * 7 Cursive Chinese
  * 8 References
  * 9 See also
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Cursive Arabic

<IMG>

<IMG>

Verses from the Qur'an in Classical Arabic, written in the cursive Arabic
script.

In the Classical Arabic script, letters of any given word are joined to one
another by a continuous flowing line. This flowing script inspired the cursive
of Medieval Latin, which in turn developed into the longhand script of
English.[2]

## [edit] Cursive English

<IMG>

It has been suggested that this section be split into a new article entitled
English cursive. (Discuss)  
<IMG>

<IMG>

United States Declaration of Independence

<IMG>

<IMG>

William Shakespeare's will, written in secretary hand[3]

Cursive writing was used in English before the Norman conquest, and was an
inheritance from Classical Arabic.[4] Anglo-Saxon Charters typically include a
boundary clause written in Old English in a cursive script. A cursive
handwriting style - Secretary hand \- was widely used for both personal
correspondence and official documents in England from early in the sixteenth
century. However, in the handwriting of William Bradford, in the early
seventeenth century, most of the letters were separate, but a few were joined
as in a cursive hand. By the late eighteenth century, a century and a half
later, the situation had reversed; in Thomas Jefferson's draft of the United
States Declaration of Independence most but not all of the letters were
joined. The presentation copy of the Declaration, written professionally a few
days later, was written in a fully cursive hand. Eighty-seven years later, in
the middle of the nineteenth century, Abraham Lincoln drafted the Gettysburg
Address in a cursive hand that would not look out of place today.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Letter written in England in 1894, showing an example of cursive English from
that time period.

In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, before the development of the
typewriter, professional correspondence was written in cursive. This was
called a "fair hand", meaning it looked good, and all clerks in a firm were
trained to write in the exact same script. In the early days of the post
office, letters were written in cursive â and to fit more text on a single
sheet, the text was continued in lines crossing at 90 degrees from the
original text.[citation needed] Block letters could not do this.

Although women's handwriting had noticeably different particulars from men's,
the general forms were not prone to rapid change. In the mid-nineteenth
century, comparatively few children were not taught cursive, and as it was an
important skill, more emphasis could be placed on learning it; there was no
pervasive striving for efficiency in the classroom. Few simplifications
appeared as the middle of the twentieth century was reached. An example of the
timeframe in which cursive came to be taught is that in the United States, it
would usually be taught in second or third grade (around ages seven to nine).

After the 1960s, it was decided that the teaching of cursive writing was more
difficult than it needed to be. Forms of simply slanted characters, termed
italic, were argued as being easier and traditional cursive unnecessary.
Because of this, a number of various new forms of cursive appeared in the late
twentieth century; D'Nealian, Getty-Dubay, and Zaner-Bloser Script among them.
With the range of options available, handwriting became unstandardized across
different school systems in different English-speaking countries.

With the advent of computers, cursive as a way of formalizing correspondence
has fallen out of favor. Any task which would have once required a "fair hand"
is now done using word processing and a printer. Increasingly, the teaching of
cursive is being de-emphasized in schools, and is generally reserved only for
situations such as timed tests with large writing portions, where it is
considered faster, although this use too is falling out of favor. Many teens
and young adults in Europe and North America no longer use cursive at all,
although some often connect letters when printing in ways that are not
considered correct in cursive, such as joining the cross-bar of a "t" to a
following "i".

## [edit] Cursive Hebrew

<IMG>

<IMG>

The Hebrew alphabet in cursive script, read from right to left.

Main article: Cursive Hebrew

Cursive Hebrew script is a style of Hebrew calligraphy that is very popular
for writing Modern Hebrew by hand, since it is easier to learn and faster to
write than the traditional Hebrew script. It features round letter shapes as
opposed to the standard "square" Hebrew script. Like other cursive systems, it
was designed to make writing down notes easier.

## [edit] Cursive Roman

<IMG>

<IMG>

Example of old Roman cursive.

Main article: Roman cursive

Roman cursive is a form of handwriting (or a script) used in ancient Rome and
to some extent into the Middle Ages. It is customarily divided into old (or
ancient) cursive, and new cursive. Old Roman cursive, also called majuscule
cursive and capitalis cursive, was the everyday form of handwriting used for
writing letters, by merchants writing business accounts, by schoolchildren
learning the Roman alphabet, and even emperors issuing commands. New Roman
cursive, also called minuscule cursive or later Roman cursive, developed from
old Roman cursive. It was used from approximately the 3rd century to the 7th
century, and uses letter forms that are more recognizable to modern eyes; "a",
"b", "d", and "e" have taken a more familiar shape, and the other letters are
proportionate to each other rather than varying wildly in size and placement
on a line.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Table of 19th-century Greek cursive letter forms

## [edit] Cursive Greek

Main article: History of the Greek alphabet

<IMG>

<IMG>

Ancient Greek cursive script, 6th century A.D.

The Greek alphabet has had several cursive forms in the course of its
development. In antiquity, a cursive form of handwriting was used in writing
on papyrus. It employed slanted and partly connected letter forms as well as
many ligatures. Some features of this handwriting were later adopted into
Greek minuscule, the dominant form of handwriting in the medieval and early
modern era. In the 19th and 20th centuries, an entirely new form of cursive
Greek, more similar to contemporary Western European cursive scripts, was
developed.

## [edit] Cursive Russian

Main article: Russian cursive

The Russian Cursive Cyrillic alphabet is used (instead of the block letters)
when handwriting the modern Russian Language. Some letters look much like
Latin/Roman cursive alphabet letters but most have different sounds.[citation
needed] Most handwritten Russian, especially personal letters and schoolwork,
uses the cursive Russian (Cyrillic) alphabet. Most children in Russian schools
are taught by 1st grade how to write using this Russian script.

## [edit] Cursive Chinese

Cursive forms of Chinese characters are used in calligraphy; "running script"
is the semi-cursive form and "grass script" is the cursive.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ http://dictionary.reference.com/search?q=cursive
  2. ^ The Eastern Mysteries: An Encyclopedic Guide to the Sacred Languages & Magickal Systems of the World David Allen Hulse, page 185; online at [1]
  3. ^ Cardenio, Or, the Second Maiden's Tragedy, pp. 131-3: By William Shakespeare, Charles Hamilton, John Fletcher (Glenbridge Publishing Ltd., 1994) ISBN 0944435246
  4. ^ The Eastern Mysteries: An Encyclopedic Guide to the Sacred Languages & Magickal Systems of the World David Allen Hulse, page 185; online at [2]

## [edit] See also

  * Cursive script (East Asia) (Grass script)
  * SÃ¼tterlin and Kurrent \- German Cursive
  * Paper
  * Pen
  * Penmanship
  * Spencerian Script
  * Palmer Method
  * Emphasis (typography)

## [edit] External links

  * Lessons in Calligraphy and Penmanship, including scans of classic nineteenth-century and early twentieth-century manuals and examples
  * The Golden Age of American Penmanship, including scans of the January 1932 issue of Austin Norman Palmer's American Penman
  * Popular Cursive Fonts
  * Download Normal and Bold Victorian Modern Cursive electronic fonts

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cursive"

Categories: Calligraphy | Penmanship | Writing

Hidden categories: Articles that may contain original research since March
2008 | All articles that may contain original research | Articles to be split
| All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with unsourced statements
since February 2008 | Articles with unsourced statements since October 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * å´è¯­
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 3 April 2009, at 18:55.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



