
# Protein structure

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (February 2009)  
<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)  
Proteins are an important class of biological macromolecules present in all
biological organisms, made up of such elements as carbon,hydrogen, nitrogen,
oxygen, and sulphur. All proteins are polymers of amino acids. The polymers,
also known as polypeptides consist of a sequence of 20 different L-Î±-amino
acids, also referred to as residues. For chains under 40 residues the term
peptide is frequently used instead of protein. To be able to perform their
biological function, proteins fold into one, or more, specific spatial
conformations, driven by a number of noncovalent interactions such as hydrogen
bonding, ionic interactions, Van der Waals forces and hydrophobic packing. In
order to understand the functions of proteins at a molecular level, it is
often necessary to determine the three dimensional structure of proteins. This
is the topic of the scientific field of structural biology, that employs
techniques such as X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy, to determine the
structure of proteins.

A number of residues are necessary to perform a particular biochemical
function, and around 40-50 residues appears to be the lower limit for a
functional domain size. Protein sizes range from this lower limit to several
thousand residues in multi-functional or structural proteins. However, the
current estimate for the average protein length is around 300 residues.[1]
Very large aggregates can be formed from protein subunits, for example many
thousand actin molecules assemble into a microfilament.

## Contents

  * 1 Levels of protein structure
  * 2 Structure of the amino acids
    * 2.1 Primary structure of proteins
    * 2.2 Secondary structure in proteins
      * 2.2.1 The Î±-Helix
      * 2.2.2 Î²-sheets
    * 2.3 Super-Secondary Structure
    * 2.4 Tertiary Structure of Proteins
    * 2.5 Quaternary Structure
  * 3 Forces Controlling Protein Structure
    * 3.1 Hydrogen Bonding
    * 3.2 Hydrophobic Forces
    * 3.3 Electrostatic Forces
    * 3.4 van der Waals Forces
    * 3.5 Complex Protein Structures
    * 3.6 Amino-Terminal Sequence Determination
  * 4 The peptide bond
  * 5 Primary structure
  * 6 Secondary structure
  * 7 Tertiary structure
  * 8 Quaternary structure
  * 9 Side chain conformation
  * 10 Domains, motifs, and folds in protein structure
  * 11 Protein folding
  * 12 Structure classification
  * 13 Protein structure determination
  * 14 Computational prediction of protein structure
  * 15 Software
  * 16 References
  * 17 Further reading
  * 18 External links

  
## [edit] Levels of protein structure

<IMG>

<IMG>

Protein structure, from primary to quaternary structure.

Biochemistry refers to four distinct aspects of a protein's structure:

  * Primary structure \- the amino acid sequence of the peptide chains.
  * Secondary structure \- highly regular sub-structures (alpha helix and strands of beta sheet) which are locally defined, meaning that there can be many different secondary motifs present in one single protein molecule.
  * Tertiary structure \- three-dimensional structure of a single protein molecule; a spatial arrangement of the secondary structures. It also describes the completely folded and compacted polypeptide chain.
  * Quaternary structure \- complex of several protein molecules or polypeptide chains, usually called protein subunits in this context, which function as part of the larger assembly or protein complex.

In addition to these levels of structure, a protein may shift between several
similar structures in performing its biological function. This process is also
reversible. In the context of these functional rearrangements, these tertiary
or quaternary structures are usually referred to as chemical conformation, and
transitions between them are called conformational changes.

The primary structure is held together by covalent or peptide bonds, which are
made during the process of protein biosynthesis or translation. These peptide
bonds provide rigidity to the protein. The two ends of the amino acid chain
are referred to as the C-terminal end or carboxyl terminus (C-terminus) and
the N-terminal end or amino terminus (N-terminus) based on the nature of the
free group on each extremity.

The various types of secondary structure are defined by their patterns of
hydrogen bonds between the main-chain peptide groups. However, these hydrogen
bonds are generally not stable by themselves, since the water-amide hydrogen
bond is generally more favorable than the amide-amide hydrogen bond. Thus,
secondary structure is stable only when the local concentration of water is
sufficiently low, e.g., in the molten globule or fully folded states.

Similarly, the formation of molten globules and tertiary structure is driven
mainly by structurally non-specific interactions, such as the rough
propensities of the amino acids and hydrophobic interactions. However, the
tertiary structure is fixed only when the parts of a protein domain are locked
into place by structurally specific interactions, such as ionic interactions
(salt bridges), hydrogen bonds and the tight packing of side chains. The
tertiary structure of extracellular proteins can also be stabilized by
disulfide bonds, which reduce the entropy of the unfolded state; disulfide
bonds are extremely rare in cytosolic proteins, since the cytosol is generally
a reducing environment.

## [edit] Structure of the amino acids

<IMG>

<IMG>

An Î±-amino acid

An Î±-amino acid consists of a part that is present in all the amino acid
types, and a side chain that is unique to each type of residue. The CÎ± atom
is bound to 4 different atoms: a hydrogen atom (the H is omitted in the
diagram), an amino group nitrogen, a carboxyl group carbon, and a side chain
carbon specific for this type of amino acid. An exception from this rule is
proline, where the hydrogen atom is replaced by a bond to the side chain.
Because the carbon atom is bound to four different groups it is chiral,
however only one of the isomers occur in biological proteins. Glycine however,
is not chiral since its side chain is a hydrogen atom. A simple mnemonic for
correct L-form is "CORN": when the CÎ± atom is viewed with the H in front, the
residues read "CO-R-N" in a clockwise direction.

<IMG>

<IMG>

CO-R-N rule

The side chain determines the chemical properties of the Î±-amino acid and may
be any one of the 20 different side chains:

### [edit] Primary structure of proteins

The primary structure of peptides and proteins refers to the linear number and
order of the amino acids present. The convention for the designation of the
order of amino acids is that the N-terminal end (i.e. the end bearing the
residue with the free Î±-amino group) is to the left (and the number 1 amino
acid) and the C-terminal end (i.e. the end with the residue containing a free
Î±-carboxyl group) is to the right.

The proposal that proteins were linear chains of Î±-amino acids was made
nearly simultaneously by two scientists at the same conference in 1902, the
74th meeting of the Society of German Scientists and Physicians, held in
Karlsbad. Franz Hofmeister made the proposal in the morning, based on his
observations of the biuret reaction in proteins. Hofmeister was followed a few
hours later by Emil Fischer, who had amased a wealth of chemical details
supporting the peptide-bond model. For completeness, the proposal that
proteins contained amide linkages was made as early as 1882 by the French
chemist E. Grimaux.

Despite these data and later evidence that proteolytically digested proteins
yielded only oligopeptides, the idea that proteins were linear, unbranched
polymers of amino acids was not accepted immediately. Some well-respected
scientists such as William Astbury doubted that covalent bonds were strong
enough to hold such long molecules together; they feared that thermal
agitations would shake such long molecules asunder. Hermann Staudinger faced
similar prejudices in the 1920s when he argued that rubber was composed of
macromolecules.

Thus, several alternative hypotheses arose. The colloidal protein hypothesis
stated that proteins were colloidal assemblies of smaller molecules. This
hypothesis was disproven in the 1920s by ultracentrifugation measurements by
The Svedberg that showed that proteins had a well-defined, reproducible
molecular weight and by electrophoretic measurements by Arne Tiselius that
indicated that proteins were single molecules. A second hypothesis, the cyclol
hypothesis advanced by Dorothy Wrinch, proposed that the linear polypeptide
underwent a chemical cyclol rearrangement C=O + HN C(OH)-N that crosslinked
its backbone amide groups, forming a two-dimensional fabric. Other primary
structures of proteins were proposed by various researchers, such as the
diketopiperazine model of Emil Abderhalden and the pyrrol/piperidine model of
Troensegaard in 1942. Although never given much credence, these alternative
models were finally disproven when Frederick Sanger successfully sequenced
insulin and by the crystallographic determination of myoglobin and hemoglobin
by Max Perutz and John Kendrew.

The primary structure of a biological polymer to a large extent determines the
three-dimensional shape known as the tertiary structure, but nucleic acid and
protein folding are so complex that knowing the primary structure often
doesn't help either to deduce the shape or to predict localized secondary
structure, such as the formation of loops or helices. However, knowing the
structure of a similar homologous sequence (for example a member of the same
protein family) can unambiguously identify the tertiary structure of the given
sequence. Sequence families are often determined by sequence clustering, and
structural genomics projects aim to produce a set of representative structures
to cover the sequence space of possible non-redundant sequences.

### [edit] Secondary structure in proteins

The ordered array of amino acids in a protein confer regular conformational
forms upon that protein. These conformations constitute the secondary
structures of a protein. In general proteins fold into two broad classes of
structure termed, globular proteins and fibrous proteins. Globular proteins
are compactly folded and coiled, whereas, fibrous proteins are more
filamentous or elongated. It is the partial double-bond character of the
peptide bond that defines the conformations a polypeptide chain may assume.
Within a single protein different regions of the polypeptide chain may assume
different conformations determined by the primary sequence of the amino acids.

#### [edit] The Î±-Helix

The Î±-helix is a common secondary structure encountered in proteins of the
globular class. About 35% of all amino acids in proteins are in Î±-helices,
but in individual protein molecules this number ranges from 0 to 80%. The
formation of the Î±-helix is spontaneous and is stabilized by H-bonding
between amide nitrogens and carbonyl carbons of peptide bonds spaced four
residues apart. This orientation of H-bonding produces a helical coiling of
the peptide backbone such that the R-groups lie on the exterior of the helix
and perpendicular to its axis. The average length of Î±-helices is 10.5 amino
acids, but the range is from 4 to several dozens.

Not all amino acids favor the formation of the Î±-helix due to steric
constraints of the R-groups. Amino acids such as A, D, E, I, L and M favor the
formation of Î±-helices, whereas, G and P favor disruption of the helix. This
is particularly true for P since it is a pyrrolidine based imino acid (HN=)
whose structure significantly restricts movement about the peptide bond in
which it is present, thereby, interfering with extension of the helix. The
disruption of the helix is important as it introduces additional folding of
the polypeptide backbone to allow the formation of globular proteins.

#### [edit] Î²-sheets

Whereas an Î±-helix is composed of a single linear array of helically disposed
amino acids, Î²-sheets are composed of 2 or more different regions of
stretches of at least 3-5 amino acids (average 4.5 amino acids). The folding
and alignment of stretches of the polypeptide backbone aside one another to
form Î²-sheets is stabilized by H-bonding between amide nitrogens and carbonyl
carbons. However, the H-bonding residues are present in adjacently opposed
stretches of the polypetide backbone as opposed to a linearly contiguous
region of the backbone in the Î±-helix. Î²-sheets are said to be pleated. This
is due to positioning of the Î±-carbons of the peptide bond which alternates
above and below the plane of the sheet. Î²-sheets are either parallel or
antiparallel. In parallel sheets adjacent peptide chains proceed in the same
direction (i.e. the direction of N-terminal to C-terminal ends is the same),
whereas, in antiparallel sheets adjacent chains are aligned in opposite
directions. Most anti-parallel Î²-sheets are from stretches adjacent in the
sequence, connected by just a short loop. On the other hand, parallel Î²-
sheets are always separated by a longer stretch of amino acids. Î²-sheets can
be depicted in ball and stick format or as ribbons in certain protein formats.

Ball and Stick Representation of a Î²-SheetRibbon Depiction of Î²-Sheet

### [edit] Super-Secondary Structure

Many proteins contain an ordered organization of several adjacent elements of
secondary structures that form distinct, commonly observed structural motifs
larger than individual secondary structures but smaller than domains or
subunits. They are often hypothesized to act as early steps in the process of
protein folding. Examples include Î²-hairpins, helix hairpins, right-handed
Î²-Î±-Î² loops, and the helix-turn-helix motifs of bacterial proteins that
regulate transcription.

### [edit] Tertiary Structure of Proteins

Tertiary structure refers to the complete three-dimensional structure of the
polypeptide units of a given protein. Included in this description is the
spatial relationship of different secondary structures to one another within a
polypeptide chain and how these secondary structures themselves fold into the
three-dimensional form of the protein. Secondary structures of proteins often
constitute distinct domains. Therefore, tertiary structure also describes the
relationship of different domains to one another within a protein. The
interactions of different domains is governed by several forces: These include
hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions, electrostatic interactions, van
der Waals forces and covalent bonding with use of disulfide bridges.

### [edit] Quaternary Structure

Many proteins contain 2 or more different polypeptide chains that are held in
association by the same non-covalent forces that stabilize the tertiary
structures of proteins. Proteins with multiple polypetide chains are
oligomeric proteins. The structure formed by monomer-monomer interaction in an
oligomeric protein is known as quaternary structure.

Oligomeric proteins can be composed of multiple identical polypeptide chains
or multiple distinct polypeptide chains. Proteins with identical subunits are
termed homo-oligomers. Proteins containing several distinct polypeptide chains
are termed hetero-oligomers.

Hemoglobin, the oxygen carrying protein of the blood, contains two Î± and two
Î² subunits arranged with a quaternary structure in the form, Î±2Î²2.
Hemoglobin is, therefore, a hetero-oligomeric protein(I. Shahid et al., 2008).
LUCAS

## [edit] Forces Controlling Protein Structure

### [edit] Hydrogen Bonding

Polypeptides contain numerous proton donors and acceptors both in their
backbone and in the R-groups of the amino acids. The environment in which
proteins are found also contains ample H-bond donors and acceptors of the
water molecule. H-bonding, therefore, occurs not only within and between
polypeptide chains but with the surrounding aqueous medium.

### [edit] Hydrophobic Forces

Proteins are composed of amino acids that contain either hydrophilic or
hydrophobic R-groups. It is the nature of the interaction of the different
R-groups with the aqueous environment that plays the major role in shaping
protein structure. The spontaneous folded state of globular proteins is a
reflection of a balance between the opposing energetics of H-bonding between
hydrophilic R-groups and the aqueous environment and the repulsion from the
aqueous environment by the hydrophobic R-groups. The hydrophobicity of certain
amino acid R-groups tends to drive them away from the exterior of proteins and
into the interior. This driving force restricts the available conformations
into which a protein may fold.

### [edit] Electrostatic Forces

Electrostatic forces are mainly of three types; charge-charge, charge-dipole
and dipole-dipole. Typical charge-charge interactions that favor protein
folding are those between oppositely charged R-groups such as K or R and D or
E. A substantial component of the energy involved in protein folding is
charge-dipole interactions. This refers to the interaction of ionized R-groups
of amino acids with the dipole of the water molecule. The slight dipole moment
that exist in the polar R-groups of amino acid also influences their
interaction with water. It is, therefore, understandable that the majority of
the amino acids found on the exterior surfaces of globular proteins contain
charged or polar R-groups.

### [edit] van der Waals Forces

There are both attractive and repulsive van der Waals forces that control
protein folding. Attractive van der Waals forces involve the interactions
among induced dipoles that arise from fluctuations in the charge densities
that occur between adjacent uncharged non-bonded atoms. Repulsive van der
Waals forces involve the interactions that occur when uncharged non-bonded
atoms come very close together but do not induce dipoles. The repulsion is the
result of the electron-electron repulsion that occurs as two clouds of
electrons begin to overlap. Although van der Waals forces are extremely weak,
relative to other forces governing conformation, it is the huge number of such
interactions that occur in large protein molecules that make them significant
to the folding of proteins.

### [edit] Complex Protein Structures

Proteins also are found to be covalently conjugated with carbohydrates. These
modifications occur following the synthesis (translation) of proteins and are,
therefore, termed post-translational modifications. These forms of
modification impart specialized functions upon the resultant proteins.
Proteins covalently associated with carbohydrates are termed glycoproteins.
Glycoproteins are of two classes, N-linked and O-linked, referring to the site
of covalent attachment of the sugar moieties. N-linked sugars are attached to
the amide nitrogen of the R-group of asparagine; O-linked sugars are attached
to the hydroxyl groups of either serine or threonine and occasionally to the
hydroxyl group of the modified amino acid, hydroxylysine.

There are extremely important glycoproteins found on the surface of
erythrocytes. It is the variability in the composition of the carbohydrate
portions of many glycoproteins and glycolipids of erythrocytes that determines
blood group specificities. There are at least 100 blood group determinants,
most of which are due to carbohydrate differences. The most common blood
groups, A, B, and O, are specified by the activity of specific gene products
whose activities are to incorporate distinct sugar groups onto RBC membrane
glycoshpingolipids as well as secreted glycoproteins.

Structural complexes involving protein associated with lipid via noncovalent
interactions are termed lipoproteins. The distinct roles of lipoproteins are
described on the linked page. Their major function in the body is to aid in
the storage transport of lipid and cholesterol.

### [edit] Amino-Terminal Sequence Determination

Prior to sequencing peptides it is necessary to eliminate disulfide bonds
within peptides and between peptides. Several different chemical reactions can
be used in order to permit separation of peptide strands and prevent protein
conformations that are dependent upon disulfide bonds. The most common
treatments are to use either 2-mercaptoethanol or dithiothreitol (DTT). Both
of these chemicals reduce disulfide bonds. To prevent reformation of the
disulfide bonds the peptides are treated with iodoacetic acid in order to
alkylate the free sulfhydryls.

There are three major chemical techniques for sequencing peptides and proteins
from the N-terminus. These are the Sanger, Dansyl chloride and Edman
techniques.

Sanger's Reagent

    This sequencing technique utilizes the compound, 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNF) which reacts with the N-terminal residue under alkaline conditions. The derivatized amino acid can be hydrolyzed and will be labeled with a dinitrobenzene group that imparts a yellow color to the amino acid. Separation of the modified amino acids (DNP-derivative) by electrophoresis and comparison with the migration of DNP-derivative standards allows for the identification of the N-terminal amino acid.
Dansyl chloride

    Like DNF, dansyl chloride reacts with the N-terminal residue under alkaline conditions. Analysis of the modified amino acids is carried out similarly to the Sanger method except that the dansylated amino acids are detected by fluorescence. This imparts a higher sensitivity into this technique over that of the Sanger method.
Edman degradation

    The utility of the Edman degradation technique is that it allows for additional amino acid sequence to be obtained from the N-terminus inward. Using this method it is possible to obtain the entire sequence of peptides. This method utilizes phenylisothiocyanate to react with the N-terminal residue under alkaline conditions. The resultant phenylthiocarbamyl derivatized amino acid is hydrolyzed in anhydrous acid. The hydrolysis reaction results in a rearrangement of the released N-terminal residue to a phenylthiohydantoin derivative. As in the Sanger and Dansyl chloride methods, the N-terminal residue is tagged with an identifiable marker, however, the added advantage of the Edman process is that the remainder of the peptide is intact. The entire sequence of reactions can be repeated over and over to obtain the sequences of the peptide. This process has subsequently been automated to allow rapid and efficient sequencing of even extremely small quantities of peptide.
Name (Residue) 3-letter  
code Single  
code Relative  
abundance  
(%) E.C. MW pK VdW volume  
(Ã Â³) Charged,  
Polar,  
Hydrophobic,  
Neutral  
  
Alanine ALA A 13.0 71 67 H  
Arginine ARG R 5.3 157 12.5 148 C+  
Asparagine ASN N 9.9 114 96 P  
Aspartate ASP D 9.9 114 3.9 91 C-  
Cysteine CYS C 1.8 103 86 P  
Glutamate GLU E 10.8 128 4.3 109 C-  
Glutamine GLN Q 10.8 128 114 P  
Glycine GLY G 7.8 57 48 N  
Histidine HIS H 0.7 137 6.0 118 P,C+  
Isoleucine ILE I 4.4 113 124 H  
Leucine LEU L 7.8 113 124 H  
Lysine LYS K 7.0 129 10.5 135 C+  
Methionine MET M 3.8 131 124 H  
Phenylalanine PHE F 3.3 147 135 H  
Proline PRO P 4.6 97 90 H  
Serine SER S 6.0 87 73 P  
Threonine THR T 4.6 101 93 P  
Tryptophan TRP W 1.0 186 163 P  
Tyrosine TYR Y 2.2 163 10.1 141 P  
Valine VAL V 6.0 99 105 H  
The 20 naturally occurring amino acids can be divided into several groups
based on their chemical proporties. Important factors are charge,
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity, size and functional groups. The nature of the
interaction of the different side chains with the aqueous environment plays a
major role in molding protein structure. Hydrophobic side chains tends to be
buried in the middle of the protein, whereas hydrophilic side chains are
exposed to the solvent.

Examples of hydrophobic residues are: Leucine, isoleucine, phenylalanine, and
valine, and to a lesser extent tyrosine, alanine and tryptophan. The charge of
the side chains plays an important role in protein structures, since ion
bonding can stabilize proteins structures, and an unpaired charge in the
middle of a protein can disrupt structures. Charged residues are strongly
hydrophilic, and are usually found on the out side of proteins. Positively
charged side chains are found in lysine and arginine, and in some cases in
histidine. Negative charges are found in glutamate and aspartate. The rest of
the amino acids have smaller generally hydrophilic side chains with various
functional groups. Serine and threonine have hydroxylgroups, and aspargine and
glutamine have amide groups. Some amino acids have special properties such as
cysteine, that can form covalent disulfide bonds to other cysteines, proline
that is cyclical, and glycine that is small, and more flexible than the other
amino acids.

## [edit] The peptide bond

<IMG>

<IMG>

Two amino acids

<IMG>

<IMG>

Bond angles for Ï and Ï

Two amino acids can be combined in a condensation reaction. By repeating this
reaction, long chains of residues (amino acids in a peptide bond) can be
generated. This reaction is catalysed by the ribosome in a process known as
translation. The peptide bond is in fact planar due to the delocalization of
the electrons from the double bond. The rigid peptide dihedral angle, Ï (the
bond between C1 and N) is always close to 180 degrees. The dihedral angles phi
Ï (the bond between N and CÎ±) and psi Ï (the bond between CÎ± and C1) can
have a certain range of possible values. These angles are the degrees of
freedom of a protein, they control the protein's three dimensional structure.
They are restrained by geometry to allowed ranges typical for particular
secondary structure elements, and represented in a Ramachandran plot. A few
important bond lengths are given in the table below.

Peptide bond Average length Single bond Average length Hydrogen bond Average
(Â±30)  
Ca - C 153 pm C - C 154 pm O-H --- O-H 280 pm  
C - N 133 pm C - N 148 pm N-H --- O=C 290 pm  
N - Ca 146 pm C - O 143 pm O-H --- O=C 280 pm  
## [edit] Primary structure

Main article: Primary structure

The sequence of the different amino acids is called the primary structure of
the peptide or protein. Counting of residues always starts at the N-terminal
end (NH2-group), which is the end where the amino group is not involved in a
peptide bond. The primary structure of a protein is determined by the gene
corresponding to the protein. A specific sequence of nucleotides in DNA is
transcribed into mRNA, which is read by the ribosome in a process called
translation. The sequence of a protein is unique to that protein, and defines
the structure and function of the protein. The sequence of a protein can be
determined by methods such as Edman degradation or tandem mass spectrometry.
Often however, it is read directly from the sequence of the gene using the
genetic code. Post-transcriptional modifications such as disulfide formation,
phosphorylations and glycosylations are usually also considered a part of the
primary structure, and cannot be read from the gene.

## [edit] Secondary structure

Main article: Secondary structure

By building models of peptides using known information about bond lengths and
angles, the first elements of secondary structure, the alpha helix and the
beta sheet, were suggested in 1951 by Linus Pauling and coworkers.[2] Both the
alpha helix and the beta-sheet represent a way of saturating all the hydrogen
bond donors and acceptors in the peptide backbone. These secondary structure
elements only depend on properties that all the residues have in common,
explaining why they occur frequently in most proteins. Since then other
elements of secondary structure have been discovered such as various loops and
other forms of helices. The part of the backbone that is not in a regular
secondary structure is said to be random coil. Each of these two secondary
structure elements have a regular geometry, meaning they are constrained to
specific values of the dihedral angles Ï and Ï. Thus they can be found in a
specific region of the Ramachandran plot.

<IMG>

<IMG>

The left panel shows the hydrogen bonding in an actual Î±-helix backbone. Note
that the nth residue O (Lys 143) bonds to the (n 4)th following residue's N
(Arg 147). The actual values of some displayed H-bond distances give you some
idea about the variations to expect within a helix. The center panel includes
the side chains which were omitted in the left panel for clarity. You see the
side chains pointing towards the N-terminal of the chain (lower residue
numbers) and thus it is usually possible to determine the direction of the
helix quite well during initial model building. A 0.2 nm electron density is
shown in the right panel

Here are some more representation of the same helix.

<IMG>

Backbone

<IMG>

Secondary structure cartoon ("ribbon" or "linguini diagram")  
  

Turns, loops and a few other secondary structure elements such as a 3-10 helix
complete the picture. We have now enough pieces to assemble a complete
protein, displaying its typical tertiary structure.

## [edit] Tertiary structure

Main article: Tertiary structure

The elements of secondary structure are usually folded into a compact shape
using a variety of loops and turns. The formation of tertiary structure is
usually driven by the burial of hydrophobic residues, but other interactions
such as hydrogen bonding, ionic interactions and disulfide bonds can also
stabilize the tertiary structure. The tertiary structure encompasses all the
noncovalent interactions that are not considered secondary structure, and is
what defines the overall fold of the protein, and is usually indispensable for
the function of the protein.

## [edit] Quaternary structure

Main article: Quaternary structure

The quaternary structure is the interaction between several chains of peptide
bonds. The individual chains are called subunits. The individual subunits are
usually not covalently connected, but might be connected by a disulfide bond.
Not all proteins have quaternary structure, since they might be functional as
monomers. The quaternary structure is stabilized by the same range of
interactions as the tertiary structure. Complexes of two or more polypeptides
(i.e. multiple subunits) are called multimers. Specifically it would be called
a dimer if it contains two subunits, a trimer if it contains three subunits,
and a tetramer if it contains four subunits. The subunits are usually related
to one another by symmetry axes, such as a 2-fold axis in a dimer. Multimers
made up of identical subunits may be referred to with a prefix of "homo-"
(e.g. a homotetramer) and those made up of different subunits may be referred
to with a prefix of "hetero-" (e.g. a heterotetramer, such as the two alpha
and two beta chains of hemoglobin).

## [edit] Side chain conformation

The atoms along the side chain are named with Greek letters in Greek
alphabetical order: Î±, Î², Î³, Î´, Ñ and so on. CÎ± refers to the carbon
atom closest to the carbonyl group of that amino acid, CÎ² the second closest
and so on. The CÎ± is usually considered a part of the backbone. The dihedral
angles around the bonds between these atoms are named Ï1, Ï2, Ï3 etc. E.g.
the first and second carbon atom in the side chain of lysine is named Î± and
Î², and the dihedral angle around the Î±-Î² bond is named Ï1. Side chains can
be in different conformations called gauche(-), trans and gauche(+). Side
chains generally tend to try to come into a staggered conformation around Ï2,
driven by the minimization of the overlap between the electron orbitals of the
hydrogen atoms.

## [edit] Domains, motifs, and folds in protein structure

Many proteins are organized into several units. A structural domain is an
element of the protein's overall structure that is self-stabilizing and often
folds independently of the rest of the protein chain. Many domains are not
unique to the protein products of one gene or one gene family but instead
appear in a variety of proteins. Domains often are named and singled out
because they figure prominently in the biological function of the protein they
belong to; for example, the "calcium-binding domain of calmodulin". Because
they are self-stabilizing, domains can be "swapped" by genetic engineering
between one protein and another to make chimeras. A motif in this sense refers
to a small specific combination of secondary structural elements (such as
helix-turn-helix). These elements are often called supersecondary structures.
Fold refers to a global type of arrangement, like helix bundle or beta-barrel.
Structure motifs usually consist of just a few elements, e.g. the 'helix-turn-
helix' has just three. Note that while the spatial sequence of elements is the
same in all instances of a motif, they may be encoded in any order within the
underlying gene. Protein structural motifs often include loops of variable
length and unspecified structure, which in effect create the "slack" necessary
to bring together in space two elements that are not encoded by immediately
adjacent DNA sequences in a gene. Note also that even when two genes encode
secondary structural elements of a motif in the same order, nevertheless they
may specify somewhat different sequences of amino acids. This is true not only
because of the complicated relationship between tertiary and primary
structure, but because the size of the elements varies from one protein and
the next. Despite the fact that there are about 100,000 different proteins
expressed in eukaryotic systems, there are much fewer different domains,
structural motifs and folds. This is partly a consequence of evolution, since
genes or parts of genes can be doubled or moved around within the genome. This
means that, for example, a protein domain might be moved from one protein to
another thus giving the protein a new function. Because of these mechanisms
pathways and mechanisms tends to be reused in several different proteins.

## [edit] Protein folding

Main article: Protein folding

The process by which the higher structures form is called protein folding and
is a consequence of the primary structure. A unique polypeptide may have more
than one stable folded conformation, which could have a different biological
activity, but usually, only one conformation is considered to be the active,
or native conformation.

## [edit] Structure classification

Several methods have been developed for the structural classification of
proteins. These seek to classify the data in the Protein Data Bank in a
structured order. Several databases exist which classify proteins using
different methods. SCOP, CATH and FSSP are the largest ones. The methods used
are purely manual, manual and automated, and purely automated. Work is being
done to better integrate the current data. The classification is consistent
between SCOP, CATH and FSSP for the majority of proteins which have been
classified, but there are still some differences and inconsistencies.

## [edit] Protein structure determination

Around 90% of the protein structures available in the Protein Data Bank have
been determined by X-ray crystallography. This method allows one to measure
the 3D density distribution of electrons in the protein (in the crystallized
state) and thereby infer the 3D coordinates of all the atoms to be determined
to a certain resolution. Roughly 9% of the known protein structures have been
obtained by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance techniques, which can also be used to
determine secondary structure. Note that aspects of the secondary structure as
whole can be determined via other biochemical techniques such as circular
dichroism. Secondary structure can also be predicted with a high degree of
accuracy (see next section). Cryo-electron microscopy has recently become a
means of determining protein structures to high resolution (less than 5
angstroms or 0.5 nanometer) and is anticipated to increase in power as a tool
for high resolution work in the next decade. This technique is still a
valuable resource for researchers working with very large protein complexes
such as virus coat proteins and amyloid fibers.

A rough guide to the resolution of protein structures Resolution Meaning  
>4.0 Individual coordinates meaningless  
3.0 - 4.0 Fold possibly correct, but errors are very likely. Many sidechains
placed with wrong rotamer.  
2.5 - 3.0 Fold likely correct except that some surface loops might be
mismodelled. Several long, thin sidechains (lys, glu, gln, etc) and small
sidechains (ser, val, thr, etc) likely to have wrong rotamers.  
2.0 - 2.5 As 2.5 - 3.0, but number of sidechains in wrong rotamer is
considerably less. Many small errors can normally be detected. Fold normally
correct and number of errors in surface loops is small. Water molecules and
small ligands become visible.  
1.5 - 2.0 Few residues have wrong rotamer. Many small errors can normally be
detected. Folds are extremely rarely incorrect, even in surface loops.  
0.5 - 1.5 In general, structures have almost no errors at this resolution.
Rotamer libraries and geometry studies are made from these structures.  
## [edit] Computational prediction of protein structure

The generation of a protein sequence is much simpler than the generation of a
protein structure. However, the structure of a protein gives much more insight
in the function of the protein than its sequence. Therefore, a number of
methods for the computational prediction of protein structure from its
sequence have been proposed. Ab initio prediction methods use just the
sequence of the protein. Threading uses existing protein structures. Homology
Modeling to build a reliable 3D model for a protein of unknown structure from
one or more related proteins of known structure. The recent progress and
challenges in protein structure prediction was reviewed by Zhang [3].

Rosetta@home is a distributed computing project which tries to predict the
structures of proteins with massive sampling on thousands of home computers.
Foldit is a video game designed to use human pattern recognition and puzzle
solving abilities to improve existing software.

## [edit] Software

There are many available software packages, such as free web-based STING, used
to visualize and analyze protein structures. Another example is the
FeatureMap3D web-server which can visualize the quality of a protein-protein
alignment in 3D and be used to map sequence feature annotation such as the
underlying Intron/Exon structure onto a protein structure.

Several packages, such as Quantum Pharmaceuticals software[4], can be used to
predict conformational changes of proteins and its influence on protein's
functions.

Several methods have been developed to compare structures of different
proteins. Please see structural alignment.

Computational tools are also frequently employed to check experimental and
theoretical models of protein structures for errors (examples: ProSA, NQ-
Flipper, Verify3D, ANOLEA, WHAT_CHECK).

Software for molecular mechanics modeling useful for building and simulation
of protein models.

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Brocchieri L, Karlin S (2005-06-10). Protein length in eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteomes. 33. p. 3390-3400. doi:10.1093/nar/gki615. PMID 15951512.
  2. ^ Pauling L, Corey RB, Branson HR (1951). "The structure of proteins; two hydrogen-bonded helical configurations of the polypeptide chain". Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 37 (4): 205-211. PMID 14816373.
  3. ^ Zhang Y (2008). "Progress and challenges in protein structure prediction". Curr Opin Struct Biol 18 (3): 342-348. doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2008.02.004. Entrez Pubmed 18436442. PMID 18436442.
  4. ^ Quantum Pharmaceuticals software

## [edit] Further reading

  * Chiang YS, Gelfand TI, Kister AE, Gelfand IM (2007). "New classification of supersecondary structures of sandwich-like proteins uncovers strict patterns of strand assemblage.". Proteins. 68 (4): 915-921. PMID 17557333. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17557333.
  * Habeck M, Nilges M, Rieping W (2005). "Bayesian inference applied to macromolecular structure determination". Physical review. E, Statistical, nonlinear, and soft matter physics 72 (3 Pt 1): 031912. PMID 16241487. http://www.spineurope.org/publications/Habeck%20et%20al%20031912%202005.pdf. (Bayesian computational methods for the structure determination from NMR data)

## [edit] External links

  * SSS Database super-secondary structure protein database
  * SPROUTS (Structural Prediction for pRotein fOlding Utility System)
  * ProSA-web Web service for the recognition of errors in experimentally or theoretically determined protein structures
  * NQ-Flipper Check for unfavorable rotamers of Asn and Gln residues in protein structures
  * servers That check nearly 200 aspects of protein structure, like packing, geometry, unfavourable rotamers in general of for Asn, Gln and His especially, strange water molecules, backbone conformations, atom nomenclature, symmetry parameters, etc.
  * Bioinformatics course. An interactive, fully free, course explaining many of the aspects discussed in this wiki entry.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Proteins  
Processes

Protein biosynthesis \- Posttranslational modification \- Protein folding \-
Protein targeting \- Proteome \- Protein methods  
Structures

Protein structure \- Protein structural domains \- Proteasome  
Types

List of types of proteins \- List of proteins \- Membrane protein \- Globular
protein (Globulin, Albumin) - Fibrous protein  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Protein structure determination methods  
High resolution

X-ray crystallography | NMR | Electron crystallography | EPR  
Medium resolution

Cryo-electron microscopy | Fiber diffraction | Mass spectrometry | SAXS  
Spectroscopic

NMR | Circular dichroism | Absorbance | Fluorescence | Fluorescence anisotropy  
Translational Diffusion

Analytical ultracentrifugation | Size exclusion chromatography | Light
scattering | NMR  
Rotational Diffusion

Fluorescence anisotropy | Flow birefringence | Dielectric relaxation | NMR  
Chemical

Hydrogen-deuterium exchange | Site-directed mutagenesis | Chemical
modification  
Thermodynamic

Equilibrium unfolding  
Computational

Protein structure prediction | Molecular docking  
âTertiary structure

Quaternary structureâ  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protein_structure"

Categories: Protein structure

Hidden categories: Cleanup from February 2009 | All pages needing cleanup |
Articles needing additional references from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * Occitan
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Ð£ÐºÑÐ°ÑÐ½ÑÑÐºÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 24 March 2009, at 16:22.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



