
# Microfluidics

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Glass microfluidic devices

Microfluidics deals with the behavior, precise control and manipulation of
fluids that are geometrically constrained to a small, typically sub-
millimeter, scale. Typically, micro means one of the following features:

  * small volumes(nl, pl, fl)
  * small size
  * low energy consumption
  * effects of the micro domain

It is a multidisciplinary field intersecting engineering, physics, chemistry,
microtechnology and biotechnology, with practical applications to the design
of systems in which such small volumes of fluids will be used. Microfluidics
has emerged in the beginning of the 1980s and is used in the development of
inkjet printheads, DNA chips, lab-on-a-chip technology, micro-propulsion, and
micro-thermal technologies.

## Contents

  * 1 Microscale behavior of fluids
  * 2 Effects of micro domain
  * 3 Key application areas
    * 3.1 Continuous-flow microfluidics
    * 3.2 Digital (droplet-based) microfluidics
    * 3.3 DNA chips (microarrays)
    * 3.4 Molecular biology
    * 3.5 Optics
    * 3.6 Acoustic droplet ejection (ADE)
    * 3.7 Fuel cells
  * 4 See also
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading
    * 6.1 Review Papers
    * 6.2 Books
  * 7 External links
    * 7.1 Tutorials and summaries

  
## [edit] Microscale behavior of fluids

<IMG>

<IMG>

Silicone rubber and glass microfluidic devices. Top: a photograph of the
devices. Bottom: DIC micrographs of a serpentine channel ~15 Î¼m wide.

The behavior of fluids at the microscale can differ from 'macrofluidic'
behavior in that factors such as surface tension, energy dissipation, and
fluidic resistance start to dominate the system. Microfluidics studies how
these behaviors change, and how they can be worked around, or exploited for
new uses.

At small scales (channel diameters of around 100 nanometers to several hundred
micrometers) some interesting and sometimes unintuitive properties appear. In
particular, the Reynolds Number (which compares the effect of momentum of a
fluid to the effect of viscosity) can become very low. A key consequence of
this is that fluids, when side-by-side, do not necessarily mix in the
traditional sense; molecular transport between them must often be through
diffusion. This property is important in many microfluidic devices.

## [edit] Effects of micro domain

  * laminar flow
  * surface tension
  * electrowetting
  * fast thermal relaxation
  * electrical surface charges
  * diffusion

## [edit] Key application areas

Microfluidic structures include micropneumatic systems, i.e. microsystems for
the handling of off-chip fluids (liquid pumps, gas valves, etc), and
microfluidic structures for the on-chip handling of nano- and picolitre
volumes. The commercially most successful application today is the inkjet
printhead.

Advances in microfluidics technology are revolutionizing molecular biology
procedures for enzymatic analysis (e.g., glucose and lactate assays), DNA
analysis (e.g., polymerase chain reaction and high-throughput sequencing), and
proteomics. The basic idea of microfluidic biochips is to integrate assay
operations such as detection, as well as sample pre-treatment and sample
preparation on one chip.[1][2]

An emerging application area for biochips is clinical pathology, especially
the immediate point-of-care diagnosis of diseases. In addition, microfluidics-
based devices, capable of continuous sampling and real-time testing of
air/water samples for biochemical toxins and other dangerous pathogens, can
serve as an always-on "bio-smoke alarm" for early warning.

### [edit] Continuous-flow microfluidics

These technologies are based on the manipulation of continuous liquid flow
through microfabricated channels. Actuation of liquid flow is implemented
either by external pressure sources, external mechanical pumps, integrated
mechanical micropumps, or by electrokinetic mechanisms. Continuous-flow
microfluidic operation is the mainstream approach because it is easy to
implement and less sensitive to protein fouling problems. Continuous-flow
devices are adequate for many well-defined and simple biochemical
applications, and for certain tasks such as chemical separation, but they are
less suitable for tasks requiring a high degree of flexibility or complicated
fluid manipulations. These closed-channel systems are inherently difficult to
integrate and scale because the parameters that govern flow field vary along
the flow path making the fluid flow at any one location dependent on the
properties of the entire system. Permanently-etched microstructures also lead
to limited reconfigurability and poor fault tolerance capability.

Process monitoring capabilities in continuous-flow systems can be achieved
with highly sensitive microfluidic flow sensors based on MEMS technology which
offer resolutions down to the nanoliter range.

### [edit] Digital (droplet-based) microfluidics

Alternatives to the above closed-channel continuous-flow systems include novel
open structures, where discrete, independently controllable droplets are
manipulated on a substrate. Following the analogy of microelectronics, this
approach is referred to as digital microfluidics. By using discrete unit-
volume droplets, a microfluidic function can be reduced to a set of repeated
basic operations, i.e., moving one unit of fluid over one unit of distance.
This "digitization" method facilitates the use of a hierarchical and cell-
based approach for microfluidic biochip design. Therefore, digital
microfluidics offers a flexible and scalable system architecture as well as
high fault-tolerance capability. Moreover, because each droplet can be
controlled independently, these systems also have dynamic reconfigurability,
whereby groups of unit cells in a microfluidic array can be reconfigured to
change their functionality during the concurrent execution of a set of
bioassays. One common actuation method for digital microfluidics is
electrowetting-on-dielectric (EWOD). One limiting factor for applying EWOD to
biological samples is the surface fouling due to proteins severely damages the
controllability of droplets. Another recently developed technology is based on
acoustically induced droplet transport employing Surface Acoustic Waves.

### [edit] DNA chips (microarrays)

Early biochips were based on the concept of a DNA microarray, e.g., the
GeneChip DNAarray from Affymetrix, which is a piece of glass, plastic or
silicon substrate on which pieces of DNA (probes) are affixed in a microscopic
array. Similar to a DNA microarray, a protein array is a miniature array where
a multitude of different capture agents, most frequently monoclonal
antibodies, are deposited on a chip surface; they are used to determine the
presence and/or amount of proteins in biological samples, e.g., blood. A
drawback of DNA and protein arrays is that they are neither reconfigurable nor
scalable after manufacture.

### [edit] Molecular biology

In addition to microarrays biochips have been designed for two-dimensional
electrophoresis[3], transcriptome analysis[4], and PCR amplification.[5] Other
applications include various electrophoresis and liquid chromatography
applications for proteins and DNA, cell separation, in particular blood cell
separation, protein analysis, cell manipulation and analysis including cell
viability analysis and microorganism capturing.[2]

### [edit] Optics

Tuneable Microlens Array[6][7]

### [edit] Acoustic droplet ejection (ADE)

Acoustic droplet ejection uses a pulse of ultrasound to move low volumes of
fluids (typically nanoliters or picoliters) without any physical contact. This
technology focuses acoustic energy into a fluid sample in order to eject
droplets as small as a millionth of a millionth of a liter (picoliter = 10-12
liter). ADE technology is a very gentle process, and it can be used to
transfer proteins, high molecular weight DNA and live cells without damage or
loss of viability. This feature makes the technology suitable for a wide
variety of applications including proteomics and cell-based assays.

### [edit] Fuel cells

For more details on this topic, see Electroosmotic pump.

Microfluidic fuel cells can use laminar flow to separate the fuel and its
oxidant to control the interaction of the two fluids without a physical
barrier as would be required in conventional fuel cells. [8][9][10]

## [edit] See also

  * Nanofluidics
  * List of microfluidics research groups
  * Lab on a chip
  * Î¼Fluids@Home

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Herold, KE; Rasooly, A (editor) (2009). Lab-on-a-Chip Technology: Fabrication and Microfluidics. Caister Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-904455-46-2.
  2. ^ a b Herold, KE; Rasooly, A (editor) (2009). Lab-on-a-Chip Technology: Biomolecular Separation and Analysis. Caister Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-904455-47-9.
  3. ^ Fan et al (2009). "Two-Dimensional Electrophoresis in a Chip". Lab-on-a-Chip Technology: Biomolecular Separation and Analysis. Caister Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-904455-47-9.
  4. ^ Bontoux et al (2009). "Elaborating Lab-on-a-Chips for Single-cell Transcriptome Analysis". Lab-on-a-Chip Technology: Biomolecular Separation and Analysis. Caister Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-904455-47-9.
  5. ^ Cady, NC (2009). "Microchip-based PCR Amplification Systems". Lab-on-a-Chip Technology: Biomolecular Separation and Analysis. Caister Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-904455-47-9.
  6. ^ Liquid micro-lens array activated by selective electrowetting on lithium niobate substrates S. Grilli, L. Miccio, V. Vespini, A. Finizio, S. De Nicola, and P. Ferraro Optics Express 16, 8084-8093 (2008). http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/OE.16.008084
  7. ^ P. Ferraro, L. Miccio, S. Grilli, A. Finizio, S. De Nicola, and V. Vespini, "Manipulating Thin Liquid Films for Tunable Microlens Arrays," Optics & Photonics News 19, 34-34 (2008) http://www.opticsinfobase.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OPN-19-12-34
  8. ^ Water Management in PEM Fuel Cells
  9. ^ Building a Better Fuel Cell Using Microfluidics
  10. ^ Fuel Cell Initiative at MnIT Microfluidics Laboratory

## [edit] Further reading

### [edit] Review Papers

  * Whitesides, G. M.; "The origins and the future of microfluidics"; Nature 2006, 442, 368-373. [1]
  * Squires, T. M.; Quake, S. R.; Reviews of Modern Physics 2005, 77, 977-1026. Microfluidics: Fluid physics at the nanoliter scale

### [edit] Books

  * Herold, KE; Rasooly, A (editor) (2009). Lab-on-a-Chip Technology: Fabrication and Microfluidics. Caister Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-904455-46-2.
  * Herold, KE; Rasooly, A (editor) (2009). Lab-on-a-Chip Technology: Biomolecular Separation and Analysis. Caister Academic Press. ISBN 978-1-904455-47-9.

## [edit] External links

Sister project Wikibooks has a book on the topic of

Microfluidics  
  * Biomicrofluidics, an open-source peer-reviewed journal published by the American Institute of Physics
  * Videos and animations of Microfluidic devices and their applications

  

### [edit] Tutorials and summaries

  * MIFLUS - Microfluidics Terminology tree
  * Living La Vida LOC(a): A Brief Insight into the World of "Lab on a Chip" and Microfluidics
  * \- Sacraficial Carbon Pastes and Tapes for the manufacture of Microchannels

v â¢ d â¢ e

Microtechnology  
MEMS Â· MST Â· Micromachinery  
Basic structures

Interdigital transducer Â· Cantilever Â· Microchannel  
Applications

Sensors

Microbolometer  
Actuators

Comb drive Â· Scratch Drive Actuator Â· Thermal actuator  
Switches

Digital micromirror device Â· Optical switch  
Other

IBM Millipede Â· RF-MEMS Â· MOEMS Â· Bio-MEMS Â· Microfluidics Â· Micropower  
Processes

General

Surface micromachining Â· Bulk micromachining Â· HAR micromachining Â·
Deposition Â· Lithography Â· Etching Â· Wire bonding  
Specific

LOCOS Â· STI Â· LIGA Â· HexSil Â· SIMPLE Â· SCREAM Â· Lift-off Â· SOI Â· Smart
Cut  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microfluidics"

Categories: Fluid dynamics | Nanotechnology | Microfluidics | Biotechnology |
Gas technologies

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 8 April 2009, at 04:44 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



