
# Private network

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

## Contents

  * 1 Link-local addresses
  * 2 Private networks and IPv6
  * 3 Private use of other reserved addresses
  * 4 RFC References
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

  
In Internet terminology, a private network is typically a network that uses
private IP address space, following the standards set by RFC 1918 and RFC
4193. These addresses are common in home and office local area networks
(LANs), as using globally routable addresses is seen as impractical or
unnecessary. Private IP addresses were originally created due to the shortage
of publicly registered IP addresses created by the IPv4 standard, but are also
a feature of the next generation Internet Protocol, IPv6.

These addresses are private because they are not globally assigned, meaning
they aren't allocated to a specific organization--instead, any organization
needing private address space can use these addresses without needing approval
from a regional Internet registry (RIR). Consequently, they are not routable
on the public Internet, meaning that if such a private network wishes to
connect to the Internet, it must use either a Network Address Translation
(NAT) gateway, or a proxy server.

The most common use of these addresses is in home networks, since most
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) only allocate a single IP address to each
customer, but many homes have more than one networking device (for example,
several computers, or a printer). In this situation, a NAT gateway is almost
always used to provide Internet connectivity. They are also commonly used in
corporate networks, which for security reasons, are not connected directly to
the internet, meaning globally routable addresses are unnecessary. Often a
proxy, SOCKS gateway, or similar is used to provide restricted internet access
to internal users. In both cases, private addresses are seen as adding
security to the internal network, since it's impossible for an Internet host
to connect directly to an internal system.

Because many internal networks use the same private IP addresses, a common
problem when trying to merge two such networks (e.g. during a company merger
or takeover) is that both organizations have allocated the same IPs in their
networks. In this case, either one network must renumber, often a difficult
and time-consuming task, or a NAT router must be placed between the networks
to translate one network's addresses before they can reach the other side.

It is not uncommon for private address space to "leak" onto the Internet in
various ways. Poorly configured private networks often attempt reverse DNS
lookups for these addresses, putting extra load on the Internet's root
nameservers. The AS112 project mitigates this load by providing special
"blackhole" anycast nameservers for private addresses which only return "not
found" answers for these queries. Organizational edge routers are usually
configured to drop ingress IP traffic for these networks, which can occur
either by accident, or from malicious traffic using a spoofed source address.
Less commonly, ISP edge routers will drop such ingress traffic from customers,
which reduces the impact to the Internet of such misconfigured or malicious
hosts on the customer's network.

A common misconception is that these addresses are not routable. While not
routable on the public Internet, they are routable within an organization or
site.

The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) has directed IANA to reserve the
following IPv4 address ranges for private networks, as published in RFC 1918:

RFC1918 name IP address range number of addresses classful description largest
CIDR block (subnet mask) host id size  
24-bit block 10.0.0.0 â 10.255.255.255 16,777,216 single class A 10.0.0.0/8
(255.0.0.0) 24 bits  
20-bit block 172.16.0.0 â 172.31.255.255 1,048,576 16 contiguous class Bs
172.16.0.0/12 (255.240.0.0) 20 bits  
16-bit block 192.168.0.0 â 192.168.255.255 65,536 256 contiguous class Cs
192.168.0.0/16 (255.255.0.0) 16 bits  
Note that classful addressing is obsolete and no longer used on the Internet.
For example, while 10.0.0.0/8 would be a single class A network, it is not
uncommon for organisations to divide it into smaller /16 or /24 networks.

## [edit] Link-local addresses

Main article: Zero configuration networking

A second set of private networks is the link-local address range codified in
RFC 3330 and RFC 3927. The intention behind these RFCs is to provide an IP
address (and by implication, network connectivity) without a DHCP server being
available and without having to configure a network address manually. The
network 169.254/16 has been reserved for this purpose. Within this address
range, the networks 169.254.0.0/24 and 169.254.255.0/24 have been set aside
for future use.

If a host on an IEEE 802 (ethernet) network cannot obtain a network address
via DHCP, an address from 169.254.0.0 to 169.254.255.255 is assigned
pseudorandomly. The standard prescribes that address collisions must be
handled gracefully.

Link-local addresses have even more restrictive rules than the private network
addresses defined in RFC 1918: packets to or from link-local addresses must
not be allowed to pass through a router at all (RFC 3927, section 7).

## [edit] Private networks and IPv6

The concept of private networks and special addresses for such networks has
been carried over to the next generation of the Internet Protocol, IPv6.

The address block `fc00::/7` has been reserved by IANA as described in RFC
4193. These addresses are called Unique Local Addresses (ULA). They are
defined as being unicast in character and contain a 40-bit random number in
the routing prefix to prevent collisions when two private networks are
interconnected. Despite being inherently local in usage, the IPv6 address
scope of unique local addresses is global (cf. IPv6, section "Address
Scopes").

A former standard proposed the use of so-called "site-local" addresses in the
fec0::/10 range, but due to major concerns about scalability and the poor
definition of what constitutes a site, its use has been deprecated since
September 2004 by RFC 3879.

## [edit] Private use of other reserved addresses

Several other address ranges, in addition to the official private ranges, are
reserved for other or future uses, including 1.0.0.0/8 and 2.0.0.0/8[1].
Though discouraged, some enterprises have begun to use this address space
internally for interconnecting private networks to eliminate the chance of
address conflicts when using standards-based private ranges.[citation needed]

IANA has stated that it will, eventually, allocate these ranges to the
Regional Internet Registries and thus significant addressing problem might be
encountered in the future due to non-standard use of reserved blocks.

## [edit] RFC References

  * RFC 1918 â "Address Allocation for Private Internets"
  * RFC 2036 â ""Observations on the use of Components of the Class A Address Space within the Internet."
  * RFC 2050 â ""Internet Registry IP Allocation Guidelines""
  * RFC 2101 â ""IPv4 Address Behaviour Today.""
  * RFC 2663 â ""IP Network Address Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations."
  * RFC 3022 â ""Traditional IP Network Address Translator (Traditional NAT)""
  * RFC 3330 â ""Special-Use IPv4 Addresses. IANA. September 2002::
  * RFC 3879 â "Deprecating Site Local Addresses"
  * RFC 3927 â "Dynamic Configuration of IPv4 Link-Local Addresses"
  * RFC 4193 â "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses"

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Internet Protocol v4 Address Space

## [edit] External links

  * Generator for RFC 4193 Addresses (source code available from same page)

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Private_network"

Categories: Internet architecture

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð¡ÑÐ¿ÑÐºÐ¸ / Srpski

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 15 April 2009, at 15:54 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



