
# Fashion design

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Fashion house" redirects here. For the 2006 telenovela, see Fashion House.

<IMG>

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please
improve this article if you can. (March 2008)  
Fashion design is the applied art dedicated to clothing and lifestyle
accessories created within the cultural and social influences of a specific
time. ' Fashion design differs from costume design due to its core product
having a built in obsolescence usually of one to two seasons. A season is
defined as either autumn/winter or spring/summer. Fashion design is generally
considered to have started in the 19th century with Charles Frederick Worth
who was the first designer to have his label sewn into the garments that he
created. While all articles of clothing from any time period are studied by
academics as costume design, only clothing created after 1858 could be
considered as fashion design.

Some fashion designers are self-employed and design for individual clients.
Other high-fashion designers cater to specialty stores or high-fashion
department stores. These designers create original garments, as well as those
that follow established fashion trends. Most fashion designers, however, work
for apparel manufacturers, creating designs of menâs, womenâs, and
childrenâs fashions for the mass market. Large designer brands which have a
'name' as their brand such as Calvin Klein, Ralph Lauren, or Chanel are likely
to be designed by a team of individual designers under the direction of a
designer director.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Two seamstresses, Rue du Claire by Paul Signac

## Contents

  * 1 History of fashion design
    * 1.1 Culture beginnings
    * 1.2 Late twentieth century
  * 2 Types of fashion
  * 3 Designing a collection
  * 4 Areas of work
  * 5 US Income
  * 6 Fashion education
  * 7 Areas of fashion design
  * 8 Fashion design around the world
    * 8.1 American fashion design
    * 8.2 British fashion design
    * 8.3 French fashion design
    * 8.4 Italian fashion design
    * 8.5 Japanese fashion design
  * 9 Fashion design terms
  * 10 Footnotes

  
## [edit] History of fashion design

Main article: History of fashion design

### [edit] Culture beginnings

The first fashion designer who was not simply a dressmaker was Charles
Frederick Worth. Before the former draper set up his maison couture (fashion
house) in Paris, clothing design and creation was handled by largely anonymous
seamstresses, and high fashion descended from that worn at royal courts.
Worth's success was such that he was able to dictate to his customers what
they should wear, instead of following their lead as earlier dressmakers had
done. The term couturier was in fact first created in order to describe him.

It was during this period that many design houses began to hire artists to
sketch or paint designs for garments. The images were shown to clients, which
was much cheaper than producing an actual sample garment in the workroom. If
the client liked their design, they ordered it and the resulting garment made
money for the house. Thus, the tradition of designers sketching out garment
designs instead of presenting completed garments on models to customers began
as an economy.

At this time in fashion history the division between haute couture and ready-
to-wear was not sharply defined. The two separate modes of production were
still far from being competitors, and, indeed, they often co-existed in houses
where the seamstresses moved freely between made-to-measure and ready-made.

Around the start of the twentieth-century fashion magazines began to include
photographs and became even more influential than in the past. In cities
throughout the world these magazines were greatly sought-after and had a
profound effect on public taste. Talented illustratorsâamong them Paul
Iribe, George Lepape and George Barbierâdrew exquisite fashion plates for
these publications, which covered the most recent developments in fashion and
beauty. Perhaps the most famous of these magazines was La Gazette du Bon Ton,
which was founded in 1912 by Lucien Vogel and regularly published until 1925
(with the exception of the war years).

World War II created many radical changes in the fashion industry. After the
war, Paris's reputation as the global center of fashion began to crumble and
off-the-peg and mass-manufactured fashions became increasingly popular. A new
youth style emerged in the Fifties, changing the focus of fashion forever. As
the installation of central heating became more widespread the age of minimum-
care garments began and lighter textiles and, eventually, synthetics, were
introduced.

Faced with the threat of a factory-made fashion-based product, Parisian haute
couture mounted its defenses, but to little effect, as it could not stop
fashion leaking out onto the streets. Before long, whole categories of women
hitherto restricted to inferior substitutes to haute couture would enjoy a
greatly enlarged freedom of choice. Dealing in far larger quantities,
production cycles were longer than those of couture workshops, which meant
that stylists planning their lines for the twice-yearly collections had to try
to guess more than a year in advance what their customers would want. A new
power was afoot, that of the street, constituting a further threat to the
dictatorship of the masters of coutures.

### [edit] Late twentieth century

During the late twentieth century fashions began to criss-cross international
boundaries with rapidity. Popular Western styles were adopted all over the
world, and many designers from outside of the West had a profound impact on
fashion. Synthetic materials such as Lycra, Spandex, and viscose became
widely-used, and fashion, after two decades of looking to the future, once
again turned to the past for integration. Currently, modern fashion has seen a
reference to technology such as designers Hussein and Miuccia Prada who have
introduced industrial textiles and modern technology into their fall
collections.

## [edit] Types of fashion

There are three main categories of fashion design, although these may be split
up into additional, more specific categories:

Haute couture The type of fashion design which predominated until the 1950s
was "made-to-measure" or haute couture, (French for high-fashion). The term
made-to-measure may be used for any garment that is created for a specific
client. Haute couture, however, is a protected term which can only be
officially used by companies that meet certain well-defined standards set by
the Chambre Syndicale de la Couture. Nonetheless, many ready-to-wear, and even
mass market labels, claim to produce haute couture, when in fact, according to
established standards, they do not. A couture garment is made to order for an
individual customer, and is usually made from high-quality, expensive fabric,
sewn with extreme attention to detail and finish, often using time-consuming,
hand-executed techniques. Look and fit take priority over the cost of
materials and the time it takes to make.

Ready-to-wear Ready-to-wear clothes are a cross between haute couture and mass
market. They are not made for individual customers, but great care is taken in
the choice and cut of the fabric. Clothes are made in small quantities to
guarantee exclusivity, so they are rather expensive. Ready-to-wear collections
are usually presented by fashion houses each season during a period known as
Fashion Week. This takes place on a city-wide basis and occurs twice per year.

Mass market Currently the fashion industry relies more on mass market sales.
The mass market caters for a wide range of customers, producing ready-to-wear
clothes in large quantities and standard sizes. Cheap materials, creatively
used, produce affordable fashion. Mass market designers generally adapt the
trends set by the famous names in fashion. They often wait around a season to
make sure a style is going to catch on before producing their own versions of
the original look. In order to save money and time, they use cheaper fabrics
and simpler production techniques which can easily be done by machine. The end
product can therefore be sold much more cheaply.

## [edit] Designing a collection

<IMG>

This article's tone or style may not be appropriate for Wikipedia. Specific
concerns may be found on the talk page. See Wikipedia's guide to writing
better articles for suggestions. (July 2008)  
Many designers carefully research and plan a collection so that all the items
in it complement each other, and have the particular fashion look which the
company is known for or is going for. Oftentimes, a designer will look at what
the fashion directions have been in previous seasons, keep an eye on what
others in the fashion business are doing, and read fashion forecasting
magazines. They also rely on knowledge of their own customers to see which
styles succeeded and which were less popular in past seasons. Such research is
combined with creative ideas to develop a theme for a collection. Other
considerations must be taken into account as well, such as which season the
collection is designed for (e.g. choosing thinner, lighter fabrics for summer;
thicker, warmer fabrics for winter).

Designing a garment

  * The design: Different designers work in different ways. Some sketch their ideas on paper, others drape fabric on a dress stand.
  * Making a card pattern: When the designer is completely satisfied with the fit of the toile (or muslin), they show it to a professional pattern maker who then makes the finished, working version of the pattern out of card. The pattern maker's job is very precise and painstaking. The fit of the finished garment depends on their accuracy.
  * The finished dress: Finally, a sample garment is made up in the proper fabric and tested on a fitting model.

## [edit] Areas of work

There are three main ways in which designers can work:

Working freelance: Freelance designers works for themselves. They sell their
work to fashion houses, direct to shops, or to clothing manufacturers. The
garments bear the buyer's label.

Working In-house: In-house designers are employed full-time by one fashion
company. Their designs are the property of that company, and cannot be sold to
anyone else.

Own Label: Fashion designers often set up their own companies. A lot of
designers find this more satisfying than working for someone else, as their
designs are sold under their own label.

## [edit] US Income

Most fashion designers earn between $13,440 and $93,000. The U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics reports an average annual income of $67,370 for fashion
designers in 2005. Median annual earnings for fashion designers were $48,530
(Â£26,019) in 2000. The middle 50 percent earned between $34,800 (Â£18,658)
and $73,780 (Â£39,557). The lowest 10 percent earned less than $24,710
(Â£13,248), and the highest 10 percent earned more than $103,970 (Â£55,743).
Median annual earnings were $52,860 (Â£28,340) in apparel, piece goods, and
notions - the industry employing the largest numbers of fashion designers.[1]

## [edit] Fashion education

<IMG>

<IMG>

A classroom filled with sewing machines and mannequins.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A student fashion show, 2007

There are a number of well known art and design schools worldwide that offer
degrees in fashion design. The most notable of design schools include Central
Saint Martins College of Art and Design in London, Fashion Institute of
Technology in New York City, and Parsons The New School for Design also in New
York City.

## [edit] Areas of fashion design

Many professional fashion designers start off by specializing in a particular
area of fashion. The smaller and the more specific the market, the more likely
a company is to get the right look and feel to their clothes. It is also
easier to establish oneself in the fashion industry if a company is known for
one type of product, rather than several products. Once a fashion company
becomes established (that is, has regular buyers and is well-known by both the
trade and the public), it may decide to expand into a new area. If the firm
has made a name for the clothes it already produces, this helps to sell the
new line. It is usually safest for a company to expand into an area similar to
the one it already knows. For example, a designer of women's sportswear might
expand into men's sportswear. The chart below shows the areas in which many
designers choose to specialize.

Area Brief Market  
Women's Day wear Practical, comfortable, fashionable Haute couture, ready-to-
wear, mass market  
Women's Evening wear Glamorous, sophisticated, apt for the occasion Haute
couture, ready-to-wear, mass market  
Women's Lingerie Glamorous, comfortable, washable Haute Couture, ready-to-
wear, mass market  
Men's Day wear Casual, practical, comfortable Tailoring, ready-to-wear, mass
market  
Men's Evening wear Smart, elegant, formal, apt for the occasion Tailoring,
ready-to-wear, mass market  
Girls' Wear Pretty, colorful, practical, washable, inexpensive Ready-to-wear,
mass market  
Teenage Wear Highly fashion-conscious, comfortable, inexpensive Ready-to-wear,
mass market  
Sportswear Comfortable, practical, well-ventilated, washable Ready-to-wear,
mass market  
Knitwear Right weight and color for the season Ready-to-wear, mass market  
Outerwear Stylish, warm, right weight and color for the season Ready-to-wear,
mass market  
Bridal wear Sumptuous, glamorous, classic Haute couture, ready-to-wear, mass
market  
Accessories Striking, fashionable Haute couture, ready-to-wear, mass market  
## [edit] Fashion design around the world

Most major countries have their own fashion industry, including Belgium,
Spain, Portugal, Brazil, India, The Netherlands, Germany, Poland, and
Australia. However, only five nations have established truly international
reputations in fashion design. These countries are France, the United Kingdom,
the United States of America, Italy, and Japan.

### [edit] American fashion design

The majority of American fashion houses are based in New York, although there
are also a significant number in Los Angeles, where a substantial percentage
of clothing manufactured in the US is actually made, Miami, and Chicago, which
was once a center of American fashion. American fashion design is dominated by
a clean-cut, casual style, reflecting the athletic, health-conscious
lifestyles of many American city-dwellers. A designer who helped to set the
trend in the United States for sport-influenced day wear throughout the 1940s
and 50's was Claire McCardell. Many of her designs have been revived in recent
decades. More modern influences on the American look have been Calvin Klein,
Ralph Lauren, Anna Sui, Donna Karan, Kenneth Cole, Marc Jacobs, Michael Kors,
and Tommy Hilfiger. Designer fashion for younger Americans is apparent with
fashion labels such as Abercrombie & Fitch, Hollister, American Eagle, and
Aeropostale.

### [edit] British fashion design

As in France, the majority of British fashion houses are based in the capital,
London. British fashion houses are associated with a very traditional, British
style: elegant, yet conservative cuts, fine yet not overly extravagant
materials and a sort of noble, even 'imperial' elegance, such as that of
traditional 'Fifties debutantes' gowns, compared to the French 'chic'. The
first fashion designer, Charles Worth, was a native of Britain, although he
made his name in Paris in the 19th century. British Designers include Vivienne
Westwood, Paul Smith, John Galliano, Alexander McQueen, Burberry, Stella
McCartney, Matthew Williamson, and Christopher Kane.

### [edit] French fashion design

Most French fashion houses are in Paris, which is the capital of French
fashion. Traditionally, French fashion is chic and stylish, defined by its
sophistication, cut, and smart accessories. Among the many Parisian couture
houses are Louis Vuitton, Chanel, Christian Dior, Givenchy, and Yves Saint
Laurent, who display their work at the designer collections that are held
twice a year.

### [edit] Italian fashion design

Most of the older Italian couturiers are in Rome. However, Milan is the
Italian fashion capital, and it is the exhibition venue for their collections.
Italian fashion features casual elegance and luxurious fabrics. The first
Italian luxury brand was Salvatore Ferragamo (who has exported exquisite hand-
made shoes to the U.S. since the 1920s); among the best-known, exclusive
fashion names, Gucci is the greatest-selling Italian fashion brand, with
worldwide sales of $7.158 billion dollars. [1] Other well-known Italian
fashion houses include: Valentino Garavani, Dolce & Gabbana, Emilio Pucci,
Roberto Cavalli, Versace, Giorgio Armani and Prada.

### [edit] Japanese fashion design

Most Japanese fashion houses are in Tokyo. The Japanese look is loose and
unstructured (often resulting from complicated cutting), colours tend to the
sombre and subtle, and richly textured fabrics. Famous Japanese designers are
Yohji Yamamoto, Kenzo, Issey Miyake (masterful drape and cut), and Comme des
GarÃ§ons 's Rei Kawakubo, who developed a new way of cutting (comparable to
Madeleine Vionnet's innovation in the 1930s).

## [edit] Fashion design terms

  * A fashion designer conceives garment combinations of line, proportion, color, and texture. While sewing and pattern-making skills are beneficial, they are not a pre-requisite of successful fashion design. Most fashion designers are formally trained or apprenticed.
  * A pattern maker (or pattern cutter) drafts the shapes and sizes of a garment's pieces. This may be done manually with paper and measuring tools or by using an AutoCAD computer software program. Another method is to drape fabric directly onto a dress form. The resulting pattern pieces can be constructed to produce the intended design of the garment and required size. Formal training is usually required for working as a pattern marker.
  * A tailor makes custom designed garments made to the client's measure; especially suits (coat and trousers, jacket and skirt, et cetera). Tailors usually undergo an apprenticeship or other formal training.
  * A textile designer designs fabric weaves and prints for clothes and furnishings. Most textile designers are formally trained as apprentices and in school.
  * A stylist co-ordinates the clothes, jewelry, and accessories used in fashion photography and catwalk presentations. A stylist may also work with an individual client to design a coordinated wardrobe of garments. Many stylists are trained in fashion design. However, many are not and simply have a knack for pulling great looks together. They are also referred to as personal shoppers.
  * A buyer selects and buys the mix of clothing available in retail shops, department stores and chain stores. Most fashion buyers are trained in business and/or fashion studies.
  * A seamstress sews ready to wear or mass produced clothing by hand or with a sewing machine, either in a garment shop or as a sewing machine operator in a factory. She (or he) may not have the skills to make (design and cut) the garments, or to fit them on a model.
  * A teacher of fashion design teaches the art and craft of fashion design in art or fashion school.
  * A custom clothier makes custom-made garments to order, for a given customer.
  * A dressmaker specializes in custom-made women's clothes: day, cocktail, and evening dresses, business clothes and suits, trousseaus, sports clothes, and lingerie.
  * An illustrator draws and paints clothing designs for commercial use.
  * A model wears and displays clothes at fashion shows and in photographs.
  * A fit model aids the fashion designer by wearing and commenting on the fit of clothes during their design and pre-manufacture. Fit models need to be a particular size for this purpose.
  * A fashion journalist writes fashion articles describing the garments presented or fashion trends, for magazines or newspapers.
  * An alterations specialist (alterationist) adjusts the fit of completed garments, usually ready-to-wear, and sometimes re-styles them. NOTE: despite tailors altering garments to fit the client, not all alterationists are tailors.
  * A wardrobe consultant or fashion advisor recommends styles and colors that are flattering to the client.
  * A photographer photographs the clothes on fashion models for use in magazines, newspapers, or adverts.
  * A fashion show producer is a person or firm that organizes runway/catwalk shows.

## [edit] Footnotes

  1. ^ "Best Global Brands: The 100 Most Valuable Brands", Vera Bradley BusinessWeek

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fashion_design"

Categories: Fashion design | Arts occupations

Hidden categories: Cleanup from March 2008 | All pages needing cleanup | All
articles needing style editing | Wikipedia articles needing style editing from
July 2008

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * CatalÃ 
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Galego
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * PortuguÃªs
  * RomÃ¢nÄ
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Svenska
  * TÃ¼rkÃ§e
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 30 March 2009, at 19:54.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



