
# Substitution cipher

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding reliable references (ideally, using inline citations).
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2009)  
In cryptography, a substitution cipher is a method of encryption by which
units of plaintext are replaced with ciphertext according to a regular system;
the "units" may be single letters (the most common), pairs of letters,
triplets of letters, mixtures of the above, and so forth. The receiver
deciphers the text by performing an inverse substitution.

Substitution ciphers can be compared with transposition ciphers. In a
transposition cipher, the units of the plaintext are rearranged in a different
and usually quite complex order, but the units themselves are left unchanged.
By contrast, in a substitution cipher, the units of the plaintext are retained
in the same sequence in the ciphertext, but the units themselves are altered.

There are a number of different types of substitution cipher. If the cipher
operates on single letters, it is termed a simple substitution cipher; a
cipher that operates on larger groups of letters is termed polygraphic. A
monoalphabetic cipher uses fixed substitution over the entire message, whereas
a polyalphabetic cipher uses a number of substitutions at different times in
the message, where a unit from the plaintext is mapped to one of several
possibilities in the ciphertext and vice-versa.

## Contents

  * 1 Simple substitution
    * 1.1 Examples
    * 1.2 Security for simple substitution ciphers
  * 2 Homophonic substitution
  * 3 Polyalphabetic substitution
  * 4 Polygraphic substitution
  * 5 Mechanical substitution ciphers
  * 6 The one-time pad
  * 7 Substitution in modern cryptography
  * 8 Substitution ciphers in popular culture
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 External links

  
## [edit] Simple substitution

<IMG>

<IMG>

ROT13 is a Caesar cipher, a type of substitution cipher. In ROT13, the
alphabet is rotated 13 steps.

Substitution over a single letterâsimple substitutionâcan be demonstrated
by writing out the alphabet in some order to represent the substitution. This
is termed a substitution alphabet. The cipher alphabet may be shifted or
reversed (creating the Caesar and Atbash ciphers, respectively) or scrambled
in a more complex fashion, in which case it is called a mixed alphabet or
deranged alphabet. Traditionally, mixed alphabets are created by first writing
out a keyword, removing repeated letters in it, then writing all the remaining
letters in the alphabet.

### [edit] Examples

Using this system, the keyword "`zebras`" gives us the following alphabets:

Plaintext alphabet: `abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz`  
Ciphertext alphabet: `ZEBRASCDFGHIJKLMNOPQTUVWXY`  
A message of

    
    flee at once. we are discovered!
    
enciphers to

    
    SIAA ZQ LKBA. VA ZOA RFPBLUAOAR!
    
Traditionally, the ciphertext is written out in blocks of fixed length,
omitting punctuation and spaces; this is done to help avoid transmission
errors and to disguise word boundaries from the plaintext. These blocks are
called "groups", and sometimes a "group count" (i.e., the number of groups) is
given as an additional check. Five letter groups are traditional, dating from
when messages used to be transmitted by telegraph:

    
    SIAAZ QLKBA VAZOA RFPBL UAOAR
    
If the length of the message happens not to be divisible by five, it may be
padded at the end with "nulls". These can be any characters that decrypt to
obvious nonsense, so the receiver can easily spot them and discard them.

The ciphertext alphabet is sometimes different from the plaintext alphabet;
for example, in the pigpen cipher, the ciphertext consists of a set of symbols
derived from a grid. For example:

An example pigpen message

Such features make little difference to the security of a scheme, however â
at the very least, any set of strange symbols can be transcribed back into an
A-Z alphabet and dealt with as normal.

In lists and catalogues for sales people sometimes a very simple encryption is
used to replace numeric digits by letters.

Plain digits: `1234567890`  
Ciphertext alphabet: `MAKEPROFIT` [1]  
Example: MAT would be used to represent 120.

### [edit] Security for simple substitution ciphers

A disadvantage of this method of derangement is that the last letters of the
alphabet (which are mostly low frequency) tend to stay at the end. A stronger
way of constructing a mixed alphabet is to perform a columnar transposition on
the ordinary alphabet using the keyword, but this is not often done.

Although the number of possible keys is very large (26! â 288.4, or about 88
bits), this cipher is not very strong, being easily broken. Provided the
message is of reasonable length (see below), the cryptanalyst can deduce the
probable meaning of the most common symbols by analyzing the frequency
distribution of the ciphertextâfrequency analysis. This allows formation of
partial words, which can be tentatively filled in, progressively expanding the
(partial) solution (see frequency analysis for a demonstration of this). In
some cases, underlying words can also be determined from the pattern of their
letters; for example, attract, osseous, and words with those two as the root
are the only common English words with the pattern ABBCADB. Many people solve
such ciphers for recreation, as with cryptogram puzzles in the newspaper.

According to the unicity distance of English, 27.6 letters of ciphertext are
required to crack a mixed alphabet simple substitution. In practice, typically
about 50 letters are needed, although some messages can be broken with fewer
if unusual patterns are found. In other cases, the plaintext can be contrived
to have a nearly flat frequency distribution, and much longer plaintexts will
then be required by the user.

## [edit] Homophonic substitution

<IMG>

<IMG>

The forged nomenclator message used in the Babington Plot.

An early attempt to increase the difficulty of frequency analysis attacks on
substitution ciphers was to disguise plaintext letter frequencies by
homophony. In these ciphers, plaintext letters map to more than one ciphertext
symbol. Usually, the highest-frequency plaintext symbols are given more
equivalents than lower frequency letters. In this way, the frequency
distribution is flattened, making analysis more difficult.

Since more than 26 characters will be required in the ciphertext alphabet,
various solutions are employed to invent larger alphabets. Perhaps the
simplest is to use a numeric substitution 'alphabet'. Another method consists
of simple variations on the existing alphabet; uppercase, lowercase, upside
down, etc. More artistically, though not necessarily more securely, some
homophonic ciphers employed wholly invented alphabets of fanciful symbols.
(See Poe's "The Gold-Bug" for a literary example; cf. the Voynich manuscript.)

An interesting variant is the nomenclator. Named after the public official who
announced the titles of visiting dignitaries, this cipher combined a small
codebook with large homophonic substitution tables. Originally the code was
restricted to the names of important people, hence the name of the cipher; in
later years it covered many common words and place names as well. The symbols
for whole words (codewords in modern parlance) and letters (cipher in modern
parlance) were not distinguished in the ciphertext. The Rossignols' Great
Cipher used by Louis XIV of France was one; after it went out of use, messages
in French archives were unbreakable for several hundred years.

Nomenclators were the standard fare of diplomatic correspondence, espionage,
and advanced political conspiracy from the early fifteenth century to the late
eighteenth century; most conspirators were and have remained less
cryptographically sophisticated. Although government intelligence
cryptanalysts were systematically breaking nomenclators by the mid-sixteenth
century, and superior systems had been available since 1467, the usual
response to cryptanalysis was simply to make the tables larger. By the late
eighteenth century, when the system was beginning to die out, some
nomenclators had 50,000 symbols.

Nevertheless, not all nomenclators were broken; today, cryptanalysis of
archived ciphertexts remains a fruitful area of historical research.

The book cipher and straddling checkerboard are types of homophonic cipher.

## [edit] Polyalphabetic substitution

Main article: Polyalphabetic cipher

Polyalphabetic substitution ciphers were first described in 1467 by Leone
Battista Alberti in the form of disks. Johannes Trithemius, in his book
Steganographia (Ancient Greek for "hidden writing") introduced the now more
standard form of a tableau (see below; ca. 1500 but not published until much
later). A more sophisticated version using mixed alphabets was described in
1563 by Giovanni Battista della Porta in his book, De Furtivis Literarum Notis
(Latin for "On concealed characters in writing").

In a polyalphabetic cipher, multiple cipher alphabets are used. To facilitate
encryption, all the alphabets are usually written out in a large table,
traditionally called a tableau. The tableau is usually 26Ã26, so that 26 full
ciphertext alphabets are available. The method of filling the tableau, and of
choosing which alphabet to use next, defines the particular polyalphabetic
cipher. All such ciphers are easier to break than once believed, as
substitution alphabets are repeated for sufficiently large plaintexts.

One of the most popular was that of Blaise de VigenÃ¨re. First published in
1585, it was considered unbreakable until 1863, and indeed was commonly called
le chiffre indÃ©chiffrable (French for "indecipherable cipher").

In the VigenÃ¨re cipher, the first row of the tableau is filled out with a
copy of the plaintext alphabet, and successive rows are simply shifted one
place to the left. (Such a simple tableau is called a tabula recta, and
mathematically corresponds to adding the plaintext and key letters, modulo
26.) A keyword is then used to choose which ciphertext alphabet to use. Each
letter of the keyword is used in turn, and then they are repeated again from
the beginning. So if the keyword is 'CAT', the first letter of plaintext is
enciphered under alphabet 'C', the second under 'A', the third under 'T', the
fourth under 'C' again, and so on. In practice, VigenÃ¨re keys were often
phrases several words long.

In 1863, Friedrich Kasiski published a method (probably discovered secretly
and independently before the Crimean War by Charles Babbage) which enabled the
calculation of the length of the keyword in a VigenÃ¨re ciphered message. Once
this was done, ciphertext letters that had been enciphered under the same
alphabet could be picked out and attacked separately as a number of semi-
independent simple substitutions - complicated by the fact that within one
alphabet letters were separated and did not form complete words, but
simplified by the fact that usually a tabula recta had been employed.

As such, even today a VigenÃ¨re type cipher should theoretically be difficult
to break if mixed alphabets are used in the tableau, if the keyword is random,
and if the total length of ciphertext is less than 27.6 times the length of
the keyword. These requirements are rarely understood in practice, and so
VigenÃ¨re enciphered message security is usually less than might have been.

Other notable polyalphabetics include:

  * The Gronsfeld cipher. This is identical to the VigenÃ¨re except that only 10 alphabets are used, and so the "keyword" is numerical.
  * The Beaufort cipher. This is practically the same as the VigenÃ¨re, except the tabula recta is replaced by a backwards one, mathematically equivalent to ciphertext = key - plaintext. This operation is self-inverse, whereby the same table is used for both encryption and decryption.
  * The autokey cipher, which mixes plaintext with a key to avoid periodicity.
  * The running key cipher, where the key is made very long by using a passage from a book or similar text.

Modern stream ciphers can also be seen, from a sufficiently abstract
perspective, to be a form of polyalphabetic cipher in which all the effort has
gone into making the keystream as long and unpredictable as possible.

## [edit] Polygraphic substitution

In a polygraphic substitution cipher, plaintext letters are substituted in
larger groups, instead of substituting letters individually. The first
advantage is that the frequency distribution is much flatter than that of
individual letters (though not actually flat in real languages; for example,
'TH' is much more common than 'XQ' in English). Second, the larger number of
symbols requires correspondingly more ciphertext to productively analyze
letter frequencies.

To substitute pairs of letters would take a substitution alphabet 676 symbols
long (262 = 676). In the same De Furtivis Literarum Notis mentioned above,
della Porta actually proposed such a system, with a 20 x 20 tableau (for the
20 letters of the Italian/Latin alphabet he was using) filled with 400 unique
glyphs. However the system was impractical and probably never actually used.

The earliest practical digraphic cipher (pairwise substitution), was the so-
called Playfair cipher, invented by Sir Charles Wheatstone in 1854. In this
cipher, a 5 x 5 grid is filled with the letters of a mixed alphabet (two
letters, usually I and J, are combined). A digraphic substitution is then
simulated by taking pairs of letters as two corners of a rectangle, and using
the other two corners as the ciphertext (see the Playfair cipher main article
for a diagram). Special rules handle double letters and pairs falling in the
same row or column. Playfair was in military use from the Boer War through
World War II.

Several other practical polygraphics were introduced in 1901 by Felix
Delastelle, including the bifid and four-square ciphers (both digraphic) and
the trifid cipher (probably the first practical trigraphic).

The Hill cipher, invented in 1929 by Lester S. Hill, is a polygraphic
substitution which can combine much larger groups of letters simultaneously
using linear algebra. Each letter is treated as a digit in base 26: A = 0, B
=1, and so on. (In a variation, 3 extra symbols are added to make the basis
prime.) A block of n letters is then considered as a vector of n dimensions,
and multiplied by a n x n matrix, modulo 26\. The components of the matrix are
the key, and should be random provided that the matrix is invertible in
\\mathbb{Z}_{26}^n (to ensure decryption is possible). Astonishingly, a Hill
cipher of dimension 6 was once implemented mechanically!

Unfortunately, the Hill cipher is vulnerable to a known-plaintext attack
because it is completely linear, so it must be combined with some non-linear
step to defeat this attack. The combination of wider and wider weak, linear
diffusive steps like a Hill cipher, with non-linear substitution steps,
ultimately leads to a substitution-permutation network (e.g., a Feistel
cipher), so it is possibleâfrom this extreme perspectiveâto consider
modern block ciphers as a type of polygraphic substitution.

## [edit] Mechanical substitution ciphers

Between circa World War I and the widespread availability of computers (for
some governments this was approximately the 1950s or 1960s; for other
organizations it was a decade or more later; for individuals it was no earlier
than 1975), mechanical implementations of polyalphabetic substitution ciphers
were widely used. Several inventors had similar ideas about the same time, and
rotor cipher machines were patented four times in 1919. The most important of
the resulting machines was the Enigma, especially in the versions used by the
German military from approximately 1930. The Allies also developed and used
rotor machines (eg, SIGABA and Typex).

All of these were similar in that the substituted letter was chosen
electrically from amongst the huge number of possible combinations resulting
from the rotation of several letter disks. Since one or more of the disks
rotated mechanically with each plaintext letter enciphered, the number of
alphabets used was substantially more than astronomical. Early versions of
these machine were, nevertheless, breakable. William F. Friedman of the US
Army's SIS early found vulnerabilities in Hebern's rotor machine, and GC&CS's
Dillwyn Knox solved versions of the Enigma machine (those without the
"plugboard") well before WWII began. Traffic protected by essentially all of
the German military Enigmas was broken by Allied cryptanalysts, most notably
those at Bletchley Park, beginning with the German Army variant used in the
early 1930s. This version was broken by inspired mathematical insight by
Marian Rejewski in Poland.

No messages protected by the SIGABA and Typex machines were ever, so far as is
publicly known, broken.

## [edit] The one-time pad

Main article: One-time pad

One type of substitution cipher, the one-time pad, is quite special. It was
invented near the end of WWI by Gilbert Vernam and Joseph Mauborgne in the US.
It was mathematically proved unbreakable by Claude Shannon, probably during
WWII; his work was first published in the late 1940s. In its most common
implementation, the one-time pad can be called a substitution cipher only from
an unusual perspective; typically, the plaintext letter is combined (not
substituted) in some manner (eg, XOR) with the key material character at that
position.

The one-time pad is, in most cases, impractical as it requires that the key
material be as long as the plaintext, actually random, used once and only
once, and kept entirely secret from all except the sender and intended
receiver. When these conditions are violated, even marginally, the one-time
pad is no longer unbreakable. Soviet one-time pad messages sent from the US
for a brief time during WWII used non-random key material. US cryptanalysts,
beginning in the late 40s, were able to, entirely or partially, break a few
thousand messages out of several hundred thousand. (See VENONA)

In a mechanical implementation, rather like the ROCKEX equipment, the one-time
pad was used for messages sent on the Moscow-Washington hot line established
after the Cuban missile crisis.

## [edit] Substitution in modern cryptography

Substitution ciphers as discussed above, especially the older pencil-and-paper
hand ciphers, are no longer in serious use. However, the cryptographic concept
of substitution carries on even today. From a sufficiently abstract
perspective, modern bit-oriented block ciphers (eg, DES, or AES) can be viewed
as substitution ciphers on an enormously large binary alphabet. In addition,
block ciphers often include smaller substitution tables called S-boxes. See
also substitution-permutation network.

## [edit] Substitution ciphers in popular culture

  * Sherlock Holmes breaks a substitution cipher in "The Adventure of the Dancing Men."
  * The Al Bhed language in Final Fantasy X is actually a substitution cipher, although it is pronounced phonetically (i.e. "you" in English is translated to "oui" in Al Bhed, but is pronounced the same way that "oui" is pronounced in French).
  * Uryomoco, the fictional language from El Goonish Shive is a substitution cypher from English.
  * The Minbari's alphabet from the Babylon 5 series is a substitution cypher from English.
  * The language in Starfox Adventures: Dinosaur Planet spoken by native Saurians and Krystal is also a substitution cipher of the English alphabet.
  * In World of Warcraft, characters speak different languages depending on their race and faction. Any languages a given character speaks are rendered in English (or the language of the server, on non-English servers), but languages the character does not speak are run through a substitution cypher before display. For example, when a Horde character says "lol", any Alliance characters in the area will see "[Orcish]: kek"

## [edit] See also

  * VigenÃ¨re cipher
  * Topics in cryptography
  * Ban (information) with Centiban Table

## [edit] References

  1. ^ David Crawford / Mike Esterl, At Siemens, witnesses cite pattern of bribery, The Wall Street Journal, January 31rd, 2007: Â«Back at Munich headquarters, he [Michael Kutschenreuter, a former Siemens-Manager] told prosecutors, he learned of an encryption code he alleged was widely used at Siemens to itemize bribe payments. He said it was derived from the phrase "Make Profit," with the phrase's 10 letters corresponding to the numbers 1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-0. Thus, with the letter A standing for 2 and P standing for 5, a reference to "file this in the APP file" meant a bribe was authorized at 2.55 percent of sales. - A spokesman for Siemens said it has no knowledge of a "Make Profit" encryption system.Â»

## [edit] External links

  * Substitution cipher implementation with Caesar and Atbash ciphers (Java)
  * Online simple substitution implementation (Flash)
  * Online simple substitution implementation for MAKEPROFIT code (CGI script: Set input in URL, read output in web page)
  * Monoalphabetic Substitution Breaking A Monoalphabetic Encryption System Using a Known Plaintext Attack
  * http://cryptoclub.math.uic.edu/substitutioncipher/sub2.htm

v â¢ d â¢ e

Classical cryptography  
Ciphers: ADFGVX | Affine | Alberti | Atbash | Autokey | Bifid | Book | Caesar
| Four-square | Great | Hill | Keyword | Nihilist | Permutation | Pigpen |
Playfair | Polyalphabetic | Polybius | Rail Fence | Reihenschieber |
Reservehandverfahren | ROT13 | Running key | Scytale | Smithy code | Solitaire
| Straddling checkerboard | Substitution | Tap Code | Transposition | Trifid |
Two-square | VIC cipher | VigenÃ¨re  
Cryptanalysis: Frequency analysis | Index of coincidence | Kasiski examination  
Misc: Cryptogram | Bacon | Scytale | Straddling checkerboard | Tabula recta  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Cryptography  
History of cryptography Â· Cryptanalysis Â· Cryptography portal Â· Topics in
cryptography  
Symmetric-key algorithm Â· Block cipher Â· Stream cipher Â· Public-key
cryptography Â· Cryptographic hash function Â· Message authentication code Â·
Random numbers Â· Steganography  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substitution_cipher"

Categories: Classical ciphers

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * Äesky
  * Deutsch
  * ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Simple English

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 17 March 2009, at 12:52.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



