
# Dance notation

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

See also: Category:Dance notation and Category:Dance notators

<IMG>

<IMG>

La Cachucha, by Friedrich Albert Zorn.

Dance notation is the symbolic representation of dance movement, it is
analogous to movement notation but can be limited to representing human
movement and specific forms of dance such as Tap dance. Various methods have
been to used to visually represent dance movements including:

  * Abstract symbols
  * Figurative representation
  * Track or path mapping
  * Numerical systems
  * Music notation
  * Graphic notation
  * Letter and word notations

## Contents

  * 1 Usage
  * 2 History
  * 3 Notation and computers
  * 4 See also
  * 5 Further reading

  
## [edit] Usage

The primary use of dance notation is the preservation of classic dance
documentation, analysis and reconstruction of and any kind of body movement
can represent and note with this mathematical notation by Ram Paul
choreography and dance forms or technical exercises. Many different forms of
dance notation have been created but the two main systems used in Western
culture are Labanotation (also known as Kinetography Laban) and Benesh
Movement Notation. Eshkol-Wachman Movement Notation and DanceWriting are also
in use, but to a lesser extent.

Another purpose of dance notation is the documentation and analysis of dance
in dance ethnology. Here the notation is not used to plan a new choreography
but to document an existing dance. Dance notation systems developed for the
description of European dance are often not applicable and not appropriate for
the description of dances from other cultures, e.g. the polycentric dances of
many African cultures, where the movement of the body through space is less
important and a great deal of the movements takes place inside the body.
Attempts have been made by ethnomusicologists and dance ethnologists to
develop specific notation systems for such purposes.

## [edit] History

The first computerized notation system, which displayed an animated figure on
the screen which performed the dance moves specified by the choreographer, was
the DOM dance notation system, created by Eddie Dombrower on the Apple II
personal computer in 1982. (See Dance Notation Journal, Fall, 1986, 4(2) pp.
47-48.)

Several notation systems are used only for specific dance forms, for example,
Shorthand Dance Notation (dances from Israel), Morris Dance Notation (Morris
dance), and Beauchamp-Feuillet notation (Baroque dance).

Ann Hutchinson-Guest's seminal book Choreographics (1989), compares thirteen
historical and present-day dance notation systems (with visual examples) and
through 'one to one' comparisons illustrates the advantages, and disadvantages
of each system. The book is good introduction to the development and
implementation dance notation systems.

In 1975 Ann Hutchinson-Guest reconstructed the choreographer Arthur Saint-
LÃ©on's Pas de Six from his 1844 ballet La VivandiÃ¨re along with its original
music by the composer Cesare Pugni, for the Joffrey Ballet. The piece was
reconstructed from Saint-LÃ©on's own method of dance notation known as La
StÃ©nochorÃ©graphie. In 1978 Pierre Lacotte staged the Pas de Six for the
Kirov/Mariinsky Ballet, who still retain it in their repertory. The Pas de Six
has since been staged by many ballet companies all over the world, and is
known as either the La VivandiÃ¨re Pas de Six or the Markitenka Pas de Six (as
it is known in Russia).

One of the most famous collections of dance notation is the Sergeyev
Collection, which was recorded in the method of notation devised by Vladimir
Ivanovich Stepanov. The collection documents the famous Imperial Ballet's
(today the Kirov/Mariinsky Ballet) repertory from the turn of the 20th century
- the majority of which were staged by the great choreographer Marius Petipa.
The collection includes Petipa's original choreographic designs for such
ballets as The Sleeping Beauty, Giselle, Le Corsaire, Swan Lake (staged with
Lev Ivanov). Other works included are the original version of The Nutcracker,
and the Imperial Ballet's definitive CoppÃ©lia. It was with these notations
that many of these works were first staged outside of Russia, forming the
nucleus of the Classical Ballet repertory.

## [edit] Notation and computers

<IMG>

This section does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2009)  
There are four areas of dance notation research and development:

  * notation editing software for the creation of printed notation scores
  * machine-readable versions of existing dance notation
  * handwritten and / or machine readable dance notation for computer animation and Human use
  * machine specific movement notation such as Motion capture data

## [edit] See also

<IMG> Dance portal  
  * Labanotation
  * Sergeyev Collection
  * Stepanov Choreographic Notation
  * Motif Description (a subset of Labanotation)
  * Benesh Movement Notation also known as "Choreology"
  * DanceWriting
  * DOM Dance Notation
  * Eshkol-Wachman Movement Notation
  * Action stroke dance notation
  * Shorthand dance notation
  * ContÃ© movement notation
  * Morris dance notation
  * Beauchamp-Feuillet notation

## [edit] Further reading

  * Cage, J. and Knowles, A. (1973) Notations. Reprint Services Corp. ISBN 0-685-14864-5
  * Drewes, Henner (2003) Transformationen - Bewegung in Notation und digitaler Verarbeitung in Fellsches, J (Ed) Folkwang-Texte Bd. 18. Verlag Die Blaue Eule, Essen. ISBN 3-89924-057-X
  * Hutchinson Guest, A. (1989) Choreographics: a comparison of dance notation systems from the fifteenth century to the present. Routledge ISBN 90-5700-003-2
  * Neagle, R.J. and Ng, K.C. (2003) Machine-representation and visualisation of a dance notation in Proceedings of electronic imaging and the visual arts - London July 2003

Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dance_notation"

Categories: Dance notation

Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Deutsch
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * ×¢××¨××ª

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 19:29.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



