
# Magic (illusion)

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

"Illusionist" redirects here. For the film, see The Illusionist.

For the artistic tradition, see Illusionism (art).

Performing arts  
Major forms  
Dance Â· Music Â· Opera Â· Theatre  
  
Minor forms  
Circus Arts Â· Magic Â· Puppetry  
  
Genres  
Drama Â· Tragedy Â· Comedy Â· Tragicomedy Â· Romance Â· Satire Â· Epic Â·
Lyric  
  
Magic is a performing art that entertains an audience by creating illusions of
seemingly impossible[1] or supernatural[2] feats, using purely natural means.
These feats are called magic tricks, effects or illusions.

One who performs such illusions is called a magician. Some performers may also
be referred to by names reflecting the type of magical effects they present,
such as prestidigitators, conjurors, illusionists, mentalists, escape artists,
and ventriloquists.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Categories of effects
  * 3 Secrecy
  * 4 Learning magic
  * 5 Types of magic performance
  * 6 Misuse of magic
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
    * 8.1 Bibliography

  
## [edit] History

<IMG>

<IMG>

Hieronymus Bosch: The Conjurer, 1475-1480 Note that the man in the back row is
stealing another man's purse. He is also applying misdirection by looking up
at the sky to misdirect the audience from his actions. The artist has even
misdirected us from the thief, because we are drawn to the magician.

The term "Magic" is etymologically derived from the Latin word Magi.
Performances we would now recognize as conjuring have probably been practiced
throughout history. The same level of ingenuity that was used to produce
famous ancient deceptions such as the Trojan Horse would also have been used
for entertainment, or at least for cheating in gambling games, since time
immemorial. They were also used by various religions from times ancient, and
were even known as far back as the early 17th century to be used to frighten
uneducated populi. However, the profession of the illusionist gained strength
only in the eighteenth century, and has enjoyed several popular vogues.

In 1584, Reginald Scot published The Discoverie of Witchcraft. It was written
to show that witches did not exist, by exposing how (apparently miraculous)
feats of magic were done. The book is often deemed the first textbook about
conjuring. All obtainable copies were burned on the accession of James I in
1603 and those remaining are now rare. It began to reappear, in print, in
1651.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Jean EugÃ¨ne Robert-Houdin, the first modern magician.

From 1756 to 1781, Jacob Philadelphia performed feats of magic, sometimes
under the guise of scientific exhibitions, throughout Europe and in Russia.
Modern entertainment magic owes much of its origins to Jean EugÃ¨ne Robert-
Houdin (1805-1871), originally a clockmaker, who opened a magic theatre in
Paris in the 1840s. His speciality was the construction of mechanical automata
which appeared to move and act as if they were alive. The British performer J
N Maskelyne and his partner Cooke established their own theatre, the Egyptian
Hall in London's Piccadilly, in 1873. They presented stage magic, exploiting
the potential of the stage for hidden mechanisms and assistants, and the
control it offers over the audience's point of view.

When one thinks of the typical magician, they always think of man with wavy
hair, a goatee, and wearing a tailcoat. The model for this prototype was
Alexander Herrmann (February 10, 1844 â December 17, 1896) better known as
Herrmann the Great. Herrmann was a French magician and was part of the
Herrmann family name that is known as the "first-family of magic". Those that
witnessed Herrmann the Great perform considered him the greatest magician they
ever saw.

The escapologist and magician Harry Houdini (real name Ehrich Weiss, 1874 -
1926), took his stage name from Robert-Houdin and developed a range of stage
magic tricks, many of them based on escapology (though that word was not used
until after Houdini's death). The son of a Hungarian rabbi, Houdini was
genuinely highly skilled in techniques such as lockpicking and escaping
straitjackets, but also made full use of the whole range of conjuring
techniques, including fake equipment and collusion with individuals in the
audience. Houdini's showbusiness savvy was as great as his performing skill.
There is a Houdini Museum dedicated to him in Scranton, Pennsylvania. In
addition to expanding the range of magic hardware, showmanship and deceptive
technique, these performers established the modern relationship between the
performer and the audience.

<IMG>

<IMG>

\- A fettered Houdini

In this relationship, there is an unspoken agreement between the performer and
the audience about what is going on. Unlike in the past, almost no performers
today actually claim to possess supernatural powers. There is a debate amongst
people who perform mentalism as to whether or not to perform their style of
magic as if they have real power or if they can simulate this power[3].

It is generally understood by most people that the effects in the performance
are made through sleight of hand (also called prestidigitation or lÃ©ger de
main), misdirection, deception, collusion with a member of the audience,
apparatus with secret mechanisms, mirrors, and other trickery (hence the
illusions are commonly referred to as "tricks"). The performer seeks to
present an effect so clever and skillful that the audience cannot believe
their eyes, and cannot think of the explanation. The sense of bafflement is
part of the entertainment. In turn, the audience play a role in which they
agree to be entertained by something they know to be a deception. Houdini also
gained the trust of his audiences by using his knowledge of illusions to
debunk charlatans, a tradition continued by magicians such as James Randi,
Arthur Ellison, P. C. Sorcar, and Penn and Teller.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Herbert L. Becker, first magician to include rock music in stage shows.

Magic has come and gone in fashion. For instance, the magic show for much of
the 20th century was marginalized in North America as largely children's
entertainment. A revival started with Doug Henning, who reestablished the
magic show as a form of mass entertainment with his distinctive look that
rejected the old stereotypes and his exuberant sense of showmanship that
became popular on both stage and numerous television specials.

Today, the art is enjoying a vogue, driven by a number of highly successful
performers such as David Copperfield, Lance Burton, Penn and Teller, Derren
Brown, Barry and Stuart, Criss Angel, Dorothy Dietrich, Greg Frewin, Herbert
L. Becker, and many other stage and TV performers. David Blaine is sometimes
included in this category, though his major performances have been more a
combination of Houdini-style escape tricks and physical endurance displays
than the illusion magic performed by others. The mid-twentieth century saw
magic transform in many different aspects. Some performers preferred to
renovate the craft on stage (such as The Mentalizer Show in Times Square which
mixed themes of spirituality and kabbalah with the art of magic). Others
successfully made the transition to TV, which opens up new opportunities for
deceptions, and brings the performer to huge audiences. Most TV magicians are
shown performing before a live audience, who provide the remote viewer with a
reassurance that the illusions are not obtained with post production visual
effects.

Many of the basic principles of magic are comparatively old. There is an
expression, "it's all done with smoke and mirrors", used to explain something
baffling, but contrary to popular belief, effects are seldom achieved using
mirrors today, due to the amount of work needed to install it and difficulties
in transport. For example, the famous Pepper's Ghost, a stage illusion first
used in 19th century London, required a specially built theatre. Modern
performers have vanished objects as large as the Taj Mahal, Statue of Liberty,
and the Space Shuttle, using other kinds of optical deceptions.

## [edit] Categories of effects

<IMG>

<IMG>

David Blaine is a modern magician who incorporates street theater in his
performances.

There is much discussion among magicians as to how a given effect is to be
categorized, and disagreement as to what categories actually exist -- for
instance, some magicians consider "penetrations" to be a separate category,
while others consider penetrations a form of restoration or teleportation. It
is generally agreed that there are very few different types of effect. There
has been disagreement between some magicians (such as Dariel Fitzkee, Harlan
Tarbell, S.H. Sharpe) as to how many different types of illusion there are.
Some of these are listed below.

  * Production The magician produces something from nothingâa rabbit from an empty hat, a fan of cards from thin air, a shower of coins from an empty bucket, or the magician themselves, appearing in a puff of smoke on an empty stage -- all of these effects are productions.

  * Vanishing The magician makes something disappearâa coin, a cage of doves, milk from a newspaper, an assistant from a cabinet, or even the Statue of Liberty. A vanish, being the reverse of a production, may use a similar technique, in reverse.

  * Transformation The magician transforms something from one state into anotherâa silk handkerchief changes colour, a lady turns into a tiger, an indifferent card changes to the spectator's chosen card. A transformation can be seen as a combination of a vanish and a production.

  * Restoration The magician destroys an object, then restores it back to its original stateâa rope is cut, a newspaper is torn, a woman is sawn in half, a borrowed watch is smashed to piecesâthen they are all restored to their original state.

  * Teleportation The magician causes something to move from one place to anotherâa borrowed ring is found inside a ball of wool, a canary inside a light bulb, an assistant from a cabinet to the back of the theatre. When two objects exchange places, it is called a transposition: a simultaneous, double teleportation.

  * Escapology: The magician (an assistant may participate, but the magician himself is by far the most common) is placed in a restraining device (i.e. handcuffs or a straitjacket) and/or a death trap, and escapes to safety. Famous examples include being put in a straitjacket and into an overflowing tank of water, and being tied up and placed in a car being sent through a car crusher.

  * Levitation The magician defies gravity, either by making something float in the air, or with the aid of another object (suspension)âa silver ball floats around a cloth, an assistant floats in mid-air, another is suspended from a broom, a scarf dances in a sealed bottle, the magician hovers a few inches off the floor. There are many popular ways to create this illusion of the magician himself being levitated, such as the Balducci levitation, the King Rising, and the Andruzzi levitations.

  * Penetration The magician makes a solid object pass through anotherâa set of steel rings link and unlink, a candle penetrates an arm, swords pass through an assistant in a basket, a saltshaker penetrates the table-top, a man walks through a mirror. Sometimes referred to as 'solid-through-solid'.

  * Prediction The magician predicts the choice of a spectator, or the outcome of an event under seemingly impossible circumstancesâa newspaper headline is predicted, the total amount of loose change in the spectator's pocket, a picture drawn on a slate. Prediction forms the basis for most 'pick-a-card' tricks, where a random card is chosen, then revealed to be known by the performer.

Many magical routines use combinations of effects. For example, in the famous
'cups and balls' a magician may use vanishes, productions, penetrations,
teleportations and transformations all as part of the one presentation.

## [edit] Secrecy

The purpose of a magic trick is to amuse and create a feeling of
wonder;[citation needed] the audience is generally aware that the magic is
performed using trickery, and derives enjoyment from the magician's skill and
cunning.[citation needed] Traditionally, magicians refuse to reveal the
secrets to the audience. The reasons include:

  * Exposure is claimed to "kill" magic as an artform and transforms it into mere intellectual puzzles and riddles. It is argued that once the secret of a trick is revealed to a person, that one can no longer fully enjoy subsequent performances of that magic, as the amazement is missing. Sometimes the secret is so simple that the audience feels let down, and feels disappointed it was taken in so easily.
  * Keeping the secrets preserves the mystery of professional magicians.

Membership in professional magicians' organizations often requires a solemn
commitment to the "Magician's Oath" never to reveal the secrets of magic to
non-magicians.

    The Magician's Oath (though it may vary, 'The Oath' takes the following, or similar form):
    
    "As a magician I promise never to reveal the secret of any illusion to a non-magician, unless that one swears to uphold the Magician's Oath in turn. I promise never to perform any illusion for any non-magician without first practicing the effect until I can perform it well enough to maintain the illusion of magic."
Once sworn to The Oath, one is considered a magician, and is expected to live
up to this promise. A magician who reveals a secret, either purposely or
through insufficient practice, may typically find oneself without any
magicians willing to teach one any more secrets.

However, it is considered permissible to reveal secrets to individuals who are
determined to learn magic and become magicians. It is typically a sequential
process of increasingly valuable and lesser known secrets. The secrets of
almost all magical effects are available to the public through numerous books
and magazines devoted to magic, available from the specialized magic trade.
There are also web sites which offer videos, DVDs and instructional materials.
In this sense, there are very few classical illusions left unrevealed, however
this does not appear to have diminished the appeal of performances. In
addition, magic is a living art, and new illusions are devised with surprising
regularity. Sometimes a 'new' illusion will be built on an illusion that is
old enough to have become unfamiliar.

Some magicians have taken the controversial position that revealing the
methods used in certain works of magic can enhance the appreciation of the
audience for cleverness of magic. Penn and Teller frequently perform tricks
using transparent props to reveal how it is done, for example, although they
almost always include additional unexplained effects at the end that are made
even more astonishing by the revealing props being used. Val Valentino, as
"The Masked Magician," revealed a number of secrets in a series of four Fox
Network TV specials; causing controversy among fellow magicians. The reason
Penn and Teller are held in high regard among magicians, while Valentino was
nearly blackballed, is that Penn and Teller only expose pieces that they
themselves have created for the purpose of exposure, while Valentino exposed
other peoples' creations against their wishes without even mentioning their
names.

Often what seems to be a revelation of a magical secret is merely another form
of misdirection. For instance, a magician may explain to an audience member
that the linking rings "have a hole in them" and hand the volunteer two
unlinked rings, which the volunteer finds to have become linked as soon as he
handles them. At this point the magician may shove his arm through the ring
('the hole in the ring'), proclaiming: "See? Once you know that every ring has
a hole, it's easy!"

See also: Intellectual rights to magic methods

## [edit] Learning magic

Dedication to magic can teach confidence and creativity, as well as the work
ethic associated with regular practice and the responsibility that comes with
devotion to an art.[4] The teaching of performance magic was once a secretive
practice.[citation needed] Professional magicians were unwilling to share
knowledge with anyone outside the profession[citation needed] to prevent the
laity from learning their secrets. This made it difficult for an interested
apprentice to learn magic beyond the basics. Some had strict rules against
members discussing magic secrets with anyone but established magicians.

From the 1584 publication of Reginald Scot's Discoverie of Witchcraft until
the end of the 19th century, only a few books were available for magicians to
learn the craft, whereas today mass-market books offer a myriad titles. Videos
and DVDs are a newer medium of tuition, but many of the methods found in this
format are readily found in previously published books. However, they can
serve as a visual demonstration.

Nowadays, magicians can join magic clubs. Here magicians, both seasoned and
novitiate, can work together and help one another for mutual improvement, to
learn new techniques, to discuss all aspects of magic, to perform for each
other â sharing advice, encouragement, and criticism. Before a magician can
join one of these clubs, they usually have to audition. The purpose is to show
to the membership they are a magician and not just someone off the street
wanting to discover magical secrets.

The world's largest magic organization is the International Brotherhood of
Magicians; it publishes a monthly journal, The Linking Ring. The oldest
organization is the Society of American Magicians, of which Houdini was a
member and president for several years. In London, England, there is The Magic
Circle which houses the largest magic library in Europe. Also PSYCRETS - The
British Society of Mystery Entertainers, which caters specifically to
mentalists, bizarrists, storytellers, readers, spiritualist performers, and
other mystery entertainers. The Magic Castle in Hollywood is home to the
Academy of Magical Arts. A very credible source into the likeliness of magic
can even be found by searching through the infinite pages of YouTube.

## [edit] Types of magic performance

Magic performances tend to fall into a few specialities or genres.

<IMG>

<IMG>

A mentalist on stage in a mind-reading performance, 1900

  * Stage illusions are performed for large audiences, typically within an auditorium. This type of magic is distinguished by large-scale props, the use of assistants and often, exotic animals such as elephants and tigers. Some famous stage illusionists, past and present, include Harry Blackstone, Sr., Howard Thurston, Chung Ling Soo, David Copperfield, Siegfried & Roy, and Harry Blackstone, Jr..
  * Platform magic (also known as Cabaret magic or Stand-up magic) are terms used to describe magic performed for a medium to large audience. Night club magic and comedy club magic are also examples of this form. The use of illusionettes (small table top illusions) is common. The term Parlor magic is sometimes used but is considered pejorative. This genre includes the skilled manipulation of props such as billiard balls, card fans, doves, rabbits, silks, and rope. Examples of such magicians include Jeff McBride, Penn & Teller, David Abbott, Channing Pollock, Black Herman, and Fred Kaps.
  * Micromagic (also known as Close-up magic or Table Magic) is performed with the audience close to the magician, sometimes even one-on-one. It usually makes use of everyday items as props, such as cards and coins (see Coin magic) and seemingly 'impromptu' effects. This is also called "table magic" particularly when performed as dinner entertainment. Ricky Jay and Lee Asher, following in the traditions of Dai Vernon, Slydini, and Max Malini, are considered among the foremost practitioners of close-up magic.
  * Escapology is the branch of magic that deals with escapes from confinment or restraints. Harry Houdini is a well-known example of an escape artist or escapologist.
  * Mentalism creates the impression in the minds of the audience that the performer possesses special powers to read thoughts, predict events, control other minds, and similar feats. It can be presented on a stage, in a cabaret setting, before small close-up groups, or even for one spectator. Magicians in this field include Alexander, Theodore Annemann, Banachek, David Berglas, Derren Brown, Kuda Bux, Bob Cassidy, Chan Canasta, Tony Corinda, Joseph Dunninger, Uri Geller, Luke Jermay, Kreskin, Al Koran, Max Maven, Richard Osterlind, The Piddingtons, Ehud Segev, and The Zancigs.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Amateur magician performing "children's magic" for a birthday party audience.

  * Theatrical SÃ©ances is that aspect of magic that simulates spiritualistic or mediumistic effects. This is meant purely as theatre and not meant to "conjure up spirits." This is an aspect of stage magic that is often misused by charlatans who pretend to actually be in contact with spirits.
  * Children's magic is performed for an audience primarily composed of children. It is typically performed at birthday parties, preschools, elementary schools, Sunday Schools or libraries. This type of magic is usually comedic in nature and involves audience interaction as well as volunteer assistants.
  * Online magic tricks were designed to function on a computer screen. The computer essentially replaces the magician. Some online magic tricks recreate traditional card tricks and require user participation, while others, like Plato's Cursed Triangle are based on mathematical, geometrical and/or optical illusions. One such online magic trick, called Esmeralda's Crystal Ball, became a viral phenomenon that fooled so many computer users into believing that their computer had supernatural powers, that Snopes dedicated a page to debunking the trick.
  * Mathemagic is an aspect of stage magic that combines magic and mathematics. It is commonly used by children's magicians and mentalists.
  * Corporate Magic or Trade Show Magic uses magic as a communication and sales tool, as opposed to just straightforward entertainment. Corporate magicians may come from a business background and typically present at meetings, conferences and product launches. They run workshops and can sometimes be found at trade shows, where their patter and illusions enhance an entertaining presentation of the products offered by their corporate sponsors. The pioneer performer in this arena is Eddie Tullock.[5]
  * Gospel Magic uses magic to catechize and evangelize. Gospel Magic was first used by St. Don Bosco to interest children in 19th century Turin, Italy to come back to school, accept assistance and to attend church.
  * Street magic is a form of street performing or busking that employs a hybrid of stage magic, platform and close-up magic, usually performed 'in the round' or surrounded. Notable modern street magic performers include Jeff Sheridan and Gazzo. The term "street magic" has recently (since the first David Blaine TV special "Street Magic" aired in 1997) come to be used to describe a style of "guerilla" performance where magicians approach and perform for unsuspecting members of the public on the street. Unlike traditional street magic, this style is almost purely designed for TV and gains its impact from the wild reactions of the public. Magicians of this type include David Blaine, Criss Angel and Cyril Takayama.
  * Bizarre magic uses mystical, horror, fantasy and other similar themes in performance. Bizarre magic is typically performed in a close-up venue, although some performers have effectively presented it in a stage setting. Charles Cameron has generally been credited as the "godfather of bizarre magic." Others, such as Tony Andruzzi, contributed significantly to its development.
  * Shock magic is a genre of magic that shocks the audience, hence the name. Sometimes referred to as "geek magic," it takes its roots from circus sideshows, in which "freakish" performances were shown to audiences. Common shock magic or geek magic effects include eating razor blades, needle-through-arm, string through neck and pen-through-tongue. Magicians known for performing shock magic include Criss Angel, Andrew Mayne, Sean Fields, The Amazing Jonathan, and Brian Brushwood.

## [edit] Misuse of magic

<IMG>

This article does not cite any references or sources. Please help improve this
article by adding citations to reliable sources (ideally, using inline
citations). Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2008)  
In modern conjuring, it is not considered ethical to give a performance which
claims to be anything other than a clever and skillful deception.

Fraudulent psychics or mediums have long capitalised on the popular belief in
ESP and other paranormal phenomena for financial gain. Controversy still
surrounds the hugely successful 1970s illusionist Uri Geller and his ability
to bend spoons, for instance. During the height of the vogue for Spiritualism
and the wave of popularity for sÃ©ances from the 1840s to the 1920s, many
fraudulent mediums used conjuring methods to perform illusions such as table-
knocking, slate-writing, and telekinetic effects. The great escapologist and
illusionist Harry Houdini devoted much of his time to exposing such fraudulent
operators. Magicians James Randi, Penn & Teller, and Criss Angel are involved
in similar debunking today. Randi has, for example, shown how people have been
taken advantage of by unscrupulous faith healers who, using simple sleight-of-
hand, remove chicken-giblet "tumors" from the patient's abdomen. More
recently, British magicians Barry and Stuart used some of the Biblical
accounts of miracles as inspiration for the tricks they presented in two TV
specials.

Con men and grifters often use techniques of conjuring for fraudulent goals.
Cheating at card games is an obvious example. Other scams continue to defraud
the innocent, despite having been exposed and debunked. The card trick known
as "Find the Lady" or "Three-card Monte" is an old favourite of street
hustlers, who lure the victim into betting on what seems like an easy and
obvious win. Another example is the shell game, in which a pea is hidden under
one of three walnut shells, then shuffled around the table (or sidewalk) so
slowly as to make the pea's position seemingly obvious. Although these are
well-known as frauds, people are still fooled enough to lose money on them.

## [edit] See also

  * American Museum of Magic
  * Indian magicians
  * List of magicians
  * List of magic publications

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Henning Nelms. Magic and Showmanship: A Handbook for Conjurers, page 1 (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, Inc, 2000).
  2. ^ Jim Steinmeyer. "A New Kind of Magic," in Hiding the Elephant: How Magicians Invented the Impossible and Learned to Disappear (New York, NY: Carroll & Graf Publishers, 2003).
  3. ^ Pogue, David (1998). [www.dummies.com Magic for Dummies]. Hungry Minds. pp. 255\. ISBN 0-7645-5101-9. www.dummies.com.
  4. ^ "The Theory and Art of Magic". The Linking Ring (The International Brotherhood of Magicians). November 2000.
  5. ^ Bill Herz with Paul Harris. Secrets of the Astonishing Executive (New York, NY: Avon Books, 1991).

### [edit] Bibliography

  * Milbourne Christopher (1962). Panorama of Magic.
  * Dunninger, Joseph. The Complete Encyclopedia of Magic.
  * Randi, James (1992). Conjuring: A Definitive History. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0312086342.
  * Randi, James (1982). Flim-Flam!. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0879751983
  *   * Stebbins, Robert A. (1993) Career, Culture and Social Psychology in a Variety Art: The Magician. Malabar, FL: Krieger..

v â¢ d â¢ e

Magic and illusion  
General

Mentalists Â· Assistants Â· Exposure Â· Tarbell Course Â· Sleight of hand Â·
Magic club Â· Magic conventions Â· Equivocation Â· Misdirection Â· Magic
Allied Arts

<IMG>  
Genres

Card Â· Gospel Â· Torah Â· Micromagic Â· Platform Â· Parlor Â· Children's Â·
Street Â· Theatrical sÃ©ances Â· Escape Â· Coin Â· Mental Â· Bizarre Â· Stage
illusions Â· Mathemagic  
Tricks

Stage illusions Â· Platform magic Â· Close-up magic Â· Levitations Â·
Mentalism Â· Escapology  
Lists

Timeline Â· Conjuring terms Â· Manufacturers Â· Magicians Â· Magic tricks  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_(illusion)"

Categories: Secrecy | Circus skills | Entertainment | Illusions | Magic
(illusion) | Deception

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since February 2009 | Articles with unsourced statements
since March 2009 | Articles lacking sources from November 2008 | All articles
lacking sources

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ©
  * à¦¬à¦¾à¦à¦²à¦¾
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * íêµ­ì´
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ×¢××¨××ª
  * LÃ«tzebuergesch
  * LietuviÅ³
  * Magyar
  * ÐÐ°ÐºÐµÐ´Ð¾Ð½ÑÐºÐ¸
  * à´®à´²à´¯à´¾à´³à´
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * à¹à¸à¸¢
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 1 April 2009, at 11:56.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



