
# Posting style

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

For the practice of posting to raise the visibility of an Internet forum
thread, see Bump (Internet).

When a message is replied to in e-mail, Internet forums, or Usenet, the
original can often be included, or "quoted", in a variety of different posting
styles.

The main options are interleaved posting \- also called inline replying or
bottom-posting â in which the reply follows the quote; or top-posting â in
which the reply precedes the quoted original message. While each online
community differs on which styles are appropriate or acceptable, within some
communities the use of the "wrong" method (usually top-posting) risks being
seen as a breach of netiquette, and can provoke vehement response from
community regulars.[citation needed]

For users of modern e-mail clients and "intelligent" e-mail services like
Gmail, which display entire e-mail threads in logical order and hide previous
content, the distinction between different posting styles is often now less
relevant.

## Contents

  * 1 Styles
    * 1.1 Inline replying
    * 1.2 Trimming
    * 1.3 Top-posting
    * 1.4 Bottom-posting
    * 1.5 Other variants
  * 2 Netiquette Guidelines
  * 3 Attribution lines
  * 4 References
  * 5 External links

  
## [edit] Styles

### [edit] Inline replying

Inline replying style (or "interleaved reply", "point-by-point rebuttal",
though it is sometimes also called "bottom-posting") was the original Usenet
standard invented and used years before the existence of the WWW and the
widespread public use of e-mail and the Internet in general.[1] It is a format
that can include top-posting for comments that need to precede one's response
to specific points of what is being responded to. It can also include bottom-
posting for introducing new material or summarizing what has been said in
response to specific points of the text being replied to.

    
    This is an example of inline replying, with this introduction top-posted
    and a follow-up bottom-posted.
    
    > What are the advantages of inline replies?
    
    I would say chronological order, keeping related content together, and
    easy comparison of a reply with the original content that prompted it.
    
    > Are there any disadvantages?
    
    Primarily additional scrolling, and potentially unhelpful message previews.
    
    
    But you could have learned this by reading the article on Wikipedia!
    
One advantage of inline replies is that the discussion remains in
chronological order, which some people find easier to follow. Keeping related
sections of a discussion together within a message can also make it easier to
fork off parallel "threads" of discussion from a single source message, each
perhaps dealing with only one specific point (or subset of points) from the
original. A corresponding disadvantage is the need to scroll down past quoted
text to read new prose. This ordering change can also reduce the usefulness of
mail readers that sample the first line of the message when displaying a list
of messages.

Another advantage (including over paper letters) is the positioning of each
partial reply directly under the paragraph, sentence, or phrase to which it is
replying. This reduces the need to remember a large chunk of context, can
reduce ambiguity about what prompted a particular reply, and can make it
easier to see where a reply misunderstands or ignores the original text.

Some people think that proper netiquette for the inline reply method requires
one to respond in some manner to all points that were addressed in a message
of reply to one's original message, or else one is not being courteous and
forthright.[citation needed] This is similar to an in-person conversation
where when you ask a question to someone's face, you rightly expect a
response, even if it is only to say "I don't want to answer the question".
Only when one responds to a discussion in progress is it not impolite to not
respond to all points of the person whose text one is responding to - ie. it
is fully acceptable for a new responder to a thread to address only specific
points of an ongoing discussion between others (again, just as if such a
person had been listening to an in-person discussion and wanted to address
only one specific point).

Inline replying is also frequent on Internet forums, and other situations in
which the previous discussion is publicly available. However some webmail,
most forum, most wiki discussion pages and all blog commenting software do not
support automatic quoting in a way that can be easily used for inline replies
(for example by including the previous message with prefixed level
indicators). Inline was also originally used in all e-mail (because such users
had come from Usenet),[citation needed] but again with the advent of the World
Wide Web, vast numbers of new users, newly designed e-mail readers and webmail
interfaces, most users and providers have abandoned the original
standard.[citation needed]

As inline replying proceeds back and forth, multiple indicators (left margin
right angle brackets, vertical bars or indents, depending on the software and
mode - text or html - that one is using) will build up (see examples below).
These are called "levels" and their number indicates how many e-mails back is
any text that is still within the ongoing discussion. If the discussion is
between two people only, then, when in reply mode, the responder's text is
always at the even levels (0,2,4,6, etc) and the text of the person being
responded to is always at the odd levels (1,3,5,7, etc). Attribution lines
such as "Joe Blow wrote:" can also make it explicitly clear which text belongs
to whom.

### [edit] Trimming

When replying to long discussions, particularly in newsgroup discussions, most
of the text is often deleted such that only a taste of the original (a
reminder) is left â even if this means leaving a sentence hanging. If
instead portions of quoted text are merely "trimmed" (leaving only the
relevant quoted material), and some refer to this style as "trim-posting" or
"edited-inline-posting". Sometimes an indicator of deleted text is given,
usually in the form of a square bracketed tag as: [snipped], [trimmed], or
simply [...].

One simple convention is that paragraphs which are not replied to are trimmed
(with or without an indicator), indicating the poster is not advancing
discussion of these points. A more complex and slightly different convention
is that dropped paragraphs indicate the discussion on these points is
completely over; points which are not replied to but which are still "open"
are simply quoted without writing a reply. This latter convention uses quoting
as an affirmative indicator that un-replied-to text has been read but not
responded to.

Without trimming, signature blocks, free e-mail service ads, and corporate
disclaimers can pile up in a useless but growing "tail" at the end of each
message. These are often removed by convention without an indicator.

If the precise nature of the quote is not immediately apparent from the
remaining text, it is polite to include a brief 'subject' text in the bracket,
so the original author's words are not misunderstood by readers unfamiliar
with the original.

    
    On Thursday, Jim wrote:
    > When considering the variation in style between the original
    > novel and the movie adaptation, it is clear to see that
    [snipped...]
    
    Yes, but almost twenty years separates the book and the film.
    
    
    > The movie clearly adds a sense of menace to the story which
    > is not present in the original book.  This is unacceptable
    [Darker interpretation pros and cons, trimmed...]
    
    I disagree.  The darker tone works well, once one understands 
    the two are aimed at different audiences.
    
### [edit] Top-posting

Top-posting includes the entire parent message (and usually previous messages)
verbatim, with the reply above it. It is sometimes referred to by the term
TOFU, an acronym for "Text Over, Fullquote Under". It is the default
implemented by Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, Gmail, and others, and
resembles forwarding messages with new text prepended at the top. Example:

    
    No problem.  6pm it is then.
    Jim
    
     
    -------- Original Message --------
    From: Danny <danny@example.com> 
    Sent: Tuesday, October 16, 2007 10:01 AM
    To: Jim <jim@example.com>
    Subject: RE: Job
     
    Whoa!  Hold on.  I have a job scheduled at 5:30 which mails out 
    a report to key tech staff.  Can you not push it back an hour?
    Danny
     
    
    -------- Original Message --------
    From: Jim <jim@example.com> 
    Sent: Tuesday, October 16, 2007 9:40 AM
    To: Danny <danny@example.com>
    Subject: Job
    
    I'm going to suspend the mail service for approx. thirty
    minutes tonight, starting at 5pm, to install some updates 
    and important fixes.
    Jim
    
    
The message is responded to with another full-length message, similar to
traditional written correspondence except that the response includes the
original message. While top-posting is sometimes recommended against, it is
the more common style in business e-mail correspondence.[2][3] Customer
service e-mail practices often require that all points be addressed in a clear
manner without quoting, while the original e-mail message may be included as
an attachment merely as evidence.

One benefit of the style is that when a new correspondent is included in an
otherwise private discussion (due to forwarding or addition of new
recipients), the background of the discussion, or "thread", is also
accessible, with the most recent response immediately visible at the
top.[4][5] Especially in business correspondence, an entire message thread may
need to be forwarded to a third party for handling or discussion. In this
case, it is appropriate to "top-post" the handling instructions or handoff
discussion above the quoted trail of the entire discussion â as the
intention is simply to "approve" or "provide instruction", not to respond in a
point by point manner â or to send a copy of all the e-mails comprised by
the discussion. (In environments where the entire discussion is public, like
newsgroups or online forums, inclusion of past discussion is not necessary,
and trim-posting is sufficient.)

E-mail has long supported a convention for forwarding verbatim an entire
message, including its header. An untrimmed quoted message is a weaker form of
transcript, as key pieces of meta information are destroyed. (This is why an
ISP's Postmaster will typically insist on a forwarded copy of any problematic
e-mail, rather than a quote.) These forwarded messages are displayed in the
same way as top-posting in some mail clients.

The default quote format and cursor placement of many popular e-mail
applications, such as Microsoft Outlook and Gmail, encourages top-posting.
Microsoft has had a significant influence on top-posting by the ubiquity of
its software; its e-mail and newsreader software places the cursor at the top
by default, and in several cases makes it difficult not to top-post (this is
caused by a bug present on most flavours of Microsoft Outlook where the
quotation symbols are lost when replying in plain text to a message that was
originally sent in HTML/RTF, along with the fact that on the default Microsoft
Outlook setup, no quotation symbols are generated at all â this makes it
very hard to distinguish between new and quoted text); many users have
accepted this as a de facto standard. In addition, users of mobile devices,
like BlackBerries, are encouraged to use top-posting, because the devices only
download the beginning of a message for viewing. The rest of the message is
only retrieved when needed, which takes additional download time. Putting the
relevant content at the beginning of the message requires less bandwidth, less
time, and less scrolling for the Blackberry user.[6][7][8]

Partially because of Microsoft's influence, top-posting is more common on
mailing lists and in personal e-mail.[3][9][10][11] Top-posting is viewed as
seriously destructive to mailing-list digests, where multiple levels of top-
posting are difficult to skip. The worst case would be top-posting while
including an entire digest as the original message.

Some believe that "top-posting" is appropriate for interpersonal e-mail, but
inline posting should always be applied to threaded discussions such as
newsgroups. Objections to top-posting on newsgroups, as a rule, seem to come
from persons who first went online in the earlier days of Usenet, and in
communities that date to Usenet's early days. Among the most vehement
communities are those in the Usenet comp.lang hierarchy, especially
comp.lang.c and comp.lang.c++. Top-posting is more tolerated on the alt
hierarchy. Newer online participants, especially those with limited experience
of Usenet, tend to be less sensitive to arguments about posting style. The
classical reverse chronological post ordering used in weblogs is essentially
top posting.

This example is occasionally used in mailing lists to mock and discourage top-
posting: [12][13][14]

    
    A: Because it messes up the order in which people normally read text.
    Q: Why is top-posting such a bad thing?
    A: Top-posting.
    Q: What is the most annoying thing in e-mail?
    
### [edit] Bottom-posting

Another style of replying to messages has been dubbed "bottom-posting". The
reply is placed below the quote to preserve the logical order of the replies
and follow the Western reading direction from top to bottom.

This is typically done when only a single portion of the previous message is
being replied to; the rest of the quoted material is trimmed.

    
    > At 9.40am Wednesday, Jim wrote:
    > > I'm going to suspend the mail service for approx. thirty
    > > minutes tonight, starting at 5pm, to install some updates 
    > > and important fixes.
    
    At 10.01am Wednesday, Danny wrote:
    > Whoa!  Hold on.  I have a job scheduled at 5:30 which mails out 
    > a report to key tech staff.  Can you not push it back an hour?
    
    No problems. 6pm it is then.
    
Scrolling down through a post to find a reply is inconvenient, especially for
short replies to long messages, and many inexperienced computer users may not
know that they need to scroll down to find a reply to their query. When
sending an untrimmed bottom posted message, one might indicate inline replies
with a notice at the top such as "I have replied below." However, as many
modern mail programs are capable of displaying different levels of quotation
with different colors (as seen here), this is not so much of an issue any
more. Another good method to indicate that there is more reply text still to
come is to always end your text with a signature line. Then the reader will
know to continue to read until your signature line appears. This method is
particularly polite and useful when using the inline reply method, since it
tells the reader that your response is complete at the point where your
signature line appears.

### [edit] Other variants

<IMG>

<IMG>

Alternative e-mail quoting styles supported by Microsoft Outlook

Many e-mail readers and web mail interfaces implement top-posting using the
right angle bracket (">") prefix character (which indicates the level of the
text in that line - number of previous replies in which it was written) and
referred to as "prefix each line of the original" in Microsoft Outlook). This
method is less popular with some people because lengthy reply histories can
produce an awkward number of cascading prefix characters. However, good
software reduces the spacing by placing additional prefix characters right
next to each other and the use of methods of indicating reply levels by means
of numbers of such prefix characters has some highly important advantages -
see inline replying above for more information.

    
    No problem. 6pm it is then.
    Jim
    
    At 10.01am Wednesday, Danny wrote: 
     
    > Whoa!  Hold on. I have a job scheduled at 5:30 which mails out 
    > a report to key tech staff. Can you not push it back an hour?
    > Danny
    > 
    > At 9.40am Wednesday, Jim wrote,  
    > > I'm going to suspend the mail service for approx. thirty
    > > minutes tonight, starting at 5pm, to install some updates 
    > > and important fixes.
    > > Jim 
    
Another style called "double-quoting" involves replying in an interleaved
manner to selected quotes from the original message, as described above, but
then following this with a fullquote of the entire message, as if top-posting.
This preserves the thread text in a single message, and also allows seeing
what's being replied to in context. However this also results in some portions
of the original message being quoted twice, which takes up extra space and
might be considered confusing.

    
    > Can you present your report an hour later?
    Yes I can. The report will now happen at 3pm, and the summary will be sent no later than 5pm.
    Jim
    
    
    At 10.01am Wednesday, Danny wrote:
    > > 2.00pm: Present report
    > Jim, I have a meeting at that time. Can you present your report an hour later?
    >
    > > 4.30pm: Send out summary of feedback
    > Also if you do the above, this may need to happen later too.
    > Danny
    > 
    >
    > At 9.40am Wednesday, Jim wrote:
    > > My schedule for today will be:
    > > 10.00am: Gather data for report
    > > 2.00pm: Present report to team
    > > 4.30pm: Send out summary of feedback
    > > Jim
    
## [edit] Netiquette Guidelines

In the words of RFC 1855, the RFC Netiquette Guidelines, which comprise a
comprehensive set of voluntary netiquette conventions:

> If you are sending a reply to a message or a posting be sure you summarize
the original at the top of the message, or include just enough text of the
original to give a context. This will make sure readers understand when they
start to read your response.

This section of the RFC is discussing public archived postings such as mailing
lists and newsgroups. For interpersonal e-mail, the subject line is often
sufficient to remind the sender of what was being discussed, and no quoting of
any type is necessary to indicate a reply. However, if one is politely
addressing points of a conversation, according to the recommendation the
points discussed should be explicitly stated or quoted inline. This is stated
in the RFC regarding interpersonal communication such as e-mail:

> When replying to a message, include enough original material to be
understood but no more. It is extremely bad form to simply reply to a message
by including all the previous message: edit out all the irrelevant material.

Some would add that one should also include a blank line in between quoted
material and responses to ensure that they are clearly set off from one
another. Some mail programs may even try to re-word-wrap entire paragraphs and
cause quotes and replies to be jumbled together illegibly if they are not
cleanly separated. Newer e-mail software that operate in HTML e-mail mode, and
use a left vertical bar instead of prefix right angle brackets (">"), attempt
to enable word wrapping without spillover to lines with an incorrect number of
level indicators, but are seldom successful unless both respondents are using
the same software. A common mistake is to leave "tails" of right angle
brackets (or left vertical bars) above or below a quoted block, running into
the preceding or following paragraph of new material, instead of creating an
entirely blank line as a separator.

## [edit] Attribution lines

Since quoted material frequently becomes several levels deep, if a relevant
point is retained during a discussion, "attribution lines" are commonly used
to indicate the author of each part of the quoted material. Because some
people may think that the color of the examples below implies that the color
of the attribution line means that such person wrote the text of that color
(which is not true), it is important to realize that when color is used by
software it is applied to all text of the responder, which includes the
attribution line for the previous responder which is placed at the start of
the message by the software when a reply is performed. Thus in the example
below which is the current message as sent by Nancy and read by Alfred, it is
Alfred that wrote the level 3 text "Do you like ..." and Nancy who replied
with "No." (at level 2). After that, Alfred replied (at level 1) "How come?"
and finally Nancy responded (at current level 0) with "I prefer to reply
inline."

    
    > > Alfred Bartosz wrote:
    > > > Do you like top-posting?
    
    > Nancy Nguyen wrote:
    > > No. 
    
    Alfred Bartosz wrote:
    > How come?
    
    Because it messes up the flow of reading.
    
    > What do you do instead?
    
    I prefer to reply inline.
    
Many mail user agents will add these attribution lines automatically to the
top of the quoted material. Retaining these lines as the discussion continues
results in the following style. Note that the level indicator of the
attribution line is always one less than the text of the attribution.

    
    Alfred Bartosz wrote:
    > Nancy Nguyen wrote:
    > > Alfred Bartosz wrote:
    > > > Do you like top-posting?
    > > No.
    > How come?
    
    Because it messes up the flow of reading.
    
    > What do you do instead?
    
    I prefer to reply inline.
    
Alternative variant, widely used in Fidonet and some mail user agents, is
adding initials of responders before quoting symbol:

    
    Alfred Bartosz wrote:
    AB> Nancy Nguyen wrote:
    NN>> Alfred Bartosz wrote:
    AB>>> Do you like top-posting?
    NN>> No.
    AB> How come?
    
    Because it messes up the flow of reading.
    
    AB> What do you do instead?
    
    I prefer to reply inline.
    
## [edit] References

  1. ^ This can be verified by examining archives of Usenet posts at Google groups, for USENET groups which existed long before the beginning of the WWW (1993).
  2. ^ Mallon, Rebecca; Charles Oppenheim (February 2002). "Style used in electronic mail". Aslib Proceedings 54 (1): pp. 8â22. doi:10.1108/00012530210697482. ISSN 0001-253X.
  3. ^ a b "reply intelligently to e-mail" (blog post and responses). TechRepublic. January 19, 2006. http://content.techrepublic.com.com/5254-6257-0.html?forumID=99&threadID=173898&messageID=1928226&id=3923716. Retrieved on 2007-01-11.
  4. ^ Quoting: Top Posting â Dan's Mail Format Site
  5. ^ Sensible email â Blog post and discussion
  6. ^ My rapidly growing email habit blog post
  7. ^ Stopping SirCam â postfix.org mailing list
  8. ^ Top Posting and Mobiles â Jabber mailing list
  9. ^ Various authors (March 19, 2004). "Top posting" (Mailing list thread). FreeBSD mailing list. http://lists.freebsd.org/pipermail/freebsd-questions/2004-March/thread.html#40694. Retrieved on 2007-01-11.
  10. ^ Various authors (October 13, 2002). "Top-posting is so Microsoftish" (Mailing list thread). SuSE Linux english discussion. http://lists.suse.com/archive/suse-linux-e/2002-Oct/index.html#1698. Retrieved on 2007-01-11.
  11. ^ Kennedy, Angus J.; Peter Buckley, Duncan Clark (October 2003). Andrew Dickson. ed (Google Book Search). The Rough Guide to the Internet 9 (2004 edition ed.). London: Penguin Books. pp. 241\. ISBN 1-84353-101-1. http://books.google.com/books?visbn=1843531011&id=umvBESswHH8C&pg=RA5-PA241&lpg=RA5-PA241&sig=RBlX3-xwWrEtI-B-zKOw8CABX2M. Retrieved on 2007-01-11. "It used to be taboo to reply at the top of a message ("top posting") until Microsoft made it the default setting"
  12. ^ ARM Linux â Mailing Lists â Etiquette
  13. ^ Top Posting
  14. ^ What is top-posting

## [edit] External links

  * RFC 1855 â Netiquette Guidelines
  * Rules to Better Email
  * top-post in jargon dictionary
  * Quoting Style How to use quote correctly using interleaved quoting instead of top-posting
  * Why is Bottom-posting better than Top-posting
  * In Defence of Top-Posting
  * Outlook Quotefix, Outlook Express Quotefix and OE PowerTool â third party utilities for automatically reformatting quoted text in Microsoft mail products
  * The Trim-Posting Manifesto
  * Using Internet e-mail
  * The Aglami Top-Posting FAQ
  * Stewart, Godwin (7 September 2006). "USENET and Mailing List posting netiquette". http://linux.sgms-centre.com/misc/netiquette.php. Retrieved on 2008-03-10. (see #9 for comments on proper inline quoting)
  * "Mailing and Posting Etiquette: Quote Judiciously". River of Stars. 14 January 2004. http://www.river.com/users/share/etiquette/#quotes. Retrieved on 2008-03-10.
  * "Mailing and Posting Etiquette: Post In-line for Context". River of Stars. 14 January 2004. http://www.river.com/users/share/etiquette/. Retrieved on 2008-03-10.
  * "Email Etiquette: Courtesy No. 6 ~ When replying to emails always respond promptly and edit out unnecessary information from the post you are responding to.". TheIStudio.com using the brand NetM@nners.com. 15 February 2008. http://www.onlinenetiquette.com/courtesy6.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-10. (see the 4th paragraph)
  * Easter, Mike (3 April 2006). "Re: Joe jobs - was Re: Victim of Spam-Trap addresses...". SpamCop. http://news.spamcop.net/pipermail/spamcop-list/2006-April/110211.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-10.
  * Meiss, Alan (16 March 2005). "101 Ways to be Obnoxious on Usenet". Epsilon 3 Productions. http://www.epsilon3.com/home/humor/usenet_h.html. Retrieved on 2008-03-10. Internet Archive at http://web.archive.org/web/20050316032233/http://www.epsilon3.com/home/humor/usenet_h.html
  * Sherwood, Kaitlin Duck. "Email Guide - Email Tutorial - Learn Email Basics". newbie.org. http://www.newbie.org/email_basics/. Retrieved on 2008-03-10.

v â¢ d â¢ e

Blogs and blogging  
Types

Micro-blogging/Tumblelog Â· Photoblog Â· Roblog Â· Mobile blogging Â·
Collaborative blog Â· Online diary Â· Sideblog Â· Spam blog Â· Video blogging
Â· MP3 blog Â· Blog carnival  
Niches

Blog fiction Â· Dream journal Â· Corporate blog Â· Edublog Â· Fake blog Â·
Fashion blog Â· Classical music blog Â· Bloggernacle Â· Warblog  
Technologies

Software Â· Blog directory Â· Trackback Â· Refback Â· Permalink Â· Ping Â·
Pingback Â· Linkback Â· Bliki Â· RSS Â· Atom  
Related articles

Escribitionist Â· Blogosphere Â· Aggregator Â· Pay per click Â· Web feed Â·
Web syndication Â· Slashdot effect Â· Posting style Â· Spam in blogs  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Posting_style"

Categories: Internet culture | E-mail | Usenet | Etiquette

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since March 2009

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * CatalÃ 
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Italiano
  * Suomi
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 11 March 2009, at 10:08 (UTC).
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



