
# ISO/IEC 8859-1

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

ISO 8859-1, more formally cited as ISO/IEC 8859-1 is part 1 of ISO/IEC 8859, a
standard character encoding of the Latin alphabet. It is less formally
referred to as Latin-1. It was originally developed by the ISO, but later
jointly maintained by the ISO and the IEC. The standard, when supplemented
with additional character assignments (in the C0 and C1 ranges: 0x00 to 0x1F
and 0x7F, and 0x80 to 0x9F), is the basis of two widely-used character maps
known as ISO-8859-1 (note the extra hyphen) and Windows-1252.

In June 2004, the ISO/IEC working group responsible for maintaining eight-bit
coded character sets disbanded and ceased all maintenance of ISO 8859,
including ISO 8859-1, in order to concentrate on the Universal Character Set
and Unicode. In computing applications, encodings that provide full UCS
support (such as UTF-8 and UTF-16) are finding increasing favor over encodings
based on ISO 8859-1.[citation needed]

## Contents

  * 1 Coverage
  * 2 History
  * 3 Relationship to ISO/IEC 8859-15
  * 4 Codepage layout
  * 5 Related character maps
    * 5.1 ISO-8859-1
  * 6 ISO-8859-1 and Windows-1252 confusion
  * 7 Similar character sets
  * 8 See also
  * 9 Notes
  * 10 External links

  
## [edit] Coverage

ISO 8859-1 encodes what it refers to as "Latin alphabet no. 1," consisting of
191 characters from the Latin script. This character-encoding scheme is used
throughout The Americas, Western Europe, Oceania, and much of Africa. It is
also commonly used in most standard romanizations of East-Asian languages.

Each character is encoded as a single eight-bit code value. These code values
can be used in almost any data interchange system to communicate in the
following European languages (with a few exceptions due to missing characters,
as noted):

Modern languages with complete coverage of their alphabet

  * Afrikaans
  * Albanian
  * Breton
  * Catalan
  * Danish
  * English (US and modern British)
  * Faroese
  * Galician
  * German

  * Icelandic
  * Irish (new orthography)
  * Italian
  * Kurdish (The Kurdish Unified Alphabet)
  * Latin (basic classical orthography)
  * Leonese
  * Luxembourgish (basic classical orthography)
  * Norwegian (BokmÃ¥l and Nynorsk)
  * Occitan

  * Portuguese (Portuguese and Brazilian)
  * Rhaeto-Romanic
  * Scottish Gaelic
  * Spanish
  * Swahili
  * Swedish
  * Walloon
  * Basque

  
Languages commonly supported with nearly complete coverage of their alphabet

  * Dutch (missing Ä², Ä³ but these should always be represented as IJ or ij in electronic form)
  * Estonian (missing Å , Å¡, Å½, Å¾ for loan words) 
    * Note that Windows-1252 and ISO-8859-15 do contain these
  * French (missing Å, Å and the very rare Å¸; they are generally replaced by 'OE' and 'oe' without the normally required ligature, and 'Y' without the diaeresis) 
    * Note that Windows-1252 and ISO-8859-15 do contain these
  * Finnish (missing Å , Å¡, Å½, Å¾ for loan words) 
    * Note that Windows-1252 and ISO-8859-15 do contain these
  * Welsh (missing Å´, Åµ, Å¶, Å·) 
    * Note that ISO-8859-14 does contain these

  
Coverage of punctuation signs and apostrophes

For some languages listed above the correct typographical quotation marks are
missing, for only Â« Â», " ", and ' ' are included.

Also, this encoding scheme does not provide the correct character for the
apostrophe and oriented single high quotation marks, although some texts use
the spacing grave accent and spacing acute accent that are both part of ISO
8859-1, instead of the 6-shaped/9-shaped quotations marks or apostrophes (and
this works reliably with some font styles where all these characters are
displayed as slanted wedge glyphs).

See also: Alphabets derived from the Latin

## [edit] History

ISO 8859-1 was based on the Multinational Character Set used by Digital
Equipment Corporation in the popular VT220 terminal. It was developed within
ECMA, the European Computer Manufacturers Association, and published in March
1985 as ECMA-94, by which name it is still sometimes known. The second edition
of ECMA-94 (June 1986) also included ISO 8859-2, ISO 8859-3, and ISO 8859-4 as
part of the specification.

In 1985 Commodore adopted officially for its new AmigaOS operating system
ANSI/ISO8859-1 layout for its codepage and all internal operations in order to
refer to international approved standards rather than proprietary standards,
as it happened in those times with MS-DOS, and Mac OS and thus this standard
was also used for manufacturing the keyboard layout of Amiga 1000 computer
that was launched in July 1985. All versions of Amiga OS upto 3.1 used
ISO8859-1. Since the demise of Commodore International in 1994 all further
versions of AmigaOS (3.5, 3.9) continued to have ISO8859-1 codepage set
enhanced with Euro Currency character, but without a leading firm capable to
impose official standards both Amiga and its clone variants (MorphOS, AROS)
did not update officially to ISO 8859-15 neither follow a common approach in
the introduction of Euro character in 2001. MorphOS 2.0 and further versions
are UNICODE UTF-8 compliant.

<IMG> This section requires expansion.  
## [edit] Relationship to ISO/IEC 8859-15

Although ISO/IEC 8859-1 has enough characters for most French text, it is
missing a few letters that are less common. It is also missing a single-glyph
representation for the letter Ä², two Finnish letters used for transcription
of some foreign names and in a few loanwords (Å and Å½), typographic quotation
marks and dashes, and common symbols such as the euro sign (â¬) and dagger
(â ).

In order to provide some of these characters, ISO/IEC 8859-15 was developed as
an update of ISO/IEC 8859-1. This required, however, the removal of some
infrequently-used characters from ISO/IEC 8859-1, including fraction symbols
and letter-free diacritics: Â¤, Â¦, Â¨, Â´, Â¸, Â¼, Â½, and Â¾.

## [edit] Codepage layout

Since all 191 characters encoded by ISO/IEC 8859-1 are 'graphic' (ISO's term
for characters that are not control codes) and are compatible with most web
browsers, they can be shown as glyphs in the following table. Since the space,
no-break space, and soft hyphen characters would not normally be visible, they
are represented by abbreviations for their names. All other characters are
represented literally. Row and column headings indicate the hexadecimal digit
combinations to produce the eight-bit code value; e.g., the letter L is at
code value 4C.

ISO/IEC 8859-1 (Latin-1)  
â0 â1 â2 â3 â4 â5 â6 â7 â8 â9 âA âB âC âD âE
âF  
  
0â  
  
  
1â  
  
  
2â  
SP  
0020  
32 !  
0021  
33 "  
0022  
34 #  
0023  
35 $  
0024  
36 %  
0025  
37 &  
0026  
38 '  
0027  
39 (  
0028  
40 )  
0029  
41 *  
002A  
42 +  
002B  
43 ,  
002C  
44 -  
002D  
45 .  
002E  
46 /  
002F  
47  
  
3â  
0  
0030  
48 1  
0031  
49 2  
0032  
50 3  
0033  
51 4  
0034  
52 5  
0035  
53 6  
0036  
54 7  
0037  
55 8  
0038  
56 9  
0039  
57 :  
003A  
58 ;  
003B  
59 <  
003C  
60 =  
003D  
61 >  
003E  
62 ?  
003F  
63  
  
4â  
@  
0040  
64 A  
0041  
65 B  
0042  
66 C  
0043  
67 D  
0044  
68 E  
0045  
69 F  
0046  
70 G  
0047  
71 H  
0048  
72 I  
0049  
73 J  
004A  
74 K  
004B  
75 L  
004C  
76 M  
004D  
77 N  
004E  
78 O  
004F  
79  
  
5â  
P  
0050  
80 Q  
0051  
81 R  
0052  
82 S  
0053  
83 T  
0054  
84 U  
0055  
85 V  
0056  
86 W  
0057  
87 X  
0058  
88 Y  
0059  
89 Z  
005A  
90 [  
005B  
91 \  
005C  
92 ]  
005D  
93 ^  
005E  
94 _  
005F  
95  
  
6â  
`  
0060  
96 a  
0061  
97 b  
0062  
98 c  
0063  
99 d  
0064  
100 e  
0065  
101 f  
0066  
102 g  
0067  
103 h  
0068  
104 i  
0069  
105 j  
006A  
106 k  
006B  
107 l  
006C  
108 m  
006D  
109 n  
006E  
110 o  
006F  
111  
  
7â  
p  
0070  
112 q  
0071  
113 r  
0072  
114 s  
0073  
115 t  
0074  
116 u  
0075  
117 v  
0076  
118 w  
0077  
119 x  
0078  
120 y  
0079  
121 z  
007A  
122 {  
007B  
123 |  
007C  
124 }  
007D  
125 ~  
007E  
126  
  
8â  
  
  
9â  
  
  
Aâ  
NBSP  
00A0  
160 Â¡  
00A1  
161 Â¢  
00A2  
162 Â£  
00A3  
163 Â¤  
00A4  
164 Â¥  
00A5  
165 Â¦  
00A6  
166 Â§  
00A7  
167 Â¨  
00A8  
168 Â©  
00A9  
169 Âª  
00AA  
170 Â«  
00AB  
171 Â¬  
00AC  
172 SHY  
00AD  
173 Â®  
00AE  
174 Â¯  
00AF  
175  
  
Bâ  
Â°  
00B0  
176 Â±  
00B1  
177 Â²  
00B2  
178 Â³  
00B3  
179 Â´  
00B4  
180 Âµ  
00B5  
181 Â¶  
00B6  
182 Â·  
00B7  
183 Â¸  
00B8  
184 Â¹  
00B9  
185 Âº  
00BA  
186 Â»  
00BB  
187 Â¼  
00BC  
188 Â½  
00BD  
189 Â¾  
00BE  
190 Â¿  
00BF  
191  
  
Câ  
Ã  
00C0  
192 Ã  
00C1  
193 Ã  
00C2  
194 Ã  
00C3  
195 Ã  
00C4  
196 Ã  
00C5  
197 Ã  
00C6  
198 Ã  
00C7  
199 Ã  
00C8  
200 Ã  
00C9  
201 Ã  
00CA  
202 Ã  
00CB  
203 Ã  
00CC  
204 Ã  
00CD  
205 Ã  
00CE  
206 Ã  
00CF  
207  
  
Dâ  
Ã  
00D0  
208 Ã  
00D1  
209 Ã  
00D2  
210 Ã  
00D3  
211 Ã  
00D4  
212 Ã  
00D5  
213 Ã  
00D6  
214 Ã  
00D7  
215 Ã  
00D8  
216 Ã  
00D9  
217 Ã  
00DA  
218 Ã  
00DB  
219 Ã  
00DC  
220 Ã  
00DD  
221 Ã  
00DE  
222 Ã  
00DF  
223  
  
Eâ  
Ã  
00E0  
224 Ã¡  
00E1  
225 Ã¢  
00E2  
226 Ã£  
00E3  
227 Ã¤  
00E4  
228 Ã¥  
00E5  
229 Ã¦  
00E6  
230 Ã§  
00E7  
231 Ã¨  
00E8  
232 Ã©  
00E9  
233 Ãª  
00EA  
234 Ã«  
00EB  
235 Ã¬  
00EC  
236 Ã­  
00ED  
237 Ã®  
00EE  
238 Ã¯  
00EF  
239  
  
Fâ  
Ã°  
00F0  
240 Ã±  
00F1  
241 Ã²  
00F2  
242 Ã³  
00F3  
243 Ã´  
00F4  
244 Ãµ  
00F5  
245 Ã¶  
00F6  
246 Ã·  
00F7  
247 Ã¸  
00F8  
248 Ã¹  
00F9  
249 Ãº  
00FA  
250 Ã»  
00FB  
251 Ã¼  
00FC  
252 Ã½  
00FD  
253 Ã¾  
00FE  
254 Ã¿  
00FF  
255  
â0 â1 â2 â3 â4 â5 â6 â7 â8 â9 âA âB âC âD âE
âF  
Code values 00â1F, 7Fâ9F are not assigned to characters by ISO/IEC 8859-1.

The lower range 20 to 7E (the G0 subset) maps exactly to the same coded G0
subset of the ISO 646 US variant (commonly known as ASCII), whose ISO 2022
standard switch sequence is "ESC ( B". The higher range A0 to FF (the G1
subset) maps exactly to the same subset initiated by the ISO 2022 standard
switch sequence "ESC . A".

## [edit] Related character maps

The ISO/IEC 8859-1 standard has long been the basis of a number of character
maps, also known as character sets, charsets, or code pages, the most popular
being ISO-8859-1 (note the extra hyphen) and Windows-1252. Both of these maps
are a superset of ISO/IEC 8859-1; they supplement the standard's 191 character
assignments by mapping additional characters to at least some portion of the
code value ranges 00â1F, 7F, and 80â9F.

### [edit] ISO-8859-1

In 1992, the IANA registered the character map ISO_8859-1:1987, more commonly
known by its preferred MIME name of ISO-8859-1 (note the extra hyphen over ISO
8859-1), a superset of ISO 8859-1, for use on the Internet. This map assigns
the C0 and C1 control characters to the code values 00â1F, 7F, and 80â9F.
It thus provides for 256 characters via every possible 8-bit value.

ISO-8859-1 is (according to the standards at least) the default encoding of
documents delivered via HTTP with a MIME type beginning with "text/". It is
the default encoding of the values of certain descriptive HTTP headers, and is
the standard encoding used by the X Window System on most Unix machines in
locales which use that character set. It was also the basis of the repertoire
of characters allowed in HTML 3.2 documents (HTML 4.0, however, is based on
Unicode).

Escape sequences (from ISO/IEC 6429 or ISO/IEC 2022) are not to be interpreted
in documents labeled as ISO-8859-1 encoded. As well as the canonical name and
preferred MIME name mentioned above, the following other aliases are
registered for ISO-8859-1: ISO_8859-1, ISO-8859-1, iso-ir-100, csISOLatin1,
latin1, l1, IBM819, CP819. ISO-8859-1 was also incorporated as the first 256
code points of ISO/IEC 10646 and Unicode.

Code point Control character Abbreviation  
00 Null NUL  
01 Start Of Heading SOH  
02 Start of Text STX  
03 End of Text ETX  
04 End Of Transmission EOT  
05 Enquiry ENQ  
06 Acknowledge ACK  
07 Bell BEL  
08 Backspace BS  
09 Horizontal Tab HT  
0A Line Feed LF  
0B Vertical Tab VT  
0C Form Feed FF  
0D Carriage Return CR  
0E Shift Out SO  
0F Shift In SI  
10 Data Link Escape DLE  
11 Device Control 1 DC1  
12 Device Control 2 DC2  
13 Device Control 3 DC3  
14 Device Control 4 DC4  
15 Negative Acknowledge NAK  
16 Synchronous idle SYN  
17 End of Transmission Block ETB  
18 Cancel CAN  
19 End of Medium EM  
1A Substitute (character) SUB  
1B Escape character ESC  
1C File separator FS  
1D Group separator GS  
1E Record separator RS  
1F Unit separator US  
7F Delete DEL  
Code point Control character Abbreviation  
80 Padding Character PAD  
81 High Octet Preset HOP  
82 Break Permitted Here BPH  
83 No Break Here NBH  
84 Index IND  
85 Next Line NEL  
86 Start of Selected Area SSA  
87 End of Selected Area ESA  
88 Character Tabulation Set HTS  
89 Character Tabulation with Justification HTJ  
8A Line Tabulation Set VTS  
8B Partial Line Forward PLD  
8C Partial Line Backward PLU  
8D Reverse Line Feed RI  
8E Single Shift 2 SS2  
8F Single Shift 3 SS3  
90 Device Control String DCS  
91 Private Use 1 PU1  
92 Private Use 2 PU2  
93 Set Transmit State STS  
94 Cancel Character CCH  
95 Message Waiting MW  
96 Start of Guarded Area SPA  
97 End of Guarded Area EPA  
98 Start of String SOS  
99 Single Graphic Character Introducer SGCI  
9A Single Character Introducer SCI  
9B Control Sequence Introducer CSI  
9C String Terminator ST  
9D Operating System Command OSC  
9E Privacy Message PM  
9F Application Program Command APC  
ISO-8859-1  
â0 â1 â2 â3 â4 â5 â6 â7 â8 â9 âA âB âC âD âE
âF  
  
0â  
NUL  
0000  
0 SOH  
0001  
1 STX  
0002  
2 ETX  
0003  
3 EOT  
0004  
4 ENQ  
0005  
5 ACK  
0006  
6 BEL  
0007  
7 BS  
0008  
8 HT  
0009  
9 LF  
000A  
10 VT  
000B  
11 FF  
000C  
12 CR  
000D  
13 SO  
000E  
14 SI  
000F  
15  
  
1â  
DLE  
0010  
16 DC1  
0011  
17 DC2  
0012  
18 DC3  
0013  
19 DC4  
0014  
20 NAK  
0015  
21 SYN  
0016  
22 ETB  
0017  
23 CAN  
0018  
24 EM  
0019  
25 SUB  
001A  
26 ESC  
001B  
27 FS  
001C  
28 GS  
001D  
29 RS  
001E  
30 US  
001F  
31  
  
2â  
SP  
0020  
32 !  
0021  
33 "  
0022  
34 #  
0023  
35 $  
0024  
36 %  
0025  
37 &  
0026  
38 '  
0027  
39 (  
0028  
40 )  
0029  
41 *  
002A  
42 +  
002B  
43 ,  
002C  
44 -  
002D  
45 .  
002E  
46 /  
002F  
47  
  
3â  
0  
0030  
48 1  
0031  
49 2  
0032  
50 3  
0033  
51 4  
0034  
52 5  
0035  
53 6  
0036  
54 7  
0037  
55 8  
0038  
56 9  
0039  
57 :  
003A  
58 ;  
003B  
59 <  
003C  
60 =  
003D  
61 >  
003E  
62 ?  
003F  
63  
  
4â  
@  
0040  
64 A  
0041  
65 B  
0042  
66 C  
0043  
67 D  
0044  
68 E  
0045  
69 F  
0046  
70 G  
0047  
71 H  
0048  
72 I  
0049  
73 J  
004A  
74 K  
004B  
75 L  
004C  
76 M  
004D  
77 N  
004E  
78 O  
004F  
79  
  
5â  
P  
0050  
80 Q  
0051  
81 R  
0052  
82 S  
0053  
83 T  
0054  
84 U  
0055  
85 V  
0056  
86 W  
0057  
87 X  
0058  
88 Y  
0059  
89 Z  
005A  
90 [  
005B  
91 \  
005C  
92 ]  
005D  
93 ^  
005E  
94 _  
005F  
95  
  
6â  
`  
0060  
96 a  
0061  
97 b  
0062  
98 c  
0063  
99 d  
0064  
100 e  
0065  
101 f  
0066  
102 g  
0067  
103 h  
0068  
104 i  
0069  
105 j  
006A  
106 k  
006B  
107 l  
006C  
108 m  
006D  
109 n  
006E  
110 o  
006F  
111  
  
7â  
p  
0070  
112 q  
0071  
113 r  
0072  
114 s  
0073  
115 t  
0074  
116 u  
0075  
117 v  
0076  
118 w  
0077  
119 x  
0078  
120 y  
0079  
121 z  
007A  
122 {  
007B  
123 |  
007C  
124 }  
007D  
125 ~  
007E  
126 DEL  
007F  
127  
  
8â  
PAD  
0080  
128 HOP  
0081  
129 BPH  
0082  
130 NBH  
0083  
131 IND  
0084  
132 NEL  
0085  
133 SSA  
0086  
134 ESA  
0087  
135 HTS  
0088  
136 HTJ  
0089  
137 VTS  
008A  
138 PLD  
008B  
139 PLU  
008C  
140 RI  
008D  
141 SS2  
008E  
142 SS3  
008F  
143  
  
9â  
DCS  
0090  
144 PU1  
0091  
145 PU2  
0092  
146 STS  
0093  
147 CCH  
0094  
148 MW  
0095  
149 SPA  
0096  
150 EPA  
0097  
151 SOS  
0098  
152 SGCI  
0099  
153 SCI  
009A  
154 CSI  
009B  
155 ST  
009C  
156 OSC  
009D  
157 PM  
009E  
158 APC  
009F  
159  
  
Aâ  
NBSP  
00A0  
160 Â¡  
00A1  
161 Â¢  
00A2  
162 Â£  
00A3  
163 Â¤  
00A4  
164 Â¥  
00A5  
165 Â¦  
00A6  
166 Â§  
00A7  
167 Â¨  
00A8  
168 Â©  
00A9  
169 Âª  
00AA  
170 Â«  
00AB  
171 Â¬  
00AC  
172 SHY  
00AD  
173 Â®  
00AE  
174 Â¯  
00AF  
175  
  
Bâ  
Â°  
00B0  
176 Â±  
00B1  
177 Â²  
00B2  
178 Â³  
00B3  
179 Â´  
00B4  
180 Âµ  
00B5  
181 Â¶  
00B6  
182 Â·  
00B7  
183 Â¸  
00B8  
184 Â¹  
00B9  
185 Âº  
00BA  
186 Â»  
00BB  
187 Â¼  
00BC  
188 Â½  
00BD  
189 Â¾  
00BE  
190 Â¿  
00BF  
191  
  
Câ  
Ã  
00C0  
192 Ã  
00C1  
193 Ã  
00C2  
194 Ã  
00C3  
195 Ã  
00C4  
196 Ã  
00C5  
197 Ã  
00C6  
198 Ã  
00C7  
199 Ã  
00C8  
200 Ã  
00C9  
201 Ã  
00CA  
202 Ã  
00CB  
203 Ã  
00CC  
204 Ã  
00CD  
205 Ã  
00CE  
206 Ã  
00CF  
207  
  
Dâ  
Ã  
00D0  
208 Ã  
00D1  
209 Ã  
00D2  
210 Ã  
00D3  
211 Ã  
00D4  
212 Ã  
00D5  
213 Ã  
00D6  
214 Ã  
00D7  
215 Ã  
00D8  
216 Ã  
00D9  
217 Ã  
00DA  
218 Ã  
00DB  
219 Ã  
00DC  
220 Ã  
00DD  
221 Ã  
00DE  
222 Ã  
00DF  
223  
  
Eâ  
Ã  
00E0  
224 Ã¡  
00E1  
225 Ã¢  
00E2  
226 Ã£  
00E3  
227 Ã¤  
00E4  
228 Ã¥  
00E5  
229 Ã¦  
00E6  
230 Ã§  
00E7  
231 Ã¨  
00E8  
232 Ã©  
00E9  
233 Ãª  
00EA  
234 Ã«  
00EB  
235 Ã¬  
00EC  
236 Ã­  
00ED  
237 Ã®  
00EE  
238 Ã¯  
00EF  
239  
  
Fâ  
Ã°  
00F0  
240 Ã±  
00F1  
241 Ã²  
00F2  
242 Ã³  
00F3  
243 Ã´  
00F4  
244 Ãµ  
00F5  
245 Ã¶  
00F6  
246 Ã·  
00F7  
247 Ã¸  
00F8  
248 Ã¹  
00F9  
249 Ãº  
00FA  
250 Ã»  
00FB  
251 Ã¼  
00FC  
252 Ã½  
00FD  
253 Ã¾  
00FE  
254 Ã¿  
00FF  
255  
â0 â1 â2 â3 â4 â5 â6 â7 â8 â9 âA âB âC âD âE
âF  
Note that most of these control characters are not made for use in portable
ISO-8859-1 encoded plain text documents, but only within specific protocols or
devices, except a few ones whose behavior are standardized: TAB (09), LF (0A),
CR (0D) and NEL (85); all but the first one are used to encode end of lines or
to separate paragraphs, and TAB is often considered equivalent to whitespace.
However FF (0C) is commonly accepted in some applications interpreting plain-
text documents as an additional ignorable whitespace at the beginning of
lines, to mark the position of an explicit page break when printing.

However, some encodings allow using BS (08) to create additional characters by
emulating the superposition of multiple characters on printing devices.

Some ISO standards assign specific functions to some controls (for example in
ISO 2022) where SO (0E), SI (0F), DLE (10), ESC (1B) and SS2 (8E) are used to
control the encoding of characters after them or to switch between multiple
encodings.

The NUL character (00) is commonly used as a string terminator in some
programming languages, or as a filler in database records that must be ignored
and is not part of the encoded text. STX (02) and ETX (03) are commonly used
for delimiting frames in some transmission protocols. SUB (1A) is also
commonly used as a replacement character to mark errors detected in input
transmission streams, and it may be rendered graphically. DC1 (11) and DC3
(13) are commonly used in the XON/XOFF protocol for controlling the
transmission speed. Finally, EM (19) or EOT (04) may be used as an end-of-file
marker in some text file formats.

## [edit] ISO-8859-1 and Windows-1252 confusion

It is very common to mislabel text data with the charset label ISO-8859-1,
even though the data are really Windows-1252 encoded. In Windows-1252, codes
between 0x80 and 0x9F are used for letters and punctuation, whereas they are
control codes in ISO-8859-1. Many web browsers and e-mail clients will
interpret ISO-8859-1 control codes as Windows-1252 characters in order to
accommodate such mislabeling but it is not a standard behavior and care should
be taken to avoid generating these characters in ISO-8859-1 labeled content.
However, the draft HTML 5 specification requires that documents advertised as
ISO-8859-1 actually be parsed with the Windows-1252 encoding.[1]

## [edit] Similar character sets

Main article: Western Latin character sets (computing)

The Apple Macintosh computer introduced a character encoding called Mac Roman,
or Mac-Roman, in 1984. It was meant to be suitable for Western European
desktop publishing. It is a superset of ASCII, like ISO-8859-1, and has most
of the characters that are in ISO-8859-1 but in a totally different
arrangement. A later version, registered with IANA as "Macintosh", replaced
the generic currency sign Â¤ with the euro sign â¬. The few printable
characters that are in ISO 8859-1 but not in this set are often a source of
trouble when editing text on websites using older Macintosh browsers
(including the last version of Internet Explorer for Mac). However the extra
characters that Windows-1252 has in the C1 codepoint range are all supported
in MacRoman and except for the few missing ISO-8859-1 characters a Macintosh
can send/receive files (and email) that are encoded/marked as ISO-8859-1 (with
the C1 Control Characters) and Windows-1252 by remapping the glyph's codepoint
numbers.

DOS had code page 850, which had all printable characters that ISO-8859-1 had
(albeit in a totally different arrangement) plus the most widely used graphics
characters from code page 437.

## [edit] See also

  * Latin characters in Unicode
  * ISO/IEC 8859-15 â a derivative of ISO-8859-1

## [edit] Notes

  1. ^ HTML 5 Draft Recommendation â 15 September 2008, 8.2.2.2. Character encoding requirements, retrieved [2009-02-01].

## [edit] External links

  * ISO/IEC 8859-1:1998
  * ISO/IEC 8859-1:1998 \- 8-bit single-byte coded graphic character sets, Part 1: Latin alphabet No. 1 (draft dated February 12, 1998, published April 15, 1998)
  * Standard ECMA-94: 8-Bit Single Byte Coded Graphic Character Sets - Latin Alphabets No. 1 to No. 4 2nd edition (June 1986)
  * ISO-IR 100 Right-Hand Part of Latin Alphabet No.1 (February 1, 1986)
  * Windows Code pages
  * Differences between ANSI, ISO-8859-1 and MacRoman Character Sets
  * The Letter Database
  * The ISO 8859 Alphabet Soup \- Roman Czyborra's summary of ISO character sets

v â¢ d â¢ e

Character encodings  
ASCII â¢ Baudot code â¢ Code page â¢ EBCDIC â¢ Fieldata â¢ Morse code â¢
Unicode  
ASCII variants

ATASCII â¢ Galaksija â¢ ISO/IEC 646 â¢ PETSCII â¢ YUSCII â¢ ZX Spectrum
character set  
Extended ASCII

ArmSCII â¢ Iran System â¢ ISCII â¢ ISO/IEC 8859 â¢ ISO/IEC 8859-1 â¢ KOI8
â¢ KamenickÃ½ â¢ Mazovia â¢ Mac OS â¢ TSCII â¢ VISCII â¢ Windows code
pages  
ASCII-related

ASCII art â¢ ASCII Ribbon Campaign â¢ Bob Bemer â¢ Braille ASCII â¢
Control characters  
Unicode

GB 18030 â¢ Han unification â¢ Universal Character Set â¢ UTF-8 â¢
UTF-16/UCS-2 â¢ UTF-32/UCS-4  
Unicode-related

UTF-7 â¢ UTF-9 and UTF-18 â¢ UTF-EBCDIC â¢ TRON  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_8859-1"

Categories: ISO 8859 | IEC standards

Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements | Articles with
unsourced statements since June 2008 | Articles to be expanded since May 2008
| All articles to be expanded

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * EspaÃ±ol
  * Esperanto
  * FranÃ§ais
  * Nederlands
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * âªNorsk (nynorsk)â¬
  * Polski
  * PortuguÃªs
  * Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * TatarÃ§a/Ð¢Ð°ÑÐ°ÑÑÐ°
  * ä¸­æ

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 2 March 2009, at 20:07.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



