
# Composting

### From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to: navigation, search

<IMG>

<IMG>

Stable bedding collected for composting.

Composting is the purposeful biodegradation of organic matter, such as yard
and food waste. The decomposition is performed by micro-organisms, mostly
bacteria, but also yeasts and fungi.[1] In low temperature phases a number of
macro-organisms, such as springtails, ants, nematodes, isopods and earthworms
also contribute to the process, as well as soldier fly, fruit flies and fungus
gnats. There are a wide range of organisms in the decomposer community.[2]

  * A biodegradable material is capable of being completely broken down under the action of microorganisms into carbon dioxide, water and biomass. It may take a very long time for some material to biodegrade depending on its environment (e.g. wood in an arid area versus paper in water), but it ultimately breaks down completely. Many contaminating materials not dealt with in common composting are in fact "biodegradeable", and may be dealt with via bioremediation, or other special composting approaches.[3]

<IMG>

<IMG>

Stable bedding after shredding and three weeks of hot aerobic composting.

  * A compostable material biodegrades substantially under specific composting conditions. It is metabolized by the microorganisms, being incorporated into the organisms or converted into humus. The size of the material is a factor in determining compostability, and mechanical particle size reduction can speed the process. Large pieces of hardwood may not be compostable under a specific set of composting conditions, whereas sawdust of the same type of wood may be. Some biodegradeable materials are only compostable under very specific conditions, usually with an industrial process.

## Contents

  * 1 Importance
  * 2 Materials
  * 3 Approaches
  * 4 In nature
  * 5 Vermicomposting
  * 6 Industrial systems
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

  
## [edit] Importance

Composting upcycles organic kitchen and yard waste and manures into an
extremely useful humus-like, soil end product, permitting the return of vital
organic matter, nutrients, and particularly bacteria, that are vital to plant
nutrition to the soil. Managed aerobic composting arranges environmental
conditions so they are optimal for the natural processes to take place. There
is a popular expression: "compost happens", but it is helpful to engineer the
best possible circumstances for large amounts of organic waste to decompose
quickly and efficiently, with the greatest conservation of useful nutrients
and mass. Uncontrolled composting is when compost "happens", and although that
may be functional in some circumstances, as with forest floor detritus, a
neglected heap of kitchen and yard wastes will more likely result in "smells
happen", or "rodents happen" long before useful compost does.

Long used in subsistence farming and home gardening for creating garden-ready
soil, composting is becoming increasingly important and better understood as a
tool for reducing municipal solid waste,[4] and reducing the amount of green
waste going into landfills. The decomposition of organic material sent to
landfills is a principal cause of methane, an important greenhouse gas, making
reduction of organic waste being landfilled a key element in the fight against
climate change. In suburban and rural areas, much of the organic waste could
be removed from the waste stream by promoting home composting, where consumers
compost their yard waste and kitchen scraps on their own land, regardless of
whether the material is ever actively re-used as "soil".[5] In urban areas
with dwellings predominantly lacking individual yard space, there are indoor
small scale composting alternatives, such as vermicomposting and bokashi
composting.[6]

## [edit] Materials

<IMG>

<IMG>

Posters for compost education (European)

Composting organisms require four equally important things to work
effectively:

  * Carbon ("C" or carbohydrates), for energy - the microbial oxidation of carbon produces the heat. 
    * High carbon materials tend to be brown and dry.
  * Nitrogen ("N" or protein), to grow and reproduce more organisms to oxidize the carbon. 
    * High nitrogen materials tend to be green (or colorful, like fruits and vegetables) and wet.[7]
  * Oxygen, for oxidizing the carbon, the decomposition process.
  * Water, in the right amounts to maintain activity without causing anaerobic conditions.

Certain ratios of these elements will provide beneficial bacteria with the
nutrients to work at a rate that will heat up the pile. In that process much
water will be released as vapor ("steam"), and the oxygen will be quickly
depleted, explaining the need to actively manage the pile. The hotter the pile
gets, the more often added air and water is necessary; the air/water balance
is critical to maintaining high temperatures until the materials are broken
down. At the same time, too much air or water also slows the process, as does
too much C (or too little N).

The most efficient composting occurs with a C:N mix of about 30 to 1. All
organics have both carbon and nitrogen, but amounts vary widely, with
characteristics noted above (dry/wet, brown/green).[8] Fresh grass clippings
have an average ratio of about 15 to 1 and dry autumn leaves about 50 to 1
depending on species. Mixing equal parts by volume approximates the ideal C:N
range. Few individual situations will provide the ideal mix of materials at
any point in time - in this respect, home composting is like horseshoes,
perfect is great, but close still works. Observation of amounts, and
consideration of different materials[9] as a pile is built over time can
quickly achieve a workable technique for the individual situation.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Home compost barrel in the Escuela Barreales, Chile.

Ingredients that are primarily carbon include:

  * Dry, straw-type material, such as cereal straws and corn stalks
  * Dry leaves (best shredded, as with a rotary mower, to prevent matting)
  * Wood, as coarse or fine (may compact) sawdust, or ground wood waste
  * Paper, corrugated cardboard, box board, and office paper or newsprint (soy-based inks)

Ingredients with relatively high nitrogen content include:

  * Green plant material, like crop residues, hay (especially alfalfa), grass clippings and weeds.
  * Manure from poultry, and herbivorous animals such as horses, cows and llamas.
  * Kitchen waste - fruit and vegetable cooked waste and trimmings, juicing-pulp residue, tea and coffee grounds.

For "back yard" composting, mixing the materials as they are added increases
the rate of decomposition, as does reduced particle size (ie, chopped,
shredded), or materials can be added in alternating layers, about 15
centimeters (6 in) thick. Keeping a carbon "cache" handy to the pile for
covering and mixing with fresh wet additions (lawn clippings, kitchen scraps)
is simplest. Special additions or activators are not necessary, although some
sprinklings of good garden loam as a first pile is built will aid more rapid
working by inoculating it with beneficial soil bacteria, and some of the
material from the first finished batch can be used in the subsequent mixes.
Agricultural lime is not necessary - the bacteria prefer a slightly acidic pH,
and their processing invariably results in a near-neutral product.[10] Seaweed
meal, rock dust or rock flour, and other trace element amendments are best
added to the finished compost, or directly to the garden.

## [edit] Approaches

Active (referring to aerobic microbial action), Most Fuss (for the operator).

<IMG>

<IMG>

An active compost heap, steaming on a cool morning. The heap is kept warm by
the exothermic action of the bacteria as they decompose the organic matter.

Hot thermophilic composting is essential with some materials, such as meat and
other animal products, dairy products, eggs, grease, cooking oil, manure of
non-herbivores, and residuals from the treatment of wastewater, in order to
kill pathogens; but these materials are not generally recommended in home
composting because of the likelihood of creating odors and attracting rodents.
Human waste can be composted by industrial methods as well as composting
toilets. When high temperatures are reached, the resulting compost can be
safely used for agricultural or horticultural purposes, providing local health
regulations are met. Humanure fertilizer (as opposed to night soil) is used
throughout the developing world and is becoming more accepted as a garden
amendment in the developed world.

Hot, aerobic composting is conducted at close to the ideal conditions noted
above, allowing thermophilic bacteria to thrive. These aerobic bacteria break
down material faster, producing less odor, fewer pathogens, and less
greenhouse gas than cool, uncontrolled, or accidental anaerobic methods.
Commercial scale composting operations actively control the composting
conditions (C:N ration, moisture level and air), usually in a closed
environment (in-vessel composting, tunnel composting or aerated static pile
composting), where air is fan forced through the mass, and moisture added with
sprayers, or conserved via the enclosure, with computer monitored probes
detecting conditions.

In Thailand an aerated static pile system is in use by farmer groups at over
400 sites. The process needs only 30 days to finish without manual turning,
with 10 metric tons of compost produced per month. A 38 cm (15 in) squirrel-
cage blower with 2.2 kW (3 hp) motor is used to force air through 10 covered
static piles of compost twice a day. The raw materials consist of agricultural
wastes and animal manure in the ratio of 3:1 by volume.[11]

High temperatures destroy insects, larvae, and weed seeds, but no compost will
be totally sterilized by high temperatures alone. In a hot compost where the
temperature exceeds 55 Â°C (130 Â°F) for several days, the ability of most
organisms to survive is compromised, and there are temperature standards[12]
set by various regulating authorities for commercial products[13]
Nevertheless, there are many organisms in nature that can survive extreme
temperatures, including a group of pathogenic Clostridium, so no compost is
100% safe. The necessary second stage of hot composting is maturation, a
period allowing the dissipation of any phyto-toxins[14] remaining from the
process or contaminating ingredients (eg: chemical residues), and achieving a
state of nutrient stability (low C:N ratio) that will not have an impact on
Nitrogen availability in the receiving soil.[15]

<IMG>

<IMG>

An alternative to manual turning, the "Wing Ding" compost aerator

For backyard composters, carbon and nitrogen ratios in various ingredients and
the calculations required to get the ideal mixture can be intimidating, so
rules of thumb exist for approximating it by ingredient types and condition,
as mentioned in Materials above. If the pile is built in a short period, and
has a good mix of materials (C:N) and a coarse structure, with about 50%
moisture ("like a squeezed out sponge"), the temperature should rise within
days to as high as 60 Â°C (140 Â°F). When the temperature begins to fall, more
air is needed, usually added by turning the pile or using an agitating tool,
and moisture may be needed at the same time. Turning or other aeration is
usually needed about every 6-10 days to maintain the highest heat levels until
the material is fairly uniformly broken down to unrecognizability, and
temperatures no longer rebound. A pile that has been maintained at peak
temperatures may be ready for maturing in as little as 30 days. Another 30-60
days maturing should suffice to allow passing the "germination test".[16]

To achieve thermophilic decomposition, a compost bin is best about 1 cu.m (1
cu.yd), or 1 m (3 ft) wide, 1 m (3 ft) tall, and as long as desired for
windrow composting. This provides enough insulating mass to build up heat but
also allows oxygen infiltration. The center of the pile heats up the most, so
regular turning/mixing is needed for insuring all material spends some time in
the hottest area. When turning the pile results in no further temperature
rise, the active aerobic phase is complete, and the mass may be turned out to
a maturing pile. When the matured material has a dark brown crumbly appearance
and the smell of rich damp earth, it is ready to use.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Turning a home compost bin

The natural sequence of the decomposition community involved will be:  
0-15 Â°C (32-59 Â°F) - psychrophiles predominate, beginning the heating
process as they multiply  
15-40 Â°C (60-104 Â°F) - mesophiles take over, psychrophiles die off or are
relegated to the borders  
40-70 Â°C (105-160 Â°F) - thermophiles work at their peak, including consuming
many other bacteria  
At the lower temperatures and around the borders, there will also be various
fungal activity, as well as larger organisms, getting their share - a very
dry, cooler pile may be attractive to ants, and gastropods may visit very wet
piles. As the temperature returns to ambient at the end of the process, the
sequence reverses, including new organisms that prefer the more degraded
materials. Added heat and pile insulation may be useful in the coldest
weather, but is not ordinarily necessary, and is not desirable if it
interferes with aeration or natural convective evaporation. Keeping the top
dry and burying fresh additions in the center of a pile will be effective
during winter conditions until heating resumes in spring.

Passive (a misnomer, there are always active biologic processes), or Some fuss
- no fuss

Cool or ambient temperature composting, when the level of physical
intervention is minimal, usually results in temperatures never reaching above
30Â°C (86Â°F). It is slower but effective, and is the more common type of
composting in domestic gardening. Such composting systems may be in open or
closed containers of wood or plastic, or in open exposed piles. Kitchen scraps
are put in the garden compost bin and left untended. This scrap bin can have a
very high water content which reduces aeration, and may become odorous. To
improve drainage and airflow, and reduce odor, carbon-rich materials, or
'browns', such as wood chips, shredded bark, leaves, or twigs may be added to
mix and cover each wet addition, or holes made occasionally in the pile. The
amount of attention may vary from none through occasional to "regular".

## [edit] In nature

An unusual form of composting in nature is seen in the case of the mound-
builders (megapodes) of the Australasian region. These Megapodes are fowl-
sized birds famous for building nests in the form of compost heaps containing
organic litter, in which they incubate their eggs. The male birds work
assiduously to maintain the correct incubation temperatures, by adding and
removing litter from the compost pile. Good evidence that thermophilic
composting is a process of nature, not man-made.

Forest floor detritus is the natural fertilizing material in temperate
forests. Soil dwelling organisms slowly decompose the continuously deposited
litter from below, returning the nutrients to the soil for bacterial
conversion to forms useful to the native vegation. This is a natural form of
mulching or sheet composting. While some may be tempted to gather this rich,
partially decomposed litter for use in a home garden, it is best left to the
use of the forest.

## [edit] Vermicomposting

Worm composting or vermicomposting is a method using Red Wiggler worms in a
container to process kitchen waste. Moistened high-carbon bedding such as
shredded paper is used as a base to which the food waste is added, and the
worms and micro-organisms convert the materials to rich compost called worm
castings, a nutrient and microbially rich material. Worm composting can be
done indoors, allowing year-round composting, and providing apartment dwellers
with a means of recycling food waste.

## [edit] Industrial systems

Industrial composting systems are increasingly being installed as a waste
management alternative to landfills, along with other advanced waste
processing systems. Mechanical sorting of mixed waste streams combined with
anaerobic digestion or in-vessel composting, is called mechanical biological
treatment, increasingly used in developed countries due to regulations
controlling the amount of organic matter allowed in landfills. Treating
biodegradable waste before it enters a landfill reduces global warming from
fugitive methane; untreated waste breaks down anaerobically in a landfill,
producing landfill gas that contains methane, an even more potent greenhouse
gas than carbon dioxide.

Large-scale composting systems are used by many urban centers around the
world. Co-composting is a technique which combines solid waste with de-watered
biosolids, although difficulties controlling inert and plastic contamination
from Municipal solid waste makes this approach less attractive. The world's
largest MSW co-composter is the Edmonton Composting Facility in Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada, which turns 220,000 tonnes of residential solid waste and
22,500 dry tonnes of biosolids per year into 80,000 tonnes of compost. The
facility is 38,690 meters2 (416,500 ft2), equivalent to 4Â½ Canadian football
fields, and the operating structure is the largest stainless steel building in
North America, the size of 14 NHL rinks.[17]

## [edit] See also

<IMG>

<IMG>

Compost educator showing the results of composting to students at a community
compost education site.

<IMG>

<IMG>

Showing the volume reduction of decomposing organics over time.

  * Compost bin Home containers
  * Container composting Small scale
  * Compost The product
  * Compost uses
  * Compost tea
  * Bokashi composting
  * Comparison of anaerobic and aerobic digestion
  * Decompiculture
  * Ecological sanitation
  * Humanure Composting
  * In-vessel composting
  * Jean Pain Farm-based compost bioenergy system
  * List of composting systems
  * Sustainable agriculture
  * Biodegradable polythene film
  * Bioplastic

## [edit] References

  1. ^ Compost microbes, Cornell Univ.
  2. ^ Compost consumers, Cornell Univ
  3. ^ Gypsum board composting
  4. ^ Vancouver, B.C. Canada municipal program
  5. ^ The Natural Resources Defense Council on Composting
  6. ^ home made Effective Microorganisms for Bokashi composting
  7. ^ Materials for composting - University of Illinois extension, retrieval date: 3/12/2009
  8. ^ Klickitat County WA, USA Compost Mix Calculator
  9. ^ Effect of lignan content on bio-availability
  10. ^ Lime addition and pH
  11. ^ Aerated Static Pile composting
  12. ^ British Standards Institute Specifications
  13. ^ US Composting Council testing parameters
  14. ^ Phytotoxicity and maturation
  15. ^ US Composting Council Standards
  16. ^ abstract: Phytotoxicity of biosolids compost at different degrees of maturity compared
  17. ^ Edmonton composting facility

## [edit] External links

  * Making Compost
  * Composting tips
  * Commercial scale systems
  * US EPA regulations for commercial compost use
  * State of Florida compost info page
  * Riverside County CA home compost bin plans
  * Washington State Extension Service on composting
  * Maturity indicators for estimating phytotoxicity in compost-amended soil
  * Understanding the microbiology of compost
  * British Standards Institute spec's
  * Cornell University Composting pages

  

v â¢ d â¢ e

Topics related to waste management  
Anaerobic digestion Â· Composting Â· Eco-industrial park Â· Incineration Â·
Landfill Â· Mechanical biological treatment Â· Radioactive waste Â· High-level
radioactive waste management Â· Reuse Â· Recycling Â· Regiving Â· Sewerage Â·
Waste Â· Waste collection Â· Waste sorting Â· Waste hierarchy Â· Waste
management concepts Â· Waste legislation Â· Waste treatment  
v â¢ d â¢ e

Topics related to environmental technology  
Environmental impact assessment Â· Environmental design Â· Sustainable
development  
Pollution

Industrial ecology Â· Solid waste treatment Â· Waste management Â· Air
pollution (control Â· dispersion modeling) Â· Water (Wastewater treatment Â·
Industrial wastewater treatment Â· Water purification)  
Renewable energy

Alternative energy Â· Energy development Â· Energy efficiency Â· Renewable
energy (development) Â· Sustainable energy Â· Fuel (Alternative fuel Â·
Biofuel Â· Hydrogen technologies) Â· Transportation (Electric vehicle Â·
Hybrid vehicle)  
Conservation

Birth control Â· Permaculture Â· Conservation ethic Â· Recycling Â·
Ecoforestry Â· Conservation biology Â· Environmental preservation Â·
Remediation Â· Green computing Â· Building (Green Â· Natural Â· Sustainable
architecture)  
Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composting"

Categories: Composting | Biodegradable waste management | Organic gardening

##### Views

  * Article
  * Discussion
  * Edit this page
  * History

##### Personal tools

  * Log in / create account

##### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article

##### Search



##### Interaction

  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Help

##### Toolbox

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Cite this page

##### Languages

  * Bosanski
  * ÐÑÐ»Ð³Ð°ÑÑÐºÐ¸
  * Äesky
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * FranÃ§ais
  * æ¥æ¬èª
  * âªNorsk (bokmÃ¥l)â¬
  * Polski
  * Svenska

Powered by MediaWiki

Wikimedia Foundation

  * This page was last modified on 4 April 2009, at 04:31.
  * All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License. (See Copyrights for details.)   
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a U.S.
registered 501(c)(3) tax-deductible nonprofit charity.  

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers



